AN Exalted Diotrephes REPREHENDED, Or the Spirit of Error and Envy IN William
Rogers against the TRUTH And many of the Ancient and Faithful Friends thereof,
Manifested in his late Monstrous Birth, or Work of Darkness, (viz.) his False
and Scandalous Book, Entitled, The Christian Quaker-Distinguished, etc.
Wherein he has discovered himself to be an Apostate, and not the True
Christian Quaker; but as one driven out from the Presence of the Lord, and
Unity with His Chosen People.

Also a Comparison between his said Book, and many Exhortations and Reproofs,
Contained in an Epistle, given forth under his Hand against that Spirit, and
work of Division, he is now fallen under; whereby his Apostasy, Self
Contradiction, and Confusion may appear.

To be dispersed only among Friends, unless his Book is made more Public.

Out of thy own Mouth will I Judge thee, thou Wicked Servant, Luke 19.22. But
Evil Men and Seducers shall Wax worse and worse, Deceiving and being Deceived,
2 Timothy 3.13, 14. But continue thou in the things which thou have Learned, and
been Assured of, knowing of whom thou have Learned them, verse. 14. In verse. 9,
10. But Diotrephes, who Loves to have the Pre-eminence, prating against Us
with malicious Words, etc. London, Printed for John Bringhurst, Printer and
Stationer, at the Sign of the Book in Grace Church Street. 1681.

LEt it not seem strange to any, As though some new thing had happened unto Us,
that We have Occasion thus publicly to Appear against One that has made
Profession of the Truth with Us, but is gone out from Us; according to that of
1 John 4.2. and 1.9. They went out from Us, but they were not of Us; for if
they had been of Us, they would no doubt have Continued with Us: But they went
out, that they might be made Manifest, that they were not all of Us.

THE PREFACE.
AMongst the many Exercises and Perils, the Lords People in this Age, as in all
Ages have met with, they have not been unacquainted with Perils by False
Brethren, according to what the Apostle Paul Testified, Acts 20.30. Also of
your own selves, shall Men Arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away
Disciples after them; whose Qualifications are at Large spoken of by the said
Apostle, in his Second Epistle to Timothy, and Third, (viz.) Without natural
Affection, Truce Breakers, false Accusers, Incontinent, fierce Despisers of
those that are Good, Traitors, Heady, High-Minded, etc. as the certain Fruits,
by which they should be known.

To the Great Exercise, Grief, and Sorrow of the Faithful, there has not been
wanting diverse of the like Instances of such Men, who since we have been a
People, have Arisen from amongst our selves (as this Man William Rogers now
does) under the Profession of the Truth, to oppose and gainsay the Blessed
Order and Government thereof, whereby the loose Conversations of the Wicked are
Restrained or Judged, and the Truth cleared from the Reproach thereof. And
these have not been without the like specious pretenses with William Rogers, as
standing up for the Ancient Testimony, and Principle of the Light, and against
Apostasy, setting up Man's Prescriptions, Impositions, Innovations,
Persecutions, etc. but their Fruits withering: And their End has made them
Manifest, as this Man's also does, and will do, to be the Men Apostatized
themselves, Led, and Acted by a Spirit that would open a Gap, and break down
the Hedge, that every Man may do as he List, whilst under the Profession of the
same Truth, without being called to Account, and dealt with in a
Gospel-Church-Order for it.

This small Treatise is not Intended for a full Answer to William Rogers's
Voluminous Book, which requires a considerable time for Inspection into diverse
Matters and Papers; for such a Reply to trace him in all his False
Insinuations, grievous Perversions, and notorious false Charges of many
Innocent Men, and Faithful and Eminent Laborers in the Work of the Gospel
amongst Us, already Manifest to Us by their Answers and Certificates in
Writing; wherein they have Largely Vindicated their Innocence, in most, if not
all those things relating to matter of Fact, alleged against them, especially
G. F. and have caused Copies thereof to be Delivered to William Rogers many
Months since, and long before his Book was in the Press: Such more full Answer
more publicly to be made, we Refer to some other Hand or Hands, who are
Eminently concerned to do it. In the mean time, we thought it not Amiss, to
give the Reader some short discovery of the Subject, and Occasion of the
Differences William Rogers Writes about; and of His Work in General; and that
by Comparing his former Exhortations and Reproofs, with his late Printed Book,
and Behavior amongst Us; the Reader may have some Taste of his Spirit of
Error and Envy, and be cautioned in himself thereby, how he gives Credit to
his many, and false Accusations against the Innocent.

An Exalted Diotrephes Reprehended.
WHen the Unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, he walks through dry Places
seeking Rest, and finding none.

Then he says, I will Return into mine House, from whence I came out; and when
he is come, he finds it Swept and Garnisht.

Then Goes he, and takes with himself Seven other Spirits, more Wicked than
himself, and they Enter in, and Dwell there; and the last State of that Man is
worse than the first, even so shall it be to this Wicked Generation,

Mat. 12. verse. 43, 44, 45.
THat this is the Case of this miserable Man William Rogers, manifested by his
late Fruits, is past doubt with us, whom, through Unwatchfulness, Disobedience,
and Rebellion against God (which is as the Sin of Witchcraft) the unclean
Spirit and Adversary of Man's Soul, the old Accuser of the Brethren, has thus
Entered, and Exalted upon the Pinnacle of his own conceited Abilities; and
having now the Rule in him, and over him, makes War through him, against the
Lamb and His followers; and having fitted him for his Service, now sets him
about that which has been all along his Work (viz.) To Reproach the faithful
People of God, the whole Profession, and the good Order and Government of the
Truth, which the Lord has brought forth amongst them (as that which strikes
at the downfall of his Kingdom) with many false and opprobrious Accusations, as
of being Apostatized, and Guilty of Imposition, Persecution, Innovation,
Gentilian-Lordship, Blind Obedience, etc. whereby William Rogers has not only
Rankt himself among a Number of those Apostates, who from the beginning in a
Spirit of Enmity and Prejudice have risen up like Core (saying) You take too
much upon you, against the Heavenly Care and Order of such as truly Fear and
Love God, and in whom, as he himself has confessed, God has opened Council
for that End (viz.) To be as Helps and Governments in the Church, which are not
to be Despised, being in Subjection to Christ, the one Head, and Lawgiver. But
as may appear in the following Epistle, with this Aggravation, That which he
formerly Approved and Exhorted to, he is now found smiting against, and what he
then severely detested and reproved in others, He is now found heinously Guilty
of himself (viz) of Representing such as Aiming at other Ends and Interests, in
such their Religious Care, and Heavenly Order and Government, than Christ's
Interest and Government over All; whereby out of his own Mouth he is Condemned.

And now for as much as he has so publicly, and injuriously appeared in his
late Book, to the great Scandal of our Profession, as an open Enemy to the
Truth, we are concerned for the Honor of the Lord's Name, which is dear unto
us, publicly to make him manifest (A work otherwise not pleasing to Us) that
he may proceed no further, but that his Folly may appear to all Men, and that
the Ignominy and Reproach, he has as much as in him lies, brought upon the
Lords People, and faithful Laborers, and their Holy Profession, may be Rouled
and Washed away.

But before we proceed to make William Rogers manifest by his late Fruits among
us, we think it requisite to give some short Account of the Subject, Occasion,
and present state of the Divisions mentioned in his Book, and how William
Rogers is concerned therein.

Many of the ancient and faithful Brethren of the Northern parts, as we are
credibly informed, being under an Exercise in their Spirits, by reason of the
Unfaithfulness of some that walk amongst them, with Respect to diverse things,
amongst whom J. S. J. W. etc. were Interested, they had a godly care upon their
Spirits, to make a narrow search and inspection thereinto, which the Guilty
could not bear, but set themselves to oppose their proceedings; by which means
a great difference arose: so that the Friends who were zealous against such as
were Backsliding from the Truth, and its Heavenly way and Testimonies, remained
some time under a burden and exercise because thereof. At length, as we are
credibly inforformed, the Friends of the Quarterly Meeting at Kendal, made
known their Exercise to diverse other Brethren, desiring a meeting with J. S.
and J. W. before them, in order to the composing the Difference, which was
Rejected by them. However, those Friends and Brethren sent to them again, and
also some of them went to them, and appointed a Meeting, near the place where
they were, desiring them to come, but they would not, as holding themselves not
obliged to submit to them in that case, and leaving things under this state of
Dis-reconciliation, came into the South, making their complaints, and spreading
their differences, particularly amongst us at Bristol, where they met with some
that adhered to them, strengthened them, and set them up, too forwardly
Espousing the Cause upon the alone hearing of their Complaints against the
Friends of the other Party, who were far distant from us; amongst the rest,
William Rogers was an early Proselite, and so great a Devotee to these men's
Interest, that he industriously labored to Proselite others there-unto, upon
the Credit of his pretended knowledge of the ground of those Differences: what
an evil Instrument this man was, from the beginning thereof, in this City and
elsewhere, is not easily to be Related, how he forstering up J. S. and J. W.
labored to stave off the early endeavors and expedients for reconciliation,
as being not altogether suited to his mind, who was now become as a Master of
this Faction, with which some of this City were like to be led aside, whose
Souls the Lord in his Mercy has Rescued out of the Snare.

The Intelligence of those Differences, spreading through diverse Parts of the
Nation, especially where J. S. and J. W. Traveled and Resorted; a Concern
under the Apprehension of the evil consequences thereof, came upon some Ancient
Brethren, to endeavor a speedy stop thereto, moved for a new Hearing, which at
length was agreed to on all hands. Accordingly a meeting was appointed, and
held at Drawel in Yorkshire, Anno 1676. to which resorted several of the
Ancient Friends and Brethren, leaving all Occasions and Relations in love to
God, and earnest desires for the preservation of the Church's Peace.

After their great Travel, and tender Endeavors, then for Reconciliation and
Peace, J. S. and J. W. being bowed into some Degree of Submission, at length
produce a Paper Containing a Condemnation against themselves.

It may not be amiss here to Relate out of W. R. his Narrative, the Character
he has given of the Temper and Frame of the Spirits of those Brethren at the
Meeting at Drawel, when they gave forth their Sense, and Account, concerning
the Difference relating to J. S. and J. W. which does not a little confirm the
Integrity and Soundness of it, being from the Pen of so great an Opposer and
Villifier, as he has Manifested himself to be.

The words of W. Rogers on the aforesaid account are, that,

In all friends there appeared as far as I could perceive, a spirit inclined to
peace and unity in the Cruth, many hearts being bowed down, in the earnest
desires of their souls breathing unto God, and that in great Zeal, and
sincerity for the gathering them into nearer Union and fellowship with their
brethren therein.

Again, in his account of the Fourth days Travel, he says as follows.

The matter so gone through, and ended, the brethren waited, and great was the
exercise that was upon their spirits, for a very considerable time; after some
silence the brethren chosen at London, and many other Friends, that were not of
the six last chosen, spoke their sense and Judgment upon the whole matter, not
only relating to the fact before them, but also to that spirit, which according
to their inward sense, caused a separation to this effect:

That they (viz.) [I. S. and] I. W. had not kept in Unity with their brethren,
as they ought to have done; but had let in jealousies, doubts and scruples,
whereby they had given way to a spirit of division and separation; which spirit
they did condemn and judge, yet so as there appeared amongst the brethren, a
Traveling Love and Life beyond what I can now declare, that they might not be
cut off from them, but brought into perfect Unity with them: so that at length,
the two accused brethren, being, as I was perfectly sensible, ready to
condescend to their brethren, therein, so far as their understandings were
opened, brought forth this Ensuing Paper of satisfaction to their Traveling
brethren, and the Churches of Christ. Thus far R. W.

Here follows their Paper of Condemnation.

WE are sensible, that in the hour of Temptation, that has appeared through
us, which has given an occasion of offense to the Churches of God, unto whom
the knowledge of the Northern differences has come, and since the inward sense
of our brethren, who we are sensible, have a Travel on their spirits, for
preservation of peace and Unity in the Church of God, concerning us is such,
That Iealousies have entered us, and that we have been at sometimes exercised in
things, tending to oppose Friends in the practice of those things, that they
testify, are commendable in the Church of God; we are sorry that any weakness
should appear in us to give occasion for such offense, and as How comes it to
pass, that there is now nothing in all this, and that it is no better than a
Rattle to please Children? is not this manifest deceit and hypocrisy?
satisfaction to our brethren, and the Church of God in general, we do from the
very bottom of our hearts condemn that spirit, whether it has appeared in us
or any, that has given offense to the Church of God in general, or that oppose
the order of the Gospel, or any faithful Brethren in the practice of those
things they believe are their Duty.

This paper being sent to some Friends in diverse parts of the Nation, for the
satisfaction of such to whom-the knowledge of the differences had come; the end
for which it was given forth J. S. and J. VV. were offended at it, set
themselves to extenuate (or take off) the weight of it; not owning it according
to the common acceptance of A condemnation of themselves therein; confessing,
they owned the Paper, but in another sense, than against themselves.
Notwithstanding, what it plainly imports, and they knew the Brethren took it
for; and William Rogers, who confessed he drew it for J. S. and J. W. Reported,
there was nothing in it; and that the most innocent man amongst us might own
it, and never hurt himself; and that it was no better than a Rattle to please
Children: implying, those Friends and Brethren Assembled at Drawel, he has, as
before Recited out of his own Narative, given such a Character of: and these
things we have proved already by sufficient Witnesses, out of his own mouth,
instead of bringing forth Fruits of Peace and Humiliation, the said J. S. and
J. W. having dealt thus un-sincerely with the Brethren, began a new Quarrel
with them that were concerned in the hearing and declaring the judgment of the
Spirit of Truth, at Drawel, concerning the differences, etc. calling their
Account, a lying Narrative, and charging them with doing wickedly by them, both
by word and writing; W. R. also joining with them, who by this time began to be
desperate, and warmly to engage in their Quarrel; and in defense of their
pretended Innocence, they set themselves to oppose and Exclaim against the
proceedings of the Brethren at Drawel-Meeting, with many opprobrious terms, in
perfect contraries to the Character W. R. had before given thereof; all which
things have been made appear at large. And instead of breaking up their
separate-Meeting, or clearing themselves of them (which is a public Ensign of
Division; and Reproach to the Truth) and instead of making void their
Subscription, tending to a separation, both are continued with J. S. and J. W's
names thereto, whereby some have been encouraged in the Divisions: and so far
have they made void (as to themselves) the benefit of all the Transactions of
that Meeting at Drawel. And now because the Friends of Truth, cannot be at
Peace and Unity with them in their work of Separation and Division; but keep
the Spirit of sound judgment upon that dividing Spirit, and are at a distance
from them, until they Repent, and be Reconciled, therefore are they disquieted.

And as for William Rogers their furious Warrier, and whom they have permitted
to fight their Battles for them against the Lamb's followers, we have looked
upon him of late, as A Man Tormented in Spirit, under the disappointments he
has met with in his way on the one Hand, Note, his Articles have not only
Demonstrated this to be his Design, but his words also very frequently to be
what he would have accomplished amongst us.
in not being able to Effect that Mischief of Division and Separation, which
both publicly, and privately he has Labored to bring to pass in this City,
about those Men; and on the other Hand, finding the Cause of his Party, whom
under pretense of Crying down Man, he has industriously Labored to Exalt Man
or Men above, as well as against their Brethren, notwithstanding all his
Endeavors, Manifestly to Decline, not only in the General, but in the
Consciences of some from amongst themselves, as by diverse Testimonies under
many of their Hands, showing how they were Betrayed, and Led aside from the
Ancient Unity, to join in a Subscription of Party with J. Story, and J.
Wilkinson, may be made appear.

And now, as to the utmost Mischief, W. R. is able to do, he has in the
Bitterness and Envy of his Spirit and Power of Darkness, with which of late he
has been Acting, Printed his most scandalous and abusive Book, which he had
long threatened to bring forth, and which is now come Abroad; and so Wicked,
that we must needs say, though we knew the Man's lofty Spirit, and expected no
other than bad from him; yet we are sorry for his sake, at what he has brought
forth, it being so Monstrous, and Confused, and abundantly supplied with most
grievous Falsehood, wicked Perversions, and Mis-representations of many
Faithful and Innocent Men, who truly fear God, though he has for the most part
omitted their Names, which we take not to be out of any Favor or Kindness in
him toward such; but rather under Apprehension, that the Eminency of diverse of
them, together with the Credit of their Integrity in the Consciences of persons
of all Qualities and Degrees, would have but worsted and disserted his Cause:
and for as much as it is Evident to us, that the Generallity of the People
called Quakers in this Nation (some few here and there, in some Countries
excepted) are at Unity with those Brethren in their Testimony against this
Spirit and Work of Division, William Rogers is now principally concerned in,
and for which those Brethren are so villified and abused in William Rogers his
Book, we cannot but look upon such his Injuries and Reproaches, to extend
through them to the Body of the People called Quakers in this Nation, and their
Holy Profession, thereby prostrated to the public Ignominy and Contempt of the
open and secret Enemies of the Truth, who may be too apt to believe what he
Writes: which being duly considered, let all that have the Fear of God before
their Eyes, Judge whether the Man, that is Guilty of these things, can be
rightly Esteemed a True Christian Quaker. We having thus given a short, but
true Account of the Occasion, Subject, Proceedings, and Continuance of the
present Differences, shall proceed to say something of William Rogers his late
behavior amongst us, in this City.

His Qualifications (with Respect to his Profession) of being a True Christian
Quaker, is that we are concerned about; and to lay him open, as they have been
plentifully Manifested to us, by his behavior of late Years, amongst us in
this City, to our Great Grief and Exercise. Know then, that whatever William
Rogers has formerly been, or whatever he is yet accounted to be, by any that
takes part with him, and has made him as a Head and Captain in this late work
of Strife and Division, from the Ancient Unity and Fellowship in the Truth;
which the Lord through his Goodness and Mercy, has put a great stop unto, and
Hedged up their Way; and is now causing the Rebellious Instruments thereof to
Wither and Blast, and become as Unsavory Salt, fit for nothing, but to be
trodden under the Feet of Men.

And for such who have any Tenderness and Sincerity remaining in them toward
the Lord and his People; such the Lord has Gathered, and is Gathering out from
amongst them; especially in some of the Northern Parts, where this Division
first Sprang and Arose. We say, whatever William Rogers may be accounted of, by
such as take part with him:

We, whose Names are Subscribed to this small Treatise (being his Neighbors)
have by frequent Experience, known many times to our Grief and Sorrow; and
therefore in Truth and Righteousness, and in Sincerity of Heart, we declare,
that he is a Man of a Heady, Willful, high-Minded, Unruly, Passionate, and
Furious Spirit; and therefore cannot be Justified: For the Sway of his Fury
shall be his Destruction, if he Repent not.

We have known him upon frequent Occasions, to be so very Extravagant with his
Tongue, as well as his Pen (which we doubt not but in time will be undeniably
Manifested in his Book) insomuch, that his many slanderous Assertions have long
since been but of little Credit with us: and therefore, we conclude with the
Apostle, His Religion is vain, and whatever his talk of Religion and
Christianity is, it is Manifest to us, it consists more in his Head, than in
his Heart; and so indeed is a Stranger to the Life of it, he being alive in the
contrary Nature. And truly, he has long been a Burden, not only to us (but
as we have too much Cause to believe) to some Hundreds in this City, by his
very rude and clamorous Behavior, at our Men's Meetings, as well as public
Meetings, wherein we account he has been the chief Instrument of the great
Disturbance and Disorder, that has been at sometimes therein Manifested;
though with no small Impudence he now makes mention of it in his Book, without
taking Shame to himself; but Assigning to others what himself was Guilty of, as
one chief cause of the present Publishing the Things contained in his Book; and
having thus diligently, both sought, caused, and took occasion, he now vents
the Bitterness that is in his Heart, which we believe is Naucious and Offensive
to them that truly Fear God amongst us.

We think it not necessary, particularly here to Recite the many Abuses of his
lavish Tongue, together with his Frequent, Rude, Insolent, and Imperious
Behavior, at our Men's Meetings, as the Natural Effects of those his
Qualifications before Mentioned, wherein, and whereby he has from time to
time, Industriously Labored to cause a Separation amongst us.

Neither do we think it necessary at present, to particularize his Profane
Speaking concerning the Power of God, no more than we have already done,
concerning his Horrible unsincere Dealing with the Brethren at Drawell, both
proved out of his own Mouth, unless required thereto; and the Reason why we so
think it not necessary at Present, is not only for that it would Render us much
the Larger, and the Credit of our Testimony, not strictly Requiring it; but
because some of us have already, both by Word and Writing, Charged him home
with diverse of these things; so that he is not Ignorant of them, for which we
could never have any Satisfaction, either public or private, to this day; in
such Cases of Charge against him, his way and manner has been, and we Judge it
is according to his Principles, To Refuse the Submitting such matters to the
Hearing, Judgment, and Determination of Friends of the Meeting, indefinitely
Assembled in a Church Way and Method, as is Established amongst us, for the
strengthening the Good, and Reproof, and Discouragement of the Evil and loose
Walkers. But his Manner is in such Cases to urge, The Choosing so many Men on
each Part, like as if the Case were about an Horse or Cow; a subtle Method of
his, to shelter the Head of the Transgressor from the stroke of Righteous
Judgment: A practice he has been of late too Eminently Guilty of in our
Meetings, to the Grief of the Upright: For the Transgressor will be sure to
Choose such, as are like himself, and of party with him, to stand by him to the
Uttermost; and this effects but Confusion. Thus it appears, it was not without
Cause, that William Rogers has stood up so Zealously for Liberty, and some of
his Adherents against Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, which called them in
Question for their backsliding: seeing they, if they should submit to such
Meetings, are likely to have their Fleshly Liberty Restrained, or to be
publicly Judged, and Disowned for it; and this is the Reason in the Ground and
Bottom whatever contrary Pretenses they make that W. R. etc. are so disquieted,
and of his Exclaiming in his book against the Godly Care and Zeal, of the
faithful, under the black Characters of persecution, imposition, and the like.

These things considered, we cannot but admire at the confidence of W. Rogers
in the 27th. page of his Preface, wherein he says, He blesses God, that has
so preserved him, by the Arm of his power, as that none of his Opposers have,
so far as he knew, laid any thing to his charge, but for things wherein he has
acted (though misrepresented by them) to keep a Conscience void of offense
toward God.

We whose names are hereunto subseribed, having heard the foregoing relation of
W. Rogers, his being of a heady, self-willed, unruly, and passionate spirit, of
his Lavish, and abusive tongue, rude Carriage, and behavior in meetings of
late years amongst us, do hereby certify, that to our knowledge, the Character
given of him therein is true, and that we also have many times, to our great
grief and exercise, been eye, and ear witnesses of his being notoriously guilty
therein, to the great shame of his profession, witness our hands. Dated in
Bristol, the 16th of the 6th Month, 1681.

Lawrence Steel, John Moon, John Bainton, Henry Diddicott, Paul Moon, Charles
Jones, Samps. Coysgarne, John Cowlinge, John Higgins, John Barnes, William
Minor, Peter Young, James Sturridg, Jun. William Rouch, Thomas Bayley, Richard
Philips,
Here follows the Epistle before mentioned under W. Rogers and Arther Eastmeads
hands; together with diverse brethren, who still keep their habitations in the
Unity of the Spirit and power of God, given forth from the yearly Meeting,
since the beginning of the Divisions, in the North, as W. Rogers confesses by
the date thereof, in the second page of his preface, and is a manifest Reproof
to that Spirit of Strif and Division, then at work; as also a discovery against
whom, and what the instruments thereof did then, and do still oppose
themselves, into the mischief of which spirit, and work, W. R. himself is of
late fallen, so that he must bear his own judgment, and condemnation.

Thou art inexcusable O man! whosoever thou art, that judge. For wherein thou
judges another, thou condemnest thy self. For thou that judge, do the same
things. But we are sure, that the judgment of God is according to Truth
against them which commit such things,

Romans 2.1.28. The Epistle, with the following Marginal observations, is here
commended to the Conscience of the impartia^ reader.

London the 26th 3d month, 1673. Dear Friends and Brethren,
THe Lord our God having by his Eternal Power, raised up, and preserved many
faithful, and living Witnesses of his blessed Truth, until this Day; both for
the Conversion of many from Darkness to Light, and for the building up,
Establishment and Comfort therein by his own Living Word of Life and
Reconciliation. And having also signally Blessed This was at the yearly, or
general Meeting; which Meeting, was then Approved by W. R. but now Smitten at
by W. R. and the Members thereof, as consisting of an uncertain Number of
uncertain qualified Persons p. 1. p. 7. and yet in the same page, undertakes to
Assign some of the following Qualifications, viz. False Accusers, Men-pleasers,
and many of them Lovers of Pre-eminence, and time Servers, that take that as an
opportunity to appear unto others, that which they are not in themselves; and
do take upon them, to call themselves a general Meeting. See his Confusion, and
Self-contradiction, both in word and practice.
this precious Opportunity of our assembling together, with his glorious
presence, power and Majesty, manifest amongst us, which many were, and are Eye
witnesses of, and in the unspeakable sense thereof, many have been as melted,
and their hearts exceedingly broken, and their souls overcome, and deeply
affected with Gods unspeakable goodness and power, love and life, so
plentifully shed abroad amongst us, and in our hearts, in the sense whereof our
hearts are open, and affected toward you all, even in the same dear, and
tender love and life, that is abundantly shed forth unto us, and from which our
salutation is to all our dear Friends, brethren, and Sisters, in this, and
other nations: having the General State of the Churches, and people of God
opened unto us, with a tender care upon our hearts, and breathing of our souls,
that they all may grow, prosper, and be preserved in Unity, Peace, and good
order, that divine life and virtue may Reign, and abundantly flow over and
through all, to the Replenishment, and unspeakable comfort, that you may keep
out the Enemy in all his appearances, that would make divisions, and
disturbances in the Churches; for at this time the Enemy is busy, and
secretly at work for that end, to make Note, the end and occasion of this
Epistle, against the Rents and Divisions then on Foot: and now Espoused by
William Rogers, to the Gratifying the Enemy, and bringing the open Opposers,
and Adversaries of Truth over us, formerly judged, but now practiced by Willam
Rogers, witness his whole Book, made public to the view of the World.
rents, endeavoring thereby to bring the open opposers, and adversaries of
Truth over; it is that strife, and division may be stirred amongst our selves,
that they desire and watch for; and therefore where any are instruments
thereof, they serve not the Lord Jesus Christ: but the Enemy. Mark, the very
Character of William Rogers his Work and Spirit, and his Judgment against all
such as are Guilty of these things, which now includes himself in chief,
Witness not only his Offense against such like Exhortations, as excluding of
Jealousies, and having an Eye to the Brethren, Preface, p. 6. but also his own
evil Surmizes, and hard Speeches in this Book, against many of these very
Brethren, with whom he joined in the Epistle; and many other faithful Laborers
in the Lord's Work, though most of them are not particularly Nominated, whom he
terms Up starts, Innovaters, Adherents to G. F. page 3. of his Preface;
Insinuating most grievous and faise Charges against them, as the main Design of
his Book, rendering them Apostates, false Accusers, Imposers, Persecutors,
Exercising Gentilian Lordship, blind Obedience, Setting up an outward
Directory, Orders, Innovations, Prescriptions, Decrees, and what not; seeking
thereby to Undermine, and to beget a disesteem, and slight of their Testimony.
See how this Man is now found in the very Practice of those things he once
Condemned; whereby, out of his own Mouth he is Judged; being like the Dog,
returned to the Vomit; and the Sow that was Washed, to her Wallowing in the
Mire.
They that make divisions, and cause offenses, contrary to the Gospel, and that
seek to sow discord amongst brethren, are not only to be marked, but the Lord
will make them manifest, and his power will bring them under, and debase them,
as it has done (and will do) that spirit that is guilty of jealousies,
Evil-surmisings, whisperings, and hard speeches against the brethren, and
faithful. Laborers in the Lords work; it is the accuser of the brethren that
strikes at their Testimony, and seeks to undermine to beget a disesteem and
slight of them in it, which adversary must be watch't against, and forever cast
down and out: and we are assured from the Lord, that all sowers of discord,
accusers of the faithful brethren, slighters and undervaluers of their
Testimony and gifts, self-seekers, Whisperers, Back-biters, and all self-willed
and self-exalted spirits, God will abase them, his eternal power will work them
under, and all that which offends, shall be removed, Gods pure power is at
work, refining, thoroughly purging his floor, and sanctifying his Church and
people, that there may be no rent, nor schism; but that the Lord may be one,
and his name one, amongst us; and blessed are you, that keep to your first
love, and retain your integrity to the end. Had William Rogers been of this
Spirit, and continued, we had never seen his contrary Work of Darkness and
Confusion; but this he is far from; now having approved himself an utter Enemy,
Villifier, and Opposer of Christ's Rule and Government in his Members;
insomuch, that the very Term it self (viz.) Church Government is become an
Offense unto him, as may appear in Diverse parts of his Book, particularly Page
45. of part the First.
Oh, dear friends and brethren, watch in the light against all the enemies
wiles, and pray for the peace of Jerusalem, that she may be seen in her beauty
and splendour, or as a City without breaches, that peace may remain within her
walls, and prosperity within her palaces: Oh! let it be the general care of
all our brethren, to whom the Lord has committed an oversight in the Churches,
to keep things quiet, and in good order by the power and wisdom of God, who is
not the Author of confusion, but of peace; and that the public affairs of
Truth be managed, and carried on in the same power and wisdom, which is pure,
and peaceable that all in Humility may submit to Christ's Rule and Government in
a spirit of meekness and condescension; keep out all roughness, harshness, one
toward another, and all self rule, and dominion, that is not of the life, but
in the will of the flesh, and let all this be kept down for ever, and no
strange fire be kindled among you, nor in your meetings: and elders, and
Overseers, must not be This is the very Temper and Spirit he is fallen under,
as is already Observed at Large.
self willed, nor soon angry, nor given to haste or passion, nor any shortness
or britleness; for such keep not in a sound mind, nor in discerning, either of
true judgment or mercy, which are both to be exercised, among you, as the
spirit of life opens to you the conditions and states, to which they properly
belong; for as all looseness, disorderly walking, and scandalous conversations
and practices, must be severely reproved, and judged out, especially amongst
them that are convinced of the precious Truth, and the guilty to bear their own
judgment, and burden; so likewise mercy and forgiveness, must be extended to
such as having been over-taken with a fault, comes to feel a true tenderness in
their hearts through judgment, and to receive counsel that they may be
preserved in fear and watchfulness: and let not Judgments, and Testimonies
against miscarriages and offenses be made If the Matters alleged in W. R. his
Book against G. F. and others by Name, were true, How does it agree with this
Exhortation, in making of them so public as he has done? See how he condemns
that in others, which he allows in himself.
more public, than the miscarriages are, to harden those that miscarry, and
give the adversaries of Truth advantage to throw dirt upon friends; but be
careful and tender for the truth and friends in that matter, and endeavor to
save the souls even of those that are tempted, and drawn aside: as also that
private differences that may happen amongst any friends or brethren, be ended
by some few in the wisdom and counsel of God, with as much privacy as may be,
without troubling or disturbing the public meetings, or Churches with them,
and without public reflections upon persons, where the difference or offense
on either hand, is not notorious or publicly manifest, but best to be ended
privately, both for the preservation of them who are concerned therein, and the
preventing of such occasions, as may either stumble the weak, cause confusion,
or give the world occasion to It Is a very little matter what becomes of the
Honor of Truth, and the Holy Profession thereof, with W. R. now, who has set
himself in defiance of the Friends thereof, under the Notion of Apostates and
Innovators.
reproach friends and Truth. And friends, we do desire that all differences may
be ended, in the several Counties, where they do arise; and that the honor of
God, and the peace of the Church, may be minded both by those who cause it to
be defamed, and those who are to determine, and that none join with such a
singular spirit as would lead him to be This W. R. is not a little guilty of,
in frequently Refusing to refer his Matters, and Acquiesce in the Judgment of
a free Meeting of Friends; and when he has upon Occasion agreed to such a
Meeting, he has made it his business to Quarrel with the Judgment and
Determination thereof, as in the Case of Robert Barclay, more particularly
observed hereafter: See his Backslidings, and Condemning himself now, in that
which he Allowed not formerly.
sole judge in his own cause, but in the restoring and healing spirit of
Christ, both the offended, and the offender may for the truths sake submit to
the power of God in his people, in those Citys, place, or Countries, with such
friends, as the parties concerned shall call to their Assistance.

And Friends, let the Authority of Gods power, heavenly and peaceable Wisdom,
be Eyed in all your Assemblies, that the Government of the Truth and
Righteousness may be Exalted over All, that true Judgment and Mercy may have
the place: And although a general Care be not laid upon This Testimony in
behalf of the good Order and Government in the Church of Christ; and G. F. as
one more particularly Instrumental therein, as that which Answered God's
Witness in All, compared with the Character of him and it, in W. R. his Book,
would require large Observations; to which, we give general Reference, but may
instance a few Passages in page 45. of the first part, he says, We are Jealous
(but who that we is, he does not say) the Corruption, Usurpation, and Injustice
may creep in by such, who contend so much for Church Government, with Respect
to outward Forms of Government, since the Form some take to Govern, is in some
Respect, worse than the Forms of diverse Apostate Christians; this is a wicked
Abuse of many Faithful Friends, concerned in his Charge, in the said page.
every Member, touching the good Order and Government in the Churches Affairs;
nor has many Travessed therein: yet the Lord has said it more upon some, in
whom he has opened Counsel for that End; and particularly in our dear Brother,
God's Faithful Labourer, G. F. for the Help of many. And God has in His
Wisdom, afforded those Helps and Governments in the Churches, which are not to
be Despised, being in Subjection to Christ, the one Head, and Lawgiver,
Answering, his Witness in all, and so all necessary Counsel, Admonitions, or
Testimonies How does this agree with his Advice in the Epistle? and, What is
the matter now? Is the Constitution of the Government owned amongst the People
called Quakers, and the helps afforded thereby, which he so much Commended
formerly, as having a Service in a Subtendency to the Light, and as proceeding
from it, now become altered, or ceased, and worse than the Apostate Christians
(God forbid) and Rebuke his lying Spirit? what were those Dignities and
Governments that W. R. with others gave such a Judgment upon the Despisers of,
but the same he now pours out so much Contempt upon? And is the Encouraging
of the People of God to be Diligent and Faithful therein, and to Judge all
contrary, exalted, and opposing Spirits; now become doting on outward Orders,
and a neglect of God's Teaching, as he Insinuates in his Preface, page 30. or
justly be termed Imposition, Persecution, or Setting up another thing than
Christ Jesus, to be King and Lawgiver; no such matter: It appears by this
Epistle, he thought it not so formerly; or are the said Helps and Governments
Christ has so afforded in his Church, as he confesses, become the promoting a
Zealous Observation of other Men's Lines, made ready to their Hands; or the
pretended Dictates of the Spirit, through others, or at best through that one
Man George Fox, as is Contained in page 40. of his Preface. No sure, the Change
is in himself; see his Prevarication, and how he is become Degenerated, and
found by his Writing and Opposition, pulling down and Destroying what he once
Built up.

What is the matter that he had so much Unity with George Fox, and adhered to
him in these things formerly, and now so bitterly Smites, and Inveighs against
him? Is he (viz.) George Fox, a Changed Man? No, Thousands can Witness to the
contrary whose Consciences he has Answered, and does Answer in the Power and
Wisdom of God; and is A sweet Savor of Christ in them that are Saved, and in
them that Perish: For the Apostle says, Unto one, We are the savor of Death
unto Death; and unto the other, the Savor of Life unto Life, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16.
or are the principal Matters of Fact, which William Rogers alleges against
him, said to be of late Years, since he so nighly owned him: No, no, but many
of them long before; from which, as also what he Charge him with of later
Times, he has already Answered, what seemed worth taking Notice of; and
Vindicated his Innocence, and Manifested William Rogers his malicious Abuses of
him.


that have been given Forth, and Received in the Universal Spirit of Life and
Unity, have their Service for God, in subjection to his Light and Subservency
to, and in order to Answer the great Rule and Law of the Spirit of Life, as
proceeding from it: And they that are Spiritual, will acknowledge those things
spoken or written from this Spirit: and for this end, to be the Requirings of
the Lord; and many in diverse Places have Received Help and Encouragement from
Him; through those Helps and Governments, that he has Afforded in the Church,
the True and Living Body, which we are Members of; in which (as all keep their
Habitations) there is a Sweetness, and Harmony of Life, Unity, and Subjection,
one to a-another, and a preserving one of another, in the Lord. Yet every Man
in his own proper Order; for every Member of the body is not Note, it is not
Intended, or Understood hereby, That some of the Members of Christ's Body,
should be without his Divine Light in their own inward Parts: for Christ the
Head of the Body, is One in the Male, and in the Female (as the Apostle says)
who gives Light unto them all; which as they abide in it, gives them to see,
and have Unity one with another, and with the Doctrine, Counsel, and
Instruction, which he Immediately opens, and gives forth, in, and by, his
Faithful Servants, in whom he more fully opens his Divine Counsel; unto whom,
he has committed a Dispensation of the Everlasting Gospel of Peace, who
faithfully Labor in the Life and Doctrine of Christianity; and therein are
good instrumental Helps in Government.
an Eye; and yet each Member has its proper place, and Service, and all in
Subjection to the one Life, Power, and Head, which is Christ; and it has been
observed by us, that that Spirit which despises Government and Dominion, and
speaks Evil of Dignities; is either a Singular, or a Self-Righteous,
Self-Separating Spirit, that would (it self) bear Rule, and be Judge over all;
which also Works to stumble and darken the simple, or a Loose, Disobedient,
Careless Spirit, that would not be Reformed, but altogether live at Ease in the
Flesh, and fleshly Liberty, which the Power of God will Rebuke; It had been
well for W. R. if he ever had this Dominion, that he had kept it; for it is the
same, and no other, that the Brethren seek, and are Exercised in, for no other
End or Interest, as they have Declared; God is their Witness, who knows the
Secrets of all Hearts, and will plead with W. R. in his Righteous Judgments,
for being found in the wrong Spirit, that does surmize or insinuate Jealousies,
to the contrary, as these Lines Import.
but though he has given us Dominion over that Spirit, and its perverse Ways,
which opposes the Power, and would work Division, and lead into corrupt
Liberty; yet it is no Dominion over your Faith, that we seek, but that we may be
Helpers of your Joy in the Lord; and you as diligent Co-workers, together in
the Faith and Love of God, wherein we may be all a mutual Comfort, Joy, and
Crown of Rejoicing, one to another, as having one Master, and we all Brethren
in Him, who is the Lord of the Household, and God of Glory; whose Glorious
presence is with us; and it is a wrong Spirit that would surmise, or insinuate
Iealousies, or beget prejudice against the Faithful Laborers in the Gospel,
and Helpers in Government, to Mis-represent such, as aiming at any other Ends
and Interests than Christ's Interest and Government over all, which God is
Record, we are clear from seeking or claiming at any other. And in his How came
W. R. by this Authority and Power, to give Judgment against such Works, and
Workers, and deny, and quarrel with it now? Is it not Manifest to be, because
he himself is fallen into the same Snare, not only of being Secret, but now as
an open Enemy to the Truth, and Heavenly Society therein. And we are persuaded,
if he Repent not, the time will come, when he will find his own Judgment, as
it is already seen by the Faithful, to be Verified in his own particular.
Authority and Power, we stand Witnesses against that Spirit forever, both in
our open and secret Enemies, which either Smites at our Heavenly Society, or
would break our Unity with the Prince of Peace, who is our Head and Lawgiver,
unto whom Thrones, Dominions, Principallities, and Powers are jubject, be Glory
for ever, unto whose Power and Government we commit you all, and in true, and
endeared Love, Rest

Your Dear Brethren William Rogers. Authur Eastmead. William Penn, James Hall,
George Coal, Charles Marshal, William Gibson, John Moon, John Langstaff,
Samuel Thornton, Edward Brown, James Claypoole, Robert Barclay, John Cox, James
Merrick, Thomas Briggs, Morgan Watkins, John Rauce, Charles Lloyd, Richard
Almond, Robert Carry, Thomas Green, John Anderdon, Alexander Parker, John
Whitehead, William Brend, John Bauldren, Will. Fallowfield, Samuel Cater, James
Adamson, Stephen Crisp, John Grave, George Whitehead, Jasper Batt, Thomas
Salthouse, Samuel Wattson, Luke Howard,



We desire the true Copies hereof may be Communicated to, and Read in the
several Quarterly, Monthly, and other Meetings, of Friends and Brethren
throughout England, and elsewhere.

Now if it be queried How comes it to pass, that William Rogers is so
Metamorphosed or Changed in a few Years, as to appear thus in perfect
Contradiction to himself, in judgment about the same things; either he must be
in the right then, and wrong now; or contrariwise, in the right now, and wrong
then?

The Answer according to the Witness of the Spirit of Truth in our hearts, and
experience we have had of him by his late Fruits, that Evil ( viz. Pride and
Envy) has altered his Understanding, and Deceit beguiled his Soul, and
Prejudice against the Lords Work, and many of his faithful Laborers has Eaten
as a Canker until the Love that was once raised in him, came to be destroyed:
And now his Soul is filled with Bitterness, in which the Enmity lodges, and
though his pretenses are high, as all his Predecessors in this Work were, in
whom Satan was Transformed, and wrought in a Mystery; yet with the Light he is
seen, and judged to be as they also were, in the Mystery of Iniquity: And what,
though in his fallen Wisdom, which is Accursed, he lifts up himself on High, and
would have the World believe, as though God had raised him up as the great
Reformer of our Age; yet do we know, and are assured with many hundreds more of
the Flock and Family of God in this City, and in the Counties adjacent, to whom
he is personally known, That He is not of God; for, we have not only tried his
Spirit, but his Works also have made him manifest. And albeit, he begins and
makes use of these Words of Christ in his abusive Book (As I hear, I judge) we
know he is a man Uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, and therefore his judgment is
unjust, and he has no right to take up the words of Christ, and apply them to
himself; for, he has judged many he has never heard. Christ said, judge not
according to outward Appearance, but judge Righteous judgment: But how void
William Rogers is, either of the true hearing or judgment, has been by his
Un-Christian behavior amongst us, and by his manifold abuses in his Book
(grounded upon Reports and Conjectures) of many innocent men, and by his self
Contradiction, as by the foregoing Epistle, is abundantly manifest. And, truly
we are sorry for him, that he should so backslide, as he has done, and fall
from the right way of the Lord, and footsteps of his Flock and Family, which
he once rejoiced in. And it is very remarkable; to see how directly William
Rogers has trodden in the same footsteps with the several Apostates that have
arisen up from among our selves, in that, like Saul against David, he has so
maliciously levelled his Arrows, and cast his Javlin against that one Man, G. F.
above all others; loading him as hitherto has been done with manifold
Calumnies and Reproaches, which the Lord has, and we doubt not, but still will
blast, and make his Innocence to appear over all his wicked Designs, to the
confusion of his, and Truths Adversaries, whatsoever they are, or may pretend
to the contrary. And, the cause thereof, we conclude to be from the Enmity of
the wicked one, the Son of Perdition, that has entered the heart of this man,
William Rogers, as he has other Instruments formerly, where he sits, and is
Exalted, in a high Profession, to the end that he may the better deceive, and
draw from the Blessed Unity, and fellowship in the Truth and heavenly Guidance
of the Light it self, into a Selfish, Disorderly, Looss, Libertine Spirit, from
God, and unsubmission, and unsubjection one unto another, according to the
Gospel Order in the Churches of Christ; That by how much the more God has made
use of our dear Friend, G. F. and honored him with the first Message of the
Light and Truth, as revealed in our day and age, whereby the Hearts of many
Thousands have been gathered from the Evil of their ways, and converted unto
God, and remain living Witnesses of the Appearance, Blessing and Presence of
God with him, and bear the Seal of his Ministry, and continued faithfulness
unto God therein, who has also endued him with Understanding, and Wisdom, in
the openings of his Council, wherein he has been, and is instrumental in the
hand of the Lord; For the settlement of good Order and Discipline in the Church
of Christ, as Helps and Governments; for its Establishment and Comfort in him,
who is its sure Foundation and Rock forever. By so much the more abundantly,
has the Enemy wrought by his Instruments against that faithful Servant of the
Lord, viz. G. F. to hinder the Lords Work, and to Obscure his blessed
appearance in him, and through him, and among his Chosen People, to their joy
and Comfort in their Heavenly Society, they are gathered into: But the Lord
has hitherto blasted their Designs, and made their Folly manifest, as he does,
and is doing at this day, Blessed be his Name for ever.

We shall now proceed to take some notice of a few more passages in his Book,
and first, that, in the 2d. and 3d. pages of his Preface, wherein he says,
That so great a Concern of Conscience lies on many, to encourage the
publication of his Book, as we can no longer forbear, lest it should be
reputed, that the Doctrine and Life of Christianity were wholly extinct amongst
the aforesaid People.

Here, as in diverse other places of his Book, we cannot but Observe, that, he
claims many to be concerned in Conscience with him, in the publishing thereof,
thereby magnifying his Number; But, who or where those many are, we know not;
William Rogers might (if he had pleased) or may yet, tell us by what Name they
are called, and we would have him know, we expect it; that so, we may be able
to satisfly our selves, upon a due Consideration of their example in Life and
Doctrine, whether they are men more fitly qualified than himself, for such an
undertaking; especially if any of them live in this City, because upon enquiry
hitherto we have not been able to find them out. It seems to us, if W. R. had
so many bright, and shining lights in the Doctrine and Life of Christianity,
above the rest of their Neighbors, (viz.) the people called Quakers, to whom
it was become such a Concern of Conscience, as he writes, they should be as a
City, set on a hill, and come forth, and own it publicly in the face of all
people: but this we are doubtful is too plain and open for him, to talk of many
in the dark to father a work of darkness, seems to carry more credit with it
than to particularize a few as Rash, Self-willed, and Injurious as himself,
that does own it.

Alas, Alas! To what a height of Folly and Pinnacle of Conceitedness is this man
arrived. The Prodigy of our Age, as it should seem by his Book and Bullwork
against Apostasy, now showing himself as an Ensign to the Nation, lest it
should be reputed, that the Doctrine and Life of Christianity were wholly
Extinct among the People called Quakers.

As to the Life of Christianity, we have already manifested how much he is a
stranger to it, through his perverse Practices among us, and corrupt Nature
Ruling in him, and consequently, a very unfit man to be set up as so great a
Reformer, or, to concern himself so much about the miscarriages of others, as
he accounts them, Mat. 7.5. Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of
thine own Eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy
Brothers Eye.

And as to the Doctrines of Christianity, not to insist upon his saying and
unsaying again, ( viz. in that he has one while confessed they are publicly
owned, another while charging an Apostasy therein, We refer to the many printed
Testimonies written by diverse eminent Brethren, still living, in the Defense of
the Gospel Truths; and how much in perspecuity and clearness, they are beyond
any thing in William Rogers his Book, is left to the impartial Reader to judge;
as a Reproof to his strange conceited Confidence, as well as false and ungodly
insinuations against them and the People called Quakers in general, as though
the Doctrine and Life of Christianity were in danger of being reputed to be
wholly Extinct among them, unless he and a few others (in comparison of the
People called Quakers; however he is pleased to magnify their number) who are
of party with him, had discharged that concern of Conscience, he pretends lay
on many, to encourage the publication of his Book, designing thereby, no doubt,
being the natural Consequence of his Lines, to obviate the Universality of such
a Reputation, by rendering themselves the men that kept their primitive Station
in the Life of Truth, and retained the ancient Doctrines thereof, whilst they
undertook so generally to detect so many of the most public, and most reputed
Quakers (so called) and their Adherents, who are People in general who have
Unity with them in the Truth and blessed order thereof (and which makes up the
other part) of Degeneracy therefrom into an Apostasy and Innovation.

It still seems strange to us, that such men (if such they be whom W. R.
intends) should lie so hidden and concealed, as not to be found, and no less
strange, that they should make use of, and encourage W. R. to be their mouth to
speak to the world by, who has known so little of the sanctification of his
Nature, and consequently very unlike what his lines bespeak them to be. This
adds no Credit to their matter, but gives just occasion of jealousy, and will
do, unless they disprove it, by a discovery of themselves, That what ever is
pretended, they are but too much like him; for if it be otherwise, and that
they really are such as excel in the Doctrine and Life of Christianity, let
them come forth, and show themselves: What though they are but as one of a
City, and two of a Tribe, yet if they have the Truth on their sides, that is
stronger than all, and shall prevail.

It is likewise to be observed, after what an injurious as well as disingenuous
a rate William Rogers, has dealt with the People called Quakers, in often
gathering up the words of some person or persons, we know not who, neither does
he tell us, nor when, if ever spoken by any, particularly the Doctrine in the
sixth page of his Preface which he makes so much ado about in several parts of
his Book, as one of his great Marks of Apostasy, wherewith he reflects upon the
Brethren, (viz.) Let us exclude Reasoning, the Wisdom, and the jealousy, and
let us have an Eye to the Brethren. But who sees not the unrighteousness of
such dealing, which together with many pieces and scraps of matter collected
out of diverse Papers and Epistles, he has not only quoted in such a confused
manner, that no Reader, unless before acquainted with the grounds and occasion
thereof, can rightly understand, and consequently, not in a capacity to make a
sound judgment therefrom: But to extort a judgment, as it were, from the
inconsiderate and prejudiced, he has so paraphrased upon such Words and
Doctrines, such scraps and pieces of matter, so collected by him, and framed
such notorious false insinuations, and perversions therefrom, and vilifications
of many faithful and eminent Laborers, and through them the generallity of the
People called Quakers that adhear to them, as guilty of such things as their
Souls abhor, and is particularly mentioned in the beginning of this Treatise,
which the Righteous God of Heaven and Earth sees and beholds, and will plead
with him, and recompense him for it in his due time, if he Repent not.

The next thing we have to notice of, is his unjust Charges and Reflections on
those Sixty-Six Friends and Brethren, that subscribed the Epistle dated from
Ellis Hooks his Chamber, the 12th. of the 7th. month, 1677. and more
particularly with relation to his manifest abuse of the four Friends of
Bristol, that were concerned therein.

On this Epistle it is (to take little notice of his Objections against the
Constitution of the Meeting it came from, more than to tell him, that what he
would not have it to be, that it is, ( viz. from the Yearly Meeting) we observe
William Rogers grounds another of his great Marks of Apostasy he charge those
Brethren with, viz. judging of the Merits of the Cause without hearing the
same, Preface, page the Sixth; and for proof thereof, says, That John Story
and John Wilkinson have been judged by many of the Subscribers thereof, if not
all, without a hearing of either Party; for, that the Epistle does not import,
that the judgment given was on the hearing either of one or both Parties,
Convened before them, 2d. part page 77. But the fallaciousness of this
Insinuation will easily appear by what follows.

We have already given an Account of the Meeting, that many Friends and
Brethren had with John Story, and John Wilkinson at Drawell in Yorkshire, and
the Result of that Meeting.

We have also signified, how J. S. and J. W. have behaved themselves since, to
the grief of those very Friends, abusing them both by word and writing, with
many opprobrious Terms, disowning their Judgment, as Unjust, and Unrighteous,
etc. Extenuating Their Paper of Condemnation, not owning it as such against
themselves, continuing their former Subscriptions to a Paper tending to a
Separation, upheld and maintained in some part of Westmoreland, etc. whereby
they made void, as to themselves, the Benefit of all those Transactions at the
Meeting aforesaid, and which would have Succeeded, had they behaved themselves
as they ought to have done: But forasmuch as they have continued in the same
Spirit of Division and Separation, Contemning the Counsel and Advice of those
Brethren, they still stand justly Chargeable with those things they were before
found Guilty of.

Those things considered, the Sixty Six Friends and Brethren, who Subscribed
that Epistle, some of them being the same that were personally present, and
concerned at the Meeting at Drawell, before mentioned; and many other approved
Traveling Brethren in the Work of the Ministry (however now termed, Vpuarts,
Apostates, and Innovators) having received satisfactory Knowledge, upon the
undoubted Credit and Testimony of many Brethren of their Proceedings at
Drawell. And likewise, many of them being abundantly sensible; and diverse
having certain Knowledge of their persisting in the same. Spirit of Division
and Separation, had a Concern upon their Spirits, under the Apprehension of the
dangerous Consequence of such Men's Traveling up and down in a disreconcil'd
Estate (sowing, and spreading their Discontents and Divisions, being forewarned
thereof) with a renewed Admonition against that Spirit of Division, and causion
to Friends to beware thereof, which was the cause of their giving forth that
Testimony; which however they ( William Rogers, and some others) are Disquieted
at, is Just and Righteous in the Sight of God, and stands good upon their
Heads, and will do, until they Repent, and be humbled under the sense of their
great Offenses.

Friends having this Sense, as abundantly appears in their Epistle, That they
still persisted in the same Spirit of Opposition and Separation, as before;
What Merits of the Cause were here to judge of more, than was already
Determined, unless it were Their persisting in the same Work of sowing and
spreading their Divisions, and offering their Gifts, whilst disreconciled to
the Brethren? Which was Evident to the Friends of that Meeting, in their
rejecting the Advice and Counsel before given them, by Epistle from the
Yearly Meeting, to the contrary.

We having thus opened the Ground of this Matter, do Commend it, with the
following Queries, to the Conscience of the Impartial Reader, to Judge, Whether
such a Charge, as William Rogers has given, against no less than above Sixty
Friends and Brethren, at once, as no small Mark of their Apostasy, viz. of
being Guilty of judging the Merits of a Cause, without hearing the same, or of
Disowning J. S. and J. W. though they could not justly Charge them of Evil, be
rightly imputable to those Brethren, upon signing their Epistle, to whom the
knowledge of Matters transacted at Drawell, were so Transmitted, as is before
Related.

First, Whether? Since it was not feazible, that the Church, or every Friend
concerned, for the understanding of the Truth of the Matter, relating to J. S.
and J. W. could go down into the North, to hear the probation thereof, the
Testimony given in a Narrative, from so many faithful, approved Men, upon
inward Sense, and plain external Evidences of Witnesses, be not sufficient
proof against the said Men? Secondly, And if this be not, What can be? Matters
considered, with those Circumstances abovesaid, amongst the Societies and
Transactions of Men, either in things Temporal or Spiritual, wherein Men many
times transact Matters upon the unquestioned Credit one of another, whilst
under necessity of great Remoteness one from another? Thirdly, Whether to give
Credit to one or two Men, in his or their own Cause, against more than twenty
Eye and Ear Witnesses, who are Conscientiously concerned to hear and search
into the Truth of Matters, be consistent with Reason, Christianity, and true
Wisdom? Fourthly, Whether not only the Refusal of such Testimony, Evidence, and
Judgment, as was given from the Meeting at Drawell, upon Examination, and
Proof of Matters, John Story and John Wilkinson being present, but the
Invalidating thereof, and Reflecting on those Meetings and Friends (as False
Accusers, and Judges of the Merits of a Cause, before they Hear it) who do
Receive it, and join with it, and unto whom the Truth has been so evidently
Transmitted, carries not with it an unavoidable Tendency to overthrow the
Authority, Credit, Service, and frequent Practice of Friends of Truth, in their
Meetings throughout the Nation, in any Case; and thereby to Strengthen the Hand
of Transgressors, and their Abettors in their Insolency against the Truth, and
the Friends thereof in General?
Let all Persons of Sobriety Judge, Whether the Consequence of this, which has
been, and is William Rogers's Practice, be not to open a wide Door for Apostasy
and Licentiousness, by which means, A Man may be proved The Worst of Men in one
Country, and come into another, and stand upon his Justification, and be
Abetted therein, notwithstanding the Testimony of such as heard Matters proved
against him? And, Whether this does not Manifestly Destroy the Faith and Credit
one of another, the Ground, both of Christian and Civil Society. Had not that,
the Consequence of this, had it been the Practice of the People called Quakers,
as it Manifestly has been of W. R. and his party, given the World just Cause
to Judge, as W. R. by many Suppositions, and false Premises does insinuate,
That the Doctrine and Life of Christianity, were in danger to be wholly
Exstinct amongst them.


And now, as to William Rogers his several Charges against the Four Friends of
Bristol, of being False Accusers, and refusing to admit a Meeting to Prove the
Matters in Charge, in the aforementioned Epistle against John Story and John
Wilkinson, before an equal number of Friends, Chosen on each Part, part 2. page
10.

To this we Answer, It Is no wonder William Rogers has termed those friends
False Accusers, seeing he has not stuck to say the like, or worse, concerning
many other Faithful Brethren. How Unrighteous this Charge is against the Four
Friends of Bristol, or any of the rest that Signed the Epistle, may appear by
what is already Written: Neither do they nor we remember, That ever we refused
a Meeting upon those Terms, provided, they should agree, what should be taken
for Evidence; although, if they had refused such a Meeting, we cannot see how
that could deserve any just Reflection, seeing Experience teaches us; That
when the Guilty, or any of party for them, has equal Liberty to choose, without
whose Concurrence, no dicisive Judgment must be given: The Consequence
thereof, is like to effect nothing but Controversy, and a shelter to the
Offender, as is before hinted, which Leads us to make this Query; That

Whether the admitting of no Meeting to be equal for the decision of spiritual
matters in Controversy, but what is made up of a certain number of chosen men
of each side to judge (the offender having an equal Choice) be not wrong and
inconsistent with the practice of the Friends of Truth; and has not a tendency
to make void the Authority of our Meetings, in which the Power of the Lord, in
its free Exercise, is to be Guide and Judge?

But, whatever William Rogers pretends, The Obstruction to a Meeting by
consent, principally lay in the disagreement, as to the reflection of this
Question, viz.

What should be sufficient Evidence for proof of those several Charges
contained in the Epistle? which lead the four Friends, and others in their
behalf, to insist upon the Narrative of Friends from Drawell, with the
Examinations and proofs of matters there, which they had in Custody, together
with John Story and John Wilknsons Writings, to which their hands were; but
this would not be accepted of by W. R.

And, as to the other abusive passage in the same page of his Book, viz.
Whether will they (meaning the four Friends of Bristol) as yet admit a Hearing
before any Meeting, wherein the Witnesses to the Accusations, should be
excluded from being judges.

Both they and we say, Its utterly false; most of us then, being present at the
Meeting, which was on the 16th. day of the 5th. month, 1677. where these things
were discoursed, do declare, that we never heard them so express themselves,
but do look upon it as one of William Rogers's ungodly Charges, and grievous
Perversions of their words; what was spoken, from whence it is supposed William
Rogers has falsely drawn the aforementioned Conclusion, was, That they could
not have any of the several Brethren excluded from being present, and to be
concerned in judgment, that had given forth the Account from Drawell (whom
William Rogers indeed has called false Accusers) but who were faithful
Witnesses to the proof of the Accusations, and not Accusers themselves, as his
Charge seems to insinuate: All which things they have manifested more at large,
in a partiular Answer long since. And although, William Rogers is pleased to
say, in his Book, That a Reply thereto has manifested their notorious
Weakness, if Charity may excuse them from wilful Wickedness; But how, nor
wherein, neither they, nor we know. As for his expression of notorious
Weakness, we esteem it as the Fruit of an over-fond conceit of his own
Abillities, above others: And if he has Charity to excuse those Friends from
the Imputation of wilful Wickedness, we should be glad of the like, were not
our Eyes and Ears witnesses of such Fruits from him, on diverse occasions, as
almost leaves us void of room, or any just pretense for so much Charity, in
many respects, concerning him.

And as for the Bristol Certificate, subscribed by twenty seven Friends on
behalf of G. F. his Innocence, to the best of their knowledge As a man remote
in Spirit and Example, from any such Practice, either in Bristol or else where,
as Flying in times of Persecution, though often charged therewith by Apostates
and bad Spirits, and now implied in William Rogers 's Charge against him: To
which they not only oppose their Observation of him in Bristol, but their
Experience, and confirmed since to the contrary, by his large Travells,
Sufferings, and Imprisonments in many Iales, in which They never knew that he
has flinched, but endured patiently, etc.

Which Testimony of those Friends of Bristol stands clear, and unspotted over
all W. R. his Cavils, and injurious Reflections in the 69th. and 70th. pages of
his fifth part, wherein he compares them to Perjured Iuformers, suggesting,
That their Evidence must needs be false, as though they undertook to prove a
Negative, which was impossible for them to do, because they conjectured the
time of G. F.'s being in Bristol, then about fifteen years past (being a time
of Persecution) to which they supposed it must needs be, that W. R. should
Assign that fact of G. F. his departing out of the Meeting, and going down a
back pair of stairs, to avoid the Persecutors, adding thereto, That they never
knew, or could remember, any such thing by him; They being generally all, or
the most part of them, at all the Meetings G. F. was at here, and yet they do
not limit or restrain their Testimony to that time only; but extend it to all
others, to the best of their knowledge, having never seen any just occasion for
such a Charge: But William Rogers taking advantage in that he had not nominated
any time for his Charge, makes use thereof, endeavoring thereby to baffle
their Evidence, though in truth it renders his the weaker; hence it is, that he
charge them with Undertaking to prove what was impossible for them to do,
unless they had been at all the Mettings in Bristol with G. F. that ever he was
at with him, which is not unlikely, but that most of them might: But what
juggling is here? and how does this man fence and dodge, not only to extenuate
the Credit of those Friends Testimony, but to stave off the imputation of a
false Accusation from himself, in saying, he had affixed no time; and yet does
not deny, but that the time they mention, was the time intended by him, which
should in reason render their Testimony of more Credit with the Considerate.

Neither does he say any thing to the Objection made against his mentioning a
back pair of Stairs that G. F. should go down, etc. for indeed there was none
such, both pair of stairs being equally public, and common for Friends
constantly to go up and down at, out or into the street, as he and others well
knew. More might be said, but this we judge sufficient to every impartial
Reader, who shall have the sight of that Certificate on behalf of G. F. and
William Rogers's Objections thereto, to manifest how unrighteously he has
done, by comparing the Subscribers thereof to Perjured Informers, who are many
of them both men and women, anciently and publicly known in this City, and
approved for their Truth and Faithfulness in the Consciences of honest People
of all sorts therein; The Consideration as well as knowledge whereof in W. R.
we cannot but apprehend was the Cause why he omitted all their Names, except
One, viz John Ware, a man less publicly known in the City, then most, if not
any one of the rest, whereby his disingenuity and unfaithfulness does not a
little appear.

Thus it may be seen, how William Rogers takes upon him to abuse the People
called Quakers by wholesale (as we use to say) having so learnt the habit of
impudence, as sometimes upon his bare single Credit or say so, and that in his
own Cause too, not only to oppose the Truth of the Testimony of many Brethren;
but to abuse them with approbrious Reflections, whom he has therefore termed
false Accusers and Persecutors, and no less than above sixty Friends and
Brethren at once, whom he renders Upstarts, Apostates, and Innovators, for
signing the aforesaid Epistle.

And at another time, Charles Marshall and thirty six Brethren more, are by
him, as sole judge in his own Cause, charged of being guilty of signing an
unrighteous Paper, because of their decisive judgment given against him
therein, upon a free hearing of the Difference betwixt him and Robert Barclay,
as may be more particularly taken notice of ere we have done.

And many of the Ancient and faithful Friends, and Inhabitants of the City of
Bristol, are wickedly compared by him to Perjured Informers, because of their
Christian Testimony in behalf of G. F's Innocence, in that matter W. R.
Charge him with, and against whom his Enmity and Rage is great. But let him
consider, that the time hastneth, that for all these things he must come to
judgment.

And now as to the many and personal Injuries, and Misrepresentations of Robert
Barclay, and George Fox, the one with respect to Doctrine, the other to Life
and Conversation, wherewith great part of William Rogers's Book is supplied, we
refer to their own, or some other hand, for particular Replies thereto; only
noting first, as to the business of Robert Barclay, that it is an Argument to
us of no small Impudence in William Rogers, to continue his Cavils against His
own meanings, and misconstructions of Robert Barclay's Doctrine in his Book
entitled, The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. and perfectly savors of his being
led, and Acted by a Spirit that will be sole judge in his own Cause, a thing he
has formerly Condemned in others, as may appear in the afore-recited Epistle,
to which his Name was: And the reason of this Observation is, because his
Unchristian dealing with Robert Barclay, and slender ground he had for his
large Objections against some passages in his Book, was so clearly Evidenced in
the Consciences of many weighty Friends at London, with whom he had a Meeting
by consent ( Robert Barclay being present) for the hearing, and resolving his
Objections, which was effectually done, and by his own Confession he most
Christianly dealt with therein, and the Truths asserted by Robert Barclay, were
vindicated and cleared, from the Misconstructions of William Rogers, whereof
some of us were both Eye and Ear Witnesses, as at large appears, as well by the
Testimony of that Meeting, subscribed by thirty seven Brethren, as from
William Rogers his Letter under his own handwriting, which he drew up as
satisfaction for the wrong he had done Robert Barclay; wherein William Rogers
does not only acknowledge, That he has not done according to Gospel order by
Robert Barclay, but was justly worthy of blame, in what he did; But also, that
he is persuaded, that Robert Barclay is not principled as he and some others,
by some passages in his Book, took him to be. Notwithstanding all this, William
Rogers has gone about in his Book, to undo, or unsay, what he has said in his
Letter, and to publish his Objections against his own meanings and
misconstructions of what Robert Barclay has written in his said Book, like a
man fighting with his own shadow; thereby making void as much as in him lies,
the determination of that Meeting, reflecting on the Friends, as guilty of
signing an Unrighteous Paper.

What shall we say, or think concerning this Man, whom nothing will serve, but
to be sole Judge and Vmpire in his own Cause; and unless this be granted him,
he appears to us resolved to be Contentious, though it be to his own Ruin.

The other thing we have to take notice of, with Relation to William Rogers's
Charges against G. F. is (not only considering William Rogers, a man of such a
Temper as is before employed) to hear how little reason G. F. had to take notice
of his pretended Dissatisfactions against him, though indeed restlesness,
turmoile and enmity, of Spirit against him, manifest by his rude and
un-christian method he has taken, too large here to recite; but also as a
Reproof to his false Insinuations against G. F. in his Book, as though he
shunned the Test, and as being unwilling to submit to justice; to manifest the
contrary, how G. F. called William Rogers to account at a Meeting here in
Bristol, for proof of diverse Charges and Insinuations, contained in a Letter
under William Rogers his own hand against him, and now made public in William
Rogers his Book, and what the Result of the Meeting was, as it appears by the
following Certificate.

WE underwritten, being at a Meeting at Richard Sneads, the 15th. of the
12th. month 1677. to hear a Letter read, that was writ by William Rogers to G.
F. containing several Accusations, Charges, and Insinuations against him, do
hereby declare, that it was read, and that William Rogers owned it, and when he
was called upon by G. F. William Penn, George Whitehead, Lawrence Steel,
William Gibson, and others, to prove his Accusations and Charges against G. F.
and others, he refused so to do; and notwithstanding he was entreated, and
urged long thereto, yet said, it shall not be, I will not proceed, unless G. F.
will under his hand Charge me, and give me his Charge in Writing. Thus he
shuffled with the Meeting: And though we told him, that the Letter was his, and
consequently, the Accusations and Charges were his, and therefore, that it lay
at his Door to prove them, yet he persisted Obstinately to give us no Proof,
and so went his way.

William Penn, Charles Jones, John Moon, Richard Snead, Richard Vickris, James
Merrick, Charles Jones, Jun. Peter Walter, Stephen Smith, Erasmus Dole, etc.


These things considered, and William Rogers his apparent shifting and
shuffling herein Manifested: What Reason had G. F. or any other, to take any
more Notice of his Letters, than of Waste-Paper? or to Regard his impertinent
Rambling, Clamours, and Railing up and down in diverse Parts of the Nation,
against him (about Matters whereof he had already Cleared himself in Writing)
and that whilst G. F. was far remote in the North; and yet when he was near the
City of London, and William Rogers in the City, he would not, (as we are
credibly informed) go to him. We say, What Reason had G. F. or others, to
Regard William Rogers in these practices, any more than they would any other
Apostates or open Adversaries? What hopes could G. F. or any other, have to
satisfy such a Man, whose Prejudice and Enmity was so great, that he was in
Travel to give Vent thereto; and yet thus Manifestly deprived of common Modesty
and Equity, usual amongst Men, in case of Difference; insomuch, that he either
will not Acquiesce in the Determination of a Matter, when Heard and given
Judgment upon; but instead thereof, make it his business to enlarge his Abuses
against the concerned therein; or otherwise shift and shuffle, and at length,
utterly refuse to make proof of his Charges, when called thereunto?

There is one thing more, we cannot omit to make mention of, viz. the manner of
William Rogers his abusive Insinuations and Charges, not only against many
Eminent and Faithful Brethren; but (through them) against the generality of the
People called Quakers, as Apostatized, etc. chiefly with Respect to the blessed
Order and Government they are Exercised in, and is Established among them, viz.
That it is most frequently to be observed in his Book, that his Method is to
draw positive, and scandalous Conclusions, and wicked Perversions, from not
only uncertain, but most false Premises and Conjectures, salving himself, as
well as he can, with these and such like Expressions (which are his usual best
Reasons for his many foul Accusations against them) viz. If Reports be true, we
take it to be thus; we have cause to Believe; I cannot but be full of
Jealousies, etc. like the wicked, that said, Report, and we will Report; And
after the Example of Thomas Hicks, and John Faldo; when by his Suppositions,
Jealousies, Doubts, Reports, Meanings, and Misconstructions, he has made up
his Man of Straw, as we may Term it, or Apostate-Innovator, and called him a
Quaker, he then bestirs himself, and as yet retaining some Notions of Truth in
his Head, he does bring them forth as Arguments to Fence with against his own
Work, whilst the Enemy of his Soul keeps him in Blindness, that he cannot see
himself to be the Man. How much this is his manifest Practice throughout his
whole Book, and how wretchedly bad such Courses are, is left to the impartial
Reader to judge.

We having thus (for the Truth's sake) discovered William Rogers his Spirit and
Behavior amongst us, and something of his many Abuses in his Book, more
particularly with Relation to some Friends, and Passages in this City; we
Commend what we have Written to the Witness of God in every Conscience, not
doubting, but the judicious Reader, when he has duly weighed the Management
of William Rogers, with reference to the Matters herein treated of, will see
Cause, as well from the Matters themselves, as the slenderness of the Credit,
wherewith the Abuses therein manifested are attended, both to detest and loath
such extravagant Courses as he has taken, to Reproach the People called
Quakers, and their Holy Profession, and to suspend his Belief of other things
delivered in his Book, against some particulars, no less Injurious, until time,
by some other Hands so Manifest them.

Richard Snead, Charles Harford, Richard Vickris, Charles Jones,


THE END.
LONDON, Printed for John Bringhurst, Printer and Bookseller, at the Sign of
the Book in Grace Church Street, near Cornhil, 1681.


