THE DAYSPRING from on high visiting the WORLD: OR Gods Salvation revealed,
and the work of Redemption declared, and the way opened into the Everlasting
Rest.

ALSO The two births discovered, and their several Image, and the enmity that
is betwixt them.

WITH The Lambs appearance in Glory, and his Power and Government Exalted.

By WILLIAM SMITH.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

THere is a dark night of Apostasy over the Earth, in which the world are asleep
upon there beds of ease, and their eyes are not opened to behold the wondrous
works of God, neither can they believe it though it be declared, for they will
neither see with their eyes, nor hear with their ears, nor understand with
their hearts, but stands despising the work of the Lord, and the appearance of
his righteousness; Therefore does the Lord God utter his voice from his holy
hill, and the sound thereof goes forth into the world, and the words reaches
unto the ends of the Earth, that all may awake and behold the salvation which
now is revealed in the springing of the day, for the acceptable time is come,
the morning Star is risen, the day is dawned, the Son of righteousness shines,
and it is from on high revealed, that the eyes of all might be opened who have
so long slept the sleep of death, that they might see their Savior, whose Name
is Jesus the begotten of God, the brightness of his glory, and express Image
of his person, in whom is the fullness, and unto whom all power is given, the
Father is well pleased in him, and none comes to the Father but by him, there
is none besides him nor any like unto him, who is full of grace and truth, look
unto him all ye ends of the Earth, for the day of your visitation is come, in
which the grace of God appears, be ye all turned unto it, that your eyes may
be opened to see the love that God has unto you, for God so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten Son who is the light of the world, in whom the
promise of grace is fulfilled in breaking the Serpents head, and recovering out
of his snare, he it is that does redeem, who is not of the world, but Redeemes
out of the World all that believe in him, for he works the work of God, and
destroys the work of the Devil, and casts out the man of sin, he fans the
Nations with his hand, and purges the floor by his mighty power; Kings shall
bow before him, Nations shall tremble, the mighty men shall fall, and Princes
shall be broken by his might, who is now appearing in power and great glory to
Judge the world in righteousness, unto him does the Law and Prophets witness,
unto whom he was revealed, and in his life they prophesied, and spoke of the
glory that was in him, which was to be revealed unto ages to come, and is now
broken forth in these last days, and is beheld as the glory of the only
begotten of the Father, and the Law and Prophets have their end in him, and are
all fulfilled by him who is come to perfect the work of God, and he has the
witness both of the Law and Prophets, therefore unto him look, who is salvation
to the ends of the Earth, who visits you in this his day, and reaches unto you
with a manifestation of light, that you may therein see the evil of your doings
and come to repentance, that the true light may lead you, which is manifest
from God unto you, that thereby you may come out of darkness, death and
bondage, to know the Redemption which by the Lord is wrought, and plentifully
revealed in this his day, and put not this from you to ages past (for therein
you deceive your selves) but all look near, and see what you can witness of
Redemption from your vain conversation, and salvation from your sin, for it is
not you^ talk of what God has done in times past for others, and what great
salvation unto them appeared, and how they were saved, that will save you, or
Redeem you, but to have your minds turned unto that which they was Redeemed by,
and saved in, and to feel the the power of it to work effectually in you as it
did in them who were true witnesses of it; for what will it profit you to read
of the great deliverance wrought by the outstretched arm of God, for Jacobs
seed out of Egypts bondage, if you find not the same work wrought in you by the
same power, you are not in their deliverance, but are still in bondage, and are
kept in that which they was delivered from, and so his work was wrought upon
the blind, the Lepers, and the lame, and the blind received sight, the Lepers
was cleansed, and the lame walked, and this you may read as it is declared, and
yet may your eyes be blinded, and your leprosy not cleansed, nor your ancle
bones strengthened, you may read of the promises and the consolation which they
had who did believe in them, and yet may you be out of them and miss the
consolation that they found in them who believed in that unto which all the
promises was made, for all the promises of God are yea and Amen in Christ Jesus
(mark) yea and ^men are all the promises in Christ Jesus, in whom they stand
sure; and all your reading and talking of these things declared, and saying
these promises you believe in, and you apply them by faith, and so receives the
comfort, it will not stand you in stead in the needful time, for whilst you
talk of faith, and applying the promises by faith, you deceive your selves in
your imaginations, being yet in your sins, and out of the faith of the Son of
God which purifieth the heart, and so you are out of the condition of those who
lived in the promises, and knew them to stand sure in the seed; Therefore all
unto the light come, and in it wait, that you may feel the same power to work
in you, and bring the same thing to pass in you, as it has done in ages
before you, that whilst you talk of liberty by Christ Jesus, your selves may
not be found servants unto sin, and in bondage to corruption, for of whatsoever
a man is overcome, unto the same is he in bondage, and if you be found servants
unto sin, you are in bondage to it, and not in the freedom of the Son, so all
having sinned, all must unto the light be turned, and by it be Redeemed and
know the power of it to work true freedom into the glorious liberty, before any
can truly say that they are set free, for all must stand as they are before the
Lord; therefore think not your selves to be above what you are, least whilst
you think that you are something, you prove nothing, and so deceive your
selves; fore there is a groaning felt in you under the bondage of corruption,
and unto that does the breathings of life reach, that the heavy burden might be
undone, and the oppressed set free, which in you is pressed as a cart that is
full of sheaves, and by you in bondage kept, for unto the Lord of life are you
found enemies and fighting against him, and hates to be reformed by him, though
long he has striven with you, and now is the Lord God holding forth plenteous
Redemption, and making known his salvation, and in his good and perfect gift is
visiting all people, that all may turn unto the light, and come out of darkness
and depart from evil, which is made manifest in the light, and so come to feel
the Redemption of of God in your selves, and the operation of his Spirit which
works the work of God, and brings forth fruit unto holiness, for as in sin
you abide, you are not redeemed, neither knows Christ nor the working of his
power, but abides in the unbelief and in darkness, and brings forth unfruitful
works thereof, the imagination of your hearts being always evil, and that you
love, and hates the light which does reprove, and will not come to it, which
does as truly work in power as it is believed in, as ever it did in ages past,
and salvation is as truly felt in the leadings of the light, as they felt it
who declared of it, and were called out of darkness into it; so it is of
concernment unto every one to prove themselves, that the pure rejoicing you may
have in your selves and not in another, for the Lord God is visiting all in the
light, and has given a manifestation of the Spirit unto every man to profit
withal, then the gift of God you are not to neglect in your selves, but are to
take heed unto it, and every motion of it, that your minds may be ordered in
it, and lead by it to the knowledge of the living God, whom to know is life
eternal, and none did ever come to the knowledge of him, but as they was turned
to the light, and heeded the light which shone in their hearts, in which the
knowledge of his glory is manifest in the face of Christ; and do you think to
come to the knowledge of God by another way, be ye tried in this ye Priests and
Professors and all people, if the knowledge of the true God you be come unto,
whom to know is eternal life, are you come to know this, or are you not in that
knowledge which can never come to know the true God? be honest with your selves
all of you, and see if you become to that in which the knowledge of his glory
has been revealed from the beginning, for now it is the same as ever it was,
and it changes not, but is witnessed through ages and generations to be always
the same, without any variableness, for that which Abel was guided by, and in
which he offered up a sacrifice in righteousness, the same guided Noah, and in
it he preached righteousness, the same appeared unto Abraham, and he believed
in it and was guided by it, and rejoiced to see it and it was counted unto him
for righteousness, and in this was secrets revealed unto the Prophets, Moses
lived in it, and by the manifestation of it was the Creation opened to his
understanding, and he saw to the beginning, and so declared in the openings of
life, and all the holy men of God were inspired by it, and gave forth the
Scriptures in the motion of it, he that has ears to hear let him hear, for
this was a perfect guide unto all that believed in it before writings was, and
all the words that are written, do bear witness unto the word which was in the
beginning with God, and it was God, and they had all Redemption by him, and
salvation in him who believed, and this was a guide unto the righteous from the
beginning, and would you have another guide now? you have lost that which
guides holy men, and righteous men, and gives them the knowledge of the living
God, and you feel that you want a guide to bring you to God, but takes not heed
to that which is manifest from him, which does reprove you as you are out of
the way, and would lead you in the way of life would you turn unto it, but you
hating the reproof of it, does not come to know it, and so you follow a guide
which leads you in the way of death; for that which guided Abel, Noah and
Abraham, and all the holy men in times past, when they had no visible thing to
be a guide unto them in the way of life; it is the same now, and as sufficient
now as ever it was, and they were made holy and righteous in it, and were
accepted of God; And would you be better then they were, who were righteous
men, and holy men, redeemed from the earth, and saved by the Lord, and were
accepted of him? Consider of this, for there is not another Rule besides Christ
who is given for a Leader, that he may be Salvation unto the ends of the earth;
therefore all come unto him, and in his light believe, that you may feel his
power to work in the inward parts and purify your hearts, for there is a
measure given unto every one of you, that does reprove you in secret as your
minds be after evil, be ye turned unto it, that you may feel the work of it, to
cast off the weight that lies upon you, and the sin that so easily besets you,
that the seed out of bondage may arise and come forth; for as the light is
believed in, so is the power felt, to rend the vail and scatter the clouds, and
makes mountains fall and hills melt, and is dreadful to Pharaoh and all the
Egyptians; he that is wise in heart may read how he is acquainted in his own
particular with the operation of Gods Spirit, for Redemption is plentifully
revealed in this present age as in times past, and many bear true witness of
it, who has felt his power that works in the day, who has made known his
Salvation, and revealed his glory, and brought many sons and daughters unto it,
where they know the truth that makes free, and are redeemed from the earth,
and saved by the Lord, and their minds are after heavenly things, and they
worship God day and night in his Temple, and gives glory unto him that sits
upon the Throne and unto the Lamb for ever and ever; and this is the true birth
that is born of God, whose Image is heavenly, and he works the work of God, and
all that believe in him are saved by him* for the Devils work he does destroy,
and the sin he takes away, and that is done by him which no other could do, and
so does the Redee^^^ live, and the stone Elect is known that is precious, which
all the wise builders set at naught, and are bringing forth false births in
their own wills, which bears the image of the earthly, and neither redeems nor
saves from sin, but they abide in darkness and brings forth the works thereof,
and are in the house of bondage kept, and knows not the Rest and Peace in God;
and so all people who he from the light, they are from the guide that leads
in the way of life, in which secrets are revealed, and the Mystery opened, and
though such swear the Lord lives, they swear falsely, for his life they know
not, but are enemies to it, and every appearance of it, and so brings forth
their own conceivings and preaches it for Doctrine, and stands in similitudes
and likenesses, forms and imitations, where the false birth is exalted and the
fleshly mind puffed up which breaks forth in appearance, and makes a great show
of godliness, and in that glories, but the power is denied, and Christ is
rejected, and his appearance persecuted by this fleshly birth; Therefore does
the Word of Power reach unto you all, ye Highpriests and professors, that unto
the light you may be turned, and have your understandings opened to know the
Scriptures, that you may learn of him of whom the Scriptures testify, for he
is the power of God unto Salvation to all that believe, and he will teach you
truth in the inward parts, and make you to be of understanding hearts, to know
Redemption by him and Salvation in him, who gives true freedom out of bondage,
and leads into the Fathers love where all fears are cast out and doubtings
removed, the flesh being subdued and the false birth crucified, his
righteousness is received in whom the Father is well-pleased, and this is the
day of Redemption which from the beginning was and is now witnessed to be the
same, and so declared in the Spirits power and not in words which man's wisdom
teaches, for that is earthly and cannot reach unto things above, nor know the
Mystery of the heavenly, and that makes the world so ignorant of the things of
God, because they are from the Spirit of God, in which secrets are revealed,
and in which the Mystery is opened, and the only true God known, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent, which none can comprehend or know with that which is
in the transgression, and at enmity with God, though words they may have, and
in them be puffed up, yet from the life they are found, and in their carnal minds
are at enmity against it; Therefore miserable will all your Comforters be, who
knows not the Consolation of Israel, and in the day of calamity your strength
will fail and your hearts faint, and it is coming upon you, and will be heavy
upon your heads; And who then will remove it or take it from you, who knows not
Christ within you? Therefore all know this from the Lord, that form without
power will not save you, nor the Letter without the life will give you peace,
and if either be found amongst you, let your doctrine and practice be examined,
and let it be tried what image it bears, for you wanting the life and power of
God, your birth is fleshly, and born of the flesh and of your own wills, and
not of the Will of God; Therefore arise and depart, for it is not your rest,
you are polluted, and your image is defiled and must be destroyed, for he
appears against you whose Image is heavenly, and you must be taken and slain
before him, because you will not that he should reign over you, for he is
destroying Antichrist with the brightness of his coming, and with the sword of
his Spirit is he slaying the wicked, and all flesh is but as grass before him,
for he is blowing upon all your glory, and it fades away and dies as the
untimely fruit, and if your eyes were not blinded, you might see the arm of God
dashing you one against another, and breaking you in pieces as potsherds of the
earth, and scattering you as the Sun scatters the morning clouds, and this is
the day of glory which shines forth in brightness, and discovers all your
emptiness in the Son of righteousness, who is risen in power, and gone forth
rejoicing, and all your idols of silver and gold must be broken down by him,
and the carved works of your own hands must fall before him, for his Image is
heavenly, though you have marred it and sees no comeliness in it that you
should desire it, because the worlds glory is not upon it, therefore cannot you
believe that it is he, but puts him to open shame, and with your sensual wisdom
crucifies him, and under your earthly carnal minds buries him, and sets your
own life above him, and so is our Lord crucified in the streets of spiritual
Sodom and Egypt, where he is trodden under foot and despightfully used;
consider if ye be not found enemies to God, who hates the Light, and loves your
evil deeds better, walking after the flesh and satisfying the lust thereof, and
sets the lust above the life, which makes the seed to groan under the bondage
of corruption, bearing the earthy image which is in the transgression; Now all
be awakened, for the day is come, and the true light shines in which the
Fathers love is manifested, and plenteous Redemption witnessed, be ye turned
unto it all ye ends of the earth, for there is not another Savior but he that
is born of God, and comes into the world to redeem out of the world, and take
away the sin of the world, in whom the Fathers bosom is opened, and his love
tendered unto all people that none might perish, but that all might come and be
saved, he that can receive it let him, for this is the only begotten of the
Father, which is come in power and great glory, to put an end to sin, and
destroy the work of the Devil, that the bands may be unloosed and the Prisoner
freed, and every captive redeemed by his outstretched arm; this is good tid^ngs
unto the poor, Salvation is come, that the mourners may be comforted and the
feeble strengthened, that all who breath after God, may walk with him in the
light of the living; Now let all flesh be silent, for God is risen the glory of
all flesh to stain, and Nations and Kingdoms to subdue, Who stands exalted
above him, and brings forth a birth that is not of his begetting, but is of
Hagars seed, and rises up against him, and is at open enmity with him
despising and rejecting, reproaching and reviling, crucifying and slaying the
appearance of him who is the express Image of the Father; Now let all be
measured with the line of true Judgment, and then it will be seen unto whom
this condition will reach, and who they be that are in the enmity, and in that
exercises cruelty against the Lord of glory, disdaining and scorning,
reproaching and persecuting the life of righteousness, the day of trial is
come, the Throne is prepared for Judgment, and He that Judges Right sits upon
it, who is the Lord of Hosts; come ye Priests and Professors appear before him,
and stand your trial, he will do you no wrong, but will pass true Judgment,
according to the evidence which shall be given in by the Just witness in your
Conscience, and then will you stand guilty before the Lord, for the sentence
will pass against you, and the Judgment will fall upon on you, and a Just
recompense of reward will be given unto every one of you, and this is in the
breathings of Gods love declared unto you, that you may once turn before
repentance be hid from your eyes, for you have often been warned, and still you
have refused it, and hated to be reformed; now look unto him whom you pierce,
let your joy be turned into heaviness, and your laughter into mourning, that
you should so despise him who would have you to be saved, and so evil entreat
him who has so long suffered and been patient toward you; Now stand still in
the pure fear of God, that you may come to see Salvation, which is so
plentifully revealed and made known in the breakings forth of the love of God
in the light, that you may come to witness Redemption by him who is the way to
the Father, whose coming is prepared as the morning, to give light unto such as
be in darkness, and this will be known unto you all, that it is not want of
love from God which will be the Condemnation, but your hating the light which
from his love is made manifest unto you, for a manifestation of the Spirit
there is given unto you all, that you thereby might profit, and who joins to
the Spirit, joins to the Lord, and denies the evil deeds, and comes out of
imitations, and over all false births to the birth immortal, before which the
false birth dies and comes to an end, and all imitations withers and consumes
away, and in that are you glorying, which the Spirit of the Lord is blowing
upon and blasting, and though you be heightened in your glory, and stands as if
you were rich, and had need of nothing, yet are you fathomed to the bottom, and
your ground is tried, and you are seen to be poor and miserable, and the woe
does reach unto you who are covered, but not with the Spirit of the Lord;
Therefore come down you high and lofty ones, who have climbed up another way
then by the door, you are thieves and robbers, and have stolen words from your
neighbors which is not your own, and have sowed them together, and made you a
covering, and in it stands decked as a painted harlot, yet will not all this
hide you from the pure eye of God, for he is enquiring after you, and his voice
reaches unto you, and in the cool of the day he comes to see where you are,
you being erred from him, and out of Communion with him, for Adam was fallen
from God, when it was said unto him, where art thou, read in the fear of God,
and try your ways and doings, O ye Priests and professing people, and see
where you are, whether in the innocence, or subtlety, in the life, or in
knowledge, covered with righteousness, or with leaves, bearing the image of
the heavenly, or the image of the earthly, in which of these are you consider,
for the day of visitation reaches unto you all who be out of the way of life;
put off your coverings, for they will not hide you, nor be a defense unto you,
for now does the Lord appear against you, and his controversy is with you all,
and the day hastens toward you that burns as an oven, and all the proud and
the wicked must be the stubble, and it will burn and there shall be none to
quench it; therefore be not you deceived, for God will not be mocked, he sees
your ways and doings, and you cannot hide your Council from him, though many
things you do he has no pleasure in them, neither does he require them at your
hands, he is weary of your meetings, and your prayers he hears not, though
you make many of them; but heaven is shut upon you, and the showers does not
fall, and so you are a parched heath that brings forth no fruit, neither does
your will worship and fained humility make you stand approved in the sight of
God, neither do you please him, nor are your performances accepted, for you
walk after the flesh, and satisfies it in the lust, and so joines to the
harlot, and commits whoredom, and brings forth a child of whoredom, and the son
of an adulteress woman which is at enmity with the seed of life, and
persecutes the birth that is born thereof. But now is the Lord redeeming his
chosen, and unto the good land is bringing of them, in which all wars cease,
and every one comes to know a quiet habitation in the lot of their own
inheritance, and possesses their own portion with joy and gladness, and fits
under their own vine where none makes them afraid, for into the holy city many
are come, where the Lambs government is known, who is set upon his throne, and
in great power does he reign, to subject the kingdoms of the world; for he is
the Lord, and all must worship him, who in his glory does appear, and of whose
government there is no end, for he has taken to him his great power, and
rules, and with his own arm does he scatter the proud, and with his own arm
does he gather the humble, and in his hand does lead them into the holy City,
where he is King for ever, and makes all wars to cease, and seals an
everlasting decree of peace; this is the new Jerusalem come down from God out
of heaven, where there is, no^ curse nor sorrow, nor hell, nor death, but the
glory of the Lord fills it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, in which many
walk who are by his power redeemed from the earth, and are made to sing songs
of deliverance, and gives glory unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb for evermore; and this is the rest prepared for the people of God,
into which many are entered, and many are pressing in the light of the Lord*
Therefore arise you wearied ones, and forth of Egypt depart, the day of God
reaches unto you, that out of darkness you might come, in which you have long
sojourned as in a strange Land, and under a strange government, where you are
oppressed, and evil entreated, arise and come forth, the day of Redemption is
come, and he who is the light of the world makes himself known, and his
visitation reaches unto all; Stay not behind him, but his outgoings wait to
know, who leads in his light, and will not leave you in darkness, nor under
Pharaohs power, but will ease you of your burdens, and break open the house of
bondage, and free you from oppression, and guide you in the way prepared to the
everlasting rest; gird up the loins of your minds, for salvation is near you;
stand still and see it, for the day has appeared in which Gods arm is
revealed, by which the Sea is divided, and Pharaohs host destroyed; therefore
who is Pharaoh, and what is his power that he should withstand God, is not he
the King of Egypt, and his power the power of darkness? and is not the Lord
the King of glory, and his power made known in the light, which is a plague to
Pharaoh and his house? for God is making his power known upon him, because he
is his enemy, and stands in his heard heartedness against him, the hand of
God smites him, and the breath of the Almighty is kindled against him; and
that is come to pass concerning him which all the Inchanters of Egypt cannot
do: Therefore a warning this is from the Lord God unto all that be his enemies,
and are found fighting against him, and resisting the light of the Lamb, that
you may all repent and turn to the Lord, before utter destruction come upon
you; for God confounds all your devices, and brings to naught all your
Inventions, though you sit as Kings in Egypt, yet from thence is God bringing
you down, and makes your Councels to be of none effect, your great host cannot
save you, nor all your horses and Chariots defend you from the outstrethed arm
of God, who is smiting your firstborn throughout, and you must know that there
is no God like the God of Israel; Therefore cease thy cruelty thou violent
beast, whose power is in the dark, in which thou have long Reigned, and also
made war with the Lamb and his followers, and shed innocent blood, with which
thou have made thy self drunk, and yet art not satisfied, but still thirsts for
more* how have thou been exalted, and set up in thy glory, that the world has
wondered after thee, and has said, who is like unto thee, who is able to make
war with thee? for the power of the Nations has been given unto thee, and from
thence have thou had thy life; but now thou must know that there is one above
thee, in whom all power is, who subdues the Nations under him, and takes away
thy life from thee, that thy strength fails thee, and all thy beauty goes
from thee, and thou appearest an ill favored harlot, for now thou art seen
within, and thy nakedness does appear, thy covering is removed, that thou can
not hide thy self any longer, and now does he rise against thee, that makes
war in righteousness, who with great power is come, the pure and undefiled
One, who upon his throne over all does reign, thy heads and horns to break, and
to redeem his chosen from thee, whose power is filled with cruelty, and thou
shall know that the Lamb in his power reigns. Therefore let Sion rejoice, and
the daughters of Judah be glad, because of Gods righteous judgments, who is
pleading the cause of the innocent, and executing vengeance upon the beast,
destroying his marks and names; his heads and horns (let him that reads
understand) Rejoice ye Saints, and all you holy ones, for the Lamb is exalted
in dominion, and of his government there is no end; for he is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, and the holy hill of Sion is his throne, and there he does
reign with the Scepter of his righteousness, and executes true judgment upon
the heathen who are in their rage against him, and would not that he should
reign over them, he is taking vengeance on them all, and he will be eased of
them, because they are his adversaries, for none shall prosper that fights
against Sion; for the time is come that God will have mercy upon her, and out
of the dust she is arising, and the oil of joy is given for mourning, the
garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, therefore all you tender
ones, whose face is Sion-ward, walk in the light of the Lamb, and follow him
whithersoever he goes, stand in the innocence and meekness of him, and know
his strength to gird you about, and feel his power to obtain the victory; for
you God has visited in his everlasting love, and made known his salvation in
you, and given you to believe and also to suffer for his sake; all keep in the
word of his patience, and let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be
perfect and entire, wanting nothing, but stand complete in him, who is the
head, and fear not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their revilings,
but be ye clothed with humility, and put ye on the garment of Righteousness,
and show your selves in the Lambs meekness, that his own life in you may preach
to the world, and his own innocence may shine through the vessel, that God in
you may be glorified, and your hearts in God may be comforted; and in that all
dwell which God has revealed in you, and keep your minds down in the
stillness, that over all the Lamb you may feel, his government everlasting in
you to set up, and his righteous Scepter over you to reign, and so in the
Kingdom all lie down, where the Lamb is exalted upon his throne, and know the
righteousness and peace that is therein; for there is gladness of heart
obtained, and the everlasting rest prepared, unto which you are redeemed, and
are by the Lord a people saved, therefore be ye all joined together in the
Lords love, and there abide in the holy fear, that the teachings of the Lamb
you may always hear, and that you may feel his hand to knit you together, and
bind you up in the bundle of life, and so to be made perfect in one, that his
image you may bear who is without sin, and in his life reign over hell, and
know your bodies prepared to do his will, that with one heart and mind you may
serve him, and feel your increase in him, that you may grow up together into
the measure of his fullness, whose life is perfect, pure, and holy; and let
none look back again, nor turn aside to either hand, but keep to that which
leads in the way, and feel it to prepare the way before you, that out of all
Reasonings you may be kept, and out of all snares preserved, that so you may
walk worthy, (in the power of God) of the high calling whereunto he has called
you, and in his power live to his praise, for God has done wonderful things
for you, and his own outstretched arm has brought great things to pass, who
has reached unto the mighty, and brought them down from their seat, and has
exalted that of low degree, and out of bondage has delivered you, and leads
you in a way that you did not know; go on rejoicing, and be ye faithful unto
death, for the Lords goodness goes before you, and the everlasting rest is
prepared for you, and into the good land will the Lord bring you where the milk
honey flows, and the fountain of life opens, in which strength is renewed,
that there is neither weariness, nor faintness, but everlasting joy and
gladness; therefore be ye comforted in the Lords love ye dear children of
light, for the world sees not that which God has prepared for you, nor knows
not the food which you feed upon, for it is hid from their eyes; but blessed
are your eyes, for they see, and the things which God has prepared for you are
unto you revealed by his spirit, there be you all stayed, and wait to feel him
carry on the work which in you he has begun; and he will make bare his arm for
you, and drive out all enemies before you, and settle you in a quiet
habitation, and cover you with his wing, and preserve you under his shadow, and
in the Kingdom prepared will he establish you, and seal an everlasting decree
of peace unto you; and this is your portion ye tender ones, who have denied
your selves, and the worlds glory, and have no inheritance therein, but
follows the Lamb in faithfulness, and walks in the paths of Rigteousnesse;
your portion is durable riches, and your inheritance that which never fades
away; for the Kingome is everlasting, and he that reigns therein endures for
ever, and of his government there is no end.

THE END.

