AN Epistle to the Flock of Christ. Being a Heavenly portion distributed from
the Love of God.
DEar Friends, and Brethren, Beloved in the Lord who have obtained Grace; Mercy
and Peace in God the Father through the Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom God has
appeared in Light and life where ye have seen the excellent Glory of
Immortality, and the riches and treasures of that Kingdom which is not of this
World, and having seen that glorious sight or spectacle by the appearance of
the heavenly seed in your inward parts, so you have seen both what the truth
is, and from whom it comes, and you know that it is God of all truth who has
manifest truth unto you and you having loved truth in the manifestation, so you
are in measure acquainted with its virtue and operation, and (...) has drawn
you with a cord of love out of your dead works to serve the living God in
holiness of life, and you being joined to the truth with constant and steadfast
minds, your love and obedience is more enlivened and quickened to the leadings
and working of it, so that you are followers of the truth in love to your own
satisfaction and comfort, and this was the gift of God which unto ^^u was given
in the beginning to lead you out of Egypts darkness ^^d bondage, and by which
the word of salvation was first preach^^ unto you for you Restoration and
recovery out of that th^al^^m, and as your love and obedience has stood in
Faithfulness (...) the Word of Salvation that was first p^eached unto you, so
you ^now the blessed effects of it unto your deliverance out of Egypts ^arkness
and bondage, and also knows that glorious liberty and ^^eedom which in the
truth you have obtained by the mercy of God, and so you know how the appearance
of the heavenly seed ^^th withered the Earthly Weeds, and how the light has
driven ^way darkness, and truth deceit, and life death, and love envy, and
meekness wrath, and patience fretfulness, and temperance in^rdinacy, and faith
unbelief, and peace trouble, and joy sorrow, and as truth has thus changed you
by the operation of its power (...) bringing with it all these heavenly virtues
and graces into ^our Souls, so it has made you new creatures by regeneration
in overcoming that spirit and nature in which ye were prone to evil, and where
darkness had dominion over you to oppress you with heavy burdens, and by this
ye are come to know that the Almighty has showed you kindness and tender
mercies by manifesting himself unto you in a needful time, and stretching forth
his arm to help you when distress and trouble was upon you in your captivity,
for then did you travail in pain and groan in sorrow as wanting deliverance,
and the Lord did pity you in your mournful state, and sent a visitation to
you in an acceptable time, and a deliverer came in power that has broken the
bands of death, and raized you from under the region and shadow of it, and so
you have seen the Lord in his appearance and goings, a^^ are acquainted with
his power both in killing and making a li^^ and also in pulling down and
raising up, and how he has shown kindness to you for your everlasting good, so
that ye are beco^^ as Plants of his Right hand, and Babes of his own Family, a^
Lambs of his own Flock, and now knows your portion in the he^venly Seed and
Life which is immortal, and have taken up yo^^ rest in that land which
strangers does not possess, where know the Inheritance sealed unto assurance,
and so cannot look (...) any other thing to be your comfort, peace, or
satisfaction b^ the heavenly inheritance in Christ Jesus, and has drawn y^^
from things below and fixed your eye upon things above, a^ that which comes
from above is your portion and consolati^^ and every one has a part according
to the kindness of him th^^ disposes and this heavenly portion is distributed
amongst the heavenly plants Babes and Lambs whose satisfaction is the will of
God, the bread from heaven is broken unto your feed upon, and water of life
flows unto you for your refres^ment, the heavenly seed is an open Fountain
from which Etern^^ life is freely ministered unto you that have renounced evil
are a^ good things prepared, therefore my dear Friends and Brethr^^ be not
careful or a portion or Inheritance in fading things, for you are dead to all
fading things so life and immortality wi^^ take you up into heavenly Mansions,
and into a heavenly por^io^ and inheritance, and there you will know that all
things are h^^ with Christ in God for you, and that will ease you of the
bu^densome care that may come upon you by looking (...) Temporal Possessions,
and you will feel the Heaven^^ Power, and Li^e, in Dominion over that which
would draw you into Temporal things to weaken your Faith wit^ doubtful Fears
and there your Immortal Souls will be (...) liberty and freedom in the
Immortal life, and you will have ^^e rejoicing in your heavenly portion as
being the only good (...) God is the only good, from whose heavenly love a
heavenly ^rtion is distributed amongst you, and as God is the only good, ^en so
is his gift that proceeds from him, and his gift being (...) only good it is
eternal life, and they that receive the heavenly ^rtion receives eternal li^e,
and lives by their portion, and (...) that lives by their portion they praise
the good which is ^od.

Oh this is the excellent treasure and portion which is immor^l and never dies,
happy for ever are you that have a part in it, ^d keeps it to the end, your
tree is planted by the Rivers of Waters and brings forth Fruit in due season,
your leaf does ^^t fall in Winter, nor wither in Summer but you always flourish
^^d are fair in fruitfulness for the heavenly power is over you to ^^eserve and
keep you at all seasons, and so you are the branches ^^at the living Vine
sends forth to bear Fruit to Gods glory, ^^d this being the work of the Lord
by the operation of his hand (...) is in his hand preserved from being blasted,
and though Win^er storms may be violent, and Summer may yield a scorching ^eat,
yet the hand of the Lord preserves you from the extremes ^f both, and your
Fruit does not decay, because it is of that seed which henceforth and for ever
God has blessed.

Oh glorious God, full of good, thy name is wonderful, and thy ^lect remembers
thee.

Oh holy life, full of light thy appearance draws unto thee, and ^hy offspring
loves thee.

Oh living power, full of operation, thy work sanctifies, and ^hy workmanship
depends upon thee.

Oh infinite spirit, full of virtue, thy Fountain ministers, and ^hy Family
praises thee.

Oh blessed truth, full of grace, thy word instructs, and thy Followers exalt
thee.

Oh heavenly wisdom, full of divinity, thy counsel orders, and thy children
honors thee.

Oh Eternal Majesty, thou art all in thy own fullness, thou distributeth and
never wants, none can add unto thee, none can take from thee, none can compel
thee, none can limit thee, thou art from everlasting and none is like thee, the
seed of Abraham lives by Faith in thee, and the Fruit of his loins are heirs of
thy Kingdom, and in blessing thou blesses them according to thy promise, and
unto thee they gave endless glory.

Oh all ye Lambs of life, praise ye the Lord, he that is one only true, and
wise in himself, the maker o^ all things, who of himself can do all things,
praise ye his power with the powers of your Inner man which by Regeneration is
renewed: and in praising be humble before him that your mellody may be well
pleasing to him, for he is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, the High and Mighty
One that distributes your portion, and as ye sit in the heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, he will fill you wi^^ his goodness, and so praise his name in the
land of the living, and bless the one and only God who blesses you.

So all dear and beloved friends every where, all wait for the distribution of
your heavenly portion which the heavenly God gives with his own hand, that ye
may be always ready to receive it in his own time and having received it from
his hand be choice of it, and not prodigal with it, for it is an excellent
treasure, and not to be lavished, and you that are choice of it, as you receive
it in the distribution from the love of God, it will be a precious portion unto
you, and you will feel it renewed and increased as you are choice in the using
of it; and so your portion will not decay by Prodigal spending, but will be
always ready to relieve you when you stand in need, and there you will gather
strength in the Lord and in the power o^ his might to stand in this strong
tempest which is broken forth to overwhelm the render desires and breathings
which God has begotten a^t^^ himself, and if it were possible to beat down the
pure appearance of truth and righteousness, and to lay waste the true way and
worship of the living God, and as the violence of this furious tempest blows
upon you to cause your hearts to fail from following the Lord in the leading^
of his light, and so to bring you back again into Egypt and the house of
bondage; so you had need be watchful to the power of the almighty which is
able to preserve you, and to be strengthened with might by his spirit in the
Inner Man, that in the leadings of the light you may all continue following the
Lord in his own way, and not be turne^ aside to ei^h^^ hand, or driven back
again into the old nature, for if any turn aside, as if they would stand and
fee the end, and then think to turn in again when a calm may come, they may be
so ta^en captive as never to se a r^turo, and if any go back again into the old
nature for safty and security, there captivity will be great and heavy; for
these are the things designed by the violence and fierceness of the ^^mpest,
and if it could ^ron aside or drive back again by its fury, then the nature of
it would be a liberty to triumph in the works of Iniquity, therefore all dear
friends, be watchful to the light and power of the Lord God, that in him ye may
be strong to stand against the tempest in its fierceness and fury, and set the
Lord always before you that he may lead you and keep you in the way
everlasting, for it is in vain for any to fly to the Mountains or Hills for
help and salvation, because the tempest will pursue thither and find out the
most secret place, but the name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous
fly rhither and are safe, and so it may be said to the Righteous it shall go
well with them, because they fly to the name of the Lord for Refuge and Safety,
and so are neither turned aside nor driven back again, but in the name of the
Lord are preserved, and are quiet from Fear of evil, and so it is well with the
Righteou^ whose dwelling place is in the name of the Lord, and blessed ar^ the
Righteous that ke^ps their habit^ t^ch and are re^mov^d, the Lord is your
strength and po^ti^r, and Crowned R^j^ycing.

Oh you are amiable in your dwellings who in the light have taken up your rest,
your Garment is an Ornament of ^xcellen^ beavty, and your bed a sw^^t and
pleasant sav^ur, and in you^ faithful testimony the Lord has pleasure, and
because you only seek the honor of his name he will honor you, and th^ugh the
dark places of the earth be full of cruelty against the in^cc^ncy o^ your life,
yet the power of the Almighty will be a sure de^erce over the glory, therefore
gird up the l^yns of your minds and hop to the end, for God is with you.

And dear Friends, I cannot but exhort you in Brotherly kindness to be steadfast
in the Faith, c^ntent in patience, and quiet i^ meekness, and abounding in
love, that no part of the garment spotted of the flesh may appear upon you, but
the pure Heavenly Wisdom and Righteousness of Christ Jesus may fill you are
cloth you, then Wisdom will instruct you in all things wherein truth is
concerned and so in wisdom to be ordered in the truth and one toward another
and let nothing but the love of truth and on^ another appear amongst you, and
that will go over and wear on whatsoever is contrary for if you have an eye one
upon another t^ give Judgment in things wherein your eye may not b^ satisfied,
it will run you into diverse apprehensions, an^ secretly work into divisions,
for the enemy is busy. ^^ advance his work if he be not resisted, there are
many things to be well weighed and considered wherein truth is concerned, and
such as are strong to bear with the weak and h^^p them, that none may be turned
out of the way that in wisdom may be preserved, for if you will consider the
present ^ime you may be sensible that you are all concerned to walk wisely both
to such as are within and such as are without, and yet not suf^or your
testimony in any thing to be weakened, and as you wait ^or Gods wisdom it will
in all things direct you as best becomes the gospel of Christ Jesus, and then
peace and unity will be preserved amongst you, and ye will all be found in the
true service of love to Gods glory.

So in all things my dear Friends be mind^ul to take counsel of the Lord God
that his Wisdom may direct you in all your ways word^ and works, and there you
will all have mutual satisfaction in the ^^^ty of one spirit to your
everlasting peace, joy and comfort, and the blessings of the Lord God will
cover you and rest upon you.

And let not your ear be open to intelligence abroad neither speak much among^^
your selves of what is done unto you or others but all dwell in the heavenly
mansions of light and life, and hearken to the inteligence of wisdoms voice,
and that will preserve you in the ^eeling of your heavenly portion.

And be not dismayed at Tribulations, but follow the light into the Kingdom,
and there you will find a sure reward for all your sufferings and afflictions.

Dear Friends and Brethren, my dear love salutes you, and unto the Lord God I
commend you, and in the Lambs patience I rest with you.

The 24th day of the 6th month, 1670, Your Friend and Brother in the tender
compassion of Christ Jesus, W. Smith.

THE END

