A REPLY TO THE Observator; TOGETHER With a SERMON Preached on the 24th of
August last past, on Gal. 6.2. at St. Giles in the Fields, (most unjustly
reflected upon by him.)

By WILLIAM SMYTHIES, Curate at St. Giles Cripplegate.

LONDON, Printed for John Southby at the Plough in Cornhil, 1684.

TO THE READER.
READER,
AS I hope you will be more ingenuous toward me than the Observator has been,
and pass a favorable Construction upon a very plain Sermon, which was far from
being intended for the Press; so I will deal as fairly in giving you an account
of some Passages which occasioned his virulent Reflections upon me. I had
formerly preached upon the Verse immediately foregoing the Subject of this
Sermon, If a Man be overtaken in a Fault, etc. Which I made choice of on
purpose to persuade my Auditors so to behave themselves toward Dissenters,
that they might be encouraged to a sincere and exact Compliance with our
Church: Upon which account there were such Reproaches cast upon me, that I was
forced to Publish it in my own Vindication. Having finished what I intended
from that Verse, I resolved to proceed to this, which I saw would give me
opportunity for seasonable Discourses relating to other Matters. I live in a
Parish where the Burden of Poverty is very heavy, and yet some have been
offended at me for concerning my self for the Poor as I have done; pretending
that it increased the number of them: I thought therefore I should do well to
give a Reproof to these Persons. There has been likewise very vexatious
Contests at Law, and great Complaints that the Innocent were slandered by
secret Backbiters. These I considered did likewise deserve a sharp
Reprehension. But that which the Observator charges me with, of suggesting that
Dissenters lay under the Burden of Oppression and Persecution, and that the
Government ought to ease them, or any thing to that Purpose, never entered into
my Thoughts, nor can I believe that he really thought I intended any such
thing: If he did, I challenge him to name another Person in the Congregation
that was of his Mind. But want of Stuff for his Papers, and not Ill will
against any that are of a contrary Temper to himself, provoked him to accost me
after this rude manner. If I had been of such Principles, as he would persuade
the World I am, certainly I should not have been so unworthy as to have vented
them in the Pulpit of that great and good Man, the D. of N. to whom he showed
but little respect, in that he knew that so far as he could be believed to
speak Truth, the D. must be very ill thought of in desiring such a factious
Preacher to supply his Absence. I have transcribed part of his Observator, that
you may see how unlike a Christian, or a Gentleman, he is pleased to treat me.

At the end of his first Column he is reviling a Magistrate, and a Constable,
by charging them with being Favorers of Conventicles, and from thence takes
occasion to ridicule my Sermon as follows:

-- What is This, but Making Friends of the Unrighteous Mammon, and Providing
beforehand against a Rainy Day? He that Shuffles, and Cuts thus, betwixt God,
and his Own Soul; and Cries, Let the King, and the Church take their Fortune,
I Will Shift for my self; That Man, I say, has already Abandoned his Post, and
Entered into a Treaty with the Faction. He does as good as say, Look ye
Gentlemen; We are Christians; and it is Our Duty to Help one Another; and to
bear one Another Burdens. If the King gets the Better on it, Let Me alone to do
Your Business: And in case of a Turn The Other way, You shall do as much for Me.
What Is All This, I say, but a Tacit Composition with a Public Enemy; where a
man delivers-up his Honor, and his Conscience for the Saving of his Skin, and
Interest? And the Devil Himself, with his Cloven-Foot, Attests the Contract.
Why This Man would have been Safe, in the Coach it self; Nay, in the very Arms
of the King and the Duke at the Rye-House, unless a Chance-Shot should have
happened to take-him-off: And he would have pleaded the very Merit of his
Services to the Party. You are Wonderfully Tender too, on the behalf of your
Dispensing Ministers; Their Good Name is Wounded it seems, for bearing with the
Infirmities of their Weak Brethren. What Is their Discretion, I prithee, to the
Authority of a Law? Do they make more Scruple of Gratifying their Weak Brethren
in their Peevish Mistakes, than they do of Keeping their Own Oaths? I have
heart of One of Your Godly Ministers that was willing to do a Good Office for a
Man of Power, and Reputation, with the Dissenters, by putting out an In Verbo
Sacerdotis to Interest; for the Use, and Behoof of the Good Old Cause: He was
Judicially Interrogated about somebodies coming to Church; and their Conformity
to the Rites, Ceremonies, and Methods of the Public Worship, as by Law
Appointed: Particularly, about coming to Church, [Yes] and then about Receiving
the Sacrament. [ Yes too.] Ay but How? ( says the Question) [Very Decently
truly] ( Cries the Answer.) Well! But what do you Call, Decently? ( says the
Question again) Is it Sitting, or Standing, or How? Come; was it Kneeling, or
not? [No Truly, it was Sitting, but very Decently.] And in another place he
proceeds thus,

-- Trim. Prithee say Nobs. If This Furious Zeal of Thine; This Inexorable
Cruelty, and Rigor, be of Heaven, or Hell? Is This according to the Apostles
Advice, [The Bearing of one another Burdens; And in so doing, the Fulfilling
of the Law of Christ?] Do you not know that [ Loving One Another, is the Great
Lesson of Christianity? It was the very Precept Inculcated to the Disciples,
upon the Treason, and Apostasy of Judas: How are Poor People Grieved under
Pressures, and who Heeds it? Nay we have a Generation of Men that take Offense
at Those that Help 'em: Ay, and they are even Glad of seeing Mischief; And so
far from Relieving their Brethren, that they make Themselves, their Burdens.
They Seek Occasion against them; And when they have Slandered the Innocent
without Cause, They Hide Themselves. Their Tongues are Set on fire, with the
Fire of Hell; And instead of Bearing their Fellows Burdens, They Break their
Backs. But who are they that do All This? They are the Sons of the Devil; And
are come to do the Work of their Father, which is the Devil. Oh the Baseness of
These Devilish Natures, that will not be Content with Conformity! It is the
Due Execution of the Law, that is the Way to Convince Dissenters: And when they
come once to Answer the Law -- Well! The Law of Christ is above All Laws; And
Christ is a Great Prince: But there is Another Prince, which is the Prince of
This World, That Is the Prince they Serve.

Obs. Hold thy Hand; as thou love me Trimmer; and tell me betwixt Friends
now, Which thou Mean, by That Other Prince; whether the Prince of the Air,
or the King of Great Britain? Why thou have Trimmed- it away here, as if thou
were putting in for a Living of six or sevenscore pound a year. Here Is first
the Common Topique of All Trimmers: Bearing of Burdens: which Implys
Oppression, and Persecution. The Dissenters lie under Those Burdens; And the
Government is to Ease them. Love One Another, is a Christian Lesson; but are we
to love Men's Iniquities; or was it the Apostles Meaning, we should bear the
Burdens of One another Sins, and Transgressions? Are we to love Hypocrites, in
the very Hardness of their Impenitent Hearts? Nay, the Hypocrisy it self; after
so many Judgments Denounced against Them, and It, by our Blessed Savior? Are
we to bear the Burdens of Men, Swelling, and Triumphing in the Sins of Schism,
Contumacy and Sedition? Mercenary Wretches, that to serve a Present Turn, Cast
themselves at the Feet, and Lick-up the very Spittle, of a Tony, or an Oliver?
Will you call it a Slander, to tell the Naked Fact of a Practical Usurpation?
Or the Hiding of a Man's Self, to do it in the Open Sight both of God, and Man?
What would some body give now, that I could Name, for a Stand in some
Parish-Pulpit to get a Shoot at the Observator! In fine; Every Son of the
Charch is made a Child of the Devil; and upon the Whole Matter, here is [The
Conformists Plea for the Non-Conformists.] The Law of Christ, you say, is above
All Laws. What Is That to say, in this place; but that the Law of the Land, and
the Law of Christ are at Odds? But the Men of Forty One, are the Best
Expositors of the Duty of Bearing one Another Burdens, according to the very
Letter. They bore the Kings, and the Churches Burdens, (Poor Wretches) Baggs,
Parchments, Estates, and Livings; and the Devil of any Other way they Practiced
of Bearing one Another Burdens.

Thus you see what the Visit was, which in his foregoing Paper he gave notice
that he would return to Cripplegate.

You may take notice of the Passages which he cavels at in my Sermon, by some
of the Words being printed in Black Letters.

A REPLY TO THE OBSERVATOR.
SIR,
I Was informed by your Paper on Wednesday last, that you were in haste to
return a Visit as far as Cripplegate; and perceiving the day following what the
Visit was, and how early you performed it that Morning, I could not but think
you to be one of that number of whom the wise Man observes, that, They sleep
not except they have done Mischief.

The Visit was a most unaccountable Descant upon my Text and Sermon at St.
Giles in the Fields the last Sunday: which I here faithfully publish, that the
World may judge whether there were the least cause for such Opprobrious
Reflections; and pity the case of an ancient Gentleman, who makes it his
Calling and Employment to reproach and villify whom he pleases.

The Sermon shall speak for it self; and I doubt not but all sober Men will
say, that it is not more plain than honest.

You suggest, Sir, That I am a Mercenary Wretch, who, to serve the present
Turn, do cast my self at the feet, and lick up the Spittle of a Tony or an
Oliver. But there is no Man living whom you might not with as much appearance
of Truth, have thus reproached! It Is very likely that I should pay such a
mighty Reverence to the rotten Bones of the great Usurper under Tyburn, who
detested and despised him when in the height of his Glory. Such was my
Behavior then, that his Tryers would not permit me a Stand in a Parish-Pulpit
of my own, to get a Shoot at any body. And when I had hid my self in a private
place in the Essex-Hundreds, I was routed thence by one of Oliver's Agents,
because my Name was then Malignant, as it is now Trimmer, and forced to make my
escape after twenty weeks preaching there, carrying no other Reward for my
pains away with me, but a Quartan Ague. In such Circumstances was I at that
time, when SOMEBODY kept his Coach and six Horses. So far was I from being a
SPY or OBSEVATOR in those days. And if you will play the Man, and charge me
point blank with being, or having ever been an Admirer of your Tony, or having
a kindness for any Rebellious, Factious, or Associating Principles; I will
produce more Loyal Persons, and better Protestants for my Compurgators than One
that I know of was able to produce when he was accused for being a Papist. I
thank God, I have been so far from acting any thing against the Government or
Interest of our Church, that I have been beyond Expectation, successful in
serving both. The worst Enemy I have must acknowledge that by contending for
Conformity, both from the Pulpit and Press, I have brought great numbers to the
Sacrament, and an exact Conformity to the Orders of the Church. And I believe
my Lord Bishop will be ready to attest, that I have waited upon him about
baptizing of converted Quakers and Anabaptists, and their Children, as often as
any one of the Clergy has done. But if I had been of such a Spirit, as I
perceive would please You, I had never brought any Dissenter into the Church,
nor convinced any one Person of his Errors.

I know, Sir, it is objected against me (and it lately came to the Ear of his
Majesty himself, by the means of some spiteful People) that I have been an
Associate with Dissenters: But the only Truth in that Suggestion is, That I
love all Men, and according to my Power, do good to all. I do not think that
Religion teaches Men to be ill natured, nor can any prove me a greater Friend
to Phanaticks, than my great Master was to Publicans and Sinners.

The greatest Kindness I ever did for any Dissenters from our Church, was for a
Family of Papists; Persons of Quality, whose whole Estate was unjustly kept
from them by a Protestant Dissenter; and yet I think I could as soon be a Jew
as a Popish Christian.

I have likewise suffered in my Reputation by being kind in the Distribution of
other Men's Charity, (where I was not limited by the Donor) to all that were in
excessive want, without respect to their Opinions: but as the Church has lost
nothing by it, so I cannot but see enough in all Men to provoke me to Kindness
and Pity to the Persons, even of those whose Principles and Practices I
heartily abhor. I may very well be content to suffer in my good Name, in so
notorious a manner, since this has been of late the lot of diverse who are a
thousand times more deserving than my self. Some of the most eminent Divines of
the Church of England have been most falsely accused: And there is a certain
Magistrate on whom some think you have been throwing your Dirt, in the same
Paper in which you Visit me, who is a most devout Conformist to the Church (and
was so, long before he was in Commission), and a very vigorous Prosecutor of
Conventicles; however he may have been represented by some, whose Loyalty and
Conformity to the Laws of God, the King, and the Church, lie far more in their
Talk than Practice.

And now, Sir, (not to pay you in your own Coin, I mean in returning reviling
for reviling) give me leave sedately to ask you a few Questions.

1. If Men's calmly treating Protestant Dissenters, speaks them Trimmers, what
does your wonderful mildness and gentleness toward Popish Dissenters speak
your self to be? Or, rather what does the mighty Kindness you are ever
expressing toward them, speak you to be, whilst in the mean time you profess
your self a Son of the Church of England? Why should not your so vigorous
pleading the Cause of the Papists, make You as justly liable to the charge of
Trimming? And, to speak to but one instance of your kindness to them: If I had
been at a quarter of that pains for the lessening of the Phanatique Plot, See
Observe. Aug. 30.
that you have taken to sham and redicule the Popish One, I would not complain
that you abused me in calling me Trimmer, or by a worse Name, if there be any
worse. May I not speak to you in your own Dialect, and in most of your own
Words to me, as follows? Why this is right Trimming, etc. You do as good as
say, Look ye Gentlemen; We are Christians, and it is Our Duty to Help one
Another, and to bear one Another Burdens. If the King gets the Better on it,
Let Me alone to do Your Business: And in case of a Turn to the Church of Rome,
You shall do as much for Me. What Is All This, I say, but a Tacit Composition
with a Public Enemy; where a Man delivers-up his Honor, and Conscience for
the Saving of his Skin, and Interest? And the Devil Himself, with his
Cloven-Foot, Attests the Contract. Why This Man would have been Safe in the
Arms of Sir Edmond Bury-Godfrey had the Papists killed him, when, three days
after his Death, he thrust himself through with his own Sword.

2. I demand of you, Whether you did more foolishly or spitefully, in asking,
Whether by the Prince of this World. I meant the King of Great Britain, or the
Prince of the Air? Pray, who ever called the King of Great Britain the Prince
of this World?

3. I ask you, Whether you do like a Son of the Church of England? or, on the
contrary, vilely disparage her Cause, in supposing, as you often do, that Men
who have once imbibed Phanatique Principles, can never become sincere
Conformists? Is not this to suggest, that the Arguments to Conformity to our
Church are of but little or no force? or that the Clergy are too weak to
justify it?

4. I ask again, Whether he that undertakes to pass public Censures at the
rate that You do, upon the Divines of our Church, and their Pulpit-Discourses,
assumes not to himself the Office of a Bishop? And whether in so doing you do
not plainly charge their Diocesans with not keeping a vigilant Eye upon the
behavior of their Clergy? And whether it would not have become you much better
to inform their Lordships of those Offenses you can make good proof of, than
thus to blacken them to the World, and that, for the most part, upon no other
Evidence than the Tales of Gossipping Busy-bodies, or Malicious People; not to
add that of your own Invention?

5. I demand, See Observe. Numb. 120.
Whether you did not cast an unmannerly Reflection upon his Majesty himself,
for making your Tony his Lord Chancellor, when you reproached some Doctors of
our Church for then dedicating Books to him?

6. I ask, Who that Trimmer was who being judicially interrogated about
somebodies receiving the Sacrament, and answered Yes, and being asked How?
replied very Decently. And being asked again, was it Sitting or Standing, or
How? replied again, It was Sitting, but very Decently. If this strikes at me,
as some think it does, it is either a Fiction of your own Brain, or a base
Calumny brought to you by one of your Factors.

7. Since no good Man will think that Rebels, or Disturbers of the Government,
can be lashed by your Pen too severely; were it not more advisable that for the
future you should suffer those to live in quiet who are no less Loyal, but far
more peaceable than your self?

I will conclude with serious advice to you, although it is too probable that
you will burlesque it as you did my Sermon; That since you have been so
exceedingly obnoxious, by reason of certain foul Misdemeanors which you have
been publicly accused of, and from some of which you have not yet vindicated
your Reputation; you would no longer blemish the Church by pretending to be her
Advocate, by which the Mouths of Phanatiques are opened against her: And that
since you have lived so long in Contention and gratifying a very exasperated
Spirit, you would now think it high time to betake your self to the great
concern of another State, that you may die in Peace, and in the favor of
Almighty God; which is heartily prayed for by him, who desires the Eternal
Happiness of his worst Enemies; and who is,

Cripplegate Aug. 30, 1684. Your Well-wishing Friend and Servant, W. S.

Gal. 6. Ver. 2. Bear ye one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.


THE great Design of the Apostle in this Epistle, is to rectify the Errors and
Mistakes which were amongst the Galatians, and to allay those Unchristian
heats, which are the certain consequent of them.

There was such a contest amongst them about Christian Liberty, that some were
ready to take a Liberty, which, to be sure, is most Unchristian: A Liberty to
bite and devour one another, Chap. 5.15.

That Christian Liberty which they contended about, was a Liberty from
observing any longer the positive Institutions of Moses, i. e. Those
Institutions which were no part of the Moral Law, but only performed in
obedience to Divine Authority. The Galatians had been told by false Teachers,
that they must observe the one as well as the other. The Apostle determines the
Controversy, by telling them plainly, That if they did any longer observe
those legal Institutions, they should lose the Benefit of the
Gospel Dispensation. I Paul say unto you, If ye be Circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing. But though the Apostle had done this, yet it was no easy
matter for him to persuade them to maintain Christian Love and Unity amongst
them; and therefore in this Chapter, he prescribes some Rules which Christians
ought to observe in order to it. The first is in case of Offenses, v. 1. If a
man be overtaken in a Fault, ye that are Spiritual, restore such an one in the
Spirit of Meekness. The second is more general in the words of my Text, because
it relates to all the grievances, and unhappinesses that attend men in this
Life. Bear ye one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. The
Galatians were greatly concerned about fulfilling the Law of Moses in observing
the abolished Rites: The Apostle requires them to observe the Law of Love, to
bear one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, which should never
be abolished.

In the words, there are these two things: 1. A very great Duty, Bear ye one
another Burdens. 2. A very great and cogent Argument to the Performance of it,
And so fulfill the Law of Christ.


You may take these three Observations from them: two are supposed, and the
other expressed.

1. Every man has his Burden. The Apostle in the former verse says, If a man
be overtaken in a Fault, etc. but he does not say, if a man has a burden let
him have help to bear it. It Is possible that a man may live so as to be
inoffensive to others, or at least so as not to be Obnoxious to Censure, which
I conceive is the meaning of the Apostle: But it is not possible for men to
live in this World, and to be freed from burdens. Every Man has his burden.

2. Every man's burden either is or may be too heavy for him. This is supposed
in that the Law of Christ requires that he should have help to bear it.

3. It is the great Duty of every Christian to bear his Brothers Burden. I
intend that my discourse shall be from the last of these, and I shall endeavor
to do these four things. 1. To show what men's Burdens are. 2. What is implied
in the Duty of bearing one another Burdens. 3. To consider the force of the
Argument. And so fulfill the Law of Christ. 4. To make some inferences by way of
Application. I shall speak briefly of these: especially of the two first, which
I have elsewhere enlarged upon.

I begin with the first, namely, What are men's Burdens. You will say, that I
have undertaken a very hard task. I may as well undertake to tell all the
Thorns in a Wilderness, or all the Waves upon a Tempestuous Ocean, as to count
the Evils of this Life, which are Men's Burdens.

There is no State or Condition of man, but has burdens which belong to it,
and are inseparable from it. From the King upon the Throne, to the Beggar upon
the Dunghill Every one has his Burden. The Evils of this Life are like Pharaohs
Froggs, that will be croaking in Kings Chambers. When Moses was the Supreme
Magistrate over the People of Israel, his Fatherin-Law told him, that his
Burden was too great for him, Exodus 18. v. 18. Thou will surely wear away --
this thing is too heavy for thee; Thou art not able to perform it thy self
alone. And we find him groaning under this Burden of Government, Numb. 11.14. I
am not able to bear this People, it is too heavy for me. If it were proper for
me to enlarge upon this head from this Subject, I would show what a great
Argument this should be to Subjects to obey their KING, that they might not add
to His Burden: And how necessary it is that we should pray for Kings, that God
would enable them to bear their great Burdens; and likewise show the Folly, as
well as base Disloyalty of those, who desire the Life of their Prince, and yet
load him with their disobedience to his Laws.

I might also show in the next place, that Ministers have their Burdens, and
that they are very great likewise; and every one almost adds to the weight of
them. The Doubts and Scruples of those that are Good, and the Debaucheries, on
one hand, and the Errors and Divisions on the other hand of those that are Bad,
do make our Burdens to be very Heavy. But this I must not enlarge upon, for
fear of a mis-application.

If Kings, who are Gods-Vicegerents, to whom God requires such a peculiar
regard, that they are called Gods in the Scripture. And if Ministers, for whom
God has declared a peculiar regard in the next place (however contemned in the
World) Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; If these must have
Burdens, others have no reason to expect that they should go free.

More particularly, The Burdens of men in this life, may come under these three
Heads: 1. Such as relate to Bad Men: 2. Such as relate to Good men: And 3. Such
as relate to both Good and Bad.

1. Such as belong to Bad man. The impenitent Sinner has his Burden, and it is
such a Burden, as he that is once rid of, would not, for all the world, be
loaded with it again. The wicked man travelleth in pain all his days, Job
15.20. If his Conscience be awakned, he is allways loaded with Guilt and Fear.
His secret Complaints are very grievous, and are sometimes a very great
interruption to his Mirth: In laughter his Heart is sorrowful, and the end of
his Mirth is Heaviness. If any man shall ask the impenitent sinner the Apostles
Question, Romans 6.21. What fruit had you? He can give no answer. But if it be
asked, What Burden had you? he must answer, That it was a very heavy one: That
he had no rest or quiet in his mind by reason of it. I know very well, that
this does not appear whilst sinners are in Health; but when they are bound in
Cords of Affliction, and God shows them their Transgression, they then
acknowledge, that they never enjoyed so much pleasure as countervail'd the
terrors of their Consciences, which were the immediate consequence of them. And
if the sinner does not feel the Burden of Guilt and Fear, his condition is the
worse; because, the less he feels his Burden, the more he adds to the weight of
it, which he will certainly feel in another State. There is another Burden
likewise which belongs to impenitent sinners, which I may call an accidental
Burden, and that is Religion. The worship and service of God is a very great
Burden to them: They are such as the Prophet Amos speaks of. c. 8. v. 5. who
think long for the Sabbath to be gone, that they may sell Corn, and set forth
Wheat. They have ordered their business so, for want of beginning right at
first, and by contracting evil Habits, that they are as well burdened when they
do that which they should, as when they do that which they should not. The
service of God, and the service of the Devil, are both Burdens to them. But I
will not enlarge farther upon this head because, I do not think it so proper
from this Subject.

2. The good man has his Burdens too, Many are the Afflictions of the
Righteous, and many are their failings and infirmities, which are the occasion
of their grief and trouble. The Burdens of good men are either, 1. Real Evils:
or, 2. Such as I may call Imaginary.

1. Such as are Real Burdens to them. When a good man has done that which is
dishonorable to God, a scandal to Religion, or an occasion of Offense, by
which others are encouraged in that which is evil, it is a very grievous burden
to him. This was David's Burden, that he had caused the Enemies of God to
Blaspheme; and it was that which caused the continuance of his grief and
sorrow, after that his Pardon was Sealed, and sent to him. This made him
complain, That his Iniquities were a Burden too heavy for him.

2. There are likewise burdens which I may call Imaginary, because they proceed
from false Conceptions and Imaginations of the mind: When a Good man mistakes
his condition, and thinks himself to be in the case of the Impenitent Sinner;
and this is caused either, 1. By some grievous Affliction that befalls him; or
2. By the prevalency of a melancholy constitution.

1. By some great Affliction. When a good Man is assaulted by a sharp Sickness
of Body, or by some great loss in his Estate or Family, it makes him think that
God is offended at him in a greater Degree than he is at them that truly Fear
and Serve him. This was the Argument that Jobs friends used against him, and it
was an Argument which he used against himself. Although God had declared, That
he was a perfect and an upright Man, and that there was none like him in all
his Country; yet when he came to endure great Afflictions, they caused him to
cry out, I have sinned, What shall I do? And why do thou not pardon my
Transgression, and take away mine Iniquity, etc. The great Afflictions of his
Body made him suspect, that his Soul was in danger.

2. These Imaginary burdens are caused by a Melancholy Constitution, by which
the fancy and imagination is disturbed; and those that are really Religious,
think they are in an Evil Condition. They do not make any Determinations
concerning themselves from the Rule of Gods Word, but from their own dark
Conceptions; and to be sure, those that give way to them, shall not want the
help of the Tempter to make their burden heavy. The case of such is commonly
misrepresented, they call themselves troubled in Mind, when it were more proper
to say, that they are disturbed in their Fancies.

3. There are burdens which belong both to good and bad men. 1. The burden of
Sickness, Poverty, loss of Relations, and such like common Afflictions. 2. The
burden of natural defects, as Blindness, Deafness, Lameness, etc. 3. Spiritual
burdens, such as relate to the Soul, and to the faculties of it. These we call
infirmities; a weakness of Mind which came by the Fall of Man, and from which
he can never have a perfect recovery whilst he is in this State.


1. A weakness of Judgment. The Understandings of Men are exceeding liable to
mistakes. Men of the most Sagacious Parts, and such as have been most eminent
in their Generation, for Piety and Holiness, have been in very great Errors.
Some of the Ancient Fathers of the Church were of such Erroneous Opinions, as
the Church has in all Ages exploded.

2. Weakness in reference to the affections and passions of the mind, which are
apt to be predominant, and to be as unruly Servants which domineer over Reason,
which should be their Master by which they should be governed, and over
Religion too, which should be their Prince and Sovereign, whose Authority must
not be disputed. Sometimes the Passion of Love prevails as in David for his
Rebellious Absalom, sometimes the Passion of Fear, as there was in the
Disciples, when they thought the Savior of the World could not keep them from
drowning. Sometimes a grievous mistrust of Gods Mercy, as there was in the
Psalmist, Psalm. 77. when he cried, Has God forgotten to be gracious, has he
in Anger shut up his tender Mercies; concerning which he recollects himself,
and says, ver. 10. This is my infirmity. Sometimes the Passion of Anger gets
the upper hand, as it did in Jonah for the loss of his Gourd. Sometimes a
furious Zeal Occasions discord, as it did between the two Apostles, Paul and
Barnabas, Acts 15.39. when they were in such a heat, that they could not endure
each others company, but departed asunder one from the other. These are the
burdens of men whilst they are in this Life.

2. The second thing I propounded, is to consider what is implied in this duty
of bearing one another burdens, or what is necessary to the performance of it.

1. There must be a sympathizing heart. Whatever burdens we see others loaded
with, we must presently put our selves into the same condition, and consider
what we would expect in the like case. We must consider their condition as if
it were our own. We should have such a Spirit as brave Uriah had, who wanted no
courage to encounter with his enemies, nor pity to sympathize with his
Friends. He knew not how to take his necessary repose, he was so uneasy to
think that the Ark and Israel were in distress, and his Lord Joab and his
Servants were encamped in the open Fields, 2 Samuel 11.11. Or like Queen Esther
who said, How can I endure to see the Evil that shall come upon my people: and
how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred: Or, like the Apostle, 2
Cor. 11.29. Who is weak, and I am not weak.

2. There must be a helping hand. This is a natural consequent of the former.
He that sympathizeth is in pain for his Brother; and by easing him, he eases
himself.

3. There must be a continuance of both. We are all Travelers that are going
on with our burdens, and must not leave one another in distress. The Apostle
tells us, we must bear one another burdens; but he does not tell us when we
must lay them down.

I proceed now to the two last things which I chiefly desigh to discourse of at
this time. Therefore

3. I shall consider the force of the Argument. And so fulfill the Law of
Christ. It is an Argument of very great force, to him that rightly considers
it; and so it had need to be, considering our ill natures and dispositions. We
are very apt to be weary of, and impatient under our own burdens, and therefore
it is no easy matter to persuade us to bear other men's. The Apostle therefore
urges the strongest Argument that can be offered to Christians: It is a
fulfilling of the Law of Christ. (...) Complete: Complete the Law of Christ. We
are not to understand it, as if he that bare his Brothers Burdens had done all
that the Law of Christ requires of him, but that he had done that which is very
greatly required of him, Complendi verbum non significat perfect prestare sed
re ipsa exequi: He that bears his Brothers Burden, has really performed the
great Law of his Savior. More particularly,

1. It is his Law, who insisted more upon it than upon any other. It is endless
to mention all the Parables and plain Expressions which requires, that men
should forbear one another, forgive one another, and do good one to another. A
Christian should be so full of Love, that it should be as a sweet Perfume to
all that come near to him. His very Enemies must partake of it. There is one
consideration which one would think should be of mighty force to persuade men
to this Christian Duty: It was the last thing which our Savior insisted upon,
when he was leaving the World. We read in Jo. 13. that the Devil had no sooner
put it into the heart of Reader, I pray observe, That this passage is cavel'd
at, and Judge what the Observator intends; for I know not.
Judas to betray him, but he made it his business to put it into the hearts of
his Disciples to love one another. He made it His Commandment. This is my
Commandment, that ye love one another: By which we may understand, that the
Observance of it would exceedingly Oblige him. He calls it a New Commandment,
although it was as old as any other, both Imprinted in the Nature of Man, and
revealed in the Word of God. He makes it the Characteristical Note of a
Disciple, By this shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye Love one
another. Not but that all men of all Religions acknowledge it to be their Duty
to Love one another, but the meaning of our Savior, is: That there should be
such a Degree of Love amongst his Disciples, as should exceed men of other
Religions; as it was in the first Ages of Christianity, when the Pagans said,
See how these Christians Love one another. All these Expressions of our
Savior, which may seem difficult to be understood, are used by way of Motive
and Argument, to persuade and quicken men to Christian Love and Unity.

2. It is his Law, who has annexed the greatest Rewards to the Performance of
it, and the greatest Punishments to the Neglect of it; by which we may
understand that it is an indispensable Duty, and must not be omitted by us. I
need not mention any more than that known place, Mat. 25. There Is Come ye
Blessed, to them that bare one another burdens: And depart ye Cursed, to them
that did not. Our Savior only speaks concerning the duty of the second Table,
probably for this reason; Because there is not such an impression of it upon
the minds of Men, as there is of the duty which relates to the first. Men think
they may Love God, though they do not love their Neighbors. They think that
they are good Christians, and that they pay to God the honor that is due to
him, although they show no regard to their Brother and Fellow Christian. Men
know that to love God, is the Great Commandment; but they do not consider that
the second is like, namely, that they must Love their Neighbors as Themselves.
Many who call themselves Christians do not consider the Mystical Union that is
betwixt Christ and his Church; that every good Christian is a Member of that
Body whereof Christ is the Head; and that it is as Unchristian for one Man not
to bear another burden, as it is unnatural for the Hand not to help the Foot,
or any other Member of the body that is greived, according to that of the
Apostle, Romans 12.5. We being many are one Body in Christ, and every one Members
one of another. They do not consider that the Church is Gods Building, and
that, as in a Building, that Stone which is so rugged that another Stone cannot
be laid upon it, is only fit to be thrown into the Street; so that Man who is
so rugged, that he will not bear his Brothers burden, is not fit to be part of
Gods Building. For this reason our Savior insisted more upon this Duty than
upon the other. And for this reason he only mentions everlasting punishment to
those that did not help and succor their Brother, because men are not sensible
of the necessity of this Duty, and the Danger of neglecting it.

3. It was the Law of Christ, who was an Example of it to others. He came into
the World to bear our burdens, and to show us how to bear our Brothers: as I
may show in the several instances which I have already named.

1. He bare the burden of Impenitent Sinners. He considered their deplorable
condition. He was grieved for the hardness of their hearts, and used all means
to recalim them. He was willing to bear the burden of reproach, that he might
ease them of the burden of guilt and fear. The Pharisees said, that he was a
Friend of Publicans and Sinners, and they said true, tho he was not so in their
sense. He was a Friend to them, in that he called them to Repentance, and made
a Public Declaration, that all that were weary and heavy laden, should come to
him to be eased of their burdens, Mat. 11.28.

2. He bare the burdens of Good Men. He fulfilled the Prophecy that was spoken
of him, That he should Bind up the broken hearted. Be of good cheer, was an
expression which he exceedingly delighted in. When he was going out of the
World, he was mightily concerned for the grief and trouble which his Disciples
should then endure. He said, Let not your hearts be troubled, I go to Prepare a
place for you, etc. And when he arose from the Dead, he was in have to ease
them of that Burden of Grief, which he knew was very heavy upon them. The
Servant knew his Masters mind, when he said to them that came to the Sepulcher,
Go quickly, and tell his Disciples, that he is risen from the Dead.

3. He bare the burdens which are common to men. The Blind, and the Deaf, and
the Lame were those upon whom he bestowed his Miracles. He made all his retinue
stand still till he cured the Poor blind Beggar.

He bare the burden of Infirmities, rather Pitying than taking Offense at them;
knowing what the Frail State and Condition of Man is. He did not cast off his
Disciples for showing a furious Spirit, in calling for Heaven to consume them
that were not civil to him, but only rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what
Spirit ye are of, Mat. 9.55. Nor did he reject his Disciples because of their
weak Faith when they cried, Master, save us, we Perish. One would think it
should have been a great Provocation to him, that his Disciples were asleep
when he was in his agony, and that it should have been an unpardonable offense;
but we find that he only blamed them for it: He said, Could not ye watch with
me one hour? But he did not say, From this hour I will be as regardless of you,
as you have been of me. There are some who complain of bad Memories, but
certainly there never were any more forgetful than the Disciples were. They had
forgotten almost every thing which our Savior had said to them; Nay, they had
forgotten that which was of the greatest moment to be remembered, namely his
Resurrection from the Dead. His Enemies remembered it, and therefore made his
Sepulcher sure; but his Friends had forgotten it; and yet our Savior continued
his Love toward them. All these instances are left to us for our example and
imitation, that we should bear the infirmities of our Brethren, and not make
them the occasion of, so much as, lessening our Love to them.

4. It is the Law of Christ, who still bears our burdens now that he is in
Heaven. He pities us, and he prays to God for us, and sends his Holy Spirit
into our hearts to comfort us, because he knows by his own experience that our
burdens are heavy. The Author of the Hebrews tells us, that he took our Natures
upon the Earth, that he might bear our Burdens in Heaven. Heb. 2.17, 18. In all
things it behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a
Merciful and Faithful High Priest in things pertaining unto God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the People; for in that he himself has suffered
being Tempted, he is able to Succor them that are tempted.

5. And lastly. It is his Law who has put it into the power and capacity of
every man in the World to fulfill it. It were a very hard case, if there were a
work required which should have a glorious reward annexed to it, and yet there
should be some Christians who should be utterly incapable of doing it. He that
has not a hand to help his Brother, may have a heart to Sympathize with him:
and he that can neither afford help himself, nor procure it from others, may
pity and pray to God for him; and if he does so, the will is accepted for the
deed, and he has so born his Brothers burden, as to Fulfill the Law of Christ.

That which remains, is to make some Inferences by way of Application.

I. I infer the excellency of our Religion, and what a great obligation there
lies upon us to observe the Precepts of our Blessed Lord. How dear should he be
to us, in that he has given us such a Law. We have no burdens to bear, but
what our sins have laid upon us, and yet our Savior is not willing they should
be too heavy for us, but requires that we should have help to bear them. The
Law of Moses required Statutes that were not good, Ezekiel. 20.25. Commands which,
as I showed, were only to be observed in obedience to Divine Authority: No man
was the better for them any otherwise; than as he was satisfied that he had
done that which he was commanded. There was no intrinsic good or excellency in
them. But the commands of our Blessed Lord, are such as in their own nature
tend to the good of Mankind: They tend to the easing of our grievances, and to
the making of our lives comfortable to us in this World, before we come to the
happiness of the World to come.

II. From what I have said on this Subject, I would infer somewhat concerning
the three States. This World, Heaven, and Hell.

I. Concerning this World, I would infer these four things.

1. They are exceedingly to blame, who place any Happiness or Contentment in
it. It is not a place of pleasure, but of pain: not of ease, but of toil and
weariness. A place in which men, have burdens to bear of their own, and of
other men's too. A place in which men are so loaded, that they are in continual
want of help to bear their burdens. We are weary Travelers that are always
going on with our burdens, The rest remains, for another State. Every day
has its evils, and new days produce new burdens. He that is weary to day,
knows not but he may have a heavier load to morrow. If a man expects rest or
quiet, he is often disappointed, and has cause to complain as Job did, When I
looked for Good, then Evil came unto me; and when I waited for Light; there
came Darkness. There is nothing more dangerous than for a man to think himself
secure from danger. There are blessings for them that bear burdens, and a woe to
them that are at ease. Nay, the lighter that a man's burden is, the greater is
his danger. Those that are not in trouble as other men, nor plagued as others,
are the men that are brought into desolation as in a moment. A man in this
World, is like a Ship upon the Ocean; If it has no burden, it is in danger of
being lost: There must be ballast if there be no goods. The nature of man is
such, that if his mind be not ballasted by some affliction or other, he is in
the greatest danger of miscarrying, and being cast away. He that at any time
has no burden of his own had need to bear his Brothers burden, that he may not
be of too light a mind. We have little reason to set our minds upon this World
where it is necessary we should bear burdens.

2. It bespeaks our patience, and that we do not fret and vex our selves at
every cross that befalls us. Some men are apt to be in a rage upon every little
occasion, as if the world were appointed to be a place of ease and pleasure;
whereas they are much mistaken; it is a place in which we must bear heavy
burdens, both of our own and other men's.

3. Since the World is such a place for burdens, it concerns men to live so
that they may be always willing to leave it, that they may be unloaded. Whilst
we are in this World, we are both a trouble to our selves, and to others
likewise that help us to bear our burdens. We are often tired our selves, and
we are oft-times very tyresom to others; it concerns us therefore to order our
business, so that we may go cheerfully to that place where Job says, The weary
are at rest, chapter 3. v. 17.

4. Since the world is such a place for burdens, how foolish are they that live
wicked and ungodly lives in it? They have no ease here, and they live as if
they were resolved to have none hereafter; as if outward burdens, the crosses
and troubles of this life were not enough; they load their souls with inward
burdens, which are continually gauling and tormenting of them. That which is
most common amongst Sinners, is most unaccountable; they take pleasure in
nothing but that which brings Pain, nothing pleases them but that which proves
an intolerable burden to them. They often make grievous complaints of the
burdens of this life, and yet they prepare worse burdens to themselves against
they go out of it.

II. From what I have said, we may infer somewhat of the Happiness of Heaven,
and that to a double purpose.

1. To quicken our diligence for the obtaining of it. There are no Burdens, but
everlasting Rest and Pleasure. All Grief and Sorrow is done away. In thy
presence there is fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand are Pleasures for
evermore. No man has a burden of his own or of another, to bear in that
State. There is Rejoicing with them that Rejoice; but as for Weeping with them
that Weep, there is no occasion for it. Heaven does not know what it is, for
all Tears are wiped away before the entrance into it. Instead of bearing one
another burdens, there is joining with one another in eternal Praises and
Hallelujahs: To God the Father who appointed us burdens in this World in order
to our happiness in the next. Afflictions work for us an exceeding weight of
Glory. We should very hardly find the way to Heaven if we were not loaded. They
that are light and at ease, for the most part, go another way: To God the Son
who himself bear our burdens, and commands us to bear one another, till we
come to that Mansion which he has taken up for us in Heaven. To God the Holy
Ghost who supported us under our burdens, or else all the help from men had
been too little. It is God that Comforts those that are cast down, although he
employes men as his Instruments, by whom he conveighs comforts. There are no
burdens in Heaven, unless a Man could be weary of Perfection and Happiness. The
Pleasures there, are not like the Pleasures on Earth, wearisome and tiresome to
them that are Lovers of them. God intended these only, that man should use them
for his Recreation, and then go on with his Burden. If men exceed in them they
are very wearisome, and it is necessary they should be so, because they are
very unsuitable to the Nature of Man, and to the best and most noble part of
him. If man had been all Body and no Soul, sensual Pleasures could not have
been tiresome to him; but in regard he has a Spiritual part, there must be
Spiritual Pleasures to refresh his mind. On the other hand, because man is
Flesh as well as Spirit, he is therefore apt to be weary of the long
continuance of that which is pleasant to the mind: Religious Services. But in
Heaven Pleasures can be no burden, because the Soul is separated from this vile
Body, and has nothing to clog it. Corruptible does then put on Incorruption,
and Mortal puts on Immortality, that there may be all pleasure and no pain. I
will not farther enlarge upon this. We are all bunglers when we come to give
any account of that with our Lips, of which it has not entered into our hearts
to conceive. When we speak of Heaven, it is not so necessary to give an account
of the glory of it, as of the certainty of it, for whosoever believes such a
State, believes the Glorious Things that are spoken of it. I might therefore
make use of one Argument from the Text, to prove, that there is a future State
of Happiness; for if Good Men must bear burdens of their own and of other Men's,
certainly there is another State in which they shall be freed from them. We can
not think, that the Children of God who are born again, and made like unto
their Heavenly Father, are only born to bear burdens.

2. It may make us patient in the bearing both our own and other Men's burdens
whilst we are on this side Heaven. Our lives are very short and inconsiderable,
and at the end of them we lay down our burdens, and enter into the joy of our
Lord, who appointed us to bear them. In the mean while if God sends us help
from Heaven to bear them, and requires we should have help on earth, and will
shortly wholly ease us of them; we may well bear them with constant Patience.

III. I may infer somewhat concerning the Hellish State, the place of Torments,
where the Scripture tells us, there is Weeping, and Wailing, and gnashing of
Teeth; and likewise, that there are many that enter in there. If Good Men must
expect to bear burdens in this World, and they are sometimes very grievous to
be born, what must bad men expect in that State? There the burden is
intolerable: Those that are forced to bear it, or I may more properly say,
have brought it upon themselves, would fain exchange it for that which is far
lighter: The Rocks and Hills. Their burdens is the wrath of the Lamb, which is
far more intolerable, Rev. 6.16. Their burden is the guilt of a gnawing
Conscience, which is as a thousand Tormentors, as well as a Thousand Witnesses:
A heavy load which lies upon the naked soul stripped of all those coverings,
those vain conceits with which Sinners get some little ease to their guilty
minds.

And as their burdens are intolerable, so there is no help to bear them, ( For
every Man must bear his own burden, v. 5.) but every one rather adds to the
weight of them. There is no Solamen Miseris by the number of those that are in
that State. The Glutton in the Parable desired, that his Brethren might not
come into the place of Torments, he had burden enough already. The more there
are to weep and wail, the more doleful is that State. But I will not enlarge
any further upon this unpleasant head, but only desire that Sinners would
seriously and timely consider of it, and that it may make them so serious, as
not to despise those reprooss which I am to give from what I have said on this
Argument. There are three sorts of Persons which I can not but reflect upon.

I. If every Christian must bear his Brothers burden, they are very much to
blame, who take no notice of what others bear. There are a great many in the
World, who are so far from bearing their Brothers burdens, that they will not
so much as see them or endure to hear of them. They do no more concern
themselves for the afflictions, and miseries of others, than if they were alone
in the World. They are like the Priest and Levite riding by, and taking no
notice of him that lies in misery. Men are such lovers of themselves, that if
any complain of their burdens, they ease them as the Chief Priests and Elders
eased Judas of his burden: What Is that to us, see thou to that. There are many
in the World loaded with Sorrows, who may complain with the Psalmist, Psalm.
142.4. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no Man that would
know me, refuge failed me: no Man cared for my Soul. We may sometimes see that
sorrowful sight which Solomon saw, Eccle. 4.1. I beheld the tears of such as
were oppressed, and they had no Comforter. The World is full of those who are
so far from weeping with them that weep, that if they can be merry themselves
they care not who is sad, like those whom we read of in the Prophecy of Amos
6.6. who were for Feasting, and Drinking, and Music, but not for bearing other
men's burdens. They were not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph. If it be the
Law of Christ, that men should bear one another burdens, what will become of
those that take no notice of this Law, but only fulfill the Law of Covetousness?
When men are required to relieve the necessitous, their Language commonly is, I
know not what I may come to before I die. I wish they would as well consider
what they must come to after they die, when they shall appear before him who
has declared, that those that do not feed the Hungry, and Cloth the Naked,
shall go into everlasting Punishment. Those that would not bear their Brothers
burden in this World, shall have one of their own to bear in the World to come.

II. They are more to blame who are so far from bearing one another burden,
that they are offended at them that do. There are such Monsters in the World to
whom it is a burden to see other men at ease. Nothing is so sweet to them as to
see others in bitterness. Solomon says, Pro. 17.5. He that mocketh the Poor,
reproacheth his Maker; and he that is glad at Calamities shall not be
unpunished: where note, there are some men who mock at the Misery, and are glad
at the Calamities of other men. They are not so ready to rejoice with them that
rejoice, as they are to rejoice when they hear what cause others have to weep.
There were such in old time, and will be to the end of the World. When Nehemiah
was to repair the Breaches, and make up the Walls of Jerusalem, There were two
base men, Sanballat and Tobiah, who were not able to endure the good he did.
Neh. 4.10. It grieved them exceedly, that there was come a man to seek the
welfare of the Children of Israel. The man came not to do them any hurt at
all; but if he had, it may be they would not have been more grieved than they
were at the good which was done for others. The Psalmist likewise gives us an
account of such men (of which we have too many in the World) who cannot endure
to do good themselves, or that others should, Psalm. 112. v. 9. He speaks of the
Liberal Soul of a Good Man: He has dispersed, he has given to the Poor. And
at the next verse, he tells us how wicked men are affected at it. The Wicked
shall sce it and be grieved, he shall gnash with his Teeth and pine away. It
kills some men to see others kept alive, and nothing angers them more, than to
see others solicitous for their welfare and Subsistence. But

III. And Lastly, They are most of all to be reproved, I wish I could do it
sharply enough, who are so far from bearing other Men's burdens, that they are
other Men's Burdens. They live in the World, as if they came into it for no
other purpose, but to send others grieved out of it.

Sometimes men are loaded with the Burden of Calumnies, and Reproach, to their
vast prejudice. One of the Blessings which Jobs Friends Promised to him, chapter 5.
v. 21. was, that he should be hid from the Scourge of the Tongue, which is
indeed a fearful Scourge. There are a great many in the World, who if they can
but Slander the Innocent, and obtain Concealment, it does exceedingly please
that of the Devil which does mightily prevail in them. They have sent their
Brother a burden to make his Heart ache, and he must not know from whence it
comes. We know that slanderers have a great advantage in that their reports run
like wildfire. There are two Scriptures, which if joined together, give an
account of it, Their Tongues are set on fire of Hell, There are likewise some
men whose Pens are set on fire of Hell.
and they go through the Earth.

There are others who seek to ruin their Neighbors by contests at Law,
forcing them thereby to spend their Substance. The Childrens bread is taken
away, and a bone of Contention sent in the room of it, only to gratify
implacable malice. These Cases are very hard, but it is not hard to give a
Reason of such Actions. We must know, that there is another Law besides the Law
of Christ. There is a Prince of this World, as well as a Prince of Peace. The
Scripture tells us, that the Devil has Children as well as God, 1 Jo. 3.10.
And as Gods Children are like their Father in being Merciful and Kind, so the
Devils Children are like their Father in being Malicious and Cruel. But what
will become of these Men? The Man's condition who is ruined by another is very
sad. But how dismal is his case who has ruined him? Methinks I hear God say to
him, as he did to Cain, What have thou done? the voice of thy Brother, and of
his whole Family cries unto me. Thou should have been his Comforter, and
thou have been his Tormentor. Thou should have supported him, and thou have
ruined him. Thou should have born his burden, and thou have Broke his Back.
I may say to this Man, as it is said in Job: What will thou do, when God rises
up? and when he visits, what will thou answer him?

I might, if time had permitted, have proceeded to Exhort, and persuade to the
practice of this Christian duty, and to have urged many Motives, and Arguments
for it. I will mention but one, and it is for Svms sake, and for Jerusalems,
that I cannot be silent, concerning it. I have very exactly copied this
Paragraph, (as I hope, the Auditors will be ready to attest) which I verily
think contains all that provoked the furious man.
Let us bear the burdens of those that have Dissented from us, but are returned
to our Congregations. I do not mean, that we should do any thing to prostitute
the Churches cause, nor that we should debauch our Consciences, by giving the
least encouragement to pernicious Errors, but that we should pity their
Infirmities, and endcavour to rectify their Mistakes; that they may no more
provoke Authority, disparage Christianity, and occasion thousands to be
Profane and Atheistical, whilst an exact compliance with the Churches Orders,
and an encouragement of the due execution of Her Censures, is certainly the
fittest way to restrain that ungodliness which has abounded as our divisions
have abounded. If, when Authority drives by a due execution of Laws, we shall
draw and encourage by expressions of Brotherly Love and Kindness, we shall
convince those that have dissented from us, that we are not of such Spirits as
they suspected, nor so unfit for Christian Communion; but will acknowledge, as
some have done, that they were greatly mistaken both concerning the Ministers
and People of our Church. I thought fit to conclude with this, not only because
it is seasonable at this time, when men of Good Principles have done hurt to
the Church by an intemperate Zeal; but because it was the very occasion of the
words. The heat that was about Christian liberty had almost consumed Christian
Love, and therefore the Apostle, for the reviving of it, and that there might
be no disturbance in the Church of Galatia, does here require, that the People
should Bear one another Burdens.

FINIS.

