THE Faithful Witness: OR, A HAND OF LOVE REACHED FORTH, That the blind may be
guided, and the scattered gathered. ALSO, Man's Sin and Rebellion declared and
the long-suffering of the Lord showed. ^ith a true Call unto all People to meet
the Lord by speedy repentance, and vvait to yield him ready obedience, for here
is the right Way of the Lord opened. Also the state of Professors plainly
manifested, wherein they may see how they are erred, and how the Serpent has
deceived and betrayed them. (...) a Warning unto all the tender hearted amongst
them (...) (...), and receive the Hand of Love, that they may no longer abide
in (...), but walk in the way of righteousness, where true rest and peace (...)
^^joyed. Truth defended and cleared from the Lies and Slan^^^s declared by
Jonathan Johnson of Lincoln, a Baptist in profession.

(...) who bears no evil will to any man, but wishes well to all men, and am
(...) to many by the Name of William Smith.

^^^DON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

THE Faithful VVitness.
GIve ear all ye Inhabitants of the Earth, for these sayings are true and
faithful; be meek and lowly in your hearts, and how your ears to Wisdoms voice,
and turn at her reproof; for in your own Ways are you wandering, where peace
you know not; the bowels of compassion is freely opened from the Fathers love,
and his good will is made known amongst you, in that he is striving with you to
turn you into the right way, that you might walk therein; for he has not left
himself without a Witness in all your consciences, which does not consent to
your ungodly deeds, but does convince you thereof, and bears testimony against
your ways of vanity, which your minds are exercised in, and all your wicked
practices which by you are brought forth from your vain minds, where you are
beset with sin, and servants thereunto, your carnal minds being at enmity
against God, and not subjected to his Law, you are at liberty in the flesh; and
satisfying the lust thereof; and though you all profess to know God, yet in
Works you deny him, and your hearts are far off from him, therefore is your
Worship vain; for Gods fear is not before your eyes; therefore you run to do
evil, and rebels more and more against the Lord, wallowing in the mire of
defilements, that pollutes and stains your own consciences, your minds being in
the earth, and your faces downward, thick Clouds of darkness does compass you
about, and the Prince of darkness rules over you, and leads you all out of the
way, where none does good; you are a Cage of unclean Birds, every one
follovving the lust of his own heart, that you multiply your transgressions
with delightings, and commits sin with greediness, and strengthens your hands
in wickedness; a sinful Nation you are, and a seed of evil doers, filling up
the measure of iniquity, and nourishing your hearts as in a day of slaughter;
from the crown of the head to the sole of the feet, there is no whole part in
you. O! how long will you suffer the Lord to wait that he may show mercy to
you? How often have you rejected his loving kindness, and grieved his holy
Spirit? What a day of a patience and forbearance has he exercised toward you,
that you might have turned unto him, and received his mercy? You are a
stiff-necked people, who sets your selves against the Lord, and every
visitation of his love, refusing to return, and hating to be reformed; for when
you have been called by that of God in your own conscience, you have not
hearkened; and when it has smiten, you have refused correction; have you not
felt a Witness in your own conscience against you, when you have been acting
iniquity, and that it has judged and condemned you for your secret faults,
that fearfulness has surprised you and paleness of face has come upon you,
when no man has been near you, nor no tongue accused you, yet that has been
within that has numbered up your transgressions, and set your sins in order
before you, and brought them all to light in your own conscience, which the eye
of man has not seen, nor for which the tongue of man could accuse you; yet
they have appeared fresh in your minds, though many years before they had been
committed by you: O consider what it is all you that have so long outstood it,
and yield obedience to the reproof of it, that you may be acquainted with it,
and thereby know it to be Gods faithful Witness in your own conscience placed
against sin, and the hand of Love reached forth to lead you out of sin, and so
come to have communion with it, and walk in the light of it, that you may not
fall under the eternal condemnation thereof; for though it be as a sign, every
where spoken against by those who are at enmity with it, and that they call
i^^atural, and a delusion; yet if you turn at the reproof the of, and yield
obedience to it, you will know it to be God ^ighty Power unto salvation; and
this will give you the e^^^ence in your selves, that it is a manifestation of
God which does discover all that in you which is contrary to its own property,
which it has no fellowship nor communion with; and this can neither be natural
nor a delusion, which does reprove the natural man in his natural state, where
he is an Enemy to God, a fervant to sin, and under the Devils power, by whom he
is tempted and deluded to consent to the motion of sin, and to bring forth the
Works of Iniquity, which the Faithful Witness does not consent to, but
testifies against, and shows it to be evil in the conscience of every man, and
reproves thereof, and calls every man to separate from it as an unclean thing;
this you may all read in your selves, in the light which you are enlightened
withal: Yea drunkards, swearers, liars, and all profane persons, you all have
a manifestation of God in you, which does discover your sins unto you, and
brings them unto your remembrance, and many times strikes you with fear and
terror for the evil of your doings, and brings you into sadness and mourning
for your sins past, which in the light is made manifest unto you in your own
conscience; and this is not a natural thing, nor a delusion, but it is Christ
the light of the World, who was before the World was, and is the power of God
made manifest to destroy sin, and the Devils Works; and this is he unto whom
you are all to look, and stand obedient unto whatsoever he does command you,
that you may know salvation in him, and redemption by him whose Hand of Love is
reached forth in this his day of power, that a willingness he might beget in
you to follow him, and be guided by the Hand of Love out of darkness, where the
god of this World rules, who is a deceiver, unto whose delusions many are
given up, and do believe his lies, in which they oppose the truth, and are at
open enmity with it, being silled with Wrath and Envy against it: Now such
whose deeds are evil, loves not the light, neither will come to it, but runs
from it, and speaks despightfully of it, as the Pharisees did of him who is the
Son of God; and though mighty signs and wonders he did amongst them, making the
blind to see, and the dumb to speak, yet were they filled with envy against
him, and said he cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, But he
knowing their thoughts* said unto them, Every kingdom divided against it self,
is brought to desolation; and if Satan cast ^^t Satan, he is divided against
himself, how shall then his kingdom stand? But if I cast out Devils by the
Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you; this you may read
Matthew. 12. And here you may read whose offspring you are; for this Scripture
is fulfilled this day upon this ungodly generation, though your eyes be blinded
that you see it not; therefore repent, and be converted, that the hand of love
may lead you, and that your sins may be blotted out; for with a light of Christ
are you all enlightened, that does discover your secrets parts, and makes
manifest the counsels of all your hearts, and is the true light that lights
every man that comes into the World, Ioh. 1. 9. This is plain Scripture, and
you say you believe the Scripture; but you say again, This Scripture does not
speak of a light within; then weigh it wisely, and see how every man that comes
into the World is enlightened, and by it you may read 2 Cor. 4. 6. For God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts to give
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: This
is plain Scripture, and this was the Apostles Testimony, That the light shone
in the heart, (that is within people) and there gave them the light of the
knowledge of Gods glory: But then you say, These were believers, and you grant
that believers have a light of Christ in them, but not people in their natural
state; the Apostle was once in the natural state, and was a persecutor of those
that did believe in the light, yet was the light in him, shining in the
darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not; but when it came to shine round
him, and convince him that he was an enemy to it, and kicking against it, he
bowed before it, and submitted unto it, and yielded ready obedience, Lord, what
will thou have me to do? Then did it shine forth of darkness, and did shine in
the heart, in which the knowledge of Gods glory was made manifest; read this in
Gods pure fear, and consider if you be not where the Apostles once were, and
there stands in open rebellion against that which he came to believe in, and
bear his testimony unto; and further witnessed, That a people who held the
truth in unrighteousness, had a manifestation of God in them, Romans 1. 19.
Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed
it unto them: Here was a people who was not in the faith, and yet that which
might be known of God, was manifest in them, and whatsoever does make manifest,
is light, Ephesians. 5. 13. then the light was within them, and the truth was within
them, but they did not believe in it, but changed it into a lie, Ver. 25. and
did not like to retain God in their knowledge, Ver. 28. Therefore unto vile
affection did God give them up, that they might believe lies, because they
received not truth in the love of it; this is a Witness which none of you can
fly from; whithersoever you go, it will ^^nd you out; contend no longer
against it, for in it does the Grace of God appear to all men, by which the
love of God comes to be felt in all that do obey and submits to the teachings
of it; and though there be many in the unbelief, that speaks unadvisedly of it,
neither knowing what they say, nor whereof they affirm, who calls it a natural
light, and delusion; yet in that love which unto me is freely opened, and
through the Grace which I have received in it, I am constrained to bear my
Testimony, and to declare unto all people, That the light of Christ with which
every man is enlightened, is the mighty power of God unto salvation to every
one that do believe in it, and a living Witness in every man's conscience is
placed, to condemn the Workers of iniquity, who has not a love to it, because
their deeds are evil; there is no escaping of it, for it is quick and powerful,
searching, trying and proving all secrets, and the counsels of all hearts are
naked and bare before it: Read this soberly, for it is written plainly in the
love of God, who is rich in mercy, and plenteous in goodness and truth, whose
bowels of compassion moves in pity toward a sinful generation, who has no
pleasure that any of you should dye; therefore in this his day does he reach
forth a hand of love to lead and guide out of darkness all that turn unto it,
and are made willing to be guided by it. Now all prove your selves in the light
which you are enlightened withal, and examine your selves truly, and see if
you cannot witness this testimony to be faithful and true, and feel the
Testimony of the Spirit bearing witness in your inward parts, unto what is here
declared; for unto that of God in all consciences I am manifest, which does not
consent to your sins, but is separate from sin, and made manifest to take away
^in, who is the Lamb of God, pure and undefiled, and though you have a general
talk amongst you of Faith in Christ, and living by faith upon him, and that he
is your Savior and Redeemer, yet you work iniquity daily, and pleads for sin
term of life, and neither knows salvation nor redemption in him, who is the Son
of Gods love: Therefore be not deceived with a vain hope, and groundless Faith,
which stands only in Words, when your Works denies your Faith to be living,
being yet in your sins, for the lusts of the flesh you do fulfill, and draws
iniquity with Cords of Vanity; look inward, the light will not deceive you, but
manifest every secret sin which lodges in your hearts, which you would keep
hidden to have your life in; for though you may not be committing all sin so
greedily as may stand with your hearts against many things which may be
commonly counted profane, yet examine if you have not something secretly
lodged, which your minds are captivated in, and which the light of Christ in
your consciences does reprove you for; there is your lover; and that must be
cast out, and trodden under foot, if ever you come to vvitness redemption by
Christ. Some men are not common Drunkards, as the World calls them, yet
secretly has a love to be in the excess, some in neither of these, yet has
another lover; So some in pride, some in covetousness, some in foolish jesting,
and idle talking, some in vain sports and pleasures of the World, that so you
are all found to have some secret lover which you would not have tried in the
light; now there is nothing so secret which shall not come to light, though
long you may hide it, and smothe^ the Witness of God in your own conscience,
that testifies against it; yet to the light must every secret thing come,
whether it be good or evil, and in the light be tried and judged in righteous
judgment. Therefore all unto the light give up your selves, and yield
obedience to every motion thereof in your own consciences, that you may become
followers of it, in love to it; for if you stand in the enmity against it, and
be more in love with your evil deeds then you are with the light, there will
be no escaping the condemnation of it; therefore let this be a Warning unto you
all who live in pleasures upon the Earth, that you may cease to do evil, and
depart from your iniquities, and break off from your sins, before the time come
in which you will say, There is no pleasure in them.

O hearken! hearken! for this is the day of your visitation, now is the
accepted time; now is Gods Witness striving with you; now is the Hand of Love
reached forth unto you; therefore whilst it is called to day, harden not your
hearts, but turn unto the Lord who stands ready to have mercy upon you, for
therein does he delight: Now let not your hearts be hardened to outstand this
day of Visitation, left the day of Vengeance and Indignation come upon you, and
overtake you, because mercy you have refused. Consider this all you who have
your life in pride, covetousness, drunkenness, swearing, lying, envy and
malice, and vanities of the World, if these things be not showed you to be evil
by something in your own conscience that does convince you of them, and reprove
you for them, and brings you to an understanding that you ought not to do them;
this is the light of Christ which is pure, and has no communion with darkness,
nor the unfruitful Works thereof, but is separated from the unclean, neither
joining with it, nor consenting to it, but has a life in it self which is holy
and undefiled, and does pursue the evil-doer in judgment, who is at enmity
with it, and in disobedience to it. O sink down in Gods fear, and consider what
a day of patience and forbearance he has continued unto you; how long has he
spared you? And what a time of repentance has he given you? And how many years
has he striven with you, that with the Cords of Love he might have drawn you,
and with the Hand of Love have led you? But you have rejected it, and casts
love behind your backs, and likes to retain your evil deeds better, and to love
darkness rather: What Visitations of Gods pure love have you set at naught,
that you might walk after the way of your own hearts, and the lust of your own
eyes, rising up in rebellion against the pure Witness of God in your own
conscience, and ^laying it, that you might live in pleasures, and walk at
liberty in the flesh, without reproof: And thus is the just condemned and
killed by you, and he resists not; he is rejected and despised by you, wounding
him by your transgressions, and bruising him with your iniquities, yet does not
he open his mouth, but as a Lamb is he led to the slaughter; O look up unto him
whom you pierce, and mourn, let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your
joy into heaviness; for he does not so deal with you, but suffers and bears in
patience, and in the bowels of pity is yet striving with you, that his
goodness might lead you to repentance; and thus does he love his enemies, and
does good to those that hates him: Therefore all bow your ears, and hearken,
and be diligent to obey the light before it cease striving with you, and the
long-suffering of the Lord come to an end concerning you, and his tender love
be shut up from you, who have gain-sayed and outstood the day of your
Visitation, and then you begin to knock like foolish Virgins, when the doors is
shut, and all things quiet, and to seek a place of repentance when it cannot be
found, though you seek it with tears.

O prize the day of your Visitation; and let all vain Disputers of this World
lay their hands upon their mouths, and confess they have done foolishly in
contending and striving in their own wills against that which has so long
striven with them, that they might be turned from the darkness unto the light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, tha^ the hand of Love might guide them to
receive the Grace of God which so freely he has made manifest unto them: Read
you Priests, Professors, and all people; who hates the light, and will not
^bide to hear of it so near you, as in your own conscience, but are filled with
rage and fury against it, speaking scornfully, proudly, and disdainfully of it,
and ast that are guided by it; in this you are all friends; and joins together;
fear and tremble before the living God, for his wrath is revealed from heaven
against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of men; and a day of sad
lamentation is kindling from the breath of the Almighty, and will fall upon the
heads of the ungodly^ who in their stout-heartedness outstand the day of Gods
loving kindness; this testimony will reach you all, and that of God in your
conscience answers to it; give all diligence thereunto, for it is a sure Word,
and teaches right things; it will not deceive you if you incline your m^^ds
unto it, that you may be doers of what it teaches; for it is Gods Grace that
appears, and if you yield obedience to it, you will know it brings salvation
with it, and will teach you to deny the ungodliness and worldly lusts, in which
the Prince of darkness leads you, and deceives you, and brings forth his Work
by you in all manner of sin and wickedness, in which you are serving him, and
in which your minds are captivated by him; and the light of Christ in your
conscience has no communion with such Works of darkness, but stands a Witness
against them, and reproves you for them, as you join unto them: And this is the
Word of his Grace, that would have you to deny them, and forsake them, and to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present evil World; for the
fashions of this World passes away, and all your vanities will wither, and
your beauty consume, and the later end will come upon you, when the Lord will
have no pleasure in you, but will give you your portion with hypocrites;
Consider all you vain people of the World, who live in rioting and drunkenness,
chambering and wantonness, strife and envying, what will you do? And what
account will you make unto the righteous God, who is Judge of all the Earth,
and will re^ard every man according to his deeds? Run not so headily in the
exercise of Wickedness, but stand still, and hearken to the still Voice in your
conscience, which tells you that is not the Way; for death and destruction is
before you, and the pit is near unto you, and many of you are come to the brink
thereof; be stayed in time, before you fall therein, from whence there will be
no recovery; and let the time past of your lives suffice that you have spent,
and lived so many years together in the lusts of the flesh, against the light
and love of God. Therefore all in Gods fear stand, and feel it placed in your
hearts, that from iniquity you may depart, and ^in no more, but all come into
obedience to that of God in you, which makes ^in manifest, and there Gods power
know, to sanctify and cleanse you by the washing of Water through the Word,
that a new life you may come into, and walk in the regeneration; He that has
an ear to hear, let him hear; For the love of Christ constrains me to bear
testimony of what is made manifest unto me in the light, that you may all come
to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved; and likewise knowing the terror of
the Lord, I cannot but persuade men to depart from the evil of their Ways,
which the Wrath of the Lord is revealed against, and that you may all come to
know that the long-suffering of the Lord is salvation, and that his
saving-strength is near at hand, to help in the needful time; and here you will
find power to preserve you from the temptations which the enemy casts in, and
then labors to draw your minds to join unto; for as obedience is given unto
the light, power is received that destroys the Devils Work, and weakens his
kingdom; and then the Hand of Love is reached forth to take hold of you, and to
lead you out of darkness, and from under his Government, into the new and
living Way, and there gently guides you, and order^ you, and keeps you from
all the assaults which the Enemy does pursue withal; and he who has life in
himself, will give life unto you, and make you able to stand and ^ight the good
fight of Faith; and here the Divine nature is felt, and the glory of the only
begotten of the Father is beheld: And this is the testimony of the Faithful
Witness, which from the Fathers Love is made manifest in the conscience of
every man, that you might believe in it, and know the saving-strength of it,
working redemption for you, and putting an end to sin, and overturning the
powers of darkness, and bringing in everlasting righteousness; and this is the
Hand of Love reached forth unto you all, to lead you out of the House of
Bondag^, into the glorious liberty of the ^ons of God; where your
understandings will be opened to know the Scriptures, and the power of God; for
as you give obedience to the reachings of the Spirit, so will the things of God
be made known unto you, and no man can know the things of God by any e^her way,
either by Art, Study, Learning, or any industry of the natural part, but as the
spirit of God makes them known in the children of obedience, who give up
themselves to the teachings of it, and by it are guided to know the Scriptures
fulfilled in themselves; and this vvil bring you to a right understanding of
the Scriptures, as you receive the same spirit of Faith, and walks in it, as
they received and walked in, by whom the Scriptures were declared; for he that
was then light, life and power unto all that did believe in him, and gave them
an understanding to know the things that were true; he is the same now, and
changes not; but wicked men have changed his glory into shame, and minds
earthly things; yet is his light, life, and power the same unto all that
believe, and comes to have the spirit of their minds renewed by him, and so the
Scripture is truly owned and witnessed, being fulfilled in all that walk after
the Spirit, and have the spirit of their minds renewed by it, as they had who
has declared it in Words, which are written: and so the same Spirit guiding,
brings into unity with the same Words, which was given forth from its own
movings in the hearts of those who by it was constrained to declare them; and
thus the children of obedience owns the Scriptures, and has unity with them in
the same: Spirit that gave them forth, and knows them fulfilled in themselves,
walking after the same Spirit. Let this be well weighed by you who are wise in
your own eyes, and prudent in your own sight, and in that Wisdom talks so much
of what is written, and gets the Words thereof, and with them contend in your
Wills, and fights against the Lord, and every appearance of righteousness,
brought forth in the motion of the Spirit, which is the mystery hid from your
eyes, and revealed unto the Babes, who walk in the light which reveals secrets,
and makes them to be of understanding hearts, to know the true God, and eternal
life; and here is the door of hope for all you tender ones, who are breathing
after God; come, walk in the light that an entrance you may feel ministered unto
you, and ^n enjoyment of the possession of that which in the door of hope is
opened for you, where the Rivers of Gods good pleasure runs freely, with
which he does satisfy the poor of the flock, who vvaits to be refreshed
thereby, which he does renew their strength in, to follovv him in the narrovv
way, in which flesh and blood cannot walk, nor no unclean thing must enter;
Therefore do not you hew broken Cisterns, nor feed upon husks any longer, but
to the streams of life all come, and feel how good the Lord is; so all wait to
know the hand of Love to lead you, and the Spirit of truth to teach you, which
will not deceive you, bnt teach you right things; though such who are at
enmity with it, speak unadvisedly of it, yet it is truth in it self, and abides
the same for ever, and will overturn all who in the height of envy and fury do
pursue it with swelling Words of vanity.

Therefore let all things be tried and proved in the light, and in it search
your selves, that you may come to the bottom, and have all the dross purged
out, and the tinn taken away, that your hearts may be purified in the light,
that so you may stand approved in the sight of the pure God: And here is the
right Way of the Lord opened, and a Hand of Love reached forth to guide you out
of all crooked paths, and to bring you into the Way of Righteousness, Truth,
and Holiness, and bring you to an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled,
where joy unspeakable is possessed: And this honor has all the Saints, who are
found faithful before the Lord, to follow the Lamb whither soever he goes.

Therefore let this testimony come unto you who have had some openings of Gods
Love, and have felt the gift of Grace made manifest in your conscience, that
has convinced you of many things, and brought you to forsake much of the
Worlds Fashions, and Customs, and Worship, and have brought you to a separation
from it, that you are not so openly profane as many of them are, but are
turned from many appearances of evil, which the light did truly make manifest
in you, and convince you of in your own conscience; and a simplicity there was
begotten in you, that Truth was precious unto you, and a love you had unto it,
and came to have a sight of many things afar off, and a desire in you to press
after the enjoyment of them; and by the light you were guided out of many
things which it did convince you of to be evil; and you could not any longer
continue therein, because they were made manifest unto you to be Works of
darkness. Deal truly with your own hearts all of you, for there is nothing
secret which shall not come to light; and you cannot deny but that it was
something of God in your own conscience that made sin manifest, and convinced
you thereof, and moved in your hearts to draw you from it, and made discoveries
of secret things, which in your hearts were lodged, and showed you the Worlds
Ways and Worship to be against the truth, and did convince you thereof, and
brought you to separate from it in appearance. And ^ere was pure breathings in
you which longed for God, that you might come into his Court, and enjoy his
presence; O this was a simple and innocent state, in which you were precious in
Gods sight; and whilst you did abide faithful, waiting in patience for Gods
loving kindness, therein to grow up into the measure of Christ's fullness; the
Lord was not wanting to you, but was large in his love, and free in his mercy,
as in obedience you walked to the measure of the gift of Grace; and your
Prayers and Tears came up before him, and was had in remembrance by him: O what
breathings, pantings, and hungerings has there been in many of you after the
Lord, with strong cries and tears, for a Visitation of his Love; and that you
might walk in the light of his countenance! How zealous and fervent have you
been after righteousness, and to follow the motion of the Spirit of life with
cheerfulness! Have you not cried down forms, and set up the Spirits Worship,
and its teachings? And has not the spirit judged you in your own conscience,
when you have not obeyed it? And have you not been brought to stoop down, and
lie low under the sense of Judgment, and that you could not find a resting
place, but still that of God in your own conscience pursued you whithersoever
you went, you could not leave it in any place; but near you it did appear,
witnessing against you, and judging you for your disobedience? Can you not
vvitness these things to be true, many of you? and that this has been your
condition, going heavily and mournfully under Gods displeasure made manifest
against you? And has not your anguish and trouble been within you, which has
brought you into meekness and lowliness, and beaten you down in your selves,
that you have confessed your own nothingnes^ and insufficiency, and here has
been brought to wait on the Lord alone in simplicity, that his saving-strength
you might feel to help you? And did not you find him to be a God near at hand
when your eye was toward him, and your expectations from him? Did he not open
his love freely, and gave you savoury refreshment and comfort, and made bare
his own Arm to help you, and wrought all your Works in you,and for you, that
you have even admiredd his goodness, and acknowledged his power in his free
Gift and Grace unto you? and whilst the simpli^ity did abide in you, and you
was faithful to what was made manifest unto you? What pure breathings had many
of you after a greater measure of the gift of Grace, and that the Lord would
pour forth more of his Spirit upon you, that you might be made fruitful, and
grow up to the Lord in it; And here you had precious discoveries, as you stood
in obedience to the measure of Gods Spirit, thereby to be guided, and so
separated from the Worlds form, in obedience to the light of Christ in your own
conscience, and that it did constrain you to depart, having made known unto you
something more excellent, which was above the Worlds Worship, and which you
found to be your duty to walk np unto, that you might come into liberty, and to
serve God in the Spirit; and here you stood in Gods fear, and assembled
together to wait for the Spirits moving, that it might teach you to speak, and
teach you to pray, and that all your duties might be offered up, and performed
in the Spirit; Has not this been declared by many of you, from what you have
truly felt of Gods loving kindness made manifest in you, which brought you to
deny, and testify against many things which you were convinced of to be evil?
but you have forsaken your first Love, and have not been faithful to the end;
therefore the Lord has somewhat against you, because you uphold that Woman
Jezzabel, and suffers her to teach and seduce, by whom many are overcome, to
commit fornication with her; for the true Guide you have lost, which once did
lead you in the way, and would have brought you to the true rest, had you kept
your minds stayed in it, and vvalked in obedience to it; but the Enemy has
deceived you, and prevailed over you, and drawn you into crooked paths, where
you are got into the Earth again; for the simplicity is betrayed, and your
desires are cooled; and your breathings and pantings after God are stayed, and
you are set down in a form which once you were convinced of to be dead and
barren: Let not this offend you, for it is the truth concerning many of you,
and the Witness of God in your conscience does answer to it. Therefore remember
from whence you are fallen, and repent, for the lord would not have you perish,
but still reaches forth a hand of Love unto you, having more pleasure to save
then to destroy; therefore is he still striving with you, and gives you no rest
nor peace in the way which the god of this World has led you into, and blinds
your minds in; for your actions witness against you daily, that you are
servants to sin, and that Liberty you speak of, and says you are redeemed
unto, is but an occasion for you to serve the lusts of the flesh, which makes
you one with the World again in Words and Practices, where the Enemy has taken
you captive, and leads you in earthly pleasures, and covetous practices, in
which you are wanton and light-minded, in foolish jesting, and vain talking,
turning the Grace of God into wantonness, and making shipwreck of Faith and a
good Conscience, being heightened in your imaginations in what you have taken up
in the observation, in which Satan has transformed himself by his deceitful
working, in bringing forth a form in the imitation, where you are set down, and
have taken up your rest; and here he has deceived you with a vain hope, having
settled you in a form without power, and does work a persuasion in your minds,
that it is the right Way, and so sets you in enmity against the pure motion of
the light of Christ in you, having got your minds out, to look abroad, and have
your expectation from something that is without, and so he has drawn your
minds from that which is within, that once did truly move in yon, and would
have brought you into the power, had you been faithful to the end; but you are
fallen short of that which they witnessed, whose practice you pretend to
follow, and are turned against it, and become the greatest Enemies unto it; for
he that has prevailed over you, and betrayed the simplicity in you, seeks to
pervert the right Way of the Lord by you, and fills you with fury to cry out
against those that walk in uprightness of their hearts before the Lord, and in
his fear are kept, that they dare not sin against him, but walks in
righteousness and holiness, in which the light leads them, and which by his
Grace he teaches them, from which you are erred and gone astray, and walks
after the imaginations of your own hearts, where your own Wills leads you, to
take up a practice in imitation of what others have done, who was by the Spirit
of Truth guided, and by it commanded, and in which they performed all their
services; but unto this Spirit you are found Enemies, and fighting against it
in the strength of your own Wisdoms, and so runs into error, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God, but denies that which gives the understanding
to know them, and so never comes to the fulfilling of them, nor to have unity
with them, but as they are Words declared and recorded; for you stand not in
obedience to the same spirit, that in the inner man it might teach you, and
lead you to the Lord God, who has life in himself, and gives life unto all
that come unto him, and believes in him, by which all the children of obedience
are refreshed and satisfied, who lives by faith, looking for, and waiting to
receive those things which are not seen; but that which you take up your rest
in, and are satisfied with, is visible and temporal, which is seen, and beheld
with natural eyes; and so you miss that which is spiritual, and cannot be seen,
which is the substance, and the end of all changeable things, not living by
Faith, but by sight, and contents your selves with created refreshments; but
that which the soul hungereth after, and pants for, is living Bread that
comes down from Heaven, which whosoever eats, shall never dye: for it is the Bread
of life, whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is drink indeed! O pure
refreshment from the Lords presence! Blessed are all that are found worthy to
sit down at this Table, and to partake of this Bread, and drink of this Cup,
which is the Communion of Christ's blood.

Be ye of an understanding heart, O ye professors, and consider if you have the
substance, and that you live in Christ, and he in you; and that you feel those
things you feed upon to have life in themselves, and to give life unto you; if
life be not in your Bread and Wine, they are not the Communion of Christ's body,
nor blood, but bare Bread and Wine, retaining their own quality and virtue, as
created refreshments; and if you say this was their practice who enjoyed
Christ, and fed upon him, and that the Bread which they brake was the Communion
of Christ's Body, and the Cup which they drank was the Communion of Christ's
Blood; but I say, Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, least you
eat and drink damnation to your selves, not discerning the Lords body; for that
which they received, and had Communion in, who lived by Faith, was not Bread of
grain, nor Wine in a silver Cup; but the Bread which they brake was the
Communion of Christ's body, and the Cup which they drank, was the Communion of
Christ's Blood; and you cannot prove any other thing without inventions; and
they being many, was one Bread, and one Body; but the mystery is hid from your
eyes, who in your Earthly Wisdom would comprehend the things of God; for you
being run from the Guide which once did give you light, and for a season you
rejoiced in it, you are departed from that which would have given you a true
discerning of the Lo^ds Body, and wrought Faith in you to have believed, though
you had not seen; and if you had been obedient to have followed that of God
which once did truly move in you, then you would have continued in the holy
Commandments given of God, and have walked in them as children of obedience,
and discerned the Lords Body, and the Communion which they had in it, who did
eat and drink, and fed upon it in their hearts by faith; And this was the Bread
which they did eat, and the Cup which they drank, and had their life in him who
is the Bread of Life, whose examples none can follow in truth, but such as
receive the same Spirit of Faith, and walks in obedience to it, which you are
found fighting against with the Words which from it were declared, which you
say is more sure then it is in its movings: What a Vail has overspread you!
And what thick darkness has covered you who denies the motion of the Spirit
from which the Scriptures were declared! Did not holy men of God speak as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost? Did it not first move within them, and gave them
a Divine inspiration, by which they came to know the things of God made
manifest in them, and from the motion of the Spirit declared as it gave them
utterance; and so the Scriptures came to be given forth, and a true Record it
is of what they were made Witnesses of, who had communion with the Spirit, and
tasted of the Word of life? and the Scriptures are profitable where the
manifestation of the Spirit is received, and believed in, by which the
understanding is opened to know them, and the power of God, but not to set them
above Christ, not against him, as you are doing, who are your selves departed
from him, and yet uses your tongues to speak the Words which were declared from
the motion of the Spirit, and sets them in opposition to the same light and
spirit which now as truly moves in the children of obedience, as it did in
them who were made Witnesses of the Grace of God, and through the operation of
the spirit did declare it.

Therefore be not so rash in your minds, as to call good evil, and Truth a
delusion; but sink down in Gods fear, and know that which is near you, to
reprove you in your ignorance, and then you will know there is nothing so sure
as that which was before the World, or Man, or Scriptures were, which is that
which changes not, but is to day as yesterday, and abides the same for ever.

And this is the everlasting truth which from the beginning has been made
manifest through ages and generations, according to the dispensation of Gods
good pleasure, which all the holy men of God have walked in, and been obedient
to, and declared of, whose sayings are all true and faithful, and are owned to
be a true Declaration of the living Word which from the beginning was, and now
is, which changes not, in which they felt Gods loving kindness made manifest
unto them, as they vvalked in obedience unto him; and likewise declared of Gods
severity and displeasure revealed against the ungodly and unbelievers; and thus
was the truth known from the beginning, to instruct, and lead, and guide the
righteous in the holy Way, wherein they erred not, and to convince and condemn
the World for sin, who walked with a froward heart against the Lord: Be not
deceived, for all visible things must perish, and that which has a beginning,
has an end; howsoever it may appear in show unto you, there will be no help
found in any created being in the needful time; for your foundation which in
your own Wisdom you have laid, and in your own strength you are building upon,
one tempest will beat it all down, and your labor will be lost after so many
years spent.

Therefore be meek and lowly in your hearts, and ^ink down to the Cornerstone,
and reject it no longer, for it will not fail, neither can the Gates of Hell
prevail against it: All wait for the Hand of Love to bring you thither, that
there your footsteps may be placed, and your goings ordered, that a spiritual
House you may know raised up by the Arm of the Lord; and here Christ is known,
who is true for evermore, and leads into all truth those that believe in him,
and are guided by him; the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the
first and the last; there is none besides him, nor any to be compared into him,
who baptizeth all that believe in him into one body, by one spirit, and there
cleanses them by the washing of Water through the Word, where the regeneration
comes to be witnessed, and the answer of a good conscience received, the pure
Water flowing forth which washes and cleanses the body inwardly, by which
believers comes to be baptized into Christ, and puts him on; and this is the
one baptism, known and witnessed by all that follow the light of the Lord, and
walks in obedience to his commands: and if you do not wilfully outstand Gods
Witness, you cannot but confess this is the baptism in which believers are
baptized, and is the one baptism the Scriptures declares of, and that there is
not another to be continued.

Therefore be silent before the Lord, and yield obedience to what he commands
you by his spirit in the inner man, and there know that one baptism which all
believers are baptized with, in which they are washed and cleansed, to follow
Christ in the regeneration and newness of life; He that can receive it, let
him: For you cannot prove by plain Scripture that Christ was a Minister of
Water Baptism, or that he did command it, or preached it for Doctrine, or
pressed it as a duty; but he sent his Disciples forth to preach the Gospel of
the Kingdom, and to give that which they had received freely; and you cannot
prove that when they were thus sent forth, that they had received
Water Baptism; but what was made manifest in them, and which they had received,
that they gave, and declared thereof in Gods power; and this reached the inward
parts, and pricked the hearts of those that heard it, and brought them to
enquire what they might do; unto whom Peter said, Repent, and be baptized every
one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the holy Ghost, Acts 2. 38. This day is this Scripture
fulfilled, praises be unto the Lord God for ever; and many are true Witnesses
of this baptism, whose hearts have been pricked by the eternal living Word in
their own conscience, that they have been brought to enquire what they might
do; and the living Word has been obeyed, and the reproof thereof, which has
wrought the godly sorrovv unto repentance, never to be repented of; and there
the Fountain has been opened, which washes away sin and uncleanness, and
baptizeth into the Name of Jesus Christ, where sins are remitted, and the gift
of the Holy Ghost received: And in this Scripture Water is not once named,
where the Apostle preaches the Doctrine of Baptism, and was the first which
was preached after the Holy Ghost fell upon them.

Therefore be not so envious against those who witness the truth as they know
it in Jesus, and are baptized with the Holy Ghost and Fire, and has felt him
whose Fan is in his hand, thoroughly purging his floor, and cleansing the
inward parts from all unrighteousness; and this licks up the Water, and
consumes it, as the fire did which fell from Elijah's Altar, which was a true
figure of the two Ministrations, if you could read it; for had you obeyed that
which once did truly move in you, and opened Gods love unto you, and gave you a
sight of many things which in your hearts were secretly lodged, and let you see
the Ways and Worship of the World to be vain; if you had continued faithful
unto this pure Guide, it would not have left you on Jordans brinks, nor in the
midst thereof, but would have opened it unto you, and led you through it, and
over it, and given you an inheritance in the true rest for ever.

Therefore be awakened, and lift up your eyes, and behold where you are; for
you are not come where ^ongs of deliverance are sung, but are set down short of
the pure rejoicing, from whence you are all called to arise, and join to the
Hand of Love which is still reached forth unto you, that thereby you might be
gnided in the Way of peace that leads to eternal life; and though many of you
may swell in Wrath because the little stone is smiting your Image, and that you
know not how to uphold it but by contending for it, and talking of the
Scriptures, yet this will not uphold it, nor your Worship and obedience to it;
for the Witness is true, and the testimony thereof does stand against you, and
over it you cannot prevail; and this is my rejoicing in it, that I have the
answer of a good conscience, and peace with God; and though many of you may be
hardened, and set your selves against the Word of Truth, and hates to be
reformed by it; yet truth is the same, and you cannot change it with all your
inventions.

And let all the simple-minded who are yet seeking rest, and are not satisfied
with what you are feeding upon, O return unto the Lord, and come again to that
of God in you, who will heal your backslidings, and open your understandings,
where the right Way of the Lord will be made known unto you; for it is man that
does deceive you, and leads you in many Ways that they have imagined; and in
their Wills sets up their own inventions for the Way of God, when the Lord has
not required it at their hands; and whilst you are (...) bewitched with the
Inchanters and Southsayers, and (...) your delight in their crooked paths, you
will not find that wherein satisfaction is, which some of you are truly
se^-king after: Therefore unto you is this moved from the living God, who are
tender hearted, and in whom there is yet a true breathing after God, who cannot
be satisfied with those things that will perish, but are seeking after the
enjoyment of something that will abide; hearken to the light of Christ and feel
the Hand of Love, and join your selves unto it, that you may be acquainted with
it, and know the leadings of it; this will bring you to the life from whence it
comes, as you yield obedience to it, there will you feel living springs opened
freely to you, and plentifully to refresh you, where you will know the Water
that fails not, which yeildeth satisfaction and pure refreshment; and though
many be set down with their hearts hardened, and denies every motion of the
Spirit in them, and instead of being filled with the Spirit according to the
Apostles Doctrine, they are filled with envy and fury against it, and every
appearance of it, and opens their mouths in blasphemy against it; but they
shall all know a day of Trial, in which a recompense of reward will be given
from the righteous God, who will bring every secret thing into Judgment, and
make all his Enemies his Footstool; let not their hard heartedness be an
occcasion to make your tender hearts stumble at the Way of Truth; neither give
your minds to harken to their Enchantments, who has so long bewitched you from
obeying the truth; but all be diligent to hearken to the light which is truly
moving in many of you, and does couvince you that you are not walking in the
right Way, you see something amiss amongst you, which you cannot have communion
with, and something which you are not come to live in, and which you cannot
deny but to be truth as it is brought forth from the Spirit of Truth in others.

Therefore do you weigh and consider vvisely where you are, that you may be no
longer deceived, but may come and know the right Way of the Lord. So all in
the light keep your minds stayed, and hasten not, but lie down and patiently
vvait, that you may see salvation brought unto you, as you are brought to stand
still; and so will the Lord work his own Work for you, by the Arm of his power,
and make known his secrets, and reveal his Son in you, that you may not confer
with flesh and blood.

So unto the light of Christ with which you are enlightened, all give up your
selves in obedience, that every motion thereof you may be willing to follow,
that it may be your Leader, and guide you out of your own Ways, and Words, and
Works, and Thoughts, and bring you into subjection, to do the Fathers Will in
all things, and to obey his Teachings which by his Spirit he requires, and it
will bring you to know truth in the inner parts, which the Lord loves; and as
you obey the light, and follows it, you will feel every motion thereof to be
precious, and bringing you nearer unto the life from whence it comes, where
the pure openings of Gods love you will feel to satisfy you.

So all in Gods fear stand, and sink down to the Cornerstone which in you is
placed, and know that to be your foundation, and this will be a sure Way to
come to Christ, when you feel his Virtue to stay your Issue; and this is the
Grace of God that brings salvation, and appears to all Men, and teaches what
to deny, and what to walk in, which if you take heed unto, you will need no
other Teacher, but as the anointing teaches you, which is in you, and is
truth, and no lie, which will open your understandings to know the things of
God, and let you see things that differ, and bring you to a true discerning
betwixt the precious and the vile, where man's Way and Gods Way will be plainly
opened unto you; For the Seeds sake this is declared: Reject not counsel ye
tender hearts, but be willing to receive instruction, that your minds may be
informed where to wait for Gods loving kindness, that the Hand of Love may lead
you in the new and living Way that brings to the Father, where the true Rest
you will find, and perfect peace.

Truth defended and cleared from the Lies and Slanders declared by JONATHAN
JOHNSON.
HAving observed the Envious Spirit to rage for a long season in Jonathan
Johnson against the Truth as it has been declared and published in the motion
of the Spirit of Life, and that as Books has come to his hand which has been
so published, he has been set on work in his busy mind to write in the leaves
thereof against the truth which has been therein declared; for which cause I,
having unity through the love of God with that truth so declared, and being
made a Witness thereof, it was laid upon me as my duty to write unto him, and
declare against his secret working, in which I offered this unto him in the
fear of the Lord, That he would set out his own Work, and make it public in
print, and also sent him some Queries for to answer publicly, and thereby did
let him know that I should not receive him upon any other account, but as he
made his Work public, having heard much of his contentious spirit; unto which
offer and queries, he sent me a plain denial in Writing back again, in which
were many Words and false Accusations against the truth, which I did not find
my duty to reply to in Writing, having before let him know that I should not
receive him upon that account; therefore my duty was now to let him know that
it was my desire that Truth might appear, and be seen where it was, and so was
ordered to write to him again, wherein I then offered in the fear of the Lord,
to reason with him, which he would not receive, but put it by, under false
pretenses, and false Accusations, which in Writing he sent unto me again; and
then the boaster was got up, and told me I stood spechless, and was silent, and
had nothing to answer; and seeing he would not be brought to any way by which
his false accusations might come to light, and his deceit discovered, I was
moved to return unto him in Writing some of his lies and slanders with which he
falsely accused the truth, and the righteous generation, whom his scornful
spirit calls the generation of Quak^s, whom he had also accused with many other
things, which I did not return unto him with the rest, because he said I might
ere long hear him make them manifest in print; and in that Writing he sent me
some queries to answer, though he had plainly denied to answer mine; therefore
I laid it upon him, That what he had in private papers written, and charged
upon the truth, he might prove, and print them and his queries also, with the
rest which he had said he would make manifest in Print; but he not being
willing to make all his lies and deceit so public, as in Print, he writes unto
me again, and therein offers Proof to what was Returned unto him, and laid upon
him to prove publicly, and says he had proved them all before, as his
Writings made manifest, and it was but shifting and dissembling to call for new
Proof; yet he says, That both I and others may see his readiness to prove what
he had said, he had sent plain Proofs of the 20 Particulars, which he said I
might have drawn into 12 or 14, seeing 6 or 8 of them, all concerned one and
the same thing: but he said, The Quakers loves to be numerous.

Let the simple-minded here observe, and the spiritual judge what thick
darkness is upon him, to say, We love to be numerous, when all the Particulars
which I returned unto him, were invented by him, or some other for him, and
sent with his own Name unto them, which now he says might have been drawn
into fewer; did not he first make them numerous, by multiplying of them
without need? and I did but write* what I received from him, which he now
condemns as numerous, and so out of his own mouth is judged to be a
transgressor, allowing that in himself, which he condemns in another: And
that some of his deceit may come to view, and that it may be seen what Proof
he offers, and of what nature they are, and thereby it may be judged how he
proved his Lies before, which he says his Writings will make manifest, I
shall here therefore give forth the Particulars which unto him I returned, and
the Proofs which he has offered, with a short Reply unto them severally, in
which he is unveiled.

Particular. The first is, That the quakers observes the Worlds Form.

Proof. This Charge was to thy self, in observing the Worlds Form in thy Title
Page, of thy Book, in which thou have laid down thy Weapons of Defense.

Reply. That, by which every thing is proved to be truth, is truth, but no lie
is of the truth, therefore thou have but added sin to sin, offering one lie to
prove another; for in thy Writing, these were thy words, I do not say that
writing Scripture phrases in a title page is against the truth, but against
your own Principle as you are Quakers, who cry out against others for following
the Worlds Form, and yet your selves do observe it, therefore thou art found
guilty of making Lies thy Kefuge, and would in thy ignorance persuade others
that it is a proof of the matter: Let the wise in heart consider, and that of
God in all Consciences judge, if this be a proof, of what thou have falsely
accused the Righteous with, or if this Charge was only to my self, or in
general, from thy own words be thou judged, which I have here truly set down,
that all honest minds may be truly informed, and thou may be convinced by that
of God in thy own Conscience to be a false accuser, and that is my Weapon, in
which I stand to defend the truth from thy lies, and it will cut thee down, and
there shall be none to hold thee up.

2. Partic. That they maintain their device of formal quaking.

Proof. That they labor to maintain their formal quaking, is laid open in
their Books, and Writings.

Reply. Such a Proof may shame a formal Professor, to reproach the Saints
Condition, and call it formal, when the Lord by his power makes the Earth to
tremble and melt at his presence, of which Condition, Moses, David, Habakknk,
and many others, were true VVitnesses; which Condition we own, and on the Lord
do wait, that by the power of his Spirit it may be wrought in the inner man,
and it is the work of the Lord, who is unlimited in his power, and what he
does, who shall say unto him, What do thou? who Works when, and where
he pleases, as the vvind blovveth where it lists, which is in no formal
practice bound up, or limited, neither do we so maintain it, either in Book or
Writing, but thou have added sin to sin again, and manifested thy envy to all
moderate Spirits, and no way that thou can find out to help thy self, but by
making Lies thy Refuge, for a Liar thou art proved, and therefore have no cause
to think why thy words should pass for proof in any matter against which thou
contendest, without thou canstbring plain Scripture, to manifest that what thou
contendest against, is contrary to the Leadings, and Guidings, and Work of the
Spirit of truth, and the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles in ^he Scriptures
declared; but what thou have done, does manifest thy folly, and en^ity against
the truth, and those who walk therein.

3. Pa^^ic. That their light within, is a false Harlot.

Proof. Their light within is their false Religion, being against the light and
teachings of the Scriptures; and false Religion is known of all, who knows any
thing, to be a false Harlot.

Reply. Who comes to the knowledge of Gods glory, comes to know him in the
light which shines in their hearts, which light shines within, and brings to
know God, where the pure Religion is witnessed, which the Scripture declares
of; but thouknowest nothing as thou ought to know, and so puts the true light
for darkness, and calls pure Religion a false Harlot, for the true light which
lights every man that comes into the world is Christ, Joh. 1. 9. and he is
the truth, John 14. 6. and they that follow him comes to the light of life,
Joh. 8. 12. and they examine themselves, and knows Christ to be in them
according to the Scripture, 2 Cor. 13. 5. and he is in them the hope of Glory,
Col. 1. 27. and this Christ we preach, and this Grace of God we declare, which
we know to be in us, and is truth in the inward parts which the Lord loves,
and will stand above thee, and all thy deceit, though thou have blasphemed him.

4* Partic. That they steat Scriptures to deck their false Harlots with.

Proof. Is proved in first calling the Scriptures dead and liveless, to bring
their false Harlot called light within, into osteem, and then fills their
mouths with it, to seem spiritualized, and to make the world believe it is from
themselves, and not from Scripture; and this was proved against these in thy
Title Page of thy Book to H. H.

Reply. The light within is already proved from plain Scripture to be Christ
the light of the world, and the eternal truth and power of God, and the
Scriptures are dead and liveless unto thee, who art at enmity with the light
and life from which they were declared, and unto which they bear testimony, and
therefore we deny thee, though thy mouth may be sometimes filled with Scripture
expressions, and of which it is now empty; but the Scriptures we own, and have
unity with them in the same Spirit from which they were given forth, and knows
them to be fulfilled in us, who walk after the Spirit; and what thou say was
proved before to this matter against me, is a proof which was of thy own
inventions, as these are, which thou have now offered to thy shame for ever,
not giving a Scripture expression, nor naming a Scripture for what thou have
said; but thy mouth is filled with Lies instead of Scripture, and that thou
calls a proof.

5. Partic. That they labor to have the Scriptures dead in m^ns est^mation.

Proof. Is proved plain^y in telling men the Scriptures are a dead Letter, and
a liveless Book; and saying it is a damnable Doctrine to say the Spirit is
received by the hearing of Faith preached, and believing according to the
Scriptures, and in calling the Doctrine and Ordinances of Christ in the
Scriptures, outward Forms and liveless.

Reply. That which has not life in it self is dead, and thou cannot deny it,
and the Book has not life in it self, neither can the Letter thereof give life
to any, though they may read it and hear it all their life time, and if ever
thou come to know the Scriptures, and the true use of them, thou must come to
the light which is the life of men, without whom all things are dead; and it is
a damnable Doctrine to preach the Letter for Christ, and set it above him,
which is not according to the Doctrine of those who were Ministers of the
Spirit, and not of the Letter, and this does the Letter declare; and the Spirit
is not received by hearing or reading the Letter, but by the hearing of Faith
preached in the heart by the Spirit that quickneth, and the Doctrine of Christ
and the Apostles, which the Scriptures do declare, and believing according to
that Doctrine we own, and in it walk, by the same spirit which does not lead
any contrary, who by it are guided, but leads into the fulfilling of all, and
into the life where living virtue is received which from the beginning was
ordained, which is not dead nor formal, but life and power; but thou can sit
down in thy own time, to eat and drink in immitation of what thy imagination
comprehends by reading the Scriptures, that the Saints did, and so thou glories
in appearance, and not in heart.

6. Partic. That they deny the Scriptures.

Proof. Is proved before in which they are manifested to be the most audacious
denyers of Scripture that ever has been, of all the Antich istian party.

Reply. That which thou have proved before, thou have manifested thy self in, to
be a servant unto him who is an enemy to truth, and every appearance of
Righteousness, which by the light is brought forth in the Children of
Obedience, that strikes at every work of darkness, having no Communion with it,
and this makes him rage, in Wrath and Fury in thee, to speak great swelling
words of vanity, and offer them for a Proof that his Lies might have a likeness
of truth put upon them, by which many are at this day deceived; for the
scriptures are owned and believed in, and the Doctrine of Christ is obeyed, and
the light is walked in, which gives us fellowship with the Father, and with the
Son, where we have Communion with the life; but Antichrist denies the Father
and the Son, and is at enmity with the divine Nature, and fighting against
every appearance of godliness, which from the living virtue thereof is brought
forth, which thou makes thy great business to oppose, and contend against.

7. Partic. that they are not guided by that light and spirit that gave forth
the Scriptures.

Proof. Is proved both by their denial of those Scriptures and Commands g^v^n
forth by the light and spirit of God in the Scriptures, and also in their
se^ting up a pretended light within, contrary to any teachings of the spirit of
God in the Scriptures.

Reply. Thou art proved a Liar by plain scripture, in the Third Reply, where it
is proved, that Christ is the light, and it was in their hearts, and this does
the teachings of Gods spirit in the scripture witness, and we neither deny the
teachings nor Commands given forth by the light and spirit of God in the
scriptures, but have unity with them, and the some light and spirit teaches
us, and unto the Commands thereof we wait to yield obedience; but it is thy
business to make Lies thy Refuge, and adds one to another without shame,
neither showing what the Teachings and Commands are; which thou say the
scriptures teaches and commands, and what we deny; nor what the light and
spirit is, nor where to be waited for, which thou say we are not guided by;
but thou passes all for Proof, because thou say it.

8. Par: That they are evil dealers, and fighters against God.

Proof. Is proved in their evil dealing, and fighting against the spirit of God
speaking in the Scriptures, and denying obedience thereunto, and railing
against those that d^ obey, to exalt their lying spirit against it.

Reply. What shall be done unto thee, O thou false tongue, who without fear
utters such Lies against the innocent, who are guided by the spirit of truth
out of all evil dealing, or wrong doing! but thou art in the depth of the
bottomless pit, and from thence foaming out thy own shame, not fearing to speak
any thing which the lying spirit puts into thy mouth, and calls it a Proof,
when thou have neither scripture ground, nor reason, to show for what thou
say, but as the Devil hatcheth mischief in thy heart, so with a ready mind
thou serves him in what he will have thee to do, and so falsely accuses the
innocent, who in all obedience serves the Lord, and walks-after the spirit, and
yields all obedience to it, and yet thou say they deny the spirit of God
speaking in the scriptures, but have not showed what those speakings are, nor
who they are that do obey, that they rail against, nor what the lying spirit is
that they exalt, for what thou have here laid down, is but in substance one
with thy whole matter, which thou calls Proofs; for what thou have to say is
chiefly against the light within, and disobedience to the scripture teaching,
in which thou have been proved a liar and a false accuser, manifesting nothing
but envy against the Righteous generation, whose foundation is sure, and their
footsteps so ordered upon it that all thy darts cannot make them to move,
neither can the strength of thy might shake their foundation.

9. Part. That they have neither part in, nor fellowship with the Scriptures.

Proof. What part or fellowship can they have with the Scriptures, who deny
their Teachings, and Commands thereof, and the spirits speaking (...) and (...)
(...) from their Teaching, except that part and fellowship of condemnation
which the Scriptures does pass sentence of, against all that disobey their
Teaching.

Reply. Will thou not here see thy ignorance, to ask a question and offer it
for a Proof? was ever any that thou read of in the scriptures, who were
guided by the spirit of truth, thus taught? for the scriptures does not set up
it self, to be the teacher, neither can thou prove it, or that the scripture
passes sentence upon any, but the Lord gives forth his Word, that gives
sentance against all the disobedient, and the scriptures do but declare that
sencence which was given forth by the Lord; and it is the grace of God that
teaches, and the anointing within, and this the scripture bears Witness of,
and directs the minds of all people unto, where true teaching is received, from
the true voice, and this we labor to draw all men unto, therefore thy
condemnation will be from the light which thou art at enmity with, and hates
it, because thy deeds are evil.

10. Partic. That they are guilty of taking counsel together against Christ.

Proof. Is Proved in their binding themselves together in many and several
places, and thereby all the violence of words and writings that they can, draw
men from the teaching of Christ and his Apostles, to follow their false
devices, and secret pretended light:

Reply. Thou art in the Heathens rage, and there fighting against the Lord, and
speaking evil of the things thou know not, calling the light false and
pretended, which Christ and his Apostles preached for the doctrine of
salvation, unto all that love it and believe in it, and for condemnation unto
all that hate it; and unto this light we exhort all people to look unto and be
saved, which is the eternal truth, which thou can not prevail against.

11. Partic. That they seek to kill Christ in his Witness.

Proof. Is proved in their seeking to kill that Christ which is preached and
taught in the scriptures, to set up their own fals^ Idol, which they call
Christ within, never preached or Taught in scripture, but the scriptures will
be lively Witnesses to their condemnation.

Reply. Thou art a cruel blasphemer to call Christ within a false Idol, and
dare affirm that he never was so preached or taught in the scriptures; do
thou talk so much of the scripture and their teaching, and have thou never read
in the declaration thereof that Christ is in heaven? and did not he teach
unbeleevers to look for the kingdom of heaven within them? and have thou not
read Joh. 17. 23. I in them, and thou in me; and Gal. 1. 15, 16. But when it
pleased God who separated me from my Mothers womb, and called me by his grace,
to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Gentiles; and Col.
1. 27, 28. To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this
Mystery, among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory, whom we
preach: Now let the wise in heart judge thy blasphemy, who has denied Christ
and the plain words of scriptures, and says Christ within is a false Idol, and
that he was never so preached in the scriptures, when they preached that Christ
that was in them, and not another, whom we know to live in us, and so preaches
him, which thou by wicked hands crucifies and slayes in thee, and so blasphems
his holy name; I am moved to warn thee to repentance, that thou may not go on
in the hardness of thy heart, to treasure up Wrath, against the day of Wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, for thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and the bond of iniquity.

12. Partic. That they set up a Kingdom of darkness.

Proof. Is proved in setting up their low-bred devices of darkness, against the
glorious and heavenly light of Christ in the scriptures.

Reply. Let thy mouth of iniquity be for ever stopped, who has denied Christ
and the scriptures, and stands an open enemy against the glorious light of
Christ, declared of in the scriptures; but where is it written that the
heavenly light of Christ is in the scriptures, but it is written that the true
light is Christ, and the scriptures are not Christ, but are they which
testifies of him, therefore thy understanding is darkened, and the god of this
World has thee captive at his will, and fills thee full of Witchcraft, that by
thy sorceries the simple minds are deceived, unto whose view thou art now
opened, and thy enchantments is discovered, that thou may be seen naked and
bare.

13. Partic. That they are against the Scriptures.

Proof. Was there ever any more grossly and wickedly against the scriptures than
they who denied their life, disobey their teachings, boldly and audaciously,
and sets up their own darkness which they call light, against the light thereof?

Reply. Thou have here manifested thy folly, in asking a question and offering
it for a Proof, and speaking the same sentences over again which thou have used
before, and is Replied to, but thou art is a lost man, who knows not which way
to take, and so many times goes backward, when he should go forward, as thou
art doing, who knows not what to say to make up something, to call a Proof; but
the scriptures thou have denied, and it is plainly proved against thee, and the
light which they bear Witness of thou art an enemy unto it, and fighting
against it.

14. Partic. That they deny the Lord that Bought them.

Proof. Is proved in their bringing in damnable here^ies; 2 Pet. 2. 1. under a
pretense of a light within, to deny the ^ight of Christ held forth in the
Scripture; as in the doctrine of Redemption, saying, Their light within is the
Redeemer, and that nothing without a man can Redeem^ him; by which is denied
that great Redemption, and Redeemer, who without ^ll m^n, did Redeem all men.

Reply. Thou have here brought a scripture, which is owned, and seen to be
fulfilled in thee, that have denied Christ within, who is the Lord, which is a
damnable heresy, and contrary to the scriptures; and does not that scripture
say, that such as bring in damnable here^ies shall also speak evil of the way
of truth? and is not this thy great business to speak evil of Christ the light
of the world, who is the way and the truth, which thou art speaking against,
and so act out of the doctrine of Redemption, not knowing thy Redeemer to live,
having not obeyed from thy heart the form of Christ doctrine, and so art not
come to the work of Redemption, which works by his own mighty power in all
that believe in him, saving from fin, and redeeming from all iniquity, and
making perfect for ever through the sanctification of the spirit, which is his
work within, and yet without all men; these things thou can not reach unto,
in thy wisdom below.

15. Partic. That they make the Word of God of none Authority.

Proof. Is proved by their Traditions against ^he teachings of the Word of God,
which tells men, that they who are without Faith are without Christ, and the
true light, Ephesians. 2. 12. But the Quakers tells men, who are without faith, that
they have and must look to Christ and the true light within; a flat
contradiction to the div^n^ Authority of the Word of God.

Reply. All that knows the Word of God, and the teachings thereof do see thee
to be in that state as they were, who were without Christ; and the Apostle does
not say that Christ was not within them, but that they were without Christ, and
without God, in the world, and therefore he calls them to awake and arise from
the dead, (...) Christ might give them light, which was not a light without
^nem, for that they had whilst they were dead, but to the light within them,
did he mind them, which when they had received, they were made light in the
Lord, and knew him to be the Author of their Faith, which he wrought in their
^ea^^s by the Word of his power, which is the Word of Faith preached, and
stands in the divine authority of God, that so it is the true doctrine which the
Word of God teaches, without any contradiction, that they who are without
faith are without Christ; and yet who are without faith are to look unto Christ
within them, and obey him there, that he may work faith in their hearts, which
those who are at enmity with him, does not come to know, and so abides without
him in the unbelief, and in the world, having no comunion with his life, and
though such be without him, yet he is within them a faithful witness to reprove
them in their own conscience, for their transgression and disobedience; but the
Book unto thee is sealed and thou art unlearned and thy heart hardened, that
thou will not believe truth, though from the living Word of God it be declared.

16. Partic. That they set their hearts against the Lords Teachings in the
Scriptures.

Proof. Is proved in their setting themselves in array against the teachings of
Christ and his Apostles in the scriptures, which is the open manifestation of
the true light, and calling men into the desert and secret place, to look for
light in the house of darkness.

Reply. Christ said, false Christ's and false Prophets should arise and show
great figns and wonders, insomuch that if it were possible they should deceive
the very elect; but says he, Behold I have told you before, wherefore if they
shall say unto you, Behold he is in the desert, go not forth, Mat. 24. If thy
understanding was opened to know the scriptures, Christ's own words declares
the^ plainly what thou art, and what signs and wonders thou art showing to
deceive by, saying, Christ is without, behold him there, Christ says, Go not
forth, this is his own doctrine, and all believers obeys it, and that which
they were not to go forth from, was within them and when those false Prophets
came which Christ said should come, John savv their deceit, and their seducing
spirit, in the same light, in which thou art now made manifest, and he
exhorted to bevvare of that which did seduce, and to look unto that which
was within them, which is the anointing, says he, that ye have received of
him and abides in you, and you need not that any man teach you, but as the
same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth, and no lie, Joh. 2 27.
And thus the Scriptures comes to be known and witnessed in the unity of that
Spirit which is but one in all, Christ said false prophets should come, Go
(...) forth, John saw them when they did come, and he said, Abide in the
anointing which is in (...); and here is the pure Doctrine of Christ and the
Apostle declared in the unity of the Spirit, which thou art at enmity with, and
so teaches another Doctrine, as all false Prophets and deceivers do.

17. Partic. That they set up their own traditions.

Proof. Is proved in setting up their pretended light, which is quite contrary
to the light and teachings of Scripture:

Rep. Thou being in the state of darkness, calls good evil, and so falsely
accuses the truth by thy lying spirit, which to make way for thy lies to be
brought in, cries out against the truth to be contrary to the
Scripture-teaching; and under this Vail of thick darkness, was the Lord of
glory crucified by the wise Scripture-learned, who cried out against him, to
teach contrary to what was written in the Law and the Prophets, and so
enviously set themselves against him who was the end of the Law and Prophets,
and falsely accused him (as thou in that Wisdom art doing) who is the light of
the world.

18. Partic. That they pull down the Oracle of God in the Scriptures.

Proof. Is proved in their calling the Scriptures dead and lifeless, and
pulling their teachings from men's hearts and minds, that they might receive
their false Voice which is quite contrary to them.

Rep. Christ's sheep hear his voice, and follows him, and his voice they know
from strangers; and it is the true Voice which is uttered from Gods holy
habitation, which is sweet to all that love it, and a terror to all that hate
it, unto which we mind all people to give diligence, that with a ready
performance they may obey and do whatsoever it does command; and this is the
still voice which is behind thee, from which thou starts aside, and will not
abide the reproof thereof.

19. Partic. That they set up their own Idol-Books as a living voice.

Proof. Is proved in their setting up their Books for Teachers, and calling the
Scriptures dead and lifelefs; which books compared with their denial of the
Scriptures teaching, are set forth with bl^sphemous Tities.

Rep. The Lord God who lives for ever, pleads the cause of the innocent against
thy false tongue; and he that searches all hearts, and judges right in every
conscience, knows that thou do falsely accuse the righteous generation, and
that there is no guilt upon them, as to what thou have charged against them;
for they do not deny the Scriptures, nor sets up their Books for Teachers,
neither are the Titles thereof blasphemous; but in this thou have served thy
Master to the full, and to all moderate Spirits art manifest to bear the Image
of him who was a liar from the beginning; and thou have neither showed what
they deny the Scriptures in, not what Titles their Books bears, nor how they
are blasphemous, neither have given any Scripture Proof or expression for what
thou have said, but as thou hatcheth mischief in thy heart, so thou utters it
without fear.

20. Partic. That they persuade themselves and others of a light within,
without and against any testimony of Scripture.

Proof. Is proved in all their teachings by word and writing which chiefly
consists in this, to te^^ men who are not in the faith, That they must look
only to the light within them, and not to the Scriptures light, which is
without, and against all Scripture-teaching.

Rep. The beast has been sore troubled for any defense against the Lambs
power; for thou have had thy proofs so far to seek, that if thou had not gone
down into the pit of darkness, where lies are invented, thou might have
stood silent, which had been better for thee then to make lies thy refuge, and
with them accuse the truth, and rise up against the Lamb and his followers, to
make War, and rather then thou will stand still, thou will add lie to lie, and
speak them over and over, as is manifest in the particulars, and what thou have
offered to prove them by; and it is a true Doctrine, and has before been
plainly proved, That all men are to look unto Christ who is the light of the
World, that in his light they may walk, and know him to be the Author of Faith,
and to work it in their hearts with power, and no unbeliever is to look unto
any other thing but Christ the true light, and the Author of Faith, and the
Teacher, and there is not another, neither does the Scriptures set themselves
in that place, but bear witness unto him unto whom all power is given, who by
his own living voice calls all to come unto him, and they that come, he does
not cast off, neither sends them to the Scriptures (not any thing else) for
life or salvation, but opens the fresh springs, where satisfaction and pure
refreshment is received, and eternal life witnessed, and the
Scripture-testimony owned, and so by the light are thy lies and false
accusations condemned.

Then thou say, Th^^ reminds me of what I ought to prove against (...) which
is, That thou goes upon thy belly, and feeds upon the dust.

Thou did confess in thy Writing that it was the Lords Sentence against the
Serpent; then look into the 23. of Matthew; and there see what sort of people
they were that Christ calls Serpents; and though there be not thy name, yet
thou have the nature, and in that is working the same wickedness, and filling
up the measure of thy fathers: And here thou may read thy self, and thy
portion; and this is a plain proof to all the children of light, unto whom I
offer it, who has unity wi^h that which proves all things

Then thou bids me labor to have my mind enlarged, though my body be in
prison, and then ask, If the light within has taught me to deny Tithes
without the Scriptures; and if I will say my cause is good, being for the
non-payment of Tithes, and if the light within has taught me that without the
Scriptures, then thou say he who throws me in prison may pretend as good a
light within to demand them, as I to deny them; but if I deny to pay because
the Scripture has taught me otherwise; thou ask, Why I will not as well
obey them in what they command me in other things, as in the non-payment of
money; and then ask, Why I will call them dead and lifeless, and yet call
them for my defense when I am in need, Then thou bids me consider well of this,
and be not deceived.

It is not my own labor that can enlarge my mind unto God; neither is it the
imprisonment of my body, that can keep my mind bound, but in the Lords power my
heart is enlarged, and I made willing to run the way of his Commands, who is
near unto me, and in the midst of my sufferings; his comforts delight my soul,
and his right hand upholds me, and my cause is good, being for the nonpayment
of tithes, and thou can not overthrow it; and by the light of Christ in my
conscience I am taught to deny them, and in the light I have unity with the
Scriptures, and am made to stand a Witness against all deceit and oppression,
as they did who gave forth the Scriptures, knowing Christ the end of all types
and figures, tithes, and temples made with hands, who is the unchangeable life;
But this Gate is too straight for thee to enter in at, and the way to narrow
for thee to walk in, and so thou lightly esteems of those that are truly called
by the Lord to walk therein, and unto all things which by the Doctrine of
Christ in the Scriptures I am commanded, I desire to wait, that I may perform
them with a ready mind, and that I may as a good servant do the will of God who
is my helper in the (...) full time, and does defend me from all false tongues;
neither (...) own, or call any thing for my defense in the truth, but he (...)
who is my life, in whom I trust, that does not fail me, but (...) wrought great
things for me by his own arm, and I trust will (...) deliver me, when the good
pleasure of his will he has performed* So thy secret parts are unveiled, and
thou art manifested where (...) goes, and upon what thou feeds; for it is the
Serpents poison whi^^ out of thy mouth is cast, who would give him that casts
me into ^^^^on as good right to demand Tithes by a pretended light, as I to
deny them from the true light, and so by thy rule would make the thing
pretended to be of equal weight, with that which in the truth is ^^^^blished;
for all that receives the spirit which is of God, knows the things that are
freely given of God, and the light of Christ which enlighteneth every man that
comes into the world, does not give unto any man as good a right to demand any
part of the substance which the Lord gives and increases unto me, as it does
unto me (...) deny that* ^an of his demand, and to receive my own which the
Lord has increased unto me: And he who pretends such a light to ^^mand that
which is not his, nor which no man can in the truth giv^ him any interest in,
he errs from the true light, and his pretense (...) not make his demand neither
equal nor warrantable; for the (...) light does not lead any man to covet, or
to desire that which is (...) his, but brings all that are guided by it to be
satisfied and contented with the Lords free-gift and increase unto them; and so
the tenth Cock of Hey or Corn, or other increase, is as truly my own as the
nine, being the same increase unto me from the Lord, and I (...) challenge it
as the Lords blessing, and so receives it as my own, ^^^^ly from the Lord,
without yiedling any account to any man; (...) have the answer of a good
conscience in it, and peace with God in suffering for it; and who receives
tithes, denies Christ the true light and who pays tithes, are not guided by
him who is the end (...) Tithes, and of that Covenant under which Tithes were
paid.

Therefore look over thy self again, and be covered with shame, and let thy
(...) tongue be forever silent, who has so proudly, scornfully, and
disdainfully spoken (...) the right way of the Lord, and those that walk
therein; So I have considered thee (...) light, in which all things are
considered wel^, and sees thee to be a blasph^^^e^, a (...) a liar, and a
slanderer, and so has proved thee. Therefore the Doctrine of (...) is prea^ed
unto thee.

W. S.

THE END.

