The Glory of the New Covenant.
MAny and diverse are the manifestations of the Love and grace of God, wherein
he is willing to show forth the Riches of his Mercy in his own kindness, and
from one degree to another he opens himself according to the good pleasure of
his will, and also according to the preparedness and fitness that the heart is
in to receive him; for although it be in his pleasure to manifest, and measure
forth the Riches of his grace and love unto a people, yet he does not do it
beyond their present capacity, in which he beholds them in a preparedness and
fitness to join unto him, and receive him, for he well knows and
understands, that there is a part in man which would abuse his Gifts, if it
could compass them to it self, and therefore he withholdeth the manifestations
of his love and grace from that part, and does never answer it by manifesting
or measuring forth any thing of his love unto it, for he has determined to
famish that part to death, that the true hunger of the true birth may openly
breath unto him, and receive satisfaction in him: for though that part which is
of the flesh, may catch at something which unto the poor is manifested, yet it
can never compass the gift it self, for that is ever with held from it, as
being unworthy to be entrusted with such an excellent Treasure; and it can
never attain unto any higher degree of what is manifested from God unto the
true birth, then to behold it afar off; in which sight it creates a likeness of
what it beholds, and transforms it self, as if it was the same thing; and
here many people sits under the government of a transformed Spirit, and does
believe that they are come under their own Vine, and sits under their own
Fig Tree, and that they are ceased from their own labor, and are entered into
their Rest; and this they cry up as the most excellent glory that far exceeds
the glory of service; and this is no other but the fleshly part that is set
down at ease under the government of a transformed Spirit, under which the true
Seed lies in bondage, and deep Captivity, and such have kept back that which
they should have given to the Slaughter, and has saved the worser part alive,
and are set down at ease in it, and so they have erred from that of God in
them, by which he prepares and fits the heart to receive him in his own way,
and the glory of their Rest is but as a fading flower which to day is excellent
in its show, and to morrow passes away, and is no more; and this is not the
glory of the New and Everlasting Covenant, wherein the God of Love and Peace is
all unto his Children: For a new Heart will I give them, says the Lord, and a
new Spirit I will put into them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. Mark, Here the Lord prepares a new heart, and a new Spirit, which
according to the preparedness and fitness, is only in a capacity to receive him
in the manifestations of his Love, Grace, and Mercy; which being received into
that heart and Spirit which God prepares, he then becomes their God that so
Receives him, and they become his people in his own Covenant; and this is the
passage from Death to Life, when the Law has had its full force in the old
heart to condemn the flesh, with all the motions of it; and so it is a
ministration that is Glorious, though it be a ministration of Condemnation, for
as much as it makes way for the Rising of the Seed in which there is a better
hope; through which ministration all must pass before they be prepared and
fitted to receive the love and grace of God: For when the Law has had its full
force upon the old Man, and has condemned the first Adams sinful flesh, then
is the way prepared for the second Adam to manifest his life in his quickening
Spirit; and there the new Birth comes to be born, which has a new heart, and a
new Spirit, and is in a capacity to receive the Love and Grace of God; and so
Grace and Truth comes by Jesus Christ, who fulfils the Law in every point, and
causes the administration of Condemnation to cease, and brings in the
ministration of Righteousness that far exceeds it in Glory. And here the New
Covenant comes into its place by the Resurrection of the Seed, and in the Seed
the glory of it does far exceed the glory of the first Covenant; and there the
good thing is come, unto which the shadow pointed, the Substance come, the
Life come, the Everlasting glory come, and a sure Defense stretched over it.
And this is the Rest that is Pure, and never was Polluted; and who are entered
into it, they labor no more in their own works, but are now Created in Christ
Jesus, who works all for them, and in his strength they are able to do all
things; for he has quickened them in his life, and in his life they are zealous
of good Works; and who are come into this quickening power and life of Christ,
they are truly in their Rest, for their own works are all ceased, and they are
ceased unto them, and yet they labor in the Holy Calling whereunto he calls
them; for as he gives them life, so in his life they have motion, and in the
motion of his life, they do all things according to his Will: and this is the
Work in the New Covenant. Not according to the Works of the Old, for then it
was said, Do this and Live: But now it is said, Live, and do whatsoever I
command you. And this is true love manifested unto him, when that is done which
is commanded by him; for by the power and virtue of his Life received, there is
strength given to do those things that are well pleasing in his sight; and who
are come into this Covenant of love and life, they are more active in doing
what his pleasure is to have done, then when they were laboring and working in
the weakness and unprofitableness of the Flesh, and so the glory of the New
Covenant does far exceed the glory of the Old. Forasmuch as the Life is Risen,
and the Righteousness thereof Revealed, which is the good thing unto which the
first Covenant pointed; and it does not destroy any good works which God has
ordained, but quickneth more into them, and makes more zealous of them, and
the new heart, and the new spirit is more servent to serve the Lord, being that
life is come which quickneth in service, and in which the service is accepted;
And this is the birth that is Redeemed from under the Law, and the service of
it, to serve God in Newness of Spirit under his Grace, in which it is approved
and accepted; for as no flesh living under the Law can be Justified, so no
Innocent Babe that is under Grace is condemned, but all its works and services
are reckoned for Righteousness, and are Blessed. And here is the riches of
grace, by which Redemption is perfected, and who shall lay any thing to the
charge of this Birth? Who shall say thou art to cease from service and labor,
when the life has quickened into service, and requires labor in the work of
the Gospel? surely such would not have the harvest gathered, who would have the
workmen cease from their labor, they do not feel the weight of the harvest in
that life which once said, The Harvest is great, and the laborers are but sew,
pray ye theefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth painful
laborers into his Harvest. Here was labor and service to be done for the
gathering of the harvest, and surely it is as great at this day as e^e; they
that feel the weight of it in the life, they cannot say to the true Laborers,
your service is over, and that your labor is in vain, and you are to cease from
it. Oh no, they pray that the Lord of the Harvest would send forth more painful
Laborers for the help and furtherance of the Work; for it is a day wherein much
service has been done for God, and all the faithful improves their diligence
to serve the Lord, and one another, for they are in the Love, and the Grace,
and the Mercy, and therein they are ready and willing to serve the Seed in all,
not by speaking their own words, but in and by the word of the Lord; and this
is the day of the Lord, and not the day of man, for the Lord is all in it, and
his servants serve him, and their reward is with them; these drinks at the
living springs, and out of their bellies flows Rivers of living water; for as
they are in Covenant with God, and partakers of his Divine nature, even so they
communicate the virtue of it to the refreshing of the weary, and to the
reviving of all the tender plants, and herein their service stands for God, and
answers to the righteous life in every Conscience, and they cannot cease from
their labor, being that God has entrusted them with the work of the Gospel,
and they dare not do it negligently, much less throw it by carelessly, and they
that would have it so, or can do so, did yet never know the necessity of that
work laid upon them, but came forth in a froward spirit which Judgment
pursued, in the feeling of which, they conclude the same unto all, and where
Judgment has overtaken any in this place, and that they are sensible of their
own have, it is safe for such to cease from that labor, and to wait in
humility for the rising of the life, that they in the same may be disposed to
serve the Lord; for whosoever has stepped forth hastily into this great work,
they will assuredly feel Judgment to overtake them; for the living God is
zealous of his glory, and will not give it to another, for he is risen in the
Glory of his own Covenant, and his Life is revealed in Righteousness, and many
there be that are entered into it, and knows it to be their Rest; and though
they have attained the excellent glory of this Righteous life, by the virtue of
it is Resurrection, and as to themselves have rest and peace in it, yet they are
constreined to seek the good of others, and to labor in the life of their
Rest, to bring others to Rest with them, for the greater part of the work is
yet behind, though much there be already done, and therefore whilst it is day,
it is the time to work, that what is yet behind may be fulfilled; for it is
certainly believed, that the same power which did begin the work, will in due
time accomplish it, and in the mean time it prospers to the joy of all that
faithfully labor in it, and this is the work of the New Covenant which is
glorious, and does far exceed the glory of the work of the first Covenant; for
as much as the work of the first Covenant, was in the weakness and
unprofitableness of the flesh, but the work of the New Covenant is in the power
and life of the spirit, and so the service of the New Covenant is a free
service through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, who has brought life
and immortality to light by the glorious Resurrection of his heavenly power,
under which the babes sits down as under a shade, and knows the Government upon
his shoulders, and he fills their habitations with Joy, and everlasting Peace;
and so the true Vine is come, and the sitting down under it, is known amongst
the heirs of life, who rejoices together in the unity and peace that they have
in him, and willingly serves the Lord, and one another in singleness of heart,
and therefore every one is to watch in the light of the Covenant, that none may
loose the guide of their youth, for who looses that, does certainly loose their
way, and never comes to the purchased possession of the heavenly Inheritance
that is in Christ Jesus, but satisfies themselves with some apprehensions and
applications of what they have beheld a far of, and so the guide being lost,
the way is lost, and the inheritance lost, and then there is a sitting down in
a Rest apprehended, short of the rest that is purchased; and here the flesh is
at ease, and the will at liberty, through which the mind is tossed, and the
Righteous life heavily burdened.

Now, who comes to wait in the light of the Covenant, with that to be guided,
they see their way and are preserved; and so the children walks together in the
unity and peace of the Covenant, and the dread of the Lord is before them, and
the Cross is delightful to them, and whatsoever they take up the Cross unto,
they have strength given to bear it in the patience, and so the first nature
comes to be crucified, and life, and immortality comes to be raised, in which
the glory of the New Covenant is Revealed and Exalted, and all that are born
and brought forth in this life, they are truly prepared and fitted to receive
the love and grace of God, and he does not withhold any good thing from them;
for as they are born of him, even so they live by him, and always depends upon
him for the renewings of his Mercy, that they in the same may renew their
strength to follow him faithfully and innocently, in the way which he prepares
for them, and whatsoever they do, they do it in the Fathers Will, and seeks his
glory alone. Therefore all ye firstborn of God, who are risen from the dead,
and have received the love and grace of the Father, and lives and abides in the
Covenant of his Mercy, proclaim his message to the ends of the earth, seek the
dispersed, gather the scattered, raise up the dead, revive the hope of Israel,
that the captives may rejoice at your Voice, and the poor may be glad at your
Message; keep in the heavenly authority of the life, and then you will
understand when the word of the Lord comes upon you, and when the message of
life rises in you, and when the Fountain opens to issue forth it is virtue,
then will the fresh streams run through you, as water from a spring, and all the
thirsty will draw near unto you through the sweetness of that savor.

Oh ye dear brethren in the Everlasting Covenant, how beautiful are your feet
that never turned aside from the way of peace, but have faithfully followed the
Lord in the leadings of his life, and willingly served him in singleness of
your hearts, you are well known in the Family of the Righteous, and your names
cannot be rooted out; all the Virgins are in love with you, and they cannot be
drawn from you, because your innocence remains with you, and the heavenly
wisdom rests upon you, in which your memory stands for ever, for from the
beginning ye have faithfully labored in the work of the Lord, and ye behold
the fruit of your labor with joy and peace: Oh, the brotherly kindness of my
dearest love is always with you, and in the same spirit of life I travel even
as you do, that Israel may be gathered and established for ever; and in this
labor and travail of the spirit, we have a sure seal that God is with us, and
that his power in us does accomplish his own work to his own glory: Therefore
let all that enters into this labor in this day, feel the weight of it in that
life and power which is able to carry it on, and prosper it unto a full
perfection; for assuredly it is a service of which it may be said, Who is
sufficient for it, or who is able to accomplish such a weighty work? And I know
as the weighty life is felt, it will keep all in the pure fear, and in a deep
consideration of what any are called unto, and so the life will not be overrun
in have, but will keep the forward part in the Cross, and by it is power, make
it is own passage for the streams of its virtue to run according to it is
pleasure; and who keeps in the sense and feeling of this living Ministration in
themselves, they will certainly gather the minds of others to be sensible of
the same, in the feeling of it, and so a true birth will be begotten in the
life, and born of the life, and nourished with the life, and then the unity
will be held and not broken; for the life is the coard that binds up in it is
self, and places every Member in it is Office, to serve one another in love;
therefore let the weight of this service be deeply considered by all who are
called unto service this day, and do not presume one above another, but rather
prefer one another; for if the mind puff up in presumption, the life is lost,
and then the words will not profit, though in themselves they may be true; and
there is the occasion given whereby many offenses rises, and that is not the
service of the New Covenant, nor does not exalt the glory of it; and what may
be performed by such a service, it does not further the work of God, but rather
hinders it, for something of the flesh will be ready to boast and glory in it,
which is not good: So let all who have received a gift to Minister, and are but
young in the exercise of it, be watchful in their Calling, that through
diligence in the life, they may perfectly understand the work set before them,
and not to be hastly in any thing, but according to the necessity laid upon
them by the living power, so to answer the Lord faithfully, and serve him with
reverence and godly fear, and then all occasions of offense will be excluded,
and the life alone will be exalted, and that is the true ground of unity which
never was divided, nor never will; and there the more excellent glory of the
New Covenant comes to be established in the heavenly wisdom, where all the
babes rejoice in unity, under the reigning power of the Lambs Authority.

And now ye dear children of the Kingdom, and heirs of Life, dwell and abide in
that power which has quickened you, and made you alive to God, and there you
will truly feel your preservation and safety, and as there ye sit, you will
indeed favor the things that be of God, and those that be of man, and you
cannot reject the savor of that which proceed from the nature of the life
where ye are set down, but will receive it into your habitations with gladness
and singleness of heart, and be refreshed and comforted by the living virtue
that ye savor in it, and therefore sit in the power of God, and feel that to
be your own, and that will never scatter you into the land of Famine, but will
preserve you, and keep you in the fresh sense of the heavenly spring both in
your selves and others, and unto this have all the faithful labored to gather
you, and it is not another thing that has been preached amongst you by the
truth of the Gospel, and therefore cleave unto it as your first love, and then
the message of truth in the life of truth, will be as sweet and savoury unto
you as ever, and so the everlasting spring of heavenly virtue and consolation
will be kept open amongst you, and the love and life of good will plentifully
abound in you, and therein the freshness of your love will be increased unto
God, and one to another, and his blessing will there fall upon you, as showers
of moisture upon the thirsty ground.

Therefore assemble your selves ye children, assemble in the power of the most
high, and wait upon God in the dread of his power, so will his glory cover you,
and rest upon you for ever.

Many Exhortations of this nature have been unto you from several brethren, and
therefore no further necessity is laid upon me in this particular, then to
stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance, that ye cleave unto, and hold
fast that which you have received of God, whose gift is Eternal life. Peace be
with you, and amongst you all for evermore, Amen.

Nottingham County Goal, the 3. Month, 1664. W. S.

THE END.

