THE SPIRIT OF Meekness, Recommended for the Reducing of the Erroneous AND Such
as have Dissented From the CHURCH OF England.

By William Smythies, Curate at St. Giles Cripplegate, London.

LONDON, Printed by T. Milbourn for Samuel Lee at the Feathers in Lumbard
Street, 1684.

To the Honored John Pery Esquire One of His MAJESTY'S Justices of the Peace, for
the County of Middlesex.
SIR,
I Will not offend you by Publishing my Obligations to You, And I hope I shall
not offend You by the Dedication of this small Treatise, as I am sure I should
if there were the least expression in it of Disloyalty to the KING, or
Disaffection to the Church of England; And yet I must acknowledge that I expose
it to Public view, partly that I may vindicate my self from the guilt of some
Aspersions by which others have endeavored to Expose me, as one Schismatically
inclined.

In the late times of Usurpation, I had no sooner left the University and began
to Preach, but there was a Caveat entered against me in the Book of Cromwells
Trya^s of Ministers amongst those who were accounted Episcopal-men, by one (as
I had cause to suspect) who afterward conformed to the Church, and became my
unsuccessful competitor since I came to London. I was thereby forced to leave
my Native County, and to live a precarious Life for some Years, till His
Majesty's Return. But I bless God there never was (and I hope never shall be)
any objection against my Conversation.

There are some now who would represent me to the World as a dissembling
dissatisfied Conformist, and Consequently both a great Hypocrite, and a very
great Fool. The greatest cause of this report, has proceeded from my Treating
Dissenters so, that I might gain upon their Affections, as being the best way
to bring them to Conformity to the Church: and which has been the good effect
of it, their being my Auditors. It is a sad case that it should be our Duty and
our great Concern to bring those to the Communion of the Church who have
Separated from it, and yet our great Reproach if they become our Hearers.

But I may well be contented and account it an honor to be reproached,
considering that it has been of late the lot of some of the most Eminent
Divines in this Age; Men whose Works have not only praised them in this City,
but in both the Universities and throughout this Nation (and some other
Countries) and have been an eminent means to fix sound Principles, not only in
great numbers of the Laity, but of the Clergy likewise. Those men who have done
the greatest Service to the Church are reproached and scorned by a furious sort
of men that pretend most regard to it: But as those Worthys cannot but have
great satisfaction from themselves, in that they have discharged their duties
to God in their Ministerial Function; so have I, And the good success which it
has pleased God to give me by bringing many, not only to the Church, but to
both the Sacraments who had from their Cradles despised the Ordinances of the
Christian Religion, is a Satisfaction to me which outweighs all the reproaches
which heady and inconsiderative men can heap upon me.

I bless God I can with a good conscience declare to the World, that I ever
designed to do good by my Ministry according to my mean Capacity; and to that
end I have always set my self against the two great evils of the Age, Division
and Debauchery. I have likewise made it my business upon all occasions to
commend the Discipline and Methods of the Church of England, as tending more to
the promotion of true Holiness, than any of those Devices which have been
formed against Her, and which God never prospered; and I am sure the same will
appear to be my design in this Treatise, which I humbly offer to you.

I know no Person, to whom I can with more confidence present it, than to your
self. I have taken occasion in it to show the necessity of Obedience to
Government, and That I am sure is well pleasing to you; for I am confident
there is not a day passes, but all that are admitted into your company may
take notice of your affectionate Loyalty to the King.

I have commended a hearty compliance with the Rules and Orders of the Church,
than which nothing is more acceptable to you, as appears by your great delight
in Episcopal Authors, the great esteem which you have for the conformable
Clergy, and your diligence in Suppressing the Conventicles: and which is the
greatest expression of sincerity, your early attendance every day upon the
Public Prayers of the Church.

My chief design in it, is to persuade the People to treat those who have
Dissented, with a Spirit of Meekness; and I am sure that is very agreeable to
Your Disposition, for it has been your earnest desire and request to men of
stubborn humors, that they would not make themselves obnoxious to the just
severity of the Laws, but live in peaceable obedience to Government. That you
are of this temper, appeared likewise by your great displeasure when you heard
of complaints made by the Dissenters, of some Affronts and Incivilities that
were offered to them when they came to the Church; which was the only occasion
of this discourse, for which I am sure I shall not suffer in the esteem of
sober and good men.

Sir, I know your Soul abhors Flattery, and so does mine. I would not therefore
have mentioned these things, if I did not fear that some ill men should
misrepresent you, as they have done others who are truly Zeallous for the good
both of Church and State.

That the God of Heaven may Prolong your days, and continue to you the great
Opportunities of doing good, both in your Public and Private Capacity, is and
shall be the hearty Prayer of,

Ever Honored Sir, Your most Obliged and Devoted Servant, William Smythies.

THE CONTENTS.
A Preface showing the occasion of the Words. Page 1. The Text Explained. p. 6.
Arguments to persuade to Meckness. From the Excellency of it in it self. p. 15.
From its acceptance with God. p. 17. From the Public Good that is done by it.
p. 23. From a Particular good to those that are of this Spirit. p. 28. It is an
Argument Of Piety. p. 29. It is an Argument Of Wisdom. p. 39. It is an Argument
Of Humility. p. 44. From the necessity of it in reference to others. p. 48. A
contrary Spirit is Offensive To Magistrates. p. 49. A contrary Spirit is
Offensive To Ministers. p. 54. A contrary Spirit is Offensive To all Pious and
Orthordox Christians. p. 59. And an unwarantable Offense to Dissenters. p 61.
The Application. p. 78. to the End.
THE SPIRIT of MEEKNESS
GAL. Chap. 6. Ver. 1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
Spiritual, restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness, considering thy self,
lest thou also be tempted.
THE great design of the Apostle in this Epistle, is to vindicate himself from
the Aspersions of false Teachers, and to keep the Galatians from aspersing one
another. There were two things charged against him. One was, that he had no
right to be an Apostle; and the other was, that he Preached false Doctrine. But
this is no part of my present Business: But to consider the second, viz. The
Apostles great care to keep the Gallatians in that Peace and Unity which the
Gospel, to which they were newly converted, does require. There was a very
great heat amongst them, insomuch that the Apostle was afraid lest they should
bite and devour one another, and be consumed one of another, Chapter 5. v. 15. The
contest was about Christian Liberty. And because there is at this day a great
stir about it, I think it necessary by the way, to show what that Christian
Liberty was.

It was not a Liberty for every Christian to refuse the Orders of the Church,
and if the Governors of it did not please them in what was required, or show a
special command from God for every indifferent thing which was prescribed for
Order and Decency; presently to turn their backs, and heap up Teachers to
themselves in opposition to their Governors. I am sure that had been an
Unchristian Liberty, for it had been a Liberty to throw Christianity out of the
World so soon as it came into it: Or to make it the most ugly and deformed
Religion in the World. If when the Apostle told the Corinthians, that at his
coming to them he would set things in order; they had sent him word that they
would not observe his orders, unless they were by special Revelation from God;
Or they would be Judges whether his orders were fit to be Received; It would
have made strange work in the Christian Church, and spared the enemies of it
the trouble of persecuting Christians, for the Stubborn and self-conceited, if
their numbers had been sufficient, would have persecuted the Orthordox, and
such as were of the most Christian, humble, and submissive tempers.

The Christian Liberty, which we read so much of was quite another thing. There
were some Judaizing Christians amongst the Galatians. They thought that they
must as well observe the Law of Moses, as the Law of Christ, or else they could
not be justified and saved. The Apostle to rectify their mistakes, tells them
that they were at liberty from that Yoke, and that they ought to take that
Liberty. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if you are Circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing, c. 5. v. 2. But however, lest that should be of dangerous
Consequence, he takes care to prevent two great evils which might ensue: One
was in reference to themselves, and the other was in reference to their misled
and dissatisfied Brethren. He was afraid, as to the first, that this Christian
liberty should be an occasion of Licentiousness, and therefore admonishes them,
that they should not use this liberty, as an occasion to the Flesh, v. 13. And
he was afraid that heats of Opinion should be the Occasion of coldness of
affection, and therefore adds imediately in the same verse, but by love serve
one another; and for fear they should not, he presses to them the Duty of
Brotherly love, as that which is a fruit of the Spirit of God: and in the
conclusion of the Chapter he cautions them against two great evils which
obstruct it: Vain glory and Envy. Vain glory is a branch of Pride, by which a
man seeks to be uppermost, and they that are guilty of it do seldom think they
can stand high enough in their Reputations unless they tread upon their Brother
and Fellow Christian. Envy is a divelish temper of Spirit, by which one man's
happiness becomes another man's misery: One man's health another man's sickness.
It was a very proper question which was once asked a pale envivous Man, Are you
sick, or is your Neighbor well? Where Envy Rules, one man's Prosperity is
another man's Adversity. The envious man, how rich soever he is, is undone by
the Riches of another man. The Apostle having Admonisht them of those two great
Enemies to Brotherly Love in the Conclusion of that Chapter; In this he
prescribes some general Rules which tend exceedingly to the healing of
divisions, and the continuance and promotion of Love amongst Christians. I have
made choice of the first, which is a direction how Christians, who are
themselves inoffensive, should treat them that offend. Brethren, if a man be
overtaken in a fault, ye that are Spiritual restore such a one with the Spirit
of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be tempted.

I will not spend much time in the explication of the terms in the Text. I
suppose I shall not need to tell you what it is to be taken in a fault: I wish
we all knew as well what it is to have a Spirit of Meekness: and I wish we all
knew as well what it is to restore our Brother with such a Spirit. A fault is
any thing that a man does which is against the Profession of Christianity, or
against any Law of God. He is guilty of a fault who commits any known sin to
the prejudice of his own soul, by which it is polluted and made obnoxious to
Gods wrath and displeasure. And he is guilty of a fault likewise who breaks the
Peace and Unity of the Church by Schism and causeless Separation. I intend my
discourse shall chiefly relate to the latter: The restor-of them to the
Communion of the Church who have separated from it. The Apostle speaks at
large, concerning any fault, but in regard the Galatians had been seduced by
false Apostles, and had been taught false Doctrine, we have no reason but to
think that he intended this fault as well, if not rather than any other. And
this is the fault in which men are most apt to be taken unawares. The Works of
the Flesh which the Apostle mentions are so manifest, Adultery, Fornication,
etc. That men are not apt to be taken with them unawares, as he is with this. A
man is more easily led into errors of Judgment than he is into errors of
practice, especially considering how easily the Scriptures may be wrested and
misunderstood, and that there has been in every age False Prophets and False
Teachers, and many following their Pernicious ways. Whatsoever the fault is in
which our fellow Christian is overtaken, he is to be restored by those that are
Spiritual. But the next question is, who they are?

By the word Spiritual, I conceive we are to understand all such as are
reformed from the deeds of the Flesh, and whose lives do show forth the fruits
of the Spirit, according to what the Apostle mentions in the former Chapter. I
know there is another interpretation given of the Word (...), which I shall
have afterward occasion to take some notice of; but considering the context,
how the Apostle in the foregoing Chapter, ver. 13. required that the Galatians
should by Love serve one another, and in the Conclusion of the Chapter
immediately before my Text, that they should not Provoke one another, nor envy
one another: And in the words next to my Text, that they should bear one
another burdens; I know not why by Spiritual, we should not understand every
good man in whom the fruits of the Spirit do appear.

Restore: The word (...) signifies properly to set a bone that is broken, or
out of joint. The bonds of Christian Love are very strong, and it is by them
that we are knit together like joints enclosed with nerves and sinews: and when
one dissents, and breaks Communion, it is or should be, like a bone broken or
out of joint, at which the rest of the members should be deeply concerned. Thus
we may consider the meaning of the word, if by being taken in a fault, we
understand the fault of separating from the Public Communion of the Church.
which as I mentioned, is a very proper sense of the words.

In the Spirit of Meekness. It is very necessary that we should understand what
the Spirit of Meekness is, that we may rejoice and be thankful if we have it,
and earnestly strive, and pray to God for it if we have it not. It may best be
known by its opposites.

1. Meekness is opposite to turbulent passion, that which does exceedingly
disorder both the soul and body where it is prevalent. The Apostle therefore
joins a meek and a quiet Spirit together, 1 Pet. 3.4. He that takes another in
a fault, and is so rufled and discomposed, that he knows not how to speak
calmly to him, in order to the restoring of him, wants a Spirit of Meekness. 2.
A meek Spirit is opposite to a revengful Spirit. This made Moses so famed for
the meekest man in all the Earth, Numb. 12. Because when Aaron and Miriam spoke
against him and said, Has the Lord only spoken by Moses, has he not also
spoken by us? He was not moved to passion, nor did he seek revenge. And
therefore it is said, ver. 3. Moses was meek above all men which were upon the
face of the Earth. 3. A Meek Spirit is opposite to a rigorous Spirit. When a
man desires the Punishment, rather than the Reformation of him that is taken in
a fault, which is the end of Punishment, such a man has not a Spirit of
Meekness. The Apostle says to the Corinthians, 1 Epist. chap. 4. ver. 21.
Shall I come unto you with a Rod, or with a Spirit of Meekness? Where the
Spirit of Meekness is opposed to the Rod, which signifies severity. 4. A Spirit
of Meekness is opposed to a Spirit of reviling and speaking evil. Meekness
bridles the Tongue. Our Savior was famed for this Spirit, because he was dumb
and opened not his mouth. He was silent, and answered not a word, when, to be
sure, there were no provocations which could be compared to his. Or if it does
not shut up the tongue, yet it commands a soft and gentle speech, which is
exceedingly obliging to the offending person. Thus Lot showed his Meekness to
the men of Sodom, when they pressed upon him, and would have offered violence
to the Angels that were his Guests, I pray you Brethren do not so wickedly,
Genesis 19.7. A taunting reproaching tongue, is as contrary to a Spirit of
Meekness, and as contrary to a Christian Spirit, as any thing can be; as will
appear more in the sequel of my discourse.
The words being thus explained, I proceed to that which is principally
contained in them. They give us a direction how we should treat our Brother
when he has done amiss. We must restore him: we must use our utmost endeavors
to set him right again, and this cannot be done any other way, so well as by a
Spirit of Meekness: Or, to be sure, this must be the first way that must be
used with him.

I have thought fit to discourse on this Subject as that which is very
necessary, and very seasonable: All that we can do being little enough to allay
those Unchristian heats which are amongst us, and which are blown into a Flame
upon every occasion. There is nothing more requisite at this time, than that we
should treat those that have been taken in a fault with a Spirit of Meekness,
and yet there are Complaints as if men were farther from it now, if possible,
than they have been heretofore. The rage and fury of some men, and their desire
to ruin all that have done amiss, is such, that he who speaks but a Meek word
concerning them, is supposed to be guilty of the same fault himself. Many men
are so far from observing this Rule and Precept of Christianity: restoring him
that is taken in a fault with a Spirit of Meekness, that they account a Spirit
of Meekness to be the greatest fault of all. It would be enough (if some might
be judges) to prove a man guilty, if he does not presently fly in the face of
him that has done amiss. As if the Character which our Savior gave of a
Disciple, were to be blotted out, and another quite contrary were to be placed
in the room of it: That it should be no longer, By this shall all men know that
ye are my Desciples if ye love one another. But, by this shall all men know
that ye are my Disciples if ye hate and revile one another, and speak evil one
of another. The world is come to that pass now, that it requires more than
ordinary courage in a Minister if he dares commend a Spirit of Meekness. But I
will adventure to do it, and to tell you the reason of it too, which may
exceedingly aggravate my crime. There is a grievous complaint made by some, who
have dissented from the Church, that upon their return to it, they do not meet
with that Christian Spirit by which they should be encouraged to have Communion
with us, and to continue it; but with Revilings and Affronts to the great grief
and discomposure of their Spirits in the House of God.

This Text tells them, that Christianity requires men to be of another Spirit,
and such persons, and all others that have been overtaken in faults ought to be
otherwise treated. I shall therefore recommend a Spirit of meekness to you from
the consideration of these five things.

I. From the consideration of what it is in it self. It is a most sweet,
pleasant and delightful temper of mind. A meek man is always at quiet in
himself. When other men are almost consumed by the heat and rage of their own
passions: Wrath Kills the foolish man. He is like Jonah under his Gourd, cool
and in very good temper. When other men are like the Israelites in the
Wilderness, fretting and vexing themselves, because every thing does not happen
as they would have it: wrangling with God and distrusting his Providence, as if
he did not know how to provide for men in their streights, or how to deliver
them from their fears, and are therefore complaining against their Governors;
he is like an Israelite in the Land of Promise: he has Milk and Honey flowing
in the temper of his own mind. A meek Spirit does not only keep men from hurt,
but it gives them the enjoyment of all that is good. There are a great many in
the World who have great plenty of the good things of this Life, but they enjoy
no good at all by them, because of the uneasiness of their own peevish fretfull
Spirits. The sewerness of their own tempers takes away the sweetness of all
that they do possess, but a meek Spirit gives a man all that is pleasant from
what he enjoyes. He patiently bears Crosses, and thankfuly receives Comforts.
In this sense that which our. Savior said is very true, Blessed are the meek,
for they shall inherit the Earth. They enjoy the good things of this life, and
have the greatest Sweetness that they afford, and may expect the longest
Continuance of them. I might show likewise, that it is the most obliging
Temper, and therefore does exceedingly conduce to the good and Comfort of men's
lives, whilst they are in this World. But,

II. As it is a Temper very pleasant in it self, so it is highly acceptable to
God, and gives us a good assurance of his Love and Favor: A meek and quiet
Spirit is to God of great price, 1 Pet. 3.4. And it must needs be so, for it is
like unto God himself. Fury is not in me, says the Lord. In this as well as in
other virtues, we are Followers of God as dear Children. The Lord is slow to
anger, and so is the meek man: When he is provoked, He does not willingly
afflict nor grieve the Children of Men. Men may pretend to what they please,
but he that delights to vex or torment him that is taken in a fault, is far
from being Merciful as his Heavenly Father is Merciful. God draws offenders to
him by the cords of a man, and by the bonds of Love. The greatest offenders,
who are not hardened and incorrigeable, are dealt tenderly with. God says, Let
us reason together, to those whose sins were as Scarlet and as Crimson. His
Language to great sinners is by meek Expostulations, Why will ye die? etc. And
if God be so favorable and so desirous that those who have offended him should
be reformed and not punished, what strange Tempers are they of whom nothing
will satisfy but Rigor and Severity.

We find likewise, how highly God values a Meek Spirit, by the great Love that
he shows to those that are of that temper. He does severely punish those, who
can be so base and disingenuous, as to offer any Affront or injury to a meek
man. When Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses, Number. 12. God was exceedingly
offended at them, for but opening their lips against him. He said unto them,
Why are ye not afraid to speak against my Servant Moses? And the anger of the
Lord was kindled against them, and he departed, ver. 8, 9. And by what follows
it appears, that he went away in an anger; for Miriam was struck with a
Leprosy, and Aaron seeing it, made have to lament for what he had done, and
with an humble submission to Moses, to ask forgiveness. Aaron said unto Moses,
alas, my Lord; I beseech thee lay not the sin upon us wherein we have done
foolishly, and wherein we have sinned, ver. 11. And might, for all that, have
suffered very severely, if the Meek man whom he spoke against, had not spoken
to God for them. Nay, though Moses cried unto the Lord, yet Miriam (who
probably was the first in the fault, and instigated Aaron to it, or was more
peremptory in her reproves) was shut up seven days, that she might spend that
time, in considering what it is to speak against a Meek man.

It appears likewise, how great an Esteem God has for a Spirit of Meekness, by
the many promises which he has made to Meek men in his word. The meek will he
guide in judgment; and the Meek will he teach his way. The Meek shall be hid in
the day of the Lords Wrath, as in Psalm. 25.9. Zeph. 2.3. and inumerable other
places in the Scriptures.

Meekness was the Temper of our Blessed Savior, and it was his command that
his Disciples should follow his example in it. Learn of me for I am Meek and
lowly. A furious man is no true Disciple of Christ. He is a Scholar that will
not learn of his Master. Our Saviors Meekness was such, that it occasioned
Fury in his enemies, because they could find no evil in his words or actions
was so far from reviling any, or using reproachful Expressions, that when he
was reviled, he reviled not again. If any were taken in a fault, he was not
presently for punishing them, but but by Meekness and Kindness reforming of
them. The Scribes and Pharisees John 8.3. Brought him a Woman that was taken in
Adultery, in the very Act. She was taken in a fault indeed. Moses in the Law,
said they, commanded that such should be stoned, but what say thou? This
they said tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. If he had absolved
her, they would have accused him of violating the Law of Moses. If he had
condemned her, he would then seem to annul the very purpose of his Coming,
which was to call sinners to Repentance, and not to inflict temporal
Punishments.

In this transaction we do not only find the Wisdom of our Savior, in
propounding that to them, which made their guilty Consciences turn them all
away, but his Meekness to the woman that was taken in the fault. He said to
her; Woman where are those thine accusers? has no man condemned thee? She
said, no man, Lord. He said to her, Neither do I condemn thee: Go, and sin no
more: We are not to think, that our Savior said this, that he might so much as
extenuate the Fault that she was taken in, but to show that he would not take
upon him to be a temporal Judge, who came to be a Spiritual and Merciful
Savior. He did not so much as give her a reproachful word, but bad her Go, and
sin no more. He that delights to revile and reproach, to condemn and punish;
one would think that of all Religions in the world he were no Christian, nor
ever heard who Christ was, or what he required of his Followers. The Apostle
had no stronger Argument to use to the Corinthians than this was, 2 Cor. 10.1.
Now I Paul beseech you by the Meekness and Gentleness of Christ.

III. A Spirit of Meekness tends to a public good, both of Church and State.
There are two things of absolute necessity, for the Establishment of our Peace
and Prosperity. That the People should have a Spirit of Submission toward
their Governors, and a Spirit of Meekness one toward another. My great design
is to persuade those, that are not faulty as to the first, but are of undoubted
Loyalty to the King, that they would not be failing as to the second. They are
both very great Duties, and such as the Gospel does very strictly require of
all that profess Christianity. The Apostle joins them together, and it would be
happy for the Nation, if there were no man that put them asunder, Tit. 3.1. Put
them in mind to be subject to Principalities, and Powers, to Obey Magistrates
And ver. 2. To speak evil of no man, to be no Brawlers, but Gentle, showing all
Meekness unto all men. The Apostle supposes, that there might be great
occasion to provoke them to Railing and Evil speaking, but he tells them they
must not give way to Passion, although their Zeal for their Religion might
prompt them to it.

My design is to speak chiefly of the Necessity of this temper, as conducing to
the Churches Peace and Unity, which certainly men do not consider, whatever
they pretend, when they exasperate others by Reviling and Evil speaking. We
have been a great while biting and devouring one another (and by that means we
have made sport for them that hope to devour us all;) insomuch that it is Gods
great Mercy that we are not Consumed one of another. There is a great
opportunity given to us, of promoting the Churches Peace and Unity, if an
Unchristian temper of Spirit does not hinder it. Many that have dissented are
constrained, by the execution of Laws, to serve God with us. I heartily wish,
that we may constrain them another way; such a way, I mean, as Christ
Constrains us, and that is by his Love toward us.

The great thing which we ought earnestly to endeavor and Pray, for is the
Peace of Jerusalem, that our eyes may see her a quiet Habitation, and that we
may all join together in Love and Unity; but this can never be, if we are not
of peaceable Spirits, or as the Apostle says, of meek and quiet Spirits, to
them that are now come among us. We read that when Solomon built his Temple,
There was neither Hammer, nor Axe, nor any Tool of Iron, heard in the House,
whilst it was in building. It had no doubt a typical Signification to show,
that there must be no Jarres or Contentions amongst the Worshippers of God,
which are as the knocking of Iron Instruments, and much more unpleasant than
they can be. As there was that care taken in the building of the house of God,
so I wish we may take a care alluding to it, in our repairing of the unhappy
Breaches of the Church of God; and that we may all be as those Workmen who
helped on with the building, but made no noise.

Reproaching and speaking Evil of men, whatever their faults have been, is not
the way to bring them into the Churches Communion, but to make them shun and
avoid it. I should exceedingly wonder, if I should hear one say, that he has
been in company with Dissenters, and that he took occasion to tell them what
they are: That he treated them with such reproachful Titles, as the Devil and
his Emissaries has sent out of other Nations, to set Protestants at variance
one against another. And now that he has done this, he hopes it will be a
means to bring them to Church, and that he and they shall all join together, in
lifting up their hearts to God in the use of the public Prayers of the Church:
He hopes now that they shall come together to the Blessed Sacrament of the
Lords Supper.

If we love the Church, we will heartily endeavor to increase her Members, and
if we pretend to that, and yet revile those who have dissented, we are Fools
and contradict our selves. We should do very well to learn Wisdom from an
Enemy. If a Jesuit should see any of us in their places of public Worship,
how kindly should we be treated by them, in hopes that they might bring us over
to the Church of Rome. If we had of late gone to the Conventicles of
Anabaptists, or any other Sectaries, how gladly would they have made room for
us, and treated us with all possible kindness, in hopes that we would be in
Love with their Party: And shall we have less regard for that Church whereof we
are Members, which is admired by all Learned men of the Reformed Religion, as
the best constituted Church in the world?

If the present Execution of Laws, drive those that have dissented into our
bosoms to be embraced by us, and not upon the Swords and Spears of reproachful
Tongues, we have great cause to hope that they will be satisfied of the great
Necessity, and likewise of the great Benefit of a hearty and sincere
Compliance. I will conclude this particular, with the Apostles importunate
Request to the Ephesians, Chap. 4. v. 1, 2, 3. I beseech you, that ye walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with long suffering, forbearing
one another in Love. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace.

IV. As a Spirit of Meekness tends to a General good, so likewise to our own
Particular good and Benefit. It is a great satisfaction to us, if we are well
assured, that we are of such a Temper of mind, as becomes our Profession, and
which is not only pleasant in it self, but acceptable to God, and serviceable
to his Church. It is an argument that we are such persons as we ought to be:
Particularly.

1. It a great argument of true Piety and Holiness. That we fear God, and are
truly and sincerely Religious. The Apostle joins Meekness and the Fear of God
together, 1 Pet. 3.15. But Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, And be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you, with Meekness and Fear. The Apostle did not mean, that they
should fear them that should call them to Question, but that they should only
show Meekness toward them: and that there should be in them that fear of God,
which should keep them from the fear of Men.

The Apostle says, Ye that are Spiritual, etc. Intimating that Meekness is to
be expected from such. If we are not Meek, it may be suspected that we are not
Spiritual. This is one of the fruits of the Spirit, mentioned in the foregoing
Chapter, v. 22. The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness.

A Spirit of Meekness is a great evidence that we are good Christians, and that
our Religion has tempered our minds. It Is that (as I have already showed)
which our Savior requires of all that are his Disciples; And if we read the
Epistles of the Apostles, we may conclude that there was nothing which they did
with more ardent Zeal, and continued fervency contend for, (not only for the
promoting of Christianity in the World, but) as that which was a good Evidence
of men's being in a Religious State. Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy
and beloved) bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of mind, Meekness,
Long-suffering, Col. 3.12. The Apostle plainly shows, that those who are highly
valued of God, should show a Spirit of Meekness toward men.

Besides, If we do not treat our Brother with a Spirit of Meekness, but with
biting Scoffs and Revilings, we are not good men, for our Carriage toward them
contradicts our Prayers to God. We pray, that God Would lead into the way of
Truth all such as have erred, and are deceived. We pray that all who profess
and call themselves Christians, may be led into the way of Truth, and hold the
Faith, in Unity of Spirit, and in the bond of Peace. And if we treat those ill
that have erred, and are returned to the Church (where it is to be hoped they
will be convinced of their Errors:) It is a sign that we never were devout in
those prayers, for we seem discontented that God has heard them.

I heartily wish that those men, who are so apt to reviling, would consider
what the Apostle says. Every one must give an account of himself to God; and
consider how impossible it is, that they can be justified, when they shall
appear before that God, who will judge men according to the Gospel; which as I
have showed does so strictly require All Meekness toward all men. Surely there
is not a man, that ever read the Comands of Christ, who can think that he shall
come off well at the great Tribunal, if he can only say, Lord I was so Zealous
for the Church, that I hated all that separated from it; I could not see them,
but my Spirit was incensed. I could not speak to them but with provoking
Expressions etc. This plea might be of great force, if God would make men's
Passions to be the rule of Judging, and not his Word, which requires that we do
good to all, that we love our Enemies, and that we should make it our business
to convert sinners from the errors of their ways.

But on the contrary, If a man can say, Lord I have been afflicted for thy
Church, to see the Rents and Divisions which have been amongst Christians. It
has greived me to see how little men have regarded Jerusalems peace, and how
much they have indulged their unreasonable and causeless Prejudices; I have
heartily prayed to thee to bring them into the way of Truth. I have endeavored
to convince them of their mistakes, and to persuade them, with all expressions
of Meekness and Love, that they would consider the Dishonor that has
redounded to thy Great Name, and to the profession of the Holy Religion of
Christianity: And when I saw that they Returned, my heart rejoiced, and my Arms
Embraced them; and I was glad when I could go with them into Thy House, or meet
them there.

This is the right Temper of a Christian, and this is the Person that will be
found fit to sit with Christ, when he shall Judge the World. A Spirit of
Meekness is a good evidence of a sincere Christian, and that he shall come off
with Triumph when the Lamb shall appear sitting upon the Throne.

One would think that what our Savior said in his Sermon upon the Mount, Mat.
5.21, 22. should make all men afraid of Reviling their Brother, as they love
their own Souls, and value their Eternal welfare. He tells them, that they who
are guilty of it are Murderers, and shall be punished as such (and I am sure
the House of God is a very unfit place for men to commit Murder in) if their
timely Repentance, which is a change in them to a better temper, does not
prevent it. Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old times, Thou
shall not Kill; and whosoever shall Kill, shall be in danger of the Judgment:
But I say unto you, that whosoever shall be angry with his Brother without a
Cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment; and whosoever shall say unto his
Brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the Council; and whosoever shall say,
Thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell Fire. Our Savior spoke to them who
thought that the sixth Commandment could not be broken, unless a man did
actually commit Murder, and therefore he Explaines it, by telling them, that
men might be Murderers in their Hearts, though they were not so with their
Hands: And that those who are of Malicious and Reproachful Spirits, should be
punished as such. He gives an account of it with allusion to the several
degrees of Punishments amongst the Jews, whereof the least was Death.
Whosoever shall be Angry with his Brother without a Cause, shall be in danger
of the Judgment: that is, whosoever shall be Offended at his Brother, more from
his Aptness to take Offense, than from any Cause given to him; or shall not
moderate his Passion with a proportionable respect to the nature of the
Offense, shall have that Punishment in another state, which is answerable to
that which the Jews called Capital: He has made himself thereby liable to
Eternal Death in another State. And whosoever shall say to his Brother, Racha,
that is, worthless empty Fellow; that shall vilify him as mean and
inconsiderable, shall be in danger of the Council, of being condemned to suffer
a greater punishment than an ordinary Death; that was to be Stoned to death,
which was the sentence of the Sanhedrim: Meaning, that he who used Reproachful
Expressions, should have a greater punishment than he who did not vent his
passion in Opprobrious Language. But, whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be
in danger of Hell Fire, which we are not to understand, as if the punishments
aforementioned were any whit less than the punishment of Hell Fire; but as
signifying a greater degree of Punishment, or, I may say, the Fire made hotter:
It alludes to the burning in the Valley of Hinnom, which was a punishment far
greater than the other two (where Children were put into Brazen Vessels, set
over the fire till they were Scalded to death;) and therefore signifies, that
he who does not only use undervaluing Expressions, by representing his Brother
as weak and empty-headed, but proceeds to the highest degree of Railing, which
is expressed by saying to him Thou Fool, shall be in danger of exceeding great
punishment in the place of Torments.

I was the more willing to give an Account of this place, according to the
Opinion of the best Expositors; not only because there are many who do not
Understand it, but because there are more who do not Consider it; and because
it is very much to my present purpose. If a man would know what his condition
is, and what it is like to be, let him Examine the Temper of his Mind, whether
Religion has subdued his Passion, and keeps his Tongue from venting it. Bad
Words do as well discover a bad Man as bad Actions, what ever men may pretend
to. Let men that are apt to revile, consider what St. James says, and look to
themselves, chap. 1. v. 26. If any man amongst you seem to be Religious, and
bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own Heart, that man's Religion is
vain. Surely then they are very far from being Religious, who do not bridle
their Tongues in that House which is appointed for Religion, and the Worship of
God.

And let not men think, that any Zeal for Religion, or any Devotion which they
show in the House of God, will avail them, if they are void of a
Christian-Spirit toward their Brethren. It is a strange thing, that men should
think that their praying to God can be acceptable, especially at that time when
they have reviled their Brother. Nor let men think, that they shall only be
called to account, for what they have been toward God: For we find in the
Gospel, that when the great day of Judgment is spoken of, the transactions of
it which are mentioned, do chiefly relate to what we are toward one another;
for fear (as we may suppose) that men should think, that a dread and reverence
of God should avail them, though they are of evil Spirits toward their
Brethren. A Spirit of Meekness is a good argument of Piety; that we are in the
favor of God, and shall be for ever Happy in another World,

2. A Spirit of Meekness is an Argument of Wisdom. We never hear any say, that
they have been in company with men whom they have heard Reviling and
reproaching other men, and therefore they believe them to be Wise men: But on
the Contrary, all men know that such are very weak men; men that are very unfit
to Manage any affairs of concern, because they can not Manage themselves. We
find that every Fool and Idiot can give ill Language, if he can but speak: But
as Solomon says, The words of a wise man are heard in quiet, Eccles. 9. v. 7.
He is a Wise man who will not be provoked to Passion, but can give a mild reply
to him that is Furious and Provoking.

It is exceedingly to be lamented, that those who call themselves the Disciples
and Followers of the Meek Jesus, should come so far short as they do, of the
Meekness of many Heathens whom we read of, for which they were very deservedly
accounted Wise men. We read of one, who when he was basely Reproached and
falsely Accused, took no other notice of it, but only to say, Been loqui non
didicit. He told those that were with him; that he perceived The man had not
learnt to give Good Words. Of another, who was so affronted by his Opprobrious
Adversary, that he followed him to his own house all the way Rading at him; But
the Meek man did exceedingly Pity him; and because it was in the Dark, he
commanded his Servant to take a Candle and Lanthorn, and light the man back to
his own house. We read of another, whose Provocation was greater: It was not
enough for his Enemy to fill his Ears with base Language, but he gave him a
great stroke upon the Head: At which the abused Person would not be moved to
Passion and Revenge, but only made a reply to this purpose, What an ill thing
it is, that when men go abroad, they forget to put on a Helmet to defend their
Heads. These were Wise men, of whom History has made mention, that their
Wisdom might be recorded for the honor of their Memories, and the Examples of
others, that they might have such a Spirit of Meekness, for which these were
Eminent.

I know there are some men who seem to be Meek men, and are not: Such as can
restrain their Passions, with a resolution to study a full Revenge afterward
for any Injury that is done to them; and in the mean while, they can give very
smooth words: But these are men in whom there is Devilish Policy, and not that
Wisdom which I am speaking of; nor is their Temper a Spirit of Meekness, by
which they lay aside Prejudice and Revenge as God requires, but a most
desperate and Devilish Spirit, far more mischievous than that which vents it
self by a present Rage and Fury. This is Wisdom (if I may give it so good a
name) which is from beneath, but the Spirit of Meekness is an argument of that
Wisdom which is from above, which is first pure and then peaceable; That Wisdom
which I may call Christian Policy, by which Christianity was exceedingly
promoted in the first Ages of it, and which would tend exceedingly to the
advantage of the Church of Christ amongst us. That Wisdom which the Apostle
exhorted to for the bringing in of Proselites, Colos. 4.5. Walk in Wisdom
toward them that are without; Redeeming the time. His meaning (according to
the sense of some good Expositors) is, that they should be circumspect, and
carry themselves so, as to take all opportunities to render Christianity lovely
and amiable to those who were prejudiced against it. And because the Tongue is
an unruly member, which betrays folly and weakness, he adds, ver. 6. Let your
speech be always with grace, seasoned with Salt pleasant and not unsavory,
that ye may know how to answer every man. By which we may observe, that good
words are not only tending to the good of others, but they show a man that
speaks them to be a Wise man. Remarkable likewise is that Expression of St.
James, Chap. 3. v. 13. Whosoever is a Wise man and endued with Knowledge amongst
you? Let him show out of a good Conversation, his works with Meekness of
Wisdom. The Apostle had before been showing what a mischeivous member the
Tongue is, and what an Unchristian thing it is, that men should Villify and
Reproach their Brethren with it, those especially that profess Religion; that
God should be blessed, and men should be cursed with the same Tongue, which is
the meaning of the Apostle, ver. 9. Therewith bless we God even the Father, and
therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God. That
cursing of men is interpreted to be railing against them, and reviling of them.
To avoid this, there must be Meekness of Wisdom; that Wisdom which has
Meekness accompanying of it.

3. It is an Argument of Humility, and that a man has a great sense of his own
Failings and Infirmities. He that is acquainted with himself, and considers
what his own faults have been, can not be very apt to break out into a Rage and
Passion, because of the faults of other men. It is impossible that any man can
take another in a fault, so often as he may take himself. If men would look
back and consider what they have done amiss themselves, it would give a check
to their ill-natured passions toward others.

This was the Apostles Argument which he would have Titus use to them that were
very mindful of other men's faults but very forgetful of their own. In the
forementioned place, Tit. 3.2. he requires them To speak evil of no man, to be
no brawlers, but gentle, showing all Meekness unto all men, and at v. 3. he
tells them, that their own faults should be a Motive to it. For we our selves
also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and
Pleasures, living in Malice and Envy, hateful, and hating one another. It may
seem very strange, that men who had been guilty of so many faults, should be
apt to speak evil and to brawl against others. And yet this the base nature of
man is very prone and apt to, which makes such an exhortation necessary.

As our Savior said to those that accused the Woman of Adultery. He that is
without sin, let him cast the first stone. So I may say when a man is taken in
a fault, let him that is without faults lay aside a Spirit of Meekness, and
bite and devour him.

It were well if every one, (especially those that want a Spirit of Meekness)
had a Phylacterie with the Apostles words written upon it. In many things we
offend all, because it would make men kind and gentle to their Brother
offender. It might make Christian acquaintance to show their love one toward
another, by being kind and gentle Monitors of each others faults. I know very
well, that men are apt to aggravate the faults of others, and to extenuate
their own; or otherwise he that takes another in a fault, would presently
consider that it becomes him to be Gentle and Meek, because if he has not been
guilty of the same offense, yet he may have been guilty of many others, which
have tended as much to the dishonor of God, and prejudice of the Church, as
this which his Brother is taken in.

Besides the faults that are past, we know not what may yet be to come. I had
not need to revile my Brother to day, who may be taken in a greater fault to
morrow; but considering my own aptness to offend, tell him of his fault with
such a Spirit of Meekness, as I would have used toward me. This is the
Apostles Argument in the Text, and it is, or should be, a very cogent one.
Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. We are disturbed at the
intolerable, and inexpressible mischeifs of Separation: and the Consideration
of them is apt to exasperate one man against another. It is a grievous Scandal
to the Protestant Religion all over the world. But yet it concerns us to show a
Spirit of Meekness toward them that have Separated, Considering our selves
lest we also be tempted. Peter thought that he could dye rather than deny his
Master, but temptations prevailed upon him.

There are a great many, who think that nothing can make them fly from their
Principles, but yet they know not how far the fiery Trial on one hand, and
Allurements on the other may prevail, by which they may dishonor their
profession, and bring a great scandal to their Religion. It is given as a
Reason why God deals gently with us: He remembers that we are but Flesh, and a
Wind that passes away; and I am sure our weakness, and Instability should be a
great reason, why we should treat our Brother meekly.

V. We must restore our Brother with a Spirit of Meekness, that we may avoid
occasions of ossence. A Spirit of Bitterness and Reviling is in this respect of
more dangerous Consequence, than men are usually aware of. Those that gratify
their Passions may please themselves, but they do exceedingly displease others.

1. It is a great Offense to our Governors, to whom only it belongs to punish
those who are taken in a Fault. The civil Magistrate has the Sword in his
Hand, and therefore it does not become the People to have Swords in their
Mouths: I mean sharp and cutting Reproaches. If the common People will
undertake to Arraign, Accuse, and Condemn men for their Faults; the question
may be asked them, which the Hebrew man asked Moses, Exodus 2.14. Who made thee a
Ruler and a Judge? We all know that Reviling is the next step to Rebellion and
Confusion; especially when it is occasioned by that which is of public
concern, for then it is not so properly one man that reviles another, as one
Party reviles another. If we show a Spirit of Hatred against those that have
been of a different Opinion, we shall make them think long for an opportunity
to be revenged because they see no hopes that they can be reconciled. And this
must needs be a very great offense to the Magistrate, to whom it belongs to
discountenance and oppose all occasions of Jarres and Contests, as he values
his own and the Kingdoms safety.

It has always been the great care of those whom God has set upon the
Throne, to keep their Subjects from exasperating one another by opprobrious
Names, especially when there has been Contests about Religion, which are of
most dangerous consequence to the Government. Queen Elizabeth, taking notice of
this in her Reign, forbids it as that which she called the loosening of Charity
which is the knot of all Christian Society; and commanded that all her Subjects
should forbear all vain contentions, and that they should not use in despite or
rebuke of any these convitious Words, Papist or Heretic, Schismatic or
Sacramentarian. It was likewise the Command of King James, that there should be
no railing against the Persons of Papists or Puritans.

In the Reign of Our late Sovereign of Blessed Memory (who might himself be
called a Spirit of Meekness) we know very well that there were opprobrious
Names which helped to enrage one Party against another, till the King and many
thousands of his Subjects were destroyed.

Our dread Sovereign, so soon as God restored him to his Throne, did not only
pass an Act of Oblivion, that he might pardon all Offenses past, but by several
Declarations, and Charges given to his Judges, has commanded that there should
not be so much as any terms of Distinction, by which his Subjects might be at
variance one with another. It may therefore seem somewhat strange, that those
who profess so much Loyalty and Duty to the King, should not be careful to obey
his Commands in this, as well as in all other Declarations of his Royal Will
and Pleasure.

It is likewise a great Offense to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: Those to
whom the Government of the Church is committed, and to whom it belongs to
censure those who are Faulty. They are by the Rules and Orders of the Church to
show a Spirit of Meekness, to admonish him that is taken in a Fault upon
complaint made to them; in hopes that the Offender will reform, and that there
will be no need of farther Severity.

Dr. Hammond by [Yee that are Spiritual] in the Text understands the Governors
of the Church, those to whom the (...), the gifts of the Spirit were given, in
order to the discharge of their Ministerial Function and Offices; That the
Apostle requires them not to deal too severely, but gently with those that have
offended, in hopes of reclaiming them. I may make this use of it. If the
Governors of the Church are to restore Offenders with a Spirit of Meekness, I
am sure it must needs be a just cause of Offense to them, if the people
discover a spirit of Bitterness.

The People have a Rule given them by our Savior what to do in case of
Offenses, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. If thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go
and tell him his Fault between thee and him alone: If he shall hear thee, thou
have gained thy Brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one
or two more; that in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every word may be
established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church, etc.
I am sure those Persons are far from obeying the command of our Savior, and
observing the Rule which he has prescribed, who never tell Offenders their
Faults privately but take the first occasion to publish them with the greatest
Aggravations. And I am sure they are very far from observing what the Church
requires, and therefore are themselves very fit to be complained of, and would
certainly be censured by her Governors if they obstinately persisted in it.
There is one Homily of the Church against Contention, in which a Spirit of
Meekness is commended. That by being Soft, Meek, and Gentle in answering, we
may overcome our Adversary with Gentleness; especially in matters of Religion
and Gods Word, which should be used with all Moderation and Soberness: For it
is better to give place Meekly, than to win the Victory with breach of Charity.
We may by this see, what temper of Spirit the Church requires her Sons to be
of, and we may conclude that those, who are of a contrary Spirit, do offend
those to whom it belongs to censure Offenders.

2. It is a great offense to Ministers. It hinders them from doing that good
which otherwise they might do, in convincing men of the Necessity of uniting,
and the Reasonableness of a hearty Compliance with the Church, as it is now
established. A reviling reproachful Spirit in the People is enough to make them
lay the fault upon the Preacher, according to the old saying, like Priest like
People. And if they do not, yet it is enough to make them forsake the Church
again, or come very seldom to it. And it is a hard case, that Ministers must
ask the People leave, whether they shall have an opportunity of convincing men
of their Errors and Mistakes, and treating them with such a Spirit of Meekness
as the Gospel requires, and which tends to the restoring of them.

I know it is Objected, that Ministers have not been careful in this matter,
but upon all occasions, have discovered a contrary Spirit: They have showed
such a Spirit of Bitterness as might rather encourage Reviling than suppress it.

Ans. I cannot deny but there have been and are such Ministers, whose Zeal for
the Churches interest have so far transported them, that they have not
considered so well as they should have done, that they do not show that temper
of Spirit which the Gospel requires, nor that which answers the end which they
propound to themselves, viz. The bringing of those to the Communion of the
Church who have separated from it, and the more firm Establishment of those who
have not.

As to the first, Sarcasms and Satirical Reflections do commonly make those
that have been hearers, who are of wavering minds, turn their backs at least
upon that Preacher, if not upon all other Ministers of the Church. And as to
the other, that which may be, and I hope is designed to increase in the hearers
a dislike of Separation, does only more highly exasperate the minds of some
against Dissenters, (and I am sure there is no need of that) but is very
displeasing to those that are sober and serious-minded Christians. I have
therefore sometimes thought that if those men, whose Parts and Learning are to
be admired, would improve them only by meek Insinuations, and strong and
rational Arguments, it would bring Dissenters to be their Auditors and
Admirers, and might make them prefer their Sermons before those which they hear
from others.

The Apostle was afraid lest Timothy, being a young Preacher (and I suppose
they are Chiefly if not only such who are complained of) should be faulty in
this; and therefore requires him that he should look carely to the Temper of
his own mind, which is of great moment to every Christian, but especially to a
Minister. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be
gentle unto all men, apt to Teach, patient. In meekness instructing them that
oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the
acknowledgment of the Truth.

However some few Ministers may be blamed for being too severe in their
Expressions, yet I am sure there are others, men of the greatest Eminency in
the Church, who are of that Meek temper which may commend them to all good men:
Such a Temper as was in the Prophets of old time, who could not tell how to
deliver a harsh Message; but were very forward to expostulate the case with
sinners, and to tell them their Faults and the punishment which they were
bringing upon themselves, after such a manner that there appeared no fault at
all in them: Such as Jeremiah was, who when he was commanded to tell the Jews
of their Captivity which was approaching, declared his grief for it -- Neither
have I desired the woeful day, thou know, Jer. 17.16. And such as Daniel was,
who when he interpreted the dream to Nebuchadnezzar, did it with an Aching
heart. He was astonished and his thoughts troubled him. They are of that Temper
which the Apostle was of himself, and which he requires should be in Timothy,
and all other Ministers of the Gospel. And they have had very great success,
for by treating men with a Spirit of Meekness, they have brought many
Proselites to the Church. It is well known that many who have Dissented, coming
but accidentally to hear them, have been so satisfied as to return no more to
the ways of Separation. And what a great Offense must it needs be to those
Ministers, if the People shall discourage those from frequenting the Church,
who may be so treated there, as to have delight in her Ministers and her
Communion.

3. It is a great Offense to all Sober, Pious, and Orthodox Christians, who are
Conformable to the Orders of the Church. It is their hearty desire, and earnest
Prayers to God, that those who have Dissented may return to the Communion of
the Church, and that they may be treated with the Spirit of Meekness. It is the
grief of their hearts, to see what causeless Divisions there are amongst us;
and therefore they cannot but rejoice at any opportunity which may tend to the
healing of them. I dare say that those who have been guilty of Reviling, are
none of those many hundreds of Communicants who meet every Month at the Lords
Table; but are such who absent from the Sacrament; and this Spirit of
Bitterness which they do discover, shows that they are not fit to come to it.
As I am sure they are a very bad sort of men, so I hope the number of them is
not great. Whoever they are, they are a great Offense to all Pious and Good
Christians, who hear of their ill Deportments: which may be of good use to
those that have been ill treated by them, that they should not be discouraged
by those Miscarriages which are as offensive to us as they are to them. And it
should be of good use to them that have been guilty in this matter: They should
consider, that (as our Savior said to his Furious Disciples) they know not
what Spirit they are of. They do not consider that it is neither pleasing to
Magistrates, nor Ministers, nor yet to any good Christians who are of the
Communion of the Church and who are as great Enemies to Division and Separation
as they can be. But

4. It is a great and unwarrantable Offense to those who have Dissented. We
are, as I have already mentioned, to show all Meekness unto all men, and we are
exceedingly to rejoice in any opportunity of expressing Love and Kindness. It
is a very great mistake, if any think that a man cannot show Respect and
Kindness to another, but he must be a favourer of his Opinion. We may easily
propound to our selves sufficient Reason, why we should Love every man, let his
Judgment be what it will; and I am sure, that there is the greater necessity of
showing kindness to those who have Dissented, that we may be the better able to
rectify their Judgments and to convince them of their Mistakes.

But more particularly; There are three things hinted in the Text, why we
should not offend such, but restore them with a Spirit of Meekness.

1. The first I take from the Apostles Compellation, Brethren. As he gives that
Title to the Galatians who had been exceedingly to blame for indulging their
Errors and Mistakes, so should we to those that have separated from us. I know
the Devil (as I have already mentioned) has by his Factors abroad, sent other
Names amongst us, and they pass very readily; but if we look into the
Scriptures, and consult the Gospel, we shall find that our Savior, and his
Apostles has only furnished us with such Titles as signify Love, such as may
oblige and win upon those that have erred, and not such as may provoke or
discourage them.

It is true that when our Savior speaks of those who have so offended, that
they will not be reclaimed by the secret Admonitions of him whom they have
trespassed against, (which is an Argument of a most sweet and pleasant temper
of mind, and therefore shows that the offending Person is very stubborn and
Obstinate,) nor regard the counsel of one or two more (who come as well to
plead with them that they may amend, as to be witnesses against them if they
continue obstinate) nor regard the Public Complaints made against them to the
Church, (which is the last remedy) his direction is, That such should be
accounted as a Heathen Man, and, a Publican, that is, their Society should be
avoided, and they should have no Communion with them; or as Dr. Hammond
explaines it in his Paraphrase upon the Place, Look upon him as a desperate
deplored Sinner, fit for the censures of the Church to overtake him. Our
Savior says, If thy BROTHER offend thee, and thou have gained thy BROTHER,
which shows that when men have offended they must not presently be cast off
with Wrath and Indignation, but there must be the Love of a Brother still
continuing, and it must appear in the Methods which are to be used for the
reclaiming of him. The reason why our Savior requires that he should be told
his fault privately, is, that he may be reclaimed, and not be exposed to any
shame or Reproach for what he has done, by which a man shows the Love and
Tenderness of a Brother. But I am sure they are very far from observing this
Rule, and from expressing this Love and Tenderness of a Brother, who never tell
men their faults privately, nor with one or two more, but take occasion to
upbraid them with their faults publicly, and it is at that time too when they
are mending their faults, and therefore do not so much as want a private
admonition. I do the rather mention this of our Savior, because though it
seems to relate only to personal Offenses, If thy Brother shall trespass
against thee, etc. Yet doubtless it is to be understood of any Offenses
whatsoever, because they give occasion to Christians to exercise their Charity
toward the souls of their Brethren, as well as any personal Offense committed
by them.

The Apostles followed this Rule of our Savior, and required that whatsoever
Offenses men were guilty of, yet still they were to be accounted Brethren, and
the Love of a Brother was to be showed to them. I will mention but one, and it
has a Special relation to the case that I have in hand, 2 These. 3. v. 14.15.
And if any one obey not our word by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no
company with him, that he may be ashamed; and what follows? Does the Apostle
by this encourage them to cast Contempt and Scorn upon him wheresoever they see
him? No, but requires that there should be a tender Love showed to him, Yet
count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. These two verses have
a special relation to that which goes before at the 11th. verse, For we hear
that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but
are busy-bodies. There were such persons amongst the Thessalonians as we have
too many of them amongst us; who are disorderly persons, that had rather mind
any other business than that which belongs to them; and instead of minding
their work, they are disputing the Orders of the Church, and by what Authority
it is, that the Governors of it requires this or that to be done, for which
there is no express Rule. Such persons as these are, must needs be exceedingly
offensive to the Governors of the Church, because of their Haughtiness and
Insolency: And they must needs be very Offensive to all Religious Members of
the Church, because they disturb the Peace, Unity, and Harmony which should be
amongst the Worshippers of God. But however though their Offenses were so
great, that other Christians of better Tempers were to avoid their company, yet
when occasion was offered they were to admonish them as Brethren; as those for
whom they still retained a great Love, and hearty Desire for their good. We
ought to retain a Love for them, in reference to their temporal Concerns, and
to be very sorry that they should incur any Penalty which may tend to the
impoverishing of themselves and Families: This common Ingenuity requires of us,
and therefore much more does Christianity require it. And we ought more
especially to be concerned for their Spiritual and eternal Welfare; because
they are our Brethren, and they are called so from that Relation, which we bear
unto our Heavenly Father.

2. A second Intimation which I have from the Text is from the Word (...). As
the Galatians were overtaken in a Fault, so we must account those to have been
likewise, who have dissented from us. There is a great difference between
Errors of Judgment and Errors of Practice. When men are guilty of Errors of
Practice, they are Wilful and Obstinate, and act quite contrary to their own
Principles, for they know they are wrong, and offer violence to their own
Consciences, and yet they are to be treated with a Spirit of Meekness, that
they may be made sensible of their Wickedness, and reclaimed without punishment
by the Execution of Laws against them, if it can be effected. And if these men
(of whom it cannot properly be said, that they were overtaken in a Fault,
because they knew the Fault before they committed it) are to be treated with a
Spirit of Meekness in the first place, much more then are they to be dealt
tenderly with, of whom it may very properly be said, that they were Overtaken.

No man runs wilfully into an Error of Judgment, but it is through Weakness and
Ignorance, and Inability of mind, for which he is to be pitied. The minds of
Men are liable to such errors and mistakes, that sometimes men have thought
that they have done well, when they have done the worst Acts. Our Savior said
to his Disciples, John 16.2. The time comes that whosoever kills you, will
think that he does God Service. His Expression is not, whosoever kills you
will say, but he will think that he does God Service. It shall be according to
the persuasion of his Mind. His erroneous Concience will tell him that he does
God service. I may mention a very strange Error which takes place in our days,
and does great mischief to the Church. There are thousands amongst us, who
speak very reverently of our first Reformers from Popery; that do exceedingly
honor their memories; and yet they fly as far from the Reformation that was
established by them, as if to return to it were to return to Popery, and all
that they did signified nothing, but only to that age in which they lived. All
the Alterations and Amendments, which have been made since their time,
signifies nothing, but their orders must be wholly thrown away. How little did
those Holy and Learned Men think, that such things would come to pass; I
mention these Instances, because some men will not be persuaded, that there is
any thing but Wilfulness and Obstinacy that is the cause of men's dissenting,
and therefore they ought not to be treated with a Spirit of Meekness.

We ought in this case to call to remembrance the years that are past, to
consider how men were affrighted by their Teachers at any thing that did but in
the least, countenance Conformity to the Church of England. They were brought
up in a Dislike, or rather an Abhorrence to the Rules and Orders of it. They
engaged themselves in a Communion with men of other persuasions, and made
choice of a Minister to be their Pastor, who Dissented from the Church. Nay it
may be they are good men, and were converted by that Minister or some other of
the same persuasion, from the ways of Wickedness to the practice of Religion.
It is well quoted by a late Learned Writer for the Church, In the Division of
hearts that are in the World, it is certain that some good may dissent. If we
consider what Educations men have had, and what Principles have been instil'd
into their minds, we may well conclude that they were overtaken in the fault of
Separation, and not that it was a wilful Choice, and therefore they are to be
treated with the Spirit of Meekness.

Besides, we ought likewise to consider, as a Consequent of this, that Errors
of Judgment being deeply fixed, and having been of long continuance, are not
easily removed. When men have entertained an Error, how weak and unaccountable
soever it be, yet it is truth to them, and therefore they are very loath to
part with it. In this case, he is mad who thinks he can scold a man out of his
Opinion, or that Reviling him will restore him. There must be another and a
milder way used: He that would rectify a man's Judgment, must use his utmost
endeavor to get first into his Affection. The Apostle says, Romans 15.2. Let
every one of us please his Neighbor, for his good to Edification. He that
would do good to another man, he that desires his Edification, that he may be
built up in the Faith, and that he may grow in Grace and Knowledge, must do all
that he can or may, to please him. Their jnfirmities must be born withal
(according to what the Apostle says in the foregoing verse) and nothing must
be done to discourage them. A man that has indulged an Error, will scarcely
hear what another man says, who has no kindness for him: It is to be
questioned whether he will be convinced by him that has. Remarkable to this
purpose is that forementioned place, 2 Timothy 2.25. In Meekness instructing them
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the
acknowledgment of the truth.

Doct. Hammonds Paraphrase upon the place is thus, with great Calmness and
temper, dealing with those that are of different Opinions from us, though in
opposing us they oppose the Truth, as counting it not impossible, or hopeless,
but by the Grace of God they may be brought to Repentance, and so come to
acknowledge the Truth at length.

There are Three things very sit for us to take notice of, in what the Apostle
says. First, That to show a Spirit of Meekness, is the best way to deal with
men of different Opinions from us: If any thing prevails with them, that will.
If we think to deal otherwise with them, it is the way to make them oppose the
Truth still, and us likewise, and all that we can say to recover them.
Secondly, When we deal with men after this manner, Meekly and Gently, yet it is
but a Peradventure whether it will have any good effect upon them, because men
are commonly so wedded to their Opinions, that they part not so long as they
live. Thirdly, He that uses a Spirit of Meekness has most reason to expect
the assistance of Gods Grace, who as I have already showed, requires that
Temper of mind, and delights in those that have it.

If we consider, that he that has dissented is not only our Brother, but
likewise that he has been overtaken in a Fault, we are not only obliged to
treat him with a Spirit of Meekness from a principle of Love and Ingenuity, but
from the Necessity of the Case; because it is our Duty to use our utmost
endeavor to restore him, and a Spirit of Meekness makes us most fit to effect
it.

There is somewhat which may be considered from the word (...) in the text,
which I told you, signifies the Setting of a bone that is broken, or out of
joint. Those that have been taken in the fault of Dissenting may be in great
pain, they may have an aching Mind, which is worse and far more painful than an
aching Limb. It must be acknowledged, that nothing is so tender as the mind and
conscience is (although it ought to be considered that there is nothing more
apt to error, and men must have a care that it be guided by a Rule: and that
from the tenderness of it, men do not start at the performance of what is their
Duty, for fear of hurting it) and therefore we ought to deal gently and
tenderly with them as he that sets a bone. They have received ill Principles,
and have thought it their duty to separate from us, and that they should
displease God by having Communion with us; and although they are in some
measure satisfied, yet they are still in some Fear and Doubt; like a man whose
bone is set, but he has not recovered his strength. It is very great
unkindness, or I may say, Cruelty to revile a man who is under any discomposure
of mind. Besides, as it is a thing grievous in it self, so it may be in another
respect; because it is a means to increase his pain which he had before. He was
afraid lest he should do amiss by joining in Communion with us, and this ill
carriage toward him increases his fear, and so puts him to more pain. There is
no question but that any Alteration in matters of Religion and the Worship of
God, meets with great aching and regret of mind. We may easily understand it by
making the case to be our own. Suppose that we should be required no longer to
Worship God by a Public form (which we count most solid and substantial, and
is a great advantage to our Devotion,) but should be required to join with
those that use Extemporary prayers, and it appears to us that they have not
considered before hand what they should say when they speak to the Great and
Holy God; it would be a great Trouble to us, especially if we had ever doubted
whether we might join with such men, and in such Prayers.

The Case is the same; for the trouble of a man's mind is according only to the
Opinion which he has received, which he is not apt to make any doubt of: A Jew
or a Turk, or I may say a Heathen-Idolater is as much in pain if you require
him to alter his Opinion, as he that has the greatest evidence for his
Religion, and gives the most satisfactory Reason for his way of Worshipping
God. We must restore our Brother with a Spirit of Meekness because he is in
pain about his being restored.

That which now remains is, that I make some Inferences by way of Application.

I. It is of great moment, that men be very careful and diligent in examining
the Temper of their own minds, for if they be not, they may not only be in
great danger, as to their own immortal Souls, but do great mischiefs to others,
and particularly to that Cause which they would advance. Most certain it is,
that every man may be taken in a Fault, and it is as certain that every man is
not fit to tell others of their Faults. He must have a great command of his own
mind, and be of an excellent temper, who expects to have any influence upon the
mind of another that has done amiss. Those that have been faulty must be
reproved for their Faults, but there must be Love and Kindness tempered with
the reproof, or else it will only provoke, and not restore. And this is not
all, but he must be a good man himself who would make another good, and he that
has offended must believe him to be so. David says, Psalm. 141.5. Let the
righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness: and let him reprove me, it shall be
an excellent Oil which shall not break my head. Where note there are some that
smite, and it is no kindness; there is nothing but Malice and Hatred in it.
There is a Reproof which breaks the head, and does rather enrage the Offender
than prevail with him to mend his faults. Where the reproof comes from a good
man, it is as an excellent Oil which does not break the head. The Psalmist
alludes to a Custom which was in ancient time, to anoint the head with Oil
which cast a fragrant smell. It was wont to be used especially at the times of
feasting, and of great mirth and triumph, and to be omitted when there was
occasion of fasting and humiliation. So that the meaning of the Psalmist is
very high, Let him reprove me, and it shall be an excellent Oil: It shall be
sweet and pleasant and joyful to me that I have such a friend that shows such
true Love and Kindness to me, as to reprove me for my Faults. It shall not
break my head. As kind Reproofs are figuratively called Oil, so Words are
figuratively called Blows, which offer great violence, and do great hurt to
men. It was Job's complaint to his Friends, who did not treat him kindly, Job.
19.2. How long will ye vex my Soul, and break me in pieces with words. There
are some men whose Reproofs are accompanied with so much Rage and Bitterness,
that they may be said to break the head, i. e. they are a very great Affront or
injury to a Man, or as a more usual expression, is they cut men to the Heart.
But the Reproofs of those who are good men, are expressed with so much Love and
Tenderness, and desire of doing good to the offending person, that they are as
an excellent Oil, both sweet and healing, which offers no injury, nor are they
taken so, but are very obliging. David thought himself so exceedingly obliged
by them, that he resolves to requite them, by being a Friend in adversity to
him that reproved him. And therefore it follows, My Prayer shall be in their
Calamities. Some men when they are reproved for their faults, are of such a
malicious nature and disposition, that they rejoice at any evil which befalls
their Reprovers, and take that opportunity to insult over them: But he would
take that opportunity to express his Obligations by praying to God for them.

He that reproves another must be a good man himself, or else it is very
doubtful whether he can restore his Brother: Especially where the Fault is an
Error of Judgment, and relates to matters of Opinion. If a man that is
scandalous in his Conversation, reproves a Schismatic, he will be ready to
tell him, that he is fitter to be reproved himself, than to reprove others; and
that he is not a man fit to dispute matters of Religion, who has nothing of
the Power of it prevailing in his own mind.

Some men when they have taken another in a fault, should desire others to
reprove them who are more fit to do it, rather than undertake it themselves;
for otherwise it may be that instead of mending one fault, there may be two
more added to it: One in the Reprover, and another in the Offender. The
Reprover will be in a passion, and discover a froward Spirit, and that is one
Fault; and he that has offended may be enraged by it, and not restored, and
that is another. There are two faults added to that one, which might have been
amended by a Spirit of Meekness. Or if I may allude once more to the word
(...): He that restores is as one that sets a Bone, but a provoking Reprover is
like one that tampers with the Patient, and only puts him to more pain: Or
worse, in stead of setting one bone he breaks another: Instead of mending a
fault he makes more. As the case may be, he that reproves another may, for want
of a Spirit of Meekness, be in a worse fault than he was in, whom he should
have restored, and may do more hurt to the Church and to Religion.

II. When one man takes another in a Fault, let him take care that there be
respect had to the nature of the Offense which the person is guilty of.
Whatsoever the Crime be, a Brother and a Fellow-Christian is to restore with a
Spirit of Meekness; but there are some who are of such furious Spirits, that
the Spirit of Meekness is laid aside upon every small occasion of Offense.
Christians should have a great care, that they avoid a censorious Spirit, by
which every Offense is represented with the greatest aggravations that it is
capable of, and sometimes far greater. We should treat Offenders (and I am sure
that is the way to restore them) as the Apostle treated the men of Athens, Acts
17.22. Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too
superstitious. He might have told them that they were Idolatrous, which is a
far greater crime. It is said, v. 16. His Spirit was stirred in him, when he
saw the City wholly given to Idolatry. He was exasperated to see such Learned
men Worshipping false Gods; and yet it appears that his Spirit was very Meek
and Calm when he applies himself to them to tell them of their Faults. He does
not say ye Idolaters, but ye men of Athens; and he only charges them with
Superstitition, because probably if he had charged them with the Worship of
false Gods, their Spirits would have been so exasperated against him, as not to
regard the force of his strong Arguments, by which he endeavored to convince
them of the true God, and that Jesus whom he preached to them was the Son of
God. Superstition is nothing but what the Worshippers of the true God may be
guilty of. It is men's making Conscience where no conscience is to be made, and
their being afraid in matters of Religion, and the Worship of God, where no
fear is; when men account that to be their Duty, and are afraid to neglect it,
for which there is no Rule. This is bad and blameworthy enough, but not to be
compared to Idolatry. As the Apostle used a mild Reproof, when he had taken the
Athenians in a great fault, and rather extenuates than aggravates it, in hopes
that he should the better prevail with them, so should we do to our fellow
Christian. Men must have a care of a censorious aggravating Spirit. They must
not look upon the faults of their Brother through a multiplying glass, but deal
charitably, as men who themselves are apt to offend, and would not have the
worst construction put upon their own actions. Men in case of Faults,
especially where they are not palpably notorious, should say as Jacob said to
his Sons, concerning the Money sound in their sacks, Genesis 43.12. Peradventure
it was an oversight. There is nothing more common (in this censorious age) than
for men to condemn those as guilty of the greatest Crimes, whom the Judge upon
a fair Trial acquits as innocent.

In the case of Faults we should show a Spirit of Meekness, by doing as the
unjust Steward did in the Parable, Luke 16.6. The man that owed a hundred
Measures of Oil, was to sit down and write fifty. We must not look at the
Faults of others with Aggravations but Extenuations, and that must needs be a
mighty Advantage to the restoring of him, because it is a great Obligation upon
him: Especially if his guilty conscience tells him, that he deserved to be
dealt with more roughly. But some men are all for Severity: If the Offender
owes fifty, they cry write him down a hundred, or a thousand, Ruin him, for he
deserves no favor.

III. Let men take heed, that they do not deal unjustly, by charging the fault
of him that is Guilty, upon another who is Innocent: Or, (to come nearer to
what I design) Let not the faults which have been committed by some particular
persons, be charged upon a whole Society. Some are so unjustly severe, that if
one be taken in a Fault, they are presently for punishing all that sort of men;
as if when one Malefactor is taken, all must dye that have been in his company
or of his acquaintance, although they know nothing of that for which he is
found guilty. I know very well that in some cases, when one of a Society is
taken in a fault, there may be a necessity of a watchful eye upon the rest;
because it may be suspected that Companions are alike, and that they are all
infected with the same bad Principles: Which I shall have occasion to speak
more of before I conclude this discourse. But this is not a Rule in all cases,
nor does it justify the unjust Severities of those, who condemn a whole
Society for the faults of some particular persons. There are grievous instances
of this nature, and such as have been of most pernicious consequence to the
Church, which ought to be considered and amended on both sides. On one hand, if
there be any that profess themselves to be the Sons of the Church of England,
who are of scandalous lives, the whole number of them is presently condemned.
If there be some particular persons that are vicious, although the Ministers of
the Church do sharply reprove them, and although it appears that the Church
has taken all possible care, that men may walk in the ways of Godliness, yet
it shall be looked upon as a general case, and that there is no care taken to
prevent or amend it. And, to be sure, if there be but one scandalous Minister
in a City, it shall reflect upon the whole Clergy. This is most unjust and
unchristian, and makes the Innocent grievous sufferers for the Guilty; They
suffering in their good Name for the offenses of these. It is to accuse those
as guilty of the faults of others, who are so far from partaking of them, that
they mourn in secret for them. It is to cast a reflection upon the Church,
which is the Spouse of Christ, and a sorrowful Mother, because she has some
such Children who are rebellious, and disobedient to her Laws and Ordinances.

On the other hand, in the instance of the late horrid Plot and Conspiracy
against the Life of our Sovereign, who is the Breath of our Nostrils, nothing
will satisfy some men but to conclude, that all that dissent are more or less
concerned in it: Whereas we have great reason to hope, and I have some reason
to speak it, that it has been of very good Consequence to some of the
Dissenters, who were so startled and amazed at it, that they have acknowledged
the Kings Commands for the execution of his Laws against them, to be both just
and necessary.

Thus does unjust and unchristian Censoriousness prevail, for want of a Spirit
of Meekness. Let men therefore take heed, that they do not charge the Innocent
of being faulty; for often times it happens to be so, and he that abhors the
Fault which another is guilty of, is reviled and accused after a most
unchristian manner. This is a very dreadful thing. If he that is taken in a
fault must be restored with a Spirit of Meekness, what a great fault is he
guilty of, who treats him with a Spirit of Reviling and Bitterness, who is
taken in no fault at all.

IV. I would go a step higher. Let men take heed, that they do not call that a
Fault which is commendable, and praiseworthy, and then lay aside a Spirit of
Meekness too. Some men are reviled for that, for which they ought to be
praised. There are some very good men who are dealt withal as Hannah was, 1 Samuel 1.14, 15. She was falsely accused, and it is worthy our observation, that
it was by Eli, who was a very good man. It is the great fault of many good men,
that they are very apt to censure and judge amiss of others, whom they ought to
have a high Value and Esteem for. And although it may proceed from a Jealousy,
which is caused by their abhorrence of that which is evil, yet it is by no
means to be justified. Eli said unto her, how long will thou be drunken? put
away thy wine from thee: And observe what she replied; And Hannah answered and
said, no my Lord, I am a Woman of a sorrowful Spirit: I have drunk neither Wine
nor Strong Drink, but have poured out my Soul before the Lord. Count not thine
handmaid for a daughter of Belial; for out of the abundance of my complaint and
grief have I spoken hitherto. One would think that Eli should have asked her,
what it was that she was doing; for though it had been very ill to have
disturbed her in her Devotion by asking her any question, yet it was ten times
worse to charge her of being guilty of one of the foulest sins, when she was
performing to God one of the most acceptable Duties: To load her with an unjust
Accusation, when her Soul was burdened with Grief and Sorrow. Yet this is
sometimes the lot of those that are good; of which many Instances may be given.
And good men and women may well be content to bear it, for it was that which
our Savior met withal when he was in the world. When he went into the company
of Sinners, that he might Call them to Repentance, he was accused of being a
Friend to them, as they were Sinners, and guilty of the same Sins likewise.
They said, behold, a man gluttonous, and a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans
and Sinners, Mat. 10. v. 19. As this was our Saviors Lot when he was in the
World, so it is likewise of many that are Holy and Religious Members of his
Church amongst us. There are many, who because of some outward Deportments,
(which are Expressions of that inward Reverence, which they have for God in
their minds, and by which they show likewise that Bodily as well as Mental
Reverence which is due to God) have been and are called, Popish, and
Superstitious, and reviled, as if they were Vile men, when, as Hannah did, they
are Pouring out their Souls to God, with the greatest Zeal, and most fervent
Devotion. Those who accuse them, if they conversed with them, might have cause
to account them the most Pious, and Charitable Christians, so far as it is
possible for men to judge. But this is a great Unhappiness, and does exceedingly
aggravate the Fault of the Censorious: They will not charge a man of his
supposed faults, by which they may be convinced of their mistakes, but rail
against them and Revile them abroad wheresoever they come. Though Eli was to
blame in charging Hannah falsely, yet he was to be commended much more for
accusing her to her face, than if he had taken it for granted, that she was
guilty of it, and then reproacht her by an unjust Defamation behind her back.
He spoke his mind to her, and was satisfied that he had been mistaken, and said
to her, Go in peace and the God of Israel grant thee thy Petition, that thou
have asked of him. If those that accuse others, would converse with them, and
tell them of what they think to be a fault in them, they might, possibly, be
satisfied that there was no fault but a commendable practice which they ought
to imitate.

There are others likewise, who have been accused, as our Savior was, of being
Vicious, because they have been in the Company of Vicious men, although they
never complied with them in any thing that is bad, but have taken all occasions
to reprove and admonish them. Thus have men been injured in their Reputations,
by false Aspersions, both as to their Principles, and their Practices, when
both of them have been very commendable. And if it be a Christian Duty to
restore him that is taken in a fault, with a Spirit of Meekness, how
Unchristian are they who make a Virtue to be a fault, and condemn it with a
Spirit of Bitterness.

V. I must add to all this, that those who are so ready to accuse the Innocent,
and to condemn those that are religious and good Men, are commonly such as are
guilty of very great Faults themselves, and yet will not be restored, nor
endure so much as to be told of their faults. We commonly find those that are
most faulty themselves, finding most Faults with others. They do not so much as
see a mote in their Brothers eye, and yet they find great Fault with him; and
in the mean while they must not be so much as told of a very great Beam that is
in their own eye. If those that are Spiritual are required to restore them that
are faulty with a Spirit of Meekness, what a most notorious fault is it when
they that are Carnal, treat those that are Spiritual, whom they have not taken
in a fault, with the Spirit of Bitterness.

That which follows shall be by way of Exhortation, and Advice, both to those
that have Dissented from the Church, and those that have not. I begin with
those that have separated, but are now come, I hope, with Religious minds to
join with us in the Worship of God: Let me desire you to suffer a word of
Exhortation, and as I have earnestly contended with others, to show a Spirit of
Meekness toward you, (and I value not the Censures of furious and unreasonable
men for what I have done) so I do entreat you with no less Importunity, that
you will receive with Meekness that which I have to offer to you.

1. Let me desire you to take care, that a Spirit of Meekness be not wanting in
you toward others that are of conformable Principles to the Rules and Orders
of the Church. They that complain that a Spirit of Meekness is wanting in
others, should take great care that it be not wanting in themselves. They that
would not be bitten, should take care that they do not bite. They that would
not be Reviled, must take care that they do not Revile others. You know that
what I have already mentioned is very true, viz. That many of the Religious
Members of the Church of England, have been accused of being Popish and
Superstitious, and of having a Form of Godliness (though some will scarce allow
that) but not the Power of it; whereas it appears to Sober and Unprejudiced
Persons, that they abhor both Popery and Superstition, and that they have the
Power of Godliness, as well as the Form of it. It is my earnest desire that you
should never be Reproached for that which is true, I hope therefore that you
will take care (for it is a dreadful thing) that you Revile not others for that
which is false. And, the truth is, I know no Advice more necessary to be given,
than that all sober Christians, whatsoever their Persuasion be, should make it
their business to discourage Revilers, and Evil-speakers, upon all occasions
whatsoever, although they be of the same Opinion with themselves. It is great
pity that all men do not consider the truth of a good old saying, A good word
does no hurt, and a bad word does no good. Revilers and Evil-speakers are
certainly the most mischievous men of any party whatsoever. But this is not all
that I have to desire of you, therefore,

2. If you would not be offended this way, by opprobrious Language or uncivil
Carriage; let me desire you to take care that you give no offense any other
way, as I must needs say, too many do, and I will show you wherein.

1. There are a great many of you who cast Contempt upon one Ordinance for the
sake of another: Such I mean, as will come to hear the Sermon, but will not
come to join with their fellow Christians, in lifting up their hearts to God,
in the use of the public Prayers of the Church. Gods house must be only the
house of Preaching to them, and not the house of Prayer. The great Reason is,
that they have heard it spoken against by those whom they have accounted the
best men, and therefore they cannot be satisfied to make use of it. By the same
Reason if those Ministers had commended it, they would have liked it very well.
If this be the Reason (and I am confident there are many men, whose Consciences
tell them that it is so) what Infallibility do they attribute to their
Preachers? And what Partiality are they guilty of? For if they granted the
Ministers of the Church to be Religious men, and such as aim at the Glory of
God, and the good of men's Souls, they would for the same Reason be convinced,
that it is an acceptable Worship of God.

Some have been so weak and misled as to think Extemporary Prayers to be the
best, because they are dictated by the Spirit of God. This proceeds from a high
Opinion that some people have of their Ministers, for I never heard of any
Minister that pretended to any such Divine Inspiration.

The weakness of this Conceit has been sufficiently exposed, and therefore I
will not enlarge upon it. However I will speak something, and I hope you will
not think that I forget my Text, and lay aside a Spirit of Meekness. I have
seriously considered of it, and I can not tell of any Spirit that extemporary
Prayers come from, more than other Prayers, unless it be a Spirit of
Opposition, to the Public Lyturgy of the Church; for before that Opposition,
not only some Ministers of the Presbyterian Persuasion, but likewise some of
the Independants made use of a set Form; of which I could give particular
instances from the acknowledgments of men of both Persuasions. I may add to
this, that if extemporary Prayers were really more beneficial to the People,
and did not tend only to the gratifying of their curiosity; or to the cheating
of them by a vain conceit, that they are dictated by the Spirit of God; or that
New words when men pray are the Gift of Prayer (a new-coyn'd expression for I
find it not in the Scriptures) there are many Ministers who would Pray
extempore as well as they, and no question but use would soon make great
perfectness in it Or, if they could understand, that New words every time they
pray to God would be more acceptable to him, and tend more to the good of the
People, they would use a new Prayer every Lords Day, which the Church does not
forbid them. I must needs say, that it is a very strange Conceit, that men
should think it unnecessary, when they pray to the Great God, to bethink
themselves before hand what they shall say to him; or that it should not be a
great happiness to the People, that they have a wholesome Form prescribed them,
in the use of which they may lift up their hearts to God with great and
acceptable Devotion.

There is another Reason, why many come not into the Church till the Prayers be
done; And that is, an apprehension they have that our Prayers are taken out of
the Mass Book, and therefore this were for them to Pray as the Papists do. I
should not need to mention this, or make any Reply to it, if I could be sure
that the Books which are published for satisfaction in these cases, are perused
by those who have been dissatisfied. However I shall speak very briefly
concerning it, and with a Spirit of Meekness.

Suppose we pray as the Papists do. Nay, suppose we Pray in many things as the
Turks do, who Worship the True God, as well as we; there is no hurt at all in
it. Besides, our using the same Form of Prayer with them, can be no Disrepute
to us, or occasion of any starting from it, if we consider what our Religion
is, as it relates to the Church of Rome. It is Reformation from them, and not a
Malicious Destruction of them. Reformation must only be the excluding of that
which is bad, and the retaining of that which is good. If it were Malice or
Hatred against them, we should then indeed reject all that they do. Our
Reformers wisely and Piously considered that Peace and Communion with them, and
with all that profess Christianity, is exceedingly to be desired: But in regard
of some horrible Corruptions that were broken in amongst them, they could not
have Communion with them. For these they forsook them, and would rather dye at
the Stake, (and some of them did so) than have Communion with them.

The Faults of the Church of Rome are great enough, although we do not call
those Faults that are not; and from hence it is, that though our Divines and
other Champions of the Church, do not cry out of every thing that is done by
them, and call it Popery; yet like sober, wise, judicious and Valiant men for
the Truth, they keep their ground, and do not give an inch to the gross
Usurpations and Errors of the Papists: As the Popes Supremacy, Infallibility,
Transubstantiation, Praying to Saints, and Purgatory, etc. Let not any
therefore start at those Prayers which are wholesome Forms, but join in a holy
and devout Use of them; and instead of bearing a grudge against us for them,
let them not so much as bear a grudg against the Papists, but let us all join
together in praying to God for them as well as others, that God would bring
them into the way of Truth, who have erred and are deceived, as well as others.

3. There are some who will not hear the Prayers, much less join in the use of
them, because of the Surplice. I am almost ashamed to mention it, and I am very
sorry that people should retain such weak Prejudices. Some men plead Conscience
for absenting upon that account, which is only an argument of a very Weak mind.
I cannot call that a tender Conscience but a shy or starting conscience, or I
may call it an affrighted conscience. All the account that I think can be given
of it is, that men were scared at the sight of it when they were young, and
they never cared for coming near it since. Or, they heard of some that were
scared at it, and therefore they do not care for seeing it. If any charge us
that we place any Religion in it, I might give them a downright answer, if it
were not for a Spirit of Meekness. When sober men can think it a reasonable
thing, that Judges should leave off their Robes, and Scholars in the
University should wear no Gowns, because there are some who are offended at
them; I shall think it reasonable that Ministers should leave off their
Surplices. In the mean while I pity their sickly weak-sighted Consciences, who
cannot endure to see a white Garment; and do think that they may be numbered
amongst the frenzy ones, to whom it would be more proper to give Physic than
Arguments. Let not any therefore upon such mistakes and weak Conceits turn
their backs upon that great and solemn part of Gods Worship, from which his
House has its denomination and is called a House of Prayer, for they can never
give an account of themselves to God for so doing, unless they can imagine that
God will make their Passions and Prejudices to be his Rule of judging.

2. There are others who do not absent from the Prayers, but give very great
offense by their Unreverence at that time, when others are praying to God.
Either by siting carelessly, as if they could hear them, but they cannot join
their Devotions with others in the use of them, which is the Language of some
concerning them: And they think that it is a very great Adventure, and that
they deserve very well from the Church, for such a Compliance as this is. If
this Case be truly and rightly considered, it may make all men afraid of
enclining to the ways of Schism and Separation; for what is this but a public
Affront to God, and a manifest Contempt of that way of Worship, by which it is
acknowledged, that our Forefathers have served God acceptably, and we hope
that we do so likewise. And what a great Offense must this needs be to those
who are Religious and Devout, to see what contempt is cast upon God at the time
of his public Worship and Service, and how they are accounted but Vain and
Idle, by showing Reverence to God at the time of their Devotions. We all
acknowledge, that all Outward show of Reverence to God is Vain, and
Hypocritical, if there be not an Inward dread of God in the mind. It is for a
man to draw near to God with his Lips, when his Heart is far from him. But it
is a strange Extreme that men run into, if to avoid that Hypocrisy, there
shall be no outward show of Devotion at all. It is as if the Souls of men were
in their Bodies, like Statues, which can make no outward sign of what is within.

Yet if this were all, it would not be so offensive. If those that Kneel, or
otherwise express their Devotions in crowded Congregations, were satisfied,
that those who have Dissented, do join their hearts with them in their Prayers
to God, it would be a great satisfaction to them: But it is scarcely any breach
of Charity, (because it has appeared as well by Words, as Deportments) to say,
that they only sit with Patience, during the time of Prayers, till they can
hear the Sermon. I need not tell you, that every man has naturally so much
Reverence for that Deity, which he worships, that it is a great offense to him
to hear or see the least contempt cast upon his Religion, by Words or Actions.
This is one Reason, why Turks and Heathens will not endure Christians to come
into their public Places of Worship. They know that we despise their Religion;
and if we should go into their Temples, it would only be to gratify our
Curiosities, and that would be an Offense and a great Disturbance to them. It
were well if all those that are of other Religions, were forbidden to come into
our Congregations, that they might not see that unreverence amongst many
Christians, which we could not see amongst them, if we were in their
Congregations. If those that Worship the Gods, which are yet no Gods, are, from
a natural principle of Reverence to a Deity, so offended that they will not
endure the least contempt of their Religion? If it were such an offense to
Nebuchadnezzar, that he thought a Furnace could scarce be hot enough for those
that would not bow down to the Image which he had set up? How can men be blamed
for being offended, at those who will not join with them in showing Reverence
to him, whom they all acknowledge to be the true God?

Before I pass this particular, I would ask him that is only in Love with the
way of Worshipping God in separate Congregations, this question. Suppose that
one of those, who think they cannot serve God so acceptably any other way as in
the Form of Prayer which the Church has prescribed, should come into a
separate Congregations, and all the time that the Minister is Praying, and the
people expressing the most ardent Devotion; should sit carelessly, and rather
show his Contempt of that way than join in it; would it not be a great Offense
to you? Would you not think him to be not only irreligious but very uncivil? I
am confident you would be exceedingly offended; why then will you offend those
who are of the Churches Communion, who serve God after the Ancient way of
Christian-Worship, and that which is approved of by other Reformed Churches, as
not only Lawful, but very useful and profitable for the Souls of men.

There are others who are guilty of a far greater Offense, and they are such as
are so far from joining with others, and listing up their hearts to God with
them in their Prayers, that they spend that time in talking of Vanity, and (if
what I have been credibly informed be true) of Lies also. They make the House
of God to be the place in which they meet to reproach and slander their
neighbors. This has been so great an Offense, that some who have been their
Pew-fellowes have been exceedingly (as well they might) disturbed at it. They
do not love the Common Prayer, and therefore, that they may lose no time, they
will be serving the Devil till Prayers be done.

There is another kind of Unreverence, and that is men's having their Hats on,
all the time that the Minister is Preaching. Nay, there are some who will not
be uncovered whilst the Minister is Praying, but only remove their Hats from
one part of their heads to another, as if there might be some kind of outward
Reverence expressed to Almighty God at the time of Praying, but it is no matter
how little it be. But suppose their being covered be only at that time when the
Minister is Preaching, and suppose that there were nothing to be said to prove
that it is indecent and unreverent, (for it is not my present business to
enquire into it) yet it is the occasion of Offense? And whilst no man can plead
the breach of any Law by it, I am sure (to speak the best) it is a great breach
of that Ingenuity which Christianity requires in men, in that it gives great
offense. When men come into the Church, where they see those that are the
Frequenters of it with their heads uncovered, and they keep their Hats on, it
is hard for the most Charitable to say less than that there is thereby Contempt
cast upon those who are in another posture, and that it does implicitly accuse
them of Folly and Superstition in the service of God. I may suppose that which
must not be granted, that if there were nothing to be said for it, but that it
were an Offense purely taken and not given, yet since it is an offense and a
disturbance to the minds of men in the Worship of God, and of those men too
whom Authority does commend and countenance in so doing; He that is Pious,
Prudent and Ingenuous, will be careful that he be not the occasion of that
offense.

Thus have I showed what the Offenses are, by which the minds of men, who are
Conformable to the Church, are exasperated against those that have dissented
from her Communion, to the end that they may take all possible care to avoid
giving those offenses, and to do that which may oblige those with whom they
come to Worship God, and not offend them. If you would be treated with a Spirit
of Meekness, and are not willing to meet with any provoking Words or Actions,
you must have a care that you do not offend others.

But this is not all that I have to desire of you. Methinks it is a hard case,
if Christians shall think it enough if they give no offense, who are commanded
by our Savior to love one another, and to be one as he and his Father are one.
That which I earnestly desire is, that you would not think it sufficient, if
you sometimes come to the Church, and show some Respect to the Service of God,
but that there be a hearty and sincere Compliance, which will certainly be the
greatest Satisfaction imaginable to you, and then there will be no such
occasion for the Exercise of Meekness.

Consider I beseech you the dreadful mischiefs which Disunion and Separation
have been the cause of in our days, beyond what the Soberest of the
discontented Party ever thought of. Consider how the life of the King was
lately in danger by those, who either wholly absented from the Church, or we
are sure never received their pernicious Principles from it. Consider how
unsuccessful God has made all Attempts against the Church, when they who were
no Lovers of it had those advantages to establish another Constitution, which
they cannot now hope for.

And consider I beseech you, how infinitely it will tend to the Churches Peace,
to the Reputation of the Reformed Religion, and to the Good of your own Souls,
if you could be satisfied to forsake the ways of Separation, and have
Communion with that Reformed Church, whose Ministers and People do hate Popery,
and earnestly desire the promotion of true Holiness and Goodness, as much as
you can do, howsoever Prejudices and a Misunderstanding have been the cause of
most Unchristian Censoriousness. And it may tend exceedingly to your
Satisfaction, and avoid all occasions of Reviling and Bitterness, if these
Rules may be observed.

1. Let not Education be of any force in this matter. I know that it is a
dreadful thing for men to forsake the practice of Religion, in which they have
been educated. It is a fearful thing for those that have been brought up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, to forsake their Education, and to fall
into the practice of sin and Wickedness. But for men to make this their Rule,
as to Modes and Circumstances, and matters of Opinion in Religion, is
altogether unaccountable; because a man may as well be brought up in an Error,
as otherwise, and because he may serve God as acceptably after another manner
than that in which he has been educated.

We know that a great Cause of our Divisions has proceeded from this, that men
have been brought up in a Dislike of that way of Worship which is now
established, and have from their Cradles received Prejudices against it: But
yet there is nothing more unreasonable, than to make that to be a Rule: For if
it be, every one may conclude that to be the best Religion that comes first,
which certainly every one will grant to be very absurd. And whereas some think
they are right, because they received their Principles from those men whom they
accounted Holy and Religious: I may reply, that there is no Party whatsoever,
but have Zealots who are of a strict and severe life. The Heretics of old
could never have done so much mischief to the Church, if they had not been of
exemplary Lives. Education must therefore be wholly laid aside, and men must
consider with themselves, that if what is required of them be not repugnant to
Gods Word, and Inconsistent with true Piety and Holiness; the Churches Peace,
and the necessity of Union amongst Christians, must silence all the secret
pleadings of Education, which I know are of themselves very powerful.

Besides, if it be granted that many are educated and brought up in a false
Persuasion, and that the men of that Party, whatever it is, may be of such
unblameable Lives, that they may from thence mistake, and conclude that they
are right; I may in the next place tell you, that we of this age have the
greatest Cause, that ever any had, to suspect our Educations, because of the
many Opinions that were amongst us, when we were young, which were espoused by
men of strict Lives, and very good Conversations. I cannot therefore but highly
commend those (both Ministers and others,) who do not hang the Clogg of their
Opinions upon the Consciences of their Children, but are very willing that they
should comply with the Church of England.

2. Lay aside, or rather abandon those Prejudices which you have heard and
received, as indeed Unchristian. You have heard that the Ministers and People
of the Church of England are so scandalous, that good and holy men cannot have
Communion with them. Let me tell you with a Spirit of Meekness.

1. That it is doubtful, whether ever any age produced Ministers of greater
Eminency, both for Piety and Learning, than this has done; or whether ever any
age had Christians in it more eminent for good Works, than those which this Age
has produced, who are of the Communion of the Church of England; though they
make no noise of it. It was not long since confessed, by one who is no Lover of
the Church, that the men of her Communion do most good by their great
Liberality. I should not have mentioned this, if a false Aspersion did not make
it necessary.

It has been objected by some, that we are no True Church, because God has
not blessed the Ministry of it, with the Conversion of Souls. I pray God
convert them that say so. Those who heartily comply with the Church, may find a
very considerable number of Holy Communicants, and blessed be God for it,
Ministers have been very successful in bringing many, young Persons and others,
to Righteousness.

2. Those that are vicious, and profess a great Respect to the Church, are a
great Grief to those Pious Ministers and Christians who are lovers of the Church

3. Whereas men pretend to separate upon that account, I must tell them, That
Debauchery and Wickedness, are not so much the Cause of Divisions, as they are
the Effect of them. Deathbeds have complained, that because there have been
such Doubts which is the Right way, men have resolved to take no way but the
way of Sin and Wickedness. I appeal to any sober man in the World, whether he
does not think, that Division and Separation has been a great Cause of that
Atheism and Profaneness which has of late abounded: And I appeal to any sober
man, whether a hearty Compliance with the Church of England, (by which there
would be care taken both of young and old, by the execution of Censures against
those that are Vicious and Irregular,) would not tend exceedingly to the
restraint of Wickedness, and the promoting of true Holiness and Goodness.

Men have dissented from a Pretense, that they reap great benefit to their
Souls by it; but I am sure if they were not prejudiced, and did understand and
consider the methods of the Church of England, they would have little reason to
think that any Constitution can tend more to the good of Men's Souls. But
however men must not tear the body of Christ in pieces, pretending that they do
it for the benefit of their souls. The Church is Christ's Body, which must not
be divided upon any pretense whatsoever.

3. Consult both sides. Be as willing to hear what is said on one side, as on
the other. If men take in with one Party, and conclude that they are right, and
that continuance in their way is Perseverance, and to comply with any other
were Apostasy, which I find to be the Conceit of a great many, and therefore
they will not hear what others have to say to them; it is no wonder if men
continue obstinate and perverse. If men dealt fairly and Christianly in this
case, they should go to some Ministers of the Church, and tell them, that they
would gladly comply with them, if they could be satisfied concerning some
things which they doubt of, declaring what their Doubts are, and that they are
very willing to receive satisfaction, that they might not offend by separating
from the Church: If men did so, our Divisions would quickly be at an end. And
if they do not, they have not followed the things that make for Peace; for they
never endeavored to be satisfied concerning that which they doubted of.

There are two things which I will mention as Motives to this Compliance.
First, There are many Good and Holy Christians, who are by this means fully
satisfied, and are not only Devout in the use of the public Prayers, but
frequent Communicants at the Lords Table. Secondly, Those who are thus
satisfied, must needs have far greater Peace, than those who still continue in
the ways of Separation. They avoid outward Troubles, and whatsoever
Disturbances come to the Church or State, they are not the Occasion of them.
Their minds are not royled and exasperated as others are, but they live in
Obedience to the Laws of their King, and Lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in
all Godliness and Honesty.

I will conclude with a brief Exhortation to those that are Lovers of the
Church. You see that I have not chosen this Subject, in Favor of those that
have Dissented, but have been guilty of a long Unwonted Digression, that
whilst I am contending with you to show a Spirit of Meekness toward them, I
might speak of those things to them, with the same Spirit, which have
occasioned their offending of you; which otherwise had been very improper from
this Subject; thereby using my utmost endeavor to restore them to the
Communion of the Church. I will now renew my Request, and leave it with you
that there may be no more Complaints made, that this Spirit is wanting in you.
I will add but very little to what I have said.

1. Consider that a Spirit of Meekness is a good Reputation to the Church,
which you are Lovers of. Church of England-Men, have been Eminent for their
bearing the Reproaches of others: It is great pity that they should be accused
of Reviling others. Besides, when men give ill Words, it is a sign of a bad
Cause, and that they have but weak Arguments, and that is a disparagement to
the Church, whose Sons have kept their ground, and Valiantly encountered all
that opposed them on every side, by the force of Arguments. 2. I would add
somewhat concerning those that are come to our Congregations.
1. Consider that they are men of the best Tempers, amongst those that have
Dissented. There are others who speak as ill of us, as if we were Jews or
Pagans, that we are Enemies to Holiness, and Destroyers of men's Souls, etc. And
yet if we have opportunity, we ought to treat those men with a Spirit of
Meekness: (And I am sure, we ought to Pity them, and earnestly to Pray to GOD
for them.) Surely then it does not become us, to be unkind to those who are
less Censorious, and more Compliant. 2. Consider what these men endure from
those who are so Censorious. They write Letters, and tell them of Apostasy and
Backsliding, and many are more incensed against them, than they are against
us. It is a very hard case, that they should both suffer by us, and by them for
their beginning to comply with us. This may make them desperate, and give way
to a Temptation, to forsake that Religion, which we all contend for. 3. If we
do not treat them with a Spirit of Meekness, we shall wholly discourage the
good Inclinations of others who have dissented. If they hear that their
Brethren who come before, meet with any Repulse, they will be very loath to
follow them; who otherwise might come and help to fill Gods House, and be of
the number of those who Surround the Lords Table.
GOD of his infinite mercy grant that all Christians, whatsoever their opinions
are, may lay aside all Unchristian Passions and Prejudices: That we may follow
peace with all men: That we may not make it our business to please our selves,
but that it may be our great concern to please God in the first place, and our
Neighbor in the next: That we may not rejoice in any evil which befalls others,
but may endeavor in Christian Love and Kindness, to rectify their mistakes,
and pray to the God of Peace for his Blessing upon our endeavors, by which men
may understand the necessity of Obedience to Government in all lawful things,
that they may not suffer, but that they and we may all join together in Serving
and Worshipping God in this World, and in Singing Everlasting Praises, and
Hallelujahs to him in the World to come. FINIS.

