A Reply to a Letter Sent By William Newbery, AND William Edmunds TO DR. FOWLER.
By WILLIAM SMYTHIES his Curate.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.



THere having been a very Abusive Letter Published the last week against Doctor
Fowler (whose Eminency in the Church is well known to Wise and Judicious Men)
Subscribed only by Two of his six or seven notorious Enemies; I could not,
considering my great Obligations to him, let it pass unanswered, although I
think that it may be slighted of all Sober Men, as it is of him. Their Abuses
of Me have been so common, that I value them not; yet having this opportunity,
the World shall see how much they are to blame for Reproaching me likewise.
They tell me, that I Study but little; I am sure I shall not need to Study much
for an Answer to their Letter.

I might in the first place descant upon their mock title [Reverend Pastor]
which they give the Doctor, when they design to cast the greatest Reproaches
upon him. But I will let that pass, with all their rude Language, knowing they
are the best Expressions they have to show how much they honor our Function.

I will keep close to Matters of Fact, and not render reviling for reviling.
They first Charge the Doctor for bearing hard upon them from the Pulpit, which
only proceeds from their Guilty Consciences charging them. I would fain know
how the Doctor should discharge his Duty without reproving those Vices which he
observes some of his People guilty of, and secretly spreading; so that he
cannot otherwise prevent the Mischjef of them. But it seems they are most
Galled by that which is lately sent abroad from the Press. And I doubt not but
the Conclusion was as grievous to them and their Associates in the reading, as
the Congregation observed it to be when they heard it, though, for very good
reasons, they are silent concerning it.

I am Astonished to think how they could have the Face to mention that
Certificate, and Confess the Trapan, with which the Doctor charges them. They
say, That a great Man told them, It would shake the credit of their Loyalty:
And I suppose it was the same Great Man, to whom they accused him soon after.
But whatsoever they pretend, it appears, they had too great an opinion of their
Loyalty to desire his Certificate concerning it. All Men may see that they
desired it on purpose, that they might be credited in the Stories with which
they endeavored to do him the greatest Mischief; and that they might not be
thought to be acted by ill will against Him, who had given them such an
undeserved Character. It follows, And so we laid it aside, as a thing we were
not proud of: It was time for them to lay it aside, when they had obtained what
they designed by it. But though they say, they were not proud of it; yet (to my
knowledge) they refused to part with it, when the Doctor would have retrieved
it. Let all Men judge what name they deserve for the requital which the Doctor
had, for being so ready to Certify for Loyal-Men, when they could not have
endeavored to do him greater Mischief if they had received his Denial. It is
likewise observable, That as they afterward make a Certificate for Mr. W.
which the Doctor never gave him; so they make such a one for themselves. They
say, that He certified they were peaceable and Christian-like spirited men:
Whereas he only Certified, that for ought he knew they were such Persons. Which
words were of their own penning, as the Doctor has told them in his Preface.

They do in the next place oblige the Doctor by speaking truth: for they say,
that His Opinion is much altered since he gave them that Certificate: And all
Men in City and Country would wonder at him, if his Opinion were not altered
from that time to this. But before I proceed farther, I must ingenuously
confess, That I was the occasion of his being so imposed upon by them, and that
the Character which I had given of them, overruled his suspicion of their
being otherwise. I hope I have his Pardon, being a true Penitent for it.

As to the Satyrs, Invectives, and Comminations, which, they say, the Doctor
has vented against them in the Pulpit; Let the Congregation judge whether he
be not Egregiously Slandered, unless his general exposing of the damnableness
of the sin of Malice and Ill Will before the Sacrament, which is administered
every Sunday, be Satyrs, Invectives, and Comminations against them.

They Appeal to all that know them, and to their Consciences also, That They
never opposed the Doctor out of ill will to his Person, but only to put a stop
to his Latitudinarian Designs and Practices by a due course at Law. And I will
undertake, That the Doctor shall join with them in this Appeal to all that know
them, and are not of their Party, and to their own Consciences too, whether
they have not been for above a Year and half acted by the greatest Ill Will to
him. And whereas they pretend, That their design was only to put a stop to his
Latitudinarian Designs and Practices (which word they understand as well as I
do their Welsh Rhyme) I Challenge them, if they dare, to declare the least
Proof of his being Guilty of such Designs and Practices. They cannot forget,
that Sir Thomas Exton declared to them, in his Court, That They had not made
the least Proof of any Accusation they had brought against him. And much less
can they forget, that Sir Richard Lloyd declared the same to them in His Court,
before a great Number of People on Wednesday last. And, whereas they talk of
their proceeding against the Doctor in a due course of Law; Their many Journeys
made on that account, Proclaim the Hypocrisy of this pretense, as the Doctor
knows by sad Experience.

As to the Certificate which the Doctor gave to Mr. W. they say, that He
represented him as a truly Loyal and a Conformable Man. But I am Astonished at
their Confidence, considering, He did not Certify one title for him, more than
that he was a Constant attender upon the Prayers, and a frequenter of the holy
Communion, according to the Order of the Church, and forward to public good
Works in the Parish. The Truth of which, I am sure they cannot deny. But they
Accuse him of antique Gestures, in the time of Prayers. But the Doctor is
Confident they Slander him. It is more to be suspected, That they who thus
Accuse him, come to the Prayers, rather to be Spies upon others, than to be
Devout themselves. The Doctor has observed him so Reverently and Piously
affected at the Communion, that he seldom receives it without wet Eyes. They
accuse him of being a Dissenter, till he was Churchwarden; but I am able to
testify the contrary: For I had often given him the Sacrament before that time,
and do really think, that he was a frequenter of the Church about two Years
before; and then too, when the Conventicles were undisturbed, and had the
greatest Liberty. But they say, That he was a Soldier under Colonel Hacker;
which the Doctor or I never knew of; but, it seems, it is true: Yet, if his
Enemies had been ingenuous, they should have said, That he was likewise a
Soldier under the Command of General Monk, at the time of the KING'S
Restoration. Methinks this, and the King's Pardon, should have Dischar'd him
from being reproacht for such an old Crime, by Peaceable and Christian-like
tempered Men. As for the other Stories, which the Doctor did not know of, he is
sorry if they be true; but he must have them asserted by those that do not hate
Mr. W. before he believes them, he knowing, by Experience, how false the
Reports have been, which have been spread against himself by the same Authors.
If that which Men say in their Rage and Passion be true, one of these Men was
as well a Fifth-Monarchy-Man, as the other was a Rebel; for this was told him
to his Face in the Doctor's presence. But suppose he had known these ill things
of Mr. W. Yet, Who can blame him for Certifying what he knew to be good
concerning him? Especially, when he expressed Sorrow for what he had done, and
having had such Reproofs, that I really thought there would have been a great
Breach between them.

The next Paragraph insinuates, That Mr. Recorder obliged them to inform
against Mr. W. But one of these two Men may very well remember, That the
Recorder did expressly deny it in the Doctors hearing, so that they cannot wipe
off that charge of drinking to him, and shaking hands with him, and then making
their Complaint against him.

What a bold Affront do they offer to the King's Attorney General in the next
words? in that they plainly say, That He was persuaded to grant Mr. W. a noli
Prosequi, by great and powerful Solicitation; and consequently, that his
Hearing the whole Cause, and what these Men could say against him, was but a
Mock-business. As to that which they say of Mr. W.'s opposing their disturbing
of Conventicle-houses: the Doctor professes, That he never knew any thing of
it, nor yet of his Behavior in Guild Hall, or his being against the Ringing of
the Bells upon the 29th. of May, or his Ringing and making Bon-fires upon the
Earl of Shaftsbury's discharge by the Grand Jury, whom they call (though not
out of any ill will to his person) the Doctor's good lord and master. And no
wonder, that the Doctor should be such a stranger to these things, when he came
to live in the Parish, but the Lady Day before he gave him his Certificate; but
as to their calling Shaftsbury his good lord and master: The Doctor would have
them know, That though he Officiated one Week for his Chaplain (who was his old
Friend and School-fellow) in the time of his being Lord Chancellor, yet he was
never his lord and master. And that he was so far from being of that Lords
principles, that he has enraged him by his plain Dealing. He adventured, very
honestly, to declare his mind to him against the Bill of Exclusion, upon which
the Earl told him, He perceived what Company he kept. He was likewise so
provoked once against the Doctor, that he told him, He was not worthy to say
Grace at his Table. I must also tell these Men, That a Dignitary of the Church
of most Noted Loyalty, as also a worthy Doctor; Nay, and an eminent Prelate
likewise, can and will Testify, if there be occasion, That the Doctor had
wholly Estranged himself from that Lord (whom he very seldom waited upon) but
for their persuasions not to lose all Interest in him, because at one time or
other they thought it might be improved to the doing some good Service to
Loyal-Men; and it is known that so it was improved. And the Dean of Worcester
can satisfy all Men, That the Doctor when Phanaticism was most rampant; viz. In
the Year 1679. Published an Answer to a very Whiggish Pamphlet, much cried up
at that time: For the Dean surprised him in his Study, as he was preparing it
for the Press.

In that which follows, they fall very heavily upon my self, but after the
Doctor is good Manners, and therefore I will proceed upon their return to him.

They accuse him of making them and some others of his Neighbors a parcel of
Lewd, Vicious, Profane, Scandalous, Debaucht Fellows in private Discourses and
public Preachments, as they very mannerly call his Sermons. But I am sure I
can affirm that as to his private Discourses, they of all Men, are least
acquainted with them, and in his Preaching he hates to use any such indecent
Language. He never spares Debauchery nor Disloyalty nor Phanaticism in his
Pulpit. But when he is upon these Subjects he never reflects upon particular
Persons, so as to charge the guilt of these Vices upon any of his Hearers. The
Auditors at Coleman-Street can testify for him, to whom he Preaches the same
Sermons. But, to return to his private discourses, he is so far from delighting
to talk against his Adversaries, that nothing has discomposed him more than
when he is put upon telling of their behavior toward him. And when he has
done it, his own Vindication was that which he insisted upon. He does not deny
that, out of the Pulpit, he has charged some of them with other Vices besides
Malice, and is too well able to make good his Charge, the more is the pity.
It Is confessed that in the Conclusion of his Sermon against Slandering, he
intimated plainly, that those who carried that dreadful false story to the
Court, which occasioned his Preaching it, were some of his Auditors, and such
as sometimes received the Sacrament from him, and I suppose they little think
upon what grounds he said This.

They say that the Doctor has not Lest one Stone unturned to defame them with
Persons of Honor. But it would have saved the Doctor many Pounds in his Purse,
and prevented much disturbance to his mind, if This had not been their own
Crime. And he tells them by Me, that the greatest Defamation, they can complain
of from him, is his not concealing the Barbarous usage, which, God knows, he
has had from them. As to what follows of the Doctors disparaging of them to
their Customers: There never was any thing more false; for he professes, that
he knows not any one Person that deals with them. But it may be their having
themselves so published their restless endeavors to ruin the Doctor both in
his Reputation and Estate, may have been the occasion of loss to them, for
which they must blame Themselves, and not Him.

I come now to one of the most spiteful suggestions, that malice it self could
have invented, viz. That the first visible change of the Doctors Countenance
and Carriage toward them was upon their suppressing Six or Seven Conventicles,
and after that, upon their endeavor to purge the Vestry of some very ill Men.
Now, as to their suppressing of so many Conventicles, he cannot say, that ever
he heard of these Men's Suppressing One, tho it may be they have Many, and there
is no Divine in England but may as well be charged with being a Favourer of
Conventicles as He may. He has Written no less than four Books against the
Principles of Conventiclers, and I never heard any with greater force of
Argument, expose them from the Pulpit. Let that one Book of his, Entitled
Libertas Evangelica be consulted, which was written and Published, 1680. when
the Fanatics had the greatest Liberty, and let the Doctor be judged of by that
Book, and whether it is imaginable he should tack about to them after they were
a crushed Party. And I wonder what any Man can imagine he can promise to himself
by being a Favourer of Conventicles, considering his Promctions, unless it
could be supposed that he loves mischief for the sake of it. As to their
endeavor to purge the Vestry of ill Men, they know in their Consciences, that
this was no cause of altering the Doctors Countenance toward them, but it was
their telling that shameful untruth of him at Mr. Secretary Jenkings his
Office, viz. that he was an encourager of such People in the Vestry; and I
think he had little reason to be fond of such Men as should thus abuse him.
There is nothing better known in the Parish, than that he had not the least
hand in bringing such Men into the Vestry, and that they were chosen by the
Vestry it self, and that in the Doctors absence too, and he knowing nothing of
it. This he made to appear very fully at Mr. Recorders Chamber, when these Men
began to torment him; and likewise he expressed in my hearing the greatest
forwardness to have all such put out, provided it could be legally done after
the Act relating to Vestries was expired; and the Recorder was satisfied, that
it could not be done any otherwise but by persuading them to resign their
places. And let that Gentleman be asked whether the Doctor did not show great
industry in the management of that Affair.

As to his endeavors to hinder the Churchwardens from presenting Dissenters;
all they said is so false, that he appeals to Sir Richard Lloyd and Sir Thomas
Exton, whether the Contrary did not fully appear in both their Courts.

Whereas, they call Cripplegate a Sanctuary for Phanaticks, I am persuaded they
do not abound more there than in other great Parishes. And every body knows,
that the Greatness of Parishes is a sufficient encouragement to those People to
take Lodgings in them, especially when the Laws against them are put in
Execution.

As to the Doctors giving the Sacrament to two Excommunicated persons before
Publication, which was the only true Article of many that were exhibited
against him, and which he did not put them upon proving; these men might be
abundantly satisfied the last Wednesday in the Arches, that the Doctor had all
the reason in the world to believe, that he did Well in doing this; And that he
never used more prudence and caution in any thing that he ever did.

They mind the Doctor of suppressing an order, appointed to be published for
the Presenting of all persons that came not to the Sacrament. This was near
three years since, and the Doctor did but his Duty therein, for, as the
Instrument had no seal, so he satisfied his superiors, the night before, that
it was not fit to be read, because it would sound strangely in the Church, to
hear the Churchwardens publicly required to do a thing impossible, it
enjoining them to Present all that came not that Easter to the Sacrament; For
if these men say true, the Communicants in the Parish are no fewer than 30000.

In the Conclusion, The Doctor has a Scoff given him upon the account of two
Vindications: The First they twit him with, is his Book against Bunian. But
does it really Offend these great Churchmen, that the Doctor should Write
against such a great Phanatique, and confute his mad Principles? But that is
the business of that Book, called, Dirt wiped-off; which, by the way, would
have been a very good Title for this Reply. The Other was his Vindication of
the Demolishing the Picture of the Blessed Trinity, which the Doctor declared
to have been done by the Authority of an Act of Chapter. But whereas they
intimate, that He could bear that in the Seal, which he accounted Idolatry in
the Glass. The Doctor Answers, that Seals are never made the Objects of
Worship; and likewise, that it is very hard to discern what it is in the Seal.
But especially, that the changing of the Seal, lies not in the power of the
Dean and Chapter.

I am now to speak for my self, whom they are pleased to salute by the Name of
a Grand Informer, and a Talebearer between the Doctor and his Parishioners;
and then to tell me, that there is not a Curat in England that studies less, or
usurps more upon his Neighbors. I am sorry they are so uncharitably
censorious, as to think that I have so little regard to the peace of my own
Mind, or that they should think me so impolitick as to be a Talebearer, or the
Doctor so unworthy as to endure it. I have been so far from exasperating him
against the Parishioners, or them against him, that I challenge all Men to
produce any one Instance of it. These very Men know that I have with all
meekness and calmness, endeavored to make them sensible of their Mistakes
concerning him, as well as of their ill Dealings with him. And the Doctor knows
what I have done toward a mutual good Understanding.

That which they say of my studying so little, is very disingenuous,
considering the Concerns of the Parish to be so great, that I cannot promise to
my self the freedom of one Hour in a day, from the necessary performance of my
Ministerial Offices abroad. If they could have charged me of frequenting ill
Houses, or keeping ill Company, I know they would not have spared the divulging
of it.

I know not what they mean by my usurping upon my Neighbors. I challenge them,
and all Men, to produce one Instance of my doing any Man a wilful Injury, or
denying the worst Enemy I have any reasonable Courtesy. It has been a great
satistisfaction to me, when any of my Enemies have recommended poor People to
me, that, by my relieving of them, it might appear I had no Piques against any
Man, but that whatever I said which might offend them, proceeded from the
discharge of a good Conscience.

That which follows next, relates to my Sermons upon Restitution, and the
occasion of them; in which they cast a very false Aspersion upon me.

The true Account of that Business is as follows.

About nine Years since, I was desired to visit a poor Man who was dying of a
Consumption. He desired my Prayers, and that I would give him the Sacrament.
Upon examination of his past Actions, he acknowledged that he had exceedingly
wronged a great many Tradesmen, but had nothing to restore, having very little
besides the Bed he lay on. I desired him to send to the injured Persons his
Confession, and beg their Forgiveness. To which he replied, that if he should
tell them what he had done, they would tear him out of his Deathbed. I
proffered to secure him from his Fears, promising, That if he were arrested, I
would take care of Bail for him, for I knew that Death would bring the first
Execution. I was very desirous to visit those whom he had wronged, and to treat
with them on his behalf; but he would not discover them. I was so tender of
him, because of his desire to receive the Sacrament, that I consulted with two
of the most eminent Divines in the City; who were of opinion that I ought not
to give it him; and soon after he died without receiving it:

Upon this, I consess, it was that I preached upon Restitution: but whereas
they say that I was offended at the poor Man, I do not know that ever I saw him
before that time; nor do I remember that he gave me the least occasion of
offense, nor was it possible for me to take any from a Man in that condition.
And whereas they say, that I denounced Damnation against Usury, Extortion, and
Oppression, the World shall shortly judge of it; for I have a Treatise of
Restitution now in the Press, which contains all that I said in the Pulpit, (as
any Man may judge, by comparing the Book with my Notes) with a very large
Addition to it; and I pray God it may do as much good as the Sermons did.

I know no reason they have to compare me to Muggleton, or to tell me of
damning People from the Pulpit. The Subjects of Charity, the Sacraments, and
Instructions of Youth, are those which I have chiefly insisted upon; and I am
sure they cannot say, that I choose Texts on purpose to preach Damnation, for
they know my usual way is, to proceed in a Chapter from Verse to Verse; and
they cannot accuse me of fixing upon any that might lead me into such
Discourses. If any serious religious Person shall tell me wherein I am to blame
in my Sermons, I will thank them, and amend; but in the mean while, the
frequent Thanks which I have had from dying persons for my Sermons, (how broad
and coarse soever they are) are such an encouragement to me, that a thousand
Revilers shall never trouble me.

But now comes my great Charge: By my Slanders and Calumnies (they say) I have
diverted the Charity of diverse good Benefactors, and gotten the Money into my
own hand, of which I give no account.

In the first place; I would know to whom it is that I must give the Account?
And when they have told me that, I will produce it, and show how I have
disposed of all that ever came into my hands, for I have the Persons Names and
Places of abode. If Authority commands it, or any Benefactor desires it, I am
ready to give them satisfaction. But I suppose these Men know that there was a
most vexatious Contest (carried on at the Charge of the Poor) before I came to
the Parish; which discouraged Benefactors (as well it might) from giving Money
into the Officers Hands. And yet my disposing of that which was committed to my
Care and Conscience, has been the occasion of such Fewds and Malice, as I hope
the World cannot parallel. They need not be so much offended at me now, for the
great Benefactors are dead, by whose Charity, I am sure, I have kept some
hundreds from perishing, and I have comparatively, but very little to dispose
of.

Whereas they charge me of Calumnies: All that they can truly allege is, That
I did severely reprove those who imbezell'd the Poors Money in
Drinking-meetings; and that misspent some hundreds of Pounds of Donation-mony,
given by deceased Benefactors: The truth of which I am yet able to testify, and
do wish that it may be referred to the Commissioners for Charitable Uses,
whether I have been blameworthy.

They charge me of increasing the number of the Poor, by bringing them out of
other Parishes into theirs. To which I Answer, That when they can bring the
Officers of other Parishes to tell me, that their Poor are decreased by my
means, I will give credit to them. If these Men knew what belonged to
ingenuity, they would have acknowledged, that as I have received several Sums
into my own hands, so I have procured some hundreds of Pounds (by public
Collections) to be paid into the hands of the Officers, more than they received
before I came into the Parish.

My next Accusation is, my Project of a Nursery for poor Children.

It Is very true, that I had such a Project, and there was a greater number that
I took care of than they mention. And had it not been for the peevish and
envious Dispositions of some People, it had been one of the greatest Advantages
to the Parish that ever they received.

I proffered to make it appear, that I took off Eighty Pounds Charge from the
Parish in one Year; and considering how many Persons of Quality, and others,
have sent to me since to take off Children; I am sure there had been but very
few, except those that are very little Ones, but had been well disposed of.
Those Children who were fit to work, were employed, because I knew that it was
in vain to put them to School, who must be taken from it, and put to Trades,
before they could know their Letters; but the Younger were kept to Learning,
and some of them made good proficiency. Whatsoever Money I took for them, I laid
out in Clothes and Provisions, and never trusted their Nurses, lest they should
want. It Is true, that I took the Parish Pay, because I knew that Benefactors
did not give me Money to discharge their Rates. Whoever took notice of them as
they went to Church, knew they were Clothed by my Care, but not at my Charge;
and I would fain know whether the Children should not go to Church because of
that notice? It seems I am obliged to them, for not accusing me of appointing
the Nurse to hang a Clog upon some Children that were unruly, which I thought
might reclaim them without being beaten.

But there is a very wicked Suggestion at the end of that Paragraph, That some
of them dying, it was not thought convenient to give the Searchers the view of
them.

To which I answer; That I never concerned my self about Searchers; it was
their own fault if they did not do their Duty. The two Children they mention,
died (about 7 Years since) of Consumptions; and I am told, by the Nurse, that
one of them was not searched, which I knew nothing of. I think it was a Child
that was little less than an Idiot, for which I had great pity; and I do not
believe that it ever received the least stroke after it came to my Care. They
talk of a Court of Justice, and one of them says, that there is Affidavit made
before one or more Justices of the Peace, that the Child was not searched. It
may be they intend, when the Nurse and others that can testify concerning the
Child's Death are dead, to try if they can fix an Accusation against me, by
which they may try me for my Life. It was very well, that at the end of this
Paragraph they did not think of saying, they had no Malice or Ill Will against
me, as they said elsewhere concerning the Doctor. In short, I desire no
blessing from the great God of Heaven and Earth, (whose Minister I am) to my
self and numerous Family, but according to my faithfulness in that which has
been committed to me for the Poor. Nor do I desire that my own dear Children,
when I am dead, should ever be committed to the Care of those who will be more
tender and saithful than I was to the poor Children. It was great satisfaction
to me, not long since, to hear that one of my Enemies said, he believed, That I
endeavored, by my Preaching to save Men's Souls. And that another, when he took
occasion to revile me, said, That he believed I was faithful in the
distribution of other Men's Charity.

The next Paragraph, desires the Doctor, as he values his Credit, and theirs,
not to be led (by me) into uncharitable Mistakes. I do not think the Doctor is
very ambitious that his Credit and Theirs should be Companions. But it seems
that his Mistakes are uncharitable by my means. How far I have been from doing
ill Offices, I have already mentioned, and I am sure, if need be, the Doctor's
Deathbed will acquit me from any such Guilt. But it is an odd conceit, that
they should charge him of uncharitable Mistakes: As if such a shameful
Prosecution, as I believe was never heard of in any Age, their putting him to
so vast a Charge, for doing what he did, by the best Advice and Direction,
(which these Men acknowledge they did believe) and what many other Ministers
had done by the like Advice: Their disregarding our Savior's Command, of
telling him his Fault in private, and falling upon him on a sudden and
unexpectedly, was in kindness to him and his Family; and he would have taken it
so, if his Curat had not led him into an uncharitable Mistake. It Is mighty
probable!

Then it follows, Curats do not behave themselves so in other Parishes; and it
is hard for Cripplegate to be the only Curat-ridden Parish in London. I can
scarcely forbear a merry Answer to this. The Curat was a Rector many Years in a
considerable Living, where he has the respect of all the Parish to this day.
And he was a Curat in a Parish in London before he came to Cripplegate, in
which he heartily concerned himself for the Poor, and yet the Parishioners were
not offended at him, unless it were for leaving them: But it seems Cripplegate
is Curat-ridden. I do not think there is one of many hundreds that will join in
that complaint. It is a Parish for which he has a most sincere Affection, and
will have till his Death, if he should remove to morrow, and never come more
into it. But I must say, if one of them be ridden, it is the Curat, for I am
sure he is very lean, and tires almost every day under his Burden, tho he is
very far from repining at it. But these Jockeys cannot be contented, unless
they ride the Curat and the Doctor too.

There is one notorious Falsehood which came late into their Minds, as appears
by their placing it: That I concerned my self in the choice of Common Council
Men; which I once before denied in Print, and now do it the second time, and
challenge any Man, that uses to speak Truth, to charge me of one word that
ever I spoke to any Man by which it might appear. This is as true, as that I
sold the Keys of Pews in the Church, which never entered into my thoughts. Or,
that I lost the favor of the Bishop of Glocesier; whereas he was pleased to
send many miles for me to attend him upon his Deathbed, and preach his Funeral
Sermon. Or, that I was parted from my Wife; which the supposed Penman of the
Letter, with others, was pleased to publish, when there was not the least
absence, nor so much as one angry word, that might be the occasion of that
Report. And I do bless God for it, few were ever united in that Relation, who
delight more in the Society of each other. I might mention a great many more,
but that I am so used to be slandered by these, and a few other such Men, that
my Innocence will not suffer my Memory to stand charged with them.

There is one thing I omitted in its due place, viz. That the Churchwardens
who refused the Oath, were of the Doctor's bringing in, is as great an untruth
as ever they told: for the Doctor professes, that, as to the best of his
remembrance, he never held up his hand for any one Churchwarden; so he spoke
to no one to give his Voice for either of these; and that he never heard of one
of them, before he was nominated for the Office, nor remembers that there was
one word of Objection then against him. But as for the other, whereas they say
he never received the Sacrament before he was excommunicated, the Doctor
declared in the Court that it is false, and that for about, or above a year
before, he several times received it at his hands, and that he took him for as
honest a Man as any in the Parish, tho he had once been a Dissenter.

Another thing worthy to be observed, is, That one of these Men, viz. Mr. N.
never made it his endeavor to get the Vestry purged, till it was carried
against the admitting of him; and then immediately he bestirred himself to be
revenged upon those who, he was told, were for keeping him out; so far was his
pretended zeal for the Government, the Motive by which he was acted in so
doing. And when he and his Companion went about to get Hands to their Petition,
they never acquainted the Doctor with it. And whereas, they call the ill Men of
the Vestry the Doctor's Party; as he was over impartial, and would side with no
Party against the reason of his Mind, as he has declared to them; so he stiffly
opposed that Party that opposed Mr. N's being a Vestry-man, (they know likewise
that I was extremely troubled at it); and this was the only ill Thing, if it
were so, that the worst of them ever did in the Vestry in the Doctor's Time.
But as for him, whom he now makes the very worst of these Men, no Man was for a
long time greater with him than he was. In short, I desire it may be taken
notice of, that the Doctor declared in the Court, last Wednesday, That if good
proof could be made, of his showing undue Favor to any one Dissenter, he will
forfeit his Living of S. Giles Cripplegate. And further he declares, That there
is no Dissenter in his great Parish, he can call to Mind, to whom he is obliged
for the worth of one Farthing, except one who gave him once a Book, and a
Trifle not worth refusing, but never desired the least kindness of him. And he
believes there is no Divine in London, from whom the Dissenters of his Parish
do more estrange themselves, than those of Cripplegate have ever done from him.
And he is confident, that hardly two of them come at him in a Twelvemonth,
upon any other Account, than the Business of Conformity.

I will conclude with a few words of Seasonable Advice.

1. Let no Man charge the ill-dealings of these Men with the Doctor, upon the
Parish of S. Giles Cripplegate; for I verily believe, that where he has one
Enemy, he has a thousand Friends in it. It has in one respect proved well for
him, in that he hears every day, how great numbers of his People (such as
cannot be accused of Disloyalty or Phanaticism) are enquiring for his happy
deliverance cut of his Enemies hands, I do not think that any Minister could be
more happy in the Love of his Parishionets, than he would be, if six or seven
Men lived elsewhere. 2. Let none be discouraged from Conformity to the Orders
of the Church. I hope such vexatious Persons being in her Communion, will not
hinder the Compliance of those that have dissented. Thanks be to God, there are
a very great number of very pious Church-of- England Communicants in the Parish
of Cripplegate, whose Communion may be very delightful to all good Christians.
3. Let every one consider the unhappy Consequence of Miscarriages in
Parish-Affairs. Few Ministers ever came to the Service of a Parish more desired
than I was. Few Ministers have been more serviceable to any Parish, than I have
been to this; and I am sure, no Minister could ever come with greater desire to
do Good. But the vexatious Contests, which were carried on at the Charge of the
Poor, and continued after my coming: The misimploying the Poors Money, by which
many Donations of deceased Benefactors (of which I do not charge these Men) are
utterly lost, were Things which I could not forbear showing my abhorrence of:
And That has occasioned such an hatred against me, as has put some few Men,
for the space of ten Years, upon all endeavors of being injurious to me; and
now to the Doctor for my sake. But I can easily look at the Providence of God,
and acknowledge that these things are good for me. For my Labor (though every
one knows it to be great) is so pleasant to me; the Opportunities of doing good
so delightful; and the great Respect of the Doctor on the one hand, and of an
Attentive and Pious Congregation on the other, so encouraging, that my Cup
would be too sweet, if God did not permit my causeless Enemies a little to
embitter it. How long these things will continue, I cannot tell, nor what
Enemies there are that design the next Mischief. However, I am resolved to
publish no more such Vindications, and that in Obedience to my Superiors, who
think what is published, more than was necessary, for the clearing of their
Reputations, whose Behavior and Conversations are too well known for their
good Names, to be made considerable Sufferers by these Men; who have made
themselves to be taken notice of by nothing so much, as by their great Enmity
and Ill Will to them.
They have of late had too much leisure from their honest Callings; and it is
to be hoped, that there will shortly be that increase of Trade, which will find
them other Business, than to be vexatious and reproachful to their Ministers,
who would be glad to hear of the change of their Natures, and that they take
more care of the Salvation of their Souls. I can, and do call God to witness,
that I ever had a sincere kindness for these Men; and that from a true respect
to them, it has grieved me to see these Miscarriages: But I will never be
afraid, in my Sermons, to show the Evil of any Sin which I see prevailing, tho
it should offend all the Friends I have in the World. It would be an
unspeakable satisfaction to me, if they; and some others, would consider what
causeless Enemies they have been to the Doctor, and do that which may tend to a
hearty Reconciliation, which they know he has exceedingly endeavored.

This, and all Happiness to them, is unfeignedly desired by W. SMYTHIES.
December. 14. 1685.
London, Printed for John Southby, at the Harrow in Cornhil. 1685.


