AN EPISTLE To all the CALLED AND Chosen of God.

BY William Smith.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

An Epistle to all the Called and Chosen of GOD.
Dear Friends,
IN the deep Sense of that living Voice, which has called you out of Darkness,
to the Light of Life; there is something upon me to communicate unto you, for
the furtherance of your Faith and mutual Joy, and for the Settling and
Establishing your Hearts and Minds in the Power of the Gospel of Christ, which
has been, and still is preached unto you for Life and Salvation; that as the
Lord has called you by his Heavenly Voice, so you may all obey from your
Hearts that blessed Doctrine, which by his Holy Spirit has been plentifully
held forth amongst you, unto Conversion, Edification and Comfort; that through
your Obedience you may witness the Lord to make choice of you, as a peculiar
People, to show forth his Praise, and so make your Calling and Election sure,
For though many may be called, yet if they do not obey from the Heart that
Spirit by which they are called, they may not be chosen; and so a Profession of
Truth may be held out of the Life and Power of it; and you cannot but know what
all Professions are, out of the Life and Power of Truth; For when you were
seeking after God in bare Professions, you could not find true Satisfaction to
your Souls; but were cumbred about many things, and wanted One Thing that was
only needful; and now the Lord in his Mercy has enlightened you with his true
Light, in which you see the many things, and their emptiness, and are come to
know One Thing, which is the Fullness, and in which ye have all Life, Power and
Blessings; and so far as ye are come to witness the Substance, ye have the true
savor of good Things in one Thing, where all is contained; and it is the Love
of God unto you, that has so disposed your Hearts toward himself, and as a
Cord has drawn you out of things below, which are changeable, to a feeling of
that which is Immortal, and never changes; and as the Love of God is the
ground of your change from things below into things that are above, so it is a
safe and sure Foundation for you to stand upon; for in it self it does not
admit of any Alteration, but is always firm and sure in its own Nature and
Life; and as ye are fastened to it, and stand upon it, you will find it to be a
Rock of Strength unto your Feet: And what can be more desirable to you, then
the Thing that ye have sound, the Thing which in it self is of an Immortal
Nature, and yields Immortal Riches? can you fix your Eye upon any thing among
the many things, or upon all the many things, to desire after any one or all of
them? Can you part from your Foundation, which is sure and safe, and is a Rock
of Strength to your Feet, to join or close with any thing, or things, which are
of a lower degree in nature and quallity? Oh! no, my Friends, your Safety is to
stand in that which is safe in it self; yea, to stand in the Light, where the
Love of God first reached unto you, and by which ye have felt the greatness of
his Power working in you; in that is your safety, as being safe in it self: For
you may be tried with an Hour of Temptation, but as you stand in the Light and
Power of God, ye will overcome it, and so you will feel the Rock to be Strength
to your Feet, that they may not (...)* and by the mighty Power of God you will
be kept, as ye stand and abide in it, and the Hour of Temptation will pass over;
and so you will not fall into Snares to be entangled, but walk in the pleasant
Path of Life to you endless Comfort: For what were your days when ye were
cumbred about many things? Were they not full of Trouble, Grief and Sorrow? Did
not the Seed Mourn whilst ye were professing God in that nature, which gloried
in Appearance only? And did you not ten go a a People bowed down under the
Bondage of Corruption And were not many of you in that time cast down, as a
People without Hope? and were you not brought to lay your Hands upon your
Loins for very feebleness? And was there not a secret Cry, That the Lord would
appear, and show you his Salvation; and that he would guide and direct you in
the Way where you might find his Presence? And how wonderfully did God appear
for you in that great Straight as having regard to the Cry of the Poor and the
Sighing of the Needy? And how did he manifest his Light in you, to give Light
unto you? And did he not then send forth the Messengers of his Covenant in the
Spirit of first born among many Brethren? And did not those Messenger declare
the Way of God's Salvation to you, and sounded Glad-tidings in your Ears? Did
they not instruct you into the Way of Life, Peace and Truth, and preach the
Light to be the Way that leads unto God? And was not their Message a faithful
Testimony, that reached the Faithful Witness in every Conscience, and so
labored to bring all to the Witness in themselves? And when this Glad-tidings
was sounded in your Ears, and that your Ears heard, and your Hearts believed;
did you not begin to see the emptiness of all other pretended Messengers, and
came to a feeling of God's Witness in your own Consciences, and so came to know
the Thy(...) reprovable, and to learn of that which reproved? And did not the
Lord herein show great Kindness unto you, that when you were as a People
without Hope in a wearied Condition, then to appear to manifest the Way of
Life, wherein you might find Rest to your Souls? And has not the Lord now
showed you a pleasant Path, where Mercy and Truth meets together, and where
Righteousness and Peace embrace and kiss each other? Oh! never to be forgotten
Mercies, but worthy to be had in Everlasting Remembrance: And ye are happy that
keep in remembrance the Days and Times past, wherein God has showed you
Favor; for thereby you come to feel his Love, Mercies and Favors to be more
enlarged unto you; and as ye are come out of the many things, and have found
One Thing to be the chiefest, so all mind to keep it as a Pearl of great Price:
For ye have found the Lord's Christ, and the Lord's Christ is become your
Strength, and Stay, and Salvation; and this is very weighty to be felt upon
every ones Heart, That the Living God has revealed his Son in you, and that ye
know him to be the Lord's Christ; this is that alone in which your Peace and
Felicity stands immutable, and is of far greater worth and value then the
many things: And as in the Light ye have found the Riches and Treasures of an
Endless Life, even so to keep in the Light; and keep your Possession, and be
not drawn out with any Whimsical Fancies and Conceits to lose your Possession;
it is the Word of the living God unto you all: For the Lord has showed great
Kindness unto you, that ye might glorify him in your Bodies, Souls and
Spirits, as being his, and so to Honor the Lord in all things, for the
exceeding Riches of his Kindness toward you: for it is required of all, unto
whom the Lord has showed Kindness, that they be found faithful, and so to
behold the Lord in his goings, and go with him, then all will know the things
that concern their Peace, and things by which they may edify one another, and
so be a Help and Comfort one to another, even as God is a Help and Comfort unto
them: For, how wonderful is the Work which the Lord has wrought for you in
Egypt, and bringing you out of Egypt, and carrying you through many Trials, and
delivering you from many Enemies; for the Deliverer is come to open the Prison
Door, and set the Captive at Liberty; yea, he is come who has all Power in
Heaven and Earth, Christ Jesus, the great Deliverer, the only Savior,
Preserver, Sanctifier, and Justifier; and ye that know his coming, ye are
Witnesses of the greatness of his Work, and of his Power, Might and Strength in
working; and so ye are sensible into what Root ye are planted by the Right hand
of the Almighty; and ye know that ye spring up in his Life, as his Offspring,
and that the Pluckers cannot pluck you out of his Hand; for all have been
plucking at you, but cannot pluck you out of the Hand of your Planter; and so,
he that has planted you into his Life, he keeps you from being plucked out of
it; and it is his great Mercy unto you, in that he has planted you into such a
blessed Root, and raised you up into it, and keeps you from being plucked out
of it; here he gives unto you eternal Life, that ye should no perish, but live
forever; and so he has chosen you, and ordained you to bring forth Fruit, and
that your Fruit should remain; for Christ Jesus keeps you by his Power in your
Plantation, and none can pluck you out of your Plantation. Therefore all abide
in him, who is not of the World, but has chosen you out of the World; yea, I
say, abide in him and your Fruit will remain, and will not be shaken and
spoiled with Storms and Tempests, and so you will flourish like the Palm Tree,
and grow like the Cedars in Libanon: for you that trust iu the Lord and whose
Hope the Lord is, you are as Trees planted by the Waters; and that spread out
their Roots by the Rivers, and shall not see when heat comes, but their Leaf
shall be green, and shall not be careful in the Year of Drought, or in the Year
of Restraint, neither shall cease from yielding Fruit: And so the Almighty God
has chosen you in this day to bear the fruits of Righteousness in his
Righteous Life, and by that Fruit ye honor the God of your Salvation, who
keeps you in his Life from being plucked out. And so all live in the Faith,
which in the Power of God ye have received; keep in the Power that is able to
keep you unto the End, and so by Faith get Victory over the World, and please
God; and add to your Faith Patience, that ye may not think the time long in
which your Faith is trying: for the trying of your Faith works Patience, to
bring forth Fruit; therefore let Patience have its perfect work, that ye may be
entire, lacking nothing; and as ye have purified your Souls in obeying the
Truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned Love of the Brethren, so let your Love
be continued as in the beginning; for Brethren, that keep the Faith, they
labor in the Love, which edifies the Body; and as ye love the Brethren that
keep the Faith, there will be no entertainment for the Grudger and Evil
Surmizer; for where that spirit is entertained, it corrupts the mind with Evil
Thoughts and Self-Conceits, and that runs into Self-Separation, Division and
Distraction; but as ye walk in the Light you will feel the Love over all such
things; and so love the Brethren, and one another unfeignedly, and that is your
Strength, by which the Power of Darkness is to be overcome; for Unity in the
Unfeigned Love is the Strength of the Body, and so it is a complete Body under
the Rule and Government of Christ Jesus the Head; and he in all things has the
pre-eminence unto whom all belongs.

And all walk worthy of the tender Mercies which God has largely manifested
unto you; and take heed of giving or taking any Occasion of Offense, but all
mind your own Conditions and Concernments; and let none be Wise in their own
Eyes, but look upon themselves with that Eye which can prefer another; for the
lowly Mind, that keeps in the Light, is preserved in the Love that thinks no
ill, and in Love is ready to serve, and does not seek to be a Master; for if
such a thing does at any time arise, Offenses are at hand, and that does much
hurt as it is put in practice; therefore all avoid such things, by living in
the True Simplicity and Peaceable Wisdom, that ye may all keep the Faith that
works by Love, and edifies the Body; and so all will live as Brethren, in a
faithful Testimony to God's Glory, and there his Presence will be with you, and
your Joy will be full.

And all keep down to the Power that keeps in the Life, that all your words may
savor of Life; for the words of Life are Gracious words, by which Grace is
ministered to the Hearers; but where words swell above the Life, they only
influence upon the Affections, which draws out of the Peaceable and Quiet
Habitation, and from feeling the weighty Life in its Resurrection, and all such
Motions run whirling about in the Air, and that stirs up Tempests, where all
are tossed about with Wind and Waves: Therefore all wait to be stayed with the
Power of God, which is the Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast. For when
the Life rises, it rises with weight, and all that rise in the Life, they are
sound and weighty; for, they stand in the center of Life, and are moved by the
motion of it; and there all are preserved in Wisdom and Understanding, and are
always nourished with the Nourishment that in the Life is present, and so are
always living and fruitful in a certain state; and here all come to be kept in
the true Tenderness and Sweetness, out of all Flattery and Feignedness; for the
Affections move uncertainly, and never do establish any in their goings, but
sometimes will appear as living in the highest degree, and then again will fall
and dye, and be as nothing; and that is an uncertain State, where none can
stand sure: therefore all mind the Life, and the weighty savory words of Life,
that with the Life every one may be truly refreshed, comforted and stablished.

Oh Friends! Be ye all watchful to the Heavenly Light, to be preserved in the
feeling of Eternal Life, that ye may all follow the Lamb in his goings, and not
go into any thing that is contrary to him; for that draws a vail over the
Life, and obstructeth the Virtue, and then the pettish part is ready to be
exceptious, and streighten the Life, and the Unity in it, and so the evil Eye
comes to be opened, and the Whisperer and Reporter to be let at liberty, and
then the Enemy works into parties, to spoil the Heritage of God; and it is set
much upon me by the Spirit of the Lord to warn and exhort all Friends, To be
very circumspect in all their ways, and to keep to the Light, by which they
were first convinced, and in which true Love abounds, that none may run out,
and grieve the Spirit of the Lord, and bring Grief one upon anothet, but all
keep in the good Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace, and so all
will understand what to join unto, and what to stand at a distance from; for a
good Understanding keeps good Order, and they that have attained to it, they
speak with the Spirit and with an Understanding, and pray with the Spirit and
with an Understanding, and sing with the Spirit and with an Understanding, and
with the Spirit and with an Understanding God is glorified; and unto his
Blessed Name and Power be Glory forever, Amen.

And Friends, Be very mindful in all things wherein you are concerned, to
answer the Lord in Obedience and Faithfulness to the End, that your Hearts and
Minds may be constant to persevere in the Way of Godliness, that in the Light
you may feel the Strength and Power of Life, to do the Will of God; and so the
Lord will keep you in his Way, as a People that are ordered and disposed in his
Counsel, and you will be as a Holy Generation, and a Royal Priesthood, to offer
a living Sacrifice of Praise upon his own Altar: For the Lord is exceeding good
to all that faithfully love him and serve him; he is nigh to help them wherein
his Name and Truth is concerned; for his Power is as the Wings of an Eagle* and
where his Power bears up, there is no fainting, but a Faithful Continuing
with Joyfulness, to serve Him unto the End.

Therefore, all keep in the Light, which the Messengers of the Covenant first
preached unto you, and by which your Hearts were touched and turned unto God;
abide in that, as being the one and only in which the Love, Life, Spirit, Power
and Wisdom of God rests; for all rests in the Light, and in the Light all
comes to be witnessed in one Nature and Being: and whatsoever would draw your
Minds from the Light, under any Color or Pretense, let it not prevail over
you, but stand in the Light, and resist it as your Enemy: For, as the Light is
only true, so there is to be an abiding in it; for all that go from it, to find
any thing true above it, they err from the Faith, and wrong themselves; or, who
go from the Light, to embrace the World, they enter into the House of Bondage;
and where the Enemy so prevails over any, it is because there is not
Faithfulness to the Light, For, if there be Faithfulness to the Light, the
Wiles of the Enemy are discovered, and Dangers prevented; for the Light lifts
up it self as a Standard against the subtle Worker: And so with the Light the
Faithful are preserved in their Faithfulness, to walk with God, and do his
Will, and there they grow in Grace and Godliness, by which the Truth is
Honored.

And herein the great Love of God is manifest to all the Faithful, who are
indeed his Chosen, and unto whom his Arm is stretched forth for their
Preservation; he only is the God of their Salvation, and in his Life he causes
all his tender Plants to grow, and with his Virtue he gives them Nourishment,
to make them live and be fruitful; yea, it is He, and none Else, he whose Name
endures forever; and all that wait upon him his Grace falls upon them:
Therefore trust ye in Him, whose Name is, I am, The Lord Strong and Mighty, The
Everlasting Immortal God, The Power that is able to subdue all things to it
self, by which ye may all feel the Resurrection of the Immortal Seed, and of
the Seed to be born again, and so as Heirs of Life to inherit Life, and in Life
to live, that the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and Ending, may be your Rest:
And as ye all dwell in the Light, you will be sensible of the Drawings and
Leadings of his Hand since the Day in which he first Appeared to you, and how
he has driven back Enemies before you, and brought you forward into a Wealthy
Place; yea, a Place where ye have found durable Riches: and keeping in the
Weighty Power you will have a weighty Life, and so be found as such that walk
worthy of the Vocation, unto which God has called you; and there you will know
the goings on from one degree of Godliness to another, unto the Perfect State
in Christ Jesus, and so you will not hastily fly up into the Air, but learn
your Goings by degrees, and walk safely, and there your Way will be pleasant to
you, and your Reward a Crown: for, who overcomes, the Lord will Crown; the
Overcomers must wear the Crown, as a Token of their Victory over all things
contrary to Truth and Purity, and also, as their Glory before him who sets the
Crown upon their Head; and such Honor have all the Saints: And so in the Power
of God all get Victory, and Overcome, that ye may wear the Crown.

And all be mindful wherein ye are concerned one toward another in all things,
that the Peace of God in all your Hearts may rule, and that the pure Movings of
God's Power ye may all know in your Understandings, that every one may know
their going forth and coming in as the Power orders, and then the Order will
be kept, and not broken; for if the true Power be not understood in its
Movings, but that another thing moves and acts, that thing breaks the Order;
and none do keep the Order of the Gospel, but who live in the Power and
understands the Motion of it; and so all are to wait upon God, to understand
his Counsel and do his Will, and not follow their own Counsel, and do their own
Wills; for, if any do so, they will run into Confusion, and come to nothing;
but who stand in the Counsel of the Lord, and do his Will, they serve him in
the order of his own Life, by which he has Glory: And so all is to be kept
down with the Power, that nothing may be seen or heard but the pure Seed in its
own pure Life, and then you will feel what the Lord makes up to himself, and
what he casts out, that must not come within the Borders of his Land, nor
within the Gates of his City, nor within the Doors of his Household and Family;
but is separated and cast out, as an unclean thing, which with his Jewels he
will not make up; For it is in the Seed that he planteth, and builds, and
makes up his Jewels; and so he fitly frames his Building together, and i^ Him
it grows unto an Holy Temple, and there is the Habitation of God through his
Spirit; and so the House is built upon the Rock, and not upon the Sand; and the
Household are fed with Bread of the finest Wheat, and not with Husks and Chaff;
and he is Lord and King in his own House, to Rule, Order and Govern his
Household; and his Household live in Order, and not in Confusion, and here ye
will all have Rest and fullness of Joy.

Therefore, be Faithful to the End in all things, that ye may Serve, Worship
and Honor the God of all Power and Greatness, that by your Faithfulness his
Power and Greatness over all the Earth may be exalted, and his Name set above
every Name in its own Excellency.

And so, in every good Word and Work be ye all Fruitful, and walk in a Holy and
Blameless Conversation; that he, who is Life, may be known to be the ROOT and
TREE by the Fruit of Righteousness, who is to Day as Yesterday, and the same
for ever.

And Friends, Be Careful to Honor God in all things; for he Honors those
that Honors him: And take heed that none Dishonor God by fond Affections
one toward another; for if any go fondly together upon the account of
Marriage, they Dishonor God, and hurt themselves: And none to be busy in
making Motions between Party and Party, or to persuade any to change their
Conditions, in which they themselves are satisfied to continue and abide; but
let every one feel the Truth in themselves, and the Movings of it in their own
Hearts, to dispose them in such a Weighty Concernment, and then the Ordinance
of God will be known in the Covenant of Life; and such a Marriage will Honor
God, as being Honorable in the Undefiled Seed.

And all keep your Judgment in the Power, Life, and Wisdom that judges
Righteously, that you may be able to discern and try spirits, whether they are
of God; and let no fair Show or Appearance out of the Life come over you to
vail your Judgment and Discerning, nor no feigned Love or Humility sway your
Affections; for if any let in such things, by letting out themselves to comply
or join with them, they will let Darkness over their Judgment, and lose their
Judgment, and then they cannot put a Difference between the Precious and the
Vile in a sound Judgment, and so may be taken and snared with a smooth formed
spirit in Carriage or Words. Therefore all be mindful and careful to keep Sound
Judgment, that not any thing, contrary to the Spirit and Life of God, may come
over you; but keep the Judgment of Truth upon all, and set true Judgment over
all; and do not set a Bias upon your Judgment, to turn or wrest you aside in
Judgment; but all Judge in Truth and Righteousness, in which you will also feel
the Mercy.

And all keep in the Stayed Sollid Life, and let not your Minds run after New
Things, to draw you from the Sound and Weighty Truth which you have seen, and
heard, and believed, but what is manifested unto you, either by Word or
Writing, let the Heavenly Truth be Received, and Embraced, and Lived in, and
none to run after new things to forget the old; and so you will all keep in
mind the Sound and Wholesome Doctrine, which has plentifully been delivered by
Faithful Brethren, both by Word and Epistle; and the Doctrine will abide and
remain in you, and you will abide and remain in the Doctrine: For, the
preaching of the Grace of God by Jesus Christ is the Sound and Wholesome
Doctrine, which all are to receive and believe; and whether it be preached by
Word or Epistle, it settleth and establishes the Heart and Mind of those that
receive it, and believe in it; and they come to grow in Grace, which is the
Doctrine preached unto them, and by them received and believed: And so, Sound
Doctrine makes a Sound People; and you that have received it, and believe in
it, you are made Sound by it; and whatsoever is manifest of that Nature, as a
renewing of the Testimony, it does more confirm you in the Doctrine which ye
have already received, but never draws you from it; and so you keep the
Doctrine from first to last, and do not forget any part of it: And you do well
that keep in mind the Sound and Wholesome Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Sound
and Wholesome Exhortations with which ye have been exhorted into Obedience and
Faithfulness in things pertaining to the Gospel-Doctrine, and so keeps in the
Gospel-Fellowship and Order; yea, I say, ye do well who are thus mindful of
that Doctrine, which in and by the Spirit of God has been preached unto you;
ye keep in that which is Sound and Wholesome, and out of that which Putrifies and
Corrupts, and so come to live in the ingrafted Word, that is able to save your
Souls.

And all Friends, Keep your Meetings in the Faith, and hold fast the Profession
of your Faith in all Meetings; and keep in mind the great Refreshment with
which ye have been refreshed in Meetings, and which still remains with all the
Faithful; and watch against that spirit and nature which at any time brings
Heaviness and Drousiness upon you in Meetings; and when you feel such a thing
coming upon you, do not give way to it, to be overcome by it, but with the
Power of God resist it in time, and so you will feel the Power as a Spring of
Living Water, to refresh your Souls.

Oh! let your Diligence be improved in Watchfulness and Perseverance, that ye
may all feel the Power and Life over that which would at any time vail you from
beholding the excellent Glory and from pertaking of the Heavenly and Living
Virtue, that so you may all feel the Arm which preserves, and drink at the
River which Refreshes and Nourishes, that ye may be Strong in the Lord, and
in the Power of his Might, and so be able to resist and overcome the Enemy in
all his Appearances. And in all your Meetings be tender over the Good one in
another, that ye may be a Comfort one to another; and so, in the Peaceable
Wisdom to live and Glorify God.

And Friends, Do not run into Superfluities in Meats, Drinks or Apparel, to
come under the Power of any; but all wait to be preserved in Sobriety,
Temperance, and Humility: And do not fashion your selves like unto the World,
in their Novelties and new Fashions; for they know not what to eat or drink, or
put on, and so are from that which should lead them into Comeliness and Modesty,
and follow that which leads them into Vanity and Folly; but do you dwell in
the Heavenly LIGHT, by which you may Adorn the Blessed Gospel, and Honor the
Lord God of all your Mercies.

Finally, Brethren, Fare-ye-well; Live in Peace, and Truth, and Holiness, and
Righteousness, and Godliness, and Love, and the God of Love, and Peace and of
all Heavenly Virtues and Graces will be with you, into whose Everlasting Arms I
commit you, and in the Love of his Life I am dearly with you all.

The 7th Month, 1672. William Smith.
Let this EPISTLE be read among Friends in the Power and Wisdom of Truth.
THE END.

