THE Standing Truth: In which may be seen, how every ones House is ordered, and
how their Families are provided, and what Peace they have in their Dwellings,
and whether they be Christians or Infidels.

With some Directions to the Everlasting Rest.

ALSO, A NARRATIVE OF Some Unjust and Cruel Dealings, by William Pocklington of
North Collington in the County of Nottingham, against William Smith of Besthorp
in the same County, concerning Tithes: And something touching Tithes in the
Ground.

With several Cases stated concerning the Law, and concerning the practice in
the Law; and how the innocent People of God (called Quakers) have and do suffer
in some Cases contrary to the Law, and in some Cases through the Illegal
Practice in the Law.

And the Liberty of all that suffer in Bonds for Tithes, justly claimed, and
demanded, upon good and sound Grounds from the Law. With many other Branches in
Particular Cases.

Which are Published in Love to all People,

By WILLIAM SMITH.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

TO THE READER.
READER,
IN the first part of this Book thou may behold the Universal Love of God,
with the Work of his Power, and thou may also behold how man comes to be
regenerated, and washed, by the Everlasting Truth, and what the state of man is
in the Truth, and what the state of man is out of the Truth; and thou may
see how Life is attained through Death, and how Rest and Peace in Christ Jesus
comes to be possessed. In the middle part thou may behold a Testimony unto
the Truth, and Enmity and Deceit in opposition to the Truth. In the latter part
thou may behold diverse Cases stated, by which thou may perceive something
of the Law, and the practice in it, and how deeply innocent people suffer for
want of Right: And these things thou reading over, and diligently observing, it
may overcome thee, to choose the better part; and in so doing, thou will be kept
out of all crooked and perverse ways, and not run with those that are wicked,
nor join hands with cruel men. And as for the middle part of this Book coming
to view, it is through a necessity upon me to do good, and that Warning may be
taken by all who in such cases are concerned: for I do not publish that part,
because I would lay open the faults of any, neither to boast or glory over the
weakness of any; for I have received the Love of God, and with that I can cover
a multitude of Offenses; though in the same Love a Necessity is upon me, to
make such Practices manifest, that whosoever is found in them, may speedily
repent and turn from them; and that such as are yet free from them, may be
preserved out of them, that so all may come to find mercy with the Lord. And
now let thy mind be to the Good in thy self, and with the Light of Christ Jesus
read this Book through, and learn of the meek Spirit of God, for in that there
is no envy; so will it teach thee Truth, and lead thee into all Truth, where
thou will feel the Everlasting Springs, and the pure Streams of clensing; and
as thou waitest in the Spirit, thou will feel the Effects of it to be Love, and
the Virtue of its nature, Gentleness and Peace; and if thou mindst it, to obey
it, thou may do well, in which my labor will be answered, who desires the
well-being of all men.

W. S.

THE Standing Truth, etc.
LOve is of God, and by the Light of Christ Jesus, the Love of God is shed
abroad in the hearts of all that believe; for the Light is a manifestation that
beameth forth from the Love, and in the Light the Love is tendered, it is an
universal Principle, that in its own purity discovers the world in man's
heart; for the uiniversality of its manifestation is not enclosed within the
compass of any bounds, but unto all men it gives light, and makes manifest
with its light, what is present in every man; and in this manifestation the
darkness cannot limit it, for it is manifest in the universal love of God, to
give light to all that are in darkness, that all in it might believe, and come
to everlasting Life. Now here is the love of God first to man, which love being
received, as in the Light it is manifested, then man comes to be drawn with the
love of God, to love God again, and this is perfect love, with which love the
sinner is sought, and for sin reproved, wherein the Lord God does make known
his own compassion to a sinner, and does manifest, That he would not the death
of a sinner, but has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish but have everlasting Life. And with this light of Christ
Jesus, is every man enlightened that comes into the world, and by it, there is
an universal manifestation of the love of God; and though the Lord God does
thus manifest his love unto man, and has given to every man a measure of the
Light of Christ, with which he is enlightened, and with which he sees his sin,
yet man not obeying the Testimony of it, he abides still in darkness, and so
he errs from the way of Truth and Life, and is a wanderer in desert places, and
takes up his abode in the dark corners of the earth, and there sits estranged
from God, and alienated from his Life, and there man suffers bondage and
affliction in himself, his pain and his sorrow is daily upon him, and his
anguish and his grief is continually about him; for no man can have true peace
in his own house until he come to the Light of Christ, with which he is
enlightened; and after he is turned unto the Light, and come into obedience,
then he has a war to make, and a great battle to fight, before he can come to
feel his peace settled and sealed; for with the Light, the body of sin, and the
body of death is discovered, and then m^n comes to see how many enemies does
compass him about, and how by them he is separated from God, then he comes to
see what he must war against, and what armor he must put on to stand in the
battle, and what weapon he must take to make way through his enemies; and by
believing in the Light and following the Light, he receives strength against
his foes, and having received the Light, he has received the Love of God, and
then he stands clad with the whole armor of God, and takes the sword of God,
with which he smites to the heart of his enemies, and wounds them to death, so
sees his enemies fall before him, and when they are fallen he casts them out,
and cleanses his house, and then Christ Jesus takes the possession, and he
brings everlasting peace in with him; and this is a wise man, whose eye looks
to his own house, and takes care of his own family; such a man loves peace at
home, and delights to see his family in order, and he is a Christian and not an
Infidel; for all Infidels are unfaithful to the Light, and so neglect their own
houses, and take no care for their own family, and their house is out of order,
and their family is not provided for, and there is no peace in that house; for,
when man's eye opens into the world, he lets his enemies into his house, and
they sit and rejoice over him; there the lust of the Eye goes forth, and the
pride of Life exalts and rules, and in that part, all envy, and malice, and
evil-will is begotten and nourished, and there the seed of the evil-doet has
his authority, and from his power proceeds all unrighteousness, all the bad
thoughts, words, and deeds; it is the very Womb of cruelty, and the Breast that
nourishes the persecuting Birth; and whilst this is entertained, that peace
of the house is disturbed, and all the family is out of order, and such a man
is worse than an Infidel, who takes not care of his own family, but lets in
enemies and entertains them, and so harbors that which disquieteth his family,
and destroys it; and then his own house being filled with enemies, and they
sitting in authority over him, he becomes actually disposed by them, and in
their nature he appears against others, and so envy, and malice, and evil-will,
and cruelty, and persecution is brought forth, and from the strength of
darkness within, it comes to be executed upon the innocent without, and this is
the wicked state, unto which there is no peace; but the righteous rejoice in
God, and in his Love their peace is sealed: Now the Light being loved, the
house comes to be cleansed, and all the old rubbish of envy and malice purged
out; for the Power comes to have an operation in all that believe, and by its
working it kills the lust of the eye, and cuts down the pride of Life, and
slayes the perverse Nature in every part, and roots out the man of Sin, and
brings down the Throne of Antichrist, and so the Seed of God rises, and the
water of cleansing is felt, and the little leaven is known, that works all
into a new lump, so that the heart and mind becomes clean, and the inward parts
are washed, and here Christ is known in his power, and his fan is felt to go in
man, and the fire is felt that burns the chafe, and for this end is Christ
made manifest; and thus does he come to man in the fall, his judgment is with
him, yea it goes before him, to cut down the seed of the evil-doer: but they
who abide the day of his coming, or who stand before him when he thus
appears, who love his refining hand, and turn not their back upon him, or who
abide the furnace, until the work be perfected by him. Oh his appearance is
dreadful whilst the wicked stands, but his mercy is sweet when the wicked is
removed. And thus to be regenerated, is a work beyond man's own reason, and
thus to be renewed and changed is a state not to be comprehended: and who comes
to the putting off their old things, they are ready to receive new, and so
passes from death to life in the translation, and then they are born again of
incorruptible Seed, in which Seed the Gospel is known, and Gospel-Peace
possessed; and there is Christ in his power over all, he rules in the family,
and all the house is in good order, and plentifully provided for; and he fills
that house with his peace, and all the family have fullness of joy in his
presence; Here a man is in Christ, and is a Christian, and then he is no more
his own, but in the Life he is disposed, and all his fruits appear for God;
Love is become his Garment, and Meekness the Girdle of his Loins; and this is
the Birth born of God, and to do his will it does delight; to love enemies is
its nature, and it can feed them when they hunger, and give them drink when
they thrist; it cannot revile when it is reviled, it cannot seek revenge when
it is persecuted, for it is born of Love, and in love is naturally disposed;
and this is the man that is after God, who is regenerated by the power of God,
and is born of the Seed of God, which Seed is holy, pure, and perfect, which
Seed is Christ, the Wisdom and Righteousness of God; and as he is in himself,
so he is made the same to all that are born of him; then man with his virtues
becomes clothed, and is holy as he is holy, in which holiness God is seen,
and in this pure holy life of Christ, the pure Religion is known, a Religion
undefiled, (mark) Christ undefiled, the Religion undefiled, and that Religion
that is not so, is none of his, for the pure Religion stands in him, and all
his fresh springs open in it; the heavenly water of Life is felt, and known,
and his Streams run and cease not; the Lord God does open his Fountain, the
strength of his love goes forth, the River cleanses the Valleys, and the
sweetness of its virtue is felt from sea to sea, the strength of it is very
great, and the banks with its fullness is ready to break; this Religion
flourishes in the Life, and in the Life it stands firm for ever, and of its
heavenly virtue there is no end. And here is the standing Truth, in which Truth
Christ is fed upon, and the meat that endures to everlasting life is known;
This is the Bread that comes down from heaven, which if a man eat he shall
never die; and except man eat of this, he has no Life in Christ; and in this
all changable things have their end, he puts that part down, out of which the
many Religions arise; and so they decay and wax old, but he endures the same
for ever, and brings in a standing Religion in his own nature, and in this
Religion there is no strife, nor envy, nor persecution, (for that is Cain's
mark) but love, and peace, and good will to all men, the love that overcomes
Cain's nature, and races out his mark, and proclaims Peace on earth, and
Good Will amongst men: Here is Christ manifested in the Fathers Love, and he
would not the death of a sinner, this is his mind; and a sinner is conttary to
his pure Nature, in which there is no sin. Then they have not the Mind of
Christ that will Kill and Persecute about Religion, and Oppress those that are
contrary minded; that is the work of Antichrist where ever it is, and such are
not redeemed out of the World, but lives in it, and with that part slays the
Lamb, and crucifies the holy One, and that is spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where
the Just suffers; for man not being redeemed, has a part standing that does
not regard the Innocence, but rules over it, and there man is wise in his own
eyes, and with that part he is lifted up, and under that part does the Innocent
suffer, and that is the part which defiles a man, and tosses his mind with the
waves of its sea; for man can never come to true settlement, whilst that part
lives in him, that would be wise in knowledge out of the Life; and whilst man
is there seeking to know, and to be satisfied with knowledge, that very part
comes over him with a vail, and blinds his mind from that which he is seeking
to know; and this part will wrest things according to its own apprehension, and
from its own apprehension will draw conclusions, and that does thicken the vail
upon man's heart, but never removes it; and man being thus situate in his own
Wisdom and Reason, and with that part comprehending, he stands at the greatest
distance from that through which the things of God are revealed, and his mind
is not simple to receive the simple Truth, but in the subtle wisdom of the
flesh, and the reason in that part, he is striving to comprehend; and here many
seek but find not, ask but receive not, they are amiss in themselves, and would
receive things into that part which God does never answer; and many lie here
unsatisfied, and many also that satisfy themselves with that which they have
comprehended, into which their belief is entered, though from God that part was
never answered, and so they build their nests on high, and in their wisdom sit
puffed up, and there the fowls of the air please themselves with notions, with
which the just are oppressed. Oh how many entertain their enemy in their house,
how do they harbor him, and lodge him, and every way seek to please him, as
the most worthy guest; but the best friend may stand and knock, and not a door
open to let him in! Oh that people did but consider their present states, how
is man filled with that which the enemy brings home, and how does he receive it
as the most lovely thing, if the old wisdom does but hunt, and the old reason
bring it home, with what joy is that entertained, and how choicely is that
treasured up, and what pride and glory does man take in such riches, it needs
not be answered in words, for he that with the Light of Christ will search his
own house, may find it to be so, and receive an answer from the Witness of God
in his own Conscience? and therefore it is high time for all people, of all
sorts and sects, to awake, for time is swift, and being past, none can make it
their own again. Oh search with that of God in you, that which bears the burden
of uncleanness, and of all your own righteousness. Oh down into the deeps,
where you never yet have been, that you may come to clearness in the bottom,
and learn the wonders of the Lord in that place; and if you love the Light, you
may see your guests, and how with strangers every room of your house is filled,
and how the Son of Peace and Love is excluded and shut out, he is too low for
your Wisdom, and too mean for your Reason, and when he would come in by his
Light, and beget your love unto him, your eye cannot behold any comeliness in
him, and so you exclude him as not worthy of acceptance; and he being thus
rejected, that is holy, and meek, and just, and good, what can your houses be
filled withal but passion, and deceit, and envy, and malice, yea rottenness and
hypocrisy is lodged in your rooms, and with such guests your houses are
filled; and there is an unclean house, and an unclean heart and mind, which
God's beesom of judgment must pass through, before the Son of Peace come into
that house to govern: So in the universal Love of God, here is the Truth laid
down, as it is in Jesus, that all who seek after the Lord God, may be informed
into the right way, and let them mind well, what here breefly follows.

The Light comes from God, and shines in darkness, and with the Light darkness
is discovered; for the Light is not of darkness, though it shines in darkness;
but with its manifestation it shows and reproves darkness with its deeds,
and that is the first Principle of the pure Religion, and the first Step into
the way of Peace: for to obey the Light, is to obey Christ the Power of God;
and through obedience, when the Light reproves, the Power is felt to take away
that which is reproved; and Judgment is executed upon that Nature which has
transgressed; for the Power being minded, it begets man into a selfdenial, and
leads him in the daily cross, to all that which it does reprove in him; and
then the Power crucifies that part down which has disquieted, and troubled man
in himself, and through the Power, man comes to his Peace; for the way of the
Cross is the way of Peace, and the Cross is the Power of God, and the Power
stands in the way which leads unto Life; and self must bow and be humbled unto
it, and the Cross must be daily taken up to that part which would save its
Life, and there must not be a turning aside to fly the Cross; for that which
draws to do so, is darkness and not Light, and there is a part in man, that
is very hardly brought to the Cross; and if it be brought unto it, it is a very
hard thing to keep it there; the Life is sweet, and would save it self, and so
the darkness stands to wrest aside from the Cross, and that which wresteth
from the Cross, does wrest the Scriptures also, unto which it draws the mind,
and raises up a defense for its Liberty: here darkness wresteth, and then
catches and enshareth, and the old Wisdom and Reason does here betray the
Innocence, and such never come clearly through, though they may have seen some
openings; for the Cross being denied, and the judgment fled, man never comes
to be changed, but abides in the old nature, and what he has seen afar off, he
gathers it into the old part, and with that unrighteous part, he holds the
Truth; and that is the part which loves not the Cross; but to die is the
greatest gain: Who have ears to hear, let them hear. When a man can stand
still, and eye the Power, and the work of the Power in himself, then he sees
from whence his Salvation comes; and then Christ is known in his Power, and
received in his Power, and there is no reasoning against him; which Power is
the Cross to every part of the old nature, and humbles it down to the death,
and crucifies the world unto man, and man unto the world; and there he loses
his own Life, with all his Wealth, and all his old garments are stripped from
him, and the willing and running cease in him; and all his own Wisdom and
Reason comes into silence; and there he lies before the Power a naked Child,
and in that state waits for an entrance into a new Life, which through the
Cross is attained; and there is the passing from Death to Life, and Christ
Jesus is then known, and Life in him, and so an innocent birth is born of the
Seed of God, and man rises in Christ, and becomes an heir of Life and blessing,
and then he knows the Kingdom and the Inheritance, and there he possesses the
Peace and the Joy; and then the Seed manifests its perfect beauty, in its own
perfect righteousness, and perfect holiness, and the glory of it spreads
abroad; and this is a state which can never be compassed, nor attained, but as
in it self it is revealed; for the strongest Reason of man is below it, and the
deepest of his Wisdom cannot fatham it, nor compass it; neither is there any
other way to possess it, but through death to all that part which would
compass it and comprehend it; therefore every man to become a fool, that he may
be wise; and if People would but come to such a state, they might behold the
son in his beauty, and the glory of his incomprehensible Life and Wisdom, which
many are come to witness to his praise for evermore. And all that would be
answered with Peace, must come to the simple state; for the subtle searcher
creates grief and trouble; and therefore every man and woman to deny
themselves, and receive Christ Jesus, in the despised way of the Cross, that he
may baptize them into his death, and raise them again in his own Life, and then
his Life, and Power, and Wisdom spreads abroad, and his kingdom over all is
set, and there is rest from labor, and sitting down in perfect peace: The
Inheritance known in the Kingdom, the Possession known in the Riches of it,
then man knows his portion in God, who is the Fountain of everlasting good. I
thank the, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent of the world, and hust revealed them unto babes: even
so Father, because thy good pleasure is such.

A Narrative of some unjust and cruel Dealings, etc.
I Having received the Truth of God, and coming to walk in obedience to it, and
to live it, I came to be convinced by it, of the unlawfulness of many things,
that in times past I had practiced, and observed; and amongst diverse other
things, I was convinced in my Conscience of the unlawfulness of Tithes* and
being so convinced, I duly considered them in the ground, because I would not
keep back any thing from another, that might be his right: And waiting in that
which did convince me of the unlawfulness of them, it was manifested to my
understanding, that the ground of them under the Gospel, was wholly out of the
truth; and besides, if any man had a due in such a part of my estate, as was
under the Law, when such a part was due to certain People, and for certain
uses, yet I found that the same use was not made of that part now, neither were
they such a People that now in diverse places did receive them; for under the
Law they were paid into the Storehouse, and the Levites had one part, and the
Fatherless, and the Stranger, and the Widows they were relieved with another
part; so that the Storehouse did supply the necessity of many, and there was
not an Impropriator known in that day; to have his own private Barn to gather
his Tithes into, and dispose of them to his own private use. But besides this
great disproportion, betwixt Tithes under the Law, and the use of them then,
and Tithes at this day, and the use of them now; I also was convinced; that
Christ Jesus was come to be the end of the Law, and the end of that Priesthood;
and the Priesthood being changed, there is of necessity a change of the Law;
and that by Christ Jesus, Life and Immortality was brought to light through the
Gospel; and that a free dispensation was now to be enjoyed, and lived in: And
still waiting to understand these things perfectly, I came to know my own
freedom, by the power of Truth, in my own heart, and the Truth set me free from
that state where I had been in bondage, and so I was gathered by the Light of
Christ Jesus manifest in my Conscience, into the love of God, where he opened
his Fountain, and I tasted the freeness of his grace, and of his Mercy; and in
this dispensation, the Son of God was revealed in me, and then I knew the Law,
to be fulfilled by him, and all the Types and Figures, and Shadows, and
variable Things to pass away, and come to their end; then was my Understanding
perfectly informed, concerning the particular case of Tithes, and I was clear
in my Understanding, that no Commandment stood in force for the continuing of
them; but by Christ Jesus, the Law and the Commandment, was fulfilled, and that
no man had any right, either to give or sell to another any part of that
increase which the Lord increased unto me; and was truly the fruit of my own
labor and charge: And upon this ground, I could not for Conscience Sake
toward God, observe that Practice or Custom of Tithes any longer, though
before I had done it with great diligence, yet now I could not set out any part
of that to another, which I was satisfied was my own; but I did mind to gather
my corn, as it came into order, without taking notice of any man. And William
Pocklington of North Collingham, was at that time the Farmer by Lease, from the
Impropriator, of that part called Tithes, within that place where I had corn
growing; but this is to be noted, how that he had assigned the interest of his
Lease, unto Anthony Pocklington his Brother, as the said Anthony told me
himself, and as there was sufficient cause to believe it; for the said Anthony
was in Possession, and did gather the Tithes for his own use; by which it did
evidently appear, that the present Possession, after the manner of the Law, did
lie in Anthony and not in William: Yet notwithstanding the said William caused
a Sheriffs Warrant to be brought against me, and sued me in his own Name: and
one John Tailor came into my dwelling house, and did arrest my Body at William
Pocklington's suit, and I desired to see the Warrant, and he showed it unto me,
and I found the day of appearance to be past, according to the Warrant; and
when I told the said Tailor of it, he left me and went his way: then the said
William, procured another Sheriffs Warrant against me, and one John White came
to my house and did arrest my Body, and he gave me time until the next
morning, to come to his house at Newark, and when I came there, I found William
Pocklington, who would have been drawing of me to Composition, and said he
would put it to me, if I would but give him any thing; but I could not consent
to give him any thing upon that account, whereupon he caused me to be sent to
Nottingham Prison, and it being mentioned in the Warrant that the Jailer was to
keep me safe, so as the Sheriff might have my Body, in one of the Courts at
Westminster, such a day before Oliver Cromwels Judges, to answer the said
William in a Plea of Trespass: I was desirous to have gone, and given him an
answer, but without an Attorney nothing would be accepted, though there is not
any Law to compel a man to use an Attorney in such a case, but in his own
Person he is to appear; which thing I was very willing to have done, but I was
kept close Prisoner, until the day of appearance, and also at the day, and
after the day, and was not suffered to have any liberty at all, but was kept
among the Felons in the Dungeon, and so continued a Prisoner about twenty one
weeks, and then I was sent for to London by a Warrant from a Committee of
Parliament, and I appeared before them, by whom my liberty at that time was
obtained, and I was set free from my Imprisonment. And a little time after I
had much weakness upon my Body, and I was so weak that I had not been forth of
my Bed for about three weeks, neither could I stand upon my Feet; and in that
very time, and in that exercise, the said William Pocklington procured another
Sheriffs Warrant against me, and one John Musson came to my house, and by
making a lie, he got into the room where I lodged, and did arrest my Body in
bed, at William Pocklington's suit, and presently after him came John Tailor,
and he asked me what I would do? I told them, they had my Body, they might to
what they were permitted; unto which Tailor replied, that Mr. Pocklington
says, If you cannot ride, he will hire a Cart to carry you to Nottingham: So I
was willing to give them Bond to appear, desiring to have come at that time to
a Trial with him, and for that end I procured two Friends to be bound with me
for my appearance: Thomas Elsam of Gerton was one, and Robert Cranil of North
Collingham was the other; and after the Bond was sealed and finished, the said
Musson did arrest Thomas Elsam in the chamber, at the said William
Pocklington's Suit also; and he not being willing to answer their practice, he
hailed him away: and the same day another Friend was arrested, called William
Thorpe of Gerton, at William Pocklington's Suit also, and they were both sent
to Prison; though such persons as were concerned to take the Tithes in that
place, had taken Corn and Hay from them, both in the Meadow and the Fields: but
the said William Pocklington released the said William Thorp within a little
time, and continued Thomas Elsam many weeks, and then released him also. So,
according to my Bond, I went up to London, and was there at the day of
Appearance, and did appear in my own person before the Judge, in the same Court
as was expressed in the Warrant and in the Bond, and I had an Attorney of the
same Court with me, who was an eyewitness of my Appearance; which being done,
I gave him order to enter it in the Office, according to their practice, and he
told me he did so: but the said William did not proceed any further against me
at that time, but caused Robert Carnil, who was one of my Bonds-men, to be
arrested at the Suit of the Sheriff, upon forfeiture of the Bond, though the
Bond was wholly discharged by my Appearance, as before is mentioned; yet
notwithstanding the said Robert Carnil was sent to Nottingham Prison, and there
did remain a Prisoner about twelve weeks; about which time I released his body
by a Supercedas: then he let all his Suits fall, and caused my Corn to be taken
in harvest-time; and those that he employed, took away my Corn in their own
wills, and this they have done for two years last past; yet notwithstanding he
has caused another Warrant to be brought against me, which was served upon me
the seventh day of the eighth month 1662, I being in the Prison at Nottingham
to visit Friends that were in bonds, the Under-Goaler brought me the Warrant,
and showed it me, and said it was at Pocklington's Suit, by which I am now
detained a Prisoner; and the said Pocklington meeting the Under-Goaler about
two days after, he bid him tell his Master, that he should not let me have any
liberty, (as the Under-Goaler told me) for if he did, he would complain to the
Sheriff: by which practice his spirit is made manifest to all reasonable men,
and every moderate eye may see that he is not clothed with Christianity, which
is to love enemies, but has a Heathens nature, and the mark of the Beast in
his forehead; and his envy does appear to be exceeding great, who cannot
appease it in so many years together, but still presses forward to the filling
up of his measure, which is very near at hand; and though I have patience in
the love of God to bear these things, and have from time to time overcome the
evil with good, yet I am free to open, wherein, and in what places I might or
may take just advantage according to the Law, so far as I am free to use it,
both in relation to himself, and some others by him employed in that business,
whose proceedings have been illegal and unjust, as in these particulars
following may be clearly seen.

1. The suing of me in his own name, when the Interest was in another, as
before is mentioned, and in that Case being falsely imprisoned by him about
twenty one weeks.

2. To sue me again the second time in his own name, when the Interest yet did
continue in another, as aforesaid, and causing me upon that account to go to
London, and then never proceeded further against me.

3. To cause Robert Carnil to be arrested upon forfeiture of the Bond, when I
had discharged the Bond by my own Appearance, and by an Attorney had caused my
Appearance to be entered according to their practice, and causing the said
Robert falsely to be imprisoned about twelve weeks.

4. To sue me again this last time, and having caused my Corn to be taken and
spoiled as aforesaid; and there being now Ecclesiastical Courts, in which all
Cases of Tithes are to be tried, according to that Law, and not in any Temporal
Court whatsoever, which does amount to false Imprisonment for so long as I
shall continue a Prisoner upon this account.

Then concerning others, which have been employed by him in that very business,
who have acted illegally and contrary to Law; As first, John Tailor coming into
my dwelling house, and there arresting my body, when the day of Appearance was
past according to the Warrant, and so he had no authority nor lawful power,
either to come into my house, or to arrest my body.

Then concerning those that have forcibly taken away my Corn, though I did
never oppose them by resisting, yet against them all I bear forth my Testimony
in the Truth; and there were four concerned in that matter, namely, Sutton of
Besthorp, Daulton of South-Scarle, Richard Light foot of North-Collingham, and
Pocklington's own Servant, whose name I know not; and I did let all these men
know, as I had opportunity to speak to them, that they did me wrong, and warned
them to take heed what they did in that case, and told them I did not give any
consent for them to take away my Corn; yet notwithstanding they proceeded so to
do from time to time, which does amount on their part to a forcible taking,
though never opposed by resisting; and besides, the Law does not give any such
power to take Tithes, but only binds the party to set them forth, and not to
carry them away; therefore these persons aforesaid, are no less than deep
transgressors of the Law, and have made themselves liable to the Law, as there
is freedom to make use of their own weapon: and hereby all sober people may
see, how this man's house has been furnished with envy, and though he has had
so many years to empty it, yet he has not cleared it, as by his practice is
manifest; but I desire his eyes may be opened, and that he may see the end of
those things, and come to Repentance before it be too late, for his glass is
almost run, and without Repentance his end will be bitterness; and I would have
him know, that there is a righteous God that judges between him and me this
day, and into his hand alone I commit my innocent Cause.

Something touching the Ground of Tithes; by which it does appear, that Tithes
are not of right upon any account, in any place, or to any person at this day;
neither can any Law be truly grounded from the Scriptures of Truth, either to
give them, or to sell them.
The Law was given by Moses, and under that Law Tithes (...); and they were not
to keep them back, for in (...) was a complaint that they robbed God; and they
were to bring their Tithes into the Storehouse, that there might be meat
enough, and that the Fatherless, Strangers, and Widows might be relieved, and
not want: and here was the first Covenant with its Law, and Priesthood, and
Tithes, and Temple, and Sacrifices, and Offerings of diverse sorts; and Meats,
and Drinks, and diverse Washings; all which was but a figure of him that was to
come, Christ Jesus: for the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a
better hope did; and when through those figures and shadows the better hope was
brought in, then was Moses and his Administration fulfilled, with all things
that did pertain unto it; and in fullness of time Christ Jesus came, and Grace
and Truth came by him; which Grace and Truth is free, and ends the first
Covenant, with all its Services and Ordinances, and establishes a new Covenant
upon better promises, in which Covenant Christ Jesus is known to be the
High Priest over the house of God, and there is the Gospel free, without money
or without price, and the Grace free which saves, and not the works of the
first Covenant; and it was never the practice of Christ or his Apostles, to
take Tithes, or to sue people for them* neither is the name of an Impropriator
to be found in all the Scriptures, and how these things are come to pass let
people consider; for Christ nor his Disciples did never receive Tithes, neither
gave any Commandment for any man to take them, or for any man to pay them; then
such as now take them, and sue people at Law for them, do not walk either by
precept or example from Christ or his Apostles, and therefore their practice is
altogether unlawful; and out of the Truth, and all Impropriators are wholly
excluded throughout the Scriptures; for Tithes under the Law were never
appointed to any under that name, therefore they cannot have any just right in
them.

Object. But some may say, Surely they have the greatest right to Tithes,
because they have purchased them; and the Law has made Tithes to become unto
them, as an Estate in Fee Simple?

Ans. There not being either precept or president from Christ nor his Apostles,
nor no such Institution under the Gospel, it must needs remove this Objection
wholly; and that any man can have just power to sell the labor of another, or
any increase that rises from his labor, and to give unto another person an
interest in it, as an Estate of Inheritance, this will not stand with the
reasonable part of a man: for that which does arise to one man through the
labor of another man, cannot stand for a certain Interest; because it comes
through labor and charge, and not through any thing certain; so that if a man
labor not, then the party that does claim an interest in his Increase, is
wholly disseized and dispossessed of that part which he claims as an
Inheritance: and the selling and buying of Tithes is come in of late years,
compared with the years since the Apostles time; and both the buyer and the
seller were under a vail of thick darkness at that time, which the Light of the
Lord does now make manifest; and it is now seen with a clear eye, that such
things are come to pass in the Apostasy, and instituted after the Inventions of
men, and not after Christ the Wisdom of God; and therefore they are now to be
denied, and the Root of them plucked up and destroyed, and not to stand in any
place, nor unto any man; for Grace and Truth is come by Jesus Christ, in which
Grace and Truth the Freedom is known, and Tithes, as now used in England, are
an invention of the Pope, and who would know their rise and setting up, must
look into Histories for their ground, for in the Gospel-Scriptures there is no
ground for them to stand upon; and Verstegen an Antiquary does relate their
very rise in England, and does declare that Pope Gregory sent over a company of
his Priesthood and Officers into the Island of England, who preached their
Doctrine, and turned many to their Faith; and then the Pope sent them a Letter,
to take the free gift of such as they had converted, and to live upon it: which
thing they at the first did, as the History relates, and those gifts were all
brought into one place, out of which the necessities of those were supplied
whom it concerned; but after they had spread their Doctrine more generally, and
that there was an increase amongst people in their practice, then they began to
divide the whole into particulars, and appointed to each man his place of Cure,
which he was to take the charge of, and to receive their particular gifts, but
not to receive or take of any other but such as were of his Faith, and owned
his practice; And here was the first institution of Parishes and Parish
Churches in England, according to History: and when they were thus settled, and
that the gifts would not answer their particular ends, some beginning to cool
in their love, and in their zeal, and were not so liberal in giving as
sometimes they had been; then the Pope decreed a Law, and by that Law, gave his
Priests power to compel the Tenth part of increase from all People generally,
which before was but a free gift from some, as may be seen more at large in the
History. And here was the first ground of Parishes in England, and out of which
Parish Churches are sprung, which People now make so much to do about: And here
also was the first Law for compelling the payment of Tithes. And after process
of time, it came to pass that the Popes power was denied in England, then what
had been gained unto Abbeys and Monastries, with a great part of predial Tithes
was disposed into a general service, by way of Sale, and so became converted
into the hands of Lay persons, who were called Impropriators: And here is the
ground from whence they rise, and all the right they can claim originally for
their Tithes. And now, Whether the Parish Churches, and Tithes, and Worship,
which are practiced in Parish Churches, have a sound root, let all moderate
People consider? And whether their ground be sufficient for any man to
persecute another, either for not paying Tithes, or for not going to the Parish
Church, or for not Conforming to the Worship which there is practiced? And how
People can stand by these things, and yet profess Christianity? And whether
they do not stand upon a slippery place, let them all consider? But many are
come to know the Lord Jesus Christ, and by his power are redeemed out of all
Inventions, and Will-worships, and are made a free People in his Life, and
Wisdom, and he over all is exalted, and his Kingdom is set, and stands firm,
in which is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy for ever.

And now the root of this matter being found in a corrupted earth, the fruit of
its nature has its perfect savor; and many have tasted of its bitterness from
time to time, until this day; and there has been since the first Institution,
several Laws made, for the continuing of the payment of Tithes in general, yet
by all the Laws in that case made, the recovering of Tithes was referred to the
Ecclesiastical Courts, and by Ecclesiastical Judges, and not in any Temporal
Court whatsoever, as in diverse Statutes for recovering of Tithes may be
mentioned. One in particular I shall quote, namely, 3. Edw. 6. Chap. 13. And
that it shall not be lawful unto the Parson, Vicar, Proprietor, Owner or other
their Farmer, or Deputies, contrary to this Act, to convent or sue such
withholder of Tithes, Obventions, or other Duties aforesaid, before any other
Judge than Ecclesiastical. By which it does appear, how much innocent People
are this day wronged in that case, who are sued for Tithes, by original Wirts
out of Temporal Courts; and likewise how much they are wronged through the
practice that is used in that Law, and how many this day lie in Holes and
Prisons, because the Practice of the Law has been made a snare unto them, so
that they could not proceed in their own case, as of right they ought to have
done, and this is manifest in many particulars; a few of which I shall briefly
instance.

1. To be arrested by a Sheriffs Warrant, grounded upon an original Writ out of
any Temporal Court; and by that Warrant the Sheriff is to have the Body of a
man in the Court at Westminster such a day as is expressed, there to answer the
Party who has ought to plead against him, and then the Body of that man to be
cast into Prison, and there kept, and not brought into the Court by the
Sheriff, according to the Warrant; is a practice through which many innocent
People suffer this day in a deep manner, and is a practice that stands wholly
in deceit, lies, and hypocrisy.

2. For a man to give Bond for his appearance upon his arrest, and he does
appear accordingly, and in the truth discharges his Bond; yet notwithstanding
his appearance will not be accepted to be good in Law, though by the Law it is
only sufficient; and then to proceed against him upon forfeiture of his Bond,
when in the Truth, and also according to Law, he has really discharged his
Bond: this is a deceitful Practice, and through this Practice many innocent
People have suffered.

3. To be Subpena'd into the Exchequer, and commanded to appear there in a
man's own person, and when he does personally appear, then not to accept his
appearance, to be good in Law, and in that case to proceed against him as an
offender, and to cause his Body to be arrested and imprisoned for a contempt,
when he has truly answered what he was commanded; this is a practice through
which many innocent People do suffer.

4. For a man to give his own Answer unto any Bill exhibited against him, and
to answer it in the Truth, and to tender his Answer to the Court, and that
Answer to be refused, as not being sufficient in Law, when it is a man's own
Answer, who by the Law is required to answer, and no Law that enjoynes him to
answer otherwise; and notwithstanding his Answer truly tendered, yet to be
arrested and imprisoned for a contempt, when he has observed the thing
commanded: this is a practice through which many innocent People suffer.

5. To refuse an Answer as insufficient, because a man cannot swear unto it,
though in it self it be really true; and then to cause that man to be arrested,
and imprisoned for a contempt, when he has tendered a true Answer: this is a
practice through which many innocent People suffer.

6. There being no Law in force, by which any Temporal Court can receive power
to proceed in the case of Tithes, it is wholly insufficient on their part, who
put such things in practice; through which practice many have and do very
deeply suffer.

Therefore who are yet in suffering for Tithes, and remain in Prisons upon the
account of such proceedings in any Temporal Court, they ought by the Law to be
forthwith discharged, and released; and not only so, but to be repaired for
their great sufferings, loss, and damage which they have sustained by such
illegal proceedings, and deceitful practices; through which many have suffered
to Death, others to the great loss of their outward Estates, and others to the
decay of their bodily Health, by being so long continued in hardships, who are
men of ability, and repute in their Country; and Liberty may be justly
challenged and demanded touching all that yet do suffer upon the account here
mentioned, and also for these Reasons following.

1. Because many who are in Bonds this day, were cast into Prison by Writs
original from the Temporal Courts, whose Authority was upheld by Oliver's
Power, and now his Power being disanulled, and all that was acted and done by
his Power, made void by this present Power, and is now judged ineffectual to
all intents and purposes as if it had never been: Then why should not that
judgment reach to the Innocent, and set them free from their sufferings, which
originally was occasioned by his Power, and have for many years together
continued Prisoners? I am sure sound Reason, or a tender heart, will judge this
demand both lawful and expedient to be granted.

2. This present Power now being in Government, under which Power there are
Courts Ecclesiastical appointed; then all that have been Arrested, by Writs
original from any Temporal Court, since this present Power Governed, and who do
remain in Prisons upon such Arrests, in case of Tithes; their Liberty may be
justly challenged and demanded, and it will be but a reasonable thing for such
as are now in Power to grant it, and cause it to be done.

I do not state these Cases as being versed in points of Law, but as they are
opened to me in the Truth, in which Truth is the pure and sound Reason; and
that Truth and Reason sees through all things that are unreasonable, and also
manifests what is reasonable, that the Truth and sound Reason, in another may
answer it, and receive it; and in the Truth man comes to see all uunreasonable
things: and let all reasonable People now judge whether it be reasonable on
their part, that practice such things as are here mentioned, and through such
practices cause Innocent People to suffer? and whether it be reasonable that
Innocent People should yet suffer and be continued in Prison upon such grounds?
And whether such as now do suffer in those cases, can be lawfully detained,
being Imprisoned upon original Writs in case of Tithes? And though such things
were done, when there was not another way left to recover them, and greedy men
would not be satisfied without them, though at that time there was such a
practice and proceedings; yet that Power being now judged unlawful, and
removed, such things are returned into their old channel again, and are to be
tried in Ecclesiastical Courts only: Not that I hereby justify the
proceedings of any Court in this case, for I have already showed the ground of
this matter to be corrupted; and am now wading amongst the fowl and unclean
streams, where I find little delight as to my self, but through a necessity
laid upon me, to do good both to Persecutors and Sufferers, I am constrained to
travel amongst these things, though I hasten through them, as contraries to my
Life. Now these things being duly considered, it cannot but reasonably be
judged, that we have good cause, who in these cases are concerned, to demand
our just Liberty, and do expect it; and if Liberty be denied unto us upon this
reasonable demand, then let such know who are our Oppressors, that we yet in
patience do abide, and in patience we do bear a sure Testimony against all
evildoers and unreasonable men. And here it may be seen what bitter streams
the Pope's fountain sends forth; and not only so, but also how those that are
concerned in the practice of the Law, do degenerate from reasonable men, and
with their unreasonable part do divert the streams from their proper course;
though in that channel they are too bitter for honest men to drink, yet being
diverted from that course, they are made much more bitter from such as do
practice in them: for if any part of Reason did order the practice in such
cases, it would not prove so tedious and burdensome to those that are concerned
to make defense; If a man's own Appearance would be taken for a sufficient
Appearance, as it ought to be; or, if a true Answer would be taken for a
sufficient Answer, without an Oath, as it ought to be; or, if the Sheriff would
have a man's Body to appear according to his Warrant, as he ought to do; this
would come something near to Reason in practice, and would not be so grievous
to poor men, who desire to fear God and walk in his Truth: but men are
shamefully degenerated from Truth and Reason, and their very hearts and minds
are corrupted, and their ways are all crooked, and there is no soundness in
their goings, so that an houest simple man cannot walk with them, but be
defiled and ensnared.

And now I shall mention one thing, and that from the Law, for confirmation of
what I have here laid down in the particular case of Tithes, by which it does
fully appear that no Temporal Court has any power to proceed against any man
in that case; for the Law says after this manner, (32. Hen. 8. chapter 7.) That
some have not let to substract the lawful and accustomed Tithes of Corn,
Hay, Pasturages, and other sorts of Tithes and Oblations, commonly due to the
owners, proprietors, and other possessors, etc. Wherefore it is enacted, That
all and singular persons of what estate or degree soever, shall fully and
truly, and effectually divide, yield, or pay, all and singular Tithes and
Offerings aforesaid, etc. and if any do detain any part of the said Tithes or
Offerings, then the party either Ecclesiastical or lay person, having cause to
demand the said Tithes, and being thereof wronged or grieved, shall and may
convent the person or persons, so offending, before the Ordinary, his
Commissary, or other competent Minister or lawful Judge of the place where such
wrong shall be done, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, etc. And another
branch of the Statute speaks on this wise, That if any Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual profits, which now be, or hereafter shall be made Temporal unto any
person or persons; and that if any other person or persons go about to disseize
them, or disinherite them, then in that case the party or parties grieved, may
have their remedy in the Temporal Courts, as may be seen more at large in the
full Statute. So here is a plain distinction made: for whilst any thing remains
in the nature of Tithes, and only denied as Tithes and Offerings, no Temporal
Court has power to examine or determine in that case, but the Ecclesiastical
Courts only: but if any man shall call in question the Estate of another in
the ground, as it was once counted Spiritual, and now converted into the
possession of a lay person, if an Interest in this case be questioned, then
have the Temporal Courts power to examine and determine the Interest of such
Estate. And there are diverse other Statutes which do refer the recovering of
Tithes, where they are denied, to the determination of Ecclesiastical Courts
only, which I shall not at this time, and in this place, take notice of to
mention; for that which is already said, may be sufficient to convince a
reasonable man or woman, that the ground and rise of them is out of the Truth;
and the way to recover them, if denied, is to be in Ecclesiastical Courts only,
and not in Temporal Courts, and that from determination of the Law in that
case. All which does make it evidently appear, how much we have been, and are
still wronged, who have been a suffering People many years in this case, and
through these practices; and the wrong is much more at this time in this case,
than in times lately past, because there is now Ecclesiastical Courts set up
and appointed, unto which the Law does only refer for the recovering of Tithes,
and some that in those Courts are called in question about Tithes: and
therefore the People of God, who are called Quakers, ought to be set free from
their Imprisonments in that case, who have been wronged so long together, and
yet are sufferers by Writs, and Warrants, and Subpena's out of Temporal Courts,
and through the practice of such Courts: And if any man be henceforth grieved
for want of his Tithes, then let us come to answer in such Courts as by the Law
is appointed to hear and determine the same; and let us have free liberty to
make our just and reasonable Defense on our own behalf, and not to be
interrupted in our Defense, for it is a Case that does relate to our
Consciences; and therefore such as are counted Spiritual men, who are appointed
to judge in Spiritual matters, ought to hear us to the full in what we have to
say in our own Defense, that so our Answer may be taken and considered,
touching the matter which by any Bill may be exhibited against us; and then
however it comes to pass concerning us, or what Sentence may proceed against
us, we shall be contented in our places, and shall either actively or passively
be subject without resisting, as our Testimony hitherto does sufficiently
evidence for us; only let us have fair dealings, and legal proceedings, as Men
and Christians: for, as Men, we have a perfect understanding, and in truth and
soberness we do behave our selves; and, as Christians, we have patience to
endure, and do not seek revenge; and therefore we ought to have fair dealings
amongst all men who are concerned with us in any case.

There are other corrupted streams, which descend from the unreasonable part of
men toward us, and are practiced in diverse cases concerning us, by which great
sufferings are inflicted upon us; and such practices may briefly be reduced
into these particular heads.

1. To summon us to appear at Sessions, and when we appear according to our
Summons, and stand at the Bar to make our just Defense to what may be charged
against us, then to tender unto us the Oath of Allegiance, and press us with
much violence to take it; and though that Oath was instituted touching another
people, as by the title of it may appear, which is for suppressing Popish
Recusants; and it was instituted in the sense of that danger which was by such
a people intended against the King and his Government, by the Gunpowder-Plot;
and though afterward it was pressed to the King, that he would grant the
extent of it to all his Subjects, and that he gave his consent so to do, yet it
may be seen by that Law which did so institute it in that case, and upon the
request of that Parliament, that the Intention and mind both of the King and
Parliament, was for the finding out of such a people as did adhere to the Popes
Supremacy; and though it does extend to all, as to the tender of it, yet it is
with certain considerations; as if any Officer of a Township do complain to a
Justice of Peace, that any person or persons above the age of sixteen years, do
not duly repair to their Parish Church, or do not duly receive that which is
called a Sacrament, as in the said Act is more fully expressed, That then in
such cases the Justice of Peace has power to send for such person or persons,
so complained of, by his Warrant, and may tender unto them the said Oath, which
for refusing, he has power to proceed against them, as is appointed by the
said Act: but still it is to be observed, that it is but to discover such
person or persons as privately do adhere to the Popes Supremacy; and therefore
it is expressed in the Oath, that they shall renounce the Pope; and Praemunire
was ordained only against such persons as should purchase Bulls from Rome, as
may be seen in the 16th of Rich. 2d. chap. 5. And now to make this the great
business in Courts, and at other times against us, who are an innocent People,
who deny the Popes Supremacy and all his practices, and to entrap us with it,
as with a snare, because we cannot for Conscience toward God take any Oath at
all, but live in obedience to Christ's Command, who says, Swear not at all;
and it is the matter contained in the Oath that was chiefly intended in the
first institution of it, and now to ensnare us with it upon every occasion, who
make conscience of an Oath, and yet answer the matter as full as any people:
for our peaceable living under the King's Government, does evidently
demonstrate our obedience to him, whilst many others that fear not an Oath, can
swear and yet not answer the matter contained in the Oath; and here we show
forth our obedience to the King, by answering the matter in the Oath; and we
also show forth our true love to God in keeping his Command, for it is Christ's
Command that we do obey in this case; and so it is to us the Conscience of an
Oath, and not wholly the matter; and to proceed against us in this case, is
very hard measure; and how many of us that have suffered Imprisonment, and
spoiling of our goods, and diverse other ways have deeply suffered by it, and
through the practice of it, though we are not at all concerned, by the
intention of those from whom the Oath had its first institution; and for to
fine us, or imprison us in this case, as has been, and is yet practiced, is
not only unreasonable from the consideration of these grounds here mentioned,
but it is also a practice which stands opposite to the Law it self, as in the
42. Edw. 3d. chapter 3. where it is expressed, That for the good government of the
Commons, no man shall be put to answer without presentment before Justices, or
matter of Record, or by due Process and Writ original, according to the old
Law: and if any thing from henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void
and holden for error, etc. Now by this Law none should be put to answer without
Presentment, or matter of Record, or due Process; Therefore to wave a
Presentment upon which the party stands presented, and for which cause he is
summoned there to appear, and does appear, and then to tender the Oath unto
him, and put him strictly to answer whether he will swear or no, it is not
legal in Law; for there is no Presentment, nor matter of Record, nor due
Process against him in that case; and to say, Will you take the Oath of
Allegiance? or, Will you swear? when a Presentment lies against him in another
case, and he stands at the Bar to answer his Charge, and if he do not give a
full Answer to that Question as it is demanded, which as a new thing is
tendered, and goes beside the matter for which he stands presented, and to fine
him, or imprison him, because he does not give a full Answer, is a Proceeding
void in Law, and holden for error; because no man is to be put to answer
without Presentment, or matter of Record, or due Process.

2. To be imprisoned, and kept as a Prisoner, and at the Assizes or Sessions
brought to the Bar as a Prisoner, and then to tender the Oath of Allegiance,
when a man stands a Prisoner at the Bar, and expects a due Trial in order to
his Releasment, and if he desire to hear his Charge, as a Prisoner, which every
Prisoner ought to do, and to call for his Accusers, if any be, who ought to be
there present, and that he stand upon the case of his Imprisonment, and does
not give a full Answer to the Question demanded about the Oath; then to proceed
against him as a refuser of the Oath, and to Fine him, or Imprison him, or
Disseize him of his Freehold, or any other Estate: It is a Proceeding void in
Law, and held for Error; for in that case he should not be put to answer.

3. To be Imprisoned for meeting together to worship God, and to be kept in
Prison many weeks, and then to be brought into a Court and set to a Bar of
Judgment, and there have the Oath tendered, and no charge imposed upon the
Prisoner, touching his Imprisonment, but the Oath alone pressed, and his Answer
required, and for not answering fully to the Question demanded, which generally
is this, Will you take the Oath of Allegiance? Or, Will you Swear? And so to be
Fined, or Imprisoned upon the account of refusing the Oath; or, to have his
Lands and Goods seized, in the case of Praemunire; this is void in Law, and
holden for Error: For no Presentment, nor matter of Record, or due Process in
that case, lies against the Prisoner; and the Law says, That no man, of what
Estate or Condition that he be, shall be put out of Land or Tenement, nor
taken, nor Imprisoned, nor Disinherited, nor put to Death, without being
brought to answer by due Process of the Law, 28. Edw. 3d. Chap. 3. And again
Magna Charta, Chap. 29. No Freeman shall be taken or Imprisoned, or be
Disseized of his Freehold, or Liberties, or free Customs, or be Outlawed or
Exiled, or any other ways Destroyed; nor we will not pass upon him, nor
condemn him but by Lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.
And in 3. Charles 1. And I assure you, my Maxim is, That the Peoples Liberties
strengthens the Kings Prerogative, and that the Kings Prerogative is to defend
the Peoples Liberties. And again, 3. Charles 1. in the Petition of Right, No
Free man to be Imprisoned without cause showed. And how contrary to these
things have men acted against us, who are called Quakers? and how have they
made their Wills their Law, and in their Wills have Imprisoned us, without any
cause at all showed, and have restrained us of our Liberty, though Free men of
England, contrary to Magna Charta, and diverse Statutes which have been made for
the preservation of the Freeborn People of England, of which number we are,
and can challenge as much Liberty by our Birthright, in all just Privileges,
as any People whatsoever? and therefore if the good and sound Law was observed,
we should be outwardly the Freest of all People in this Nation, as inwardly we
are by Christ Jesus, and should not come within the compass of any Law, as
Transgressors; for by the Law it self it is expressed, That the Law of God is
the Law of the Land, and that no man of what estate, degree, or condition he
be, has power to dispense with God's Laws; and the Law of God does not take
hold of the righteous, but sinners, and disobedient, of murderers, and
thieves, and evildoers; and when has the Law taken hold upon us as such a
People? Has evildeeds been found amongst us? or have we ever been brought
before a Judgment Seat, and justly charged with any misdemeanour? And are not
we then cleared by the Law of God, which is righteous? and the Law it self
says, That the Law of God is the Law of the Land, and, no man has power to
dispense with the Law of God; as in the 28. Hen. 8. Chap. 7. And if this was
practiced, then no imprisonment nor restraint, should be by any man exercised
toward us, nor no spoiling of our goods and estates would fall upon any of us,
but in all things we should be Protected by the Law of the Land, as we are
Justified by the Law of God; and then we should meet without any disturbance,
and Worship our God in his unlimitted Spirit, and the Law would stand by us in
it, and in all that we practice in answer to God we should be Protected; and
that which the Lord increases unto us, would not be taken from us, and
spoiled, nor an Oath upon any account would be tendered to us; For by the Law
of God, which is Holy, and Spiritual, and Just, and Good, our Meetings are
lawful, the Increase of our Estates is our own, and our Yea, and Nay, is true
without an Oath, and all that we practice in Conscience toward God, is by the
Law of God justified: And therefore no Law, Statute, or Ordinance, ought to
stand against us, seeing that no man has power to dispense with God's Law.
And, is it not the great cry against us, You will not be obedient to the Laws,
but are a willful People, and run your selves into danger and sufferings in
your own wills, and therefore you deserve to be punished. But let all people
know, that in what we practice, we are justified by the Law of God; and if any
Law in the Land do condemn us, and inflict punishment upon us for our practice,
then it is not what the Law it self says it is, but from another ground; and
we do not run in our own wills to do those things that we practice, but through
a necessity in the eternal motion of God's power we are constrained to bear
testimony unto the Truth, as we have received; and I am very sure that in
answering the Lord in obedience to what he lays upon us, we have the answer of
a good Conscience in it, and peace with God; and his righteous Law justifies
us, and the Law of the Land ought not to condemn us, or punish us; and let
foolish People learn to be wise and not charge the motion of God's Spirit, to
be an unruly Will, lest they be found in the unpardonable sin; for we are a
People unknown amongst the Sons of men, though our Testimony stands in
Innocence to their view, yet our Life is hid from their eyes, and they know us
not, because they know not him. And do not People from their apprehension of
our transgression of the Law, take occasion against us, and persecute and spoil
us, whilst they themselves are the transgressors, and that by their own Law;
which says, The Law of God is the Law of the Land: And the Law of God says,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; but he that will Imprison him, and
spoil his goods, and persecute him, does not love him, so is a transgressor;
but we are free, and the Law of God does not charge guilt upon us, nor condemn
us in the things we practice; and therefore it must needs be that such as act
against us are the transgressors, and whatsoever stands for Law this day, which
does condemn our practice, and punish us for the using of it, the same does
differ from the Law of God, and so degenerates from that Conclusion which the
Law it self makes, and in plain words expresses, That the Law of God is the
Law of the Land. And through the miscarriages of men toward us, whose wills
have wrested the Law in diverse cases, we have through such things deeply
suffered; and yet the yoke is continued upon us, and our Innocence is made a
prey upon, for we being a quiet People, and disposed in the principle of Love
toward all men, and cannot seek revenge upon any, therefore are our
afflictions increased, whether with Law, or without Law, or against Law, it is
not by many much regarded, as in diverse cases might be truly instanced, which
is at present waved.

And seeing that the Law it self does make such a Conclusion of its own
standing, that it is the Law of God, then to examine a little some particulars,
and places in it, if in all things it have perfect agreement with the Law of
God; for the Law of God is pure, holy, just and good; and as it has been
showed, that the practice in diverse cases does degenerate from the Law of the
Land, so it may come to pass that the Law of the Land may degenerate from the
Law of God; for the Law of God speaks on this wise,

1. Thou shall not bow to any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing; And
whatsoever is set up, and not by the Spirit of the Lord, is graven out of an
imagination, and is an Image, and to bow unto that thing is to bow unto a
graven Image; and if the Law of the Land do restrain from such a practice, then
it stands right, but if it do allow such things, or rather compel people to
practice such things, then does it degenerate from the Law of God.

2. The Law of God says, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain; And to Swear by his Name, is to take his Name in vain; and if the Law of
the Land do restrain people from all manner of Oaths, then it stands right,
but if it do allow such things, or rather in some cases, compel into such
things, then does it degenerate from the Law of God.

3. Christ Jesus the Lawgiver says, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and thy
Neighbor as thy self; and to love God, is to keep his Commandments; and to
love a Neighbor, as to love a man's self, is to do him good, and not to harm
him; Now if the Law of the Land do encourage such things, then it stands
right, but if it do allow the breaking of God's Commands, and teach men so; or
if it do allow one Neighbor to spoil the goods of another, or in some cases
rather compel such things to be done, then it does degenerate from the Law of
God, and from the Doctrine of Christ Jesus.

4. Christ Jesus the Lawgiver says, God is a Spirit, and must be worshipped in
Spirit and in Truth; Now if the Law of the Land do allow such a worship and
protect it, then it stands right, but if it do prohibit it, or rather compel
from it, then it does degenerate from the Law of God, and from the Doctrine of
Christ Jesus; and in this case, two things are very considerable to be minded,
and not to be practiced.

1. Not to bind Peoples Consciences into any Practice, or into any Worship
which in their own Conscience they are not persuaded into, nor to compel a
Conformity unto any Practice or Worship which stands not in the Spirit and in
the Truth; for to use Force and Compelling-Laws in such Cases, is but to force
People to bow unto an Image, or to the likeness of a thing which the Law of God
does expressly forbid.

2. Not to prohibit or forbid People for meeting together in any place, or at
any time above such a number; for this is to limit God, if it were possible,
and to restrain tender Consciences from their holy Exercise in God's Spirit,
and to keep them from the pure Worship, which stands in the Spirit, and in
the Truth only; and to stop them from that practice which the Father seeks them
to perform; for Christ says, the Father seeks such to worship him: and no
Law of the Land ought to take place to diminish that Liberty which any People
have in the Spirit, nor to prohibit that Worship that is performed to God in
the Spirit, though in the practice there may be contrary minds amongst them;
for the Spirit of the Lord God is free, and without limitation; and all that
are born of the Spirit they are a freeborn People, and their Worship stands
singly to God in the Spirit and in the Truth; and though there may be a
difference in Worships outwardly, and amongst the Worshippers in point of
practice, yet none ought by any outward Law, either to compel or prohibit each
other, for that is peculiar to God alone; and no man is to stand up in Judgment
concerning it, or to bind the Conscience of another by an outward Law, either
to observe the one, or to deny the other; for whoever has outward Power to
rule, and would set that Power to judge in matters of Conscience, Worship and
Religion, and from their own Judgment in such cases, make Laws, to compel to
one thing, and to restrain from another thing, such Laws do degenerate from the
Law of God, and from the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, and from his Life and
Wisdom: And therefore these things considered and weighed, it will be found of
great necessity to search well into the Laws; and where any are found to oppose
the righteous Law of God, and yet stand in force in any such case, to repeal
them, that so the Law of the Land may be reduced into the truth of its own
saying, and stand in Justice, Equity and Mercy, as does the Law of God; then
Persecution would cease about Religion, and there would be a stream of perfect
Liberty to all tender Consciences, and no Restraint would be upon any in case
of Worship or Religion, otherwise living peaceably in the Nation; so would
hearts and minds of men come into Love, into Peace, and into Settlement and
good Order, and it would allay all the heat and heart-burnings amongst men, and
cool them and quiet them; and then there would not need Swords and Spears to
preserve Order: for People coming to that of God in themselves, and worshipping
and serving God in the Spirit and in the Truth, and every one standing in the
Spirit's Liberty; then People would settle and be quiet, and love one another,
and be at Peace one amongst another, and there would be good Order through the
Nation; but this being wanting, and Compelling-Laws ruling, it makes Broils in
the Nation, and causes Distractions amongst People, which would be prevented,
if Liberty in matter of Worship and Religion was granted and tolerated: And
what harm would this do to any man? or what prejudice could come to any man by
so doing? Surely none at all, but rather happiness both to such as rule, and
such as are ruled; and the comfort of it would be found to be very great unto
all that truly fear the Lord: And this is the Liberty which the King's
Prerogative is to defend, according to the Maxim of Charles the first. But
however it has been, or yet is with us in these cases outwardly, our trust is
in the Lord God, and in him we do rejoice; and we desire that all people were
like-minded with us, and were as we are, except our Bonds and Afflictions; for
the Presence of the Lord God is with us, and by his Arm we are supported, and
through all these things the Truth stands, and that is the Word of the Lord
to all people, Truth stands: And if any yet think with themselves that with
their strength they can prevail against the Truth, then let them try their
strength, but let them also mind what will be the end of it; for this I know in
the Truth, that whosoever rises against the Truth will toil themselves in vain,
and spend their strength for naught, and in the end will lie down in sorrow;
for Truth stands: And how many have come up, and have appeared in full
strength, and have been permitted to have a blow at Truth? but how are they
wasted, and how are they passed away and perished! yet Truth stands.
Therefore all people, fear the living God, and in time be warned, for no weapon
formed against the Truth shall prosper; for Truth stands over all, and Christ
Jesus reigns, his Power, and Glory and Dignity is set on high, and in his
Love all Wrath is swallowed up; and here is the beginning known, and here is
the ending set; for the Love of God was first, and the Love of God is last, and
here is the finishing of the Work, and the closing up in perfect Peace; and
with this Love all contrary Beings are comprehended, and in its own Being it
remains unchangeable, and it is Truth and no lie; and Truth stands, Glory to
the Most High for ever and ever, Amen.

W. S.
Here is the Wisdom and Patience of the Saints: Who have ears to hear, let them
hear.
THE END.

