THE WORK OF Gods Power in Man, WITH Something that the Spirit of Truth leads
to practice, and what it leads to deny.

Given forth in love to the Seed that yet lies in bondage under the Works of
darkness, that all who are professing God and Christ in words, and observing
forms out of the power, may behold the work of the power, and that such amongst
them who breaths after God, may be informed into the right way, and come into
unity and fellowship with the Saints in Light, who in the power inherit the
blessing.

The way of God is not as the way of man: Therefore let all consider their way.
W. S.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663.

The Work of God's Power in Man, etc.
MAn being fallen and degenerated from the Life and Power of God in which he
was created good, he is become an evil-worker, filled with evil thoughts, words
and deeds, his heart and mind unclean, defiled and poluted; his soul burdened,
oppressed and afflicted; and here man lies in the mire of uncleanness, and
there is not a whole part in him, but wheresoever he lies down, he defiles
himself; and yet in this state he would be comprehending God and Christ, and in
his fallen wisdom would be applying the benefits of Christ for his comfort and
satisfaction; not at all considering that he is alienated from God by evil
works, nor regarding the power of God in himself by which the evil works are
destroyed, for of a truth, man must be changed by the power of God, if ever he
come to be truly happy; that nature must be killed which is alive, and that
must be quickened and raised which is in death, or man cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God; therefore all ye that profess God and Christ, and
Christianity, and are not yet changed into the nature of that which ye do
profess; consider seriously this short Testimony unto the Power of God, and the
Work of it in man.

1. There is a time in which God visits the sons and daughters of men; for he
beholds all people in the fall, out of the right way, and his tender compassion
moves, and his love opens, and with the Light of his Life he lets man see
the evil of his doings; for it is a certain truth, that the love of God is
tendered unto man in the Light, which does discover his sin, and that is the
day of his Visitation, wherein God willing to make known his loving kindness
unto man, he sends his only begotten Son, who is the true Light, that all in
him might belive and all by him might come to life; and seeing that man ennot
hide any thing so secretly, but that something in him does find it out, then
let him believe that it is of God which so discovers his secret intents; for it
is God that searches the heart, and there is not another way that leads unto
life, but the Light which from the Life is made manifest; for Christ is the
Light, the Way, the Truth and the Life; and all other ways lead from the Truth
and from the Life; and whosoever rejects the Light, they reject the Love of
God, the way to God, and the Truth of God, and so rejects Christ by whom they
should come to God; for Christ is the way to God, and there is ^ot another; and
his Light is manifest from the Love and Life ^o^ God, to convince every man
that in sin abides. And this is the time of convincing.

2. There is a time when man comes so to be smitten by the Light of Christ in
his Conscience, as that he is brought to stand still and consider his way, and
with the Light he comes to see the evil of his doings, and there he feels the
Light to be a Witness against him, and a Reprover of him, and so comes to be
made sensible of his own wretchedness and misery, and to feel the burden lie
upon him, and the sin every way to beset him; and then the cry rises in him,
Who shall deliver me from the body of sin and death? Then he begins to look who
shall appear for him, and help him in his distress, and who shall deliver him
out of the trouble and affliction wherein he lies; his sin is now his burden;
and that which he has had pleasure in, is loathsome to him, and he groans
under the weight of it, and travels in pain in the sense of great oppression;
and here he is compassed about with grief, trouble and sorrow, all his sins
come up in order before him, and the Light of Christ stands a Witness against
him, and executes Judgment upon him, and he knows not which way to look for
comfort, he feels the hand of God correcting him, and the stripes to fall upon
him, and which way soever he would escape, he is pursued; peace he cannot come
unto, rest he cannot find, and so is made willing to fall into the hand of God,
seeing that all his own strength cannot help him; and without Christ appear for
his redemption, he is miserable for ever; and so the Candle of the Lord being
lighted in man, he comes to see every corner of his own House, and all secret
things that have been wrought and acted in darkness, they all come into his
view, and there man sees himself defiled, poluted and unclean, and sees that no
unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of God; and so he begins to abhor
himself, and come to repentance for all the evil that he has done, and the sin
that he has committed, and begins to wait in the Light to receive power over
his corruptions, and so comes to hearken to the voice which reproves him, which
is the voice of Christ, and begins to regard when reproof comes, and there his
heart comes to be touched with the power of Christ, and with the power is
turned from the evil unto the good: And this is the time of Conversion.

3. There is a time when the Power works Redemption, by drawing and leading man
out of the sin, and so he comes to forsake the evil of his own way, and the
devices of his own heart, and begins to feel the power working in him, and
redeeming him out of those things wherein he has lived, to himself; and deaths
shadow begins to be broken, and the life begins to rise and come up into some
liberty, and then man knows his Redeemer lives, and the Power gives him ease
where he has been burdened, and sets him free where he has been captivated,
and so the Power helps him where he cannot help himself, and delivers him where
he cannot deliver himself; and the Power strikes over that Nature in Judgment,
in which sin is conceived and nourished, and so makes man conformable to the
death of Christ, and brings him into fellowship with his sufferings, and so he
is made one with Christ in his death and sufferings, by which he comes to the
virtue of his resurrection; and there his death and sufferings is known, by
passing through the same in the Work of the Power, by which Power Redemption is
wrought out of that nature which is evil, into that nature which is good, and
so man comes to be redeemed up to God by the Work of his Power, and enters into
the Power, where he receives true Faith, and by Faith in the Power he obtains
victory over the sin which has been his burden, and by the power he begins to
rise in the immortal Seed, and there feels Christ to be the resurrection and
the Life, and by his resurrection and life Man is redeemed out of death, and is
made a partaker of the riches of his Grace, in which all the benefits come to
be witnessed, to the comfort and satisfaction of the soul; and so Christ is
made Redemption unto all that in his power believe. And this is the time of
Redemption.

4. There is a time when the Power works salvation, in saving from the sin out
of which it redeemeth; for Christ is the Power of God to salvation; and by his
Power he rebukes temptation, so that when temptations would draw the mind into
those things again out of which there is Redemption, then the Faith standing in
the Power, and the eye looking unto Christ by Faith, he appears to save from
the sin which the temptation would draw into; and here Christ is felt to be a
Savior that saves his people from their sins, (mark) saves his people from
their sins; for they are his people that are redeemed by him: And though there
be a liablenesse to temptations after Redemption be witnessed, yet abiding in
the Power, they are his people, and he is their salvation, and so he keeps them
by his mighty power through Faith, he keeps them out of the evil, and keeps
them in the good; and so he that believes, is saved, he does not enter into
temptations, though temptations may be presented to him, but is kept and saved
by the power; for as Redemption draws out of the sin, so does Salvation save
from the sin, and yet the same Power; for it is not one thing that redeems, and
another thing that saves; but it is the Power which works effectually in
both; and so Christ a Redeemer, and Christ a Savior, and they that are saved
by him, they rejoice in his salvation, for he brings salvation in the creatures
weakness; and this is his salvation, wrought by the Arm of his Power; for if
people do not feel Christ to be nearer to them for Redemption and Salvation,
then where they apprehend him to be without them, they cannot feel the joy of
his salvation; for temptations are within, and if Christ be not there also to
rebuke them, and save from them, there is no man can prevail by his own
strength; but where the mind joins to his power within, and stands in his
power, there is eternal salvation obtained. And this is the time of salvation.

5. There is a time when the Power works Regeneration; for having converted,
redeemed and saved, it has a free course in man, and works effectually for the
changing and renewing of him, striking over all the old Nature, and the deeds
of it, and crucifies them down into the death, and buries them in the baptism
of sufferings, where man becomes a dying man, dies to the World, dies to his
Will, his Wisdom, his Apprehensions and conceivings; and the Power crucifies
man unto all, and all unto man; and he passes through death in the operation
of the Power; for the Power passes through the whole man, killing the lusts,
burning the chaff, consuming the dross, and dissolving the Earth, and raises
man out of the earthly habitations, and so cuts off the seed of the evil-doer,
and takes away the sin; and there the first Adam dies, and the second Adam
rises, and brings up the immortal soul in his hand; and then all things are
made new by the Work of the Power, a new birth is born, which has a new heart,
mind and tongue, from which proceeds new thoughts, words and deeds; for
behold, the Work of the Power makes all things new, and so man comes to be
regenerated and born again of in corruptible Seed, which is a mystery to all
apprehenders and conceivers; he dies to self, and receives a new life in
Christ, and has a new Name given him, which no man can read but he that has
it. And this is the time of Regeneration.

5. There is a time when the Power works sanctification, by cleansing all
that out of man which has defiled him; for the fire consumes, but the water
cleanses, and so purges the Conscience, and purifieth the heart, and makes
man clean within; for Christ prepares the soul as a Bride for her Husband,
sending forth his pure Water to wash away all spots and stains, and so puts on
the Garment of his Righteousness, and in the Life of his own Righteousness he
beholds the soul, and is in love with it, and so marries it to himself in a
perpetual Covenant never to be broken; then he that sanctifies, and they that
are sanctified, are all of one; Mercy and Truth is met Righteousness and Peace
kisseth each other; and here man is made the Righteousness of God in Christ,
and so is righteous even as he is righteous; for it is Christ that now lives
in man, and is righteous in man, and is made righteousness unto man, in which
righteousness the Saints are approved and accepted of God: Oh! let not any
grow wise by apprehension, for I am not answering that part, my love is to the
Seed, and my heart is broken in the sense of what I now write; but I am not to
write much concerning these Mysteries, left any should take them up, and say it
is done: But let all know, That this is the time of Sanctification.

7. There is a time when the Power works Justification, having brought man
unto God, and made him acceptable unto God, he is then justified before God,
for he is married unto Christ, and is one with Christ; and in Christ Jesus
there is no condemnation, and if no condemnation, then justification; for that
which is condemned, is not justified; neither is that which is justified
condemned; but that which is sanctified, is justified: For man in the first
Adam cannot be justified, but in the second Adam he is sanctified, accepted and
justified, and in his Life man in herits the peace, and the joy, and the
blessing. And this is the time of Justification.

Now as this Work is wrought in man by the power of God, he comes to enjoy the
fullness of Truth which is in God, for God is Truth in fullness; and the Spirit
by which the Truth is measured forth and manifested, it is the Spirit of Truth;
and as the Truth is received in the Spirit's manifestation, so the mind is
constrained into obedience; and the Spirit being answered in obedience, it
leads up into a larger measure of the fullness, and by degrees it brings
into the fullness; for the Spirit of truth leads into all truth, (mark) into
all truth; and being all, there is nothing wanting, which being attained in the
leadings of the Spirit, the soul comes into everlasting rest in God: And so by
the leadings of the Spirit there is a growth in the truth, and a passing on
from one degree to another, until the fullness be enjoyed, and all are to mind
the measure of truth in which they stand, and to answer the movings and
leadings of the Spirit, that in the truth they may grow and prosper; for as the
truth is lived in according to measure, there is a growth to be felt and
witnessed in it, a growth in understanding, growing up from children to young
men, and from young men to ancients, and so in understanding come to be men,
not by apprehension and conceiving, but by revelation and possessing; and as
the growth comes to be felt in the truth, so there is a decay of all that which
is out of the truth; and that which has been manifested by any practice out of
the truth, that comes to dye; for as the root is destroyed, so does the
branches dye, and then the Truth brancheth forth in its own nature, and
manifests it self according to its nature, and that is the principal of all
good works; and the good works which are wrought and manifested by it, they are
of God, and being of God they are truth; for there is not any thing besides him
true: And all good works that are wrought in him, and manifested from him, they
are approved by him; and so they that have true faith, they have good works
also, yea such good works as may be seen of men: So that the practice in the
truth is from the principle of truth, by all that are of the truth: And though
something of such a practice may be observed by such as are out of the truth
yet that does not make the practice in the truth to be ever the less glorious
in it self; for it is the principle that makes the practice true, and not the
practice that makes the principle true: But where the practice of any does
wholly degenerate from the practice in the truth, that principle does plainly
manifest its nature by what is practiced, and neither principle nor practice is
true: But where the practice of truth stands in the principle of truth, there
is the nature of the root manifested by the branch, and so the Tree is good,
and the fruit is good. And will not many speak well of the Life of such as live
in the practice of truth, and yet speak evil of their principle, and so would
make the fruit good, and the tree corrupt, which thing cannot be: for not any
thing that is truly good, can proceed from that which is evil, as the ground of
its conception. So if the life of such as are guided by the Light, do not
answer their principle in all righteousness, then people might have some cause
to say, that their principle is delusion, and they a deluded people; but if it
be so as their lives do sufficiently demonstrate, then let all people
acknowledge that their principle is truth, and that God is their God, and that
they are his people. So let all people consider their way, and behold what they
practice; for the Spirit of truth leads into all truth, and so brings forth
good fruit in all holiness and righteousness of life, and that life springs
from the Spirit as from its root, and is made manifest as it is the Work of
God, and it answers the righteous principle of God in every man; and that
which is manifested by the Spirit of Truth, and practiced by those that live in
the truth; and also what they cannot practice as being out of the truth, are
these things following.

1. They worship God in spirit and truth; but the evil worship they cannot
observe: They bow to the Name of Jesus, and cannot bow to any graven Image; for
the Name of Jesus is their life.

2. They live a godly and righteous life, walking in sobriety, moderation,
temperance, meekness, gentleness, patience, love, justice, mercy and truth;
they do unto all men as they would be done unto.

3. They honor God alone, and honor all men in the Lord; but they cannot give
flattering titles unto men, nor respect persons in the vain customs.

4. They are conformable unto Christ; but they cannot conform to fashions and
traditions; they cannot live in the lust of the flesh and the pride of life;
they cannot be excessive in meats, drinks and apparel; but what is needful,
they use it in its place, but cannot use any more.

5. They speak the words of truth and soberness; but that which is out of the
Truth they cannot speak; for You to one, is not in the truth; but Thou to one,
is in the truth; and they speak it as it is the Language of the Spirit.

6. Their word is truth in what they speak, and they faithfully answer what
they promise; but they cannot be bound by bonds of men to cause them to perform
what they may require; for by their word they are bound to perform if they make
a promise; for their word is truth.

7. They testify the truth when they are required; but they dare not swear at
all: They love Christ, and keep his command; and they cannot answer what is
commanded contrary; for all his commands are righteous unto them, and they
choose to obey him rather then men.

8. They love the Lord God and one another; but the wickedness of the wicked
their souls abhor: They are truly tender to that which is good in all; but they
cannot join with that which is evil; for the good is their rest.

These things, with much more of this nature, is practiced by such as are led
by the Spirit of Truth, and is manifested from the Spirit as fruit of its
nature; and where it is not so, the Spirit of Truth does not lead; and so
people profess Christ, but conform to the customs and fashions of the world,
which they that are led by the Spirit, cannot do; for the Spirit teaches them
to deny all customs of the world, which are vain; and not only so, but teaches
them to testify against the World, and the deeds of evil which by them are
observed; and this is good fruit brought forth from the good Tree, and is not
like the corrupt fruit of the corrupt Tree; and so the Tree is known by its
fruit, for thereby does every Tree manifest its nature.

Now let him that reads, understand, for this is declared that all may
believe that Christ is the Power of God, and that the Power of God is in man,
and that the Power of God works the Work of God; for you that cannot endure
to hear of the Light and Power of Christ within, you will not endure sound
Doctrine, but cry out against it as the greatest delusion; and you say your
Faith is in Christ without you, and you bebelieve that by his death he has
done all for you, and by his blood you are justified, and by his imputed
righteousness you are accepted. Now consider the ground of your Faith, who is
the Author of it, and how was it wrought, seeing there is but one true Faith,
and seeing that true Faith stands in the power of God, and seeing Christ is the
power of God according to Scripture: Now is your Faith within you or without
you? if within you, then Christ is there also, for he is the Author of true
Faith; if without you, then it cannot purify your hearts, which is the Work of
Faith, for faith purifies the heart; and if you will not have Christ within
you, then not faith within you, and then not pure hearts, and what good does
all your apprehensions do you, if you cannot witness pure hearts? they that
are in the unbelief, can but lie there: And what better are you by your Faith,
then they that that have no Faith at all? For all men have not Faith. This is
in tender pity to you, that you might once look within, and have regard to that
which does reprove you; for that which cries peace when there is no peace, will
not do you any good; that was ever the Message of the false prophets, to cry
peace to that nature which lived and ruled over the good Seed, and that never
did people any good, but became a hinderance to them for following on to know
the Lord, and they wanted peace in the latter end; let no such Message
strengthen you where you are, nor persuade not your selves thereby that you are
what you are not, for if you do so, you do but deceive your selves, and there
is no greater danger then to grow strong in that part which God will break, and
wise in that part which God will destroy; and whosoever strengthens you in that
nature, and cries peace to you there, they are such as run when God sends them
not, and they only please that life which must come to death.

Friends, the truest love is in plain dealing, there is no deceit in that, but
the truth is spoken to every state and condition as it is; and though there may
be a part that likes not reproof, yet the love reaches to something that lies
under that which is reproved; for all people would have love; and mercy, and
peace, but they start aside when reproof comes, that is, the sound doctrine,
which they will not endure; and though love, mercy and peace be in God, yet the
birth of the flesh is not therein concerned, and therefore it must be reproved
before the love, mercy and peace of God be obtained for you that talk so much
of Justification by Christ, whilst you are not changed and renewed by the work
of his power, you have yet a large journey to go before you can come to that
place where Justification is witnessed, for he does not justify any in sin,
though he justify the ungodly, which is a sentence often urged as a proof for
justification in ungodliness; and where such doctrine is received, it gives
the flesh an occasion to use its liberty; for a man may sometimes have been
ungodly, and such were some of you, says the Apostle; but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. (Mark) here was not justification in the
ungodliness, but here was washing and sanctifying, and then justifying such as
had been ungodly, justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus (mark that;) for
Abraham as pertaining to the flesh, found nothing, but believing in God, he
found the Seed, and his Faith was counted unto him for righteousness; and
being come to the righteousness by faith, the reward was reckoned not of Works,
and so a debt; but it was reckoned of Grace, and Abraham was justified in the
righteousness, and not in the ungodliness, and so he received the sign of
Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had, yet being
uncircumcised, who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the
Father of many Nations, according to that which was spoken, So shall thy Seed
be: Therefore to apply justification by Christ whilst people are found sinners,
is to exclude the Work of Christ in man, who appears to take away sin, and to
bring in everlasting righteousness, and to justify man in his own
righteousness; for in no other thing can man stand justified before God who is
righteous, and this is a Truth shall stand for ever. And they go on too fast
that would be justified before they submit to reproof; for Christ must be
received as he is a reprover, before any can know him as a justifier; and so
man being filled with his apprehensions, he is vainly puffed up with his fleshly
mind, and knows nothing concerning Christ as he ought to know; for people in
that state are too high, their apprehensions of justification lifts them up,
and they will not stoop nor bow to such a low degree as to reproof, they are
too wise in their own eyes by their apprehensions, and filled too full with
their own conceivings, and so loses the sense of hunger and thirst after
Christ, and that which should live by him, is in want of him; for where can any
come to feed upon Christ, if they find him not within them? How can they eat
his flesh and drink his blood, if he be not within them? And can any have life
in him if they do not eat his flesh and drink his blood? Or can any eat that
flesh that was crucified in times past, and drink that blood which was shed, as
it is flesh and blood without them? Nay, nay, there must be a nearer communion
with Christ; if any eat his flesh, and drink his blood, they must feel him to
be within them, and his fan must go in his hand within them, and his fire must
burn up the Chaff, and his water must wash away the uncleanness, and they must
be wholly separated from that nature which cannot come into communion with him:
And they must be wholly separated from that nature which cannot come into
communion with him: And this must all people know before they eat his flesh and
drink his blood.

Therefore all you that profess God and Christ in words, and apprehend your
Justification where you are, do not deceive your selves with such an uncertain
hope, for it will fail fail you in the latter end; and now learn of Christ
whilst his love is to you; learn meekness and lowliness, that your souls in
him may find true rest, yea a rest within, and that in this present World; for
you are not at rest amongst your apprehensions, but are tossed with diverse
conceivings concerning the Scriptures, and are wearying your selves in an
endless travel; and though you may apprehend a rest to your selves, and
persuade your selves that all is well, yet there is a day wherein you will know
that it is poluted, and out of that rest you must arise and depart, if ever you
come to find rest in Christ: And this is a truth which many can witness this
day, who sometimes were like-minded with you, and did apprehend that they were
that which indeed they were not, when the mighty day of the Lord broke forth in
them, they were made sensible of the sparks of their own kindling, and the
light of their own fire, in which they were vvalking, and were made to cry
unto the Lord in bitterness of spirit, who appeared to be a God gracious and
merciful to them, and with the Arm of his Power plucked them as brands out of
that fire, and in judgment and mercy has gathered them into his own Covenant;
and in what principle stands your fellowship if it stand not in the Light? Or
can there be any true fellowship but in the Light? Must there not be a perfect
principle where there is a perfect unity? And is not the Light of Christ
perfect? And must not the heart, mind and soul be bound together in the Light,
if there be perfect unity? Was the Saints unity and fellowship in any other
principle? Or did they hold forth unity with such as did not walk in the
Light? Or did they not labor to gather them into their principle, and so into
their fellowship? That ye may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship
is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Here was their fellowship
in the Truth, Light, Life and Power of God; and they did not say that they had
fellowship with such as were not in the Truth, but they held forth the Truth,
that such as were out of the Truth might be gathered into the Truth, and come
into fellowship with us; (Mark) not that ye have fellowship with us, or we
with you where you are, but that ye may have fellowship with us; and this
was true love in the Saints to such as were contrary-minded, yet not such a
love as could close in unity, but such a love as did manifest pity; and it is
the same unto you this day: For the Lord knows the labor and travel of all his
faithful Servants, Ministers and Messengers, whom he has raised in the power
of his life to preach the everlasting Gospel, upon whom the glory of his Life
rests, how that they have not done his Work negligently, but have run to and
fro in the movings of his power, to declare his everlasting Truth, that all
might be gathered to the Truth, and come into fellowship in the Truth, knowing
in the counsel of the Lord (whose servants they are) that no perfect unity or
fellowship can be held in any other principle; and they have never denied
fellowship with any that have come to their principle, if it was in never so
little a measure, if it was in the Light and Truth, they could have unity
with them there, yea, with the weakest breathing, and lowest desire after
the Truth, their souls have ever rejoiced to meet with any there, and their
love and tenderness have ever been abundantly manifested to all simple hearted
ones, though in practice they have lien different from them at present, for
they have fell to the Seed where it has been, and in tender compassion has
ever been ready to help and relieve the distressed; but they could never speak
peace to the oppression; and God does abundantly reward them for their service
and labor of love, and by the mighty Power of God through their Ministry, many
sons and daughters are come to glory, who are in perfect love, peace and unity
together, and established in everlasting righteousness, in the unchangeable
Seed of God. So all must come to the Power of God, that come unto perfect
unity, otherwise they are but in the changeable nature, and in the changeable
unity; but where the power is submitted unto, it works out the changeable
nature of the flesh, and raises the unchangeable nature of the Lamb, and
gathers the heart, mind and soul into union with him, and so makes a complete
and perfect body, in his complete and perfect life, where all drinks into one
spirit, and feeds upon one bread: And here the unity is held in the Spirit, and
it is sealed in the bond of peace. Therefore feel the power of God in your
selves, that your minds be subjected into stilness and quietness; for you are
too full of business, always thronging and cumbring your selves about many
things, which draws you from the one thing which should make you happy. Oh
that you would once hearken and obey! How well would it be with you to what it
is! For really there is a pity reaches to you, and many sad complaints are
taken up for you, considering what longings and pantings there has been in
many of you after God. Oh remember the years past, when your visitation was
upon you, and the springings of God's love was fresh in you, then were you
broken, and melted, and humbled before the Lord, and you had a fervent zeal for
God according to what you knew, the day star did rise unto you, but you was not
acquainted with it, nor did not understand that it would have led you where the
young child was, and so not regarding, you lost the sight of it, and turned
your faces toward the West, where the Sun sets in obscurity: Oh! shall you
not be lamented because of this? yea surely you are, and through the
lamentation there is compassion to that which first breathed in you, and
through the compassion there is judgment issues forth to that Spirit which
has betrayed you; and here I may include all such as have lost their first
Love, whether by apprehending Christ without them or within them; for there
stands the Traitor in all, to draw the mind into apprehensions and conceivings,
and so from waiting upon God in the principle of his Light and Life, there to
be kept in the fresh sense and feeling of the pleasant streams that issue from
the fullness, and so to grow and increase through the virtue and nourishment
thereby received; and how has apprehensions and conceivings come over that
sweet dispensation of Love, yea and Life in measure, which in years past was
felt by many? And how does death reign in them? And how is the precious Seed of
God oppressed? Oh that you would consider, whoever you are that have let in
apprehensions and conceivings of Christ, whether you apprehend him without you
or within you! the birth of his life you do not know in that state; for none
can compass his pure life by any apprehension; therefore let all cease from
their apprehensions and conceivings; and with the power of God silence all
flesh, and wait to feel the Work of the power in you, and be faithful to the
power, and then you will know Christ of whom you speak, and dare speak no more
then what you can witness, nay, nor that neither, but as the life moves to do
it; for what good does all your words that you speak with the old tongue? Can
they reach any deeper then the old nature? Or is their service any more then to
build up that which God will throw down? Were it not better for you to be still
and silent, then to cumber your selves in so much business that profits nothing
at all? Oh that you would once come to be silent to the flesh, that you might
feel the quickening of the Spirit; and to that state you must come, if ever you
be truly happy; for mercy apprehended, will not satisfy your souls, but mercy
obtained in the election through judgment to the reprobation, is that which
stands sure for ever; and they that so obtain mercy with the Lord, they truly
rejoice in mercy, and wait to be preserved in it; for there are too many words
spoken with the old tongue, and there is a time when every man's own words will
become his burden; therefore do not increase your burden by multiplying your
own words, for certainly they all gender to bondage, the innocent life groans
under them; for every word spoken, and not in the life, is a burden to the
righteous Seed; and if you yet say in your hearts, Our tongues are our own, we
will prevail, who is Lord over us? You will certainly know your burden will be
too heavy to bear in the later end, and though you may bring Scriptures that
does allow to speak of the things of God, and to exhort one another, and edify
one another, and build up one another, yet you cannot bring any Scripture that
does allow the old tongue to do it, neither can it be truly so done by it; for
they that spoke of the things of God, and exhorted one another, and edified one
another according to Scripture, they witnessed their change out of the old
nature, and were come to the silence of all flesh, and they were of the new
birth, which was not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of
God; and the tongue of the new birth spoke to edification and comfort of the
body; for it is the first born of God that speaks the things of God; and so
they exhorted one another, and edified one another; who were born of the Seed
of God. And this you must come unto, if ever you know the tongue of the
learned; for whilst you speak of your selves, you are but seeking your own
glory; but he that seeks the glory of him that sends him, the same is true, and
there is no unrighteousness in him; therefore do not hunt in Nimrod's nature to
build Babel, but feel the power of God to bridle your tongue; for if the tongue
be not bridled the Religion is vain; and if you will but come to that, then
you will know the svveetness of a silent, quiet state, where Gods presence
is felt, and his life enjoyed, where all man's own words have their period;
for they that come to the life, they need not be always learning, but sit in
the svveetness of the savor that the life ministers from its own fullness; and
when words are spoken from the life, they have the svveetness of the life in
them, and are precious and savoury to the life in all, and the life is the last
Ministration that ever shall be, and all below it, are to come up into it; for
where any fall short of it, their labor will end in sorrovv. Oh therefore be
humble before the Lord God, and stand submitted unto his power, that ye may
come to his life; who have any breathings after life, and spend not your days
in the multitude of your own words, lest you finish your work in a shadow, and
miss the substance which should do you good. So be humble in the fear of God,
that ye may feel the time of refreshing come from his presence; and do not
covet after Riches, but wait in the poverty to be fed with God's mercy; for it
is better to be a doorkeeper in the House of God, then to dwell in the Tents
of wickedness: And all that would enter into the Courts of the Lord's House,
and come to feed at the Table of the Lord, they must enter in by the Power, and
sit down in the Power, where all the Lambs and Babes are fed with plenty; for
the Famine is without the Gates, but within there is all things good for food,
the feast of fat things is there prepared, and thither must all come that
receive the Bread of life.

Well Friends, my love is tenderly to the Seed of God in you, but in that nature
where you are, I cannot say that I have unity with you, though I heartily
desire that I could say it in truth, yea much rather then to declare the
contrary; but so it is, and so it must be until you be regenerated and born
again, which work I wait to see wrought in you, that all the children of Light
may so know you, as to say in truth, they have unity with you: Which work I
leave with God, who is able in his own time to accomplish what is wanting, and
to gather together in one such as are scattered, and to bring them into one
Fold, and into one Pasture, where his Name is one, and his people one, not by
apprehension and opinion, but in truth and life; which is the singleness of
heart I desire, that so it may be with you before the day pass over, for now
it is, therefore prize it whilst it is, lest it pass away from you and be no
more. And this is true love to all your souls, that ye in the Light may come
into unity with the Saints and Household of Faith, who sit in peace and rest
with God, and inherit their portion in the Riches of his Kingdom.

The 5th. Month, 1663.
THE END.

