A Spiritual Prospective GLASS. Through which the Rulers and people of England,
may plainly see those things which concerns their peace. Being a manifestation
from the Spirit of God, in love to all people. By one that desires the
prosperity of truth, and the peace of the Nation.

W. Smith.

In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, and the Light shines in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not,

Jo. 1. 4. 5. For God who commanded the Light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts to give the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the fear of Jesus Christ,

2 Cor. 4. 6. Printed in the Year, 1670.

To the Reader.
READER.
IF absolute necessity did not constrain to make a discovery of that which does
occasion desolation, and to inform all concerned wherein they wrong both
themselves and others, and so to set the truth before the face of all people,
it would be more satisfaction to fit in stilness then in such a manner to
appear in public, and though the innocent dwell in that Love which endures
all things, yet where severity oppresses their innocence, it causes them to
manifest the truth on their own behalf, and also for the benefit of such by
whom they are oppressed, and for this very end is the matter published which in
this little book is contained, for if any conclude that the Innocent Quakers
suffer as evil doers, they make there conclusion without a good understanding,
and none are to conclude a matter until it be fully cleared by sufficient
evidence, and whoever thou art into whose hands this little book may be
ordered, thou art desired to read it or hear it, in meekness, and to consider
the matter in it as becomes true Wisdom and sound Judgment, and so by thy
own temperance and moderation, thou may reap proffit, and do thy self good,
Farewell.

W. S.

A Spiritual Prospective Glass, etc.
IT is not to be questioned but the Rulers and people of England do acknowledge
and confess that Christ Jesus is their Redeemer and Savior, and that they are
Christians through the Faith they have in his death and Resurrection, and
therefore to be hoped that the ensuing matter may meet with better respect and
entertainment in Relation to Christ an practice, for Christian practice is
always an acceptable thing to a Christian Nature and life, because nature is
delighted in that which is in agreement with it, and the first being stated as
a thing not questioned, the latter may be more fully opened and presented for
the harmony will not break where the matter is substantial in its ground and
nature, for whatsoever breaks harmony does alter the course of Nature by
malignity, for Christianity is concurrent in all passages without any malignity
in it self to let or hinder, and in this Harmony the Lord God has his glory,
and where it is not so, it is but Christianity professed which wants the
substantial ground and nature of a Christian Life, and the Title of a spiritual
Prospective Glass comprehends the whole matter by allusion for most people know
that it is the property of a visible Prospective Glass to discover visible
things plainly, which otherwise are obscure and not to be clearly discerned,
and by that means many comes to be satisfied concerning a thing by beholding it
so fully as to know what it is even so must all people come to know and be
satisfied concerning spiritual things, by beholding them in the Light and
Spirit of God, for spiritual things are spiritually discerned, and the Light
and Spirit of God does discover spiritual things as they are in nature and
Life, and in that discovery there is no deceiveableness by any false
presentation or object, but a true discovery of the substance of spiritual
things by which the Soul has great benefit and comfort, and with this blessed
Light and Spirit Abraham see Christ's day and rejoiced, and with the same light
and spirit Moses see to the beginning, and rehearsed the mighty works of God in
the beginning and he see Christ the great Prophet who was to be Raised up like
unto him, and commanded that he in all things should be heard, and so ^^ses see
the beginning and the ending in the light and spirit of God, and all the
Prophets and holy men of God, see the Heavenly and spiritual things in the same
light and spirit of God, and John see the Lamb of God, and said behold him, and
some beheld his glory as the Glory of the only begotten of the Father full of
grace and truth, and so in the light and spirit of God all the Holy men of God
discerned spiritual things, and then they did not look at things that were
temporal, but at things that were eternal, and this were a true presentation
or object which did not deceive the beholders, and by believing in it according
to the dispensation of God they came to witness Salvation and Eternal life, and
so people must come to the light and spirit of God in themselves if they would
see spiritual things, for flesh and blood does not reveal spiritual things, and
they that expect to see spiritual things in that nature they deceive
themselves, and this has been in ages past, and is at this day the ground of
error concerning spiritual things, for what man can see spiritual things with a
natural eye, there is no testimony given by the holy men of God, that they see
the things of God with flesh and blood or a natural eye, but said, The natural
Man receives not the things of the spirit of God, because they are spiritually
discerned, and no Man knows the things of God but the spirit of God, and here
the natural man is to stop and stand still and be quiet, he cannot see
spiritual things, nor receive spiritual things, nor judge of spiritual things
and so not fit to meddle with such weighty concernments, for seeing by
Scripture testimony that no man knows the things of God but by the spirit of
God, then all that would know the things of God are to mind the spirit of God
in themselves, and as the spirit is minded and obeyed, it teaches and
instructs in the things of God which it knows, and so the things of God are
revealed by his spirit and taught by his spirit, and they that receive the
Spirit they know the things of God in it, and here is the spiritual mind in
which is life and peace, and he that has a spiritual mind is a spiritual man,
and that man is fit to judge of spiritual things, because he sees them in the
spirit, and knows them in the spirit, and therefore able to give sound
judgment which the natural man cannot do, for the natural man runs into error
by believing in false objects, which darkness presents to his view, and as he
receives it into his beliefs so he holds it in his judgment and opinion as if
it was the truth, for error is a mistaking of things as to the truth that is in
them, and that was the Sadduces condition concerning the Resurrection, and
Christ said unto them, ye do err not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of
God, for if they had known the Scriptures and the ^ower of God, they would
(...) understood the truth of the (...), and not erred in (...) judgment and
opinion, for it was their judgment that (...) (...) no Resurrection, and that
(...) their Error or mistake, (...) Christ opened the truth unto them, saying,
God is not the God of the dead but of the living, so truth is not to be
concluded as to what men hold in their judgment and opinion, seeing Christ
reproved it (...) error in the (...), but that which is revealed in (...) and
spirit of God, may be safely concluded to be the (...) which is no error, for
he that is the light and truth did see the Saddu^^^ error in what they held in
the (...) (...) and opinion concerning the Resurrection, and (...) (...) there
be for people to give up their belief to the judge^^^^ (...) opinion of natural
men as to spiritual things, there can be no ^ore safety in so doing then for
one blind man to be led or guided by another that is as blind as himself,
therefore I shall speak in plainness to the Rulers and People of England for
their information in the things of God, if happily the light may shine out of
darkness in such where it shines in darkness, and by darkness not comprehended
that if it seem good to the Lord, the day may break in them and the Sun of
righteousness may arise with healing under his Wings.

Friends, unto you all that are striving against the blessed appearance of
Christ Jesus the Lord of Life, and Prince of Peace, this matter is offered in
love to your souls and to the whole nation, and though I well know that
judgment lingreth not where wickedness abounds, So I also know that God
would not the death of a sinner but rather he would turn from his wickedness
and live, and this I deliver as a testimony for God and in this matter I shall
not appear like Tertullus the flourishing Orator, but like Paul the plain and
true Apostle, for in such weighty concernments the Fear of the Lord is to be
minded, and his counsel and wisdom to be obeyed and followed, and in that I
shall speak to the witness of God in all your consciences.

1. The Almighty and Everlasting God created all things good and man in that
state was blessed and happy in the paradic of God, and there his Soul enjoyed
the benefit and comfort in the life and power by which it was nourished,

2. The good and blessed state in which man was created he loss by
disobedience, and so was driven out of paradise to his Souls sorrow and
heaviness, and that is the state of all people in the first Adams transgression.

3. The Almighty and Everlasting God promised a seed to break the Serpents head
that tempted man forth of his good and blessed state in which he was created,
that man might be again restored into his first being of life.

4. The seed promised was Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, who
by the arm of his power is able to destroy the Devil and his Work and to bring
Man again unto God and the good.

5. The holy men of God in all ages did bear witness of the power of the seed
in working deliverance from the power of the Serpent, by which they came to
witness Gods promise fulfilled, and to live in the joy of his Salvation.

6. There is no nation, people or Language unto whom the seed does not give
light, for the (...) is Christ, and Christ lights every one that comes into
the World, and his Light is a Witness in every ones conscience unto that which
is good, and against that which is evil.

7. Man believing and obeying the testimony of the Light of Christ in his
conscience, it works in power for his deliverance out of darkness where his
Soul is in bondage, sorrow and heaviness, and restores into the good again
where the Soul comes into peace, joy, and happiness, and so Christ is the
restorer of (...) to dwell in.

Now as you profess your selves to be believers in Christ, and so to be
Christians, it is necessary that you consider how far you can witne^s the
promise of God fulfilled in you, by the power of Christ, and that you may fully
examine your own conditions these following questions may be useful to you.

1. Do you believe in the Light with which Christ lights you. 2. Do you obey
the Testimony of Light in your own Consciences. 3. Do you witness your sin done
away, and the serpents head broken. 4, Do you witness deliverance out of
darkness and the house of bondage. 5. Do you witness liberty in the power of an
endless life. 6. Do you witness the righteousness of Christ to be made your
righteousness. 7. Do you witness unity and peace in the righteousness of
Christ. 8. Do you witness the goodness of God to satisfy your Souls. 9. Do you
follow peace with all men and holiness. 10. Do you feel the peace of God rule
in your hearts. 11. Do you love your enemies and do good to those that hate
you. 12. Do you serve God in Fear and Rejoice before him with reverence.
Examine your selves and your condition by these few questions, for these good
and holy things are witnessed by such as are regenerated and born again, and
except you be regenerated and born again, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, and can your Souls be satisfied out of Gods Kingdom, and is it not the
greatest concernment to know an entrance into the Kingdom of God, where the
Soul comes to be satisfied in rest and peace, and comfort and happiness, and so
there is a coming out of the first Adams transgression as the light and power
of the second Adam is obeyed in manifestation and operation, for the operation
of the light and power of Christ Jesus the second Adam makes a new creature and
they that receive Christ in his light and power to come into Union with him
they are new creatures, and new creatures are Christians in Nature and Life,
and the Spirit bears witness with their spirits that they are the sons of
God; and in such all old things are done away, and all things are become new,
and so they are in the New Covenant with a new heart, and a new spirit which
God gives them, and puts into them, and these are the people who now worship
God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh, and so they answer the life and practice of new creatures, and
Christians in times past, and this keeps the harmony and does not break it, for
the same righteousness, Unity, and Peace, runs as a natural stream in the same
light, spirit, life, and power that is in Christ Jesus, and if you come to love
this, and live in this and walk in this, your souls will come into
Righteousness, Unity and peace, and so into a comfortable and happy being; but
if you gainsay: resist and withstand the light of Christ when it testifies in
your consciences, and love darkness rather then light, your souls are in sorrow
and heaviness, whatsoever you may profess of Christianity in your judgment and
opinion, for there can be no sound judgment or opinion, but in the Light and
power of Christ Jesus, and they that resist the Light they err in what they
hold as to their Judgment and opinion in spiritual things; for the ground of
Error is ignorance, and the ground of ignorance is darkness, and then such as
love darkness rather then light must needs live in Error and not in the truth
whatever they profess, and Righteousness, unity and peace will never spring out
of darkness and error, for where ignorance maintains an error it usually
maintains it by violence and force against such as hold the contrary, and that
will never do the thing that is right, and so cannot be Righteous or bring
forth Righteousness, nor never will bring into unity and peace; but provokes
unto Wrath, Envy, and Strife, and so it is plain that error in Judgment and
opinion touching the way and worship of God is the veryground of persecution,
for as darkness vaileth the understanding from the true knowledge of spiritual
things, so it causes ignorance and error in Judgment and opinion, and then
works violently against all dissenters or opposers of that which it forms
and sets up to be observed as the way and worship of God, and this breaks
the harmony that stands in Righteousness, Unity, and peace, and can never bring
comfort and happiness to any Soul, and is it the way and manner of Christians
to practice the way of the heathens by whom they were first persecuted, and
many destroyed, for did not the heathen Emperors cause the Christians to be
persecured and destroyed for above 3 hundred years after Christ? and does it
become Christians to walk in the heathens way of outrage and cruelty one
amongst another, or should they not love one another as Christ commands and
live in Righteousness, Unity and peace together, and so judge the Heathens
cruelty and not justify them in it?

O that the Rulers of England would stand still and consider the beginning and
end of persecution in matters of Faith and Religion, for if the beginning of
persecution be well pleasing unto God, then Cains slaying his brother is no
sin, but that Cains action did nor please God is plain from the displeasure of
God against him, and the judgment of God that came upon him therefore Cain
slaying his Brother is a sin that did not go unpunished and so neither the
beginning ofending of persecution that can in any wise be profitable to those
that are exercised in it, and the Innocent Quakers could not have believed that
the King and great Counsel of Parliament would have put such an opportunity
into the hands of violent persons to ruin their estates for worshipping the
living God, for it is the living God that those people do worship, and they
worship him in the spirit and in the truth which is peaceable, whatsoever you
do reckon their meetings to be in your natural eye, and seeing that such a
violent use is made of the safe act as tends to the utter ruin of honest
peaceable Subjects, it can no way be dishonorable to your dignity to repeal it
and make it void, which if you do not your agreement in the execution will
(...) in the consequence, and that will fall hard upon your selves when the
Lord makes inquisition after such as spoils his people, but if you do repeal it
and make it void as seeing how destructive it is to the Nation in the using and
execution of it, then you will manifest some tenderness of heart in your great
assembly, and also demonstrate that it was not by you enacted with that
intention as it happens in the execution, and this would be great satisfaction
unto the Nation, for what conclusion can you make to your selves by suffering
such proceedings, or do you conclude that it may be a benefit unto such as
comes under the punishment by working their Reformation, if there be neither
benefit to your selves nor those you punish as offenders it cannot be
beneficial unto any others, for that by which any has benefit must come as a
clear thing, or otherwise it is no benefit at all, for if a man must answer as
much or more in consideration of what he receives, he has no benefit but
rather loses by what he receives, and if such amongst whom fines are to be
divided must answer the receipt unto God with a greater consideration, they
will be loosers by what they receive, for what does it proffit a man to gain
the whole World and loose his own Soul, or what shall a man give ^n exchange
for his Soul. so if a man loose his own Soul in consideration or what he
receives in such a manner for his benefit: his loss is far greater then his
gain and therefore no benefit at all unto him, and that no benefit can come to
the sufferer by working reformation is very clear, for violence was never known
to work a true reformation in any, and seeing no benefit will arise to any
party according to what may be expected, then it is altogether an unproffitable
thing which unto Christians should be detestable, and however you may be
encouraged by Prelates and Clergy in such a work upon a Christian account, yet
you will not find it to your Souls benefit and comfort, and they that encourage
you in any thing that will not bring comfort to your Souls, you have good cause
to let there counsel fall at your feet, and not to make it a head to rule over
you, for indeed most men of that sort have sought for worldly pre-eminence,
honor and proffit, for many ages past, and the more you adhere to their
Council, the more will they seek their own interest by you, and good dominion
over you, for how does the Pope exalt himself over. Emperors and Kings, who by
the Emperor was first enstalled in his pontifical dignity, and so experience
may teach you that it is not altogether your safety to set up Prelares and
Clergy above you, or to follow their advice and counsel in things that properly
concerns your own authority, but rather mind your own power in all civil
concernments, and there is nothing further wherein either they or you are to
concern your selves by the power of any outward law, and as you mind the Light
of Christ Jesus it will direct you to act in your proper places whereby your
souls may have peace and comfort, and that council you are to receive by which
you may come to allow to all tender consciences the just privilege of liberty
in things pertaining to their consciences, and that will settle righteousness,
unity and peace in every conscience that is well disposed toward God, and so
the soul will come to live in comfort as in a day of prosperity, and there you
will know the things that belongs to your peace.

Now in things of such weighty concernment there ought to be great regard to
the well being of a Nation, for there is your proper place to stand and rule
not to meddle with spiritual things, but look after the well being of the
nation, and to suppress vice and vanity that occasioneth mischief and injury,
here stand in your places and exercise your power to the punishment of evil
doers there your authority is to show it self and not in punishing tender
peaceable people for their conscience toward God, for persecution will never
bring Righteousness, Unity and peace to a Nation, but always disturbs and
disquiets the most settled condition, so thus the consequence of persecution is
for the most part strife and sedition, and yet under the color of suppressing
seditious meetings persecution is carried on as the best means to do it, and so
that which is evil in it self would make a good thing to appear evil that it
might appear against it as evil to make it self appear as if it was good, for
this is to be observed that persecution never appeared against any thing as if
it was good, but as if it was evil, and so has always had a cloak to cover it
in its greatest fury, for such as are persecuted do always suffer as such that
in the account of that spirit which persecuteth deserve the thing that is done
for it is the general cry at this day by those that acts persecution or join
with it, you deserve to suffer that will not obey the Kings Laws, and so would
appear as if they were doing a good work with their violent hands, and will
concern the King and his Laws in what they do, but such never yet looked through
the Spiritual Prospective Glass to see things as they are, and therefore they
follow evil as if it was good, and would suppress the good as if it was evil,
and so are evil doers, and who will conclude that an evil doer obeys the Kings
laws, and if it be those that do well that are such, then the Innocent Quakers
do not deserve that punishment as some inflicteth upon them under color of
disobeying the Kings Laws, and what work does this make in the Nation, does it
not make the nation like broken shattered bones when so many honest people and
peaceable subjects have their Estates torn from them by violent hands, and many
of conside able Estates have little left, and no encouragement to begin again,
and many families lies distressed for want of that which should have been their
outward Relief, can ever such things bring the Nation into righteousness,
unity, and peace, or does it not wast it like a Consumption upon the Natural
body? and what pleasure or delight can you have in such a work who join hands
to perform it? are you not smitten in your Consciences for your doings, and is
not that the hand of the Lord that smites you, and so you cause the hand of the
Lord to turn against you, and except you repent it will be terrible to you, for
you are not like to prosper that persecutes the innocent, and where is there a
president in any nation of such actions: does any Nation ruin the Estates one
of another in such a manner, surely you are not come high to righteousness,
unity and peace, whose hands are busied in this destructive work and therefore
a Spiritual Prospective glass is set to every man's eye, that you may look
through it and see the nature of truth, and the righteousness, unity, and peace
contained in it, that ye may come to love the truth and live in it to the
comfort of your Souls that so righteousness, unity, and peace, may run through
the Nation to the satisfaction of those that dwell therein, and that it may be
so I shall state a few particulars to be observed.

1. Mind the Light of Christ Jesus to be guided by it, and do unto all men as
you would be done by. 2. Be tender toward all that fear God and work
righteousness for their encouragement. 3. Ordain no Laws that may be of a
compelling or restraining power in things pertaining to God and the Conscience,
and repeal such as be in force for any such end or purpose. 4. Allow the
Supreamacy and Authority of Church Government into Christ Jesus the head. 5.
Ordain such Laws as may reform the vain lives of such as fear not God, and to
right such as suffer wrong, and to preserve outward Government in peace.
Here is your bound set, beyond which you are not to go, for God does not allow
you to go beyond civil concernments, and if you meddle with any thing further
you go too far, so stop where the Lord bounds you, and act where he allows you,
do not encroach upon his Prerogative and right, do not meddle with the
conscience which belongs only to his power, let that alone as a thing too
weighty for you, for you know no more of it then what your own Judgment and
opinion may persuade you and so may err in your doings, and if you err in your
doings you cannot do the thing that is right, and therefore better let all
alone that is out of your reach, then reach too far and hurt both your selves
and others,

Now if you mind the light of Christ to be guided by it, you will plainly see
that what is here briefly stated does much conduce to the settlement of the
Nation in Righteousness, unity and peace, for why should Religion be an
occasion of trouble and disquietness to a Nation, may not people enjoy their
own Faith and live in quietness with their neighbors, and love their neighbors,
and so the nation may live in righteousness, unity and peace together as men
though they do not all observe the same things in practice and worship toward
God, and would not this heal the broken shattered bones of the nation, and make
it a lovely nation in the eyes of all people, and has not England been counted
a lovely nation upon the account of Christian profession, and now to deform it
self with such a black Image of persecution will make the praise of it fall
with great dishonor, for what nation does make a larger profession of
Christianity then England, is it not looked upon by many to be settled in a
Christian profession after the best reformation, and will it now deform its
beauty by putting on a countenance of persecution, for the best reformation,
and persecution has not the same countenance and beauty, and has not the Lord
showed kindness unto England above many other nations, has he not sent of late
years many tender visitations and warnings by many of his faithful servants,
does not his light shine in England to expel and drive away those mists and
fogs, that have overspread the nation, and under which the people have been
scattered as sheep having no shepherds, and were there not a time when Christ
began to upbraid some Cities wherein most of his mighty works were done because
they repented not, and did he not say concerning Chorazin and Bethsaida, if the
mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would have repented long ago in Sackcloth and Ashes, but I say unto you it
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the day of Judgment then for
you, Mat. 11, (mark) more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, in the day of
Judgment then for Chorazin and Bethsaida, because his mighty works which were
manifest there did not cause them to repent, and have not mighty works been
done in late years in England by the power of Christ, which if such mighty
works had been done in some other nations they might have repented long ago in
Sackcloth and Ashes, and some in England that have believed in the mighty
works which Christ has wrought by his spirit and power and have repented and
are turned to the Lord, and his mercies peace and blessing is with them, surely
all people of all sorts had need to be serious in considering this weighty
matter, for if you persecute the innocent who are turned unto the Lord, you
will do despite unto him when you should require his kindness showed unto you
by walking worthy of it and do you not often request of the Lord to spare his
people, and bless his Inheritance and do you spoil his people and curse his
Inheritance or do you take your selves to be only his people and Inheritance
that you would have him spare and bless, and those that differ from you to be
spoiled by your hands, and cursed by excommunication as not being his people
and inheritance? you must either so conclude or otherwise you your selves are
contrary to that which you desire the Lord would do, and if you spoil those
whom the Lord spares, and curse those whom the Lord blesses, do you not
commit a great offense against him, yea an offense of a far higher degree
against God then meeting peaceably together to worship him cant be an offense
against you to the witness of God in you all I speak, to that which is true and
just and righteous from which truth and justice and righteousness proceed, that
truly justly and righteously tryes and judges all offenses, and unto that the
Innocent Quakers appeals which will clear their innocence from any offenses in
meeting together to worship and serve the Lord, for in times past, some said it
is vain to serve God, and what proffit is it that we have kept his ordinance
(or according to the Hebrew, observation) or that we have walked mournfully (or
according to the Hebrew, in black) before the Lord of Hosts, and then they
called the proud happy and they that wrought wickedness were set up; and they
that tempted God were delivered (mark) then they that feared the Lord spoke
often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of
remembrance was written for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon
his name, and they shall be mine says the Lord of Hosts in that day when I
make up my Jewels (or according to the Greek, special treasures) and I will
spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him, Malachi. 3. (mark)
here is the Lords people plainly discribed, and they are not those that said,
it is vain to serve God, and difesteemed his Ordinance or Observation, and
called the proud happy, and wrought wickedness, and tempted God, he did not own
these to be his people that he would spare, but those that feared the Lord, and
spoke often one to another, and thought upon his name, they shall be mine says
the Lord, and I will spare them, [mark] the Lord owns his people that he will
spare those that fear him, and keeps his Ordinance, or Observation, and thinks
upon his name, they are now his people that he spares though men spoil them,
his Jewels, or special treasures that he makes up, who are born of the seed
that he blesses for ever, and these are Gods chosen Inheritance that are under
his blessing, and he blesses those that blesses them, and curses those that
curses them, for this was his promise to his seed, saying, I will bless them
that bless thte, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all Nations
of the earth be blessed, and here you may see through the Spiritual prospective
glass, who are the Lords people and inheritance which he spares and blesses,
and if you spoil his people whom he spares do you not highly offend him, and
if you curse by excommunication his inherance whom he blesses do you not
highly provoke him, therefore take heed what ye do in making the Lords people
and inheritance to be offenders by your law, and so proceeed against them as
Offenders to Spoil them and Curse them, it concerns you to be serious and not
to sport with such things, but mind what you desire of the Lord in your own
words and perform it on your own parts, and do not spoil his people and curse
his inheritance any more, for they are spared and blessed of God, and he will
not hold such guiltless as spoileth and curses those whom he spares and
blesses, for do ye not absolutely fight against God when ye entreat them evil,
and are not such enemies unto God that fight against him, and did ever any
fight against God and prosper, surely you generally forget Gamalliels council,
and it would do well if some amongst you would offer it in your great assembly
to put you in mind of it, or it may be hoped that all are not like minded in
wilful purposes to injure the innocent, and it was a noble spirit in Gamalliel
that moved him to stand up in the Council when they were purposing to slay the
Apostles, and there to give his advice to stop the lury of the purposers, and
to him they agreed, and so it was seasonable advice which prevented the
execution of such a cruel design, and will Christians condemn Gamalliel for
betng a friend to the Apostles, when the Jews agreed to him, and by their
agreement did manifest that they were not so wilful in their purpose but that a
sound and weighty judgment might prevail with them to alter their purpose, and
so by experience it is found better for Rulers to let things alone that
concerns Faith and Religion for if any thing be of man it will come to naught
of it self without laws to suppress it, and if it be of God there is no law of
men can destroy the thing though the bodies and estates of such as have faith
in it may be exposed to great sufferings for it, and no God men will disapprove
of Gamalliels counsel who stood in a good consideration of the matter, and not
willing that a wilful purpose should be judge in such a weighty concernment,
and will you say the Council did not do well in agreeing to Gamalliel? I hope
not, and if you conclude they did well then do you agree to him now in your
great assembly for if they who at that time did not believe in Christ nor the
Apostles doctrine were so easily entreated to let the Apostles alone and not to
slay them as was purposed by them, then how much more should such as profess a
belief in Christ and the Apostles doctrine be persuaded and entreated to let
those alone that now believe in Christ, and live in the Apostles spirit, life,
and Doctrine, (this reaches the witness of God in you all if you will but bow
your ear to the council of it, for the wisdom from above is pure and peaceable
and gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality (or according to the greek, without wronging) and without
hyppocrisie, Jat. 3. 17. (mark) the wisdom from above is of a pure, peaceable
gentle ntture that may easily be entreated and so the mercy and good fruits are
in it where none are wronged and that was the principle that moved in Gamaliel
by the appointment of God for so good an end, and it answered the same
principle in the Jews which at that time did prevail with them to let the
Apostles alone as to the thing they purposed against them, and so there was a
pure princidl of God in them all that secretly wrought in them to deliver the
Apostles though otherwise they did not believe in it for life and peace. Now
let this be your pattern and example which produced such a good effect, Act by
this, and walk by this, that you may follow the principle of God in you as
your rule to guide you, that your purposes may not stend in wilful resolutions
as not to be easily entreated, for if it be so with you there is cause for you
to question whether the wisdom from above direct you in your undertakings, and
if by that you be not directed you may soon err in what yea do, nay, you may
possibly err in all you do, for the wisdom of God in the sure foundation for
all laws to stand upon, and be ministered from, and if law stand upon any other
thing, or bs ministered from any other thing it cannot clearly answer truth and
righteousness either in the fountain or stream, for where laws are made and
ministered in a wilful resolution and purpose against a thing, the matter is
mostly resolvedly prosecuted to accomplish the thing intended and by such
actions and paaceedings there is no sufferer can have any benifit of the law
for his own right in cases of manifest wrong, for where resolution is both rule
and law it will carry the stream in its own channel with that force as nothing
may stop it and this only law pretended to answer to the resolution and purpose
intended.

Well Friends, whatsoever you, or any of you may purpose or intend against us
called Quakers, of this you may be sure that we do not purpose or intend any
harm unto you, but really desire that it may be well every way with you, and in
this we can approve our selves to God, and it cannot be disproved by you, for
ye very well know how we have behaved our selves amongst you and toward you
for many years, and you cannot justly charge us with any alteration as to our
peaceable life, and civil deportment, but what we have been in love, and peace,
and good will amongst you and toward you, we are still the same, for our
principle does not vary and change in its nature and life, and as we are
preserved by it, to live in it we continue in the same mind and you have no
cause to be jealous of us as seditious persons, or contrivers of Insurrections,
or any way such as would do you the least wrong or injury, or any body living,
and as we have never offered injury to you, or you received any injury by us,
it is certainly below you as men to entreat us evil, and we are very sure that
wherein you purpose or intend any harm to us with a resolution to perform it
that such purpose or intention will be much more against your selves if you do
not stop the action, and as you profess Christianity so it well be more
honorable to your profession to cease from prosecution then to continue it,
that so in your day and time the Righteous and Godly Christians may sit under
their own vine, and under their own Fig Tree in quietness and peace, for wilful
resolutions and purposes never did good unto any and if you would do good to
your selves and the nation then mind humillity and the fear of the Lord, for
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom and where wisdom orders there
all things goes well, but where wisdom is wanting their all things goes wrong,
and therefore it is your greatest concernment to wait for Gods wisdom to order
you, for wisdom is better then strength, and if you take council as is to be
ordered by it then that which is wrong you will be willing to Right, and that
which is Right you will be willing to maintain, and thereby take of all
accasions by which the Innocent is vexed and troubled, and that will not only
bring peace to your own souls but also to the whole natios, and so both your
own souls and the nation will have comfort and happiness and there every one
will have the benefit of peace as they came to enjoy it, and that is the only
end of this Spiritual Prospective Glass being set to your eye, that you may
look through it and see those things that will do your souls, and the nations
good, but if you will shut your eye and not behold by what way good may come
unto you and so follow your resolusions and purposes against the righteous,
then will the Lord lift up his arm against you, and when it falls it will come
heavy upon you, for the Lord has often signified his mind unto you by his
spirit to have done you good, you have had many tender visitations from the
Lords servants in whom his spirit dwells, and you have been faithfully warned
wherein your own danger has been concerned, and it is desired that you might
regard the Lord and not slight his kindness, for though he be gracious and long
suffering yet he does not set his judgment aside where his kindness is
rejected, and itf you strive against him and his power and do not know it, he
may in his mercy remit your offense upon your repentance when you do know it,
but if ye know that it is the Lord and his power which ye strive against, and
that you will maintain your strife against him, then will he come upon you in
his own time, and none shall be able to deliver you out of his hand, and that
you may not be ignorant that it is the Lord and his power that ye are striving
against, wherein you set your selves against his people called Quakers, it is
hereby signified unto you that it is only the Lord ye strive against in what ye
do unto them, for it is only the Lord that has called them and separated them
from the ways of men, and appointed them to meet together in his fear to serve
and worship him in his spirit, and they fear his greatness and thinks upon his
name, and so keeps his ordinance or observation, and what ye do unto them for
their obedience and faithfuln^ss unto God, he takes it as done unto himself,
and wherein you strive against them, you strive against him, and this will
leave you without excuse in the day when God shall jxdge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, and the Lord will have a seed to serve him and worship him, in
his own way when ye have spent your strength to withstand his purpose, and if
you will not take notice of Gamalliels council to observe it, yet do not forget
how God plagued Pharaoh and overthrew him for his hard heartedness, and that
may bring you into a holy dread of the living God, and into a humble submission
to his light and power in all concerments, and so in time be considerate in
these weighty things as men of grave and sollid deportments, for here is the
truth plainly set before you with great regard and tenderness both to your own
Souls, and to the nation.

W. S.

THE END.

