TWO SERMONS Preached at the Cathedral Church OF NORWICH.

The one upon the 3d of May, being Wednesday in Rogation Week.

The other upon the 29th of May, being the Solemnization of His Majesty's Birth
and Restoration.

Published at the desire of the Chief Magistrates of the City of Norwich.

By William Smith, D. D. Preb.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Walter Kettilby at the Sign of the Bishops-head
in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1677.

Imprimatur,

August 18. 1676. G. Jane.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.
IF because there appear some remarks of ancient Solemnity upon this time, and
because the established Liturgy does oblige us to a religious regard to it, any
man should inquire after the reason and intention of both, the question will be
easily solved, if he do but heed the name and appellation of it, as it is
commonly called the Rogation-week, or the Week of Prayers, that is, a time
chosen and separated by the Churches Wisdom and Authority for Fasting and
Prayers, the more solemnly to implore the mercy of God upon the World at a
season, when commonly the rage of Epidemic diseases takes its beginning, the
fruits of the Earth are in greatest danger to miscarry, and Wars are then
ordinarily commenced, and Campagnes opened. Now this pious custom was so early
an offspring of Primitive Devotion, that it was made a Constitution of the
Church from a considerable Antiquity, and has been ever since observed in most
places of the Christian World, and particularly in all the Lutheran Churches
ever since the Reformation, to this very day.

But how pious and reasonable, how ancient and universal soever the observation
has been, yet the demolishers of our Rites and Order, have so prevailed with
the people, that there is scarcely one of a hundred, that understands their duty
in it, nor one of a thousand that have conscionably and duly practiced and
performed it.

And yet I don't despair, but that some pious persons here before me, may be so
affected with this short account of their duty therein, that they may in some
measure answer the intention of this ancient Establishment, and the Command of
this present Church to observe it.

Which that they may the better do, I have endeavored to accommodate them with
a suitable subject for their encouragement and direction, and that from the
words now propounded. Pray without ceasing, or continually.

Which words offer these two occasions of discourse. 1. What is meant by
continually praying, and how far the command of God lays upon us on that
account. 2. The reasonableness of observing that command so represented, by
several instances of advantages to engage us to the constant practice and
performance of it.


1. What is meant by praying without ceasing or continually?

And for the true understanding of this according to the several ways of
speaking, which the best Interpreters have used, it signifies such an habitual
frame and continued state of mind, whereby we may and do so often perform the
duty of prayer as is consistent with the discharge of other duties of Religion,
and our necessary attendance upon the common business and affairs of the world
in our lawful employments, and that may reasonably comply with our natural
infirmities as men. And in this we ought to have respect both to the private
and public performance of the Duty.

And then by praying continually as to the first I understand the well
management of our Devotions, as to those which we call private Prayers. Whether
they be those of the Closet, which our Savior mentions ( Mat. 6.) or those
between married persons, which a great Divine of our Church supposed the
Apostle to have intimated as a duty, 1 Cor. 7. 5. or whether those of the
family, where every supreme in it is a kind of Priest to God, to order the
periods and circumstances of Gods service in his own house. And that man that
has given rules to himself for the ordinary performance of those several
offices, such as a wise Guide of Souls may approve, and the practice of other
holy persons have exemplified, may be believed to have performed the duty of
praying without ceasing, so far as concerns his private Devotion.

But then secondly, by the performance of the duty of praying continually as to
the Public Prayers, I mean a constant attendance upon them in all such
appointed periods, which the Governors of every Christian Church must be
supposed to have determined to be performed in some public place set apart and
consecrated to that service of God; whether they be in some certain seasons of
the year, as this week of Rogation is one, or in so many days in the week, as
by the frequent successions of the Lords day and other Festivals, and Fasts, or
in so many divided portions of the day; and in all other contingent occasions
of Christians assembling together for the service of God.

Which Periods being so set apart for God, and appointed for our duty, do so
indispensably oblige the Consciences of men, that no man can make a wilful
omission of them (especially if it be habitual) but he may be interpreted to
have so far departed from God, and thrown himself off from his protection and
blessing. And because I see the neglect of this duty to be so universal, (and
amongst them particularly that otherwise pretend themselves to be a praying
people to a greater degree than others) I desire but once to know from any of
them what they can object against the obligation that I have affirmed to lay
upon their Consciences, so as may solve their omission to a consistency with
any real sense of Religion, or the fear of God.

I hope they don't imagine the personal faults of them that administer, or the
different manner of the administration of those Offices (as with such Rites and
Circumstances which they perhaps dislike (because they will) and God has not
forbidden them, while the substantial Worship is preserved entire) can acquit
them for their gross disobedience to God and man, and the intolerable prejudice
they make and encourage against the Governors, the Establishment, and the
obedient Sons of the constituted Church, with which they are bound to hold
Communion in such public Offices.

Now that man that shall religiously and constantly observe all such determined
and commanded Periods, for the Service of God in public, may be said to
perform all that is obligatory in the Command of God for praying without
ceasing, or continually in this second respect. And I think I may affirm, that
the Apostle did principally intend this kind of praying continually, by the
command in my Text: and my reason is, because I find the same, and the like
expression to be necessarily so interpreted, in other places of Scripture.

Thus when it is said, that Hannah went not out of the Temple, but served God
with fastings and prayers night and day ( Luke 2. 37.) the meaning is, that she
never failed to discharge her duty there, at all the appointed seasons of the
Jewish Church. And when the Apostles, after Christ's Resurrection, were said to
be continually in the Temple, blessing and praising God ( Luke ult. ult.) as it
may be observed what veneration they had to the separated place the Temple, of
which their ((...)) upper Room was a part; so their being continually there,
must mean that they made attendance to their Offices at all set hours, probably
at those which were then in custom among the Jews, that is, at every third hour
of the day. And of this practice we have several footsteps in the story of
their Acts: and so Peter and John went up to the Temple at the hour of prayer,
being the ninth hour (our three a clock) Act. 3. 1. Which custom was afterward
in some resemblance continued in the Church, of which S. Cyprian makes mention
in his Discourse upon the Lords Prayer.

And when in those appointed seasons they carefully made their attendancies,
they might be said (in the most reasonable sense) to have prayed continually,
as to the public performance of the Duty.

Thus I have discharged my self of the first occasion of my Discouse from the
word continually, or without ceasing. The next that I am to address to, is, to
show the reasonableness of our making such a constant attendance upon all the
Offices of Prayer, to which we have either piously obliged our selves in
private, or are commanded to by Authority in Public, by several instances of
incomparable advantages by it.

And the first instance is, That a continual attendance upon such Offices, is a
continued payment of that Homage we owe to God, as he is the great Creator,
Governor, and Preserver of the World, and an implied owning him to be the
Sovereign Lord of all his Creatures, to order them, and dispose of them as he
shall please: And thereby we do daily make an acknowledged dependence upon his
Providence for all we have, and all we are: actually professing to Gods honor,
that in him we live, move, and have our being ( Acts 17.) and that from him
descends every good and perfect gift ( Jam. 1.)

Whereas an habitual omission of such Duties, amongst all the evils of their
neglect, may be recounted a kind of dethroning God from his supreme Dominion,
and be interpreted a disclaiming his universal Sovereignty over his created
World, and indeed no small degree of practical Atheism, highly criminal, and
dishonorable to him.

And for ought I know, the Epicureans who would believe the beautiful Model of
the World to be the effect of nothing but the casual confluence of Atoms, to
exclude the necessity of believing the Being of a God; And the Stoics, who
would make all Events to be no otherwise governed, but by the necessary hits
and connection of second Causes, which they called Fate, to exclude a
Providence: I say I know not, but those Philosophers might as justly be
acquitted for the Errors of their Speculative, as the neglecters and despisers
of Prayers may be excused from doing God as great a dishonor by their
practical Atheism.

And therefore I cannot but wonder, that any man that seriously believes that
there is either a God, or a Providence, should not make addresses to the
Majesty of his Person for the acknowledgment of his Sovereignty, and the
devoutest applications to his love and goodness for their own safety and
protection, by the daily tender of their Prayers and Supplications at all
seasons both public and private.

2. The second instance of the reasonableness of such a constant attendance
upon Gods Service in prayer is, because as it professes a belief of, so it
makes and gives a continued use and improvement to, that very considerable part
of our Redemption, the never-ceasing Intercession of Christ, who now sits at
Gods right hand, attending the tender of men's Petitions, and as a Priest for
ever to be daily offering up to God, as the private addresses of his Servants,
so also the conjoined Supplications of devout Assemblies.

But when those Offices are neglected, we do as much as in us lies to frustrate
that grand Expedient of all our spiritual and temporal blessings; and may
interpretatively be said, to put such an undervalue upon it, as to be thought
guilty of treading under foot the Son of God, of counting the Blood of the
Covenant a profane thing, and of doing despite to the Spirit of Grace ( Heb.
10. 29.) All which three terrible expressions of Guilt, and danger, do clearly
refer to their sinful custom of forsaking Assemblies ( v. 25.)

3. The third instance of the advantage of our constant attendance upon Prayers
publicly and privately is, that thereby we are continually upon our guard
against those Armies of Temptations that march about us, under the Conduct of
the Devil and the World, which are continually invading and assaulting our
innocence; and that thereby we are continually countermining the secret Plots
and Stratagems of our own deceitful Lusts, which are always warring against our
Souls.

And this I offer not only as Prayers are the means of Grace in general, but as
they are really effective of a proper defense against the temptations to every
sin in particular and in its kind. How hardly can that tongue be conquered to
comply with the common modes of oaths and cursings, blasphemies, and rants
against God and Goodness, that was just now tinctured with words of holy
applications to God in religious offices? Or how can those feet be swift to
shed blood, or be traveling to the places of villainy and debauchery, that were
just before treading the Courts of Gods house, or helped us to yield our bodies
to the prostrate postures of solemn Assemblies? Or can the thoughts of that man
be readily engaged in the pursuit of any sinful designs or satisfactions, who
just before had hallowed his mind with religious intentions, and sanctified his
heart with the holy offices of Prayer?

Further, that holy duty daily performed, will fortify us against the daily
incursions of temptations, by keeping alive in us to the last, that grand
preservative of our innocence, our natural, and our acquired habit of religious
modesty, and by accommodating our passions (the common seat of most sins) to
Religion and Virtue. Is any man afflicted (or sad?) let him pray, says the
Apostle, ( Jam. 5.) that is, the constant attendance on that duty will
alleviate the burden of a sorrowful and discontented mind? Is any man merry?
let him sing Psalms: that is, let him gratify the present pleasantness of his
Soul in such Assemblies, where the praises of God are managed with the sweet
accents of musical harmonies, to prevent the excesses of sensual joys, and the
sordid mirth of sinful societies. Can any man complain that his own natural
constitution, or the untowardness of the instruments of his affairs, or the
common unworthy carriage of other men to him, do daily tempt him to excesses of
impatience, frowardness, and periodick fits of anger? let him here seek and
attempt his remedy, and by experience he shall find, that his frequent
engagement in religious offices will allay those storms, and reduce his temper
to the quietness and sweet easiness of a Lamb or Dove. Lastly, Is any man
surpised with the ruling passion of a sensual love? let him imitate the
example of that wise and excellent Virgin, of whom I have read, that she
commanded her fond Amorist to respite his addresses to her, till he and her
self had completed forty days in Fasting and Prayer, by which religious
expedient she cured his folly, and preserved her own innocence.

4. The fourth Instance of advantage by our constant attendance upon God in
Prayer, is, because that duty is the common Scene and opportunity for the
exercise and improvement of all spiritual Graces; which as they were attained
by the use of means, so are they maintained and improved by the constant
practices of virtue, and the services of our God: And as the exercise of every
particular duty improves its proper Grace, so does the duty of Prayer employ
and improve them all.

First as to Faith, every period in our Devotions is an act of that Faith by
which a just man is said to live to God, and to all the purposes of a religious
Conversation. Then as to Hope, our constant Prayers feed it, and confirm it,
and make the expectation of a future bliss lively and prevailing. There we are
exercising and acting the precious Grace of Humility, making our selves dust
and ashes in the apprehension of our selves toward God, and are tempering our
hearts for all kinds of submission and condescension to men.

Here the Virgin ties on her girdle of Chastity, and the married pair are every
day renewing their first betroth, and fastening the knot of their promised love
and fidelity to one another. Here the Subject does daily profess his Loyalty
upon his knees, and guards the Crown and engages his Faith for his Princes
safety. Here we discipline all our inclinations to malice and revenge; here we
forgive every trespass, and are softening our Souls for admission of terms of
peace and reconciliation with all the World. In a word, our constant attendance
on that duty will every day more and more be raising our hearts up to a pitch
of heavenly Conversation with God and Angels, and preparing us to be fit
Companions of that blessed Society above, when God shall please to call us to
it.

5. The fifth Instance of advantage which makes our constant attendance upon
all religious offices highly reasonable, is, because it will make our time, our
precious time, more accountable to God and our selves, by adjusting it into fit
portions for the service of God. For if men were as curious of considering what
accounts must be made of all the Talents with which they are entrusted, in
order to the securing their future Bliss, they would begin to think that that
of Time, which God has put in our power, and left to our choice, for the good
or bad employment of it, were as considerable as any.

And if they would recount the mercy of enjoying Time, or foresee the conflicts
of a dying Soul, when he is lamenting the loss of it, they would be as
advisable in this point, as in any other concern of Religion. Now no proposal
can be offered to a mind truly pious, whereby a man may better secure his time
for a fair account with God, than by apportioning a considerable part of it in
attendance upon the offices of Prayer, in the periods chosen or appointed for
it. At which seasons we should no more wilfully take a liberty to withdraw our
selves from our duty, whether when our Closets or our Families, or when the set
hours of Prayers at Gods House call for it, than we would lay our Consciences
waste, by committing an enormous act of sin.

And as such a course of spending time will make that Talent of our lives
happily accountable to God, so will an habituation of our selves to perform our
duty at such appointed seasons, make our time easy and acceptable to our
selves: (it is idleness and sin that makes time a burden, and our lives uneasy)
and we should with the same pleasure think of those periods of Prayers, as we
do entertain the seasons of our natural refreshments of meat and sleep, and as
delightfully recount the hours of the day by them, as by any artificial
division of time: and make us go as cheerfully to our devotions, when the Bell
tolls, as when it rings us to our meals, or sounds a retreat to our labors, or
as when the setting Sun tells the wearied Traveller that his journey is at an
end.

6. The sixth and last Instance, by which it will appear that the constant
attendance upon the offices of Prayer, must needs be reasonable, is, because it
will be a considerable part of the discharge of the command of God upon us, to
show mercy, and to do good to those that need our help and relief.

For amongst the various capacities of doing good that God has put in our
power, one is, that we can succor and relieve the infelicities of the World,
by the Charity of our Prayers. By them we can get bread at Gods hand for the
distressed, as well as give it with our own. By them we can reach the sorrows
of the Widow, and the heavily afflicted, and pass through the Walls and Bars of
Prisons, to support and comfort the mourning Captive. By them we can fight for
the Prince and the Church, when both in danger. By these we can clear the
infectious Air in raging Pestilences, and water the dry Furrows when parched
with drought, and fortify our Peace when threatened with the Alarms of War:
with all other the instances of doing good that hold proportion with these.

Now what can acquit any man to God or man, that understands his indispensable
obligation of doing all the good he can, and can believe what God has promised
and done, to assure him of the success of his Prayers; I say how can any man
acquit himself to God and man, that shall refuse any offices, or neglect any of
those opportunities, when Prayers are to be put up to God for either the common
or the particular blessings of them that need them?

I wish the Consciences of men that have any designs for Religion (and they are
infinitely unreasonable that have none) were sufficiently informed, and
seriously affected in this case: our Assemblies would not be so thin, nor so
unconcerned, when we are every day crying out for mercy, and pleading for
blessings.

Now it is in this last Instance of advantage by our constant attendance to
this duty, that we are at this time especially concerned: and therefore as upon
this ground the ancient Churches took their just plea, for the first
establishing a Week of Prayers, and why our Church have continued the
obligation to observe it, so I shall there only fix my Application.

And then I say, That if ever there were an Age that called for this kind of
Charity, and might lay claim to the benefit of a Week of Rogations, and all
other the constantly performed offices of prayers for the good of Mankind, as
necessary; it is now certainly the most proper time: the sad face, and
deplorable state of the Christian World, every where do now require it, now
implore it.

And first the deeply afflictied Asiatic and Grecian Churches, the first
Plantations of Christ and his Apostles, that have so long groaned under the
heavy oppressions of him that bids defiance to the Christian name, lays claim
to the Charity of your Prayers. But those Barbarians late approaches and
successes must alarm your pity, if you can but consider the Hungarian and
Polonian calamities.

But if these distant accents of sorrow cannot reach your hearts, yet let the
near and loud Cry of those neighboring Countries, that are harassed and undone
by the conflicting Legions of so many Princes now engaged in War, awaken you to
your most compassionate Prayers.

Let us have a care, that those poor ruined Countries may not take up
Jerusalems Lamentation against us, O all ye that not only pass, but live by us,
have ye no regard? ( Lam. 1.) O that God should lay it to your charge, as he
did once to his people by his Prophet Amos, ( Chap. 6.) That we lie upon the
beds of Ivory, and stretch our selves upon our Couches, etc. that we are
drinking wine in bowls, immerst in all sensual pleasures, and are not grieved
for the afflictions of Joseph, nor charitably concerned for their calamities. O
to your prayers, and let your earnest supplications put a stop to the flames of
Gods raging displeasure against them, lest for our ingratitude and
uncompassion, God should change the sad Scene, and afterward make them
Spectators of our ruins, that are such uncharitable beholders of their
miseries.

But if the distant Alarms of Foreign Calamities cannot awaken us from our
lethargic unconcernedness, yet sure there is something at home, that may more
nearly affect us, and that may implore the charity of our daily Devotions.

And if there were nothing but the common miseries of Mankind among us, such as
usually and universally follow Nations in their best peace and prosperity, yet
no pious and considerate mind could want a sufficient subject matter for such
offices of his Charity: Let us but consider how many poor Prisoners are now
sorrowing in their strait confinements, how many of our brethren are roaring in
torments, languishing in diseases, pinched with penury, struggling with
difficulties to live, and in a thousand cases of distress, are crying for help
in the bitterness of their Souls. And can we think there is never a tear, never
a petition due? Do these need no share in a time of Prayer, no concern in the
offices of our daily Devotions?

But besides this, cannot a wise and pious heart, as things are at present,
find any thing else, that begs the charity of his Prayers? Is there no case,
wherein we stand in need of the counsel and the aid, the care and protection of
a merciful God? For though God has blessed us above any people of the World,
under the happy Government of a gracious Prince, who has wisely provided for
our peace and plenty, when all the World besides are tossed up and down in
miserable circumstances, yet are there no just fears, no real dangers set
before us, for which it is needful to implore the mercy of a good God to
prevent the approaches of many likely ensuing troubles? Yes certainly, no
Nation in prosperous circumstances could ever offer a prospect of more to a
considering mind.

Who can but suggest to himself thoughts of danger to the State, when he shall
behold so considerable a part of the people to be so malicious to their Rulers
of every kind, so seditiously disposed against all just Rules of Government, so
wretchedly intractable to all Laws for subjection and obedience, so unfaithful
to all the Sacred obligations of Oaths, and ties of Conscience, and moreover so
universally immoral and vicious, that we look like a people preparing our
selves for our own ruin, if God prevent it not? The Charity of your Prayers is
here seasonable, if you have any design of doing good to your selves and
Country.

As to the Church, the poor Church of England, the Mirror and Miracle of the
Christian World, a Church that never refused the exactest trial from the
Scriptures, right Reason, and the best Rules of Catholicism from the purest
Antiquity; A Church that never had an enemy, but the man was distinguishable by
some remarks of ignorance, ill humor, or of driving on some base design; A
Church that has always stood an unshaken Bulwark against the strongest
invasions of her enemies of every side, she now needs your Prayers, and the
especial protection of a merciful God. Her misery is, that she has a long time
layn between two Millstones, but they are now grinding her to powder, as the
great Archbishop and Martyr forewarned his late Majesty of blessed Memory. She
has been hitherto hurrican'd with violent tempests on every side, but now she
is whirlwinded with their combined blasts; and must expect all the evils, that
enmity and treachery, faction and profaneness can bring upon her.

Where Is your Prayers, your addresses for help? Are you not rather promoting
your animosities, quarrelling with circumstances, picquering the Government,
making stories of the infirmities of your Superiors, pursuing your base lusts
and interests, when you should be on your knees, begging, and pleading, and
crying for mercy? Can any think that we are in Jehosaphats case, that we know
not what to do, and shall not our eyes be upon our God, who is sufficient to
help us, if we seek him? Are we with the Apostles in a sinking ship, and shall
we not with them lift up our voices, and say, Lord, save us or we perish? Which
if we shall daily and heartily do in our never-ceasing offices of Prayer to our
merciful God, and shall withal repent and amend our evil lives, I doubt not,
but that yet God will recover us from our dangers, and restore us to our
safety. Or to use the words of the Prophet ( Hos. 6. with which I shall
conclude) Though he has hitherto torn us, he will yet heal us; though he has
hitherto smitten us, he will yet bind us up: Which God grant for Jesus sake.

Psalm. 2. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion.
WE appear this day before the most high and holy God, to express our
thankfulness to him; as for the Birth, so for the Restoration of our gracious
King. And to recount with all joy and gratitude the concurrence of all those
mercies we then received, and now enjoy, by the incomparable blessing of that
happy day in both respects.

As we celebrate it as the day of his Birth, we may remember that it had a
remark upon it, of an Hactenus Anglorum nulli (as it was the Motto of the
Medals dispersed upon that day by his Royal Father) that is, No English Prince
was ever so born before, with so undoubted a Title to the three united
Kingdoms, and many considerable Provinces abroad, annexed to the Imperial Crown
of Great Britain.

And as we celebrate it as a day of his Restoration, I may say it was with
another, and a greater Hactenus, an Hactenus Regum nulli, that is, No King was
ever so preserved and restored, no Nation so unexpectedly and marvellously
delivered.

Heaven signified the mercy of his Birth with the appearance of a Star at noon;
but at the day of his Restoration, he brought, as it were, the Sun it self to
us, with the same joy as it appears to the poor Hyperboreans after a six months
night, or as when it has newly dispelled a dark and furious storm.

So that if we consider the day as the Anniversary of his Birth, then we
commemorate the mercy of Gods blessing us with a King, whose unquestionable
Title (by such a clear Succession from all that ever pretended an interest
before, and which no Prince in Europe can parallel) has removed and silenced
all possible pretensions of dispute; the fatal occasion of shedding so much
English blood through many former generations; and from which calamity we
should never have been secured, if the Government had still stood upon the
uncertain foot of the late Usurpations. A mercy big enough alone to perpetuate
a day of thankfulness to all generations.

Or if we consider this day with respect to his Majesty's Restitution, then we
cannot but with the greatest joy remember the incomparable miseries from which
the Church and State can thence date their renowned deliverance. I say, if we
consider the blessing of the day in either respect, it can want no title to
claim the fullest manifestations of our thankfulness to God, that for those
great ends, he was pelased to set his King upon his holy Hill of Sion.

That this Psalm was Prophetical and Typical of Christ, Expositors do easily
agree to it; and that the literal sense concerned David upon his peaceable
resettlement in his Kingdom after all his troubles, and penned on that occasion,
no doubt is offered. And that it may be reductively applied to any other case,
that holds resemblance with that of David's, (which I think none ever did so
much as that of his Majesty's) will be universally acknowledged allowable and
pious.

Therefore principally designing this last use of it, I shall offer from the
words of my Text four Heads of Discourse, which will administer so many Reasons
for this days Solemnity. 1. The Original of all Establishment in Government,
Ego posui, I have set, etc. 2. The Quality of the Government here particularly
established, Regem, A King. 3. The Extent of that Government, Upon my holy Hill
of Sion. 4. The Difficulty of the Establishment, yet, Yet have I set, etc.


1. The Original of all Establishments in Government, Ego posui, I have set.
It Is Gods own Ordination by which Kings are invested with Power and Authority
to rule and govern, ( Prove. 8. 15.) A Prerogative which no Creature must
presume to take from him, upon any pretense whatsoever, without a manifest
violation of his Right and Honor.

And of this Divine Privilege Christianity was so tender, that when the Powers
were at the worst they could be, they were still acknowledged to be ordained of
God, ( Romans 13. 1.)

And on that account our great Lord in his person paid them all that honor and
submission that ever had been before their due. And what copy our Savior set,
his Apostles exemplified in all their Practices and in all their Doctrines:
which the first and purest Ages constantly followed, without the least
interruption of their Loyalty, upon the greatest provations to do the contrary.

But besides a Constitution that is general and in common with all Authorities
from the Ego posui, I have set, we have here a meum Regum, a my King; a term of
near relation and propriety given especially to Kings that are advanced or
restored to their Thrones, by methods of especial favor, or that are set up
for remarkable instances of some extraordinary merciful Providence to the World.

And thus was David made a My King by the pregnant instances of Gods peculiar
favor to, and mavelous deliverance of him; as the Sacred History of his Life
may easily inform us, if we had time to enumerate the particular observations
of it.

Now if any King might lay claim to a parallel Title to that happy appellation,
our gracious Sovereign may do it: his case being as near a resemblance to
David's, in several circumstances of his preservation, as ever any Prince could
pretend to, as will appear in my following Discourse.

Now when it thus happens, that God sets a Meum Regem, a My King over a People,
they are to consider, that besides all the obligations of duty from the general
Commandment, besides all the engagements of gratitude from the common mercies
of being governed, there is a further additional obligation upon them, that
over and above the performance of the ordinary acts of Loyalty, may challenge a
tenderer and more curious regard and care to preserve his Person, Honor,
Peace, and Plenty. And this to be done, not only when men are pleased and
humoured, or when no fears and jealousies can possibly be suggested, or when no
complaints can be found against evil Counselors, corrupt Ministers of State,
and of the abuses of such a Princes Court (for which if Subject may dispense
their Loyalty at pleasure, then all the Rebellions of the World are
justifiable, and God has made his own Representatives the most unfortunate of
Mankind) but this tender care must also be allowed Kings, when their Subjects
judge themselves to lie under any real inconveniences of Government: which
they must study no otherwise to avoid, but by supplicating the mercy of a good
God, and by humbling themselves for their own sins, by which (as it generally
falls out) God was justly provoked, to lay such afflictions upon them: and not
by taking a present revenge upon their Princes Authority or just Rights, by
reproaches, base insinuations, and bold affronts.

And if in such cases the Constitution of the Nation allows tenders of a more
solemn advice and counsel, let it be always done with the greatest love and
tenderest regard to his Honor and Safety; and not with a drawn Sword in the
one hand, and a Petition in the other, as putting it to a Princes choice,
either to fight or bargain for his security, or meanly to submit to every
imperious and unreasonable Proposal, so as to imbase or destroy his
Sovereignty; for which in the end such Counselors, and the whole Nation with
them, will find themselves the greatest Losers, and of which this Kingdom has
had a sad and a sufficient instance, in the unworthy usages of our late Majesty
of most blessed Memory.

The sum is, Bless God that you have not only a King, but a My King, one whom
he has so especially preserved for, and miraculously restored to, you. This is
the first Head of Discourse, the Original of all Establishments in Government.

2. The second Head was a consideration of the Quality of the established
Power, that God was pleased to set over them, and that was a King, he gave them
the blessing of a Monarchy, a Vicegerency of Power and Government most like to
God himself that gave it, (the (...) the one God) and for which reason, with
more congruity and decency he allows the Monarch the Credit and Honor of his
own Name: I have made thee a God to this people, says the Almighty to Moses:
And I have said, that is, I have made you Gods, ( Psalm. 82. 6.) A Government
which God established over the especial part of Mankind his Church, under
Christ his anointed King, as my Text prophesied, and David typified. A
Government of which the holy Scripture only gives us an account in all its
Histories, and in all its directions to rule and to obey.

All other Authorities are mentioned but as Gods Creatures, (I Pet. 2. 23.) but
the Monarch as himself, dignifying him with his own Name and the Ministration
of his own Sovereign Authority, and grand instances of his Providence over the
World.

But I shall advance the reason of this days Joy on that account, by offering
to you two great advantages of Monarchical Government above all others. 1. It
is more noble and honorable than any other form of Dominion, and renders a
Nation more considerable and renowned in the eye of the World. It is fresh in
our memories, that in the days of our Commonwealth (as they called it) we were
a reproach to all our neighboring Nations, a scorn and derision to them that
were round about us. And when our Natives walked in the streets of Foreign
Cities, (from whom before we had the Privilege of a kind acceptance above any
People in the World) the finger of scorn was lifted up against us; our name was
Schellam, and our entertainment an exprobration of such shameful practices, as
by the example of which, the Turk might plead innocence, and the Salvages
justify their Barbarisms. 2. Monarchical Government, as it is more honorable,
so most safe, because, like a well fixed Center of Power, it will terminate and
combine all lines of interest in one point of Authority. And it appears to be
so certain an Expedient of the safest Peace, that whenever a defection, or
any contingency of State have laid designs for a multiplication of Supremes,
nothing has so infallibly confounded the Nations where they have happened.
When Gods ancient people fell to a division between two Kings, ten Tribes
revolting to Jeroboam; then began that sad Scene of troubles to that great
people, which enjoyed Halcyon days of peace, when they were centred in one
Solomon.


And we read of the vast Roman Empire, that when Constantine had divided his
Kingdoms among three, (though his own Sons) the division was occasional of such
ruinous inconveniences, that it gradually lost its greatness, till it withered
and lessened to a name.

What was the State of our ancient Heptarchy, but a collision of inconsistent
Powers, which kept the Nation in a continual state of War, till a resolution
into one Monarchy ended the controversy?

And lastly, let us look a little back upon our late unparalled Confusions,
and you will find, that the Contriyers of them could never have insinuated
themselves into so many advantages for a War, had they not laid their ground
upon a pretended Coordination of Power in the two Houses with the King, or not
found out two Supremacies in his Person, one in his Natural, another in his
Politic capacity, pretending to fight for the one, where they actually pursued
the destruction of the other.

Now if any Republican should murmur, object, and say, That some Cities and
Societies of Merchants have not only subsisted, but flourished under popular
Governments. I answer, that such Societies have always been most safe, when
they have kept up the nearest resemblances to Monarchy among themselves; and
that great State that pretends least to it, may in time be either necessitated
to choose a Monarch of their own, or admit him whom they at first threw off, or
shroud themselves under the Protection of some other, or be swallowed up by one
that can control their Greatness.

Now bless God for the mercy of this Day, that made us Subjects of this happy
Government; and that he has put the Nation under the safe Authority of a fixed
Monarch, who just before stood wavering upon the points of contending Swords
for its Protection: and was continually hurried up and down by the violence of
every tempest of War, that came from the several Quarters of different
Interests. In those days our Governors were all along they, that wore the
longest Sword, and were the present most successful Invaders, and every he,
that had most strength to bind our hands, rifle our Liberties, and despoil our
Proprieties. That had it not been for the kind Theocracy of a gracious God, who
showed us Mercy in the midst of Judgment, to keep us together by a most wise
and unaccountable Providence, the whole Nation had several times run into one
great riot of disorder, every man had invaded every man with the most horrid
acts of cruelty and savagery.

Therefore rejoice, O Britain, that the Power that is now set over thee, is not
any new Model of Government, no new Set of Militeers, no Table full of a packt
Company that eat and govern in the same posture; but a gracious Monarch, a
King, who came to deliver thee out of the hands of thy Oppressors, the nerves
of whose loins should strengthen and uphold thee, not whose weight should crush
and oppress thee: whose Scepter might become a Crosier to thee, whose Crown a
covering, and whose Throne a Mercy-seat.

And thus I have discharged my self of the second Head of my Discourse, and
accent of thankfulness, and

3. I come to the third, the Extent of the Monarchs Government, it is upon Gods
holy Hill of Sion, that is, over the Affairs that concerned Religion, as well
as those that respected the Civil Welfare of his Subjects. Thus Moses had the
disposal of both the Trumpets to convocate Assemblies both of Ecclesiastic and
Temporal concernment. Joash had the Testimony put into his hand, as well as the
Crown set upon his head (2 Chronicles. 23. 11.) And as our Savior, when he came to
establish his Religion, made no alteration (no not in the least instance) of
that practice in his Life or Doctrine; so that Power over Ecclesiastic Affairs
and persons, was allowed and continued to all the Roman Emperors as soon as
they assumed the Christian Profession (as Socrates the Historian affirms.) And
S. Austin assures us, that the Power of Kings extended not only to those things
( quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, sed quae pertinent ad divinam
Religionem) which pertained to humane Society, but those that concerned the
divine Religion, ( Lib. 3. contra Cresconium.)

But who knows not, that if a man would pretend to an accumulation of
Authorities, he might be as luxuriant in the case of this Royal Right, as in
any other that can be named, to the shame of both the Roman and Presbyterian
pretensions.

Now in this capacity of Power the Church of England ownes and receives, swears
and submits it self to the Sovereigns of these Nations. And it is the joy and
blessing of the day, that his Majesty was restored to the assumption of that
Power over our Sion, as well as over our Jerusalem. But that which advances
our joy and gratitude is, that there never was a season when a poor languishing
Church more needed the assistance and power of such a Regal Authority, not only
to protect, but to deliver and restore her. And the mercy of her deliverance
will appear by these several instances of her calamity at that time. 1.
Rejoice, O Daughter of Sion, for thy King, like another Zerobabel, came after
the days of a long Captivity, to restore the Houses of God, which were either
miserably ruined, or shamefully defaced, and daily assaulted, with a down with
them, down with them even to the ground, to their pristine beauty and order:
and to repair in all places, what the enemy had done wickedly in the
Sanctuaries, which before had laid so forlorn and despicably neglected, that
they looked in most places, as if some Dioclesian or Apostate Julian had been
attempting the ruin of Christianity it self. 2. God did then graciously send
his King to our Sion, to patronize the case of his own afflicted Order that
minister to his Service, which a long time had become the miserable objects of
popular fury: some of which they had murdered, others exiled to seek their
bread in desolate places, many they immured in nasty Prisons, innumerable they
deprived of support and livelihood, abetting every Abject to trample upon them,
to ruffle and bait them with the most ignominious usages. But then came the
Messenger of God our gracious King, to bring the glad tidings of their
restitution to their Places and Offices, Protection and Revenues, which the men
in sheeps clothing had devoured and robbed from God, that their persons might be
cheap, and their offices contemptible. 3. God at that time seasonably sent his
King to repair the breaches of our Sions Unity, which she had so lost, that she
then exceeded all parallels of confusion. Here was Ephraim against Manasse, and
Manasse against Ephraim, and both against Judah ( Isa. 9. 21.) Here was I of
Paul, I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, (1 Cor. 1. 12.) That the Church became
like the Ephesian Tumult, some were crying one thing, some another, till all
our Assemblies were confounded ( Act. 19. 32.) But to complete our Sions
misery, she was not only broken in pieces, but every divided Party was always
dissolving into lesser subdivisions. The universal Fate of all Schismatical
separations, as S. Austin particularly observes of the Donatists, that they
were ( in minutissimas parts concisi) minced into the smallest particles of
Faction. Lastly, God sent our King seasonably then to Sion, to restore that
faith to us, which we profess to have been that, which was once delivered to
the Saints, and that dares only stand the trial of all the acknowledged Rules
of Catholicism. Which at the time of his Majesty's Restoration, was so
confounded with all the erroneous Doctrines that ever before had born the name
of Heresy, that had Quod vult Deus lived at that time, he might have spared S.
Austins large enumeration, by having them all (and more) in his view, at one
prospect. The good old way, and all the ancient paths of Truth, were now grown
up and laid common, and so many false Meteors were kindled up in every corner,
that the poor people stood at a gaze what way to take, what light to follow.


These be several instances of our Sions calamity and deliverance, and the
reasons of her present thankfulness. But now if any ungrateful person should go
about to lessen our Joy, and reclaim and say, That the Expedient has not
thoroughly attained its end; yet he must confess, that God gave it as sufficient
to do its full work, and it certainly had done it, if our demerit of such a
mercy had not been too great, and our improvement of it too little.

And though because the obstinate Samaritans did disturb the work, because they
might not build with us after their own fashion, and by false accusation
obstructed the full completion of the building, so that the old men began to
cry and murmur, that it fell short of the splendor of the former; yet as it
is, there is no good man but may see enough, and enjoy enough, as gratefully to
acknowledge the mercy of the deliverance, and the blessing of Gods setting his
King our Sovereign upon his holy Hill of Sion.

And thus I am acquitted of the third Head of my Discourse, the Extent of Regal
Government, and so I am engaged in the

4. Fourth and last, which is the consideration of the greatness of the mercy
of David's resettlement, from the grand difficulties of the attainment, Yet have
I set, that is, in despite of the greatest opposition and the strongest
improbabilities. For though the Heathen furiously raged, and the people
imagined a vain thing, though the Kings and Rulers of the Earth opposed him
with their power and counsel, that is, though his Son Absalom and a
considerable part of his Kingdom made a defection from him at home, and the
Moabites, King of Zabah, the Syrians of Damascus, the Amalekites and Ammonites
sometimes opposed him abroad (2 Kings 8.) yet in contradiction to all these
difficulties, and after all these dangers did God set him upon his holy Hill of
Sion.

This was David's Yet, and can we not celebrate as great an one for our gracious
Charles? Yet certainly, and by far every way a greater; God brought him to his
Throne through severer difficulties, stronger opposition, and upon far lesser
hopes and probabilities. Who could believe that power less able to prevent the
admission of the Son, that was strong enough to bring so great and so good a
Monarch, as his Royal Father, to the Scaffold? Or can we think that those men
should ever indulge the safety of the Branch, that had confidence and malice
enough to destroy such a Body and Stock of Royalty? But we may measure the
difficulties and obstacles of his Majesty's Restoration by these particular
Rules of Observation. 1. God restored him when the poor deluded Vulgar had been
unweariedly taught, that the War commenced against his Royal Father and his
House, was to be accounted The Cause of God, and that the Masters of the Plot
(the better to secure their design) had wrought a great part of the people to a
belief, that there lay all obligations upon their Consciences, to destroy every
thing and person that stood a defense to his late Majesty and his Family. And
we all know, that those men will be hardly persuaded to change their mind, that
have once made it their Religion to continue in their opinion. And whose life
can be safe against him, who can think he does God good service to murder him?
2. God restored him after his Enemies had had a considerable time (twelve years
from the day of his Right) to settle themselves in their Usurpations, by trying
all kinds and modes of Parliamenting, and by experimenting all Models of
governing, and accomodating all their Tyrannies with such softning names, as
might best court the people into an acceptance of them. And so sometimes they
were Keepers of their Liberty, at another time they were a Committee of Safety,
and at last it was a Protectorship of their Privileges. But in the mean time
the poor banished King was to be believed, first an Alien, and then an Enemy to
their concerns; and by all possible Arts of Malice to be made odious and
unacceptable to the Nation. 3. God then restored him, when he had never a
Foreign Prince or State effectually to espouse his Interest. And when the
Usurpers were grown so considerable, as to be courted and addressed to, by
several neighboring Princes: among which, if any one was suspected to afford
his exiled Majesty any aid or favor, they found other Princes as considerable,
to balance him against all attempts of succor, though it were in contradiction
to the Nations public interest, and its common safety: so that it might be
then said of his Majesty as his Example David said of himself, that his very
acquaintance were afraid of him, and conveyed themselves from him, and that
no man cared for his Soul. 4. Fourthly and lastly, God then restored him, when
he was at the lowest hopes and expectations of any relief or help from his
Loyal Friends at home. They had attempted to the last shift for his
deliverance. They had moved every stone, and turned all possibilities, but
their endeavors had been always baffled, and at last so perfectly defeated,
that their persons were exposed to the watchful malice of their implacable
enemies, to murder, banish, or imprison them as they pleased. And their
Fortunes either so altogether ruined, or miserably harassed, that whereas
before those Loyal Souls had furnished his Majesty with considerable sums for
his relief, they were now so disabled and desperately discouraged, that they
either could not, or durst not afford him a sufficiency for his ordinary
support.


These were the difficulties and obstacles of his Majesty's happy Restoration,
than which in the prospect of humane judgment, none could be imagined more
obstinate or insuperable, or render his condition more hopeless and desperate.
But then God took the matter into his own hand, and himself (as he had done for
David before) sent down from on high to fetch him home ( Psalm. 18. 16) He
divided the waters of strife on the one hand and on the other, to make way for
his passage, and proclaimed to the World (to his own Honor and our Joy) that
in defiance to all his Enemies power and greatness, malice and contrivements at
home, in despite of all the compliances of his false friends abroad, and
notwithstanding all the incapacities and despondencies of them that loved him
here at home, Yet have I set my King, my Charles, upon my holy Hill of Sion.

Having thus discoursed what conquest God made upon the obstacles and
difficulties of his Majesty's Restoration, and how he helped his Anointed with
the wholesome strength of his own right hand ( Psalm. 20.) as we must first give
to God the honor due to his own great Name, so also let us oblige our selves
to the strictest regard to his Majesty's preservation and safety, lest we
defame our present profession of Gods especial favor to him, by exposing him
to the same difficulties to preserve his Throne, that he met with to attain it.

Has God given him to us by the complicated Right of his Birth and
Restoration, and shall not we preserve him now we have him by the tenderest
Love and Loyalty we can possibly express? Can any ingratitude be so great, any
disloyalty so enormous, as so to confront such a great mercy of God, as must
seem to reproach the very instances of its execution for his preservation? Did
God bring him home from an Exile, and shall we abet those persons and their
contrivements, that tend directly to the carrying him back to the same unhappy
state? Did God allow him an Oak to cover him, and shall we turn it into a Cross
to crucify him? Were men of a different persuasion made instrumental to his
safety, and shall we that are of the same Communion with him, endanger it by
our bold separations and unsatiable desires of change?

Especially let us guard his Throne with the Militia of our devoutest Prayers,
whose keen earnestness may wound his Enemies in the fifth rib every day. Let us
pray that a Colony of Angels may garrison his habitation, and a Wall of his
Subjects Love, Faith, and Loyalty secure his Sacred Person from every Invasion
upon his Peace or Honor.

O let us beg for the longest thread of time that mortality is capable of, that
may not only carry him to an ordinary old age, but may lengthen out his life to
such an unusual duration, that it may pay us back again the many years his
Exile lost us. But above all, let us be sure to secure his Throne with virtuous
and religious lives. There is a kind of Treason in sin: upon the account of
which it was once threatened, that ye shall perish ye and your King. And Ezra
penitently acknowledged to God, That for our iniquities we and our King and
Priests have been delivered up, etc. ( Ezr. 8.) O let therefore the virtuous
and exemplary lives of his Majesty's Friends cloth his Enemies with shame,
baffle all their Pretensions to better Manners, and perfectly silence their
(for the most part unjust) declamations against the irregularities of the
Loyal; that so every good Subject may think and testify, that it is not enough
to proclaim and say, but also to live

God save the King.
FINIS.

