A Tender VISITATION Of the Fathers Love, To all the Elect-Children: OR AN
EPISTLE Unto the Righteous CONGREGATIONS, who in the LIGHT are gathered, and
are Worshippers of the Father in Spirit and Truth.

To be read amongst them in the pure fear of the Lord God, when they are
Assembled and met together in his Name.

By William Smith.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Robert Wilson at the Sign of the
Black-spread Eagle and Windmill, in Martins near Aldersgate, 1660.

A tender VISITATION of the Fathers Love, to all the Elect-Children.
Dear FRIENDS and BRETHREN,
THe day is the Lords, he has appeared you to visit, and unto him must the
gathering be, his Work is great, his Arm is powerful, he has made it bare, it
rules for him, Nations shall know it, and all People shall behold the
appearance of his might, he has dealt with you in mercy, and yet is his
Judgments true; he sought you in his love when there was none to help, he saved
by his Power when all beheld you and passed by, who can declare his goodness?
or who can show forth his loving kindness? he has wrought with his Arm, and
his right hand has done valiantly, mighty things is come to pass thereby, he
found you in the Wilderness, and upon Mountains scattered, he prepared a way
for you, and has brought you into the Valleys; great things has he done, and
prosperous has his Work been, this is his Day, long it has been waited for,
and the cry has been for the appearance of it, it is now come, and in it is
his Work wrought; you that waited for it, and did abide it, are blessed, for
dreadful was his appearance whilst the wicked stood in his sight, and as a
consuming fire he came to destroy them, that many shrunk from him, and could
not abide the day of his coming, but fled from his Righteous Judgments, who had
truly waited for his Appearance; his Wrath was hot, and his Stroke was heavy,
and his rising was like a man of War, so that his Enemies sell before him, and
were scattered by his Arm, the mighty could not stand, but from their seat he
brought them down; he spoke and the Earth trembled, he uttered his voice and
the Hills melted; it is you that have beheld his mighty acts, who did abide the
day of his coming, and fled not from his Arm of power, but gave his enemies
into his hand, and did not love your lives to death; then did you feel the
strength of his might, who came in power to redeem his chosen, then did the
womb of the morning open, then did sore travail come upon you, pangs took hold
on every side, and great was the cries that then was heard; now was your
Deliverance nigh at hand, and his only begotten came into the World, this was
the day in which the poor found help, and that of low degree was raised up,
then the Prisoner came out of the pit, and the Captive was delivered out of
Iron bonds, so did his work prosper in his hand, and deliverance came by his
eternal Power, you felt his terror upon the wicked, and none was able to
resist his might, his stroke was heavy on your loins, and feebleness possessed
your reins, for in his wrath he sealed you down, and you languisht in the deep
distress; then did your cry go up unto him, and the earnest breathed for
relief, his bowels yearned to his own, and his love brake forth like a mighty
stream, his ear was open for to hear, and his Arm ready to deliver, for he
remembered his holy Covenant, and his own Inheritance whom he had chosen, he did
not leave you when you were weary, nor forsake you when you were feeble, but in
the deep he was your strength, and in your travail he you upheld, so did he
lead you in his Mercy, and yet his Judgments are all true; you walked in the
narrow way, and his Arm of power was your support, he brought you through the
gate of Death, and raised up the seed of Life, his love is not to be expressed,
nor the works of his hands to be declared, for in the midst of Judgment he
remembered Mercy, and his eye of pity was open toward you; the Lion could not
prey upon you, his mouth he stopped; the Devourer could not spoil you, him he
judged; Pharaoh could not keep you, him he Plagued; the Grave could not shut
you up, that he opened, and out of the horrible pit he you delivered, then did
the poor find help in his Power, and the needy was relieved in his Mercy, he
stretched forth his Arm, and Salvation came, and that was wrought which no
other could do, though you had run from man to man, and had enquired after God,
and sought to have obtained Peace, yet none could bring true tidings of it, but
still you mourned for want of Life, and traveled in the anguish of your
Spirits, running but obtained not, seeking but could not find, until you was
wearied in sore travail, and ready to faint under your heavy burdens; then did
you cry in your deep distress, and he heard out of his holy Hill; he made the
Fountain open wide, and his Salvation did not tarry, he gave you ease and made
you glad, and brought you into a wealthy place, that your joy in his presence
did increase, and the days of mourning passed away, for his work in you he
brought to pass, and accomplished the thing which he had determined.

Oh Friends, what has the Lord done for you! pen cannot write, nor tongue
declare; you were lost and he sought you, Strangers and he gathered you,
Enemies and he Reconciled you, Sinners and he Saved you; what could the Lord do
more for you? Mountains are fallen, the Earth is melted, the Devourer is
spoiled, for against the mighty has the Lord appeared, and his work has been
prosperous in his hand, he has brought death upon the first man, and all his
deeds he has destroyed, he has quickened the second, and in his power he is
raised, and in glory is his only begotten come into the world, and unto him
must the gathering be; you are blessed in whom he is revealed, who feels your
Union with his Life, and your Translation into his Likeness; abide with him,
depart not from him, for there is not another that can save, or can refresh the
wearied ones, for many have for saken him, and have not continued faithful to
him, though for a time they followed him, and whilst they did abide was
faithful in him, but when Tribulation came they started aside, and is turned
into a withered branch, for they could not abide the Judgment, nor the
straitness of the way to walk in, but sought for ease and a carnal liberty, and
so departed from the Lord after they was Enlightened, and of his Word and Power
tasted; and having Erred from the Right Way, they have been again Entangled,
and a yoke of bondage is come upon their necks, so has the Enemy wrought upon
them, and drawn them from the needful thing, that no Life is possessed, nor
Power enjoyed, but Antichrist Exalted, and the Temple filled with a dry spirit,
that deadness and drowsiness is over the living, the oil being stope, the
spirit of slumber entered, and the Lamp is filled with it, that when he comes he
is not regarded, nor no Readiness to receive him, for there is no delight in
waiting for him; so have many lost their First Love, and are Erred from the Way
of Life.

Oh Friends! there was a time in which he was more Brettous unto you, when in
the day he called you, and in his love did visit you, then was your hearts
upright toward him, and your joy did abound in him, that you could have left
all to follow him, and nothing was dear unto you for his sake; then was the
Oil powered forth freely, and the favor of it was sweet unto you, and your
Lamps in brightness burned in that day, and Life and Power you truly enjoyed,
and in sweet tenderness you was always kept, waiting his presence in you to
feel, and the brightness of his glory to behold, your earnest was so much unto
him, that nothing could satisfy but the enjoyment of him; Oh how sweet was his
Word unto you in that Day, how was you quickened and enlarged in it, that you
could have run and not been weary, such was your delight in his Commandments,
how did you then attend to his Counsel, and from his mouth received
Instruction, it was your Meat and Drink to do his Will, whilst the tenderness
did abide upon you, and that which God had raised was fresh and living in you,
then was your eye kept single to him, and was not after other Lovers, your
delight was in him placed, and in sweet Union with his Life you lived, in the
measure which then you had received, and therein was your lives refreshed, and
every morning your strength renewed, that there was not then a feeble Person,
nor no weariness nor saintness was upon you, but the living Power quickened, and
revived you, and a sweet savor of life was then felt amongst you. Oh consider!
for it was better with many in that day, then now, who have forsaken their
first Love, and are again come under the vail, and does not feel the springs of
life in freshness, to keep them awake and living unto God; Oh come within my
Friends, for this Book is opened to be read, divide a right, feel in the Power,
see to the Root what springs up, what is the fruit, taste and see how it is,
search to the bottom, mind Gods Witness, it will not deceive you, it will let
you all see your conditions plainly, it will not bring one thing to Light, and
hide another, but it will bring all up, that you may read thorrow with an
understanding, from the first day until now, for the Witness is true, and will
bear witness unto the Truth in all, and what is out of the Truth it will
reprove without respect of Persons; so may all see your present states, as the
witness is minded and taken heed unto, and it will keep all down to the measure
of Truth, and then none will seem to be above what they are: And upon
whomsoever the Witness smites, hearken to it, and as it opens your present
states, turn not away your ear, that whoever have erred, and from your first
Love departed, may again return: Oh he is near you, he waits for you, come, he
will not Reject you, but will freely heal you, for yet is the Day of his Mercy
to you; for verily many are cooled, and many slumber, who in the day of
tenderness truly tasted of the Word and Power, from which the Oil was poured
forth that caused their Lamps to bear a glorious show; and this is a
Lamentation in Israel this day, the glory thereof in many seems to fade, and a
dry covering comes over in its place, all may read as you mind the Light, so
will every one know your present states, for the eyes of many has been abroad,
and things has been looked at and reasoned about, and in the visible the mind
has run, until the Vail has been secretly drawn, that fears has entered,
and their faith Surprised, and then has wavered, that they have been driven
back and their strength spoiled, and so are many gone astray, and neither finds
springs nor pasture: So all be diligent, search out the Matter, the Light will
find it where it is, and let all see where you are, and what you feed upon, for
the Fathers Love sends to you all, that the strayed may be gathered, and the
faithful established, and though there may be some which will not hearken, yet
shall Isreal's glory stand, and all that are willing thither to come, though you
have erred, it shall not be remembered, but the healing virtue of life you shall
all taste and feel; Oh hearken, come, delay not, the Matter is weighty.

And all you dear and tender ones, born of the Immortal seed, sweet and
precious are you all, the Fountain opens freely unto you, the Fathers love
cannot hold from you, for you are his own, he has Chosen you, and over you is
his Arm stretched out, your feet stands in a sure place, and your Foundation
none can remove, happy are you that be in such a case, yea blessed for ever,
who has chosen the Lord to be your God, you have stood in the Judgment, and
in the Cross has walked, and nothing could turn your feet aside, you have not
been Entangled though often allured, you have been kept out of the Fowlers net,
and from him have you been preserved, so in your stations you have stood, and
has not swarved from the Lord, but in his Power has been kept, and your
Integrity you have Retained; you are the living branches who in the Immortal
knows your Life, your Leaf shall not wither, neither shall your Blossom fade,
but glorious shall your Fruit be, for in the River of Pleasure your Root is
placed, he has weaned you from the world his life to delight in, he feeds you
daily with the fatness of his House, and gives you to drink of his Fullness
freely; Oh what is like unto your Portion, ye tender Plants, your Bread is
sure, and your Water fails not, your dwelling place is full of Pleasantness,
and your peace no man can take away, the Lord has formed you in the womb, and
in his Power has brought you forth, to make you a Holy People to himself, and
a Generation to take delight in; Children of his Love you are, and his mercy is
Endless unto you, his Seed he has raised in you to Reign, and made you
Subjects to his Power, in the Covenant of Life he has Sealed you up, and who
shall separate you from his Love? Who is sufficient for these things? or, Who
can show forth his Mighty acts? Oh let not his mercies be forgotten, nor his
loving kindness slip out of your minds, for his own Arm has wrought his Work,
and in his Power you have been made to stand, else had you been as others are,
for no Temptation but is Common, and none can stand but in his Power, for he
alone is Isreal's keeper, therefore the Boaster is Excluded, and all the lofty
is cast down, who in their Difference seems to Glory, and smites at others who
in some things may Differ from them, and would have none come near to them but
such as in the likeness of their Holiness does appear, and who appears not with
them, such they Judge, and who Receives and owns them, such is there Love unto
in the affection, and so runs into a Self-separation and particular Union, and
this does not refresh the Seed, nor travails not to set it free.

Oh dear Friends, watch over this Spirit, that it may not have a place in any
of you to Rule, for the Fruit of it is Bitterness, and the End of it is
Desolation, therefore be you all stayed in the pure measure of the Love of God
Received, that therein you may bind and healm cherish and succor every
breathing desire that thirsts after the Lord God, not looking at the
appearance, nor Judging according to that, but to feel in the measure of the
Love and Life, the true state of every one, and so to divide aright, that
however any do appear, the Cry of the Immortal may be felt, and the state
thereof truly Discerned, that you may reach forth an Arm to all that stand in
need, and do good to all in tenderness, always considering what makes you to
differ; for verily Friends the Lords dear Seed breaths after him out of all
Forms and Appearances, and he is gathering and bringing forth a People out of
the Traditions, who cannot live any longer therein, such is the Earnest after
God in many this Day, unto whom his tender Visitation of Love is Reached forth;
so put not a difference in Forms and Appearances, but in their true ground
where the difference stands, that betwixt the births you may truly divide, for
the least breathing after God in Tenderness is to be Cherished in all, under
what Form or Appearance soever they do yet abide, and the Lord is gathering a
People in his Mercy out of all Professions, to make them partakers of his
living Truth, whose understandings he is opening, to behold the wonderful
things that he is bringing to pass in this his Day; so let your bowels be open
unto all, that in the Love wherewith the Father has loved you, and gathered
you, in the same Love according to the measure, you may reach to the Seed of
God in all, that every tender Plant may be refreshed, and all the weak and
feeble may be strengthened and comforted, that every one in their measures may
be considered, and as they stand Faithful unto God therein, even so to be
nourished and tendered in Love, that all may be brought to a measure of God in
themselves, and every one therein to feel there Union with God and one another,
that so all friends who are gathered into Gods Truth this Day, may be
Translated into his likeness and bear his Image, who is Love, for he has
opened his Love in freeness to you, and has largely ministered forth of the
Riches of it, and this he does require, that you should Love one another in
that Love wherewith he has loved you, and this will make you glorious as this
covering is received upon you, and by it shall all men know that you are true
followers of him, whose Name you profess, for it draws you near him, and unites
you to him, and makes your truly like him, and it will close you all up in the
purity of it self, and Unite you perfectly together, and preserve you all in
tenderness to God and one another, that there will not be an Evil Eye amongst
you, but the Strong will bear with the Weak, and not seek so much to please
themselves; and this is that which truly bears, and endures all things, and
travails to remove burdens, and to ease the oppressed, Cherishing that which
breathes in all, but cannot hurt it in any: Oh wait dear Friends in the Love
of the Father to abide, for it is a sweet thing for brethren there to dwell,
and let us consider one another, that we may provoke one another more unti
love, until it be our garment to cover us throughout, that nakedness may not
appear in any, so will all be healers and not burters, nourishers, and not
destroyers, and this is well pleasing unto the Lord, and a service that is
accepted of him, for it is the travail of the Seed to set free, and to bring
out of all straitness, that Unity may be held and Increased, and every Plant
may be preserved, and all the Body kept in sweet order, that every Member may
feel its Union with the Head, and there Receive its nourishment, so will a
supply be ministered unto that part which lacks, and every Member will stand
serviceable in its place, and bear its proper office in the Body, and none to
say to each other, I have no need of thee, but all to stand in the pure Unity
of Life it self, and there perfectly joined in the one heart, so will the Lords
Name be one, and his People one, and his service and Worship one, and this will
keep all in a sweet savor unto God, and a deareness and tenderness one toward
another, and unto this has the Lord called you, wait for the increase of it
more amongst you, that love unfegnedly may abound, and the life of
Righteousness may stand in Dominion, that so for the soul you may all watch,
and with a tender eye be careful one over another, that the Body may truly
edify it self in Love, and all may receive comfort one of another, then will
the Lord of Life delight in you, and dwell amongst you, and water you daily in
his fresh Springs, and feed you with the Heritage of Jacob for ever.

Oh dear Lambs, prize the Lords Mercies over all, for unto a high calling he
has called you, be single unto him, that his Love you may answer in walking
worthy of all his Mercies, so in his Power he will preserve, and with his Arm
defend, that no weapon formed against you shall prosper, for his care is over
his own, and unto his Chosen does his Love reach, for a good Shepherd he is
over his Flock, always taking care for them, he leads them where good Pasture
is, and feeds them with the choicest food, his Rod is always stretched forth,
and in it does their Comfort stand, his staff is near them to defend, that the
Devourer cannot Spoil, nor with his teeth make them a prey, he stands by them
in the Day, and in the Night he leaves them not, for Isreal's keeper does not
slumber; you are his Chosen, his Flock, his People, who are of the immortal
born, vour place is safe, your strength is sure, abide within and in the Life
be ever stayed, for in your Tent you rest in Peace, and blessed are you for
evermore.

And let not that eye be opened which would be looking forth, but in your Tent
abide with God, that in his gathering you may Stand, and in his Rest your
dewlling place may be; and heed not man, nor his doings, for some has been
hurt with looking there, and has lost their union with the Life, having looked
so much Abroad, until they have suffered loss at Home; and whilst the eye
has thus beheld, it has been dazzled more and more, and when the end could not
be seen, then in the astonishment they have sunck down, and into much sorrow
have been plunged; let not your minds be so abroad, but keep your habitation
within, and see man's time and day, and what it is, and neither regard his Way
nor Doings, for if he do well he is Accepted, but if evil he will be Scourged,
so man is not to be heeded, for the Lord is above him and all his ways, and
has his heart in his hand, and at his pleasure can turn it, and what comes to
pass is by his Permission, and unto all that love him it works for good,
therefore let none say, why has the Lord done this? or, why is it thus comite
pass? but all know your gathering unto God, and with him abide, and let
pationce be your covering, and meekness the girdle of your loins, for the Lord
has a work to do and it must be done by whom he will, if he bring up the
ASSYRIAN to be a Rod, and make the CALDEANS an ovenflowing Scourge, who shall
say unto him, why do thou so? they have their time, he lays them by, and
they pass away, that all may know there is a God in Israel.

Oh dear hearts, be ye all Faithful unto the Lord God, for large is his Love
toward you, he will not leave you uor forsake you, but will stand by you, and
deliver you out of all your troubles, for he is Israeli strength, and the
Salvation of his Chosenones, trust in him alone, and in his Power believe, for
he is able to Save; though the Destroyer pursue, and violently assault, yet is
he near to be a present help unto you, infinite is his Loving Kindness unto
you, who are upright in heart, his Arm has gathered you, his Arm preserves and
saves you, that the wicked one does not touch you, he has Succored and
Releived you, when the storm has blown sore upon you, he has quietted the
Wind and the Sea when it has Raged to overwhelm you, his everlasting Power you
have felt, and his renewed Mercies from day to day: Oh wait in the Light that
all his Mercies you may read, and every Visitation of his Tender Love may be
always fresh upon your hearts, that you may be kept sensible of his
everlasting Kindness, and manifold Mercies from time to time bestowed: You are
the blessed of the Lord, who in his Power are kept Faithful, and have not Erred
from his way, though often tempted, yet by him preserved, that your Confidence
in his Power does abide, which gives you victory over all the Powers of
Darkness, for in you is the seed of Life raised, who is both Lord and King, and
though the Enemy do pursue you, and casts floods of wrath and fury after you,
yet in the Authority and Power of your King you have Dominion over him;
therefore look not at Temptations when they come, but keep your eye to the
Lord, and be stayed in that which does discover them, so will he make away for
you to escape them, and keep up your Heads above them, and though your troubles
may be great, yet will the Lord deliver you out of all, and through the
Exercise of Faith and Patience he will establish you in his Holy Hill, and Seal
you up in the Covenant of Eternal life, there to rest in the bosom of his dear
Love for evermore.

So let not the thing seem small in your eyes, for it is the Arm of his Mercy,
which unto you has reached, therefore above all things to be prized, that you
should be called and counted worthy to believe in his Holy Name, and in his
everlasting Truth revealed, and also overcome by him to be followers of him in
Love, and to know the operation of his Power, by which your minds are renewed,
and Translated into a measure of his pure Life, which in you is made manifest
by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, who in you has appeared Sin to destroy, and
Everlasting Righteousness to bring in, of which you are partakers through the
Riches of his Grace by Faith, wherein ye stand: The everlasting God of Life and
Power keep you all, who in the measure of love received, lives up in the pure
obedience to answer the Lords kindness, daily waiting upon him, that in his
wisdom all the works of his hands may be ordered to his everlasting praise.

And all Dear Friends, who in the Lord service stands to bear forth a Testimony
in bonds and sufferings, or any other way therein do witness to the Truth of
God in your measures, and against all Deceit, Oppression, Cruelty, and Wrong, a
Visitation of the Fathers Love reaches unto you all; Oh feel the living Power
your Souls to refresh, and your strength daily to Renew, that none may be weary
or faint in your minds, but all in faithfulness may be upheld to God, keep your
eye out of the world and those things which you have left behind, for thither
will the Enemy often be drawing and enticing your minds, to Entangle you, but all
be watchful that out of his Snare you may be kept, for the Lord is exercising
your patience, to wean you from the love of the World, and all the things that
is in it, that your Part and Portion may be in his Life, and your hearts in him
alone may delight, that for his sake all other things may be given up freely
into his Will, that nothing may be a Bondage to the Just, or Imprison the
Righteous Seed, but that in his Power he may Reign, all other things to put
under his Feet, that nothing may be a Cumber to your mind, so will your bonds
be sweet unto you, and work together for your good; for dear is the Fathers
love unto you, his living presence wait to feel, and that will make your
Consolation to abound, above all your Sufferings, and lift you up over all that
would cast you down, and in waiting the Lord will give you strength to bear,
and patience to endure, until Iniquity have had its day, and the Sufferings be
filled up.

And be contented with your present states, and none grudge or murmr in your
minds, but all stand freely given up, that you may willingly serve the Lord in
what he calls unto, or permits to come upon you, so will his Blessing and Peace
abide with you for Ever.

For now is the Lord trying all the ways and doings of the Children of men,
and what is not of Him must fall before Him, for he will not spare the Evil
doer, though for a time he may go on, and boast himself against the Lord, and
persecute those that fears his Name, yet his End must come, and his Wickedness
upon his head will fall, and as a whirlwind from the Almighty it will light
upon him; and as the Summer chaff he will be driven away, and be no more, for
the Lord is hastening and cutting the work short in Righteonsness; therefore
fear not your adversaries, nor who, or what they be that turns against you, for
it is an evident token unto them of perdition, but to you of salvation and that
of God, for many have already had their day, and the Lord has tried them what
they would do, and they have all betrayed their trust, and turned against his
Power, and none that have been Faithful to him, for he tried them all, and gave
to each of them their Day, but none regarded what was put into their hauds, but
carelessly neglected it, so he pulled down one, and he set up another, and as
their zeal did arise, and that they came to Profess more then others before
them, he gave unto them their Day, and tried them if they would perform what
they Professed, but they have been all found Deceitful; and as bitter fruit did
spring from such as did Profess, as from those that was pulled down before
them, and nothing has been done by any of them, as to what they might have
done, either for God or his People, but from one to another the Yoke has been
continued, and the spirit of Persecution has Reigned, and the loins of one
has been as heavy as the loins of another, and none that did regard the Cry of
the afflicted; wherefore the Lord has removed them, and given their Day into
the hands of others, whom he has brought up to be a scourge unto them, and a
Cloud to cover them, for the Lord tried them All, if any could have been found
amongst them that would have done good, that he might have placed them, and set
them up in Power to have Ruled, but they all proved Corrupted, and none
performed when they was Entrusted, but went backward and drew downward, and
forgot the Lord and his Benefits, turning one against another for self
Interests, and then strive and contended, until the Lords Spirit was grieved
and vexed in beholding their Wickedness, and his Wrath kindled against them,
and he stretched out his Arm and overturned them, and has brought up a People
to be a Just Recompense unto them, and a Cloud over them, under which their Sun
is set.

What is Man or his way that he should be feared? though he set himself on High
and Boast of great things, the Lord Rules over him, and in a moment brings him
down, and all his glory passes away as untimely fruit, if he do not the thing
that is Just, the Righteous God finds him out, and lays him naked to all
passers by, whatever he may profess, and so the inside of many are discovered
in this Day of Trial, who professed much, and boasted of great things, but when
they were tried, then they betrayed and brought forth nothing but their own
deceitful Workings, neither regarding the Lord, nor fearing his Name; so he
laid them all by as Useless in his Service, and has stained the pride of their
glory, that man in all his profession may behold what he is, for all their
Professions is brought to Light, and none has done the thing that is right,
therefore are they smitten, and their Foundation shaken, that fear on every
side takes hold upon them, and like blind men they grope and cannot find a
resting place, for their way is closed up, and they have lost their aim, and
are all Scattered, that many are turned into that way again which once they
departed from, and contended against, and has lost the favor of all that
which seemingly they once Professed; and thus has the Lord God in a little
time tried the ways and doings of many of the Children of men, and in the
Balance of Truth has weighed them and their Professions, and has found them
as light as Vanity, and as Airy Shaddows they are passed away, and are all dead
and withered, as if they had never been, and now is he trying others. So dear
Lambs, all in Gods Power wait, which through all changeable things abides, and
do not depart from it at any time, for in that have you been kept in
Faithfulness to stand, that you are not shaken, nor driven away from your Hope
and Confidence, but still abides in Uprightness to the Truth of God, feeling
the sure Foundation which no man can shake or prevail against; this is to be
prized by you in the pure fear, and not to be gloryed in with a fleshly
confidence, for it is the Lords own work, and it is mavelous to behold, that
you who are so much by men despised should in Gods Arm be still Preserved, and
are not shaken from your Hope, though many storms have blown upon you; Oh feel
the Living in which you are upheld, that faithful to the end you may be kept,
for waiting so to be preserved, you shall be everlastingly saved, and glorious
will your Reward be, for the Winter is not yet quite over, though many storms
has sorely beat, yet there is some will still arise, and many will vanish in
their appearance, but some will fall and shall be felt, and in their time they
will be quick, for all is drawing near an End, but the glorious Life none can
destroy; therefore look not at man for he has been tried, and is manifest to
be Corrupted, and all his ways perverse and froward, and nothing else from man
can be expected, until he come to a measure of Gods Spirit to be guided; so
what may appear from man do not you regard, or whether it seem with you or
against you, let not your minds look after it, but dwell in Gods Power, and if
he work for you, and turn many hearts to do something that is right; let all
flesh be silent, and all boasting excluded, that God in his own work may be
Glorysied; and if any thing from man appear against you, keep to the Power to
preserve you, and in the measure of that pure Eternal Life be ye all stayed,
for there is Safety, there is Peace, Satisfaction and eternal Rest; and in that
abiding, you will all be kept from Fainting or Falling, and your strength daily
will be renewed, and your hearts always enlarged, the way of his Command to
run, and nothing will be grievous to you; so will the Truth be gloriously
exalted, and the Lords name honored, who is over all for evermore blessed.

Oh tender Babes, sweet is your savor, you give a pleasant smell, be ye all
clothed with a Low, Meek, and Quiet Spirit, and in the stillness wait to
receive your Portion, and in the coolness drink of the River of his Pleasure,
for his Mercy endures for ever, and his Bountifullness is opened freely, all
the fresh springs are in him, and his own Right Hand gives daily Bread; Oh feed
in the Pasture of Life, that in the tenderness you may daily grow, feeling the
sweet refreshings of his living presence, and in the life of Righteousness bear
his Image, and so will your Ornament adorn the Gospel, and Beautiful will you
be in the eyes of all Beholders: And the Lord of Life and Power season, you all
continually, Confirms, Strengthen, and Establish you daily, that High and Low,
Bond and Free, Male and Female, may evermore feel your Union in the Life of
Truth, that with one accord we may lift up our voice to Magnify his Name
together, who is over all Gods and Kings, alone worthy to be praised and
glorified for Ever and Ever.

Grace, Mercy and Peace, be unto you all, from God the Father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

Dear Lambs, my Life breaths after you, and with you it is wrapped up, either
to rejoice or suffer in the will of God.

Your Dear Brother in the Immortal. William Smith.

THE END.

