THE Unjust Man's DOOM: AS EXAMINED By the several KINDS of Christian Justice,
AND THEIR OBLIGATION.

WITH A Particular Representation OF THE INJUSTICE and DANGER OF Partial
Conformity.

By William Smyth, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in
Duck-Lane, 1670.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Would willingly meet so much Charity and Ingenuity from thee, to be
believed, while I profess that I propound to my self these two Designs in
Publishing these Papers: First, That (by the former part of my Discourse) I
might contribute something toward the restoring the lost Principles and
Practices of Christian Righteousness; and free the Notion of it from such
Prejudices and Misprisions which some men's Doctrines, and manner of Preaching
the Gospel, have brought upon it. And that the Scandalous Distinction (which
the world have had too just a temptation to make, by the observation of some
Professors Actions) between Godliness and Civil Honesty, Piety, and Obedience,
might for ever be removed and forgotten; and that all persons designing to be
Religious, and that do not fully understand their indispensable obligation to
the performance of every part of that Justice in order to their Salvation,
might be delivered from the Ignorance of so considerable a part of
Christianity, and their Duty to God. For it is too notorious, that many earnest
Pretenders to Religion, (by being so especially and continually called upon by
their Teachers, to be righteous by the Person, and not the Religion of Christ,
by the effects of his Merits, and not as necessarily by obedience to his
Precepts) even while they presumed to engross the Vulgars belief of being the
only men that are Godly and honest, have in contradiction to the very design of
Christianity, and to the shame of it, been grossly Unrighteous before God and
man, by being so to their Superiors (both civil and Ecclesiastic) as to
Distributive Justice, nor so careful to free themselves from the imputation of
being unjust in their dealings and transactions, as to Commutative. And though
I have cast my Discourse of Christian Justice into the Mould of a Sermon,
occasionally preached, to represent the Danger of Unjust persons; yet if any
man, being convinced of the necessity of doing Righteousness, that he may be
Righteous, (1 John 2. 7.) shall resolve to engage himself in that excellent
part of his Obedience to God; I hope I have so carefully drawn the several
Lines of Evangelical Justice, that he may be sufficiently instructed in that
part of Christianity, which may be accounted the Universal Religion of the
World; that is, as extensive as Gods Love to Mankind or Christ's Death for it,
and by which men of every Nation, even among them that are invincibly ign^^^^^
of Christianity, and so not criminally Unbelievers, (if Charity may be allowed
to speak her Sense) may be accepted for Christ's sake: that is, such as fear
God, and do righteousness) or Justice (for they are of the same signification)
Acts 10. 35. according to the light God has given them of their Obligation to
it.

The next Design (in the latter Part of my Discourse) is to represent the
Danger and Injustice of Partial and Shuffling Conformity, and to measure the
Dimensions of those many wrongs that have been done to the Church of England by
it, in all her concerns: and that in order to the finding out the best
Expedients, how to redress them And this I have done without the least
uncharitable reflection upon any Man or Parties of men, unless to reprove their
miscarriages, which do so nearly entrench upon the very Design of Christianity
and the Churches Peace, may be so interpreted. And I find upon the most serious
examination of the Affairs of the Church since the Reformation, and the most
unpassionate observation of things which have been seen done in our time (to
which a great part of this present Age can give testimony) That Ministers
Puritanizing in their Congregations in compliance with some Foreign Churches
of different Models, Persuasions and Practices against all their Obligations to
do the contrary, (with consideration had to our many sins for which God has
laid those heavy Punishments upon us) to be the Original cause of the great
Evils that befell the Church of England in the days of her Late calamity, of the
many present Discomforts that are now upon it, and the threatening dangers that
are before it. For these men so managed their business in their Churches, that
the common People (many of which had honest minds, and upright designs of being
good) are insensibly betrayed into such a dislike of the Government, Service,
and universal Constitutions of the Church, that they were prepared upon the
least check of Authority to require Conformity from them, to make it the Cause
of God, and an eminent Act of Zeal for him, to deny all Obedience to it, if not
to endeavor the universal overthrow of all its Peace and Order. So that I am
not so uncharitable as to think, that all the People that were Enemies to the
Church of England, hated it because it was good and innocent, but because
(through these men's either designed project of keeping them in Ignorance; or
through their own Inability to instruct them better) they understood it not;
and being once prejudiced with an ill Opinion, and presumed not to be Masters
of so much Reason as to be able to extricate themselves from their Mistakes,
and not likely to entertain an instruction from them, whom they were taught to
suspect and oppose, its no wonder if they became such zealous and implacable
Enemies to a Church of the most Catholic and Primitive Constitution in the
World. Now the grand Argument which they put into the Peoples Heads, to
perpetuate their enmity against the Church of England, is, That the present
Constitution is a Disposition to Popery, and that the increase of it is to be
imputed thereunto, when themselves are only guilty of it: For though the
Designs of the Factious and the Romanists are as distant as the two Poles, yet
in this they Center, that they aid one another in the boldness of their
Separations, and allow a plausible temptation to such (who consult nothing but
the Interest of an unsecure and palliated Peace, or rather to prevent some
little trouble of preserving the Church in its Integrity) to endeavor an
universal Toleration of all Persuasions, to the established Churches infallible
fall and ruin. But concerning this and all other wrongs done by them to the
Church, the Reader is refer-red to the Discourse it self.

Now if by Gods blessing I may in any measure attain both my Designs; If by the
first I may fully instruct Souls to live ((...)) Justly, one part of
Evangelical Obedience in St. Paul's Division, ( Tit. 2. 12.) And if by the
second I can contribute any thing toward the cure of the Church of England's
present Distempers, I shall not much consult what Entertainment they shall have
among such as are resolved enemies to both, and perhaps for that reason will be
so to their Faithful Monitor,

W. S.

The Unjust man's DOOM.
As examined by the several Kinds of Christian Justice, and their Obligation.

In a SERMON at the Assizes at Bury St. Edmunds in Suff. Sept. 13. 1668.

The Unjust man's DOOM.
1 COR. 6. 9. The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
SO far as the principal Design of Christianity is universal Obedience, and the
far greatest part of that Obedience is Morality; (Duties to be performed from
Man to Man) And the most excellent parts of that Morality, are the Grand
Transactions of Government, Regular Administrations of Common Justice, and
Preservation of Mutual Rights in all Societies: And so far as the Rule by which
all those are accomplished, is Law, grounded upon Right Reason, of which the
Gospel (above all Institutions that ever were is highly and designedly
perfective) so far, I say, a Divine ex officio, while he moves in his own
Sphere, may (must) be especially serviceable to such Assemblies as these: For
it is certain, that the happy event of your Affairs, (which is judicially to do
all men right, that here appear for it) depends upon every man's uprightly
doing his Duty, (...) the part he acts, in this Scene (...) Justice; from the
Judge that sentenceth, to the Advocate that pleads; from the Witness that gives
evidence, to the Jurates that determine.

Now because that every one of these should do right in his place, a civil
account (at best) can advance to no other obligation, but that it is fit and
worthy to be done; (too weak an Argument, to resist a Temptation from Profit,
or Passion, to do the contrary;) therefore they are to be religiously
instructed, (which makes this present exercise reasonable above all Apologies
and Answers for the practice of former times among us, when Divines sat upon
the principal Seats of Justice) I say, men are to be further instructed, that
to do Civil Right, is, now, of Divine Obligation, and a necessary condition of
every man's Salvation; under Encouragements of infallible Rewards, which no man
shall lose, that brings but ((...)) the least refreshment or assistance to a
just procedure; and under the terror of dreadful threatenings, which none shall
escape, that pervert Judgment, do wrong, and shall any way be instrumental to
the violation of another Right: And certainly the severest of all of them is
this in my Text; They shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

My Text being thus brought to hand, offers these two Grounds of Discourse: 1.
The guilty persons, (...), the unrighteous, or the unjust, words Synonimous,
and so are promiseuously taken all over the Scripture. 2. Their Doom and
Punishment, Shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.


1. As to the first, the word (...), unrighteous, or unjust, is not here to be
taken in its larger acceptance, by which it is synonimous with (...) Sinners
in general, and names the persons, that live in disobedience to all, or any of
Gods Commandments indefinitely, as (...) is used, ( Romans 2. 8.) unrighteousness
or unjustice for all ungodliness: And that because, (as C^. Alex. observes)
(...), every sinful act is injurious, frequently to others, always to our
selves.

But (...) is here to be understood strictly, and so denotes persons guilty of
the breach of Justice in its limited and natural sense, as it stands
distinguished from other Virtues in the Moralists Scheme: And being brought
over to be a part of Christ's Religion, was established as such, when he made
love to our Neighbor (that is, the love of practice, to do all men right and
good) to be of like obligation with Love to God, as practiced in the most
immediate Duties, and Services of Faith and Worship: For so says Christ ( Mat.
22. 39.) The second is like unto it (that is) equally, and as indispensably
necessary to Salvation, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Now for the
Measures of that Love, and (the principal design and excrcise of it). Justice,
he gave one general Rule, ( ut primum principium): All things whatsoever you
would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them; that is, Suum cuique
tribuere (the Definition of Justice) to give to every man his Right and Due.
The Offenders then against this Rule of Justice, in this strict sense, are the
guilty persons in my Text, as the words before it, (and the very occasion of
it) does fully evince; where the Apostle charge them, ( v. 8.) that ((...))
Ye do wrong and defraud. And thence infers, that such as do so, are
unrighteous, or unjust; and shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

But our Christian Obligation of doing right to all, having an influence upon
all the conversation we have with men, that is, almost all the actions of our
Lives; It Is necessary (that we may thoroughly find out the guilty in my Text) to
make a strict enquiry after this Christian Justice, as it is distinguished by
its several Objects, and Relations, and by the various kinds of Right, we owe
one to another; the breach of every part of which, does expose us, as to the
guilt, so to the severe sentence of my Text.

The first kind of Gospel-Justice, (as it respects differing Relations) is that
which is called Distributive, that is, the reciprocal Dues and Rights which
Christians must pay one to another, in matters of Superiority and Subjection to
it; from an Empire, to the little Dominion of a Family.

The first of that kind, is, the mutual Duties of Princes and Subjects. As for
the Duties which Princes owe to their Subjects, or rather to God for them; it
is not our business to enquire after. And St. Paul in his Epistles, when he
carefully provided Rules for all distributive Justice, makes no mention of the
duties of Princes; intimating, that they are accountable to none but God, whose
((...)) Ministers they are. We must not curse them ( Eccl. 10. 20.) not slight
them, so the Hebrew, ( ne detrahat Regi) not disparage them, so the Vulgar
Latin, in the most retired thoughts of our Bedchamber, for their miscarriages;
For which, (when at the greatest) we must pretend to no other remedy, but the
Primitive Churches powerful Engines, Prayers and Tears. But then the Subjects
are bound in Christian Justice, to pay their Prince Honor, Tribute, and
Obedience. And those that fail in any part of these duties, that is, that shall
whisper Jealousies into the heads of the Multitude, to defraud them of their
honor; or refuse, or decline their Tribute, the price of their own protection;
or disobey their Laws, the Nerves of all Communion and public safety, they are
(...), they have wronged their Princes, and are unrighteous, unjust persons, in
the sense of my Text. But if their unrighteousness in these cases shall ferment
to rebellious Designs, (let them pretend to as much Saintship as Corah, or
common Justice as Absalom, or Reformation as both) they are not then only
unjust to a Prince in his Personal Capacity, contrary to the Rule of doing to
all men, etc. And though he be a Tyrant, act contrary to an express Precept
((...)) not to resist evil, not allowable among private persons: But as he is a
public person, they are guilty of a National wrong; they wrest out of Gods
hand the Ordinance ((...), Romans 13. 2.) the only expedient of Mercy, by which
the Rights of all men are preserved, and the world kept from Confusion; and are
therefore answerable for all the Blood, Ruin, and miserable Consequences of a
Civil War, that is of a Princes Military defense of himself, and faithful
Subjects that adhere to him, in the day of Rebellion. So that a Rebel is an
unrighteous person, by a complication of guilt and an accumulation of wrongs.

But now permit not your thoughts, nor will I my Tongue, to make application,
by reflecting upon the unparalleled Tragedy of Evils done and suffered, upon
the breach of this Justice in our late Rebellion. If I have said so much, as
may teach the Guilty Repentance, and others that were not engaged, their duty,
it is enough; let us bury all the rest in Prayers and Charity.

But further, if the Nation be Christian, there is another Authority invested
in a Prince, over Ecclesiastic Persons, and Cases; for he is concerned as well
in the ((...), as the (...),) the Religion, as the Civil Concerns of his
Subjects (1 Timothy 2. 2.) And there is a Due of Obedience to be paid him in
Christian Justice on that account also. This Power was apparently conferred by
God on the Kings of the Old Testament; Moses had both the Trumpets; David
ordered the Courses of the Levites, and the Solemnities of the Public Service:
Joash had the Testament given him in his hand, as well as the Crown on his
Head, (2 Chronicles. 23. 11.) Hezekiah and Josiah reformed the Church by their Royal
Authority. And as Christ found it (there being no retrenchment of that power in
the Gospel) so he left it, as his own general Laws expressed and interpreted by
the Churches after-practice, can testify above all exceptions. Ex quo (says
Socrates) Imperatores facti sunt Christiani, ab ipsis res Ecclesiae
dependebant. After that the Emperors became Christian, the Churches Affairs
depended upon them. Thus was Constantine (...). And Leo the Third could say
(...). that is, they were mixed persons, they were concerned in the Government
and Protection of the Church. But of this Right, has the Romanist, and
Assemblies, defrauded their Princes; the one gets away half of their Crowns,
the other of their Scepters; both rob them of their Authority, and of their
Subjects full Allegiance. And thus it is with us, while we have a Profession
established by Law, by a power next to God ( Solo Deo minorem, says Tertullian)
and by such Constitutions, as God and Man cannot be pretended to stand in
competition for Obedience. The Bishop of Rome has a superior power
acknowledged by some, and the Assembly by others, and both profess a Religion
in Obedience to those Usurpations, and in opposition to their Lawful
Sovereign's Commands and Laws: So that the King is robbed of his Subjects,
they, of their Allegiance, and the Church torn in pieces by them both, as
between two Milstones (as the late Arch-B. in his Preface to his Controversy)
This wrong is done on either side, and for that reason they are (...), unjust,
unrighteous persons that do it. This as to the first part of Distributive
Justice, in the Concerns of Princes and their Subjects.

The next kind of Distributive Justice in the larger Circles of it, is, the
reciprocal Dues and Rights, which the Governors of the Church, and their
Charges, are in Christian Justice obliged to pay to one another. Without the
mutual performance of which a Body of men can be called no more a Church, than
a Tumult can be called an Army, or an ungoverned Rout, a City. Now as it is in
Civils, though the King be ( Supremus Judex) Chief Judge in the Law, yet he
administers Ju-Justice by his commissioned Justicers to whom also an Obedience
is due on that account: so in Ecclesiastics, he exercises his supreme
authority, for the care of the Church, by proper Officers ((...)) set apart for
that design; whose Calling though it be governed and protected by Princes, is
yet immediately from Heaven ((...), Heb. 5. 4.) they are called of God to it.
and ((...), Acts 20. 28.) Whom the Holy Ghost has made Bishops, or Overseers;
and for that reason a right of Obedience is due unto them on that account also.

First then, the Pastors of the Church are bound in Justice ((...)) to feed the
Church of God, by pastoral Government and Preaching, by Sacraments, and Offices
of Discipline, and instituting Canons, for fit Circumstances, that all things
may be done ((...), 1 Cor. 14. 40.) decently, and in order, or uniformity in
the Church of God. If they fail of their duties, they are (...), unrighteous,
and must answer deeply for the wrong they have done to their Charges.

On the other side, their people in Christian Justice owe them Reception, Love,
Honor, and (which for the Churches sake, is most especially required)
Obedience. Obey them that have the rule over you, ( Heb. 13. 17.) And as S.
Ignatius, (the best Interpreter of the Apostles meaning and practice) says
(...)) It is necessary that nothing be done in the Church, but in obedience to
the Governors of it. And this was the Sense and universal Practice of the
Church, it its primitive purity, and best Integrity. But if their Charges shall
condemn their Callings, contemn their persons, separate from their
Administrations, and refuse conformity to their Rules of Order, in the service
of God; they are (...), unjust persons, they have defrauded their Spiritual
Rulers of their, due, and (by infallible consequence) the Church of the very
Essentials of its well-being, Peace, and Unity; the ends for which Spiritual
Government was especially designed: Of which Unity the Church being once
deprived, in comes the Inundation of Atheism, Profaneness, Contempt of Gods
Service, Heresies and Factions; for all which those unjust persons must answer,
when they happen. And of all this, our own woeful experience is too convincing
an evidence. For as it is certain, that those miseries are now upon us, so it
is as certain, they own their beginning to the breach of this Christian
Justice, and commenced from the days the Disciplinarians first withdrew their
obedience from their lawful Superiors, and taught the people to despise, and
quarrel with them about indifferent Rites. Which undutifulness afterward,
fermenting, and gradually increasing, has in the various agitations of several
ages, brought upon the Church, and the Pastors thereof, all these Infelicities
and wrongs they now unjustly suffer: Grown too great (without a gracious divine
Deliverance) for hope of relief. The Church being in that Commonwealth's case,
quae nec far sua possit vitia, necremedia, neither able to bear its
miscarriages nor remedies. But I desire the severe Character of my Text may be
applied to no particular persons alive, unless it be in our Prayers, to beg
forgiveness for them, as they were instrumental to these heavy punishments, and
for our selves, that (for our sins) have justly deserved them at the hand of
God.

Thus I have gone over the parts of Distributive Justice, which Christians are
to act in the greater Circumferences of Public Relations; I now contract my
Discourse to the lesser Circles of it, in Domestic Concerns: Which though they
be less considerable, are not at all less necessary. Our salvation depends upon
every part of that Justice, as much as the other: Loyalty to a Prince, or
conformity to the Church, cannot make us just, if we do wrong at home to our
Wives, Children or Servants. Now the Christian Justice of the Family-Relations,
are the reciprocal Dues of Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters
and Servants; (...) bread to Dogs, throw it away in luxurious expenses; or if
both, or either of them, by their carelesseness in education, or by evil
Examples, shall endanger the loss of their Childrens souls: If the Children, on
the other side, grow rough, and untractable, making no Conscience to disobey a
Fathers Commands, and disoblige a Mothers tender care; or when their Parents
are in want, to evade their duty, shall tell them, with the Pharisees, it is
Corban, (Mark 7. 11.) a Gift, not to the Temple (yet that would not exempt them
from their Duty) but perhaps to a proud entertainment, or a Female Prostitute:
Such Parents, such Children, are (...), unrighteous, unjust in the sight of God.

Lastly, As to the third, of Family Relations, Masters and Servants: First,
Masters owe their Servants, in Christian Justice, civil regard, kind usage, and
just rewards for their Labors: And they again, owe their Masters Honor,
Obedience, and Faithfulness. But if the Masters shall use their Servants like
Brutes, nay like senseless Engines, like Bodies without Souls, (for so Slaves
are called (...), ^poc. 18. 13.) making their Burdens too heavy, and their
Rewards too light. And if Servants shall be ((...), Tit. 2. 9.) contradicters,
or answerers again, and deny their Reverence; or shall serve ((...), Col. 3.
22.) with eyeservice, and lose their diligence; or shall be ((...), Tit. 2.)
Purloiners, and depart from their Faithfulness: these are wrongs done on either
side, and are all unjust, unrighteous persons, on that account: And (as it is
of the other Relations) if they had nothing else to answer for, had guilt
enough, to be disinherited from the Kingdom of God. These are they, which
depart from Christian Justice in Family-Relations.

Having thus found out the (...) the guilty of Injustice, by the Rule of
Distributive, we shall now examine the actions of men by the li^^^ of
Commutative Justice: Which Aquinas defines to be that, by which a man is
directed in such Rights, as are interchangeably to be paid, from one man to
another. Now the ground of this Justice is this, God has so ordered it in his
wise disposition of the world, that the well being of every man should depend
on the mutual help of one another; to the performance of which, all men being
obliged by right reason and Religion, it becomes every man's right, to be done
to him in Christian Justice as his duc. Upon this, St. Paul grounds his
exhorta^^^ to his Philippians, to look ((...), Phil. 2. 4.) to the good and
^^ncerns of others, as well as their (...). He therefore that shall with^^^d
this Right, so that his Neighbor is injured in any capacity of (...)
well-being, he has done wrong and defrauded, and is an unjust, and an
unrighteous person. Now ^^at we may know, how far this ^^stice extends, for the
further discovery of the Guilty in my Text, we must examine the several cases
(...) which a man's well-being consists, and accordingly a right to be done
(...).

First, As to his spiritual well-being, we owe the right of saving one another
Souls, which God has put in our power to do, as St. James intimates, ( Jam. 5.
20.) And this is done, by brotherly correction, Counsel, Prayer, exemplary
Life, and such like Acts of spiritual Justice: But on the contrary, (...) any
man hinders the salvation (...) another, by neglecting those (...) or shall
really prevent it, by scandal, ill example, or by tempting him to assist in
social sins, (...) Uncleanness, Conspiracies, and the like, that man has
wronged a Soul, he has destroyed his Brother, for whom Christ died, ( Romans 14.
15.) and so is (...), an unjust person on that sad account.

2. We owe the right in Christian Justice of preserving one another in our
Temporal well-being: And the first of those, next our Neighbors life (which we
suppose to be a case too apparent to need our present consideration) is his
Honor. He therefore that shall defraud him of that precious Jewel, either by
eclipsing an innocent worth, through a subtle detraction, or wound his Credit,
by dispersion of false slanders, (following Machiavel's rule, fortiter
calumnia^, and aliquid adhaerebit; cast dirt enough that some may stick) or
shall publish his private infirmities, (...) his disgrace, or make use of them
any way, but in following St. ^aul's direction, to restore him with the spirit
of meekness, (Gal. 6. 1.) ^ath robbed his Neighbor of his honor, has done
him wrong, and is an unjust person on that account. The second right we owe in
Christian Justice, as to the temporal well-being of our Neighbor, is the
preservation of his Estate and Fortune; which whosoever shall violate, upon any
temptation, is one of the unrighteous persons in my Text. And we consider not
this, as done by acts of horrid oppression only, when the Beams and Stones are
disquieted with the cries of Orphans, tears of Widows, (...) perpetuated
sorrows of ruined Families; nor only by the intrenchments that are made upon
it, by secret thefts or notorious Rapine but whosoever shall disadvantage
another, by fraud, or subtilty, in any Negotiation, Bargain, Trade or Commerce
whatsoever, beyond the ordinary profit allowed to all Callings, by custom and
consent of honest minds; or in any kind of Vocation or employment, deal
otherwise in every single act, than he himself would be dealt with, is
unrighteous, one of the guilty, and consequently one of the unhappy persons in
my Text. Lastly, We owe in Christian Justice (as to our Neighbors temporal
well-being) the right of preserving one another Health, Limbs, and Peace;
therefore he that shall wrong him in the first, by engaging him in intemperate
courses, or deprive him of the second, by any act of private hostility, as
Duelling, or the like; or defraud him of the third, by uncivil usage, or
vexatibus Suits and Controversies; so far as in any of them, or in any other
way, a man is disadvantaged in the comfort of his Life, or means of Livelihood,
there is a wrong done, and he that has done it, is an unjust, an unrighteous
person, and as such, stands upon the necessity of restitution, or in the danger
of his exclusion from the blessed Inheritance.

Thus having gone over the Breaches that are made upon the several Branches,
both of Distributive, and Commutative Justice; there remains two more to be
considered apart; because they have a mixture of both. Of the first of these I
would give a (...) is the Devil ((...) v. 3.) The Devil has filled their
hearts with the Design.

5. Gods certain vengeance upon that wrong, by the fatal fall both of the one,
and of the other. I shall not controversially apply this evidence, but must
(for shortness sake) leave it to your serious reflections, for the ends I
mentioned it. Now that portion which has been set apart for God, and the
maintenance of 16000 Servants of his Worship among us, are either Lands, or
Tithes. As for the wrongs done to the first, they are commonly acted ( per
Sorices Palatii, as Bish. Andrews calls them) by the unhappy men about the
Courts of Princes; who as they thirst after them, so would not stick to suck
the milk of Orphans, drink the tears of Widows, as well as devour the Demeans
of Gods Servants (because as defenseless as either) as Sacrifices to their
pride and luxury. But it is alleged by the Favorites of this Design, that the
supreme Judicature may, (when they please) take them away: I answer, they may (
impune) without control; and their Authority ought not (must not) be resisted;
but whether ( just) righteously, or whether every one that has a vote in
their alienation, does not thereby rob God and man, and may justly fear Gods
vengeance for doing so, I leave it to the former Evidence to determine. As for
the wrongs done to the Church in point of Tithes, ( Decimam meam as St. Austin
supposes God to speak) there depraedations happen upon lower contrivements; as
when either the powerful man's heavy hand first presses out the Vintage for
himself, and then leaves some few drops; enough rather to upbraid, (...) I
intended should reflect upon the occasion of this Assembly, where the proper
business is judicially to administer right to them, that cannot otherwise
obtain it. Let every one then, that has to do this day with the tender Rights
of men, (whether they be the Ministers of the Law, of every sort, Witnesses, or
Juries) have a care what they do; their Souls are at stake, the Oath of God is
upon them, the Curse of God over them, the Cries of the oppressed about them,
the Evidence of my Text, and the Law of Christ against them; if therefore any
unjust Cause goes away triumphant, if any man's right be impeached, through any
defect in the discharge of their trust, they are (...), unrighteous persons,
and wheresoever it lies, must either make a timely satisfaction, or one day
appear at the great Assizes of the world, to receive for the wrong that he has
done in this, and where there shall be no respect of persons, Col. 3. ult.

Thus I have finished the whole Scheme of Christian Justice; to the universal
performance of which, the Gospel does so strictly oblige us. And now who would
think it possible, that a Christian Nation, possessed with so many advantages
of Religion, should in contradiction to the clearest Evidence of Gods Will, so
generally degenerate from the practice of it in every part; and that not among
them only, that have thrown off all Concern for Religion (that were no wonder)
but amidst the very Professors of it, even among them, that pretend to a
greater Zeal than others, in appearance for it, I cannot but think, that there
has been some (...) psalm. 73. 6.) they were exhorted to the getting the Robe
of Christ's Righteousness about, and imputed to, them; and all was well. By
these and the like unhappy Modes of teaching the Gospel, men have been driven
from their Reason, and Religion, and set their Consciences loose to all
unrighteousness. And hence it is, that they are grown every where so cross and
intractable to all Authority, Laws, and Order, and the State is full of Rebels,
the Church of Schismatics, our Houses of undutiful Children, and untrusty
Servants; and men are made universally false and unfaithful one to another. But
let them pretend what Religion they will, they shall not so escape; all unjust
persons (such as I have described) are upon the Rock, the severe Sentence of my
Text; They shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

PART. II.
So at last I am arrived at the Second Part of my Text; The Unjust man's Doom or
Punishment: They shall not inherit, etc.

In which, are two things to be observed; I. The Nature of the Punishment; it
is a disinherison. ^, The Quality of the State, The Kingdom of God.

In the first, here is a case in Law, a Title supposed, and a Disinherison
expressed: A Title, these unjust persons had, and heirs at Law they were, (and
so were all that are, or shall be deprived of that eternal Blessing) or they
could in no sense be said to be disinherited: It Is true, that Adam once
forfeited the Estate, but it was purchased again, or redeemed, by Christ, not
with Silver and Gold, but with the dear price of his precious blood, (1 Pet. 1.
18.) And that Redemption was made as large, as the Forfeiture, as St. Paul
discourses, ( Romans 5. 18.) So that the Reason why any man is now disinherited,
must be upon another account; not because Adam sinned, or that the Covenant of
Grace was renewed with any number less than all men, (1 Timothy 2. 4.) or that
Christ died for fewer than ((...)) for every man, (Heb. 2. 9.) but because that
universal Covenant, and Redemption, was made conditional, and required terms to
be performed on our part, which, whosoever should refuse to keep, should
forfeit his Title to that new purchased Inheritance. Now the Conditions of this
new Covenant made in Christ, are Faith and Obedience. To which Repentance is to
be added, as Tabula post Nausragium; of which, more anon.

The sum then is, That the unjust man, as such, in all the particular cases I
have mentioned, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, because he failed in both
the Condi^ions.

1. Every unjust person has failed in the first; he is not a true Believer in
the sense of the Gospel. For the clearing of which, we are to consider, that
Evangelical Faith, when man's Salvation or Justification is wholly attributed to
it, (as when it is said, that He that believes shall be saved, John 3. 16. and
justified by Faith, Romans 5. 1. and saved by Faith, Ephesians. 1. 8. and the like)
intends not any Act or Habit of believing, in any strict sense, but a
comprehension of all Christ's Virtues, and the whole Body of Christianity, of
which a just life is the most considerable portion Therefore St. Paul upon the
breach of distributive Justice, in one particular Instance of it, that is, a
Child's not providing for his Parents, (which by Family, 1 Timothy 5. 8. is
undoubtedly intended) affirms, that such a person ((...)) has denied the
Faith, and is an unbeliever, so much worse than an Infidel, as a practical
Atheist is a greater Prodigy than a speculative. But if Faith be taken in a
stricter sense, as sometimes it is; and particularly by St. Jame.; ( Jam 2.)
unless it be (...), ( Gal. 5. 6.) except it works, or is consummate by Love,
(of which Love the greatest part (in the Gospel sense) is Justice) it avails
not; it cannot, it is dead, says St. Jam. that is, as useless to a man's
Justification as the Faith of Devils. Whosoever therefore is an unjust person
in any of the senses I have described him, whether a Rebel to his Prince, or
refractory to the Church (...) its Order and Institutions, as to Distributive
Justice; or does wrong to his Neighbor as to Commutative, let him pretend to
what Faith in Christ he will, let it be a receiving, laying hold, or reliance
upon him, or howsoever he has been taught to define it, he is ((...), Col. 3.
6.) a Child of Unbelief; and upon the nonperformance of the Condition of
Faith, (in the account of the Gospel) he shall be dealt withal as an
Unbeliever; he has forfeited the Inheritance, he shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God.

But then 2. Faith is not the only Condition of the Convenant, by which we may
preserve our Title (...) common peace and happiness of the world; that all
Superiors might have entire Subjection, and all others Peace and right. So that
a Rebel, a Schismatic, and the unjust of the lesser Orders, may not be said
only to disobey, but to frustrate the prime purpose and design of the Gospel,
and to offer the greatest affront and contradiction to the very Spirit of
Christianity. For wheresoever the Grace of God is predominant, it will
certainly, and observedly (as its prime and signal effect) reduce the Soul to
the greatest innocence and simplicity, tractableness and obligation of doing
right, and good to all; with all which, the sins of Injustice in every kind,
are perfectly inconsistent, and irreconcilable. The Sum is, whosoever is an
habitual Offender against any part of Christian Justice whether Distributive or
Commutative, has broken not only a particular, but an universal Commandment of
Christ, and is grossly disobedient; and so has forfeited his Inheritance, his
Title to the Kingdom of God.

Thus I have shown you the unjust man's Doom in the nature of his Punishment; He
shall not inherit: which will appear so much the greater, when we consider the
quality of the Estate, from which he is disinherited; The Kingdom of God. Which
is the next thing to be discoursed.

The Kingdom of God is a Figurative Expression, designed to exalt our
Imagination of the blessed state to come: And that because we cannot now behold
its unconceivable happiness, but as ((...), 1 Cor. 13. 12. per Speculum)
through the dark Perspective of Sense, and a clouded Intellect; and therefore
it must be represented to us ((...)) by little Riddles and Shadows of the best
humane Felicities; Here it is by a Kingdom, the greatest and noblest possession
this world affords; and so enough to confirm us, that (the Design of that lofty
Metaphor) the future Bliss, is too great a loss, for so small a recompense, as
the most prosperous unjust man gains by his unrighteous practices. But that the
unjust man may be more fully upbraided for the greatness of his Loss, let me
improve the Metaphor, by saying, that first he loses God; that is, the
Beatifical Vision of his Blessed Countenance, which is better than Life it
self: He loses the Comforts of his Blessed Redeemer, who shall now appear to
him with the terrible Aspect of Flaming Fire, taking vengeance on him, and all
them that obey not his Gospel, 2 These. 1. 8. He loses the possession (to make
use of the most sensible Description of the happy issues of an holy Life) of
the City of the Living God, the New Jerusalem, the Society of an innumerable
company of Angels, of the General Assembly of the first born, and of the
spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12. Lastly, He loses his own Soul; that
is, he brings himself into such a State, (that praestat nunquam natum) it were
better for him he had never been born, or that a Millstone were hanged about his
neck, and were drowned in a Sea of Forgetfulness, and Annihilation. And all
this he adventures that he may add one handful of Earth more to the Turf of his
worldly possessions; one grain more to his accumulated heap; one garnish more
to the pride of his Life; from all which, and from whatsoever else he enjoys in
this world, he shall possibly within a few Minutes, probably within a few
Months, certainly within a few Years, be as much a stranger, as he that holds
up the Train of the Persian Emperor, or the Infant that hangs upon his Mothers
Breast. These are the miserable measures of the unjust man's Doom and Punishment.

But is he past the utmost Confines of Hope? Is his evil an irreparable loss,
an irrecoverable danger? Certainly no: For though the Gospel have drawn up the
Indictment against him, it is not yet come to Judgment: He is in a state of
damnability, but not Damnation. Not so shipwrack'd, but that there is ( Tabuta
post Naufragium) one Raft left to land him safe, one remaining condition of his
recovery, and that is, a timely Repentance; For (says God) if the wicked man
shall turn away from his unrighteousness (his Injustice) and do that which is
lawful and right, etc. if he shall restore the Pledge, and execute judgment
between man and man, he shall save his Soul alive, Ezekiel. 18. 27. When first by
Repentance, must be understood nothing less, than (what is necessary for all
other sins) a real departure from all unrighteous Actions and engagements:
Whatsoever is called Repentance, and brings not this change (be it Sorrow,
Contrition, or Confession) ought in no reason to be accounted sufficient for
Evangelical Reconciliation. Much less will ( Lachrymula and Suspirium) a Tear
and a Sigh at the last period of our Life (by such measures of Mercy as are
revealed to us) expiate the guilt of the sin of Injustice, or any other sins,
habitually and reigningly continued in, to that helpless hour. Therefore 2.
Besides this Repentance, which is common to all other sins. The unjust (which
does much heighten the sin of Injustice above all others) are obliged to
restore the injured persons (to their utmost capacity) to that Right, of which
they have deprived them. Otherwise all other Acts of Repentance, (even to the
departure from any further Commission of the sin) will be accounted fair, but
abortive Attempts. Now in the several cases of Injustice, where the Scene lies
not for restitution, as in the cases of Rebellion, Schism, and the like, the
unjust person must make satisfaction, and amends, by acknowledgments and
recantations, and those to be (if possible) as publicly and earnestly done, as
those wrongs had been before committed. For if those attempts of satisfaction
be not made (if in his power) whatsoever other acts of Repentance he had
performed, (let no man deceive himself, nor mock God) he has yet no title to
the Blessing of the penitent. But where the unjust man (in the cases of the
breaches of Commutative Justice) has defrauded any man by Oppression, Theft,
or Subtilty, in any Employment, or Contract whatsoever, so that another is
damnified by him, if that person should weep an Ocean of Tears for his sins,
and pray till his knees became callous, like a Camels, for the pardon of it, if
the unjust thing lies upon his hand, if there be not restitution made, to the
injured person, (according to his power) or if he be dead, to his Heirs; or if
neither can be found, to the Poor; (whose Right then it is, by an Escheat to
the Sovereign Lord, whose Exchequer they are) he cannot be numbered among the
Penitents, he is still an unjust man, and shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
It was upon Zacheus noble Restitution, that our Savior pronounced, This day is
Salvation come to thy House, (Luke 19. 19.) And, Si res aliena (says St.
Austin in his Epistle to Macedonius) cum reddi potest, non redditur, non agitur
poenitentia, sed fingitur; If the unjust thing be not restored, the Repentance
may be feigned, but is not performed.

And now I beseech all those persons here this day before me, whose Consciences
can inform them, that they are so unhappy as to be unjust in any of the
measures I have mentioned, first, that they take no offense at the Religion,
that requires, nor at me that preach, so severe a Method (as men may be apt to
think) of their recovery; for they ought to consider, that it was their own
wilful prevarications of the most reasonable Rules of Justice, and not the
Religion, that made it necessary.

And let me further assure them, that whosoever shall give his Soul leave (for
his own salvation) to engage in the performance of this Duty of Restitution
(how unkind or difficult soever it may appear at the first view) let him not be
discouraged (my Soul for his) he shall find such a sensible return of sweetness
and satisfaction in the very Acts, and much more in the Issue of it, that he
would not exchange his Comforts, or have neglected his Duty, for all the
Pleasures and Enjoyments in the world. His Soul shall dwell at ease, and he
shall lie down in peace; his bed shall be no more shorter, but that he shall
stretch himself upon it, nor his Covering narrower, but that he shall wrap
himself in it, (Isa. 28. 20.) that is, he shall have a quiet mind, while he
lives; and when he comes to die, he shall not be tormented with the confluence
of direful Furies about his Bed, nor behold dreadful Aspects hanging about his
Curtains, the usual Attendants of unjust men, living and dying.

What if thy House shall stand one Story lower by removing the Chambers built
by wrong, ( Jer. 22. 13.)? Or contract the compass of thy Land by hedging out
Naboth's Vineyard? Or lay aside some Circumstances of a splendid Life? Nay:
what if thou should be reduced to a retired condition, or the narrow circles
of a low fortune, by restoring what is another right? the assurance of Gods
Favor above thee, the enjoyment of a good Conscience within thee, the view of
a glorious hope before thee; (in a word) a contented life, a peaceable death,
and a blessed eternity, will be a redundant compensation for all thou shall so
nobly part with. Thus have I adventured a prejudice in your opinion, by choosing
these unwelcome (though very necessary) Doctrines of universal Justice, and
upon the breach of it, Satisfaction, and Restitution. My comfort is, if I have
not pleased you, I have done you right, I have dealt justly with you. And I do
not despair, but I have met here many persons of David's Choice, and Ingenuity,
( Psalm. 141.) who would rather be smitten friendly, and reproved, than to hear
the pleasing Balmes of unconcerning and indulgent Doctrine, to break their
heads, destroy their souls. With whom (I hope) these Instructions may so far
prevail, that it may be said of them, as St. Paul said of his penitent
Corinthians, in the Verse following my Text; Such were some of you, but ye are
washed, ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God.

A particular Representation of the Injustice of Partial Conformity to the
Clergy.

A POSTCRIPT.
Representing the Injustice and Danger of Partial Conformity.
I Have in this Sermon (as fully and faithfully as I could) made an universal
Survey of the several Branches of Christian Justice, and given notice, that the
wilful Transgressors of any part of it, stand arraigned and condemned for
unrighteous persons, as to their guilt, and cannot (upon the Gospels requiring
universal Obedience in general, and doing right to all men in particular, as
the Conditions of Salvation by it) inherit the Kingdom of God, as their
punishment.

But amongst the great numbers of unjust men, I have (in the former part of my
Discourse) sorted those persons, who deprive the Supreme Magistrate of his due,
in that part of his Authority which concern Spirituals; and the Governors of
the Church of their right of Obedience from their Charges; by refusing to
conform themselves to the Commands of both, so far as they are invested with a
power from God, to institute Laws and Canons, for the Peace, Order, and Unity
of the Churches, under their Rule and Conduct.

Now because not only the People in general are concerned in that part of
Evangelical Righteousness; but the Ministers also of Parochial Congregations
stand most especially obliged to it, and because their offenses against it, are
of far more dangerous consequence, I have for their sakes, who are of the
Clergy, made this enlargement in that particular Branch of it, as to them.

And this I have done the rather, because (at this present time) this kind of
Injustice is so spreadingly, and unconscionably committed and practiced; that
(what with the miscarriage of some, who out of worldly prudence, of others, who
out of weakness, of most, who out of wilfulness, neglect their due conformity
to the established Laws) a great number of the Churches are made irregular and
disordered in the public Administrations of Gods service: By which means the
Laws are baffled and despised, the Government suspected and defamed, the
Priesthood in general reproached as false and careless, and the whole
profession of our established Religion, is made a scorn at present, and ready to
be made a prey in future, to our enemies on every side.

My Brethren, let us have a care therefore in time, we do not too much, and too
long (for the narrow Concerns of our present quiet or profit, or to conciliate
vulgar Love or Fame) not only wickedly and unjustly, but weakly and imprudently
comply with the humors of any party whatsoever, in the neglects of our Duties,
or partial performance of our Offices: For it is certain, that no man can do
it, (upon what pious Motives soever he pretends to be induced to it, as
favoring infirmities, or tender Consciences, and the like) but besides his
real offense against the Laws of Christ strictly obliging Obedience to his
Superiors just Commands, he does thereby promote and cherish a Faction in his
own bosom; which being once warmed into a sufficient strength, shall upon the
next advantageous opportunity, not only destroy the Church in its Legal
Constitution, but in the same pitch and posture of abasement, to which the
condescension was made.

And of this, let our late experience be an impartial Judge. For when some
Bishops, and other eminent persons of the Church, who out of a pious tenderness
to some men's dissatisfactions, and designing the upholding their own, and the
Churches Respect and Credit among them (for which they were distinguished from
their Brethren by the name of Puritans) did either not urge, or not practice
strict Conformity, found at length their own grand mistake in the frustration
of all those ends which they propounded to themselves, as the reasons of their
compliance: For neither themselves, nor the Church for their sakes, found any
mercy at all from them, in the days of their Power and Fury, when nothing less
would satisfy them, than the confusion of both. Little did those Reverend
Persons think, when they strained their Candor to that Party, beyond the bounds
of their due Obedience to Law, that such a petty show of tender Piety, and
Consciences so demurely nice (that could not digest so much as a Ring on the
Brides Finger, the Infants wearing the shadow of a Cross three minutes at its
Baptism, upon its Forehead, or but the color of the Priest's Vestment; for
they pretended then but such little offenses) should cover such black Designs,
of the most unwarrantable practices that ever were acted in the world.

It behooves us therefore to suspect, when we meet with Conscience-scruplings
about such, or the like indifferent Rites and Circumstances that there lodges
underneath an unsatisfiable dislike and dissatisfaction to the whole
establishment; so that if our Ingenuity should be tempted to debauch our
Obedience, by a partial conformity to indulge them in those lesser things, it
were prudence to believe, that we should be so far from giving them full
satisfaction, that it would but the more advance and strengthen an unruly
appetite, which nothing could determine, but the destruction of all. Of this
their unsatiable humor, our late experience can convincingly inform us* when
their first modest desires of a Moderated Episcopacy, ended in nothing less,
than its extirpation* and of regulating some offensive parts of the Liturgy, in
its utter abolition. And when (as among many of them) after the Cross, followed
Baptism it self; after removing the Rails and Genuflexion, went away the
Sacrament: And when they had been at first a little gratified with the taking
away the Habits, they were never quiet, till they had renounced the very Order
and Calling of Priesthood it self. Such effects, and no better than these we
must expect from the greatest condescension that can be made, to men of this
temper and complexion.

In stead therefore of any sinful ^^^pliance with any Faction what^^^ver, by
remitting our Duties, (...) please them, as Friends (which (...) will be no
longer than they ^^^^ot be otherwise) let us gird our selves in all our
spiritual Armature against them, as the Churches, ours, and their own,
destructive Enemies; that is, let us fast and pray, and weep against their
Ignorance and Perverseness in private: Let us preach down their Follies in
publik: But especially let us guard the established Church against their
designs of unsetling the peoples ^^herence to it, with an entire con^^mity to
its legal Constitutions (...) every Circumstance; and then let us conquer their
prejudice with ^^nocency of Life and simplicity of ^anners, till by these holy
Methods, and Gods blessing, we have ^^tained (or at least endeavored to
administer the most reasonable means to obtain their recovery, (...) Sense and
Obedience.

And though, if after all this, we cannot prevail, yet it will be (...)
honorable and safe (before G^^ and Man) for us, who are the Physicians of
Souls, that they may be said to perish under, than without the application of
the most sufficient remedy. And if truth must (...) to the ground, yet let it
not (...) without a competent witness gi^^^ to it, whatsoever we suffer for it.
But by no means, let nor futurity lay it to our charge, that we have helped to
betray the best constituted Church in the world to ruin, by neglecting our
Duty, to hu^^^ and indulge a perverse generation of men, whom no kindness could
reconcile, no remissions or condescentions satisfy.

For he that thinks, that the lessening, or laying aside his Confor^^ty, or the
concealing some necessary Truths, because distastful (...) their vitiated
Palates, or the ^^pping on to some degrees of com^^ance with their popular
Modes (...) Praying and Preaching, will se^^re the Church from the danger (...)
those Factions; shall find his ^^pedient as unsuccesseful, as that ^^ysitian's,
who leaving the Cause (...) the Distemper behind, thinks (...) obtain health
for his Patient, by ^^ring the Symptom for the Dis^^se; or as absurd as his
expectation, who would hope for a regular ^^^fect, from the most equivocal
^^ause. For it is observed (and we are ready to make the Observation good by
several Instances) that (...) Congregations have contributed greater numbers to
the Herds of the different Factions, than those that have been under the
conduct of such, who would have the pieced, and partial Conformity and popular
Compliances, esca^^ under the specious, yet mista^^^ Title of Moderation.

I must confess, amongst the Enemies of the Church of England, think that sort
of amphibious Clergy, not the least, nor less dangerous than any; who forfeit
the Fidelity to their solemn Subscriptions and Declarations, and treacherously
decline the work they have assumed, and act their Offices in the Church, in
such a manner, that the People may believe, that there is something that is
very evil in them, and that they repented themselves of what they had
undertaken.

These are they, that set up Altar against Altar in the same Church that join
the Liturgy and Directory together, at the same Assembly but as much as
possible to the Disadvantage of the former, which they shuffle over with such
an undecent and undevout Mode of Delivery, and then manage their Voluntier
Effusions in Prayer, and their Hints and Corollaries in Preaching, with such
Zeal and Fervor, as if they designed to tell the People, that they never were
in earnest till then, or that those Offices in the Pulpit might be interpreted
to serve no better end, than to undermine the credit of what they had done (or
undone) in the Desk.

Such unconformable Conformists as these began the Church of Englands danger at
first Reformation, and the miserable Series, of almost all its Troubles since,
has been propagated by them; and if a ^imely care in Governors, and the
Resurrection of a good Conscience in themselves, do not prevent it, they will
yet contribute as much, (if not more) as any enemy we have, to make the present
Distempers in the Church, to become an uncurable Disease, an unsuperable Evil.

These men's Congregations are the Fountains, from whence the crooked Rivers,
and Rivulets, the Mother and Daughters of Factions, have derived their streams,
to that swelling greatness, as they now run among us, and almost over us* They
were the Seraglio's, where the late Warriors against the King and the Church,
were trained up and disciplined: And what the Seminaries beyond Seas, are to
the propagation of Popery, these are the same to the keeping up of all Factions
among us. So that all attempts for the recovery of the Churches Peace, and
Unity, by suppressing Conventicles (in which are many serious, though abused
Souls, who would the rather be ^itied (so far as can possibly conist with the
Churches safety) because they received their first prejudice by them, whom we
have too much or too little reason to call our selves) will be found
uneffectual for that end, so long as the Nurseries of Faction within the
Church, are permitted to perpetuate a Succession of such, who upon the least
check or discontent, have prepared Principles and Affections to depart from us,
and to supply their places. And this will easily be believed, when it is
considered, that the difference between some Ministers practices in Churches,
and those of unlawful Meetings is so small, that oft-times the separation may
be rather accounted a Change of Places, than Professions.

But that these Clergymen may be more regularly convinced of their sin and
folly, and find Arguments, both from Conscience and Prudence, to change their
destructive practices of popular compliances, into a Design of preserving the
Church of England's general safety, by a faithful conformity to its
Institutions; I shall here offer to their considerations, (besides those which
I have already intimated in general) a particular Series of Evils, certainly
consequent to their Disorders.

1. From these men's Miscarriages, and the teaching their People to adhere to
them (where they are) it comes to pass that the Enemies of the Church, have
contrived an Argument, by crying up the numbers of Dissenters (which by their
means are more numerous in Churches, than without) as great and formidable; to
tempt, and terrify the Civil Power, from protecting the Church, under its
present danger and oppression. Whereas, as I believe the allegation to be false
(especially if a lesser number of men in power, and of learning, and honor,
may be allowed to compensate a greater, of the mean and ignorant) so, if this
one Expedient were tried, that all Clergy men might be compelled to serve God
in public, in one uniform submission to Law, without any liberty to
extravagate from that Rule; and so no more Beacons on fire in any neighboring
Churches to alarm the Vulgar, to run up and down to gratify their natural love
of Opposition and Novelty; and a diligent care taken that no Factions without
the Church, might be headed by men of Orders, or Parts (though the common
people were less prosecuted with afflictive penalties) I am persuaded in a few
years, the numbers of Dissenters, would be so far from being formidable, that
they would not be considerable for any thing, but our pity and Charity. And I
have this ground to assure me of the possible successefulness of this
Expedient, because it is certain, that where the strictest Conformity has a
long time been constantly used, there are fewest that do trouble themselves, or
their Governors about the Design of Relaxation from it; and that there are none
that hate conformity so much, as they who live in places where it is
discountenanced and neglected. And this appears by the disloyal and undutiful
temper of those that dwell in Cities and greater Towns, where, because there
was no provision in Law for them, that would obey it; the people were resolved
to bestow their Contributions on none, but such, by whom they might be
instructed and indulged in an assured opposition to the Church.

To which one cause, most of our former and present miseries refer, (...)
effects; as when from those places were elected Burgesses of Parliament of the
same Principles, to create troubles above (whose heavy ^and, our late Gracious
Princes of Happy Memory felt sufficiently, even to the loss of the life of one
of the best Kings that ever was:) and (...) when the People of the
Neighbor-villages flockt to their Market Lectures, and were there trained up,
in dislike and enmity to the established Church, and prepared to contemn their
own Shepherds at home; unless they became such as themselves, which very often
they did, when younger Divines (who for want of Parts or Government, had little
encouragement to continue in the Universities) made it a piece of their
Education, to go thither, to scribble Notes for their own Pulpits, and to learn
the Tones, Gestures, and Phrases, which might give their own People contentment
at home.

Whereas if our present Parliament (as it was the Design of many) had upon the
Kings Restoration found out a way, to have settled a competent legal
maintenance, and men of the greatest Integrity and Learning (whose abilities
are commonly either lodged up in Colleges and Cathedrals, or obscured in
little Villages) planted in those greater places; and where they are popularly
elective, if they had been brought under the Patronage of the Crown (whose
safety is especially concerned in it) and a way found out, to embetter Trade,
in the stead of Factious Lectures, there could not have been a Stone laid,
which would have added more to the defense and security of the Church and
Throne.

But to recover my self from this Digression, I am confident that this
Expedient that I have mentioned, (whatsoever is pretended to the contrary by
them that have a design to ruin us) will give far less trouble to the Civil
Power to preserve the Church, than a Toleration of all Religions (by the making
and maintaining so many Rules to limit it, and so many Provisions to prevent
the dangers that will ensue upon it, half of which cannot be be foreseen) will
cost to destroy it: Besides the Dishonor of discountenancing that Party, which
are the only assured Friends to undoubted Loyalty, all other Parties lying
under a stain of being unfaithful to the Crown; of confounding the most
absolute platform of Primitive Christianity, which no other Persuasion makes
any such pretense to; and in defending of which, we have so far prevailed in
all rational Debates, that our enemies stand ashamed, and baffled on every
side: Of making that Church which has appeared hitherto the honor of the
whole Reformation, to become vile and contemptible in the eye of the world, by
giving advantage for the encouragement and immixture of as many false and
ridiculous Professions at one time among us, as all the Ages of the Church ever
knew in its successive Periods: Of contradicting the sense of both the
Universities, and of the principal of the most Learned men of the Age, with a
great Blow to Learning it self: Of opening a door to the increase of Atheism
and Profaneness, which if they have thriven so much under a looser hand of
Discipline, what will they come to, when all the Bars of Ecclesiastic
Government are thrown down? Lastly, (with many more evils which a better and
more experienced skill might foresee) besides the dishonor of treading upon
the Blood and Ashes, and of blemishing the Fame and Actions of our Late
Gracious King and Martyr, who died to prevent the admission of those evils
among us.

The Sum is, It is no wonder, (while so many Churches continue in their
Irregularities) why the Arms of the Civil Power are wearied and discouraged,
when all their Endeavors for the establishing an universal uniformity by the
method of dispersing unlawful Assemblies, may be too justly interpreted to be
but an emptying the streams, while the Fountain is kept running; and cutting
down the Branches, while the Root is left entire, to propagate a new progeny of
the same kind and spirit. So that when some Civil Magistrates have had their
aid required, for the redressing of Misdemeanors without the Church, it has
been reasonably answered, and objected by them, let the Churches own work of
Reformation and Order be done at home, and we are ready to give our assistance
to endeavor it abroad.

2. From these men's Disorders it comes to pass that it is no wonder that the
Government and Discipline of the Church is baffled and despised, and men are
tempted to reproach them as ineffectual, and consequently useless; when it is
considered, that besides the known Dissenters, who impudently oppose them
without, the R. R. Bishops universal care of their Churches (every Parish being
their proper Charge) is executed by so many Curates, who are Traitors to them
and their Authority within. Who contrary to their trust (given and taken with
all possible Religious and reasonable Obligations) of keeping up the Reverence
and Esteem of their Persons, Calling, and Discipline, by conducting Souls, in
one legal uniform performance of their Offices, in Canonical Obedience (which
by Oath they stand obliged to) and Filial submission to them; they tempt and
teach the people to decline all respect and obedience to their Authority, by
setting up a new mode of Worship, by the Rubric and Canon of their own
Fancies, and in opposition to their Orders and Injunctions.

Thus in stead of those excellent enjoined Prayers, and Regular Forms of
Worship, which they either omit in whole or part, or render unacceptable by an
irregular usage, they substitute such an unsavory Offering of their own
inventions, oft-times so full of Ridiculous Clamors and Gestures, and odd
Familiarities, if not of nonsense and blasphemies (against which evils,
neither the Church, nor themselves, will be secured, while they are permitted
to assume a liberty of uttering what they please, and of gaining a reputation
by it, of praying by the Spirit) that the wiser sort of the Friends to the
Church of England, are scandall'd and ashamed, and forsake the Public
Assemblies, whither by Law they are engaged to go; and the ignorant and
credulous Vulgar trained up and disciplined, in the Love and Admiration of an
irregular Devotion, and in an irreconcilable disaffection to the rational
settled Service of the Church, and an insuperable hatred to the Laws and Persons
that oblige and require it.

And then, as to the executing the Churches tender care of instructing Youth in
form and manner, as they are engaged by Law and Duty, they either wholly omit
that sweet and charitable Office, and convert it at the time appointed, into a
Discourse, that neither for matter or manner, does suit with either their needs
or capacities; or instead of conducting them in the knowledge of the duties of
Christianity, by the Church-Catechism (which does so concernedly design it)
they have presumptuously substituted a great company of other Forms, full of
private Opinions, and Heads of controverted Doctrines (as those of absolute
Election, Justification by Faith alone, and the like) which have no influence
upon, if not a contradiction to, the very reason of Christian Obedience; and
thence Parents and Tutors, and the Children themselves are left to a strange
uncertainty, when (upon change of places) they are either committed to the
conduct of men of other Fancies, or to those that follow the Churches Order in
their Institutions. Now what kind of Youth such irregular usage of Children is
like to make, may be judged by them, which they trained up in their* Twenty
years Liberty, to use their own Methods without control.

Then as to the improving the Churches care of instructing men by the Office of
Preaching, in the Duties of Justice, and Mercy, Peace and Innocence, Subjection
to Authority, and (which is the Sum of all) universal Obedience: the Peoples
ears are accustomed to the noises of new invented Phrases, and impertinent
Notions; with the Discourses of Gospel-Priviledges, Christian Liberties, and
controverted Opinions (such as of the Famous five Points, and their dependent
Articles). And instead of Preaching upon the Renowned Sermon upon the Mount (in
imitation of our Savior's own example) and pressing the Rules of Life
contained in it, the People hear the weight of their Salvation laid upon some
occasional expressions in the Epistles of the Apostles, (especially those to
the Romans and Galatians) or else they send them to Patmos, to busy themselves
about opening some of the Seals of the Revelation.

By which kind of Preaching, the People (as their Practices do too pregnantly
declare) are kept in Ignorance (some think, greater than in the darkest Age of
Popery and Superstition) of those Christian Duties, but especially of their
necessary obligation, for the attaining Eternal Salvation: which does evidently
appear, when it is observed, that no sort of People of the Nation, are so
defective in most of them, nor (as to the case in hand) so cross and
intractable to all Authorities, nor so apt (on all occasions) to rebellious
designs against them (which if a strict observation were made what places did
most especially afford the greater numbers of them, that were lately engaged
against the King and the Church, would easily be proved) than those that have
been under the conduct of such Ministries.

Hence ingenuous persons may consider, what grand and confused difficulties
(made so through these men's disorders) the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction has to
deal with, to preserve the Church in any degree from a present sinking, into a
total ruin; and (as things stand) how impossible it is (were its power
executed to the greatest perfection) to attain its end of universal Peace and
Order.

But if all Ministers of Congregations were compelled to do their Duties
exactly according to Law, and not one permitted to perform any thing in the
public Worship of God, by his own choice or fancy, whereby one Church should
be distinguished from another; and so none be presumed to come to Church, nor
meddle with any Offices or Business about it, but such as come thither (there
being no temptation from any thing else) in a willing submission to conformity,
which ('it is supposed) none would do but such, as would also be worthy and civil
to the Government of the Church: And that all professed Dissenters were looked
upon as excommunicate persons (all which are really so, either, by the Sentence
of the Church, or by their own wilful Separation) and so no further to belong
to the Churches Jurisdiction (while they resolve obstinately to continue so)
than an Heathen, or an Alien: And that then the secular power would look upon
them as only their proper Province, to regulate them by such Laws as they are,
or shall be empowered withal, made on the most Charitative Design to restore
them to the Church; its Discipline would do its own work with honor, and all
that live under its excellent conduct, enjoy it with comfort and safety to
their Souls.

Whereas, while so many Churches remain in their irregular, and mixed
conformities, and for that cause as dangerous enemies, as any the Church of
England is oppressed with, continue a kind of Communion with it, in her public
places; no wonder, when such persons are either made Officers, or any otherwise
dealt withal, by the Churches Jurisdiction, that they appear, either, to
affront it, or to render it as trifling and ridiculous as they can: and when
the Secular Power by due execution of Laws, shall bring any man to some public
Churches, it is a question whether he be restored to the Church of England, or
only removed from a lesser Conventicle to a greater; and so the Law be made use
of, rather to confirm the Dissenters in their opposition, than to restore them
to the peace and order of the Church.

3. By these men's humouring the poor people with their Directorian Conformity,
it is, that the True Sons of the Church, who in Conscience of their duty to
God, shall entirely conform themselves to the Laws established, are made the
scorn and hate of the people: who are taught to reproach them (for want of an
accusation that has truth or sense in it) by the names of Popish and
Superstitious: whereas their own Teachers might with less Injustice, and upon a
nearer agreement than we have with either the Pope, or the Worship of Demons
(as I can show them if they desire it) be called Jews or Turks, did not a good
Cause solemnly abhor such Unchristian Defenses, though a bad one (and it is a
convincing sign it is so) has no other to protect it.

And then upon the temptation of those reproachful. Names that signify and
prove no determinate thing (had they said Conformity had been against any Law
of Christ, and shown us a Precept general, or particular to prove it so, they
had done like men and Christians) the people think themselves acquitted toward
God, if they persecute their conformable Pastors, with all imaginable acts of
Cruelty, to make their lives bitter and vexatious to them: To which evils they
add this also (with him in the Psalm, imagining God to be such an one as
themselves) that if any sad Accident (in common contingencies) shall befall
them, it shall be recorded as a Prodigy from heaven to argue Gods disowning
them And whatsoever Faults (be they true or false) their watchful eye of envy
can find in their lives, they shall (with all possible disadvantage to their
Reputation) be rumored abroad as Scandals to their Profession, and as
Arguments against the Church. Not considering that the Juggling of their own
admired Guides with Christian Obedience in some things, and their gross
Disobedience to Authority in others, (to the universal wrong both of their
Civil and Ecclesiastic Superiors) are sins so much more scandalous against the
Gospel, than any their Malice pretends to lay to the Conformists Charge (if the
miscarriage of some were allowed to be a just Accusation of all) as the
Hypocrisy of a Pharisee is worse than the open Offenses of a Publican; and as
a sin that passes under a pretense of Godliness, is much more dangerous, than
those sins, whose shame is written on the Offenders Foreheads; and for which
there is no approbation or allowance from those of their own persuasion, and
(so often as their Spiritual Governors can have it signified to them) for which,
some have been obliged to submit to the Penances of public Recantations; as
has been done in this particular Diocese.

But a wise man may easily discover (though the People cannot) the difference
between the Solid Piety, and Innocence of a true Son of the Church (by which as
he has no design, so, to which he has no temptation, but to please and honor
God, and is not much concerned if any but his All-seeing Eye shall know it) and
the Sheepscloathing of Wolves, the Angelical Light which the Devil puts on,
when he turns Fanatic, and the Form of Godliness of a Deceiver, that is so
much outward Sanctimony and framed Piety, as will (by a subtle observation of
the Peoples humor) gain an acceptance and reputation from them of being Godly,
without any regard to the common Peace of the Church. And if any of them shall
chance to fall into any apparent acts of sin, which they dislike, and of which
they so bitterly accuse others, and the Church for them, so long as they comply
with them in their disobedient humor to the Church, all the condemnation they
shall have, shall amount to no more, than, It (...) pity for the man, and God
in his (...) time will show him his Error, and call him home; but he shall not
lose the opinion of an honest man. But woe to the poor Conformist, if he falls
into the same.

4. From the example of these men's Disorders it comes to pass, that the
ignorant and easy Dissenters are increased, confirmed, and hardened in their
Separations, beyond all possible recall; when they understand, that what they
depart from in the whole, is but that which those men (who by mistake enough
and by incompetent Judges are accounted the only Godly Ministers do in their
Churches reject in portions. And when, as to that little they observe, the
matter is so ordered, that they may be believed to do it, but in their own
defense unwillingly, and by constraint, and as resolved to continue the doing
it no longer, than they can get themselves set free from the burden of
Authority.

But this mischief ends not here and that which makes it much worse is, that
such persons, who are yet unconcerned as to any Religion, and are tempted
through Idleness, or Business, or some little Offense to the person of their
Priests, to stay at home; do answer all inward Checks of Conscience, and all
outward Persuasions against their neglect of serving God according to the order
of the Church, by alleging to themselves, that they absent themselves from
nothing but that, which those that are accounted Godly, do make it their
Religion to scorn, and forsake, and would fight to destroy; and those that use
it, seem to be oppressed by it, and seek to avoid it as much as they can.

By which it comes to pass, that great numbers of Men (I dare not say how great
I think them) and of Youth especially (O unhappy they that gave the occasion!)
by continued absence from the Blessings and Ordinances of the Church, and the
means of Grace and Knowledge are grown Atheistical and Barbarous, Vile and
Vicious, Bold and Hardened in their opposition to (...) Virtue and Goodness.

Hence it is (what with the one and the other) that some places look like (if
they really be not) an universal defection from Christianity: And some Priests
who faithfully perform their duty, could not without great shame and oppression
of Spirit, be serving God in the Public Place, with so few about them (perhaps
two or three in some populous places) but that they comfort themselves, that
their little Handful, compared with the Flocks that attend Faction, look so
like the different Numbers in the Narrow and Broad way, mentioned in the
Gospel, and the unequal proportion of the good and evil in the world; and by
considering, that Multitudes (when Differences are upon the Stage) seldom (and
that by accident) entertain the right side, but do usually suffer themselves to
be conducted by such Impostors, who because they cannot satisfy their Pride
and Ambition in being considerable in real worth and weight, will endeavor to
make themselves so, in Throngs and Numbers.

5. From these men's disorderly performance of Gods Service in the Church, and
the Confusions which they bring upon the Government by it, the Romanists (whose
Ends are chiefly served by it) have their Hands daily strengthened, and Hopes
advanced, for the accomplishing their Designs. And I am assured (of which
sufficient Reasons and Instances may be given that nothing can so fully defeat
their Endeavors for the introduction of their Spiritual Empire amongst us, as
an entire practis^ Uniformity in all our Churches, and a full adherence to, and
a faithful preservation of, the established Ecclesiastic Government; as the
main Bulwarks, which they endeavor to overthrow, and which we must chiefly
trust to (under God for the Churches universal Safety.

But the truth of this is so infete^ed with Riddles, and made so like the
doubtful Answer of an Oracle to the People, that they are perfectly cheated
into the Belief of a Sense as contrary to it as it it is possible and so are
delivered into an Opinion of pursuing the Churches safety against Popery, by
that Method, which is the only probable means of delivering up the Church unto
it.

The Romanists know, that they can never bring this Nation back to their
Religion, but first the established Church must be overthrown; and they know
also (no other danger yet appearing) it must be done, by improving the
Dissenters Maice, and the Peoples Folly, to confound the Peace and Order of it,
by the ruin of Episcopacy and Liturgy: which that they may do with the greater
Zeal, the Cheat (...), they must be made believe, that all that they do is to
pull down Antichrist, and keep out Popery; and to hate the Conformist, as
designing to uphold both: whereas there is no man, but he, that prevents the
setting up of both among us.

Thus the best Prince, Prelate, and Statesman then in the world, lost their
Lives, by being first rendered the Peoples hate, as designing to bring in
Popery; when wise men knew, that there were not three persons under the Sun,
whom the Romanists would rather have removed out of the way, as the grand
hinderers of their Design. The people are taught not to conform to the Liturgy,
because it is Popish; whereas the Papists hate it, because it is not so; and
when some of them have been dispensed to hear our Sermons, they are always
prohibited to hear the Service.

And whereas the Factions are at work to make the People ruin Episcopacy, as
Popish; there is nothing the Romanists desire to see rather, than it is
confusion; as knowing that it was that Order of men, that did at first throw,
and now keeps out their Usurpations. And it is known, that the strictest
Adherers to the Pope, are but back-friends to the Order of Bishops in the
Countries of their own persuasion; and that the Order of Jesuits was first
raised up, and now continued in its greatness, on design, to retrench the power
of Bishops, as an Order that can only endanger the Popes Usurpations, and yet
themselves stand upon a firm bottom of primitive Catholocisme.

But fully to confute the Peoples grand Mistake, who have been so falsely and
disingenuously tempted, and instructed, to suspect the strict Conformists, as
inclinable to Popery (the spiteful Artifice of the Factions to render them
odious) I wish them to consider, against whom has the Romanists bent their
Forces in all their Debates, and with what bitterness they have sometimes
managed them (to instance in Mr. Serjant's Schism-Disarm'd, against Dr.
Hammond) not against the Factions, one or other, but always against the
established Church of England? And who has maintained the Disputes against
them, but the strictest Adherers to it, and those generally of the Episcopal
Order it self? And if this cannot sufficiently manifest the falseness of the
Accusation, and how far the Faithful Sons of our Church are from being
Favorers of Popery, what can be said or done more to convince them?

Then let them consider on the other side, what kindness the Romanists have
shown to the Factious, (not that I think they love them more than us, or would
not destroy them also, when they had done their work of confounding us) of
which none can be ignorant, that will enquire after so many Stories that
pregnantly prove it, and that are Printed, and not Confuted: Of which there is
hardly any Clergyman, but can say something from the Circle of his own
Observation. Let the world therefore judge, whether they that have so
unworthily prejudged the People with a suspicion of us, have not given occasion
to be accused as really guil^^ of the same themselves.

The Sum is, So far as a partial Conformist, does by his unworthy usage of his
Offices, cherish in the People a dislike and disaffection, to the Service,
Orders, and Government of the Church, whereby they are prepared to oppose them,
(if not to destroy them) on all occasions; so far he must be supposed to be
doing the Papists work, to be digging down the Wall, plucking up the Hedge,
which fence and secure the Church against them; and laying all open to give
them opportunity to re-enter and possess the holy Vineyard of God amongst us.
And I think of this they have been sufficiently forewarned, by the late
Incomparable Prelate and Martyr, when in his dying Sermon, he foretold what a
Harvest the Pope would make of our Confusions; though for his good will, and
dying-tender care of the Church, the Head of a Faction, (who afterward lost his
own) was so impudent, as in a Triumph, to dip his Handkerchief in his Blood, in
requital for his Kindness.

6. And Lastly, By these men's undutiful practices it comes to pass, that the
Parochial Officers, who should inform Authority of the Miscarriages of
Congregations, are for their sakes, tempted to break their solemn Oaths to God,
given and taken, for the good end of the Churches Order and Unity, and of the
purity of Life in the Members of it, which are wholly defeated by it.

Of which Oaths so broken, those Ministers cannot but be highly guilty, as
being in no capacity to reprove them, and necessarily obliged to indulge them,
in their abominable sin of Perjury: And all to save themselves from being
justly questioned, for their own Disorders and Disobedience.

And the event is, that most Churches will be (without all visible remedy) kept
unreformed from the grossest Abuses; and the Nation in general will be taught
by such remarkable Presidents of Perjury, almost in every Neighborhood, to
contemn all other Obligations by the solemn Religion of an Oath; that the King
can promise to himself little assurance of Fealty, from them that have sworn
it; and no man secure of his Life or Fortune, when both are committed to the
trial of the Law, when only the tie of an Oath can assure any man to have right
done him. And there are already Complaints made of gross Miscarriages, where
Favor or Interest have tempted men to deal unfaithfully, and to betray the
Truth, to the preservation of which, they stood engaged by oath.

And if men still proceed to be so Atheistical, and hardy, as to make no
Conscience of an Oath, and consequently not of the lesser ties of Honor, and
common Honesty; the whole world will in a short time be sensible, that we are a
false, perfidious, and perjurious People, abominable to God and Man.

All these evils (till they shall endeavor to convince me to the contrary,
which if they do, I shall either give them a sober Reply in my own Defense, or
a just acknowledgment of my Mistake) I conclude to be done or occasioned by
them. And do yet believe, that without Repentance toward God, and a sincere
endeavor to make satisfaction to the Church, for the wrongs they have done,
they must answer deeply for them, at the Bar of Divine Justice, and be reckoned
among the urighteous in my Text.

As for the People who are abused by them, in their Judgment and Affections
against the Church of England, so many of them as are invincibly prejudiced,
that is, such as having derived their Error from the force of an unhappy
Education, and since been kept up in their prejudice, by the strong Temptation
of their Teachers seeming Godliness (in which it is no hard matter to deceive a
weak, though innocent, mind) and have not natural capacities to discover their
Mistake, by the help of an ordinary and general Means of Conviction; My Charity
tells me, that such may be dear and beloved Servants of God, and such as may
attain the end of the Gospel in pure and innocent lives, that is, that would
not for any earthly advantage, wilfully and deliberately persist in any evil
way, (except in the Instance of their (which I suppose) invincible Mistake)
whereby God should be offended, or dishonored by them.

And I wish that the best care might be taken in every part of the Nation, to
distinguish them from those, who observedly, out of a ^^oss humor, pride or
envy, wickedly maintain their opposition against the Church, and that then
there were a particular application made to them, managed with the greatest
meekness, and prudence, to undeceive them; and that all Churches did the same
thing without distinction, and no subtle heads of Factions permitted any more
to abuse them, and that Churchmen would be exactly careful of giving them no
offense, by the Irregularities of their Lives, I am persuaded in a short time,
the greatest part of the Innocent Dissenters might be gained to the Church, and
be an Ornament to it, and the obstinate would either hide their Faces in shame
and discouragement, or manifest their Falseness by the evidence of some grosser
universally acknowledged Miscarriages.

But as to the persons whom I am now reproving, as it is not possible but they
must know the tenur of their Oaths, Subscriptions, and Engagements, and cannot
but understand that a departure from them, to a contrary practice, must needs
be a wilful transgression of their duty to God and man, so I know not yet what
Argument to give myself, upon which I may ground a charitable interpretation of
their Irregularities and Compliances.

Thus have I (laying aside all apprehension of Fear or Favor from any man, or
parties of men whatsoever) dealt plainly and faithfully in this great Concern
of the Church of England, by laying the occasion of the present evils of it, on
them that practiced, and do yet continue to practice their Partial Conformity
and Compliance with the Factious humor of the Age in the Public Churches. If
I have touched a tender Sore, it is because I in tended to cleanse and heal it
not to inflame or torment it If any man becomes my enemy for telling the Truth,
it is none of my Fault, and so shall be none of my Discomfort. But (...) the
Representation (which I have made) of the Sin and Danger, shall prevail with
any one ((...) but one) who has hitherto halted in his Duty, to entertain a
Resolution in future to keep a good Conscience, consult the Right of his
Superiors, and the Safety of the Church, by keeping himself strict to his
Obedience, I shall have a sufficient Compensation for whatsoever I shall suffer
from that angry Generation of men I have to deal with, and an ample Reward for
whatsoever is here done, by him, who among the Servants of Jesus, is

(...), sept. 18. 1669. W. S.


