AN EPISTLE From the SPIRIT of Love and Peace, Unto all the upright Israelites,
who are born of the SEED that is blessed for evermore. With some things opened
concerning the two Seeds. To be read amongst Friends, when in the fear of God
they are met together in the same Spirit, that thereby the whole body may be
edified, and comforted; and all in one life, perfectly established for ever.
This is only to go amongst Friends, and not otherwise. W. S.

Printed in the year, 1663.

An Epistle.
Ye Lambs of God, pertakers of the heavenly calling, who have tasted, and do
taste of the endless life, in which ye feel the love wherewith God loves you,
in the same love I am present with you all where I behold you and feell you as
the blessed of the Lord, and in his love I am moved in true tenderness to
manifest unto you what in his life is fresh upon me, and though there be many
of you amongst whom my travel in body has not been, yet my travel in Spirit is
daily on your behalf, even breathing in the Spirit for the good and welfare of
you all, for you being brought before me as one body, and beholding you as the
gathered of the Lord, his love did open plentifully in me to you wards, and as
a fresh and living stream does reach you in your habitations: that ye thereby
may be edified and comforted, for what is our travel and labor of love, but to
inform one another, and edify one another, in the truth of God; and to build
up one another as dear children born of one life, in which life we are
comforted together, and have comfort one in another, you it is that from the
beginning have seen the mighty Acts of God, and are sensible of the power that
has preserved you unto this present time, you can read the former mercies, and
you can read the present mercies, and there is not any benefit slips out of
your minds, but the true sense of all mercies remains with you, and you can
read them to your souls comfort, it need not be repeated what God has done for
you, because you are kept in the fresh sense of what he is doing, and thereby
feel him to be the same to day as yesterday: Yea and much more abundant, for
your hearts and minds being single unto God, so does the Seed of God shed
abroad the fresh streams and rivers of life, in which ye having taken root, and
feeling the nourishment of the same, and springing up through the nourishment
which ye receive, ye are the true Israelites indeed, not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit, in which Spirit, ye receive life according to measure, and
in the drawings and leadings of the Spirit, goes on from one degree of
godliness to another, and so grows into a larger measure of the life, and of
the glory, and still presses forward to the mark, for many may run, but it is
one only that obtains the prize, for the Spirit is but one, and it is by the
Spirit that life is obtained, and they that run in the Spirit, they only
obtain the prize, and having obtained it, they know there is nothing beyond it,
and that all things below it have there period in it, for the life is the one
and the only true good, and there is no higher dispensation to be expected,
neither is there any thing besides it true: now ye that are come to the endless
life, ye are come to the only true spirit of love and peace, and ye have your
satisfaction and consolation in the virtue that proceeds from it, for in it
self it is the fullness of everlasting blessedness and whatsoever would point
you unto any thing beyond it, as some more excellent and glorious
administration, do not yield your selves to answer it, for that will run you
into apprehensions, conceptions, and comprehensions, and so draw your minds
from the measure of Gods spirit, wherein the love and life, and grace of God is
freely dispensed, and whilst you are so drawn to expect what may be, you will
loose the favor of life that is present and so run into diverse apprehensions
and conceptions, whielst you seemingly may be waiting upon the life, but the
mind being singly stayed in the measure of the spirit received. Every one comes
to see and feel their own attainment, in the love, life, grace and mercy of
God, not by any apprehension, but by an Infallible seal in the Spirits
demonstration, whereby they feel their own place and standing to be sure in the
spirit, and so hold unity in the spirit in every degree of the spirit, and they
are truly contented with their own seize; and where any are behind them,
and traveling in the same spirit, they labor in love to bring such forward in
the drawings of the spirit, and so into the place unto which they have attained
before them, and then goes forward in the movings of the spirit to attain what
they have not yet attained, but for any to hold forth a higher dispensation
generally, as if none had already attained, and to look at their place and
standing to be higher then those that have attained; this is to set up
Prophesies, before the birth of the Son, and therefore it is safe for every one
to consider their own place and standing, and unto what they have attained to
walk by the same rule, and to mind the same thing, still pressing forward in
the Spirit to attain what is set before them, and to gather such as are behind
them to come unto them, for none can gather into any higher place or degree in
the spirit, then the same place into which they have attained, and in which
they stand, wherein they being contented and eying the leadings of the spirit,
they look to the mark before them, and they look at those that are following
after them in the same spirit: and so the love has a free cour^e throughout
the whole body, and draw the weak and feeble which are yet following on in
singleness of heart, and cherishes them in the true tenderness, that they may
come up into the same place unto which any is attained in a higher degree, for
though many experiences may be declared, which in themselves may be really
true, yet at the highest they are but effects wrought by the spirit, and that
which works, is greater then that which is wrought, and is worthy of more
honor, and it is not tied or limited unto experiences, but works according
to the good pleasure of its own will, and they that have passed through any
experiences in the leadings of the Spirit, they are to inform the minds of all
unto the Spirit, and leave the effect to it is own pleasure, which may work the
same Experience, or another Experience by the operation of it is own power, and
though Experiences may not fully be the same in every place, yet there may be a
true growth witnessed in the Spirit, and a going forward into the liberty of
it is own life, and so those that have passed through the Sea to gather such
unto them as are but coming out of Egypt, and those that are in the
wilderness, to gather such unto them, who are but come through the sea, and
those that are entered into the good land, to gather all unto them that are
following after them in the leadings of the Spirit, and this will bring all
forward in the right Way, and the Cloud will be known before, and the Pillar of
fire behind, and all Israel will walk safely, and such as are not come into the
Land, they will be preserved in their travel, and in due time will be gathered
unto those that are Entered, who are settled in the life, and sealed in the
life, which is the highest dispensation of God, and besides which there is not
any thing true, for the birth of the Son is the final end of all prophesies,
and there is not any dispensation greater, neither is there any to be Expected
higher, though diverse manifestations may proceed from his life, according to
time, yet in himself he is unchangeable, and manifest his own mind, and will in
his own pleasure, and there is not any manifestation that proceeds from his
life, that alters or changes the substance of his own nature and being, for he
is all glorious in himself, and there is not any glory beyond him or above him,
and who are not yet attained to the full Resurrection of his life, they are to
mind their own degree unto which they have attained, and if they have attained
unto any measure of the life, and the glory of the life, they are come to the
last dispensation of glory, though may be not to the full and perfect glory in
that dispensation: and therefore they are to wait for the fulfilling of what is
behind in themselves; and not to diminish the Son's glory where he is risen, by
holding forth a higher dispensation of glory yet undiscovered; for that is but
a Prophecy, which the birth of the Son fulfilleth; and he is come unto whom
all prophesies points, and in whom they are all fulfilled, and they that are
born of his life, they cannot Return into the Wilderness where temptations may
enter, but lies in the bosom of his love, and in the hour of temptation are
preserved by him, and here is the Creatures nothingnesse, and Christ all in
all, who is Riches to the poor, and a Helper of the needy, unto whom let your
Eyes be kept single, ye dear Israel of God; for he is the first, and he is the
last, and besides him there is no Savior. Who is it that called you out of
Egypt, and who has led you by the hand in the day of your youngness, and who
has lifted up your heads in the day of your weakness, and who has preserved
you in the hour of temptation, and who has comforted you in your great
affliction, and who has eased you of your burdens, and who has delivered you
out of your troubles, and who has brought you into the place where you now
stand, is there any besides him that has done any of these things for you?
Nay, it is he alone and not another; and whatsoever would lessen the authority
of his life must fall before him; for he is Judge of all, and his Judgments
are true for ever; and though his compassion be very great, yet does not his
Judgments fail; for many may secure themselves, as if he was not come who has
all Judgment committed to him, and so do rather judge his Judgment then
submit unto it, and thereby hardens themselves in their own way: now that every
one in this may be careful, and none Judge before the time; because true
Judgment is committed unto such ^s know his time, for they that have his
Judgment, they have his Compa^sion also; and they do not judge in forwardness,
but bear and suffer long in tenderness; but where his Compassion will not
break, his Judgment will cut down; and however it may be rejected, yet it can
never be avoided; and they that are truly single unto God, they rather fear the
Judgment then turn against it; nay though it may not be true Judgment, yet
they will enter into a search, and with God's witness prove themselves; and if
by the witness they be cleared, and can approve their hearts unto God, then
they have their rejoicing in God, and can truly pity those that have judged
before the time, and this keeps out all prejudice, and reaches the good in
those that have judged amiss, and so brings true Judgment over that spirit,
which has not Judgment in the Son, but gives Judgment against him. So ye
that have attained unto any measure of the Life, mind your place therein, keep
low in the fear by which you will feel your growth, and so come from one degree
to another by the Resurrection of the Seed, and there hold your unity and
fellowship, considering one another in your places, and feeling the love of God
in every degree unto which you are attained, and there your bowels will be full
of tenderness, compassion, long suffering, meekness and gentleness: there is
the true bearing and forbearing one another, when you feel one another in the
measure of Life, in which you love one another, even as Christ has loved you,
for whatsoever is begotten of God to breathe after him, if it be never so
little in the pure measure of life, that is to be tendered and cherished in all
dearnesse, the bruised Reed is not to be broken, nor the smoking Flax is not to
be quenched, and if any yet sit in Egypt, groaning under the burden of
Pharaoh's oppression, oh let your bowels break unto such, that in tenderness
you may be a comfort to them, knowing that the Lord had compassion upon you in
that state, and so reach the good in all, but let the obstinate Spirit be unto
you a stranger, because it burdens that which is tender toward God, and where
tenderness is showed unto that Spirit, it strengthens Pharaoh in his
wickedness, and thereby add affliction upon the Seed, and makes it groan under
heavier weights and burdens.

And now the day is come that puts a difference between the precious and the
vile; I do not say it is to come, and is not, but that it is come, and also
coming, which manifests the nature of every Root and Branch, and therefore let
all the upright Israelites walk in the day that is come, for it is the day of
the Lord, the day wherein the Sons glory is revealed, whose coming has caused
the night to pass away, and many can say the night is over and gone, and the
perfect day is come, the day in which a Son is born, and a child is given, who
^s the heir of life and blessing: oh let Israel be glad, and Jacob rejoice, for
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, arise thou in it thou Child of
promise, shine forth in thy light, shine forth in thy glory, say not it is yet
to come, but sh^ne forth in that which is come, let not any thing discourage
thee, for thy deliverer is come, follow him faithfully, and enter with him into
the Land of Rest, and there inherit thy portion in his own fullness, where all
true Israelites rejoice together, where praises are sung in unity, and no jar
nor discord in the harmony, but the Lambs Songs, in the Lambs life, to the
Lambs glory over all for ever.

And now I beseech you suffer the word of Exhortation, serve one another in
every office of love, and let not greatness be in your eye, but watch over one
another in singleness of heart, and as dear children be at peace one with
another, and have fervent love amongst your selves, that the sweet argument of
life may be a sweet favor in all your vessels, and the virtue of its precious
balm may heal in time whatsoever rises to offend the body, for it is the wise
part of the old nature that seeks for greatness, from which nature all
prejudice and discord does arise, but the birth of life is willing to serve,
and in serving no discord can enter, and as ye stand submitted to the love, and
in the love serves one another, you will have true rejoicing together, even as
a body composed and compacted in that wisdom that seeks nothings but the glory
of God alone.

Behold I make all things new, says the Lord, my furnace shall separate
mixtures, my fire shall consume the earthly matter; the will of man shall bow,
and the glory of all flesh shall pass away, for the works of my hands are
verity and truth: who shall plead with me, and who shall stand in the mixture
and not be consumed, for behold I come in power, and my Judgment is with me,
says the Lord God, my love is to my own Seed, and my compassion is to my only
child, my mercies endures for ever, and my goodness does not cease, my own
birth shall rejoice therein, let all feel my tender Seed, for my Jewels I am
making up, and binding together my chosen ones, and the new Heavens shall be
their habitation, for it is my purpose to make all things new, and that which
is new shall only remain, and the glory thereof shall cover the earth, says
the Lord God, for behold I bring a famine upon the earth, and all shall pine
away that feeds not on my bread, but my Lambs shall have plenty in my house,
and rejoice together at my Table, and I will be glorified over all flesh for
ever, and the soul that stands in my Council shall rest in everlasting peace,
says the Lord God Almighty

Something opened concerning the two Seeds.
Great is the mystery of Godliness, Therefore the trumpet is to give a certain
sound, and the pipe is to make a true distinction, for the trumpet is not to
sound against the Seed of God, neither is the pipe to play to rejoice the Seed
of the evil doer, but the trumpet and the pipe is to distinguish the two Seeds
in their ground and natures, and man is to be considered as he is joined to
either, and is one with their nature, for man was created wholly a right Seed,
and a noble Plant, and in that state he stood in the mercy, in the grace, and
in the blessing, but he joined to the evil Seed, and thereby degenerated into
the Plant of a strange Vine, and so became subject to the will and wisdom of
the flesh, which was not of man, but of the evil Seed, for man was created in
the will and wisdom of God, and in the righteous Seed of God he was a man, and
bare the image of God in the true manhood, but the will and wisdom of the
flesh was generated by the evil Seed, unto which man yielding himself, he
entered into the beastly properties of the Serpents nature, and so lost his
righteous Image in which he was created in the righteous Seed, and though man
did thus degenerate from his created state, and entered into that nature which
is under the Curse, yet he remains a man in the property of his Creation, and
the nature of the evil Seed is the man's burden, and he groaneth and travelleth
in pain under it, being separated by it from the blessed Communion of the
fullness of his Creator, and it is the nature and properties of the evil Seed
that God appears against and destroys for the man's sake, that by his own power
he might set man free from that nature which is liable to the curse for ever:
and it is the work of God to save man, and not to destroy him; for if the
appearance of God should universally destroy man, then there is nothing remains
to be restored, and therefore God appears against the evil Seed, and also
against man, as he is one with that nature, and yet for man, to redeem him out
of that nature: And he appears in Judgment, to destroy that nature by which
man is oppressed and burdened, and so to reconcile man to himself by Jesus
Christ, and thus God appears in his free love, grace, and mercy unto man, but
in judgment, wrath and vengeance, to cut off and destroy the Seed of the evil
doer; unto which nature man being joined, and in which nature his mind being
lifted up and exolted, he also partakes of the Judgment that falls upon that
nature; for man being entered into the evil Seed, he is clothed and covered
with all the bad properties of its nature, and in those properties he appears
not as a man, but as a beast; for the manhood is thereby captivated, though the
mind of the man be lifted up and exalted, yet the property of his nature as a
man is sorely oppressed and afflicted, and the Image of the manhood is buried
and lost under the evil properties of the evil seed, and there death reigns
over man, yet not so, as that it does destroy the property of man, but only
separates him, and alienates him from the center of the life of blessedness,
and is in the separated and alienated state. The love of God in the light of
his life does reach unto man, and his grace or favor appears unto him, and
with his grace he visits him, and with his light and grace he shows man the
evil into which he is entered, and does convince him of it, that man thereby
might turn his mind from the evil unto God, who is the chiefest good, and so
come to repentance for all the evil that he has committed by the instigation
of the evil seed: and if man do not here lay hold upon the grace of God, and
the favor of God, and yield himself to the drawings and leadings of it, and so
forsake the evil of his doings by true repentance, he destroys himself in his
gainsaying, not laying hold upon the grace which is manifest from God unto him,
and is mighty to save him, he thereby becomes liable to the eternal judgment,
wrath and woe, even as does the evil seed with all the evil properties of it,
and yet the grace does appear unto man to save him, and not to destroy him: and
as man lays hold upon the grace, and joins unto it in its appearance, so does
it separate him from the nature of the evil seed, with all its evil properties;
and it helps the man, and relieves the man, by the power of its own strength,
and by its power it judges the evil seed, with all its motions and temptations,
and thereby preserves the man, and saves the man out of temptations, and so
it is not of works, but by grace that man is saved, whilst the evil seed in
judgment is condemned, for grace is not the seed of the evil doer, but unto
the man, and though man be in bondage to the evil properties, yet if he lay
hold upon the grace and receive it, then the grace works unto separation from
the evil, for it does not appear to save man in the evil, but to separate him
from it, and so to cut off and destroy the evil in judgment, and thereby
redeems, and saves, and sanctifies, and reconciles, and justifies the man, and
all the works in man and for man is wrought by the grace freely, and man is
thereby saved and not destroyed. So the two seeds are to be distinguished in
their natures, which in themselves can never be united, or otherwise, the evil
Seed may be strengthened and made to rejoice, which is to be judged, and the
good Seed may be beaten down which is to be strengthened and cherished, and as
the love of God does open in its own freeness unto man, if the evil Seed draw
that to it self, it will transform it self into the likeness or shape, and so
show it self in the transformed Image, and appear as the highest good, yet the
true birth sees thorough its likeness to its nature, and cannot join with it in
unity, for contrary natures can never be united, and so grace is to the man,
but judgment to the Seed of the evil doer, though transformed as an Angel of
light, and as man receives the grace, so by the grace he is restored into the
fullness of the blessed Seed, and thereby set free from the nature and
properties of the evil Seed, forsaking the body of the adamical flesh, and even
into the body of the everlasting Seed of God, and so becomes united unto God by
Jesus Christ who is God and man: It is Gods witness that makes a true
distinction, and not any apprehension of the fl^sh^y wisdom, for that will
speak p^^c^ to the oppressing nature, whilst the innocent Babe sits mou^ning
under it, but by the witness the two natures are separated, and Judgment to
whom Judgment, and mercy to whom mercy ^^longs, and so by the power of God,
the oppression is judged, and the oppressed helped, and relieved, and there is
perfect unity in the perfect life which is the bond of peace.

I am truly moved in that love which breaks, dissolveth and melts my heart
to salute in all dearnesse and tenderness, the whole Family of my Fathers
house, and heirs of his Kingdom, in every Nation, Country and Island where
this may be ordered to come, and the God of all peace give unto you that peace
whilst the world cannot give you, nor man's power take from you, where I lie
down and rest with you, ye blessed of the Lord.

Nottingham County Goal, the 24. day of the 4. month, 1663. W. S.

The End.

