THE Morning-Watch: OR, A Spiritual Glass Opened.

WHEREIN A Clear DISCOVERY is made of That which lies in Darkness, from whence
WARS, CONTENTIONS, and DESTRUCTIONS do arise concerning a professed RELIGION.

With a few words of tender Counsel Unto the Pope, Prelate, Presbyter,
Independent and Baptist,
etc. That they may all watch to the Morning, and in the Glass behold
themselves, and try their Principle and Practice, and see whose Image it bears,
and whether it be the same Principle that the Saints were guided by, and the
same Practice that they walked in, that none may lie any longer in darkness and
be deceived; but all may come in one spirit to be gathered, and into one body
baptized, where Love and Life, Peace and Eternal Unity is truly enjoyed and
possessed.

By one who travels for Israel's Freedom* William Smith.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Robert Wilson, at the sign of the
Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill in Martins near Aldersgate, 1660.

To the READER.
READER,
THe Way of Life, or the Way of Death, is the Choice that all people make, and
are found walking in. The Way of Life is strait, and there be not many finds
it; the Way of Death is broad, and many walk therein Therefore it is of
concernment for thee to examine thy present state, and to be careful in what
way thou walk, least suddenly thou fall into danger; for God would not have
thee pe^ish, nor to go on in the Way of Death, but would have thee turn and
depart out of it* and for that end has he freely made manifest in thee, a
measure of his Spirit to discover it, that thou may see the danger, and
escape it, and that thou may not run into it, and destroy thy self; and that
is in thy Conscience placed, which truly tryes thy ways and doings, and does
not let an evil thought, word, or deed, go unreproved; tha^ is the Light of
Christ which thou art enlightened withal, and lets thee see that when thou art
at liberty in the flesh, and satisfying the lusts of it, thou art in the broad
way that leads to destruction, and it reproves thee for it, and calls thee to
turn and depart out of it; if thou walk in pride, drunkenness, covetousness,
envy or mal^ce, in scorn or disdain of others, the Light of Christ does reprove
thee in thy own Conscience for such things, and calls thee to absta^n from
them; and this is the broad way, that leads to destruction; all that walk in
it, and will not turn from it when reproof comes, they destroy themselves, and
will perish in their gainsaying: Therefore whilst the Lord is visiting thee
in his tender mercies, harden not thy heart against him, nor re^ect his
counsel, but be diligent, and ready to rece^ve, and in the quietnes^ of thy
mind attend to the Word near thee, which is in thy heart, and in thy mouth,
that thou may obey it, and do it; for it is Gods gift unto thee, and stands a
witness for God in thy Consc^ence; it is Life, and the Life is the Light, and
the Light breaks forth in thee, and makes manifest unto thee the secrets of thy
own heart, and lets thee see all thy thoughts, whether they be good or evil;
and thou can not hide thy Counsel from it, nor cover any intent so close, but
it will find it out: This is God's Love unto thee, who has given his Son for
thee, that thou in him might believe, and have everlasting life: Wait in his
fear, his counsel to know, and his leading to follow, and he will bring thee to
the strait Way, and open it for thee to walk in, and he will judge and condemn
all that in thee which must not enter; and he will bring thee down into the
Death, where God's Wonders thou will behold in the deep: And this is the
straitness of the Way, and the Ground why so few finds it, and walks in it,
Because that flesh and blood must not enter, but be judged down to death:
Therefore Reader, be diligent to find out thy present state, and to know the
Way wherein thou art walking, and do not dece^ve thy self by crying Peace, when
sudden destruction is near at hand; and be not secure with a talk of God and
Christ, but wait to know them; and speak not of Faith and Grace, until thou
have them, for there^n thou deceives thy self, and the Enemy blinds thy m^nd in
a secure state.

So unto that of God in thee which is pure, I direct thee, that thou may know
the Leadings and Teaching^ of it; and believe in it, and join to it, and it
w^ll bring thee to know those things that concerns thy own Peace: And in the
measure of God manifest in thee, read this following Treatise, and it will keep
d^^n that mind tha^ covets Knowledge, and would be feeding upon Knowledge, which
the Lord forbids; or if any thing arise in thee which would be angry o^
envious, the Light of Christ will judge that down and ^^ll keep thee low in the
meekness and patience to read and understand; and if any thing seem hard unto
thee which at present thou may not have clearness ^n, let it alo^e until ^he
day declare it: And be not hasty to know, nor rash to ju^ge in that which
cannot d^scern it; but be sti^l, and co^l, and sink down, and wait in pat^ence
until the appointed time. And this is published in the serv^ce of Love for thy
sake who erres, for want of knowledge, and is not come to walk in the Way of
Understanding, that thou may be informed of the subtle workings of the Enemy
of thy Peace, and to know a part in that which gives Dominion over him, which
is CHRIST JESUS the LIGHT in thy Conscience; unto which I am made manifest, who
^ravels to rel^eve the weary, and to ease the oppressed ones, that the feeble
may be strengthened, and all that breath after God may be saved ^n this day of
his Mercy: My Friendship is to thee and all people, in the Truth of God.

W. S.

THE MORNING-WATCH; Or, A Spiritual GLASS Opened, etc,
AWAKE, Awake all people; Arise, lift up your eyes, watch to the Morning, the
Day is come, and the glory of Israel is risen; all things is manifest as they
are; Darkness is dangerous, and the Ways thereof leads unto Death; Why will ye
walk therein? And why will ye dye? O ye yeople! Everlasting Mercy from the Lord
God is held forth, that none might be lost, but all might be saved. Bow down
your ear, and hear; be diligent, and incline; for that is come which was before
the Subtilty, and that is manifest which in the beginning made all things, and
was before the Serpent prevailed, or before that sin or death entered; and this
h^th God revealed in his tender mercy, and has visited many therein, whose
Understandings are opened, and their eyes enlightened to behold the way of
life; and they are come to that which was before the World was made, and knows
a part in that, which was Moses life, whose understanding was opened to see to
the beginning, and beheld God's Eternal Power in the Creation, and the movings
of his Spirit upon the face of the Waters, and his bringing Light out of
darkness; and when this was opened to his understanding, and he had seen it,
then he declared it, and it was written, and that which was written, was called
Scriptures; but that which Moses declared, as the Word of o^ Life, which was in
the beginning; and this Word was with God, and was God; who said, Let there be
Light, Gen 1.3. (mark) God said it, this was the Word) the thing was done, and
came to pass: Then God saw the Light that it was good, and he called the L^ght,
Day, and the Darkness he called Night, and the Evening and the Morning were the
first day, Genesis 1.4. (Mark this:) The Word said, Let there be Light, and the
Light was brought out of Darkness; so the Morning was come and the first Day
was created in the Eternal Word; and unto this Life was Moses gathered, and had
his Understanding opened, that he could see to the Beginning, and behold the
Works of God in the Creation, which was wrought and brought to pass before his
time upon the Earth; and there was no Tradit^on to give him the knowledge of
it, but the Light which shone out of darkness in his heart, in which he was
gathered unto God, and had union with his Life; and in the L^fe revealed, Moses
had clearness in his Understanding to the Beginning, and beheld the six days
Work, and the Creation finished, and also the seventh Day in which God rested:
He ^eheld man in his Innocence and Vprightness, and saw the Image in which he
was created, and the purity and glory in which he was formed; he beheld the
Habitation in which he was placed; and he saw the covering with which he was
clothed, and in which he stood, before the Creator, and was not ashamed; he
beheld Paradise, and all the Trees of the Garden, and saw what was allowed unto
man for Food, and what was forbidden* He beheld the Serpents subtilty, and his
deceitful working, and saw how he entered, and how he prevailed over man; he
beheld how he drew and enticed man's mind from his obedience unto God; and he
saw how man fell and degenerated from the Power that had made him; and he
beheld the entrance of sin and transgression, and saw the Curse and Death that
came over all men in the Fall; he beheld and saw the Love of God open, and the
Seed of the Woman promised to break the Serpents Head. This was ^oses
understanding opened in the Light that shone out of darkness, which was
manifest within himself, in which the Morning appeared, and the First Day did
break unto him; then in the Light he read through the generations that were
before him, and declared of their states and conditions, and of their ways and
doings; and then it was written, and became Scriptures; (Mark) It was not
Scripture before Moses had declared it, and what he has declared, and what is
written, is true, and given forth by him in the Power that made all things
manifest to him: So he declared of Adam, and of h^s Innocent state, and of his
Fall, and of his driven-out-state; he declared of Cain, and of his Sacrifice,
and of Abel, and of his Sacrifice; he declared of the Flood that came upon the
World of the ungodly; and of Noah a just person, who with his Sons and
Daughters were preserved in the Ark: He declared of Abraham the Father of the
faithful, and of the Covenant that God made with him and his Seed for ever; he
declared of Ishmael and Isaac, of Esau and Jacob, and through all the
generations that had gone before him; and he did not receive these things by
Tradition, or by any knowledge that came without him, but as they were opened
and made manifest within him, where he beheld and read them in the Light and
Life by which all things were made and created, and into which he was gathered
and united. This is that Moses whom God sent into Egypt, to bring up Israel
his chosen, who with mighty Signs and Wonders delivered them from under
Pharoah's Power, and was a Leader unto them, out of Egyptian Darkness, and
from under the heavy Tasks that they we^e oppressed withal. He received the
Law at Mount Horeb, and he writ it in Tables of Stone, that Israel might know
the Statutes and Ordinances, which the Lord required that they should observe
and keep, and that they might obey the Lord their God; this was the Covenant
which God made with Israel in those days when he brought them out of the Land
of Egypt; and it was committed unto Moses, who was made a Minister of it, and
taught the people to observe and do it, that they might possess the Land which
the Lord their God had given unto them, and that they might not forget the Lord
and his Benefits: And this was Moses Ministration, for the Law came by him;
howbeit this Ministration was not the Thing it self, neither could make the
comers thereunto perfect; yet in its time was glorious, and was a true Figure
and Shadow of him that was to come, which afterward was to be more fully
revealed, whose glory exceeded* and Moses Ministration was but a Type of him,
and a Schoolmaster to bring unto him, who was before the World was; and it
held forth, though more darkly, as in a Glass, the glorious appearance of
CHRIST the Word of God, and Power of God, who was yet to come, and to be made
manifest and revealed, of whom Moses truly prophesied, when he said, A Prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you like unto me, him shall you hear in
all things; and who will not hear the voice of that Prophet* shall be cut off
from amongst the People: (Mark:) They were to be cut off that would not hear
the voice of him of whom Moses prophesied, who was yet to come, and to be the
end of the L^w for Righteousness, and to be the fulfiller of it, and to save
and redeem from under it, seeing that no flesh could be ^ustified by it,
because of the weakness and unprofitableness of it, and because it was a
Ministration of Comdemnation unto such as did not continue in all things
written therein* therefore Moses testified of him who was to be raised up, and
directed all to hear his Voice, whose Ministration was to bring in Everlasting
Righteousness, and to redeem from under the Bondage of the Law; and this was
Moses Testimony unto CHRIST the Power of God; and he did not direct People to
look at any thing, or hear any thing that was written before his time, but to
look to Christ, and to hear his Voice, that they might come to that which made
the World, and was in the beginning, with whom Moses had then true union, and
felt his life, and beheld the Excellen^y of his glory, which was still to be
revealed; and both the Law and Prophets bear witness unto him, and the
Scriptures throughout testifies of him, and declare his unchangeableness, who
through all abides the same; what he was in the beginning* he was the same to
Moses, and to David, and all the Prophets, and Holy men of God, who all
received a measure of his unchangeable life, and were thereby inspired; and as
that in them moved so they spoke and declared, and their Testimony agree^ in
one; for they were all come to that which was in the beginning, and all
declared the same thing according to its manifestation unto them; that from
Moses until John, all the true Prophets bo^e their Testimony unto CHRIST the
Power of God, whom they knew to be freely* given of God to be a LIGHT and a
LEADER, that he might be salvation unto the ends of the Earth; and as they
received, they Ministered, and truly testified of his Power; and what they knew
him to be made unto them, so they declared of him, and witnessed him to be a
King, a Judge, a Lawgiver, a Rock, a Fortress, a Deliverer: And so according
to the Manifestation they Ministered, and not by Tradition or Custom, That the
Testimony of John agreed with the Testimony of Moses, and they both witnessed
the same Thing, and had Union with the same Life: So John was come to that
which was in the Beginning, and in that he was the greatest of all the
Prophets, and was sent of God to prepare the Way, and to make the Paths
straight; for he was near to be revealed in glory, of whom Moses and the
Prophets had testified; and John declared of the Word which was in the
beginning, by which all things were made; And he testified, That in the Word
there was Life, and the Life was the Light of men, John 1. (mark:) The Word in
the beginning is the Life and Light of men, by which all things were made: This
was his Testimony who was sent of God to bear witness unto the Light; and he
did not declare of another then the holy men of God had done the same, that
Moses and the Prophets had testified of; and he was sent of God to bear witness
unto this Truth which was in the beginning, and he did not testify of that to
be the Light, which Moses and the Prophets had written before him; neither did
he testify of himself to be the Light, but that is the true Light (says John)
that enlightens every man that comes into the world, John 1.9. Here was the
Light shone out of Darkness in John, the Morning and the first Day was come
unto him, as was unto Moses, and he beheld his Glory as the Glory of the only
begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth: Then God sent him to bear
witness unto the Light which in him was made manifest, that all in the Light
might believe; and he called unto others to behold him, and said he was the
Lamb of God, and was come to take away the sins of the World, John 1.29.
(Mark:) He beheld him and his Glory, and felt his Power, and what his Power
took away; then he declared him as he knew him, and not from any Tradition or
Writing before him, though then there was much written which did truly testify
of him. Weigh this Truth all ye Priests and Professors, and ponder it in your
hearts; Have you beheld Christ, and seen his Glory whose Name in Words you
declare? Have you felt his Power to take away your sin? If yea, then why do you
teach for Doctrine men's Traditions, and build upon other men's labors, and
stretch your selves beyond your own measures, running into the Lines of what
others have written? And if nay, then how dare any of you make mention of his
Name, or speak of his Glory, or of his Power, seeing you have not beheld him
yet made manifest in your selves? You are not sent of God, no not one of you,
who cannot witness in some measure, the glory of the only begotten of the
Father revealed in you: Therefore let all flesh be silent, and the mouth of
Iniquity for ever stopped, and let none speak more of Christ, or his Glory and
Power, then they know a measure of his Life made manifest in their mortal
bodies, by which they come to know their sin taken away; For John testified,
that the giving forth of the Law was by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by
Jesus Christ, John 1.17: (Mark:) Grace and Truth was come unto John by Jesus
Christ, and he had beheld and had felt the Virtue of it, by which Moses
Administration was fulfilled in him: And this is John's Record, who was sent
of God to bear Witness unto him in whom is life, the same which was in the
beginning, of whom Moses testified, that so their Record agrees in one, and
their Testimony is unto the same Life in Unity; for they were gathered unto
Him who was in the beginning, and was made manifest through Generations to
be a Light and a Leader; and all that believed and obeyed him, had Life Eternal
in him: And this is he that was made under the Law, to Redeem them that were
under the Law, and in fullness of time came and was made manifest to Israel,
and was the end of the Law for Righteousness, unto all that did believe; and
so he fulfilled the Ministration of Condemnation, which could not justify any
because of its weakness; and he brought in a Ministration of Righteousness,
which did exceed in Glory; And this was the Word in the beginning, which became
flesh, and dwelt amongst them, and they beheld his glory, and received him; and
as many as received him, unto them he gave Power to become the Sons of God,
even to as many as believed in his Name: And John preferred him before all*
saying, He that comes after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me,
and his shoo-latchets I am not worthy to unloose: I baptize with water, but he
shall baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, whose Fan is in his hand; he
must increase, but I must decrease, says John. And when he came and was made
manifest unto Israel, of whom Moses and the true Prophets had testified, and
whose Glory they saw was to be revealed, he Ministered forth of his own Fullness,
and of his Fullness they received, who upon him waited, and in him believed:
Then he confirmed the Testimony of all the Holy Men of God, saying, I am the
Light of the World, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the Light of Life, John 8.12. And this Testimony the Pharisees could not
receive, but told him he bore Record of himself, and his Record was not true:
These were the wise Generation, and the Scripture-learned ones in that day, who
had the Law and the Prophets read amongst them every Sabbath, and yet did not
behold his glory when manifest amongst them, of whom Moses and the Prophets had
testified; nor did not believe his own Testimony, who spoke the Things that he
heard and received of the Father: Mind this all you wise people of this present
Age, who are wise in your own eyes, and hears and reads the Testimony of the
Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, and is searching the Scriptures from one
end to another, and yet you come not to him, nor cannot receive his Testimony
of whom the Scriptures do declare, and in whom is life: Now there was a poor
people in that day, that did own his Testimony, and received him, and believed
in him, and became followers of him, though by the Wise, and Mighty, and Noble,
he was despised and rejected: And those that followed him, were made Witnesses
of the Works and Miracles which he did whilst he was in that Body prepared;
and they beheld great and mighty things done by his Power, the Dead raised, the
Lame restored, blind Eyes opened, deaf Ears unstopped, the Tongue of the Dumb
unloosed, Lepers cleansed, Devils cast out, with many other Signs and Miracles
which in the days of his Flesh was done by him: And when the Work was near
finished which the Father had given him to do, and the time of his Departure
drew nigh, and that he was to leave them who believed in him, and were
Followers of him, all things drawing near an End, he said unto them, It is
expedient that I go away, that I may send you another Comforter to abide with
you for ever, the Spirit of Truth, which the world cannot receive: And when he
had finished, he departed from them, and left them, and entered into the Glory
that he had with the Father before the World began, and sits at his Right Hand
in the highest Heavens, Principallities and Powers being subject to him. This
is he that does redeem and save his People from their sin; and there is not
another Name given whereby any can be saved; but the Name of Jesus. And after
he was taken up from them, and was ascended, then did they wait for his Promise
to be fulfilled; and they tarryed in Jerusalem, and waited until they were
endued with Power from on High; and he did not leave them Comfortless, but in
his Faithfulness he came unto them, and fulfilled his Promise, and poured forth
his Spirit upon them, and they all spoke the wonderful Works of God; then they
preached his Name from City to City, and published Salvation in his Life, and so
they Witnessed that which they received in the pourings forth of the Spirit;
and they were made able Ministers of the Spirit, and in the Spirit the things
of God were unto them revealed, and they then labored and traveled, that
others who were Strangers and Aliens unto that Life which in them was revealed,
might be gathered and brought to have union with it: So their Ministry in the
Spirit was to turn people from Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of
Satan unto the Power of God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins;
(mark) There must be a coming from Darkness to the Light, and from Satan's
Power unto the Power of God, before that sin be forgiven, or transgression
blotted out: And this is that which so many wants, they want the Light and
Power of God, and lies in Darkness, and under the Power of Satan; so their sin
^emains, and they live in it, and says it must be so whilst they are in this
World; and they come not to that in which sin is forgiven and done away: And so
people preach and believe in another Doctrine and Gospel then they preached and
believed in, who were Witnesses of his Majesty, and were true Laborers in the
Gospel who converted and gathered many unto God, who sometimes were afar off
from him; and many came out of Darkness to the Light, and from under Satan's
Power, unto the Power of God, which was the Gospel that they preached, and
labored to gather people unto; and all that believed and received their
Testimony, set to their Seals that God is true; and Witnessed Salvation and
plentious Redemption in the Light and Power of Christ, and they knew the
Gospel, and Life, and Immortality brought to light by it; and then they stood
in the sanctification of the Spirit, and knew the Power of it in their Inward
parts, and their hearts was by it purified, and they were made Saints of the
Most High, and they all had their Life in one Spirit, according to the Measure
received, and in the Spirit they served and Worshipped God Day and Night, and
their Worship and Service he accepted; these were the faithful in Christ
Jesus, who had crucified the Flesh with all the Affections and Lusts of it,
and were born of the Spirit into a new life, where they Witnessed the Work of
Regeneration and Renewing in the Power of God: And then there was Epistles
written unto such to edify and comfort them, and to build up and strengthen
them, that they might stand in the Faith which they had received, and in the
Faith resist the Devil, and all his fiery Darts; and so by Faith in the Power,
they Witnessed the World, and Flesh, and Devil overcome, and Victory obtained
over all the Powers of Darkness, and in the Power they were kept, that the
Wicked one did not touch them: So these were exhorted to stand fast in the
Liberty vvhere^ith Christ had made them free, and and not look back again, to
be entangled with a yoke of Bondage, Gal. 5.1. (Mark:) their Liberty was in
Christ, and he had made them free, and they were come out of bondage, and were
not to look back again, least they should be entangled; these had the Mark
before them in the Light, and was to press forward, and not look back again;
and the knowledge of the glory of God was given unto them in the Light which
shone in their hearts, 2. Cor. 4 6. (Mark) The Light was in their hearts, by
which, they came to know God and his Glory; and they that did not believe in
the Light which was manifest in them, they did abide in Darkness, and the God
of this World blinded their minds, and kept them from the Light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.4. (Mark.) The Light was there, but they believed
not; So the God of this World ruled over them, and kept them from it; but unto
those that did Believe, it was the Mighty Power of God unto Salvation; and by
it were they gathered unto God, and had fellowship with him and one another: So
had they the true knowledge of God being in the Light gathered into fellowship
with him; then they testified, That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at
all, 1 John 1.5. (Mark) This was John's Message which he had heard of him, and
declared unto the Saints, That God is Light, and in him ^s no darkness at all;
and those that say they have fellowship with God, and walk in darkness, they
lie, and do not the Truth* but who walk in the Light, as he is in the Light,
they have fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses them from all sin; And this is John's Testimony unto the Saints
gathered in the Light; and then he exhorted them to abide in it, and walk in
it, and receive the Teachings of it; For says John, You need not another
Teacher, but the Anointing which you have received of him, and abides in you,
(Mark;) the Anointing which the Saints had received, it did abide in them, and
they needed not that any man should teach them, but as the same Anointing
taught them all things, and is truth and no lie, 1 John 2.27. And in the Truth
received, they lived, and it did abide in them; and by the same Spirit of Truth
were they led into all Truth, and had Fellowship and perfect unity one with
another in the Truth, and they were dear and tender over one another, and loved
one another with an unfeigned Love; and these were they that were born of God,
and were Children of the Light, and of the Day; and they were not of the Night,
nor of Darknes^, but out of that state were redeemed and saved by the Power of
Christ, and in his Light they were led into the holy City, which John in the
Spirit saw descending out of Heaven from God, having the glory of God, and her
Light was like a Stone most precious, and the City had no need of the Sun,
neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the Glory of God did lighten it, and
the Lamb is the Light thereof, and the Nations of them that are saved, shall
walk in the Light thereof, and the Kings of the Earth bring their Glory and
Honor into it, Rev. 21. (Mark) all that are saved must walk in the Lambs Light
which shines in the Holy City, and thither the Kings of the Earth must bring
their Glory and Honor, and all must be laid down at the feet of him who reigns
for ever; for unto the Lambs Power must all be subject, he is greater than all,
there was none before him, neither is there another after him; the Alpha and
Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the First and Last, Rev. 22. (Mark:) I am
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the First and Last: And here
Moses and John meets in unity, and their Testimony agrees in one, and all the
Dispensations and Administrations did hold forth this excellent Glory which
unto John was revealed in the Spirit; and from the beginning to the end of all
that is declared and written in so many Words, it is but a Testimony of him
whose Name is called the Word of God, Rev 19* (Mark,) The WORD is his Name, and
it was in the beginning, and by it was all things made that are made; and all
the Holy Men of God received it, and had a part in it, and by it they all
obtained Life, and they testified that there was not another Name given whereby
any could be saved: And this is declared in Words, and is called Scripture of
Truth, but is not the Word whereby Life and Salvation comes; For that was in
the Beginning, and is the same this Day, and abides for Ever; CHRIST the Power
of God, the Salvation of God, without any variableness or changing; and what
Moses saw him to be in his time, John saw him to be the same in his time; and
as he was made manifest unto them, so they testified of him, and exalted him
above every Name, and labored to gather people unto him; and many believed in
him, and were united to him, and by one Spirit were baptized into one Body, and
had fellowship and communion in one life, and in the Spirit they worshipped God
with one accord, and served him with one consent: And this was glorious in its
time, and a Service accepted of God; for they were single and upright to God,
and worshipped him in his own Spirit, and his living presence was amongst them,
and the Light of his Countenance did shine upon them, and their hearts were
made glad, and rejoiced in him, and they offered up a living Sacrifice of
Praise unto his Name: Then did Antichrist begin to work amongst them, and with
his subtilty entered and prevailed over some of them, and through his
deceivableness entangled them, and drew them from their obedience unto the
Power in which they were gathered; then did those forsake the rest that in the
Power were kept, and went out from them, and turned the Grace of God into
wantonness, and made Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience; then Night came
upon the Disobedient, and the Vail spread over them, and darkness covered them,
and they lost the Life and Power of God, and went out from the Spirit and from
the Truth, and so became false Apostles and Deceivers, holding the Form, but
denied the Power, had the Sheeps Clothing, kept the Words, but inwardly ravened
from the Spirit; And these Apostates who were gone from the Life and Power of
God, and had lost the Leading of his Spirit, they turned into the Flesh, and
joined to the Harlot, and committed Whoredom, and generated in the Flesh, and
conceived a false Birth, and in their own strength brought it forth, and it
turned a Persecutor of the Birth born of the Spirit, and exercised Dominion and
Lordship over others, and sought to pervert the Right Way of the Lord, and to
turn people from it; and after the Saints decease, who by the true Spirit were
guided, then the false Apostles and Deceivers prevailed, and drew people, unto
their Way, which stood in the Form, out of the Power so that the people were
covered with gross Darkness, and their minds blinded, that the things of God
were not at all perceived, then they sought out many Inventions, and made many
Likenesses, and set up Forms, and every man's Way seemed right in his own eyes,
and all became observers of their own Way; so set up the Kingdom in their
observations, and all crying, that Christ was in that Way which they had made
and observed. Now Christ beheld the coming of such, and exhorted to beware of
them, and not believe them, nor go forth after them; for he declared that they
were false, who shall cry him up in any observation, or set up the Kingdom of
God in any such thing; therefore says Christ, The Kingdom of God is within
you, Luke 17. So in this dark Night of Apostasy that was entered, people ran
into Confusion, and did not understand one another: And when this glorious Day
was lost that the Saints lived in who gave forth the Scriptures, and that
people were gone astray, and erred from the leading of the Spirit, and had no
union with the Life and Power that the Saints enjoyed, then they got their
Words, and in the strength of their Imaginations, they set up a Way, and formed
a Likeness, then centered in the Form, and rested there for Life; so was the
Light and Day of God lost, and no Morning in them appeared, but gross Darkness
was over them, and they did not like to retain God in their knowledge; then
they went into the Visibles, and grew wise in the Letter, and read of the
Saints Practice, and of their Worship, and labored to form up some thing like
it; and what they made and formed, in that they worshipped, and it seemed to be
right in their own eyes. So they kept the Words, and with them stood clothed,
but were from the Life and from the Spirit, inwardly ravened. And this is
Babylon the Mother of Harlots, where the Seed of God is in Captivity, and where
people are distracted and confused, all tossed like waves of the Sea, and all
unstable as Waters; and out of this the Beast rises, and his Heads and Horns
appears, and he opens his mouth in Blasphemy against God, and blasphemes his
Name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; And this John in his
time saw in the spirit; and when the Beast had got up his Heads and his Horns,
he began to make war, and to force and compel subjection to his Power, that all
might bow unto him, and receive his Mark; then did the world worship the Beast,
and wondered after him, whose Names were not written in the Lambs Book of Life;
and they that would not worship the Image of the Beast, was to be killed, And
none was to buy or sell, but those that had the Mark, or the Name of the Beast,
or the Number of his Name, Rev. 13. so came People under the Beasts Power in
the Darkness, when they were ravened from the Spirit in which they should have
worshipped the Father; then they worshipped the Image of the Beast, and
received his Mark, so turned against the Lamb and his Followers, and made War
with them, that when any thing of God appeared which was made manifest in
people, then the Beast rose up, and made War against that, and reached unto it
with his Horns, and pushed it down; so the true Church has been driven into
the Wilderness, where she has been through time and times, and dividing of
times,, and now is coming forth in the purity and glory of her Beloved, upon
whose Breast she leans; and thus people have erred and gone astray from the Way
of God, and have not known their part in that Life into which the Saints were
gathered who gave forth the Scriptures; neither has their Ears bin open to
hear the teachings of God's spirit, which is manifest within them; so they have
heapt up Teachers without them after their own ungodly lusts, and their ears
have been itching after them; and they have built Houses for them, and called
them Churches, and they have crept into them, and there have they led the silly
Women captive, who have been laden with sins and diverse lusts, and have been
ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, so has
the false Church and false Teachers spread over the Earth in the Night of
Apostasy, and the people they have loved to have it so; there was liberty for
the flesh, they could sit down in that Way, and eat, and drink, and rise up to
play, and that pleased the carnal m^nd, and satisfied the affection and lust of
the Flesh; and so has all the vain Worships and Customs which people are this
day worshipping in, who yet abides in Forms and Traditions, they are all come
up since the days of the Apostles, and are after men's Traditions, and not
after Christ; and the Conception of all has been in man's Imagination, and
has been brought forth in his own Will and Wisdom; and so is a fleshly Birth,
which has ever persecuted the Birth of God; for man's heart adulterating from
that of God in him, he goes into the Flesh, and unto the Flesh he joins and
commits Whoredom, and brings forth a Child of Whoredom (and so have all
Conceptions and bringings forth since the Days of the Apostles, been Bastards,
and not Sons) then the Father that Begets, and the Mother that Bears, would
have their Son to be set up, and they clothe him, and adorns him with fair
coverings, that he may appear beautiful, and be beloved, and then would have
all be subject to him, bow down, and worship him; and though all these Bastards
differ much in their Likeness, and cannot join, nor own one another, yet is
their Conception all in one womb, and they all partake of one Nature; and that
which makes the difference, is the Garment which they are dressed withal, in
which they appear outwardly to the eyes of the beholders; and when the true
Birth appears, they all take a part, and joins together, and conspires to kill
him and to cast him out of their Country; So does all the Harlots Children
stand this day, every one for themselves, and one against another, but all
against Christ the Son and Heir; and not one of them by what Name soever known,
that would have him to reign, but strives with him, and makes War against him,
as has been experienced in this present Age; So every one likes and loves
their own best, and labors to cherish and to strengthen that, and would have
it to have a Name and Power in the Earth; and this is the great Contention
amongst all the Apostates, who Wars, and Fights, and Destroys one another about
their Religion, they would all set up their own Birth, and would have that
Adored and Worshipped, and if there be but a bowing unto the Appearance of it,
they are satisfied with it, though the heart be in the Hypocrisy; but if any
deny to Worship that which they set up, and cannot bow unto it for Conscience
sake, then they are offended, and provoked, and so Wars, and Fights, and
Destroys one another, because their Image is not adored, nor their Birth
worshipped, and all runs to the Scriptures for shelter, and from the Scriptures
would prove their Birth to be lawfully begotten, and from that ground would
have their Son Worshipped, or would have such as cannot, to be persecuted; And
thus do all lie in Darkness, and in Confusion, in the Night of Apostasy, and
understands not one another, nor knows not what they would have done; for they
being from the Life that gave forth Scriptures, their understandings are
darkened, and they err, and knows not the Scriptures; nor the Power of God;
the Light not shining out of Darkness, nor the Morning having not appeared in
them, they be still in the Earth, where Darkness covers, and are all Wanderers
and Vagabonds in the Earth, and has no part nor union with Moses's Life, the
Prophets Life, and the Apostles Life, who had unity together in the one Spirit,
and all walked in the manifestation of it, and so declared the things they
heard, and saw, and tasted, and handled of the Word of Life; and they knew the
Son of God to be come, the same that was in the beginning, and their
Understandings were opened by him, and then they knew him that was true and was
in him that is true, even in his Son, JESUS CHRIST; this is the time GOD, and
ternal LIFE, 1 John 5. (Mark) the Son of God was come, the true Birth was born
in them, and they knew him to be the only true God, and obeyed and worshipped
him, and in him they had Eternal Life; and this they witnessed to be true: But
who knows him not to be come that is True, they are not in the Saints Life, so
runs into their Words, and gets their Words, and sows them together, and makes
themselves Coverings, but abides in the Darkness, and brings forth that which
is false, then searches the Scriptures for Words, to prove their Image a lawful
Son: And this is the bottom and foundation of all professed Religions this day,
centring in the Letter, and running thither for shelter, but are all from the
Life, and out of that which is the sure Refuge and Defense; and though all
these Births differ in their Form and Likeness, yet in the Ground one, and all
nourished from one Root; and the difference is in their branchings forth, and
appearances; for they reach to the Letter in their comprehensions and from that
imagines how the Saints practiced and worshipped, and then they add their own
Inventions and Conclusions concerning it; and so makes it up as a thing that is
true, and these are diverse in appearance; some carved out into one likeness and
some into another; some appearing more excellent and glorious than others; and
some being more painted with Scripture-words than others are; and so they make
up the Image which Daniel saw, whose brightness was excellent, and the form
terrible, the head of the Image was of fine gold, his Breasts and his arms of
Silver, his Belly and Thighs of Brass, his Legs of Iron, his Feet part of Iron,
and part of Clay, Dan. 2. (Mark) here was diverse appearances in the Image; and
some more glorious than others to behold, yet but one Image, and from the Feet
unto the Head it seemed more excellent in show, but all must fall together, for
the foundation is in the mixture, and the little Stone cut out of the Mountain
without hands it smites the Mixture, and brings down the whole Image, and in
the fall of it there is no difference made from the Feet unto the Head; but the
Iron, the Clay, the Brass, the Silver, and the Gold was broken to pieces
together, and became like the chafe of the Summer-threshing-floors, and the
wind carried them away that no place was found for them; and the Stone that
smote the Image, became a great Mountain, and filled the earth, Dan. 2 23.

Hear, O BABYLON! for this is the Lord's Decree against thee this day* and all
the Apostates that inhabits within thee; though many may be climbed up to the
Head of Gold, yet they are part of the Image whose feet is Iron and Clay, and
the little Stone will bring them down with the Rest, and they must fall and be
destroyed before the brightness of his Rising who is come to fill the Earth
with his Glory; and though Babylon be diverse in appearance, and there be many
branchings forth in her, and that there is not an agreement amongst themselves,
yet they differ not in the root, but all springs up from the heart that is
deceitful and desperately wicked, which lies degenerated from God, and the
night of Apostasy spread over it, and the fruit that is brought forth by them
has one taste, and is all bitter, and no savor of the life of God is felt
amongst them: And though it be so, that all sorts and sects profess God, and
with their lips seem to honor him, yet is their hearts far off from him; and
their fear toward him is taught by the precepts and traditions of men, and in
their works they are all found to deny him, and lies in darkness and confusion;
some setting up, and some pulling down; some building, and some destroying; so
does the Inhabitants of Babylon dash one against another, and breaks one
another, and destroies one another about their professed Religion, and are all
out of that which m^kes for Peace, and that wherewith one may edify another:
So the Image has been made and set up, and all these branches put forth since
the days of the Apostles, the Spirit of Truth being lost, and people having
run in the night of Apostasy, they have been like blind men groaping for a Way
to walk in; and when they could not find the Saints way, then in their
inventions they made ways to themselves, and what they made, that seemed right
in their own eyes: So have all the people a way and a worship, and in their own
way their hearts is most delighted, and in that they are ^est satisfied, though
it never bring them near to God, or to feel the refreshings of his living
presence.

1. Now the POPE, and those that walk and worship with him, they have a way,
and unto them it seems right as others do, and they strive and contend for it,
and counts all Heretics that differ from them; and in their zeal to their way
and worship, they make Laws and Decrees for to cut off and destroy such as
cannot own their way, and walk with them; and the Pope challenges the first
place in Government and Power, as to those things that concerns Religion, and
sets himself over all, and sits as a holy Father and Head of the Church, and
institutes and orders what his will leads him to, and that he sets up in
practice and profession; then unto that must all bow, or draw his displeasure
upon them, and he concludes something from the Scripture that may be a ground
for him in his practice; imagining that he is as Peter was, and has power as
Peter had, and fits in Peter's Seat to rule, but is not found in Peter's life, so
an earthly carnal man, dark and blind, not perceiving the things of God, and
is far off from that in which Peter had power to bind and loose; so sits in a
decked Seat in the pride and hautiness of his hear^, and in that rules over
people by the might of his earthly powers, which Peter never did; so the Thing
he makes to himself, and sets up a likeness, out of the power, and the form is
practiced, and a Will Worship performed, and in that is the Pope with his
people satisfied, and thinks that they do God service, but are found in the
degeneration and alienation from the life of God, and the in dark night of
Apostasy, where the mystery they cannot perceive, so in darkness walk, and
know not whither they go, because that darkness has blinded their minds.

2 And from the same Root another branch springs up something higher, and is
called PRELACY, whose birth is conceived in the same womb as the other, and
brought forth in the same strength, and they fly to the Scripture to uphold
that part of the Image which they bear forth, and from the Scripture they would
prove their's a lawful birth, having read of Bishops and Church Order of Prayer
and Preaching, of serving and worshipping God; and in words they deny the Pope
and his practices, and cannot join, nor own his Birth to be lawfully begotten;
yet there is none nearer in the brotherhood, nor none more like in their form
and appearance; but are all in darkness, and neither knows nor understands one
another, though children of one house; so they live in strife and contention,
warring and fighting about their likenesses, because different in form, and
neither of them a true birth; but lie in darkness, and under the shadow of
death, where peace they know not.

3 And then another branch puts out something above either of these, and is
called PRESBYTERY, and they make a great noise with the Scriptures and Form a
great Likeness, and bears forth a higher part of the Image, and they contend
more earnestly by how much they have a fairer show; and they would have their
Son to rule over all, and would have all compelled to fall down, and worship
their likeness which they set up, and presses to a conformity under penalties,
and punishments; and they have Scripture to turn unto, by which they would
prove their Birth to be the only child; so they plead their call to the
Ministry lawful, because they read some were ordained by the gift of the Holy
Ghost, and by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; and they ordain
Elders and Deacons, and Officers in their order and practice, having read of
such names in the Scripture; and they contend against Pope and Bishops, and
those Names, and cannot own nor join with them, but wars, and fights, and
destroys them; and so Babylon lies in darkness and confusion, and yet in the
ground one; for the Presbyter's Branch is from the same Root, and his birth
conceived in the same womb with the Popes and Prelates; and no difference but
in the likeness made to themselves; for they be all in darkness, and from that
which was in the beginning, and does not know a part in the life which the holy
men of God enjoyed, and from which the Scriptures were declared.

4 Then springs up another branch over all these, and is called INDEPENDENCY;
and these have something like a form of godliness, and their Birth appears more
glorious than any of the other, but is not the true Son; and though in many
things they be separated, and differs from them, yet in others they join and
consent unto them; and these bear but a higher part of the Image, by how much
they have more of the form of godliness, and are more zealous in their practice
and professed worship; and these do not so much strive after Compulsion, as
some others do; though they would set up their Son as Chief, and would have him
adored and worshipped above all; and they cannot own neither Pope, Prelate, nor
Presbyter in their practice, but seperates from them and gathers into more
particular union and fellowship together, and they run to the Scriptures to
prove their Birth lawful, and their practice warrantable; but are with the rest
in darkness, and in confusion, degenerated from the Power of God, by which all
things were made, and knows not the life of Moses, the Prophets, and the
Apostles* but stands ^loathed and decked with their words, and there seem* to
be something, and to stand above others in their show of godliness, and
Will Worship, but knows not the life revealed; so their strength lies in the
letter, and what the Saints have declared who were in the power of God
redeemed* That they build upon as their foundation, and in their imaginations,
practices in some things as they read the Saints did, and there they rest
satisfied, and contented with their present states, and conclude to themselves
a belief in Christ, and apply his promises, and what he did for them in that
body that suffered without the gates of Jerusalem, and by his death and
offering all things is accomplished for them, and no sin shall be ever imputed
unto them though they live in it, and through his Mediation and Intercession
for them, as he is at the right hand of God at a distance from them, they
believe that they have access to God, and to the Throne of his grace, and are
accepted of him; and yet they neither know God nor Christ, nor the place where
they say he sits at the right hand of God; and upon confession made of this
belief, and if there be something of soberness in people, that they do not
appear openly profane, such they receive into fellowship and brotherhood; when
the birth of God lies oppressed under the pride of their hearts, and no
fellowship with God, nor one with another in the life of God; then they break
bread together, and calls it an Ordinance of Christ, and meet together, and
speak and pray in words, which is a branch of the old Root; and a higher part
of the IMAGE, seemingly more glorious; and this is the faith which all people
in words will confess as they do, and does not at all differ from the faith of
the POPE, the PRELATE and PRESBYTER, all confessing faith in Christ, and a hope
to be saved in Christ, and that he has satisfied for all sin past, present,
and to come, and in the life to come they shall obtain eternal salvation by
Christ; and this is but the same which all will acknowledge in words, and
differs nothing in the ground from the faith of those they are separated from,
but branches forth of the same Root, and all their practice springs out of
the same ground, and is the Harlots Child, though dressed with a fairer
Covering.

Another branch there is which makes up the form of the Image, and branches
forth from the old root, and is called BAPTISTS, who have formed a birth fair
in show, and is seemingly more glorious than any of the other, and they are
also in strife and contention about it, and they fly to the Scriptures to
defend it, and to prove it to be the lawful Child; and because they read of
some that went into the water, and were baptized, they observe and do the same;
and reading in the Scriptures that there were some who met together, and
exhorted one another, and were edified and comforted one in another, they
observe and do as near as they can what they read of the Saints practice; and
so conceives a birth in the same womb, and brings it forth in the same strength
as others do, and in the ground it differs not; and concerning Christ and
salvation they are of the general faith with the other parts of the Image, and
many of them has the strongest confidence in it, and contends most earnestly
for it, being in their minds persuaded that Christ has satisfied for all
their sin, and has reconciled them unto God though they be sinners, and by him
they hope to be saved after this life is ended, and so are set down in a carnal
security, and rest at ease in the formality, and are strangers to the quickening
Spirit; and the faith that they have made is not held in a pure conscience, but
is conceived in the heart that is degenerated and corrupted: So people being
from that of God in them, which he makes manifest unto them; (...) god of this
world rules over them and blindes their minds, that those things which are
eternal they cannot perceive; then does he lead forth their minds into the
temporals, and they make haste thither, and opens their eyes to look at the
things which are seen, and this is pleasing to the carnal mind which is
willing to turn any way that it may escape judgment: And what was by the
Saints given forth, and appears in writings without them, that their life is
in, and that they contend about, and all strives to set up their own
Conceivings, and teach for Doctrine men's traditions, and mind not the measure
of God in themselves, but stretch beyond it in the comprehension, and run into
other men's lines and labors, and are all upon the earthly root, and in
darkness and confusion in their practice and worship; that from the crown of
the head, to the sole of the feet the Image has no whole part in it, but is
full of putrefaction and corruption, and every branch rotten and deceitful, and
no good fruit is found; for the bringing forth of all is from the heart that is
deceitful and corrupted, which lies fallen and degenerated from God, and cannot
bring forth any thing that is pleasing to him, or accepted by him; for as is
the root, so is every branch in its nature from high to low; and through all
these appearances there is not a sound part found, but some of them abominable
filthy, and others have healed the sore sleightily, and are all out of the life
and power of God, and are all found wanderers in the night of Apostasy, and in
the darkness have taken the Whores Cup, and do drink it, and received the mark
of the beast^, and do bear it; and this is Babylon the Mother of Harlots, and
the abomination of all uncleanness, who has held forth a Golden Cup in the
night of Apostasy, and has through her Sorceries and Enchantments bewitched
many to receive it, and drink it, until they have been drunk with the Wine of
her Fornication, and have committed Whoredom with her; that many children have
been begotten, and many Bastards brought forth of flesh and blood, and of the
will of man, which is the birth that persecutes the Son and Heir: And unto all
those is the Cup of Gods indignation poured forth, and they must all come under
the severity of his Judgment, because they are Bastards and not Sons; for
these adulterous births have provoked the Lord, and grieved his Spirit, and he
has long forborne, and spared: But on Babylon he will be avenged, and all her
Brats and Children he will dash in pieces in the fierceness of his anger, and
not one of them must stand, though never so seemingly glorious; for the day is
come, and the true Birth is born, whose right it is to Reign, and his glory he
will not give to another, nor his praise to graven Images; he is the Son, and
in him is life, and his life is the light of men; all must bow before him, and
all that is contrary to him must under his feet be trodden down; for unto him
alone belongs the issue from death, the same that was, and is, and is to come,
Everlasting, Powerful, God over all for ever and ever.

Hear ye wise, and consider ye prudent of the world; Is not this your Way? and,
Is not this the fruit of your doings? Do you not walk in darkness? and are you
not building in your Imaginations, and setting up your own inventions, and
brings forth likenesses? and, Are you not from that which was in the beginning,
and from the Saints life? and, Do you not want rest and peace to your souls? Be
stayed, and feel Gods witness in your own selves, which will return a true
answer in your own bosoms.

And now a few words of ^ender Counsel from the Lord God unto you all, that you
may see the form of the Image, and how uncomely every part of it is, that you
may not love, nor delight in it any longer; for the Lord will destroy it
together, and the little Stone cut out of the Mountains without hands, will
dash it all in pieces, and there will not be a man upon the earth found to save
or uphold any part of it.

So all watch to the Morning, that the day may break upon you, and the Light
shine out of darkness in you, that your eye may look into the Glass of
Righteousness, the pure Light of Christ in your own consciences, and there you
may behold both the Ill-favored, and Well-favoured Harlot, and what Image you
all bear, and what Cup you all drink of, and what Mark is in your foreheads;
and if you be diligent, and incline to the Lords Counsel, and hearken to his
witness in you, your understandings will open, and you will see to the beginning,
and know that which was before imaginations, or any inventions was found out;
and you will come into unity with the Saints life, and know every word you
utter forth to be spoken in the life, and all flesh silent before God, and so
will your gatherings be unto Christ, who is set up for an Ensign, that all may
come unto him and be saved; and you will feel his life in you revealed, and in
his face behold the express Image of the Fa^hers glory, and his Power he will
make known in you, and baptize in the death, and every formed fleshly birth
that exalts it self against him; and he will save you as you in him believe,
and redeem you from your vain conversations which you have in the world, and
give you life and peace for ever.

A few Words of tender Counsel unto the POPE, with all that walk in that way,
who are called PAPISTS.
HEar and consider, you that set your selves on high, and boast in the Works of
your own hands; you are weighed and tried, and your Way and Work is proved, and
you are found to be out of the Saints Life, and from the Scriptures of Truth;
for the Lord spoke by Moses, saying, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; thou
shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, nor the L^keness of any thing in
Heaven above, or Earth beneath, or Water under the Earth; thou shall not bow
down to them, nor worship them; For I the Lord thy God am a Jealous God, Exodus
20. Are you not found Transgressors of the Holy and just Law of God, making to
your selves Likenesses, and bow down to them, and Worship them, and forget the
Lord, who says, Thou shall have no other Gods but me? And are not these your
Gods which you make to your selves, and sets them up to Worship? And do you not
adore them, and bow and cringe to them? and does not this practice err from
the Scriptures of Truth, and from the Saints life? Where do you read that the
Saints made Images, and set them up, and bowed unto them, and worshipped before
them? Or did they pray unto Images, or make an Image of Christ, or of the
Saints, and fall down before it, and pray unto it? Or did they ever sprin^le
Water one upon another, and called it Holy Water? And did they ever pray by
their Beads, and use Crosses and Crucifixes? And had they a POPE to rule over
them, and to order them in the Worship of God? Who first made Cardinals, and
Friars, and Nuns, and erected Abbyes, and Monasteries? Who first set up Houses
of Wood and Stone, and called them Churches? Are not you the Inventers of all
these things which are come up since the days of the Apostles? Who made Saint
days, and called them Holy Days? And who set up Colleges to make men
Ministers? And who gave the Colleges their several Names? And who brought up
Tithes, and gave them to the Ministers made at Colleges? And who made a Law to
compel the payment of them unto such a Ministry? Who first brought up Bread and
Wine, and called it Sacrament? And who first gave Power to the
Colledge-Ministers to communicate it unto People at certain Times and Days?
And who first ordained that every Receiver of it from their hand, should give
them two pence for so doing? Who first brought up those Easter Reclignings, and
Midsummer-Dues, and Ten-shilling-Sermons? Whether was this the Saints practice
who lived in the Life and Power of God; Or are not all these things come up in
the Invention since the Spirit of Truth was lost and ravened from? How will you
clear your selves before the Lord, when he calls you up to the Ba^ of his
Justice, to give account of your doings? How will you make these things (with
much more that might be mentioned) warrantable or lawful, seeing that the
Scripture does not declare of them, nor the Saints, who were by the Power of
God Redeemed, and Regenerated into newness of Life, they did not live in them,
nor set them up? From what Root then does all these things spring? Do they not
come up from the Carnal mind that is at enmity with God? And is it not the
flesh that brings forth such a Birth as this? Have you not committed shameful
Whoredom, and run into deep Fornication, who are so far degenerated from the
holy Spirit, and from the Scriptures, that your Birth is not at all shaped or
formed like unto that which is true? So that your Birth is conceived in the
Adulteress Womb, and is a Child of Whoredom, and there is no Scripture to prove
it lawful; Your building Houses, and calling them Churches, your setting up
Crosses in many Towns, making Saints Days, praying to Saints, erecting
Colleges, calling them Christ's College, and John's College, and such like
Names; your making Ministers at them, and your giving them the tenth part of
Peoples Increase to maintain them, and making a Law to compel it, with much
more by you brought forth in the Midnight of Apostasy. Have you not erred
exceedingly from the Scriptures, and from the Spirit that gave the Scriptures
forth? And so are neither found in the Saints Life nor Practice.

Therefore be still, and hearken to the Lords Counsel, and reject it not; it is
near you to reprove you for your abominable Idolatries; Turn to it, for it is
Truth, and there is no deceit in it; the Lord has placed it in your
Consciences to be a Witness for him, from which none can hide their Counsel,
nor cover their secret Thoughts; and Cease from your doings, and give over
making Likenesses and forming Images, and turn to that of God in you which the
Imagination cannot comprehend, nor the Invention make any Likeness of: Bow down
and worship it, and be subject unto it in all things* it is CHRIST the Power of
God, the Heavenly Image, who is jealous of his Glory, and will smite all other
Images, and Image-Makers; For Babylon must fall before him, and Antichrist he
will destroy with the brightness of his Appearance. Oh ye people! your Way is
corrupted, and is not found right before the Lord, though you challenge the
first place after the Apostles, and set your selves on high with that you call
your Mother Church; yet the Lord has found you out, and all your deceitful
workings, and Whoredoms, and Abominations, whither your hearts have run out of
God's fear; that your Mother Church does now appear, and is made manifest in
this Day of God, to be MYSTERY BABYLON THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, which has made
all Nations drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, and has handed forth a
Golden Cup full of Abominations, by which she has deceived the Nations. But
the Day has declared you, and your Work is seen of what sort it is; and it is
not like the Saints Work, who drunk of the Cup of Salvation. And thus have you
spread your Skirt over the earth, and have pollutted it with your abominable
Idolatries, and have caused many to drink of your Cup of Fornication, and have
bewitched them with your Sorceries, and the abundance of your Delicacies: But
the Lord is rending your Skirt, and taking away your Covering, and your
nakedness appears to your shame; for you are seen to the bottom, and your Root
is the corrupted heart of the old Man in the degeneration* and you lie in the
Fall, and in the Transgression, where not one does good; and the Lord has no
pleasure in you, neither does he require your Worship, nor your Offerings at
your hands, but is weary of them. Therefore Arise out of y^^r Idola^ry, and
depart from it, for it is polluted, and the Lord will suddenly come upon it,
and destroy it with a sore destruction: And cease from your Cruelty and
Blood-thirstiness, and lay by your Stocks, and Whips, and Pris^ns, and do not
use such Weapons to defend your Religion; for that makes you manifest to be out
of the Saints Life, who never used such things to compel any to Conformity, or
to punish such as differed from them in Practice and Worship.

Therefore all turn to that by which they were guided, and in which they walked
and lived, the Spirit of Truth by which they were led into all Truth, and were
kept from Idols; and as it is made manifest in you, wait to receive it, and
then fight against Spiritual Wickedness in High Places, that sin and
transgression may be cut down in your own particulars, that you may live no
longer* in Pride and Haughtiness, Envy and Malice, Riotting and Drunkenness,
and such like filthiness, which you like to retain, and have a love to, more
then the Light that does reprove you for them; but all come to the Light, that
in the Light your Minds may be ordered and exercised; and it will gather you
into a measure of the same Life the Saints enjoyed, and raise your souls from
Death, and it will destroy all your Images and Bastard-Births which in the
Earthly corruptib^e Wisdom you have formed and brought forth; and as you obey
and believe in it, it will lead you to God, where Life and Eternal Salvation is
obtained, and Peace and Unity is enjoyed and possessed for ever -- Depart from
Vanity, and live.

A few Words of tender Counsel to the PRELATES, with all that w^lk in that way,
generally called PROTESTANTS.
BEhold your WAY ye People, and consider what is brought forth by you, Look
into the GLASS of Righteousness, and see whose Image it bears. Are you come to
that which was in the beginning? And does the Light shine out of Darkness in
you?

Your VVayes and Doings must come to trial, and your Work must be seen of what
sort it is, for the Light makes all things manifest: You deny the POPE and
those with him in words, and you have got the Name of PROTESTANTS to be your
Covering; but when your Works are brought to trial, they savor of the Popes
Root, and your fruit has both one taste, and your Births are Sime^n and Levi,
you are in the Apostasy, and in Darkness you abide, and there you wander form
the Way of Truth, and then you make a Way in your Inventions, and se^ up a
Worship in your Wills, and drinks of the Whores Cup, and the Beast's Mark is in
your FOREHEAD: You have an Observation which you make to your selves, and you
set up the Kingdom there, and the Customs and Traditions you walk in, which by
the Popes Power was first instituted; and you uphold and maintain his Birth,
which was nourished and brought up by him in this Nation of England when his
Power extended over it, and his Skirts covered it, and you strive to preserve
it, and to give more life unto it, and to set it up as a lawful Child, and so
in your COUNCELS makes Laws to establish it, and to compel all to worship it,
and do not consider from what Root it springs, or whether it be according to
the Scriptures of Truth, or the Saints life; but you run in haste, and in your
own Wills sets up what seems right in your own Eyes, and then make Laws to
uphold it, and to compel all to be conformable to it, under penalties and
punishment: And what have you more to say for your PRACTICE and WORSHIP, then
the POPE has for his? Or is your Birth more like the Truth or the Saints
Practice then his whom you seem to deny? What Scripture have you for your
made-Church of Wood and Stone? And who first ordained it to be a Church, and
consecrated it to be holy? And what Scripture have you for your formed PRAYERS,
and your LETTANY, and to make them up together in a Book, and call them COMMON
PRAYER? Who first instituted COLLEGES? And who gave them their Names? And who
first ordained that men should be made Ministers at Colleges? And who first
appointed TITHES to be paid to that Ministry? And who first made a LAW to
compel such a Maintenance? Who first made and ordained LORD-BISHOPS and
ARCHBISHOPS, Vicars and Curates? And who first divided their BISHOPRICS and
Diocesses? And how came they to rule over other people, and to make Vicars and
Curates under them? How came up HOODS and TIPPETS, and SURPLICES? And who first
ordained that Ministers should be clothed with them in the time of their
Worship? And who first set up ALTARS and ORGANS, and made Singing-men, and
Singing-boyes? Have you not found out many Inventions, and observe the Customs
and Traditions which has been brought in when Darkness overspread? And so you
are found to be out of the Saints life, and errs from the Scripture of Truth,
and your Root is the corrupted heart of the old man, and your Likeness bears
his IMAGE. Behold your Birth; Is it not after the Flesh, and a Child of
Whoredom? It is not like the Form of that which was brought forth by the Saints
that lived in the Truth, and worshipped God in Spirit and Truth. Oh! Arise ye
people, here is not your REST, it is polluted, and God will destroy it with a
sore destruction. Therefore come out of BABYLON, partake no longer of her sins,
lest ye be destroyed with her Plagues! And be not violent toward others that
God has separated from amongst you, neither force or compel any people by a
Law to conform to such a Worship, or bow to such a Likeness, or uphold such a
Church, or maintain such a Ministry, least you draw Judgment speedily upon
your selves; For BABYLON must be destroyed, and the Inhabitants thereof
scattered; therefore does the Lord visit in his Love, that his Seed might be
gathered, before his Wrath take hold in Judgment; For God has a Seed amongst
you, which groans, and is pressed under your Corruptions and Abominations, and
his Bowels yearns toward it. And in tender Love is this declared concerning
you, that you may turn to the Lord in this day of his Visitation, wherein his
Arm is gathering from off the Mountains and Hills, and bringing into the Fold
of his Re^^; for he is making haste, and cutting the Work short in
Righteousness.

Therefore all fear before him, who is mighty to save, and mighty to cut down
and destroy; and all incline to his Counsel, whose Word is near you, and
secretly reproves you in your own Conscience for the evil of your doings; turn
unto it, for that was in the beginning, and made and created all things, and
saw that they were good. Hearken when the Word near you reproves you, and obey,
believe, and follow it; for it teaches right things, and your understandings it
will open, and bring you to consider the fruit of your doings, and let you see
your practice and Worship to be vain; and it will lead you out of Confusion,
Warring, and Fighting, and destroying one another about your Religion; and it
will bring you to know the pure Religion, and undefiled before God, which no
carnal Weapon can either set up, or pull down: And so will you come into unity
with God, and one another, and know the Rest and everlasting Peace that endures
for ever. -- Be not high-minded, but fear.

A few Words of tender Counsel unto those called PRESBYTERIANS, with all that
are walking in that WAY.
HEar ye zealous PROFESSORS, who are mounted up on high, and in your
Imaginations stand exalted: What taste have your Fruit? And, what is the form
of your Birth? For you must come to the proof, and the Trial must pass upon
you; the Light has found you out, and makes you manifest, and you are seen to
be of the old Root, though your Branch put out something higher; the savor of
your Fruit is bitter, and the Form of your Birth is uncomely, your Work does
not answer what you seem to profess; you are run into observations, and are
setting up the Kingdom in words, and make to your selves a Likeness, and would
compel subjection to it: You have forgot the day of your Distress, when many
of you suffered under Compelling Laws, because you could not bow nor conform to
that which you were convinced to be out of the Truth; and some of you passed
through an Exercise in the Trials, and stood in faithfulness according to the
manifestation in that Day; and the Lord appeared for you, and relieved you, and
gave you Dominion over your Oppressors; and you have had a time in which you
might have done good; but the Benefit you let slip out of your minds, and did
not like to retain God in your knowledge, but when Prosperity increased, you
grew fat, and stood puffed up, and had no regard unto the poor, but walked in
the steps of those that went before you, and handed forth as bitter a Cup to
others who were tender in their Consciences, and could not conform to your
Inventions, as they had done unto you, whom the Lord removed because of
Oppression; and your little finger became a heavier weight upon many, than the
Loins of such as went before you; and then you began with your Laws to
persecute such as could not bow to your Image, and it is just with the Lord to
bring those over you whose Necks was once put under you, that you may consider
what you have done, and repent before it be too late: For the Lord does not
forget the poor, which by you is oppressed, and shamefully entreated, who this
day suffers in prison by your Cruelty and Oppression: Oh! what Hypocrisy has
been in the bottom of you, and how deceitful and unfaithful have you been unto
God! who appeared for you, and gave you ease from your Burdens, and relieved
you when you were afflicted under the Yoke that lay upon your necks, and raised
you up, and set you over your Oppressors; and when Power was given into your
hands, you turned your Feet into the same Path, and set your selves up in their
Places, and exercised LORDSHIP and DOMINION over others; and as much Cruelty
was manifest from you, as from those that you destroyed; And so you killed and
took Possession, and lived in the height of Pride and Vanity: Does not the Lord
behold you and your Doings? And will he not be avenged upon such deceitful
Workers? I tell you, yea, for he is righteous in all his ways.

Therefore be serious, and in coolness consider, and speedily turn to the Lord,
least he smite you, and there be none to deliver you; For though you deny both
Pope and Prelate, and cannot own nor conform to their Practice and Worship, but
war and fight against them, and cannot bow under their compelling Laws, nor
join with their Birth which they bring forth; yet look into the Glass of
Righteousness, and behold your own, and see whose Son he is, and whose Image he
bears; for your Births are Children of one House, and conceived in one Womb,
and born after the Flesh, and though a difference in the Form appear, yet the
Root of all is in the deceitful and corrupt heart which lies in the
degeneration; and though you have cast off much of their Idolatry, and Cut off
many useless Branches, yet the ROOT is not changed, but there you meet in one,
and your fruit does savor of it: You laid by the name of BISHOPS, and pulled
up Altars, and you rent the SURPLICES, and the Book of Common Prayer; you
pulled down ORGANS, and laid by Singing-men and Boys, with many other thing*
which then you beheld to be useless in that service; and in that day you cried
out for LIBERTY, and your zeal was hot to carry it on, and there was in many of
you an honest true desire after the best things, and your eyes were toward the
Lord, and you prospered and prevailed, whilst you did the things that were
right in the honesty of your hearts in the sight of God; but when ease came,
you presently forgot the Lord, and his benefits, and began to set up your
selves, and your own way, and branched forth in another appearance, and brought
forth a Birth with another Form and Likeness, but receives breath from the same
Life; Did not you make a DIRECTORY, and in that formed your Birth as your
wisdom invented, and made a way to your selves that seemed right in your eyes;
Did you not make CLASSIS, and ELDERS, and DEACONS to have Rule and Dominion
amongst you, and to be Chief in your Assemblies? And, did you not bring people
to a CONFESSION of what they believed? And were any to eat bread with you at
that you call SACRAMENT but such as were approved by those Officers ordained?
And, did you not thus become Judges of the Worthiness or Unworthiness of people
to eat and drink with you, and either Received them, or Excluded them in your
own Wills? Is not this a Brat that must be dashed in pieces, and the Son of the
Bondwoman that must be cast out? I tell you yea, as certainly as others have
been dashed in pieces and cast out, whose likeness you could not own to be
true: And now behold whether you be not striving with all your Strength to
uphold the life of that Root, from which you have cut off many Branches: Have
you not been digging about it all this time, and have forced some Branches to
put forth from it higher in appearance than those you cut off, and so you are
found in the Whoredom; and drinking as deep of the Cup of FORNICATION as those
you War against, and are in the dark night of Apostasy with them, all walking
in darkness, and cannot behold in clearness the Form or Likeness of one
another, and so fight and destroy one another about it: And when you cut down
one thing, you give life unto another thing that springs from the same Root,
and is of the same Nature; Why did you not pull down the made CHURCHES of Wood
and Stone, when you Rent the SURPLICES, and the Book of COMMON PRAYER? Why did
you not put down COLLEDGES-Ministers, when you pulled down ORGANS? And why did
you not take away TITHES from such a Ministry, when you pulled up ALTARS? What
is the difference of these things, that you have taken away some, and spared
others? Were you not commanded to smite AMALEK throughout, and not to spare any
thing alive; but you looked after the best things, and regarded not the Lord;
so you but put them out of their Houses, to take possession your selves; and
what might be profitable to you, or advance your glory, that you preserved and
labored to give more life unto it; for had you minded the leading of God,
neither STONE-CHURCH, nor COLLED^E-MINISTER had been this day standing as in
any seeming service for God; neither TITHES to maintain that Ministry, or any
Impropriator whatsoever; but these things you spared for your own Gain and
Glory, and have Invented how to Reform some things in Appearance, and have
continued others as seemed Right in your own Eyes, as your CHURCHES, and
COLLEGES, and COLLEDGE-MINISTERS, TITHES and GLEAB-LANDS and
EASTER-RECKONINGS; with much more, which sprung up from the same Root, and of
the same Nature as other Branches which you took away. How did you Reform that
which you call Baptising Infants, you laid by the sign of the Cross which was
made by a man called Minister in the Childs Forehead, and you laid by those
called GODFATHERS and GODMOTHERS, and yet you continued sprinkling water in
the Childrens Faces, and call it Baptism, and say, You baptize them into the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: What Scripture have you for this
practice? Did not the Sign of the Cross, and sprinkling water in the Childs
face both spring from one Root? and neither of them can be proved Warrantable
from the Scriptures of Truth; and you have laid by the One as unlawful, and
continues the Other as lawful; and this you call REFORMAT^ON. Are you not in
the Midnight of Apostasy, who upholds such things in your Profession of God,
which the Saints never practiced, nor any Scriptures declare of such things
being used by them? Who taught you to sing David's Words in Meeter? and to call
upon your Congregations to sing to the Pra^se and Glory of God, and to have a
Clerk to publish them, and give them forth? Is this to sing with the Spirit and
Understanding, and to make melody in your hearts to the Lord, who have not a
Psalm before the Clerk give it forth, and then for all people of all Conditions
to sing the Words, though they know nothing of the state of David? who
Published the words from the sensibleness of his Condition, as then he was in
when he did declare them; so they were true in him: but such as cannot witness
David's state, you make them to sing Lies in Hypocrisy.

And, who taught you to take a portion of Scripture, and call it a TEXT; and
tell people, It is the Word of the Lord; and that they may find it written in
in such a Book, Chapter and Verse; and then raise Doctrines from it, Uses,
Motives, Helps, Arguments, and make Applications? Is not this the College
Work? And have you not learned it there? And is not this the Philosophy and
vain Deceit, which people is to beware of? Do you know the Scriptures and the
Power of God, you that are so wise in your own Eyes? Where is you Scripture for
these things* Or did ever the LORD of LIFE and GLORY teach his Ministers so to
Do as you are Doing at this day? You are from the Saints life, and in the old
Root, and your Birth is begotten in Whoredom, and formed in the Inventions and
Imaginations of the Old Man, and brought forth in the strength of that Nature,
and the Lord's Controversy is sore against You, because you do in Words
profess him, but in your Works deny him: Therefore Repent speedily, and turn to
the Light of Christ in your own Consciences, and be not so wise in your own
Eyes, but become Fools to you own wisdom, that you may be wise in the Wisdom
of God, that your understandings may be opened to know the Scriptures, and the
Power of God; For the Lord is visiting the Nations in this day of his Mercy,
and his love reaches unto you, and with a measure of his Spirit he does Reprove
you, and secretly discovers unto you the intents and thoughts of your hearts:
Turn when Reproof comes, and hate it not, for the Lords Love is tendered to you
in that which does Reprove you; Hearken to it that you may be Converted and
Healed, before the Door of Mercy be shut, and no place of Repentance can be
found; for the Lord has a Seed to gather from amongst you, that cannot live
long with you; such is the earnest desire after life in many this day, and
whilst it is called to day let none behard, but all wait to Receive from the
Lord in tenderness, that his Spirit may guide and lead you, which is manifest
in you, and that the fruits thereof may be brought forth by you, that LOVE and
PEACE, and GENTLENESS may abound amongst you; that WARRING and FIGHTING, and
DESTROYING one another may all cease; that the Sound of the TRUMPET, and the
Al-arm of WAR may not be heard in the Land, but that you may be gathered and
united in the Spirit of Life, where no Confusion, nor Distraction is, but
perfect love and peace for ever: -- Turn to the Lord, and walk in the way of
Understanding.

A few Words of tender Counsel unto those called INDEPENDENTS, with all that
walk in that way.
HEar ye Wandering ones, who upon the Mountains are scattered. You are tossed up
and down, and driven to and fro in the Cloudy and dark day; something of the
Morning did once appear unto you, though you knew it not, and in the Dawnings
of the light which in you did begin to shine, your understandings were opened;
and you beheld the Forms and Practices, and abominable Idolatries which were
come up in the Darkness, and a true tenderness was raised in you toward the
Lord, and a breathing there was in you to enjoy his presence, and you departed
out of the Idolatrous ways and worship, and could not join with them, nor own
their Customs and Trad^tions which were set up, but separated from them, and
gathered into a more particular and private Fellowship to wait upon the Lord;
and in this tenderness abiding, and you kept in the fear to wait, and the
Visitations of God did break upon you, and his Love did open to that which
breathed in you; and this was a good Day unto you, and you were sweetly
refreshed in it.

But behold how you have erred, and from the Lord are gone astray, and betrayed
the Innocent Life; you were not faithful unto God, nor did not sink into his
Counsel, that his Arm of Power might have wounded the Head of the Transgressor,
and smitten him down into the Death, and buried him under the Judgment for
ever; you fled from Him when you should have joined unto Him; and so never came
through the Ga^e of Death, to obtain Life in the Resurrection: But you reached
forth with that Mind which should have come to Judgment, and with that Mind
comprehended those things which in the Day of Tenderness were opened to you in
the Light; then did you enrich your selves, and grew Wise and* Mighty in Skill
and Knowledge; and you decked the false Birth with that which God opened to you
in the Day when you breathed after him in the unsatisfiedness of your Minds,
and were in the true hunger, and in the sensibleness that you wanted Bread; so
you betrayed the simplicity, and delivered it up into the hands of the
subtilty, under which it lies in Captivity, and sorely oppressed and afflicted;
and so you erred from the LIFE which was near to be revealed in many of you,
and lost the WORD, and drew back again, and ran into the words, and have got
the words, and with them stands filled in the earthly mind that fled the
Judgment, and there you are lifted up, and exalted above the Witness of God;
and the false Birth has beautified it self with the Saints words, and sits in
the Temple as God; for you sought out an easier Way then that which God has
prepared, and drew aside for self-safety, and denied the Cross, which the Light
leads all unto that obeys it; So you never entered in at the strait Gate, to
know the enmity slain, which would not have the Life to reign; but you got up
in the Knowledge, and grew wise in the Comprehension, and branched forth in a
show of Godliness, and in your own Wisdom brought forth what you conceived
might be the nearest to the Saints Practice: So a Birth you formed in the
deceitful heart that is corrupted, and lies degenerated from God; and though
you be in some things separated, and more particularly gathered in appearance,
yet do you lie mixed and confused with the rest of Babylons Inhabitants; you
can go to their named Churches, and hear their Colledge-Ministers, which are
made by man contrary to the Scriptures of Truth; so you are in the lukewarm
state, neither hot nor cold; and your Garment is party-colored, and it is
neither Night nor Day amongst you; for you are run into the many inventions,
and drinking of the Cup of Fornication, and are joined to the Harlot, and
commits Whoredom with her, and brings forth a Birth that is after the Flesh,
which cannot please God; so has the old Enemy deceived you, and betrayed the
innocent Life which once breathed in you; and you are seated and centered in
your Form, and there have your dependence for satisfaction, and you fly to the
Scriptures to prove your Birth to be lawful; and you have got Saints Words, and
in something appear as they did in Practice; and you can say, That so you find
it written; and so did the Saints practice, and so do you; but you want the
life which they were born into, thorough the working of God's Mighty Power, and
in which they declared the Scriptures; and if you could perform all that ever
you read concerning their practice, and be not come into their life, it will
not be owned of God to be a true Worship and Service, though they in what they
did, were accepted and rewarded: And none upon the Earth can understand the
Scripture, without a measure of that life from which it was ministered. And so
have you erred for want of knowledge, because that darkness has blinded your
minds; and though much you profess and boast of high things, yet your Deeds
testifies against you, even as others do, from amongst whom you are gathered in
your Worship; you are vain and light minded; foolish jesting and idle talking
abounds amongst you; you are high-minded, and lifted up with a perfect Tincture
of Pride; many of your hearts are after Covetousness, which does not become a
people professing the Knowledge of God: These things are not charged upon you
to upbraid you, or to boast over you, but that you may come into stayedness,
and soberness, and humbleness of mind, that when God's Witness smites upon
you, and reproves you for those things that be evil, you may be sensible of its
reproof; for the Light of Christ which is pure, it does not consent to, or
allow of any such things, but reproves them without respect of persons; but you
are so lifted up in your vain minds, that you are not sensible of it, neither
have any regard unto it; so you delight in the thing, as if it were a
Privilege purchased for you by Christ, whose Name you profess; and you can
plead for your Lightness, and say it is your Liberty to rejoice and be merry;
and your Covetousness you can call it Carefulness and Providence; and your
Pride you can put it upon your Quality and Ability: So has the Enemy veiled
you, and drawn you from the Spirit of Life which does certainly reprove you in
your own Consciences for these things; and thus the Enemy does lead you out of
God's fear, and into vanity, and then seeks a fair excuse to cover it; but you
are found to walk after the flesh, and satisfies that part, with all the
affections and lusts of it; and the Witness of God is not regarded by you,
though it be always near you, and in your secret Chambers with you, and often
smiting you, and reproving you; yet you are so high over it, that you do not
heed it; nor when it calls, you hearken not to it, but run in your own Way, and
follow your own Wills, and the imaginations of your own hearts, and slights the
Day of your Visitation, and the sweet tenders of God's Love unto you in the
Light; for he waits to be Gracious though you be Careless; and his hands are
stretched forth still, that he might gather you, and do you good: You are a
People whom the Lord strives with, though you have rejected, and slighted, and
grieved his Spirit; yet is his tender Mercy open toward you, and the Arm of
Salvation he reaches to you, that into his own House he may bring you, and
there deal forth Daily-Bread, and give you Water of Life freely: I travel in
Spirit for you, and the Love of the Father reaches to you, and I know from the
Lord, that there is an unsatisfied Cry in many of you who want the Bread of
Life, and Water of Life to refresh your Souls: And when you have received that
which you call your Ordinance, and have eaten and drunken of the Temporals, you
want that Meat which endures to everlasting life, and something in you that
hungers and thirsts after the enjoyment of that. Oh! there is a Seed amongst
you that must not dye in Egypt, nor always groan under Pharoah's Power, but
must be redeemed by the out stretched Arm of the Almighty; His Love draws near
you; the Morning springs fast upon you: AWAKE, and behold what God is tendering
to you, hasten to it, and lay hold upon it; look not abroad, but come within,
and feel it near you, that you may know the Power to save you, and the Arm that
is stretched forth, to redeem you, and the Manifestation of God's Spirit within
you, will be strength and safety for you; and as you turn unto it, obey and
believ in it, it will not leave you nor forsake you, but will be a present help
unto you in the needful time; and in the patience waiting, the DAY will break,
and the SUN of RIGHTEOUSNESS will Arise, and the thick Clouds and Foggy Mysts
that darkens your understandings, will vanish away like the Morning-Dew, and
the brightness of his Rising will destroy ANTICHRIST, which so long has been
exalted in you; and all the loftiness and haughtiness will fall before him,
whose appearance is glorious.

And thus does he manifest himself, and makes known his Eternal Power in the
hearts of all that wait upon him in the Measure of his Light, and carries on
his Work prosperously in his own hand, cutting down, and sparing not whatsoever
stands in the heart contrary to him, and would not have him to Reign; and his
Works declares that it is he; for he works Faith in the heart, and reveals
Truth in the inward parts; and so becomes the Author of Faith; and of e^ernal
Salvation; and the Mystery of this Faith is held in a pure Conscience, where
his Arm has been working, and purging, and pur^fying: And as you give up to
that Measure of LIGHT in your own Conscience^, and wait to be guided and led by
it, and exercised in it, you will know CHRIST revealed within you, whom you are
looking for without you, and puts his Day far off from you; And so you live in
want of him, and know not how to come to him, nor the place where to find him,
but live in the Dreamings and the N^ght-Visions, and have a talk of him, and
what he has done for you; and so spend your precious time in slumbering and
dreaming, but do not behold the Light of his Countenance, no^ feel not the Joy
of his Salvation, nor drink not at the Wells thereof: Now wait to feel him in
the Light which makes all things manifest within you and when he draws near
unto you, re^ect him not; if you feel an evil thought discovered, that is his
appearance that makes the ^^iscovery; then do thou sink down to that which
makes manifest, and be still and quiet in thy m^^d, and in the stayedness wait
to receive him; and though it (...) but a little thing in its first appearance,
do not thou despise the Day of small things, nor cast behind thee the Grain of
Mustard Seed, because it is a little one; but wait to know the glory of the
Day, and the branching, forth of the Gra^n of Mustard Seed, until it be grown
up, and spread it self over all.

The Lords Love freely opens unto all you that in tenderness and simplicity
thirsts for his l^ving presence; and for your sakes plainness of speech is used
and God's pure Truth opened, in the Life of his own Spirit, that you may come
and partake of the Riches of that GRACE and MERCY which from the FATHER is
revealed, and appears in you all; that you may truly know the benefit that is
in the Lord of Life and Power, and feel his Eternal operation your Consciences
to purge, and your Hearts to pur^fie, that you may have fellowship with him in
the everlasting Covenant of Peace, and know the Blood of the Covenant to take
away your sin, and to pardon your Iniquity; and so the Redemption through his
blood you will feel, and the forgiveness of your sins according to the Riches of
his Grace: And this is unto you from the Lord God Eternally moved, who breaths
after Life, that you may Arise, and follow the Leadings of God into his own
House, and from his Hand receive your Daily-bread, and drink of the Water of
Life freely, and this will satisfy and refresh you, and daily renew strength
unto you, to follow the Lord God in the Light, in all obedience and
faithfulness, without any weariness or faintness; so will the Lord God receive
you, and be a Father unto you, and make you Sons and Daughters, and give you an
Inheritance amongst the Saints in Light, who are justified by Faith in Christ
Jesus -- Be swift to hear, and slow to speak.

A few Words of tender Counsel unto the BAPTISTS, with all that walk in that
WAY.
HEar you separated ones, who have set your selves in the Highest Seat, and
whose Branch puts out over all the Branches of the Tree; you are beheld, though
you be climbed high, and your Work is seen of what sort it is; you must come to
Trial, for your Work is not right before the Lord: Once did the Morning open
unto you, and a Measure of Light out of Darkness shined, and a sight you had of
something which was out of the Truth, and beheld Babylon without you in
Practice and Worship, and saw her Merchants that traded in her, and could not
for Conscience Sake Trade with them any longer, nor buy their Merchandise any
more; but you separated from them in Practice and Worship: And that which made
these things manifest to your Understandings, was Light, and it was near unto
you, though you were but little acquainted with it; you had Clearness in sight
through Forms and Traditions then in practice amongst men, and something opened
before you, that appeared more excellent, and you did not only depart out of
that which was manifest to be out of the Truth, but there was also a true
waiting amongst you, that you might come to enjoy living Bread, that something
in you hungered for, and in that day a tender people you were, whilst the true
fear was in your hearts placed, and in the fear you diligently waited, and were
kept low and little in your own eyes, and you had fresh Visitations of God's
Love, and felt that which truly judged the Abomination and Vanity which you
beheld in the World, and you were convinced of the evil thereof, and could have
no fellowship with them; and you cannot say in truth, but in that Day the Lord
was near you, to have wrought his Work in you, had you inclined to his Counsel;
and as you were kept in lowliness to wait, and met and assembled in God's fear,
he was not straightened toward you, but did relieve you, and succor you in your
wants, and had compassion upon you in all your needs: What Hungerings and
Thirstings, Breathings and Pantings were raised in the earnest for Life and
Salvation! And what a tender love was raised in many of you after the best
things! And how did you delight to walk in that Way which then was made
manifest to you! Was it no^ better with many of you in that Day, then it is
now? Consider soberly in the fear of God, and judge down the rash, wrathful
Spirit which has a Seat in many of you: Are you not gone from that in which
the Lord did first visit you, and in which his tender Love was made manifest in
you? Was it any thing without you that first let you see your Way to be
corrupted, and that brought you into a sensibleness of your want, and of your
miserable and undone state without the Salvation of Christ? Was this made
manifest unto you by Reading or Hearing, or by the Gift of God's Spirit
manifest in your own hearts? How has the old Enemy deceived you, and drawn
your minds into the Visibles, to look after and behold the things that are
seen, and there tenders you Satisfaction, and so draws your minds from the
weightier matter, and that which is of absolute necessity for all to know a
part in? And so you are cumbred about many things, and are got into the many
Words, and there you are sucking your nourishment, and laboring to receive
strength, and there have taken up your rest: What have you to live upon besides
the Letter? And what do you know of GOD and CHRIST more then what they declared
who enjoyed his Life? And if you say that it is sufficient for you to mind the
Declaration, and to know GOD and CHRIST, as the Saints have declared of them;
then examine and try your selves, whether you be in the Faith in which they
were made partakers of the Divine Nature; for the words which from the Life are
Ministered, will not give unto any a Possession of the Life, neither are they
the WAY unto Life, but they are a true DECLARATION of Him who is the WAY,
TRUTH, and LIFE; and the Light being believed in, which from the Life is made
manifest, it leads to the enjoyment of the Life from whence it comes; and then
is the knowledge of the L^ght of the Glory of God revealed and known in the
face of Christ, and the Understanding is then opened, and the Scriptures known
and set in their right place; so that you have neglected the needful thing,
which is but ONE, and have chosen the wrong part, and cumber your selves with
many things, having got the Saints words, and want their Life: You are daily
cumbred in your minds about their Meanings, and know not what they meant when
the Truth is spoken by them in plainness: So being from the WORD, you are from
the Saints Life; the WORD that was in the Beginning, was their LIFE and they
witnessed that LIFE to be the Light of men, and in the measure of that Life
received, they gave forth the Scriptures, which none upon the earth can
understand without Union with a measure of the Word of Life from which the
words were Ministered forth: So that you are found to be amiss, and wandering in
a way that does not lead to life; and all that you have formed and brought
forth, is but the Work of your own hands, conceived and generated in the
Earthly Corruptible part, which fled the Hour of his Judgment, and could not
abide his coming in Judgment: So you never came to the Judgment Seat, where
the MIGHTY falls, and the LOFTY bows; where the EARTH trembles, and the HILLS
melt, and all Flesh is put to silence; You did not wait in the Way, that in the
Victory over the Corruptible you might have come to life in the Incorruptible;
but you started aside when Judgment came to be laid to the line, and could not
abide such a Trial; so you fled it, and retained the Corruptible, and saved
your life in it; and the Birth after the Flesh is seated over God's Witness,
and that is the Birth you set up, and strive to make it fair and beautiful, and
to enrich it with the choicest things, that it may appear beautiful unto men;
and if you have but Scripture to speak, you are persuaded the thing is right,
and so you carry on your practice in words, and set up your Kingdom in words;
but you want the Power; and the Flesh never came into subjection to learn
silence, but speak, though it be not permitted: And thus do you run in the many
things, and cumber your selves with them, and labors to set them where they
ought not to be; you would set the Words above the WORD, and give them the Name
of the WORD, and call them the Word of God, and in this you err, and knows not
the Scripture, nor the Power of God; for CHRIST is the WORD of God, and his
Name is called so, Rev. 19. And the Words are nor CHRIST, but a true Testimony
of him. So amongst the Words you find how the Saints in some things walked, and
what they practiced, and then you strive to make that thing to your selves, and
to observe it, and do it as near as you can: And here you are found
transgressors of the just Law of God, who says, Thou shall not make to thy
self any Graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing: Now what difference is
there in the Ground, betwixt You and the Pope, though in the appearance there
seem to be such a great space? And though you read of such things which the
Saints performed, and in which they were accepted, if you want their Life, and
make the thing to your selves, you are found Transgressors of the Law, and
comes under Reproof for doing that in your Corruptible Wills, which they had
peace in, as they performed it in the Incorruptible Life, and yet in the
appearance no difference found in what is done: So you read that after they
received the Word, and believed, they went into the Water, and were baptized;
and you come to observe and do the same, because you read that some of them
walked in such a practice; and you say you believe in Christ, and you receive
his Word, and you go into the water, and are washed, and call it Baptism: And
here is no difference found in the Likeness of the thing, but yours appears the
same as theirs did, in the outward practice. But come up to trial, the Light
makes all things manifest as they are, and does not judge according to the
appearance, but judges righteous Judgemment; they did receive the Word, and
they did believe; and some of them went into the water, and were baptized unto
John's Baptism, and after that were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
Acts 19. And then the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke and prophesied.
Can you read this Scripture, and not see your selves where you are? Who would
be always swimming in the Water, and would not come to the Holy Ghost and
Fire, that his Name you may know, in which Salvation is, and his Fan you may
feel, which in his own hand is placed, which purges the Floor from all
filthiness, and prepares the Temple to exalt his own Name in: This is the
Baptism which they witnessed, who in his Life believed, and in which they were
baptized into his Death, and there were buried with him, and so came to the
Resurrection, through the operation of his Eternal Power; you are not come to
know this Practice, but are satisfied with your going into the Water, and
coming out again, when neither filthiness of Flesh nor Spirit is cleansed from
you, but the pollution still abides, and the Old Man lives: And so you are
short of the Saints Condition, whose practice you pretend to follow; and that
Spirit by which they were baptized into one Body, you are not found subject to;
and this was not water that baptized them into one Body; neither was it water
that baptized them into Christ, and by which they put him on; but it was the
Eternal Power of Life in which they were baptized, and in which Baptism Self
was buried, and all the Affections and Lusts of the Flesh were destroyed; and
here was not Self standing in them, neither did they make any likeness for that
part to glory in, but judged it down in the Power, and in the Power were truly
baptized into the death of the Corruptible Earthly part, and could no longer
live to themselves; and then was the entrance Ministered into the Fathers House,
where Daily-Bread they received, which did refresh the Immortal Soul.

Now because they were made Witnesses of such a state who believed and followed
the Light, and denied themselves, and took up the Cross in obedience to the
leadings of the Light; and because in the movings of the Power they declared
it, and it is written; does this Minister satisfaction unto you to read it, or
to hear it, if you come not to partake of a Measure of the same life which
ministered pure refreshment unto them, and in the strength of which they were
constrained to minister forth again? I tell you nay* for no satisfaction or
refreshment can any find, but in that life which the holy men of God were
inspired with, and declared the Scriptures from; so all that you make to your
selves profits you not, how like soever you may make it in the appearance to
that which the Saints practiced in the Power: And is not this your present
state, reading what the Saints did, and you make to your selves the same as near
as you can, and in your wills perform it, and can make it to be near in the
likeness of that, which they in the appearance practiced; So you read some of
them went into the water, and you go into the water because you read it; and
you read that they brake bread together, and you do so, because they did it?
Will you not be found setting up the highest part of the Image, and drinking of
the Cup of Fornication, and committing Whoredom, and bringing forth a Child
of Whoredom, and a Birth after the Flesh? For you lie in the Degeneration, and
walk in the Night of Apostasy, and are not come to the Regeneration, nor have
no Knowledge of that Water: So the Old man you Retain, and live his life, and
bear his Image; and you never came to the Power which Crucifies the Old man,
and puts him off, and brings forth a new Birth, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness; that so you have not put on CHRIST the
heavenly Image, but are at enmity with him; and the Old man is standing, and
you join to that which would not that Christ should Reign; And thus you profess
him in Words, but in Works deny him: And your practicing that in your wills,
which the Saints performed in the life, will not make you stand approved before
God, nor justify you in his sight.

Therefore depart from your Imaginations, and come to Gods w^tness in you, and
wait the power of it to feel, to break down your Images, and all the Carved
Works which your own hands have made out of Gods Council, and which you have
in your earthly wisdom set up to worship; and set not your Post by the Lords
Post, nor mix your Work with his Work; but cease from your own doings, and be
still, that the Lord may bring forth his own Work, in his own time, according
to his own pleasure, that you may come through the gate of Death: For verily
there is not another Way for you to obtain eternal life. And this is his Work
whose Arm is Powerful to cut down and destroy the Earthly and Corruptible part,
and to Raise up the pure Immortal Seed which breathes after Life; so will you
come to know the New-creature-state, and the New Birth born, which is not of
flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of God* and his appearance in
you will testify of him, that he is the Son of God; and this is the true Birth
whose Right it is to Reign, and under whose feet all the Harlots Children must
be trodden down; let your Eye be toward him that his Appearance you may
behold, and of his fullness receive, that you may feel union with his life, and
be translated into his Likeness.

So all you that have any tenderness, and groan under your heavy Tasks, mind
the Lords Counsel, and obey his Teaching; Start not aside when Reproof comes,
and hate not to be Reformed; for the day of your Visitation is upon you, and
God is tender over his Seed that abides yet amongst you, and is scattered upon
the Mountains with you, who breathes unto him* and can feed no longer in your
Pasture: Oh the Bowels of Gods love that opens in this day to every Nation,
Kindred, Tongue and People, that he may Redeem his Chosen that cry unto him,
and give Ease to all the Afflicted ones who mourn for want of him! For this is
the Day of his Everlasting loving kindness held forth unto all people in the
Light of his Son, that who will come unto him, and believ in him, may not
perish, but have everlasting life.

Therefore all stoop down, and incline your ear to hear* Do not continue
climbing, nor build so high in your Inventions; for that is Babylon, and the
ground of all Confussion; and from that lust of pride in the self-conceitedness
arises WARS and CONTENTIONS, and there is no service of God, nor any thing
brought forth in which he takes pleasure; so all mind that which makes for
peace, and that which leads into love and unity; for that is the Light of
Christ, which is given of the Father to be a Leader unto you, and it is true,
and will not deceive you; it is the DOOR that gives entrance unto life, which
you have not found with all your climbing, but have been heightened far off from
it. Therefore stand not exalted, but come down, and there feel the true
Baptizer, which will not suffer an evil thought to arise in you, but baptize it
down into the death, if you incline to his Counsel; and the Fan you will feel
in his hand, and his Power to purge the floor, and to gather the VVhea^ into
the Garner, and burn the Chaff with unquenchable fire; and as you keep in the
Patience, and wait in the Judgment, he will bring Judgment forth unto
Victory, and bring you into the Courts of his own House, and there minister to
your want, and supply your need; for the bread is in his own hand, and unto the
hungry he deals it, and at his pleasure he gives it; and if you wait in
patience to receive it, he will not let you want; for his compassion is tender,
and freely does he give good things to those that walk uprightly: So let not
the feeble faint, nor the weak be discouraged, but turn to the Light, and walk
in the Light, and it will lead you to the Cross, and bring you to the
Judgment Seat, and through the Gate of Death; and will open the Door into the
Fathers House, where there is bread enough* (and it is sure) and water that
never fails; So will the Lord feed you with the fatness of his House, and give
you to drink of the River of his pleasure; and this is Meat and Drink indeed,
which if you wait to receiv, you will not be in such want, and suffer hunger, as
many of you now do, who are from the leadings of God, and upon the Mountains
scattered, and there famished for want of Bread.

And this in tender love is unto you, who have been in the Water, and has been
dipped, and yet feel that you are not Cleansed, but your Consciences are still
defiled, and the weight of corruption does oppress you, and makes you go
heavily, and that keeps you from the enjoyment of life: You that are feeding
upon the visibles which you call an Ordinance, and yet cry for hunger, and are
feeble for want of nourishment, and your strength ready to fail: Oh! Arise,
Arise, Turn to the Light of Christ within you, which is freely given of God
unto you; neglect it no longer, for it is the power of God unto salvation to
all that believe, and in him alone is treasured up all good things; for he is
the fullness, and he ministers in freeness unto all that wait upon him; and he
has enough for you all, who will come that you may have life, and will
plentifully give unto you, and cause you to feel his goodness in the land of
the living -- Be not vainly puffed up, but in lowness wait to receive.

A few Words of tender Counsel to all the Inhabitants of BABYLON.
HEar, Oh ye people! BABYLON must be destroyed, and and all the Pride of her
glory must be spoiled, the Lord God has so determined, and no part of her
Country must be spared; for the Scourge is to pass thorough her Land, and to
find out high and low, rich and poor, who inhabits within her Borders, and to
smite them and spoil them, that a dreadful cry will be heard amongst them, all
slying for their lives, and none able to escape the severity of God's Judgment.

Therefore all Arise, come out, make haste, who desires to live; for
destruction comes as a VVhirl-wind, and there will not be a hiding place found
in BABYLON; for strong is the Lord that judges her, and in one day will
Judgment fall upon her, and the Lord will make a full end concerning her.

Oh! my heart is heavy, and my Spirit sad, when I behold the Viol filled, and
how near it is to be opened and poured forth; the Day hastens upon thee, Oh
BABYLON! yea, sudden Destruction is coming swiftly, and in flames of Fire it
will be rendered, and will take hold upon thee, and kindle within thee, as Fire
kindles in the midst of Tow; and who shall then stand up for thee, or bring
deliverance to thee? Not a man within thee will be able to lift up his head to
do any thing for thee; for all hearts will fail, and all faces gather paleness,
who are found within thy borders, and thou must drink the Cup of God's
Indignation, because thou have rebelled against him; for thou have been a
HARLOT from thy youth, and have decked thy self with costly Ornaments, that
thou mighest entice Lovers to thee; and many have been deceived by thee, and
have beeen overcome to commit VVhordom with thee, and many Children are brought
forth by thee, which are sons of thy Whoredom; and these thy Children would
rule in the Earth, and would have all bow unto them, and strive amongst
themselves who should be greatest: Is not this the fruit of thy womb O BABYLON,
that runs into all confusion and distraction, and have no agreement amongst
themselves, but would devour and destroy one another? And do thou not dark
thy Children with costly Attire, and ^eautifie them with fair Ornaments, that
they may be beloved because of their Comeliness, in which they appear to men?
Is not this thy VVitchcr^f^ and Sorcery which thou have spread over the Earth
in this night of Apostasy? Have not thou sitten d^^ked as a QUEEN, and thy
Children like PRINCES Sons? And have not thou, and thy Children been the wonder
of the World? And have not all been subject to thee, and bowed before thee, and
thy Sons Whoredom? And have not thou handed forth a CUP of FORNICATION? And
have not the Nations received it at thy hand, and drunk so deep of it, until
they have been made drunk? What is this that thou have done, thou MOTHER of
HARLOTS? Have thou deceived all Nations, and made them drunk, and then enticed
them to commit Whoredom with thee? Must not thou be done unto, as thou have
done unto others? And must not thou be rewarded double for all thy sins? I tell
thee yea, for he is just that will render unto thee a recompense; and though
thy Kingdom seem to be strong, and thy City to be walled, and thou enriched
therein with the best things of the Earth; all this will not save thee from the
hand of him that pursues thee swiftly in Judgment: And though thou have
gathered Nations unto thee, and have many Merchants that trade in thee, and
they all with their strength join together to save thee, yet thou must fall,
and all that strive to uphold thee; for thy Ruin is near to come, and the
wrath is kindled against thee, and ready to take hold upon thee, and to destroy
thee Root and Branch, that thy place will be no more found; and it is the Lords
long-suffering and patience that has spared thee from utter Ruin until this
day, and has not as yet out thee off in the fierceness of his wrath, with all
those that are Inhabitants in thee: It is not for thy sake that the stroke has
been kept off, but for his own Name sake, who delights to save in his Mercy,
that some of thy Inhabitants might behold his patience and his goodness, and
thereby come to repentance, as some of them have done who were once in the
midst of thee; but his own arm reached unto them, and has gathered them out of
thee, and has brought his Sons from far, and Daughters from the Ends of the
Earth; yea, from all quarters of thy Dominion, has the Righteous God brought
up a Remnant, who in thy Kingdom were once scattered and dispersed, and were
amongst thy various Observations, and thy Forms and Traditions, where they
could not find a Resting Place; and there is yet a Remnant that God will not
destroy with thee, who sit by thy Rivers, and weep; and it is for his Chosen
sake that thou art spared unto this day; but God is making haste, the work to
finish, and is opening the Eyes of many, who yet remain within thee, thy
filthiness to see, and thy abominations and wickedness to loath and abhor; and
many will the Lord gather out of thee, who now sit in sorrow within thee, and
wait to be delivered by the Arm of his Power; such does he reach unto in his
Mercy, and is drawing them out with the Cords of his Love.

So all people hear and consider, from the highest to the lowest, and let not
this seem small in your eyes, though your wisdom may account it so, and
slight it, and reject it as a tale that is told, and still make your necks
stiff, and your hearts hard against the Lord, yet shall you all one day know
that the Lord has spoken it.

And all you tender ones that breathes after God, under what Form soever you do
yet abide, or in what part of BABYLON soever your habitation is; Arise, come
forth, do not delay, neither look behind you, but make haste to the City of
Refuge, that you may live; for the Lord with*holds in pity toward you, and
long has he striven with many of you, but you have been slack in your
obedience, and have not regarded the Lords Visitation, and yet does he wait
upon you, that he may save you, and show mercy to you; and though you trifle
and put off from day to day, yet is he striving with you, that you may not
perish in Babylon's Ruin: Oh! do not delay any longer, lest he leave you, and
depart from you, and you continue touching the unclean thing, and will not be
separated from it; then he will certainly smite you, and none will be found to
heal you: Therefore give up to the Lord freely; obey, believe, and follow the
Light, that out of Babylon you may clearly come, and leave not a Hoof behind
you, and stick not in any part or place of her, though it seem never so
glorious, for ^o part of her will the Lord spare in the day when he smites.

And all you whose delight is in BABYLON, and whose love is to her, and who are
trading, and making your selves rich in her, the voice of the Lord reaches
unto you, that you might come ou^ and be saved, for he would have none of you
destroyed, therefore they who come under destruction destroy themselves,
because they refuse to hear and obey the Lords Counsel. So let the Inhabitants
of BABYLON consider, and all her Merchants ponder the thing, for the time of
desolation comes; yea, it is near at hand, he is making up his Jewels, and
gathering the Wheat into his Garner, and when he has finished, and his own
pleasure is performed toward his Chosen ones, then will the storm fall upon
thee O BABYLON; yea, fiery Indignation will proceed out of the mouth of the
Almighty, and from the fierceness of his wrath thou can not escape; but
sorrow will come upon thee as p^ngs upon a woman in travel; then WOE, WOE, WOE
unto thee O BABYLON, thy Brats and Merchants* and all thy Inhabitants who in
thee have lived in pleasure, and have made themselves rich with Trading in
thee; this will be thy portion (with all that belongs unto thee, and refuse to
come out from thee) Weeping, and Howling, and Wayling, and Lamentation for
ever; and this Cup must thou, thy Sons and Merchants receive from the Lords
hand, who is just in his Judgments, and Righteous in all his ways.

FEAR and REPENT, before it be hid from your Eyes.

A few Words of tender Counsel unto all born of the Spirit, who walk in the way
of Life.
HEar YE TENDER BABES, Consider what God has done for you who had pity upon
you, and bowels of compassion toward you when you were in a strange Land, and
when you were sat down by the Rivers of BABYLON and wept; it was his tender
love unto you, and his own arm that he then revealed to bring salvation to you,
by which he has redeemed you, as it is at this day: How has his work
prospered since the day he called you to arise, and since he turned your faces
Sion-ward, and became your Leader? He has raised you up to praise him, he has
brought you forth to glorify his Name for ever: Oh ISRAEL, thy GOD Reigns!
Oh SEED of JACOB, thy King is beautiful and glorious! his Government is
Everlasting, and his Dominion endures throughout all Ages; he is Risen to make
all subject to him, and to make all bow before the Scepter of his glory; ^e is
treading upon the high places of the Earth, and bringing the necks of all his
Enemies under him: This is thy strength, Oh ISRAEL! and this is thy salvation,
thou Seed of JACOB! God has Ransomed thee in his love, and upon thy head is
Songs of Joy: No Form nor Likeness can be made of thee, neither can the prudent
of the world comprehend thy glory: Thou art over all Exalted, Thou art over all
lift up and praised, thy Saints bless thee for ever, and all thy Redeemed ones
gives glory to thy holy Name; all born of thee wait upon thee: O GOD of Jacob,
our desires is to thee, and to the Remembrance of thy Holiness; Thou have
begotten us to thy self, and we are born to praise thee; in thy Power our
safety is, and we have none to help besides thee; Thou have brought the fleshly
Birth under thee, and thou have Raised thy own to Reign in Dominion: Oh the
glory that in us thou have Revealed! and the Eternal life which thou have made
us partakers of! What shall we say unto thee? and what shall we offer before
thee thou Redeemer of our souls? we are before thee, O Lord, and in thy love we
are overcome, and with a broken, and a contrite heart we offer up living
praises which thou do not despise: Oh! blessed be thy Name that accepts us in
thy Beloved, through whom we have this boldness and access unto thee, in full
assurance through faith in his Name that thou will not forsake us, but wilt
preserve and keep us faithful with thee unto the end, and that thou will exalt
thy Name in SION, and make it the praise of the whole Earth, this day. Oh* ye
Mourners in SION, why are ye cast down? And, why do you go so heavily? Arise,
suck the Breasts of your Mother ye tender Babes, and be strengthened; She is a
Virgin, and never was defiled, nor never joined unto strange flesh; lie down in
her Bosom, and be comforted, she will nourish you by her Side, and carry you
in her Arms, and dandle you upon her Knees, and make you stronger than all your
Enemies; so let not your hands be feeble, nor your hearts faint, ye dear Babes
born of the Immortal Seed, for the Lord is with you, and his blessing is upon
you for ever; and all your Enemies must fall before you, and BABYLON must be
given for the soles of your feet to tread upon, the Lord of Hosts will perfom
this: Therefore be ye all stayed in faithfulness, and let not any fears enter
you, whatever BABYLON may Decree concerning you, but lift up your heads and
rejoice, for this is the day of Isreal's Redemption; And look not at any Storm
or Blackness, but wait for the shining forth of the SON of RIGHTEOUSNESS, before
the Glory of whose brightness all Clouds will vanish away, and be no more; for
the Abomination must be set up, and for a time it must stand, yea and in the
holy place where it ought not; these things must come to pass, but be not ye
troubled at them, but look over them, and see to the end and Rejoice; for this
will be the fall of BABYLON Head and Tail, in which she must be plunged into
deep misery and sorrow, never more to rise, and this will be the day of SIONS
Everlasting glory: Oh my Dear friends! Our God whom we serve, he is able to
deliver, he is the same as ever he was to his own Seed, and the same
Deliverance is wrought by his outstretched arm, he appears for his Chosen this
day, and of his manifold Mercies we have largely tasted: And when BABYLON has
made her Cup Ready, and begins to hand it forth unto the Lambs, and to compel
them to receive it, and drink it, then will the Lord Appear and strike with
astonishment the hearts of the furious, and make them confess to his
Everlasting power, and to his People for whose sake he will Arise to save:
Therefore unto him look from whence help comes, and feel his power to compass
you all about, and his strength to gird you up, that none of you may be
surprised with fear or doubting, but in the Immortal stand over all, and be
Bold and of a good Courage* that BABYLON may know we cannot fall down and
Worship their IMAGE what ever they can do unto us; and GOD, even the God of our
fathers he will remember his holy Covenant, and Israel his Chosen, and though
he may try us, yet will he never forsake us, but will stand by us to deliver
us, that all may know we are a people saved by the Lord.

Oh! feel the purpose of your hearts drawn in the Light to cleave unto the
Lord, and do not depart from his Counsel; so will he make you able to stand
unto the end, and will plentifully reward you in the Riches of his Love and
Life, which is without End: And the God of Jacob keep you all; and the holy One
of Israel be Strength and Wisdom to you all, that he may have the glory over
all; who alone is Worthy, Infinite, Endless, Powerful Father of life, Blessed
for evermore.

Be not Fearful, but Believing.

A few Words concerning true Discerning and Judgment.
NOw is Salvation come from the most High, and the God of Israel is over all;
he is confounding the Wise men in their Wisdom, and destroying the strong men
in their strength; he is breaking the Idols of silver, and the Idols of gold,
and every carved work he is throwing down; and his eye beholds the way of every
man, and he sees their work of what sort it is; he is the searcher of the
heart, and he passes by beholds the Intents thereof; hidden things he brings
to light, and by the gift of his own Spirit he shows to every man his thoughts,
this is his perfect gift to every man, a manifestation thereof all men have,
that they thereby might profit; and though a measure of this Spirit have a
being in all, and makes it self manifest in all, and is the true Light that
does enlighten all that comes into the world, yet all do not receive it, nor
come to be guided by it, so walk in the flesh, and cannot please God, neither
can perceive the things of God, and what is performed by such as a Service or
Worship to God, he does not require it at their hands; and though they make
many prayers he will not hear, for they have no union with his Spirit; and this
tryes all people, and their works in a true Discerning, and gives true
Judgment upon all according to their doings; and who have not this Spirit of
Christ, they are none of his; but all that receive it, and have union with it,
they walk not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, in which they see the Shapes and
Forms of every Image and Likeness, and the ground from whence they do arise,
and no false birth can have a hiding place, but from the least to the greatest
they are discovered, and the fairest ^overing that any have clothed themselves
withal is seen through, and all the ^ormed likenesses which appears this day
amongst the Sons of men in what they do profess of God, they are all seen to be
of the flesh, and their Root and Principle is of that part and nature that is
ear^hly, from which no good thing can arise; and it brings forth a Birth in its
own likeness, and of its own nature, which by the Spirit is truly discerned,
and every work of the flesh is manifest to the Spirit, for the Spirit searches
al^ things, and truly judges all things, for the Spirit is truth: And though
this may seem in many of your eyes to be rash judgment, and you may call it
so; yet it will stand a witness against all that are satifying the flesh: For
there is not any thing so hardly received as that Testimony that strikes at the
life of another, and That which deals plainly and simply with all, and desires
the good of all, That meets with the least entertainment in the hearts of
people; but that which flatters, and cries peace when the bonds of iniquity
stands, that is a pleasing thing unto the minds of all who walk in the flesh;
and that which comes to rip them up, and discover their nakedness to their
shame, that they kick against, and will not own nor receive it for truth; for
there is not any people would come to shame for what they do; and that which
opens secrets, and brings any thing to light, by which shame may come upon
them, they turn against that and reject it, though the thing be really true
which is witnessed against; and so there is no work of the flesh that would
come under the Spirit's Judgment, though it be truly discerned and judged as
it is, and the Discerning and Judgment stand in the truth; but those concerned
in it will not own it, but cry out, Who made you a Judge? and why are you so
rash to judge, as if all were to be condemned but your selves? how do you know
the hearts o^ people? and, why may not others be as r^g^t as you for what you
know? So every Form and Likeness would save its own life by putting off the
Judgment, as if none could D^scern it; and no false Birth that would have its
nakedne^s to appear, lest it should come to shame thereby: And thus people
harden themselves against the Spirit's Testimony, which in it self is the
searcher and trier of hearts and Reins, and none can hide their counsel from
it. (Mark) Is not this the Judge that stands at the door and knocks? Does not
he discern when evil rises in your hearts? And does he not there Reprove you?
What is it that you can hide that he finds not out? what can you do in your
secret chambers that he does not know? And what thought can you think amongst
all your thoughts that he does not discern? And does he not judge you in your
own consciences if you have thought any evil or uttered vain words, or done any
thing wickedly? Will you deny this to be a true Discerne^, and a Righteous
Judge? Be sober, and there is a witness which you may feel in your own selves
to answer to the Truth declared, and all that have received the Spirit, and are
born of the Spirit, they have an understanding given them, by which they are
able to Discern the flesh, and all the works of it, and give true Judgment
upon it without respect of persons, not judging according to the flesh, but
according to the Spirit, and sees to the Root and Principle from which all
things springs up and grows; and they do not judge according to the outward
appearance, but judge Righteous Judgment; for such as Discern no further then
what outwardly appears, and then judge according to that; others from the same
ground may draw as true a Judgment against them; and here people are not to
Judge, lest they be Judged, which is a place much alleged against true
Judgment; but who so Judges one of another, it is not in the Spirit of Truth
which does D^scern through all Appearances, but it is in the flesh which cannot
perceive beyond what does appear: And so all the false Births give Judgment
one against another, and cannot bear the Judgment of one another; then they
are provoked and angry one with another, and run into Confusion and
Distraction, Warring, and Fighting, and Destroying one another about their
formed Religion; none being come to the Spirit that gives a discerning through
what appears, and gives true Judgment in the ground; but all born of the
Spirit has true union with it, and the flesh and the deeds of it is subdued
under it; and they are no more in the flesh, but in the Spirit; and have
received Christ Jesus the Lord, and walk in him, and are spiritual, and the
spiritual man Judges all things, and he himself is judged of no man: And
whether you can receive it or no, you are all truly tried and judged not in the
flesh, but in the Spirit; and your ROOT and FOUNDATION is seen and Discerned,
and is not found to be that which was in the beginning, but that which the
Subtilty generated since the beginning, and so does he rule over you, and blind
your minds, that you cannot see, nor discern further then what appears, and
the mystery of the Kingdom is hid from your eyes; and you run into the Words
with your carnal minds and earthly Wisdom, and from what is written draw
something to your selves, and form up a Likeness in your conceivings, and bring
that forth in the strength of your own wills; and this is your Foundation, and
the first Principle of your Religion, and so the HARLOT has brought forth many
Children, which in her Womb has all been conceived, and yet are not formed one
like another, but all differ in their Shape and Likeness, and then strive one
with another, and yet are all Children of one House, and all of one Kingdom;
but no Love, nor Unity found amongst them; but Envy, Hatred and Malice, and all
one against another, and divided into Heads and Parties, which is an evident
Testimony of the Ruin and Fall of your House and Kingdom; For a House divided
against it self cannot stand.

Therefore come out of it, lest it fall upon you, and utterly destroy you, and
all come to that where peace and safety is; for God has prepared a sure Refuge
and Resting place for all that will come; and he has gathered many into Unity,
and perfect Peace therein, and they rest in his love, and are preserved in his
power, and he alone is their Streng^h, and sure Defense; so has the Lord made
his Power known in this his day, and has gathered a Remnant to that which was
in the beginning, which was the Saints Life, and from which the Scriptures were
declared, and of which they all testified, that is now made manifest which the
false Apostles ravened from, and many Sons and Daughters are come to glory in
it; and this is the Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth, that cuts down
Transgression, and Reigns over the head of the Transgressor, and does discover
clearly all the deeds of Darkness, which is come up since the days of the
Apostles, and are practiced by such as are in the Apostasy; and this
comprehends all, but cannot be comprehended of any; it is Pure, Everlasting,
Unchangeable, and no Variableness there is in it; all that in it do believe,
have found the Author of Eternal Salvation, and are come to the Wisdom and
Righteousness of God, and to the enjoyment of Eternal Life which is in CHRIST
JESUS the Lord, whose Glory and Majesty is spreading over the Earth, and who is
gathering a holy people to Himself, that in them his Praise may be showed
forth; who alone is Worthy, God of Gods, and King of Saints; who by all his
Re^eemed Ones is over all, Exalted, Magnified, and Praised for Ever and Ever.

THE END.

