THE Everlasting Truth EXALTED. BEING A plain Testimony unto the Manifestation,
Growth and Prosperity of TRUTH.

ALSO Some Dangers opened and discovered in the not receiving Truth, or having
received it, departing from it.

ALSO A short Testimony unto Gospel Meetings and Fellowship; with a tender
Invitation unto all that are afar off, to come; and unto all that are departed
and gone away, to return.

William Smith.

Printed in the Year, 1669.

The Everlasting Truth Exalted, etc.
AFter the long Night of Apostasy had overspread the Earth, and the gross
Darkness of it covered and remained upon the people, and that none could be
found among the Sons of men to lead and deliver out of it; then did the Lord
manifest himself from Heaven, and the Light began to spring as the morning, and
to give light to such as sat in darkness, and under the shadow of death; and
though many traveled in pain, as being soarly opprdssed by the power of
darkness; yet when the Lord did manifest his Light, and his Love in it, there
were not many could believe that it was he, and so they received him not,
though he came unto them for their good, But to as many as received him to them
he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to as many as believed in his
Name, which were born, not of Flesh, nor of Blood, nor of the will of man, but
of God; and so the Love of God is manifested in sending his only begotten Son
into the World, to be a Light unto the World, that all in him might believe and
receive Life; but that which is born of Flesh and Blood, and of the will of man
does not believe that the Light is he whom God sends, and therefore receives
him not in his Light, when he makes himself manifest; for that nature expects
some higher or greater appearance of Christ then in his Light; but as John bare
witness of Christ to be the true Light, so his appearance is not to be expected
after any other manner, or in any other thing; for whatsoever is contrary to
that which is true, is false, and there is but one thing true (or Truth it
self) and that John testifies to be the Light with which Christ enlighteneth
every one that comes into the World, and as the Light is true, (or Truth it
self) so the expectation is to be drawn off from all other things as being
false, and the mind is to turn to the Light as being only true; and though it
seem as a low or little thing in its manifestation, yet there is nothing which
in it self is true besides it, and therefore most worthy of all things to be
loved and obeyed in the least appearance of it; for who dispises the day of
small things cannot come to the day of glory, where the Son rules; and here
many have suffered loss as to the benefit which in the Light they might have
received and enjoyed, for not loving and obeying the appearance or breaking
forth of the Light in a small measure, it does not go on in such unto a perfect
day, but being despised as a small thing, or a thing of no value, it draws
into it self again the manifestation, and then none can see the way unto God,
nor walk in the Path of Life; for the Light being despised, and so withdrawing
it self, there is nothing but darkness remains to be the Guide, and such as
walks in darkness knows not whither they go, because darkness has blinded
their minds, and this has been an occasion of stumbling unto many, who have
not loved the Light, but despised it, for in darkness they stumble, and many
times fall, but in the Light, which is the plain Path, there is no stumbling,
and they that do not walk in that Path, but dispises it, and stumbles at it,
they walk in the broad way, and in that way they cannot have peace; for they
that despise the day of small things, they despise that by which Peace comes,
and none can have peace whilst they despise that by which it comes; for they
that would have peace with God must receive and entertain the Light, and not
despise it, and though it may appear but as a little thing, yet peace is found
in the least appearance of it, as it is loved and obeyed; but the high and
softy cannot bow unto it, the birth of Flesh and Blood, and of the will of man
expects some higher and greater thing; and when the Light manifests it self by
reproof in the Conscience, there is not submission, but rather dispising, for
the broad way is more delightful to that birth then the narrow; and therefore
it is that the broad way is filled with many walkers; and so many may see the
Morning, and not come to see the perfect day; for if the Light in its
manifestation be not loved and obeyed, there is not a going forward in the
Truth, nor any growth and increase witnessed, and so the Light has manifest it
self in many, and they have seen the darkness by the manifestation, but not
loving and obeying the Light that it might become their Teacher and Leader,
they still abide in darkness, and are not redeemed and delivered, and that is
the thraldom and bondage, where many yet remains who have been visited with the
dayspring from on high, they do not love nor obey the Light when it springs
and manifests it self unto them, and so they keep themselves in their own
sorrow, and misery by loving and obeying darkness; for if the Light be followed
in love, as being only true, there is not an abiding in darkness, but a coming
to the Light of Life; and so Christ said, I am the Light of the World, he that
follows me shall not abide in darkness; which thing is true in him, and in
all those that follow him; for in the appearance of his Light the darkness
passes away, and the power of it grows weaker, and then comes redemption and
deliverance out of Darkness unto those that love and obey the Light, and so
they come out of the pollutions and defilements into that which is pure, and
holy, and righteous, and these are only the people which are found to the
praise and glory of God; for who have been visited, and do not obey the Lord,
they are not found to his praise and glory, but are sound in that by which God
is dishonored; and who have tasted of the good Word of God, and the powers of
the World to come, and have seen many great and wonderful things, and
afterward go from the Light, and lose their stedfastness, they are not found
to the praise and glory of God, but dishonors his Name and Truth and People;
for they that sometimes did own the Light to be true (or Truth it self) and for
a season rejoiced in it, and as Disciples took up the Cross to follow it, and
now are grown weary of walking in the narrow way, and so are gone back and
follows no further, they cannot be found to the praise and glory of God, but
are found to dishonor him, by departing from him, and taking liberty to
satisfy the flesh, with the affections and lusts, and that is the birth of
flesh and blood, and of the will of man, whatsoever may be pretended of the
Birth of God, or of retaining a measure of Light and Truth to wait upon God in
their own particulars; that spirit which so draws back, and causes any to
depart from the Way of Truth, and from the holy Commandment given of God, it is
a false spirit, and so an enemy to the true Spirit, and those that follow it
and live in it; and though some may say, That to withdraw and depart from that
which they have sometimes observed in outward practice, is not to withdraw or
depart from the Truth, but rather a growth, and a going forward in it; but that
will not hold to be true if tried by the Truth it self; and for want of such a
trial many have wronged themselves: for if there had been a true trial, before
there had been such a close joining, the matter would have appeared otherwise,
and the deceiveableness would have been seen under the covering, and all that
walked in the Light did see it, and were preserved; for Truth is unchangeable
in all its ways, though in degrees it appears more glorious, and being an
immutable unalterable power, it always justifies its own work and order from
one degree to another; and they that really go forward in the Truth, and retain
it in their particulars to wait upon God, they cannot possibly disesteem or
despise any practice which in the Truth is observed, and in and by which they
have often been refreshed; (for mark) Where the carcass is, thither will the
Eagles resort; and this in the beginning did draw to meet together with a
willing mind; for as the Word of Life was ministered by such as God appointed,
so the virtue of it caused resort unto it, and the same thing being yet
preserved and continued, and also much increased, according to the power and
wisdom in which it did begin, how can any lay a sufficient ground for their
withdrawing or departing from it? or how can any truly say, that they are gone
forward in the Truth, or that they retain a measure of it to wait upon God in
their own particulars? for the Everlasting power of the Lord God does yet
continue amongst those that fear him, and the Word of Life flows, and is yet
ministered in the Assemblies of the Righteous, and all the faithful meets
with it in a large and plentiful measure; and it yeildeth the same virtue unto
refreshment and nourishment as in the beginning, and keeps the same judgment
upon Transgressors; and hereby it is manifest, that the Power changes not, nor
the Word of Life cease not, but some are rather willing to cease from obeying
the Truth, and to depart from the holy Commandment given of God, and so it had
been better they had never known it, unless they repent and return, but such
things are permitted to happen, that they which are reproved may be made
manifest, and that the Lord may be magnified in stretching forth his Arm for
the recovery of such who in their simplicity have been turned aside: and though
some may think that they are gotten above the Assemblies of the Righteous, and
the ministration of the power (which is the Gospel) and that they are now more
large and universal in their love, yet that power which they despise, as a
thing below them, will bruise the head of that spirit which has lift them up,
and all that abide in that power will live the longer life, and the love which
is in the Light where the Righteous have their fellowship, it will remain when
all the pretended universal love is gone; for the love which is universal is in
God, and that love is pure, and cannot join to any impure thing, to have unity
or fellowship with it; for if it were so, then there is no distinction between
righteousness and unrighteousness; but there is a distinction, for as much as
righteousness is always justified, and unrighteousness always condemned, and
so it is as possible to join the East and West together, as to join
righteousness and unrighteousness in unity and fellowship, and who walks in the
Light in which is the universal Love of God, they cannot have fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but is made to reprove them; and so the
Light is the same now as in the Apostles days, and they that live in it are of
the same mind as they were, and they could not have fellowship with unfruitful
works of darkness, but reproved them; and the Apostles were in the universal
Love of God, and God never loved Esau: therefore all such had need consider
what they are gone from, and what they are joined unto, lest they so long
withstand the Lord until the day of visitation pass over; for it is certain
that all such as have forsaken the Assemblies of the Righteous, and
disesteemes, or rather dispises the ministration of the Gospel, that they have
filled themselves with high imaginations, and surfets with their own fullness,
and so they Ioath the Life and Virtue which is sweeter then the honey comb, and
with their own fullness they grow wanton, and makes themselves merry above the
Witness, and so with the flesh are committing whoredom and uncleanness; but
that which is begotten in an unlawful bed must not inherit the Kingdom of God,
that birth is not the Heir of Life, nor cannot have an inheritance with the
Saints in Light; (mark) it is the Saints in Light which inherits, it is their
lot only which falls into that ground, and there is none can partake of their
goodly heritage, but who are born of the same Life; for those that are full and
wonton, and in their fullness and wontonness joins to a harlot, they have no
part in the Kingdom of God and of Christ; but as they sow to the flesh, so of
the flesh they must reap corruption; and this is a grief unto the righteous,
that any who had a beginning in the Light and Spirit should go back again into
the flesh, and in that state to think they are perfect, and that their
perfection is of a higher degree then those who keeps in the Light and Spirit
where they did begin; for that measure of Light and Spirit which was first
manifest from God to spread abroad his Truth in this day, it was and is
perfect, it was, and is his good and perfect gift, it came from him as from the
Father of Light, with whom is no variableness or shadow of turning; then that
which is variable and turning, is not the gift of God, and they that are varied
and turned from the Assemblies of the righteous, and from the Ministration of
the Gospel, they are gone from the gift of God that is perfect, and the highest
degree of their perfection is perfect surmisings, and perfect prejudice, and
perfect enmity, and this state will never stand as a perfect state before the
Lord; and it is with such, as when a hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats;
but when he awaketh his soul is empty; and this is the greatest deceiveableness
in the highest mystery of iniquity, for to be deceived in spiritual things as
to the immortal Soul, is the greatest deceiveableness, and all from the Light
which is the good and perfect gift of God are so deceived; for as they are from
the Light, they are in darkness, and in darkness they sleep and dream; for they
that sleep, sleep in the night, and in their sleeping and dreaming, it is, as
if they were eating, [but mark] when they awaken their Souls are empty; and so
all that goes from the Light and Life, and falls asleep and dreameth, they are
deceived with their dreams; and by such a dreaming vision many simple ones have
been deceived; and all that are turned aside from the Way of Life, and are
departed from the Assemblies of the upright in heart, they are all deceived by
a vision which had its beginning in sleeping and dreaming, and all the
perfection that is in it, is but as a vapor that flies in the Air, and the
Souls of such are empty who have received the vision, and are sleeping and
dreaming in it: therefore all to be awakened who are sleeping and dreaming in
the night, and turn to the Light and Day which they have despised, that they
may come to see that their Souls are empty, whilst they are surfiting with
their own fullness, and so come to be undeceived by the manifestation of the
Everlasting Truth, and be recovered out of the Snare in which they are taken,
and it is only the consideration of the Soul, and love unto it, that presses
to the manifestation of these dangers, and also to the manifestation of Truth,
that such as are fallen into them may not always be entangled with them, but
come to the Light and Spirit again in which they did begin, that by the Light,
Spirit and Power of the Lord God, their Captivity may return; for Jacob is in
morning, and Israel in heaviness whilst the Captivity remains, and the Lamb is
slain, though pretended to be followed, and the Lord of Life is crucified, and
the universal Love of God is straightened, and this is not a state wherein Jacob
can rejoice and Israel be glad, but that which in this state rejoices and is
glad, it is appointed for heaviness, and a day of sorrow; oh that there might
not be a resister of the Power of God, or a withstander of his Arm, by which he
does valiant things; for that spirit which has drawn from the Way of Truth,
and has brought in surmisings, prejudice and enmity, it must come under the
power of the Lord to be judged and condemned; and who have any tenderness
remains in their hearts toward God, or any simple love to his Truth and
People, let all give up that spirit to be judged, as their greatest enemy, and
not to run in that spirit from the Judgment Seat, for then it will fall heavy
upon them in the latter end, and the Lord will be clear in that he has waited
to be gracious, and has not ceased to visit by many faithful Warnings; for
though the night vision did create, and bring forth a manifest opposition to
the Truth and Power of God, yet the Truth and Power of God spreads abroad and
prospers, and all the Whirlwinds passes away, and the Children of Light yet
lives in the still and quiet day, and the Lord blowsupon that spirit which
blows against his Truth, and it is going into its air, and all that it carries
up with it will be driven about as clouds of darkness; but the Righteous
rejoices, and are glad in the Lord, for their Foundation stands sure, and
their Building unshaken; and it is the same Foundation upon which they now
stand, as in the beginning, it is unalterably so, and the Lord is with them as
in the beginning, and they love his Word as in the beginning, and have unity
and fellowship in the Light, as in the beginning, and that which was in the
beginning is their food and clothing, and they shine in the glory of
righteousness which is their Garment, and so they have kept the beginning, and
prospers in that which was in the beginning, which is the same to day and for
ever, and there is no end of its goodness; and they that are gone away, as if
God was departed from the Assembles of the Righteous, they are departed from
God in themselves, and so have lost the sense and feeling of him in that way by
which he appears with the Faithful, for his Power and Glory is more abundanly
seen in the Assemblies of his People, and they, that cannot see him and find
him there, it is they that are departed from God, but God is not departed from
those that love him and worships him; and that is their joy and Crown of
rejoicing, that they are counted worthy to serve the Lord, and to feel his
Presence; and notwithstanding there has appeared great oppositions, not only
in a way of outward Persecution, but also in several other ways and manners,
and sometimes from such as once in measure bad received Truth, and made a
profession of it, yet the Lord has carried on his own work, and Truth has
prospered from the beginning, by which it is manifest that God is not departed,
but is the same unto all, and with all that wait upon him; for there could be
no prosperity if God was departed, but there is prosperity, yea, a great
increase, and many tender plants are springing and budding, and many are grown
to be Trees of Righteousness, of the Lords planting, and in the strength of the
Lord they stand as Pillars in his House, and there is no decay nor want in the
Family, all the Garners are rich with store, and their Land is a Land of
plenty; and all that are departed out of the House are gone into Famine, and
are decayed as Branches that wants nourishment from the Root; and herein the
great and universal Love of God is manifest to his People, who has caused his
Light to shine in their hearts* (...) also drawn their hearts to join unto it,
so that it is become (...) most precious thing by them to be desired; and as
they have been faithful to it from the beginning, so it still remains with
them, and spreads abroad its power more fully and largly; and though some might
be drawn away in the beginning who were convinced, and felt the power, yet as
their hearts are joined to it again, they are come into prosperity; for the
Lord has caused their Captivity to return, and Captivity being returned, the
pure Plant increases with the increase of God, and that is the increase in
which is prosperity, all being gathered into the Light and Power of God, they
are all fruitful Branches of a Living Root; and so all that obey the Light are
united in one, and every one in their measure grows in Grace and Godliness, and
in that all stands in the beginning; and as they wait upon God in that which
first convinced them, they are preserved out of the Net of the Fowler, and from
the deceit of the Deceiver; and this is mavelous in the eyes of many this
day; for by the preservation that many have witnessed, by cleaving to the
Power, they certainly know that there is not another thing sufficient for that
work; and so they keep their faith in it, as in the greatest; and in the very
time when darkness came upon some to draw them back, then there was no whither
else for them to go, but to that which from the beginning had preserved; for
they were come to assurance that he was the Son of God in whom they believed,
and they knew that he had the word of Eternal Life; and so they could not
forsake him, and depart from him, to go to another, but continued in his Love
according to his Command; which, if all had done so, there had not been a going
away and departing; but the Serpent beguiled, as he beguiled Eve; and though he
aimed to deceive the very Elect, yet it was not possible, because their
Foundation was sure, and they were faithful to it; and upon the Foundation
they yet stand, and are not moved, and the Truth is precious in their eye, and
the testimony of it lovely in their hearts, and they are not weary of serving
the Lord; for his power carries them as upon Eagles Wings, and such are not
born of flesh and blood, and of the will of man, but of God, and as Heirs of
God they inherit Life and Immortality; and so they rejoice in their way, and in
their portion, and in this good ground their lot is fallen, and they have a
goodly heritage, yea a heritage above the Earth, and the glory of it; for in
the Seed and Life they have found the heavenly Treasure, and the Pearl of great
price; and as their affections are set upon things above, so they do not mind
to be in love with things below; and abiding in the Light and Truth, they have
a sure Dwelling, and a quiet Habitation; and so in that which is immortal they
live with the Lord, and one another, and are refreshed in the Lord and one in
another; and these are Children which of his own Will he has begotten by the
Word of his Power; [mark] by the Word of his Power these are begotten, and they
love the Word of his Power which has begotten them, and it is Milk unto them
as Babes, and Meat as strong Men, and they know the virtue and power of it, and
cannot depart from it, and by faith in the power they obtain victory; and so
they keep the faith, and do not make shipwreck of it, and by faith they stand,
and from the beginning they have kept in the way that is good, and have not
cunningly devised Fables, but by the manifestation of Truth have approved
themselves unto God; and these are they which of his own Will he has begotten
by the Word of his Power, who love the Word of his Power that has begotten
them, and by the Word of his Power he upholds them; it is that they lean upon,
and cleave unto in all their trials, distress and tribulations, and it has
been, and is their strength from one degree of godliness unto another, and from
one degree of faith to another; and so from degree to degree they have followed
the Lord in humbleness of mind, and he has and does give his Grace unto them,
and exalts them into honor, and they are honorable and beloved in his sight;
and though some that came out with them be gone from them, yet the Truth is the
same, and they are the same in the Truth; for as they have kept in the Truth
from the beginning, so they have not wavered nor changed, but in all things
have been found faithful wherein Truth has been concerned, and many whose
dear and precious lives have been given up as a Testimony to it, and many whose
sufferings and tribulations does yet remain for the Truth sake; and it is no
less in such as now depart from the testimony, and turns against it, then a
trampling upon the Blood and Sufferings of the Faithful, and so a trampling
under foot the Son of God, and doing dispite to the Spirit of Grace; and such
are gone from the Grace of God in themselves, and so runs into the liberty that
pleases the vain mind which cannot bear the yoke; and in that Sea of liberty
in vanity the flesh is pleased, and from that Sea comes all the great swelling
words of vanity in the likeness of Truth; but the Sea is bounded, beyond which
it cannot pass, and in that which bounds the troubled Seas the faithful are
preserved from being swallowed up; and they that are fallen into this Ocean,
they are fallen from the Rock (Christ Jesus) who is the beginning and ending,
the first and last; and so they are gone from the chief corner stone the Elect
and precious, upon which the Building is fitly framed, and grows unto an holy
Temple in the Lord (so mark) the Building is fitly framed upon the Rock, and
not upon the Sea; and upon the Rock the Building stands and grows unto an
holy Temple; and so the Power of the Rock raises the Building which is framed
upon it, and there is a perfect union between the Foundation and Building, and
a perfect union in the Building; for it is framed and compacted by his hand who
is Lord of all, so it is united, and no where out of order; for that which is
out of order is not framed and compacted in the Building which stands upon the
Rock; and though it may appear as framed, compacted and builded, yet it is not
united to the Foundation: but the Lord has pleasure in his own Building: as
being his own work, and it grows to be an holy Temple, and he fills it with his
Presence and Glory, and besides this Foundation which God has laid, there is
no man can lay another, nor no man can build another Building to be an holy
Temple for him; therefore all foundations and buildings which man has laid
and builded must come to naught, for it is only his own Work that must stand
and remain; and so he has been building upon his own Foundation, and he has
framed a Building according unto his pleasure, and he causes the Building to
grow unto an holy Temple for himself to walk in; and so he walks in the Temple,
and dwells in the Temple which is holy, and this is his own Work from the
beginning.

For when the Lord appeared to make known his Truth, in this day there was no
building framed, but all in several Forms and Professions scattered, and he
beheld it, and his eye pitied, and then was his Love manifest to the scattered,
and with his Light he opened their eye that was darkened, and many came to see
that their foundation was sandy, and that their building could not stand
safely; and as the Lord was minded in this Morning of Light, or springing of
his Day, so more Light brake forth from his fullness, and the day more appeared,
and dangers came to be more clearly seen; and when dangers were discerned in
the Light, there was a fear came upon many to behold them; for as they saw
their foundation to be sandy, so they came to be sensible that it would fail,
and their building fall, and that they could not stand in safety, if they did
there remain, and in the sense of their danger they were made to cease from
building, and to cry unto the Lord for help; for they came to see with the
Light that was breaking forth, that the Lord would overturn their foundation
and building: and though some had long been working and building, yet they were
made willing to give it all up, and to become nothing as to what they had done;
and being mindful of the Light which had opened their eye, and made them
sensible of their danger, and waiting in fear and humbleness of mind, the Lord
reveals a sure Foundation of his own laying, and he called the scattered to
come into it; and as his voice was obeyed he stretched forth his Arm and
gathered, and with the strength of his Love he made many willing to be at his
disposing; and then he began to work upon their hearts by his Power, and to
frame their hearts according to the nature of his own Foundation, for all were
out of order until the Lord began to work by his mighty power, there was not
one stone framed fit for his Building, but all were rough and could not be
laid and compacted together; and in this condition the Lord found the children
of men in this day of his appearance, he did not find them framed, and so fit
for building; but he found them as such upon whom the Plain had not gone, and
for his Name sake he took the work into his own Hand, and his work reached to
the heart which was out of order; and then many came to feel the Lord working
in them by his power, and came to know that it was the Lord, which they never
knew before; and as they came to know God by the work of his Power in their
hearts, so they came to stand in fear before him, and not kowing what the Lord
would do by such a manifestation and operation of his Light and Power, they
were brought to stand still in silence and to wait for the effect, and then did
he open the Treasures of his Love and showed them his Salvation, and also
showed them his Judgment seat before which they were to stand, and they were
made willing to appear before him, and to be judged by him; and he caused his
Judgment to pass through them for the casting out of that spirit which wrought
iniquity, and for the killing of that life which had pleasure in
unrighteousness, and so his Judgments were found to be just, and he was found
to be righteous, for he judged nothing but that which was contrary to the
purity of his own Life, and was the burden of the immortal Soul, and that is
for judgment in all where ever it remains; and so he began and prospered his
work in the hearts of those that did abide the day of his coming, and they can
set to their seal that God is true; and whilst the wicked stood in his sight he
was terrible in his appearance, and whilst corruption remained he was dreadful
to behold, for his Word was as a Fire and a Hammer upon the transgressing
nature, and so his Fame has gone, and his Hammer has wrought for the purging
of the conscience from dead works, and for the raising and bringing forth of
life and immortality, and so by his Power he has squared and framed the hearts
of many, and has made them fit for his building, and he has fixed and united
them to his foundation (which is Christ the Rock) and in him he has fixed and
united them one to another, and so the building and foundation are joined in
one nature, and the building is fitly framed and grows unto an holy Temple, it
does not decay and fall, but grows and prospers in the Light, Life and Power,
and since the beginning the Lord has enlarged it more abundantly, and has
raised it into honor and glory, and herein his works has been seen from the
beginning by all that have kept in the beginning, whose eye have been to the
Lord in that by which he first made himself known unto them; and this is the
foundation and building that stands, and will stand as being only the Lords;
for man has been wholly excluded from the work, that the excellency of the
Power might appear to be of God, and that he alone might have the glory in it,
and by it; and so it is not the Wise, nor Mighty, nor Prudent of the world that
brought to pass the things which now are witnessed by the Righteous; but the
Arm of the Lord has done it, and his Power is exalted in it, and by it, and
his Power triumphs over all contrary spirits that would lay his building
waste; and many can now say as in times past, We are God's Husbandry, we are
God's Building, the Seed which is sprung up is of God, and the Building is
framed by him, and he waters his Seed, and bears up the Pillars of his
Building, and therefore his Seed and Building grows and prospers and triumphs
in Victory, and here the goings on with the Lord is known from the beginning,
for he has led many by the hand, and carried many in his Bosom, and such have
been with him from the beginning, they have not run out of either hand, or
turned back again, but have kept their Habitation in the holy Temple which the
Lord builds, and where his Honor dwells; and so have always walked with the
Lord, and the Lord with them: but who are deparred from the ministry of the
Word of Life, or utter words, and not in the Life, they are not always with
the Lord, nor the Lord with them; and so they are to mind the Light to be their
stay, and to stay their minds upon God, and keep to the Truth as the Principle
which instructs in the right way, that Life and Virtue may spring, and Unity
and Followship grow and increase; for all that have kept to the Truth, as the
Principle, they have been preserved by the Power of it, and have escaped many
dangers which others have fallen into for want of Watchfulness, for he that is
begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one touches him not, he keeps
himself in the Power by which he is begotten, and into that Power the wicked
One cannot come to touch him; and so the begotten of God is kept from the
Wicked One by the Power which begets him, and by the Power is always helped in
the needful time, and here the Righteous dwell safely under the Banner which is
spread over them, they do not depart from the Testimony of the Word of Life,
neither do they utter words as a Testimony out of the Life, but lives and
dwells in the Life as in their Habitation; and they that do not dwell in this
Habitation they utter words from a wrong motion, but who keeps their Habitation
in the Life, the Life is in their Ministry and Testimony, for such lives in the
Word of Life, and so preaches the Word of Life in its own power, and the sound
of that Word of Life and Power goes through death and darkness and reaches the
true and faithful Witness; and this is a joyful sound by which the Captive is
made glad, and this sound is gone forth into the World, and the words of it to
the ends of the Earth, and many that were in the Graves are raised up by it;
the dead has heard the voice of the Son of God and lives, for it has quickened
and given Life to as many as received the Testimony of it into their hearts,
and they that keeps it, and abids in it, they live by it, and such cannot
forget it, nor the benefits they have received by it, but estemes it and
prefers it above all other things; and so they do not let the benefits slip out
of their minds, but retains them in that from which they have received them,
and so they keep in the beginning, and goes forward in the beginning, for it
clearly manifests that such as depart from the Way of Truth, and from the
holy Commandment given of God, that they have not kept in the beginning, but
lost it, and so have lost the sense of benefits which in the beginning they
received, and now makes merry above the Witness, and grows wanton upon the
Earth, and what can the end of these things be but distress, sorrow and misery;
for all that have known the Lord in any measure, and have turned their backs
upon him, they cannot lie down in peace, except they repent; and therefore that
all might mind their own conditions, and not to resist and strive against that
which seeks their eternal good, but submit unto it, with a lowly and humble
mind, that the vapors which darkens their understanding may be removed, and
the night vision cease, and the Word of Life become precious to them as in the
beginning; for the Lord has gathered a Flock which keeps together in his
Light, Life, Power and Wisdom, and he is their Shepherd and Bishop of their
Souls; and as they abide with him, they cannot be scattered any more, for the
good Shepherd leads them, and keeps them, and the Bishop of their Souls
oversee^ them, and takes care for them; and the Pasture of his Life is their
delight and wellbeing; and so the Lord God exalts his everlasting Truth over
all, and his Work prospers against every assault that would lay it waste, and
in the pure Truth springs and spreads and triumphs, and the Lamb and the Saints
have the Victory, and must have the Victory, and the Victory they rejoice and
are exceeding glad; for they know that their labor is not in vain in the Lord,
and by many infallible proofs the Lord does evidence that they are his, and
that the labor of true Laborers does stand in his Council and Wisdom; and the
Lord God is a Witness for them that they labor in his Service, for as much as
he makes them useful both to the gathering and confirming many; and having such
a certain evidence of the Lords Power with them, they mind their Labor and
service; and though some, which in the beginning was the fruit of their Labor,
be gone from that in which they then received their Testimony, and now reckons
their Labor and Service to be useless, yet the Lord reckons their Labor and
Service useful for himself, and many that stands as the seal of their
Apostleship and Ministry; and having the seal they continue their Labor in the
work of God, and cannot cease to publish the everlasting Gospel; but goes on
with the Lord, and the Lord with them, and they are a blessing in his Hand for
converting sinners from their way, and for establishing the righteous in their
goings; and whosoever rises up to oppose the work of the Lord in the Gospel
ministration, they must certainly fall and wither as the mown grass; for the
good Seed is sown, and many have received it into the ground, and fruit is
brought forth according to increase, and the Lord God has his honor and glory
by it, and this is the sweet savor which proceeds from the Almighty to
season the Earth; for the Earth has brought forth corruptible fruit, which is
unsavory, and now the Lord God is seasoning the Earth with the savor of his
Life, and the Testimony of Life spreads abroad, that the Earth may be seasoned;
and the Everlasting Gospel is preached over the Beast, and the Whore, and false
Prophet, and many have received it into their hearts, and walks according to
the Truth of it, and because of the good savor they are in love with it; and
so the Truth and Power of the Lord God judges down, and goes over the head of
the Serpent, and the Lamb reigns, and must reign, and under his Government the
Saints rejoices.

A short Testimony unto Gospel Meetings and Fellowship, etc.
THe Everlasting God having called and separated a people by the manifestation
of his Light, Spirit and Power from the ways, customs and worships which are
observed amongst such as be in the Fall and in the Apostasy, he has gathered
them into a new and living Way, and into a holy and spiritual Worship, and in
the leadings of his Spirit they follow him according to his Mind and Will, and
in his Wisdom and Counsel he orders them to meet together, and to wait upon him
in his fear, not in the way, nor after the manner as others do who know not his
Mind and Will in what they do, but as a distinct and separated people from all
that meet according to the commandment of men, they meet according to the
Commandment of God; and this is a meeting according to the Truth of the Gospel;
for the Saints in Primitive times did not meet to wait upon God, and worship
him amongst the Jews in their Synagogues and Temple, but by the Light and
Spirit were separated from their Worship, and in the Light and spirit they met
together in such places, and at such times as the Lord ordered and appointed;
and they met distinctly and apart both from the Jews and Gentiles in their way
and worship, and did not meet or join with them to observe their practice, as
may be seen in the Scriptures of Truth, for when Christ ascended he commanded
his Disciples to tarry at Jerusalem until they were endued with Power from on
high (so mark) he commanded that they should tarry at Jerusalem, and meet
together, and wait for the Power to endue them, and being met together with one
accord in one place (mark again) being met together, there was a Gospel meeting
according to the Commandment of the Lord, And in that meeting the holy Ghost
fell upon them, and they spoke as the spirit gave them utterance, (mark again)
they did not go forth before they had received the Power, nor they did not
speak before the Spirit gave them utterance; but having received the Spirit and
Power they then speak in the Spirit, and went forth to declare the things of
God in his Power, and in the Spirit and Power which they had received they
gathered Meetings distinctly both from Jews and Gentiles, and they continue
their Meetings, and did not cease to meet after they had received the Spirit
and Power, and they were not only separated from the Jews and Gentiles as to
their worship, but they also received power to testify against the worships
which Jews and Gentiles observed; for Stephen testified against the
Temple-worship, and Paul against the Athenians Worship; and this was their love
to God his Truth and Worship, and also love to the Souls of such as were
ignorantly worshipping; and herein they discharged a good Conscience toward
God, forasmuch as they labored to open the understandings of ignorant
Worshippers, by testifying against their Worships; and as they met together and
worshipped God in his Spirit and Truth, so they kept their Meetings in his
fear, and did not forsake the assembling of themselves, but with all diligence
observed the Way and Order of the Spirit which they had received of God to meet
together, and to worship God in; and their Meetings were formed and ordered of
the Lord, and by his appointment; they were not formed, ordered or appointed of
man, or by man, but the Hand of the Lord was in the forming, ordering and
appointing of them; and they that sometimes observed them, and then departed
from them, they departed from the holy Commandment given of God; and so it does
clearly appear that the Meetings of the holy People (called Quakers) are
constituted, ordained and commanded of God, forasmuch as they answer to the
Saints Meetings in primitive times, being formed and appointed of God, as their
Meetings were, and being also observed in the same Light, Spirit, Life and
Power; and so their Meetings are no new thing, if truly examined and compared
with the purity of Gospel times; but their Meetings are of the first
constitution and appointment of God amongst Christians, and so has the first
place in Christian Practice, Service and Worship; for as they stand by the
Appointment and Commandment of God, so they are more worthy to be observed then
any Meetings that stand by the appointment and commandment of men; and all that
truly love God they do observe them as his Command; and by keeping his Command
they manifest that they love him; and many that does manifest their love unto
God in assembling and meeting together according to his Appointment and
Command, and his Command is not grievous, but joyous unto them; for by
observing and keeping his Command, they have found him in his own Way, and so
keep their Meetings unto God, and not unto men; and this is the glorious Light
that is broken forth again through the Night of Apostasy, and in which
Gospel-meetings are ordered again, as was before the Apostasy, and the
Everlasting Gospel is preached again as in the Apostles days, and Christianity
is known again as was amongst them, and the worship of God is observed again in
their Light, Life and Spirit, and the Way of Life and Peace is walked in, as
was by them, and so all things are made new by the appearance of Christ, in his
Light and Power, and yet nothing new in it self, as to the ground, but only
made new by a separation and distinction from the old: for all that man has
constituted, ordained and set up, as to Worship and Religion, it is of the old
nature, and so old things, but Christ makes all things new, and yet in himself
before all things, and he has brought forth that again which Darkness has
overspread since the primitive times, which being so large a time kept under
darkness, it now appears new, distinctly from the old; and though this be new
as to the appearance of it out of the old; yet Christ, who brings it forth in
himself, he is the beginning of all; and so he is the first and good Old Way,
as in relation to foregoing Ages; and also the last, and new and Living Way, in
relation to succeeding Ages; and he has gathered a people to himself, who
walks with him, as in the new and living Way, and in him they meet and worship
God, and enjoys his Presence; and having found the Lord in his own Way, and
walking with the Lord in his own Leading^, they cannot walk in any other way,
nor meet to worship God in any other manner; for there is but one way that
leads unto God, and in which he is worshipped, and that is Christ the Light,
and Truth and Life, and that way being found, all other ways are to be denied
as leading from God, and that is the ground why such as have found the new and
Living Way, and walk in it, cannot walk in the old and dead ways, which by the
old nature of men are set up and prescribed, but cleaves to the Way which God
has prepared and appointed, that they should walk in; and therefore the holy
People (called Quakers) who walk in the Light and Spirit cannot walk in the
ways, or observe the worships in any Form or Profession which is made and set
up by men, as knowing that Christ Jesus is not their way, nor that their
worship is constituted and ordained of God; and therefore they cannot meet with
them, nor walk with them, nor worship with them; but meets in the Spirit, and
walks in the Spirit, and worship. God in the Spirit, who is a Spirit; and this
is a Gospel-Meeting, and Way, and Worship as in the Primitive times, and all
other meetings, ways and worships are constituted and set up since the
primitive times, and they are all to be denied and forsaken, as having no life
in them; for though the Lord might once appear in Meetings, Ways and Worships
which were of a lower degree then that which now he has revealed, and that the
sender in heart did meet with something of God in such Meetings, Ways and
Worships; yet that does not bind the Lord to a continuance in such meetings,
ways and worships; neither is it a sufficient ground for any to continue in
them now the Lord has appeared in a higher and greater Manifestation of Light;
for what any have met withal as from the Lord in lower Dispensations, it was
fourth drawing and bringing them higher; not that God would fix himself in that
dispensation, or fix any unto it, but only condescended unto low things to
bring forward into higher, and so to lead on from that which is below into that
which is above, and so to lead on from that which is below into that which is
above, and so to the greatest, which is Christ the fullness, who in the
appearance of his Light and Life does swallow up all lower Dispensations,
though as to time they might be of God; and so many have seen the goings on of
the Lord in his Light, and in his Light have followed him, from the lower into
the higher, and so are come to live and walk in that where his Presence
remains; and to as many as have so followed him, and abides with him, they know
the place of his Rest, and also knows their rest in him; and so they know the
Lord to live in them, and walk in them, and that he is their God, and they are
his people; and in such a Meeting, Way and Worship the Lord is found, and he
abides and continues there in his Love, Mercy and Goodness; therefore all below
are to come up into it; and all gone from it are to return, if they would walk
with the Lord; for there is not another way wherein any does walk with the
Lord, or the Lord with them; but in his Light, Life and Power, and in that to
meet and worship him according to his own Appointment and Command; for as the
Lord is gathering into himself all lower Dispensations, and gathering in one
such as have been scattered in them; so all are to mind the Lords gathering,
that in the Light, by which he gathers, they may come to be made perfect in
one, [mark] in one is the perfection, which is Christ the Light, and Life, and
Power and Wisdom of God, in whose Light, Life, Power and Wisdom is the Gospel
unity and Fellowship, not in outward Forms and Professions, and lower
Dispensations, but in the Light, and Life of Christ Jesus, who is above all,
and greater then all; in his Light the Saints had Fellowship, as the Scriptures
testify, and in his Light the Saints have Fellowship in this day; and so by
one spirit they are all baptized into one Body, and are one Body under the
Government of Christ the head; and this is the universal fellowship in the
universal Light, where the Spirits of just men, are now known who are gone
before, and the spirits of just men now will be known by such as are to come;
and so a perfect unity in perfect Light of Christ, by which Light the faithful
are bound in a bundle of Life, and so in the unity of the Light and Spirit the
Saints now meets and worships God, and build up one another in their most holy
Faith, and edifies and comforts one another according to the practice of the
holy men and women in times past, and they keep the unity of the Spirit, which
unto them is the bond of Peace; and though some may lose the unity by going
from the Spirit, and some that may profess the Truth be not in unity, as not
walking in the Spirit, yet neither does weaken or break the unity of such as
lives and abides in the Spirit, for the Spirit changes not, though some that
profess the Truth do not walk in it, or some may withdraw and depart from it,
therefore the unity in the Spirit is certain and everlasting, and it is the
bond of Peace to all that live in it.

So all are to come unto this Light and Spirit in which the Saints meet and
worship God, and in which they have unity and fellowship with God and one
another, there is nothing below it will endure, nor nothing exalted above that
will stand; for as the Light and Spirit is the beginning, so it is the ending
unto all that abides in it; for all truth is only comprehended in the Light and
Spirit of God, and from thence received, and there is not any other things, or
things, in which true and lasting peace can be found, but in a measure of that
Light which comes from God as the Fountain, and they that have fixed themselves
below the Light, they must be dis-joyned from that unto which they are fixed,
and stand-loose from all things which they have made and set up in Worship and
Religion, and mind the Light which is only true, to lead them forward into all
truth, for where any are fixed to things below the Light, and will not be
dis-joyned and separated from them by the Light, they are ^entered in
mortallity, or the corruptible body which presses down the Soul; and
whatsoever any may pretend as to their Meetings, Ways and Worshipps to be of
God, yet they are all formed and framed in the corruptible part, and so are all
corruptible offerings, which have not the Savor of incorruptible Virtue;
therefore all Forms and Professions distinct from the Light, with all their
Meetings; Worships and Worshippers, they must all forsake their Meetings, (...)
being in the corruptible part, and as such where the living God is not to be
found, and all come to the Light and Spirit of God which opens the eye and
understanding, and gives the knowledge of God and of his Way and Truth, all to
come unto that, and follow it, and live in it, and so come to the Assemblies of
the Righteous, and to the Meetings of the Firstborn of God, and with them to
worship God in his Spirit and Truth, and to have unity and fellowship with them
in the Light which is their Guide and Way, and so come to keep the holy
Commandment given of God, for until the holy Commandment of the Lord God be
kept the mind remains in sin and transgression, and there is none in that state
which are in the Saints Worship and Fellowship, and so they must come to the
Light to be redeemed from the vanity of their minds, because the Pure and Holy
God is not worshipped with such a mind; therefore the Light must be followed as
a Leader to bring out of vanity into Truth and Purity, and so to Serve and
Worship the Pure and Holy God with a pure and holy mind, and with a sincere and
upright heart, and unto this all must come before their service and worship be
accepted of God, or before they can come to have true and lasting peace with
him; therefore let the wicked forsake their way and the unrighteous their
thoughts, and turn to the Lord who would not the death of them that dye; and so
come out of all Forms and Professions below the Light and Life, and come to the
Light, and meet with those that meets in the Light, and worships God in Spirit
and Truth, and so come to keep the Ordinance of God, and who are willing to
come in the drawings and leadings of the Light and Spirit, the Lord stands
ready to receive them, and will in no wise cast them off, as being yet the day
of his Visitation: Oh, therefore, let all come whilst the hand of the Lord is
stretched forth to gather them, and whilst his Arm is open to receive them, let
them come in the Light and in the Spirit, and bow before the Lord, and worship
in his holy Temple, that all who are drinking the cup of Fornication, may come
to the cup of Salvation, and praise the Lord.

And all that have been formerly donvinced of the everlasting Truth, and for a
time assembled with the holy Congregation, and kept the holy Commandment given
of God, and now have lost their Guide and Way, and forsaken the Assemblies of
Gods chosen, and departed from the holy Commandment, and from the worship and
ordinance of God, and are gotten into created likenesses, and are bowing and
worshipping at there own Altar, that they all may feel that again which first
convinced them, from which they are gone, that by its Power, it may cause them
to return, and so in the Light and pure Spirit to come again to the worship and
ordinance of God; that as they have departed from the ordinance of God, and
broken the Covenant, and gone from the true fellowship, so to return unto that
again from which they are departed and gone; and to return in submission and
lowliness of mind, and tenderness of heart, that the Lord and his people may
delight to receive them, and may have pleasure in them. Oh let all return from
the barren Mountains and broken Costerns, and return to the Lord whom they have
grieved by departing from him, and let them return to that which reconcileth
and makes peace, that they may not wholly lose the benefit of former mercies,
nor the benefit of present and future Mercies, but return to the Light, and
live in it, where mercies always abounds, that as there was a beginning in
the Truth of the Gospel; so to return unto that which in the beginning did lead
in the Gospel Way and Practice, and so return to the Gospel Meetings, and to
the Gospel Minnistration, and to the Gospel Fellowship, and this whilst it to
today, and whilst the door is open, and whilst the Lord and his people are
willing and ready to receive, let it bear a weight upon every heart concerned,
for as much as everlasting peace and happiness consists in it. Oh wander not
longer in desert places, nor feed no longer upon corruptiple thing, but feel
the Seed, and Life and Virtue, and with the Power of the Lord God judge down
that spirit which is gotten up, that the firstborn which is gone into
captivity may show it self again, and the Truth and order of the Gospel may be
lived in again, and the Ordinance of God kept again, and Gospel fellowship come
into again, that all who are departed may return and find rest for their Soul.

Notingham, 9th Month, 1668. W. S.

THE END.

