Something WRITTEN Concerning the Worlds Creed, Or what they Teach their
Children to BELIEVE; For a Belief of Words cannot save the Soul, but a Belief
in the LIGHT, CHRIST JESUS the Word of GOD. And this is Written unto them who
have been so long time in the Words, out of the thing, that they may come at
length into the thing, out of the Words, and know that of God in themselves,
which is to be believed in.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Sign of the Bull and Mouth, near
Aldersgate, 1660.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, says the Child, Maker of Heaven and
Earth etc. (now mark) he that believes in God, believes in the Light, for God
is Light, 1. John. 1.5. ver. And so becomes his Children; For not believing in
the Light, you deny your own belief, your own Creed, who say you believe in God
and in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son, which was Conceived of the Holy
Ghost, born of the virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified
dead and buried, etc. Nor is there any who believe in the Son, but who
believes in the Light, wherewith Christ has enlightened them, who lights
every man that comes into the World, that all men through him might believe,
John 1.9. Who says believe in the Light, that ye may be Children of the Light,
John 12.36. ver. Nether do they know any thing of his birth Conception or
ascension, which are from the light in their own particulars, and in it do not
believe, where the same nature is reigning that was in Pilate that crucified
him, and there he is not Lord where his light is not obeyed and received, who
is meek and low in the heart, and teaches all so to be that learn of him; for
such confessed him heretofore in word that in works denied him; but where the
light is followed and obeyed, there Christ the everlasting Father is believed
in, and there he comes to rise, and thou with him in the power of his life,
which before lay dead in thee, who was buried under the earth, and ascends the
same that ever was, who descended first into the lower parts of the earth, and
led Captivity captive, sitting on the right hand of the Father, above all
principalities, and powers, who in all things has the preheminency; Ephesians. 4.9.
whose judgment is eternal, judging down self in thee, and raising up his own
witness by his own power, through which his Resurrection is witnessed, and he
reigning above the corruptible part, and there he becomes Lord; and none
believes in the holy Ghost, but who believe in the light, which enlightneth
their understanding, nor know the general Assembly of the Church of the
firstborn, whose names are written in Heaven; neither are they come to the
Communion of Saints, that are not come to the light in their own particulars,
through which the Saints, the holy Ones come to have fellowship with God (who
is holy) and one with another, who can have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather reproves them, Ephesians. 5.1. and if you say you
believe such a thing as the Communion of Saints, and the remission of sins, why
do you not come to the blood of Christ to cleanse you; for they who were of
this communion said, If we walk in the light as he is in the light, then have
we fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all sin, 1 Job. 1.7.

But who say they believe the remission of sins, and yet tell people they
cannot be free from sin while upon the earth, do not such deny their own Creed
or belief, and so keep people in bondage, in sin, and unbelief, out of the
blessed man's estate, whose sin is forgiven, and iniquity not remembered, and out
of the new and everlasting Covenant of God, where sin and iniquity comes to be
blotted out and remembered no more, Heb. 8. and are such Teachers to be
followed, or hearkened unto, that keep people out from God, and out of Gods
kingdom, where nothing that defiles can enter; or is not Christ Jesus the
Light, rather to be hearkened unto ( the Lamb of God that takes away the sins
of the world?) then them that say and tell people they can never be free from
sin, [or he that takes away the sin and so leads into the kingdom] let the
sober minded people judge that love their own souls.

And will not this be grader tidings to men through the blood of the Covenant,
to have ratified the forgiveness of sin, then to tell a man he can never be
free from sin, and so make the blood of Christ of none effect, and be shut out
from God for ever, which doctrine the Teachers of the world have brought up;
but the children of the light who are children of the new Covenant, come to the
remission of sins; and he who was a Minister of Christ, was sent to turn men
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that so they
might come to witness the remission of their sins, and inheritance among them
that are sanctified, Act. 26.18. and that was the true Ministers work, for the
perfecting of the Saints, and to bring people to the faith, through which the
heart comes to be purified, and such believe the life everlasting, which of it
are made partakers, who believe in the light, which is the life of men; and he
that believes has everlasting life says Christ, Joh. 3.36. and so believes a
thing that is, that he has, and not a thing that is not, that he has not, is
a witness of the Spirit, that has been quickened by the Spirit, and so a
living witness.

But how can you believe these things who are out of the light, and see them
not, Christ descending into hell, ascending into heaven, or resurrection from
the dead, which is a mystery, until the light be turned unto, the mystery is
hid, and not revealed, Christ within the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. or know the
Judge of quick and dead, that are from the light, by which he is known; and
death and destruction may say, we have heard the fame of a God, and of a
Christ, and of such things, Job. 28.22. and so may they that are strangers in
their minds and ignorant of the mystery, Christ within the hope of glory, that
know him not there, and so in the reprobate state, according to the Apostles
own words, Know you not that Christ is in you except you be reprobates, 2 Cor.
13.5. and the Apostle spoke of some who-were men of corrupt minds, lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3.
but who believe in the light, to know Christ within, the mystery, come out of
the reprobate state; and light is come into the world, and the world is set in
man's heart, 2 Cor. 4.6. and who comes to it must come where it is come, in the
heart where it shines; and that is the light which in the Conscience
convinces man of sin and evil, and shows him the error of his way, through
which man comes to see his way out of the world, being turned to the light, and
in it believing, which is the way to the Father, Joh. 14, 6. So that them who
are the true believers, that believe in God, believe in the light, are come to
know a measure of God within themselves, that is to be believed in; and they
who believe in Jesus Christ his Son, believe in the light which he has
enlightened them withal, which is little, or the least of all seeds, which the
kingdom of heaven is likened unto, to the earthly man in its first appearance,
to whom the Parables were spoken; and this light is that which is to be
believed in, and brings into its own likeness, to be little and low, to become
a child of the light, otherwise not being turned unto, and believed in, it may
be there, as the talent hid in the earth, which does not increase while it lies
hid, and under the clods, but there is a time that the seed must arise, if ever
it grow and come from under the earth, and grow over the earth, before it come
to ripening; this little seed of the kingdom must, before it be gathered into
the barn, abide many storms in its growth, and so through the growth of the
seed the mysteries of Gods kingdom come to be known, which is revealed in the
light; for whatsoever makes manifest is light, through which Christ within,
the mystery, hid comes to be known, Ephesians. 5.13. his Resurrection, Ascension,
Death, and Burial, and what it was (in man driven out into the earth) that
crucified him and buried him; which is to be crucified, and so comes Captivity
to be led captive, by him who descended first into the lower parts of the
earth; and there God the Father comes to be believed in, where the light is
obeyed and believed, and Christ is Lord where the seed immortal comes to reign,
otherwise their faith is dead, who are yet in their sins, and not come to
believe in the light wherewith Christ has enlightened them, and have not the
faith of Gods Elect, the faith that purifieth the heart, and so in the dead
estate believe that which they neither see, nor feel, nor taste, nor handle,
the unpurified state; but who come to see, to feel, to taste, to handle, come
to a principal that is living of God, that is living in themselves; so what he
has seen and heard that he comes to believe, and that he can declare unto
others, and believes not only because others have declared it, but having seen
and felt it in their own principle; and such can give Testimony of the just,
that are come into the faith of the just that lives, and such know their
Testimony is faithful and true, that have born testimony of him, and confirm
the Scriptures, and are confirmed by them, and so lay them not waste, but bear
testimony of the truth of them wrought in themselves; having the same things
fulfilled in them according to their measure, as was in them that gave them
forth; One Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, that serve the Lord with
one consent, where the Lord is one, his Truth one, and his Spirit one, wherein
he is worshipped, such are of the one family, that grow up and meet together in
the unity of the faith, that know the Religion that is pure, and come to the
faith that purifies the heart, where there is no jars, nor janglings about
Sacraments, diverse washing and carnal Ordinances, that are come to the house,
and know its outgoings, and in-comings, and know the Ordinances of the house,
and are fed with the good things of his house, who is the Father of Spirits.
And thus the children of the light, that believe in the light, feed together,
and are nourished up together, all feeding upon the one bread, the bread of
life, that nourishes up unto eternal life; and this is another manner of
feeding, another kind of Baptism then what the worlds Professors call their
Sacraments, and so you must first be baptized into his death, before you come
to be partakers of his life; and he that comes to this comes to the substance,
the thing it self, not to shows, figures, and shadows, to keep people in that,
but to be partakers of that which is living, the bread of life, and to drink of
the water of life from the spring of life, plunging the deadly part under,
where this Baptism is witnessed, the one Baptism, baptized by the one Spirit
into the one body; 1 Cor. 12.13. and so the Baptism must be known before the
table be come unto, which the Saints have declared and were witnesses of.

Therefore you who have been in these things so long, and in such a belief,
consider whether your faith have yet purified your heart, or given you victory
over the world, or when it will, that say you believe in God, in Christ, and in
the Spirit, and yet believe not in the light, for God is light, and the Spirit
enlightneth the understanding, and Christ is the true light of the world; can
you believe in all these and not believe in the light, or is that the true
faith where the light is not believed in, which enlightneth every man that
comes into the world; or is a confession of words, or repetition of words
enough to save the soul, for the Heathen had that, which thought they should be
heard for their much speaking, who knew not God; but a belief in the light, in
the Lord Jesus Christ, that brings the salvation, for with the heart man
believes, which is more then words; and he that believes is not condemned,
but he that believes not is condemned already, the Light is his condemnation.

Cain was the first blood-shedder, because his Brothers Offering was accepted,
and his was not, for no other reason, and all that is of Cains Generation are
blood-shedders, according to the Scripture, 1. Epistle of John 3. Chapter and
the 12. and 15. verses, for how can any one whatsoever say the Lords Prayer, in
deed, and in truth, when we pray forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them
that trespass against us, so that they that say this and do it not, bring a
curse upon themselves instead of a blessing, for they desire others to do by
them, as they do by others.

W. S.

THE END.

