A SHORT TESTIMONY On the behalf of Truths Innocence; Declared in Plainness
and simplicity, being done at the Command of the Lord God, that all out of the
Truth may see their way and proceed no further. With a Discovery of the
National Ministry, whose Time now is, and is no more.

By one who loves Truth and Righteousness, and desires the Naticns Peace, and
the good of all people, who amongst many Brethren is called a Quaker, but known
by the Name of WILLIAM SMITH.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.

THe Truth of the Lord God endures for ever; what it was in the beginning, it
is the same at this day, and no man can lay another Foundation; it is pure, and
the appearance of it is glorious, it does not join with evil, neither has any
agreement with the works of darkness, it sheds it self abroad in the hearts of
all that believe in it; the intents of all hearts it makes manifest, and is a
Reprover of the workers of iniquity; it seeks nothing of this world, neither
joins to the glory thereof; it comes from God, and seeks the glory of God, and
this is the sent of God, who is true, and no unrighteousness in him, he comes
forth from the Father, and comes into the world, not to destroy the world but
to bear witness unto the Truth, that all in the Truth might believe; he is meek
and lowly, peaceable and gentle, full of mercy, goodness and compassion, he
loves his enemies, and does good to those that hate him; there is no strife in
him, but a patient suffering and forbearing; when he is reviled he revileth not
again, when he suffers he threatens not, but as a Lamb he is led to the
slaughter, and neither cries nor lifts up his voice in the streets; he is come
forth in his might, and in his strength is risen, to cut the work short in
righteousness, and to tread upon the high places of the Earth, that man may
know there is a God that rules in the Kingdoms of the World, who is jealous of
his glory, and will not give it to another, but in his right will reign, who is
King of Kings, and of his Government there is no end; his Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion is glorious, and this he is establishing
upon the top of all Mountains, and exalting over the high Places of the Earth,
not with sound of Trumpets or the Alarm of War, or the mighty Host of Men and
Horses, but with the outstretched arm of his own Power that he has made bare
in the sight of all Nations; he has appeared in his Power, and visited the
Poor in this day of his Mercy, and has helped the Needy in their great
distress; he is come who has been long waited for, and he is now revealed who
is the Salvation of God, he has chosen a People to delight in him, and
gathered a Remnant to make mention of his Name, and to declare his goodness
from day to day; he leads them in his Power, and orders them in his wisdom; and
they are given up unto him, and are made willing to follow him; he has redeemed
them to himself, and chosen them to be a peculiar People; they are not of the
world as he is not of the world, but out of the world he has gathered them,
and over the world he has set them, and they have no fellowship with it, but
testisies against it, for which cause the world hates them, not knowing the
Life that is revealed in them, for they are born again of the immortal Word,
which mortal man does not know, nor cannot comprehend in his earthly wisdom,
therefore does the birth after the flesh persecute the birth born of the
spirit; who knows him not in his appearance, nor cannot behold his glory who is
full of Grace and Truth, but has always turned against him and hated his
appearance, and could not believe that it was he, and so has persecuted and
reviled him, crucified and slain him, and in whom he has made himself manifest
and chosen to delight in him, they have been always counted the offscouring
of the world as it is at this day; and though we be hated of man, yet bear we
no evil to any, but patiently gives our back to the Smiter, and what is
permitted we endure, and counts reproaches great Riches, and to suffer for
righteousness sake more joy then to live in the pleasure of sin; and though
you strive against us, yet we are preserved, for we are born of the seed which
is blessed for ever, and we abide in our Tents and rest in the strength of the
Glory of our God, and none can curse us; therefore be at rest concerning us,
for you do not know us, nor our Resting Place, where we are set down and are
preserved in perfect peace, and are not in fear what man can do unto us; and
though we walk among you, and in the midest of you, we are not of you, nor have
no fellowship with you nor with the works that are brought forth by you, for
God has redeemed us from amongst you, and chosen us to be a holy People unto
himself, that we may show forth his Praise in walking blameless and harmless
in the Land of Uprightness, and in the Life of Innocence, and we have nothing
in our hearts but love to all, pitying those that are our Enemies, praying that
God would give them Repentance unto life, for we are followers of him who laid
down his life for his Enemies, and made himself of no Reputation, unto the
Cross humbled himself that sinners might he saved, and enemies reconciled unto
God, and this is his love to you all who would not have you perish, and he has
begotten the same mind in us, and our eye is toward him who is gone before us,
and he is a Leader and Commander unto us, and we confess to him alone who is
the Lord of Glory and the Prince of peace, who unto peace has called us and in
peace to rest, that in peace we may conquer the Nations, and in quietness
overcome the People that delight in War, and this is the Conquering Power unto
which we are subject, and this is the Captain of our salvation whom we follow,
and we have not used either Sword or Spear, or looked unto the arm of flesh to
be a defense unto us, neither is it in our hearts so to strive with any, or
persecute any, or destroy any People, but in peace to rest until he plead our
Cause, and execute Judgment for us, that all may behold that we are a People
saved by the Lord, whom we follow in obedience to do his Will, and in his Power
are made willing to go through good report and bad Report, as deceivers and yet
true, as dying and yet we live, and this day this Scripture is fulfilled in
your ears, and we do not speak it, because it was the condition of Saints
before us, but as we are witnesses of it, through the leadings of the same
Spirit; for you are not ignorant how many bad reports has been raised and
spread abroad concerning us, crying, Report and we will Report; and so have
Reports been spread in the Nation of the Quakers rising and cutting Throats
which are bad Reports, yet we have gone through them in Patience, having no
guilt upon us concerning them, but stand clear before the Lord our God, and in
our innocence are justified in his sight; How are we counted Deceivers by the
wise Generation, and yet we are born into the Truth, and walk in the Truth, and
live the life of Truth, and we know the freedom that is wrought by it, and we
have the seal of Gods Spirit, which has revealed it in our inward parts, and
this we go through in the leadings of God, in whom we have peace* how often
has death been threatened to us by unreasonable men, and yet we are preserved
in the power of God and live before him, and thus do we walk as a despised and
an afflicted people, and yet we are led through all, and in the Power of God
walks upon the top of all, and stand over all those things, and heed them not,
for our delight is in the Lord our God, and in his righteous Law we meditate
day and night, that our minds may be exercised unto him, in that which is pure
of him, that gives us peace with him and seals assurance of his everlasting
love unto us; So we mind not who are against us, or what is reported concerning
us, or how we are counted in this World, but we mind the light of Christ
manifest in our Consciences, and in the light our Minds are exercised, and with
the light all evil Thoughts are judged, and we are justified before our God,
and though the world be against us, taking Counsel what Course to take with us,
and many fretting themselves about us, yet we do not frowardly strive with any
man, but follow peace with all men, and in peace we are preserved when our
Enemies are confounded and over-turned by the Arm of God. Behold and see ye
Despisers, what a work is this, how can you believe when it is declared, that
God should plead the Cause of his Chosen People, and make bare his Arm for his
innocent Lambs, and by his invisible Power to over-turn the mighty Councels of
men, when neither Sword nor Spear has been on our side, nor any thing without
us has appeared for us, then has our God been near at hand, and a present
help he has been unto us, and with his outstretched Arm he has from time to
time delivered us from the wrath of unreasonable men; and thus we have
experienced his everlasting loving kindness, and his wonderful Works we are
made to declare amongst the Children of Men, that all may know there is no God
like unto our God, unto whom alone we look, and our eye is toward him, and we
cannot join with weapons of War, nor with any Party who is striving with them,
but we set all men aside in the Work of our God, and cannot meddle with other
men's matters, but looks unto the Lord and cries unto the God of our strength,
and our eye is single to him, and our expectation is from him alone, and he
has never failed us, but has appeared to deliver us, and in the strength of
his own life has wrought our Works for us, and with the Arm of his Salvation
he has saved us, unto whom be Glory, Dominion and Praise for evermore.

Now all People see and Consider what is the ground that you appear so full of
Enmity against a People that neither threatens you, nor appears against you,
nor bears no evil will unto you; Is it because you are in fear of your persons,
and that we seek to destroy you from off the Earth? Then let the Offense cease,
and be quiet in your Minds, for we stand clear before our God, and in our
Innocence are Justified in his sight, and neither our Hearts nor Hands have
joined, nor can join with such a Work; Therefore, be not afraid where no Fear
is, nor be not Envious from groundless Jealousies, but mind the Light of Christ
in your Consciences, and wait to receive the Love of God in it, that you may
cease from anger, wrath, malice, or bearing evil will unto a People who walks
innocently before the Lord and toward all men: And that which troubles you,
and is a terror to you, and brings fear upon you, it is your own consciences,
for there is your trouble, terror and fear, and it will terrify you, and
fearfulness will surprise you who are in the hypocrisy, for it is the same
that passed through Egypt of old, and wrought mighty signs and wonders upon
Pharaoh and all the Egyptians who stood in their hard-heartednesse and would
not obey the Lord, nor let Israel go, though God sent Moses to lead them out of
Egypt, and from under Pharaohs power, yet he withstood the Lord, and his heart
was hardened against the mighty God, until every house was searched, and the
firstborn was smitten and died, and then there was a cry amongst the
Egyptians, and great fear was upon the Land, and then was the time come in
which Israel should be set free: you must read that can, for he that wrought
then is working at this day to break off the yoke that the oppressed may be set
free, and he will not leave a House amongst you, but he will pass through it,
and smite the firstborn in it, that his Seed may come forth from under your
cruel oppression: And this I have received of the Lord, and declares it in the
Auth^^ity of God, that all may dread before the Holy One of Israel, and if your
enmity arise toward us concerning the Law of our God which in our hearts he
has written, and is holy, Just and good, and that you cannot receive Truth as
it is made known unto us by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Then be still in
your minds and wait to receive Counsel from God, and be not rash nor forward
in an envious spirit, but be cool and moderate that you may receive an
understanding in the things of God, for we dare not deny the Truth which God
has made manifest in us, whatever you can do unto us, and if Truth offend you,
then are we clear from the offense, for Truth gives not offense, but the wicked
one takes offense at Truths appearance, and so the offense comes of your
selves, and the woe is to you who takes offense at the Truth and turns against
the little Ones that are borne into the life of it, and offends them by your
cruelty and oppression; Therefore let it be well considered what Truth is, and
who they be that are come to the knowledge of it, and walks in it; that whiles
you are warring and fighting about that which you call Truth, ye be not
ignorant what Truth is, and so set up Error in truths stead, and give
judgment against Christ who is the truth and Life, of whom we testify, and
confess him before men, and that with boldness in his power, and we are not
ashamed of the Gospel, but bears witness of it to be the Power of God, and
necessity is laid upon us so to do, and we cannot be silent, but as the Lord
gives utterance we are constrained to make mention of his Name, and to declare
his Truth from day to day; And we do not take thought concerning men that rise
up against us, neither heed them as to what they can do unto us, therefore let
not the preaching of the cross of Christ offend you, neither stumble at that
stone any longer, least it fall upon you and grind you to powder, for our
Testimony is unto the Name of Jesus, and that there is not Salvation in any
other name, and this is known in the light which is manifest from him, that
lets all see the need of salvation, for this is your great want who are from
the light, you want Gods Salvation, and so remains in your sins and in your
lusts from whence wars and contentious do arise; And this is Truth unto you all
people, and do not count us your enemies because we tell it you in plainness,
and labors for you that you might come to the knowledge of it and besaved by
it, And though we have born much from you, and suffer much by you, yet this is
our care for you that you may be saved, and our desires to God for you that he
would not lay to your charge what you do unto us, and we stand innocent before
the Lord in all things that have been done unto us or intended toward us, and
we seek not Revenge upon any man, and though Truth be counted Heresy by such
as are yet in darkness, yet we know the power of it, and the salvation in it,
and after that way now called Heresy so worship we the God of our Fathers;
Therefore all people behold and see what your way is, and go not on to your own
destruction, but cease from evil, and let not envy and malice lodge in your
hearts, nor strive not in your wills against the Truth of God, for he is
establishing the throne of his glory, and who art thou that contends against
him? It were better for thee to be still and quiet, and meddle not in things
too wonderful for thee, but let that alone which concerns the most High:
Therefore all people, in time your ways consider, and proceed no further in
that which is evil, which tends to persecution and destruction, but all take
warning from the Lord, and all turn unto him, before the day of his fierce
wrath come, for if you neglect the light of Christ in your consciences you
neglect your Salvation, and if you turn against the appearance of God in his
people, and conspire against the Just, and murder the Innocent, God will find
you out, and the hour of his judgment will come, and his wrath will abide upon
you for ever. So all mind the Light of Christ within you, that is manifest from
God unto you, that you may depart out of evil, and be led unto God from whence
the Light comes, that you may come to discern the things of God, and understand
that which belongs to your peace, for all that the Lord has gathered in this
day of his mercy, to make known in them his wonderful works in his mighty power
they walk in Gods fear, and stand in his Counsel, and knows all things in their
place, and what is of God they honor, and what is of man they cannot own, for
God has raised his own Seed that cannot consent to any custom or fashion or
tradition of the World, but testifies against them all, and we are born of the
Seed which has no part in the World, and in the power of it we are redeemed
out of the World, therefore we cannot conform to the World neither in custom,
fashion or tradition, nor we cannot exercise our selves in any thing we are
convinced of to be contrary to the Truth, and this is all that you have against
us, because we answer a conscience void of offense toward God and man, and
walks in obedience to the teachings of God, which does not answer your vain
minds which are puffed up, so you cannot receive the pure language of Truth,
but rejects and scorns it and are angry, and if you be not bowed unto and
spoken unto according to your customs then you are offended, and so you fret
your selves in the pride of your hearts, because we cannot answer your vain
minds in your Customs, Fashions and Traditions, and this is the great offense
you take at us which provokes you to anger, and fills you with wrath and
indignation against us, when we walk simply in the Truth of God and do not give
offense to any in the Truth speaking, or in not moving or bowing to any man's
person to have it in respect, for such things are out of Truth, and where they
are practiced the leading of the Spirit is not known, so you that are in those
things you are in the vain customs of the Heathen and follows your own wills,
and satisfies your vain minds in your lust, which grieves the Spirit of God,
and we cannot own them, nor be conformable unto them, we dare not speak any
other Language but thou to a single person, knowing it is the spirits Language,
and has been from the beginning, and the Scripture declares of no other; We
cannot put off our hats and bow unto the persons of men, knowing that he who
respects persons commits sin, and is convinced of the Law to be a Transgressor,
and we know that when our hat is on our head, it is where it ought to be, being
given for a covering unto that part, so we cannot move it, or put it off in
honor to any man, but as our freedom is in God, for we have denied such things
in obedience to God, and we cannot return again into them to be entangled with
them, but stands in the freedom of God into which we are redeemed by his mighty
power, and we see all these things to be vain which are practiced in the World,
and are not after the Spirit but after the Flesh, and from the heart which is
deceitful and desperately wicked, and we cannot join with them, nor be
conformable unto them for conscience sake, for we are set free by the Law of
the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, and we know them to be works of darkness,
and so we testify against them, and we have the answer of a good conscience
therein and peace with God, and in this we rejoice that we have not at any time
suffered as evil doers, but for the Testimony of a good conscience in
simplicity and Innocence in the sight of God who upholds us in his arm, and
preserves us in his power from the wrath of unreasonable men; So in
faithfulness we stand approved to God, and is manifest to the measure of God
in you all, and before the Lord we stand Innocent, neither seeking nor striving
after any thing but the glory of God and the good of all people: and we do not
deny any thing in the truth, therefore we are hated without cause, nor we
cannot own any thing out of the Truth, therefore our sufferings are not
grievous to us, though we be kiled all the day long, and counted as sheep for
the slaughter, and the eyes of all are upon us for evil, yet we are preserved
by an invisible power, and our hearts are enlarged and our Tongues are
unloosed, to magnify the God of our Salvation: Therefore take warning all
people and do not withstand Truth any longer, nor proceed no further in your
enmity against an innocent people, for your folly will be made manifest if you
go on in your way, and still continue the yoke and the burdens upon us, and
have it in your hearts to spoil and persecute us who cannot for conscience sake
submit to your customs, nor allow your practices which arises from your own
inventions; So from high to low consider, and what is past let it be
sufficient, and let it not be in your hearts to proceed any further in your
wills against the Innocent, that God may divert his judgments which will
certainly fall upon your heads if you go on in your wickedness, and there will
be no escaping the fiery wrath of the Almighty. Let this warning reach unto you
and take place in you all (people) that you may dread before the Lord, and he
that has done wickedly do so no more, and who does intend any evil toward us,
let it not abide within you, but cast out your evil thoughts, and entertain
them no longer, and let not your Tongues be so perverse, but know the bridle
for them that you may not speak unadvisedly as many have done, who have called
light darkness and Truth delusion, and so have reviled and scorned us who are
by the light guided and in the truth walk, and let your moderation appear to
all men that you may do unto others as you would have others to do unto you,
for you make such measure as you would not have measured unto you again, so you
are not come to the Law and the Prophets, therefore your way is not good nor to
be proceeded in any further, but it is to be denied, and cast off and departed
from; So be stayed in time, and all mind the things that belong to your places,
and let him that Rules mind his place and rule with diligence, and make sweet
and wholesome Laws for the government of Nations, that people therein may be
protected from injury, violence, or any wrong, and be ordered in peace, and
dwell in safty every man in his place, and that sin may be cut down which does
so much abound, and all evil doers restrained from their evil ways, and the
well doers encouraged in their holy walking, that so true Judgment and Equity
may abound in the Nations, and Truth and Righteousness may Run among the
people as a mighty stream, and let him that serves serve with carfulness, and
mind his place, that he run not beyond his Power, and so pervert the issuing
forth of wholesome Laws in their right course, and turn them into a corrupted
chanel; Therefore let him that serves be careful that he stretch not himself
beyond his line as many in the Servants place do at this day, who act both
beyond Law, and contrary to the Law, and so neither regards God nor man; Let
this be all denied, and mind your-places in finglenesse, that you may perform
them with carfulness as unto God, that both He that Rules, and he that serves
may be subject to the Higher Power which is of God, and know that to be over
all Powers, that none may enter into his work or meddle with those things that
are too high for you, as many have done, who have busied themselves and spent
much time but never could perfect any thing, but have been over turned and
overwhelmed and none could be found to uphold them, and this is the Work of
the Lord, and the outstretched Arm of his Power that does all these things,
who appears to be the Salvation of a People that trust in him, and to over-turn
all those that conspire against them. How did he deliver Daniel out of the
Lions Den, and Mordecay and the scattered Jews from the wickedness intended
against them, and Shedrack, Mesheck and Abednego out of the flames of the
furnace, and from the wrath of Babylons King; And this is our God, on whom we
wait and whom we serve and worship, and our eye is toward him, and our
expectations from him, and his hand is not shortened toward us, neither does he
fail us, therefore our hearts are filled with joy, and our tongues with
praises, and our spirits rest in hope, for God has made his Tabernacle with
us, and dwells among us, and he is our God, and we are his People in Truth and
Righteousness.

O ye dear Children of Light whom God has gathered in this day of his
compassion, and counts you worthy to suffer for His Name sake, rejoice and be
glad, for great is your Reward; Lift up your heads in the strength of the Lord,
and walk in the power of his might, that you may be preserved by him in
faithfulness to him, that the Crown you may receive which no man can take from
you; O let your souls rejoice in him, and all that is within you praise his
Holy Name, for there is none like unto him who is over all Gods, and over all
Kings, sitting upon his Throne and judging right; Let all bow before him and be
subject to his Power, that in peace we may lie down together, and in rest be
established by the Arm of his Salvation for evermore.

O thou Holy Righteous Seed, thy day is come, thy day is come, thou Holy One,
thou art the Lamb, thy day is come, and victory thou will obtain, thy Power is
known that makes us rejoice in Thee, Thou art the King of Glory over all, we
are subject unto Thee, and with one accord we praise thy Name, and our voice we
lift up to Thee; Thou have Redeemed us, and we are thine, and in thy love we are
overcome to thee; Thou art the undefiled One, and what we are, we are in thee,
Thou art our life, and we live in thee; Thou glorious Birth we have been thy
star, and we worship thee, and present unto thee a living sacrifice of holy
praises, everlasting glory and endless dominion for ever and ever.

O ye Ministers of England and Nations afar off, your time now is, and is no
more; you are not upright before God, but are seeking your selves, and are
double-minded men; you serve the times and not the Lord, and you turn amongst
the changeable things, every man after his own way, having your time in your
hand, so you can run with the times, and turn with the times, and what the
times are, you are the same in show; this is your own time, and now it is,
Behold it passes away, and is no more, for God is dividing the times, and
raising his own Seed in his own time, which in your time you cannot comprehend;
How have you limited the holy One in your observing times, you have had your
time so much in your own hand that you have forgotten the Lord whose power is
unlimited, and his time unchangeable; and you have brought forth your own
Inventions in your own time, and have set them up for Doctrine and Worship, and
you have not regarded Gods time which is in his own hand, so he is not to be
found amongst you, nor in your time, but has left you and departed from you,
and you are become like a barren Wilderness and a wild Forest where Briars
and Thorns grow; and if any cannot observe your times, then you take hold like
briars and tears them, and strikes like a thorn into their side; and this is
the Spirit of Presecution that reigns in you O ye National Ministry, there is
sufficient witnesses against you who are oppressed by you in the Prisons this
day, into which you have caused them to be haled, and torn with your briars,
and where you prick them with your thorns; and is not this your Work at this
day? When will you be weary of it you perverse men of Corrupt minds who are
after earthly things acting against God and his People for filthy lucre sake?
And for this end you can be any thing in show, and turn with all times, that
your Gain from your Quarter may be upheld to you, but the Lord is uncovering
you to your shame for ever, though your Time seem now to be, for the Lord is
against you, and his controversy is with you, and all that strive to uphold
you, and you must all fall together, and there shall be none to delivery on out
of his hands; And thus you have served the times through all the Changings and
Turnings, and now you have it, but it is no more; You sigh deep, and draw your
breath from far, for that which is out of time is come to reign over you, and
you are now striving for your life, not being willing to die; what a time have
you, and what a life do you live? Consider it in the fear of God, and let your
Envy and Malice cease toward those that cannot uphold the things in which
your time and life is; What is it you would do in your time? Would you build
your Nests so high that the Lord may not see you? Or would you enclose your
selves with Cedars that he may not find you out? Declare what is in your minds
to the Nations, that People may be satisfied concerning you; How do you
manifest your selves to be of the wicked One, who with a secret breath blows
the Coals until they kindle and break out into flames; and all this has been
done in your own time, which makes you manifest to be of Cains Race, and in the
Wolves Nature, for the day has declared you, and nothing can cover you from
the all-seeing Eye of God, but your inward parts is opened, and an ill savor
arises from you, and all your Merchandise is become loathsome to the Upright in
heart, and they cannot buy them any more; Therefore behold where you are: and
what is the place of your Rest, for Babylon must be destroyed, and all her
Merchants must be spoiled, and you must not be spared who are found in the
midst of her; for the Lord God is strong that Judges her, and he will dash all
her Brats against the stones, and burn her with fire, and you that favor her
shall then Mourn for her, and you that have taken up your Rest in her Lap, and
partakes with her of her sins, you must partake of her Plagues, and destruction
will come upon you in one day, and a Hiding place you will not find; This is
from the Lord God unto you, that you may come out of Babylon and Trade no
longer in her, nor drink no more of the Wine of her Fornication, nor do not
cause others to drink of the Cup of her Abomination; But all be still in your
minds: and wait to know the measure of God in you, that the Light of Christ
which does enlighten you may be your Guide, that your Eyes may be opened, and
all your confusion discovered unto you, that you may see your way and come to
Repentance; for you are not fit to be Teachers of others while Envy and malice
remains in your hearts, and while you are Time-servers, and Men-pleasers, and
loves your pleasures more than God; You are not like Christ's Ministers who
knows the love of God in Christ shed abroad in their hearts, and in his love
are constrained to serve him, and to deny all for him; Therefore come out of
Babylon, and keep not People any longer in her with your Enchantments and
Sorceries with which you deceive, but come to the light of Christ with which
you are enlightened, that his power you may know to crucify the proud Nature
in which you live, so will you come to a good understanding of the things that
belongs to your peace, and know the Lords time in his own hand, and his own arm
that perfects his own work to his own praise, and do not strive against God,
nor fret not your selves when he appears, but walk like sober men, and let
every man stand in his freedom that he has in God, in which he answers a good
Conscience unto God, and be content with such maintenance as they are free to
allow you, and give over forcing and compelling, suing and imprisoning those
that are not of you, nor cannot join with you for Conscience sake, for that is
not the practice of Christ's Ministers, neither is there any Scripture on your
side by which you can prove your practice warrantable, but it arises from the
Beast and the Whore which gives life to the false Prophet, who must all be
taken alive, and cast into the Lake, where the worm never dies, nor the fire is
not quenched, and their carkases shall be an abhorring to all flesh, and their
time shall be no more.

THE END.

