A Few PLAIN WORDS Concerning CONFORMITY IN Matter of Religion and Worship: And
also concerning Evidence and Judgment in Cases of Conscience.
Published to all Magistrates, Jurors, and People, within the Nation of England.
Seeing that the main thing now intended by the late Act of Parliament is to
bring people into Conformity unto the Lyturgie of the Church of England, as
appears by the said Act, in providing Remedies against all other Assemblies and
Meetings as seditious Conventicles: Now the main Question will be this; Whether
the Lyturgie of the Church of England be the true Reformed Religion and
Worship, according to the purity in Primitive times? And whether such as
descent from it do yet remain in the Apostasy? This is the main Question now
to be considered; for the Lyturgie-worship, as now practiced in the Church of
England, is generally taken to be the best Reformed, and nearest to the
Apostolic Order, and so is pressed and urged as the most Refined Religion and
Worship to be observed. Now how far it is Reformed, and how near it is brought
unto the Apostolic Order, I shall not at this time compare or distinguish; but
if it were truly and rightly Reformed into the Primitive Purity, and that the
same Spirit of Truth had the ordering of it as the Apostles were ordered by,
then no Persecution would rise out of it, for in the Apostolic Order there
were never any; therefore the Reformation is yet a far off from that Religion
and Worship which was in the Primitive times, and so the dissenting from it, or
not conforming to it, does not conclude the dissenters to be in Error, because
something may lie nearer the truth of the Apostolic Worship then what the
Lyturgie of the Church of England is reformed into. For if such as have
received the Spirit of God, and therein worship him, have found something
nearer to the Apostolic Practice, than what is observed by the Lyturgie of the
Church of England, then they are to be allowed the liberty in their Worship
without restraint or prohibition, for the true Worship (...) in the Spirit, and
they that worship God in the Spirit, they are truly Reformed into the
Apostolic Order, and they cannot persecute any, but walk in love and meekness
toward all, which is the clearest Evidence of the best Reformed Religion, and
that which lies nearest unto the Apostolic Order: For the word Lyturgie
signifies, The Public Service of the Church. Now if the Lyturgie of the Church
of England, do not agree with the Lyturgie of the true Church in Primitive
times, then it is not transgression to dissent from it, and there is nothing
does more infallibly demonstrate the disagreement, than Persecution by it, and
suffering under it; for the Public Service in the true Church, is by the
Spirit of God, and none can order the Church in things pertaining to God but by
the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of God never persecuted any, nor such as
worship God in the Spirit cannot be of that mind, for that is not a good
service in the Church, neither do such as are guided by the Spirit of God
dissent from the Lyturgie, but may be truly in the public Service of the
Church, though not in the public Service of the Church of England. So then it
remains to be enquired by such as yet know not what Religion and Worship is
best Reformed and most agreeable to the Lyturgie, or public Worship of the
Church in Primitive times? and something may herein be said to answer any
enquirer.

1. That is the best Reformed Religion and Worship, which is Reformed by the
Spirit of God, because that has power to Reform and Change the heart, and so
to order the heart in the fear of God, and in the public service of the Church.

2. That is the best Reformed Religion and Worship which stands in the freedom
of the Spirit, in which there is no binding or limitation, but a free Service
in the Church.

3. That is the best Reformed Religion and Worship, which stands in love,
peace, and good will, in which there is no Restriction nor Persecution, but a
serving one another in love, which is the public Service of the Church.

4. That is the best Reformed Religion and worship, when every man does to
another as he would be done unto himself, in which there is no envy, hatred, or
malice, but a peaceable and a holy life in all godliness and honesty, which is
the public service of the Church.

These few things being well considered, it will appear, that the people who
are called Quakers, do not dissent from the Lyturgie, but are due observers of
it; for as they are guided by the Spirit of God, so their service is a public
service of the Church; but the service of the Church of England is a private
service compared with the many Religions and Worships that are in the world:
For nothing can be a public service of the Church, but that which is performed
in the public Spirit of God; because the Spirit is an universal principle, and
in every Nation it guides such as receives it and believes in it, into one way
and service, and that is public in every Nation, and not tied or bound unto
one Nation only, for that which may be observed in one Nation, is but a private
thing compared with other Nations in the world, that differ from them in matter
of Religion and worship: But the Spirit and power of God reforms Nations, and
gathers them into unity and peace in which they are true members of the Church,
and set in the public service of it; and if the word Lyturgie may be allowed
to the Quakers according to its proper signification, then they are in practice
the best observers of it, for their service is a public service in the Church.

Now let all Magistrates who are commissioned to give judgment touching
offenses, seriously consider, for the matter is of such weight and concernment,
as worthy to be deliberated, and not hastily to fall upon it in any rash
conclusion; for it is only seditious Conventicles which the late Act provideth
Remedies against, and gives this reason* because at their Meetings they
contrive Insurrections, as late experience has showed: Now the Quakers are not
any way guilty of offending in these cases; and that it may be the better
understood, I shall explain the signification of the words unto the Capacities
of all sorts of sensible people. Sedition is discord, strife, and debate.
Conventicle is a small Assembly commonly for ill things, or as the Law expounds
it, where many do impart with others to kill a man, or to take another part in
ill things, Lam. 173. Insurrection is a rising of men in Arms: Now concerning
all these things, which is the very ground of the said Act, there cannot any
thing justly be laid to the Quakers charge; for if experience in these cases be
taken for good evidence, then the Quakers Meetings are wholly cleared by the
said Act, for no such things has ever been experienced to rise from their
Meetings; and therefore the said Act not lying against them in the ground, no
Penalty or punishment is to be laid upon them by virtue of the same. And this
is written unto you Magistrates, who are commissiioned to give judgment in
cases of offenses; for it is a plea generally used by Magistrates, That they
are bound to put the Law in Execution: well, if it be so, and that you are so
careful to discharge your trust, yet you must find an offender before you can
legally execute the Law, and the offense must arise by good and sound evidence
to be a transgressing of that Law, and that according to the purpose of the
Law: So that you may be in a capacity to judge and determine Causes equally,
according to good evidence, in things pertaining to men; but as to things
pertaining to Conscience, they are too high for you, for you can have no
evidence to inform you concerning the offense, and so cannot judge or determine
the matter equally in that case: And if in this case of Meeting, there nothing
does appear of discord or strife, or any ill things, then there is not any
thing for you to take knowledge of as an offense, or that can be charged as
transgression upon such as so meet, though they meet in greater or lesser
numbers; for the Act is not against peaceable Meetings, nor against the true
Worship of God; but where there is Religion and Worship pretended in Meetings,
and some ill thing intended by that Meeting, and according to the intention
break forth into a public manifestation, then, upon good evidence, in that
case you may proceed to Penalties and punishment of the offenders, and so every
apparent offense may have a witness (without) to give evidence to the Fact, by
which Judgment may be given according to the offense. But if the Conscience
offend against God, that must be left to his witness within, and to his
Judgment alone, who both sees the offense, and knows how to punish it
according to the nature of it; and therefore all such cases as relate to to the
Conscience, is to be left to God alone, who sees secrets, and judges secrets,
and gives to every man according to his deeds, without respect of persons.

And now a few words unto you that serve upon Juries, seeing something in the
said Act may come within your enquiry; for the third offense in order to
Transportation, is to be tried by Verdict: Now where you come to be concerned
in any such case, wherein the matter lies in point of Conscience, be very
careful what you do. And first, you that serve upon grand Juries, the matter
lies of very great concernment unto you, forasmuch as you are the finders and
accusers of offenders, and so prepares the way in order to conviction or
Judgment. Now if there be not some evidence, that can make good proof that
there was some appearance of discord or ill things at such a Meeting, for which
any Party or Parties may stand Indicted, then you are not in a capacity to find
the Bill to be true, forasmuch as you cannot be informed whether such a Meeting
was pretended to Worship, and some ill thing intended by it, or whether it was
a Meeting to worship God singly in Spirit and in Truth, which the Act is not
against; and so if it lie as a case of Conscience, without any appearance; you
can have no true evidence in it, and therefore you are not to find it, nor
accuse any in that case as guilty of an offense worthy of punishment.

Object But some may say, We only enquire for the King, and therefore upon good
evidence to the Indictment, we are bound to find it, and let the Party clear
himself upon his Trial.

Answ. As you stand only to enquire for the King, so you are to enquire what
wrong the King sustains by the Fact, of which the Party-stands indicted for if
the evidence to the Indictment prove not some wrong done to the King in matter
of Fact, then you cannot know the Bill to be a true Bill, and so is not to put
the Party upon his Trial: For if the Indictment do not lie, as to some wrong
done by the Party Indicted, either a^ to Life, Estate, Peace, or Liberty of
another, and that it be not so proved by your evidence then the King is not
wronged, and you may clearly acquit the Party on the Kings behalf, and leave
things that pertain to the Conscience unto God alone, for none besides him
knows what is in man. And you that are ordered upon Juries for Conviction, your
places is of the greatest weight and concernment, forasmuch as you try the
Life, and may either save it, or destroy it: For though the grand Jury do
enquire and find the Indictment, yet it is you that either casts or clears a
man upon his Trial, for you are Judges of the Fact, and if you Judge the Party
guilty of the Fact, then you expose him to the Judgment of the Law, in that
Case. Now forasmuch as there is a late Act of Parliament made, which does refer
the Trial of the third offense punishable by it, unto a Verdict, if it so come
to pass, that any such Trial be brought before you, consider well what evidence
you have to prove it, for there lies the main thing on your Parts, who
according to your evidence does either find the Party guilty, or clear,
concerning the fact and if you find him clear as to the Fact, then you free him
(...) the Sentence of the Law. Now it may be in such Cases, you may have some
Evidence that will prove a Meeting above the number of five besides the Family,
but then consider whether such Evidence be sufficient to prove any people
offenders against the said Act, except it be also proved, that there was
discord and strife, or any ill things practiced in such a Meeting, which is the
very signification of the words upon which the said Act is grounded; now if no
such thing can be proved unto you, then there is not any Meeting that does
amount to transgression against the said Act, though there be a Meeting to the
number of five hundred or more; for it is the thing done that makes the Fact,
but if no such thing as beforementioned be done in the Assemblies of people in
the way wherein they worship, then the Act is not transgressed, and if not
transgressed, then such as meets together are not to be punished as offenders:
therefore consider well your places, for your service stands in judging the
Fact according to your Evidence; but wherein any case of Conscience is brought
before you, there can no Evidence prove the matter truly to you, and therefore
you are to leave it unto God, and to his Witness in the Conscience, and by your
Verdict to acquit all People in things relating to their Conscience, and let
them account unto God before whom they must stand or fall.

And now a few words unto all People, for seeing there is Information and
evidence to be given in the aforesaid cases, before there can be any
proceedings as to Conviction or Judgment, it does concern every one to be
careful what they do, for the Act does not impose any penalty or punishment
upon any for not informing, and therefore where any do set themselves to do it,
they will but manifest a forward mind in the thing wherein they may keep
themselves free, and if any do put themselves upon it, as to Inform against any
peaceable meeting of the people called Quakers, they will manifest more envy
and malice to their neighbors than love and good will: For the Act is not
against the Quakers Meetings, being their Meetings are peacable, and no
peacable Meeting is a seditious Conventicle, and how can any truly Inform of
unlawful Meeting, when the Law is not against it, for that makes a thing
unlawful when the thing done is against the Law in that case; but the Quakers
Meetings are not against the Act in that case made, for it is made to prevent
and suppress seditious Conventicles, and pretenders of Worship, and not
peaceable Meetings, and the true Worship. And so to meet peaceable, as the
Quakers do, and all along have done on their parts, above the number of 5
besides the Family, is not an unlawful Assembly or Meeting, for the Law is not
against it, but to meet to the number of five besides the Family; under
Pretense of Religion and Worship, and at such Meetings to enter into discord
and strife, and do ill things, as to rise in Arms, and be tumultuous to the
disturbance of the Nations peace, then it is a Seditious Conventicle, and an
unlawful Meeting, because the Law is against it, and they that meet in that
manner, (...) the hazard of the penalties and punishment that the Law in that
case provideth against offenders, and it is only such as are dangerous
Sectaries, who at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, or to raise up strife,
and ill things, which makes a Seditious Conventicle, as is before explained:
Therefore let all people be careful how they inform and give evidence in this
case, for the Act does not prohibit any peaceable Meeting, where people meets
together in the fear of God, and truly worships him in tenderness of
Conscience, this is not only a pretended thing but a real true thing, which the
Act does not prohibit. Therefore all people be in love with your Neighbors,
and then no hasty Information or evidence will be given against any for their
obedience unto God, and for worshipping him in Spirit and in Truth, according
to his mind; for if there be no Informers, there can be no proceedings, and
therefore as Information is the cause that gives motion to the Wheel, so there
ought to be great care and tenderness in it because one Neighbor may thereby
expose another unto great sufferings, and where any do so they do not love
their Neighbors as themselves, which is a sure mark of the true Religion. And
now if any should have it in their minds to inform and give Evidence in the
case aforesaid, I ask you, what you will inform touching the Quakers Meetings,
will you Inform that there was a Meeting of five besides the Family; and will
you say that you will give Evidence of it, you shall not need for we confess
it; but will you inform that there was strife and discord amongst them, or any
ill thing in action, or any apperance of rising in arms, and so a Seditious
Conventicle, according to the Act? if you say nay, we cannot give such
Information in the truth, nor we dare not give Evidence to any such thing; it
may be that some may be thus honest, and it may be some again, that will not
fear to inform, and evidence the matter by the Act intended, though they
neither see not know that so it is amongst such against whom they Inform; and
therefore, as to the first, that honestly confesses the truth, there needs not
any thing be said, being their own confession clears us; but unto such as
wilfully and obstinately resolve to do us harm, if it be in their power; unto
such we say, that your Information and evidence is not to be regarded by sober
Magistrates or Jurors; for our practice is so generally known, that it will be
apparently manifest to be envy and malice, where any such Iuformation of
Evidence is given against us.

And further, consider this one thing more in general, which I shall offer to
you by way of question: Was not the Christian Religion and Worship in primitive
times a true Religion and Worship? and was there not both Jews and Gentiles
gathered in it? and was there not many Jews and Gentiles that differed from
them in Religion and Worship? and did the true Christians endeavor to force
the Dissenters by an outward Law to join with them? You do not read in all the
Scripture, that the true Christians did ever practice any such thing, either to
inform or punish any in matter of Conscience. Therefore let not this Nation of
England give occasion unto other Nations, to upbraid them with persecution, for
it will be much to the dishonor of it, if not to the ruin of it, by the hand
of the Lord. Oh surely it cannot but touch many tender hearts who are observers
of the Lyturgie of the Church of England, to see such persecution rise out of
it, and that against an innocent people; for we that are called Quakers are a
people well known in our Countries, and the Witness of God does bear a sure
testimony for us, however men may witness against us, or however they may
accuse judge and condemn us, yet does the Witness of God clear us from the
guilt of any just offense against the present power, and the Peace thereof; and
whatsoever may come to pass concerning us in this matter, yet there is no Law
against us, and being no Law, there is no transgression, and so no Fact worthy
of condemnation Much might be said in these things, but I shall leave all with
the Lord, and to his just and righteous Witness in every conscience which will
plead with all for us, when Tongues and Pens are still and silent; and let not
any think it strange that I have used such plainness of speech in this matter,
for it is in the behalf of Gods precious Truth, and all that live in it. And
being that our liberty, Estates, and lives are herein concerned, the plainness
of my speech may well be allowed, considering also, that it is no less than
true love to all your souls who are or may be any way concerned in this matter;
for we that are called Quakers do truly love the Lamb, and follow him, and the
Lamb and the saints must have the Victory; and in the Lambs Love, Meekness, and
Patience we have Rest and Peace.

Written the 27. of the 4. Month, 1664. W. S.

THE END.

