THE WISDOM OF THE Earthly Wise CONFOUNDED, OR, A Manifestation of the Spirits
of some Envious Professors, who are ready to prefer the Hireling Priests Works
of Darkness, whose Works are against the Revelation and Coming of Christ in
Spirit, as their Forefathers Works of Cruelty and Murder were against him in
the Days of his Flesh, as may be seen at large in the Scriptures of Truth.

This was chiefly occasioned by some Nonconformists promoting the Works of
Darkness of a Conformist (or Chief Priest of Warwickshire, called, Thomas
Willson, in his Book, who slanderously charges the People called QUAKERS to be
False Interpreters of the Holy Scriptures) wherein is something of Answer to
such as have any true Tenderness left in them, and would receive the Truth if
they knew it: But its like to the Hard-hearted, Stubborn and Rebellious (like
those, Matthew. 27. 25. who said, His Blood be upon us and upon our Children) it
will be Foolishness, as is the Preaching of the Cross to them that Perish:

By WILLIAM SMITH.

Printed in the Year 1679.

The Wisdom of the Earthly Wise CONFOUNDED, etc.
WE, whom the heavenly Dayspring of God from on High has visited, who were
once in Darkness and the Shadow of Death, as well as others: I say, We do not
marvel to see (the Literal Outside Professors of this Generation, of all Sorts
and Persuasions (out of the Truth) as well as Chief-Priests (the Old Enemies of
Christ) though they so much differ and disagree amongst themselves) how ready
they are to join Hand in Hand against the Lord and his blessed Heritage, whom
he has blessed, and will bless above all the Families of the Earth: Yea, how
ready are you to catch up and embrace any piece of Darkness and Confusion that
arises out of the Bottomless. Pit of the Deceived, Envious and Babylonish
Hearts of such as hate the Witness or Light of Christ in their own Consciences;
and also envy such, who by believing in the Light of Christ within are
Witnesses of his Spiritual Appearance. So all you Malicious Papists,
Chief-Priests, Presbyterians, Independents, and Baptists of all sorts; etc.
that do not believe in Christ, the true Light, who lights every one that
comes into the World, according to John 1. 9. and 8. 12. and 9. 5. are all
wrong in the Ground, and you are all against us, and we are against you all,
till you come out of Deceit, Envy and Unbelief; we know your Spirits will
concur against us, as did your Progenitors (the chief-Priests, the hard-hearted
Jews, Scribes, Pharisees, Saduces, etc.) against Christ and his Followers in
the days of his Coming in the Flesh, who as Christ told them, they did Err, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God, Mat. 22. 29. And even so do ye,
who will not abide his Spiritual Appearance in your selves, nor in such as are
Witnesses of it. So in this State you are all from the Highest to the Lowest,
of all sorts, both Priests, Teachers aad People far from the true
Interpretations of holy Scriptures; and if ever you come truly to it, you must
come down from climbing up another way, to Christ the Door and Light of the
World, who lights every man that comes into the World. And also, if you will
be true Followers of him, that you may have Life and Treasure in Heaven, you
must with the Young man, Matthew. 19. (which I believe will be as hard for many
of you Rich Ones in your Natural Wisdoms, as for him) Sell all your great
Possessions of that Wisdom which is from below, which is Earthly, Sensual and
Devilish, in which you have given false Interpretation upon the holy
Scriptures, and thereby woefully wrested them to Justify or Indulge your selves
in a continuance in sin to the end of your days; the Wages of which is Death,
as faith the Apostle, But the Spirit gives Life, and leads to true
Interpretations of holy Scriptures; though Contrary to your Natural, Dark
Conceptions and Imaginations: The Natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because
they are Spiritually discerned; see 1 Cor. 2.

Now, I would have all you Outside, Literal Imitaters of all sorts (that are
not too high and too swelled with your vain Notions and Imaginations) to lay
them by a while, and consider Seriously, since there is but One ^ay to God, and
One Truth, One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, (which is Spiritual, and only
known to the true Spiritual Worshippers) Mark, One God and Father of all, who
is above all, and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4. 5. and a Mystery to
you all, and ever will be while strangers to the Light of Christ within, which
will give a right Understanding of Scriptures to them that believe in it and
follows it, and will lead to a right use of them, etc. But how many Ways,
Worships, Faiths, Baptisms, etc. are there amongst you, every one Crying up his
own Way and Form, pretending to the Scriptures for it: Oh! what Distractions
and Confusions are here! And where must they be charged, upon the Scriptures or
upon you, with your many Lo here is and Lo there is? Every one for his own Way,
in Opposition to the Way of God, which is but One and his People One in it. Now
look upon your selves and among your selves, and behold the Fruits of your
Interpreting Scripture; Is it not to make the World or People like a
Wilderness? Lo here, Lo there; See here, See there! But what says Christ?
Believe them not, go not after them, nor follow them; for behold the Kingdom of
God is within you, Luke. 17. 21. Thus says our Lord Christ Jesus, and we have
believed him, and in our measures have Infallibly found it so.

And if this should seem strange Doctrine to any, to whose hands these may
come, though of the many Ways, Forms and Persuasions, since you all profess the
Scriptures to be your Rule; I would know how you Interpret these following
Scriptures.

God is a Spirit, (as Christ said) and is to be Worshipped in the Spirit and in
the Truth. God is Light, and in him there is no Darkness at all. If we say,
that we have fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we Lie, and do not the
Truth; but if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we
fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all Sin. Christ said, I am the Light of the World, he that follows me
shall not walk in Darkness, but he shall have the Light of Life: and said,
Believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children of the Light. The Grace of
God which brings Salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us that denying
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live Godly, Righteously, etc. in this
present World: This Grace appearing unto all, is, that all might believe
therein, and obey it, and be saved; but some of Old did dispight unto the
Spirit of Grace (as many do now) against whom the Apostle testified, and Jude
in his Epistle witnesses against such. The Apostle said unto the Saints, By
Grace ye are saved, through Faith, etc. and said, Its a good thing that the
Heart be established with Grace: And the Lord said to Paul, My Grace is
sufficient for thee, etc. Christ in his Parable of the Talents, and of the
Pearl, and of the Field, and of the Sower, and of the good Seed, which fell
upon the diverse Grounds, does clearly hold forth the Universal Love of God unto
all People. God said by the Prophet, Look unto me, O all the Ends of the Earth,
and be ye Saved, etc. As many as are led by the Spirit of God they are the Sons
of God. The Spirit of Truth, which does lead the Saints into all Truth, the
same does Convince the World of Sin, as Christ has promised. Christ said, This
is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and men loved Darkness
rather than Light, because their Deeds were Evil; for every one that does Evil,
hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be
reproved; but he that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be
made manifest that they are wrought in God: See John 3. 19, 20, 21. and 1. 9.
and 8. 12. First Epistle of John 1. 5, 6, 7. John 16. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Jer. 17. 10. Psalm. 7. 10. Mal. 3. 5. 1 John 5. 10. Isa. 55. 4. Romans 8. 13, 14.
Psalm. 50. 16, to the End. Acts 13. 47. and 26. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7. Let us
hear what Interpretations you will give to these Scriptures. Again, the Apostle
John says, God is Love, he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in
him. Again, He that hates his Brother is a Murderer, and no Murderer has
Eternal Life abiding in him. Again, Christ said unto the Saints, I and my
Father will come, and make our abode with you. And God has promised, That he
will dwell in his People, and that he will write his Law in their Hearts, and
put his Spirit in their Minds, etc. Let us see how skilful you are in
Interpreting these heavenly comfortable Sayings.

The Lord God said by the Mouth of the true Prophet concerning the false, Woe
unto the Foolish Prophets, who follow their own Spirit, and have seen nothing,
Eccles. 13. 11. But the true Apostle said, The Spirit it self bears Witness
with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God. This Spirit was and is all
the true Christians Guide: this did of old, and now does bear Witness with, or
unto the Spirits of all true Believers, that they are the Children of God, who
are led thereby; for it leads them to do those things which please God. The
Apostle says, The Scriptures came not in Old Time by the Will of man, but holy
men of God spoke them as they were moved by the holy Ghost, or Spirit; and he
says, they are of no private Interpretation.

So you who deny Immediate Revelation, and deny and hate the Universal,
Infallible Spirit of God and Christ, you have nothing to Interpret the
Scriptures with or by, but your own fallible private Spirits, and the wicked
Spirit, The Prince of the Power of the Air, which works in the Hearts of the
Children of Disobedience, as says the Apostle, and with these joint workers in
Wickedness you cannot rightly Interpret the holy Scriptures; but by the help of
this dark Spirit you are taught to wrest them to your own Destruction: The Lord
in mercy deliver you from this false Teacher.

The Kingdom of Heaven is likened to a man that gave to his Servants Talents,
etc. Matthew. 25. 14. A manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. Whatsoever makes manifest is Light, and Christ is
that Light, Ephesians. 5. 13. He that declares to man his Thoughts, the Lord the
God of Hosts is his Name, Amos 4. 13. Elihu was constrained by the Spirit
within, Job 32. 18. The Word of God is within, Deuteronomy. 30. 14. Psalm. 119. 11. The
Law and the Covenant of Life is within, Jer. 31. 33. The Word of Faith that
purifieth the Heart is within, Romans 10. 8. Heb. 4. 12. The sure Word of
Prophecy, and the Day Star is to arise within, 2 Pet. 1. 19. God, Christ and
the Spirit of Truth that leads into all Truth, are to be known within, John
14. 16. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. The Mystery that has been hid from Ages and
Generations is Christ within, Col. 1. 26. The Anointing the true Teacher that
shall never be removed into a Corner is within, 1 John 2. 27. Isa. 30. 20. That
which may be known of God is manifest within, Romans 1. 19. I thank thee, O
Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the
Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes, Matthew. 11. 25. see 1 Cor.
1. 26.

We are not led by our own Conceivings nor Imaginations (as the Carnal-minded
outside Professors are) to interpret the holy Scriptures but by a measure of
the same Spirit of Truth, from which they were given forth, in and by which
they can be only and alone truly read and known, by which Spirit we are made
living Witnesses to the Truth of them, and can read them within, which is far
more then the bare outward reading. And we know that the Son of God is come,
and has given us an understanding that we may know him that is true, John 5.
20. And greater is he that is in us (that teaches true Reading and right
Interpretations of holy Scriptures) then he that's in the World, 1 John 4. 4.
And hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit, 1 John 14. 13. And we are sure it is he, for he has done that
in us and for us that none other could do. And he that believes, has the
Witness in himself, 1 John 5. 10.

So our God is a God at hand, a Just, Righteous and a Merciful God, who in his
everlasting love has committed a Talent or Measure of his Grace (and gives
his Light for a Witness and a Leader, Isa. 55. 4.) to every Man and Woman that
comes into the World, and according to their improving or not improving of it,
believing or not believing in it, is the Salvation or Condemnation of all
mankind. Now to speak comparatively after the manner of men, if a man should
demand a sum of Money with Usury of another, that never had any of him, and
condemn him for want of it, would it not be altogether Unjust? But the true God
is Just and Righteous in all his ways, and man's Destruction is of himself.
And further we say, that God in his endless love has offered a Day or Time of
Visitation to all mankind, and that by his secret Reproofs at times in their
Consciences for Self-Righteousness, as well as their other Ungodliness, that
they might turn to his Grace, (which has appeared to all men) Light or Witness
within them, and live.

And all you confused Builders of Babel, with your many Lo here is and Lo
there is, you have rejected the Head or chief Cornerstone and true Foundation;
and if you will be truly Wise, that you may know him, you must first become
Fools that you may be Wise, and then you will throw down and lay waste all your
lofty Buildings of Self Righteousness, and dig deeper then ever you have done
yet to the true Rock and Foundation, and whosoever Bui'ds truly thereupon shall be
safe.

But all you talkative Letter-wise People and Professors of all sorts, that
have no other Ru'e to try Spirits and Doctrines but the Scriptures, [in your
Natural Carnal Reasons, and fallen Degenerated Wisdoms] though you neither know
them nor the Power of God, but are putting Darkness for Light, and Light for
Darkness, justifying the Wicked and condemning the Righteous, as did they whose
steps you follow: What! did you never read or take notice of the Fruits of
trying Spirits and Doctrines by the Scriptures in their Carnal Reasons and
Degenerate Wisdoms (being out of the spirit which gives a right understanding
of them) Was it not to Condemn the Savior of the World, and his blessed
Followers to Death? Oh! Outside, Literal Professors of this Generation! take
heed ye be not found spiritually in the same steps: The holy Scriptures we more
dearly and truly own, in their places, than you do, and do esteem them above
all other Outward Writings, because of the great plenty and variety of sweet,
sound, heavenly Sayings, uttered by God in and through Christ Jesus, who was
filled with the Spirit without measure, and anointed with the Oil of Gladness
above his Fellows, as its written of him; and also uttered through Moses, and
the rest of the holy Prophets and Apostles: but we cannot set them above the
Spirit: We say, they are a Testimony or Declaration of what the Primitive
Saints were made Living Witnesses of, by the working of the mighty Power of God
in them, whereby they came to put off the old Man with his Deeds, and put no
that New Man, Christ Jesus which is after God created in Righteousness and true
Holiness, in whom ONLY was and is the Perfection of Saints: And without
witnessing of more or less of this Spirit that wrought in them, that gave forth
the Scriptures, there is no saving Benefit nor Comfort to be had from them; for
they, viz. the Scriptures do answer to the Witness of God, or Light within
People; and they are given forth to be read and believed, and only can be
rightly understood in a measure of the same Spirit that gave them forth; and
they testify how, where and by what means people may attain to that Infallible
Spirit, that always was and is the Saints chief Rule, Guide and Leader, who
leads in the same Path they were in, that gave them forth; and these only are
the truly learned, that can read them without wresting, and to such they are
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, etc. but they were not given forth [to be
set above the Spirit of God] they were not given forth to be wrested by
Covetous, Carnal-minded men to uphold their Carnal Sects, Opinions, Judgments
and Religions, to War against the true Spiritual Worshippers, whom the Father
seeks to Worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth. And inasmuch as the
Invisible Wise God, Creator of all things, is to be honored and esteemed above
any Visible created thing, so is his Holy Invisible Spirit to be honored and
esteemed above the Scriptures; are not all holy Declarations made by the holy
Spirit of Truth? And who dare say, That the Maker is not Greater, and more to
be looked at and esteemed, than the Thing made? How now Porfessors (that in
your Natural Reasons set your selves as Judges, both of Scriptures and the
Spirit that gave them forth) and in setting the Scriptures above the Spirit of
God, your Darkness is largely Manifest: And may you not be justly compared to
those that built the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of the
Righteous, and were the Children of them that killed them? The Scripture says,
Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God; because
many false Prophets are gone out into the World, 1 John 4. 1. I say, the
Infallible Spirit of God must Try all Spirits, and without that none can try
them: Come Professors, what say you, have you that Infallible Spirit to try the
Fallible with? If you say, Nay, but we have the Scriptures to try them by (I
never yet heard any of you say otherwise) I hope you will not deny, but that
the Spirit of Christ is Infallible; and the Scriptures say, He that has not
the Spirit of Christ is none of his, Romans 8. 9. And he that is spiritual judges
all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15. So you Fallible-spirited Natural men, what have you
to do with the Scriptures, you being the Unlearned men, who have not learned of
Christ, you do but Wrest them to your own Destruction, because you have no true
Judgment in your goings, and make to your selves crooked Paths, Lo here, Lo
there! and in your own private Spirits give your corrupt Meanings to the
Scriptures and oppose the Spirit that gave them forth. The Apostle says, He
that keeps his Commandments dwells in him, and he in him: And hereby we
know that he dwelled in us, by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3. 24.
The Lord God said by the true Prophet, concerning the false, Woe unto the
Foolish-Prophets, who follow their own Spirit, and have seen nothing, Ezekiel. 13.
3. And these are the true Confessors of Christ come in the Flesh, [and in the
Spirit] whatever Fallible-spirited men (that are rending and wresting the
Scriptures) may judge of them.

And whereas some Envious Dark Spirits (seeing their glorying in their Literal
Knowledge so hard beset) may suggest, That I Design to possess People against
(or would beget them into a Low esteem of) the Scriptures. God knows, if any
such there be, they greatly Wrong themselves and me, and all those who believe
their False Suggestions; for my only End is, That People might be possessed
with the Spirit of Truth, that leads into all Truth, and teaches the true
Knowledge of Scriptures, and to set them in their places, and not to be ever
Learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth; so that you all
might come to Christ, and learn of him, that you may have Life, is the Desire
of your Friend

Written in the 10th Month from Market-Harborough, 1678. William Smith.

POSTSCRIPT.
HAving considered that some Dark Spirits, like this Priest's may take Occasion
at my so much judging his Works to be Works of Darkness, without any plain
Proof made thereof, to Answer my present Business at this time, is not so much
to concern my self with his Darkness (it is so palpably Gross, to all that have
the least spiritual discerning) as to show the Confusion and Darkness of such
Professors that separate from such Priests, as not owning them to be Ministers
of Christ, and yet in Envy prefer and promote their Works in Opposition to the
Truth of God.

Now since his works, viz. the Priest's, seems to be chiefly about True and
False Interpretations of Scriptures, I may compare them, and see which he most
resembles: The True Interpreters do it by the Spiritual Understanding received
by the Inspiration of the Almighty: The False Interpreters do it by Natural
Reason or Earthly Wisdom of Fallen Degenerate Man. I may touch at a Passage or
two in his Book (passing by many such like) with the ground of his Matter in
General (with as much brevity as I can, because I would not be tedious to the
Reader) from which I can prove his whole heap of Confusion and Darkness of One
Hundred Sixty and Six pages to be founded upon a Shadow, and down must it
tumble and vanish away like Smoke before the Wind. So having perused His
tedious Tautologies, or rather bundle of Dark Impertenent Cavils against God's
Truth and People: I find the Scope and Drift of his Matter is to make void or
cry down (as now ceased) Immediate Revelation, Inspiration, Vision and the
Truth in the Inward Parts, or the Spiritual In-being of Christ in the Hearts
and Souls of his People (there to Work their Salvation) all which is still
continued and truly witnessed by the true Spiritual Worshippers, without which,
we affirm, there is no true Interpretations of holy Scriptures. Oh! all People,
that have the least Spiritual Understanding, behold the Darkness of such
Priests and Professors, Where there is no Revelation, there is no True Saving
Knowledge of God; see Mat. 11. 27.

Object. But we have it by the Scriptures.

Answ. I prove by the Scriptures that it must be Immediate from the Son Christ
Jesus, or you have no Life; Search the Scriptures, for in them you think ye
have Eternal Life; they testify of me, but ye will not come unto me that ye
may have Life, John 5. 39.

[See page 74, and 75. of this Priest's Book] We (says he) like Honest Men,
have no Vision, pretend none; if we were Knaves we might pretend Inspiration as
well as others.

Ah! Poor Blind Guides indeed! then you Perish, and have no heavenly
Understanding; Where there is no Vision the People Perish, Prove. 29. 18. There
is a Spirit in man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them
Understanding, Job 32. 8. When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, etc.
Gal. 1. 15. I was not Disobedient to the heavenly Vision, Acts 26. 19. I will
come to Visions and Revelations of the Lord, 2 Cor. 12. 1. And also, Paul
prayed, That the People might receive the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation: What
was Paul a Knave for this? And how often does Paul say, be ye Followers of me,
even as I also am of Christ? And if we do so, and in our measures witness the
same Spirit of Wisdom, Revelation, Inspiration and Vision, must we therefore be
Knaves for that? Oh Darkness! who is so Blind that they cannot see it! We say,
All holy Scripture is given by the Inspiration of God, and can never be rightly
known nor understood, but by the Inspiration of the Almighty, which gives an
Understanding to know them, without which they can never be truly known nor
interpreted. And in the Latter Days (says God) I will pour out my Spirit upon
all Flesh; Sons and Daughters shall Prophecy, Young Men shall see Visions, and
Old Men shall dream Dreams, Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17. Many more Scriptures might
have been instanced, as full and pertinent to this purpose; but these are
sufficient to Manifest the Ignorance, Darkness and Blindness of such Priests
and Professors: And who have believed in Christ as a Light within them know him
to be the same to his People Yesterday, to Day, and forever. So all Honor,
Praises and Thanks forever be given to him who has hid these things from the
Wise and Prudent of this World, and revealed them to Babes and Sucklings.

And as to Christ's Spiritual being within, it is before sufficiently proved;
but I perceive such Priests, and Professors do only or chiefly talk of Christ
without them, which is Well-pleasing to the Devil, that so he may do his Work
within them without Disturbance, while He that is stronger then he may not be
received to cast him out and spoil his Works: and such Ministers or Teachers,
of what sort soever, are not of Christ, but of Antichrist, as well as the Pope.

Now I charge all, or any one of the blind Guides, of all sorts in the whole
World (to whom the Spirit of true Wisdom, Revelation, Inspiration and Vision is
ceased) to give one plain Scripture that it ever was, is, or ever will be
ceased to the People of God (who did and do fear and obey him) while upon
Earth. Why did the chief Priests and outward Professors of the Letter in days
past slight and set at naught Christ Jesus, in his outward appearance to them?
because he reproved their Self-Righteousness, and said, he was the Son of God
and Light of the World, and said, his Kingdom was not of this World, neither
was it to be found in Observations, where they were seeking it, but it was to
be found within in the Spirit: so making clean the outside of Cup and Platter
would not serve them then, neither will it now. And why do the chief Priests
and outward Professors of the Letter in this day slight and reject him in his
inward appearance, as Light within in their Consciences? because he condemned
their Self-Righteousness, which they are also getting in the outward
Observations, and many of them see that if they should hearken or lend an Ear
to him or his Light within, he would break their false Peace, and bring
Spiritual War, Division and a Sword within to spoil and cut down their
Self-Righteousness, as well as the rest of their. Ungodliness, and that which
would not that he should Reign in his Kingdom within, to subject Man and Woman
to himself, who will admit of no Righteousness but his own, and therefore the
Hypocrites and Formal Professors will not abide him, but love the Darkness
rather then Light, and in their Darkness Judge his Light within to be a Spirit
of Delusion, and what not, as their Forefathers did of Old; yet he that is the
Searcher of Hearts and Tryer of Reins, has not left himself without a Witness
in you, to which I now appeal, what any of you from the highest to the lowest
know more by your long Professing of the true God (mark) whom to know is Life
Eternal, (John 17. 3) then you did at your first beginning to profess him? O!
Friends and People, that have any regard to your Immortal Souls, this is of
great weight for you all deeply to ponder, and let Gods Witness speak in you,
that will deal plainly with you, and tell you the Truth.

And since the Life of Man and Woman here is full of trouble, short and
uncertain, attended with Temptations, Oh! how does it concern all that truly
desire a better and more durable inheritance to weigh and consider that great
and double caution of Christ and his Apostles, Take heed that no man deceive
you; and let no man deceive himself, in which deceit all men are (how conceited
and confident soever they may be) till they come out of their vain and dead
Faiths into the living Faith in God and Christ, which is to believe in (as
sufficient for the Salvation of man) his Spirit, Grace, Talent, Light or
Kingdom within, which is likeed to a Grain of Mustard Seed; indeed too low and
too small a thing for the lofty Professors of this Generation to find or
receive, as was his outward appearance to your Forefathers, when he was found
in the Manger: I know your Inns are taken up with other Guests, and there is
yet no room for him; so full of vain Imaginations and high Conceits are you,
that you will not bow down so low as to receive and own him as a Reprover in
your Consciences, for whosoever do come to have their Understandings opened, and to
be enlightened with the Light of Life; so that they come to see the blind Guides
of all sorts, that are boasting in other men's Lines, of things made ready to
their Hands, and how they strive to keep People from believing in this Heavenly
Principle within, lest they with their chargeable unprofitable Preaching should
be discovered, and their running unsent, speaking of themselves, seek their own
Glory, the Praise of Men, Self-Interest, their Gain from their Quarter, etc.
all which with much more the Light within does discover, judge and condemn, and
that makes such Hireling Teachers of all sorts to hate it, and prejudice their
People against it. Oh! People of all sorts beware of such Teachers, for they
make a Prey upon you, and Deceive you; Therefore no longer spend your Money for
that which is not Bread, nor your Labor for that which satisfies not your
hungry pined Souls, but come home to your Teacher within, to the Law,
Testimony, Commandment or Light within you, which made David wiser then all his
Teachers; and so it will you, if you can receive it, believe in it, and follow
it.

W. S.

THE END.

