A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF NORWICH, On the Ninth of
September, 1683. BEING THE Day of Public Thanksgiving FOR His MAJESTY's late
Deliverance.

By WILLIAM SMITH, Preb.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

PSALM CVII. 8. O that Men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness:
and declare the Wonders he does for the Children of Men.


AS I shall not waste time by any curious search after the Author, or occasion
of this Psalm in general; so neither shall I trifle it away by making critical
Remarks upon every single Word of that part of it which I have read to you for
my present Subject: But I shall make use of the Words as they run together in
the whole; and so they may accommodably administer to this Days mighty
Solemnity, because in the reading and hearing them they may considerably assist
our grateful Devotions, as well as offer an occasion of discoursing the
measures of this most famous Deliverance. They will serve both those concerns
at once.

But if we will more strictly examine the meaning of the Words, they do
naturally represent a Devotionary Gratitude by a pious and passionate Option,
that such Men as have been any ways exposed to extraordinary Dangers, and that
have met with some extraordinary Deliverances (of which there be several
Instances in the Psalm) might be so affectionately sensible of their Relief, as
to be ready not only to praise God for his Goodness, and to declare the Wonders
of it as to themselves, but to invite and solicit others to do the same: Or as
the 32 d Verse explains the Method, that they should exalt him in the
Congregation of the People, and praise him in the seat of the Elders. O that
Men would therefore, etc.

Now that we may be sufficiently convinced, that such a Case at this time
attend us, and which does especially claim our best Praises and publications of
Gods wonderful Goodness to us, I shall offer several reasons for it from two
general Heads of those particulars, with which I intend to manage my whole
Discourse.

The first general Head or Argument is founded upon a Consideration of the
extraordinary calamitous effects of this horrid Conspiracy, if it had
succeeded, and from all which we were by the mighty Hand of God delivered.

The second general Head or Argument is founded upon a Consideration of the
great Danger we were in of all those calamitous Effects, by the likelihood of
the Conspiracies success, from the many advantages which the Treason had gained
to promise and promote an assurance of it: all which were by the same mighty
Hand of God prevented.

In every one of the many particular Instances on either respect, there will
appear so many Wonders of Gods Goodness, that any single one of them by it self
considered, may claim the Option of my Text, as much as all the Cases of
Deliverance in the Psalm put all together can possibly import, for its often
Repetition.

Under the first Head or general Argument, to advance the Glories of Gods
Delivering Providence, I shall endeavor to represent the many calamitous
Effects of this horrid Conspiracy, had it succeeded.

1. The first of them, as which would have been Causal of all the rest, had
been the barbarous Murder of the Sacred Person of the KING. -- But what? has
the Nation scarcely wiped their Eyes dry for the Blood of the incomparable
Father, but must it have been drowned again in Tears for the murder of his
succeeding Son? And that in a Scene of Cruelty more inhumane, and with a Malice
more Unsatiable than the former.

The Rage of the Factions had then but the Blood of one King for its present
gratification; but our Zealots for the CAUSE could not glut their Thirst for
Royal Blood, but by murdering (as it were) Two at one blow; the Life of the
Dearest Brother must be sacrificed to their Fury and Design. So that (methinks)
I hear the Saints of that complexion say of him, Here is the Heir, Come let us
kill him also, and seize on the Inheritance.

But then to give their Inhumanity its highest Accent, they were preparing to
Murder a Prince, whose August Majesty has not only Innobled the Nation, and
once more recovered its loss Reputation abroad; but whose matchless Wisdom has
made his own Kingdoms, as it were, an Ark of Safety at home, when almost all
the Christian Nations round about us, were, or are at present, deluged in Blood
and Confusion: and who at the same time stands the Worlds triumphant Umpire,
maintains the Balance, and when he sees cause, can check any One, whose
Ambition and Acquists shall grow too big, for the common safety of other
Neighboring Nations.

A Prince who all along manageth the conduct of his own Kingdoms Government,
with such a sweetness and ingenuity of Temper, that he never did, or can, choose
to see his meanest Subjects so much as uneasy, if Obstinacy precludes not his
Royal Kindness to relieve them: and whose Balsamous Soul would not (if
possible) suffer a Wound unclosed, even where nothing but Passion or
Inadvertency has occasioned any Breaches and Differences amongst his People.
In a word, a Prince who is every thing, that a Character of any the Most
Gracious KING, can present him.

It was His Royal Father's Wish, That He might rather be CHARLES le Bon, than
Le Grand: I hope (says He) God has designed You to be both; and His Wish and
Hope were both Prophetic. As to the first, the Le Bon, no man questions it,
that will impartially make Observation of His Royal Goodness, through the whole
conduct of his Reign: And if we would recount His famous Achievements, that
is, how he has by his wise Conduct molded three imbroyl'd Kingdoms into such
a Common Peace and mutual Order, as they never enjoyed since they Entitled the
Crown: How he has attacked and taken one of the greatest and richest Cities of
Europe, by a noble and successful Storm, I mean that of Wisdom and Counsel,
that it is now (as it were) to be garrisoned by His own Loyal Subjects, and
once more made a governable part of His own Dominions: Lastly, How He has just
now vanquished an Army of Rebels, perhaps as numerous as an Ottoman Camp,
without any effusion of Blood, but that of Justice to subdue them: I say, if by
these renowned and successful Overtures of His Reign, considered together with
all other the Circumstances of His present Greatness, we may undoubtedly write
him in the highest Eminency, CHARLES the Great, as well as CHARLES the Good.

And was it this, such a KING, that was designed to be basely and barbarously
murdered by his own Subjects? O, are you not all struck with such a horror at
the thought of it, as even to forget you have a Being at all? Don't all the
Blood of you Veins chill to a Stone, at the very Notice of it? And are not your
whole Souls, and all their Faculties, swallowed up with Surprise and Amazement?
Why don't you cry to the Heavens and the Earth to be astonished, that it should
ever enter into the heart of any of the Christian Name to attempt an Act, that
should not only have justified the Savageries of the most brutish Barbarians,
but even made Hell it self comparatively innocent in its worst Consults. An Act
that would have inverted the Order of the mischievous Regions, and placed the
Bottomless Pit* and the Abaddon above-ground, and would have so outdone Devils
at their own Art, that they should for ever after have been tormented with
Envy, as with a new kind of Hell; that there should be among Mankind in a
certain Island, greater Devils than themselves. Marvel not that I discourse in
this Rapturous manner, the Case requires it, and it is a Defect not so to
express it.

But O joyful Day, that gives us the Glad Tidings, that Almighty God took care
of his Dear Anointed, and would not suffer his Signet to be ravished from his
own right Hand: And that by a wonderful Providence, he did not only disappoint
the near approaching Attempt; but marvellously detected and blasted the
Long-train'd Conspiracy, which by several steps of Disloyalty and Seditious
Counsels, had so dangerously led on unto this last designed Bloody Period.

O then let every Loyal Heart, if the Mercy reached no further than the
preserving the Life of his Dear Lord and King, think it enough to solicit the
whole World to Praise God for his Goodness, and to declare the Wonders he does
for the Children of Men.

2. The next Calamitous Effect of the Conspiracy (had it succeeded) had been
the universal ruin of this Established Church; the Glory and main Pillar of
the Reformation, and which only in all Points can solve the Reasonableness of
it. A Church, which at this day only claims the honor of being the lively
portraicture of the Apostolic Age, and the resurrection of the Primitive
Doctrine and Polity, before any fatal defection had sullyed its Purity. A
Church, that dares be Disputed without Evasions or trifling Quarrels, and that
can defend it self upon a conjunct Trial of Scripture, first-Antiquity, and
Reason altogether; and that scorns to fly to a circling Infallibility, an
expurgatory Index, or a stubborn private Spirit, to perplex or violate those
Authorities for her own defense.

This, such a Church had this factious Conspiracy confounded: The Evil Spirit
had once again (as in the last Rebellion) put a Lie into the Prophets mouths to
intoxicate the Peoples Minds. The precious Sons of our Zion (Lam. 4.2.) had
once more been made a contemptible as earthen Pitchers, while the Sea Monsters
had drawn out the breasts to the Young ones. The Devil as General, with his
Lieutenants in Sheeps clothing, under the Flag of a Through Reformation, had
once again rallyed the whole Protestancy (as its called,) that is, all the
Heresies that ever infested the Catholic Church in all Ages, especially the
Reformado's of the Knipperdollian and Knoxian Regiments, to bear down before
them all that is Regular and Loyal, Learned, and Pious.

Or you may judge what measures of Profaneness we must have met with, by
calling to mind what was acted in the late Confusions in this very Cathedral,
when at the Morning-Service the then Reverend Bishop was detruded into an
obscure Corner of an inferior Gallery, while two Famoso Villains of the
Rebellion, Cromwell and Ireton, sat together the Sermon time in his Throne. And
at the Evening-Prayer of the same day, an unhallowed Crew of Soldiers at the
end of every Collect, confounded the Amen with a rude and loud Hallo at the
Altar, where they were tumultuously gathered together. After that, a Company of
the new Saints took all the rich Vestments, Books of Service, and a famous
Musical Ingine, and having torn them in pieces, carried them all into the
public Marketplace, with a Villain in an Ecclesiastic Habit (who thereupon
presently languished to his death) going before a profane Rout, singing the
Litany in derision, and then committed them all to the Flames: some of them (as
I am informed) repenting afterward, that they did not return back and set Fire
to the Sanctuary it self, till in that stately Monument of Ancient Piety, they
had not left one Stone upon another, to bespeak the hopes of any future
Restoration.

Such resembling Outrages as these might easily be presumed to have been acted
in every Sacred Place; and all other the profane Practices of the Churches
common devastation, would certainly have followed this Conspiracies success.

But, O happy Day that represents the News, that such desperate Designs are
disappointed; and while the Factions are pining in their Shame, and weltring in
their unsuccessful Malice, let every Son and Lover of our Constitution, take
occasion to publish the Wonders of Gods Love and Care of his precious Zion,
with a Voice loud enough to reach those Heavens, whence their help and
deliverance came.

3. The third Calamitous Effect of this horrid Conspiracy, if Success had
completed it, would have been, that the Three Nations had immediately ran into
Blood and Rapine, Revenge and Villainy: We had once more become an Aceldama and
a Valley of Hinnon; evey Zealot would have been preparing a Tophet, and setting
up his Moloch to be worshipped with the Bloody Sacrifices of the Loyal. And as
it was foretold by the Prophet, of the Jews impending Ruin, ( Isai. 3.5.) The
People would have been oppressed every one by another, and every one by his
Neighbor. And the Gospel-state of Mankind (as its represented by the same
Prophet, Isai. 2.4.) had been inverted; the enraged Vulgar would presently have
turned their Plow-shares into Swords, and their Pruning Hooks into Spears, to
execute what their bloody Leaders long-fermented Malice had before contrived.

Every Village had been a Seat of War, all united Neighbourhoods turned into
distinct Hostilities, and every single Person had been listed into one Side or
other to carry on the work of a through Destruction. Mustered Armies had filled
their Streets and emptied their Houses by reciprocal Plunders, and the Popular
Rage would soon have been such, that a Prison would not have been so much a
Restraint, as a Castle to secure the Persons (as they styled Imprisonment in
the late Confusions) of the truly Loyal, from the Routs of such Religious
Barbarians, whose Zeal had been newly inflamed by a raging Pulpiteer, for the
Cause of God, as they called it.

In a word, to discourse in another strain, We had fallen into the Hands of such,
as would have been Instruments of God's severe Vengeance upon us; and whereby
the Judgment of God had overtaken us to the utmost Execution of his
Displeasure. The reason of David's, Choice would have been improved beyond what
he could possibly account for, at that time, when his election was (2 Samuel 25.)
that he might fall into the hands of the Lord (for his Mercies are great) and
not into the hands of Men; I am sure not into the hands of such Monsters, as
would have been profligate from all that Humanity can claim as due, to the most
Merciless Enemies. For they that had once inhumanely Murdered (as it was
designed) their own Natural KING; what destruction of his Friends and Adherents
could possibly have stopped their barbarous Rage?

But, O happy Day that proclaims the blessed Tidings of our Universal Peace,
that the Armed Troops in our Streets march only as our Defense, and Guard; that
the Trumpets sound nothing but the welcome Joys of our common Safety, and evey
Drum beats us to Bed for an unsuspected Quiet! Oh, let us awaken all manner of
Expedients, whereby to express our Thankfulness to God; and, as if that were
not enough to discharge our Duty, let us heartily solicit one another to cry
and say, O that Men would therefore, etc.

4. The Fourth and last Calamitous Effect, (if there could have been any last
at all) of this matchless Conspiracy (if it had succeeded) would have been,
That it must have put a certain Period to all that can be counted English
Property, Liberty, or National Privilege. For though the weak Vulgar were
clamoured into a belief of the loss of them all, yet was it only to dispose
them to serve the Ambitious and Revengeful Designs of those, who could not
avoid the delivering them up into the hands of such Tyrants, as must in course
have oppressed them to the utmost.

And how could any Reasonable man possibly hope to enjoy those common
Endearments of his Life, from them, whose whole Design must be begun and
carried on, not only with the apparent Violation of our National Constitution;
but of the very Fundamentals of all Humane Society?

And I wonder, that Men should not remember or consider, how the Usurpers in
the last Rebellion, found it an impossible thing to fix upon any Model of
Government, by which the Peoples Native Laws and Immunities should be
preserved: They pretended it indeed, and perhaps endeavored it; but they at
last split upon that Rock.

For though Revenge, and an impatient Discontent had made the People pretty
willing to bear their Oppressions, whilst their Warriors were gaining, or had
newly attained their designed Acquists of Power; yet when that Work was done,
and the People expected a Return to their Laws and Liberties, the Rebels, after
their playing them off with various tossings of the Supreme Power from one
figure of Government to another, were at last necessitated (some of them would
fain have it accounted and act of their Favor) to call back the rightful Heir
of the Crown, rather than endure the Peoples Clamor for their Laws and
Liberties, or adventure their Fury for their Recovery of them.

But if that Usurpation had stood, or if by this Conspiracy it had been
regained, it could not have been avoided, but that every Chief General of the
Army, must have been our absolute Monarch; and whatsoever Freedom could have
been obtained, must have been upon the favor of the longest Swords; which
would have kept us so long in quiet, as the whole Nation had been their
Prisoners, and every man's Fortune laid to Pawn to maintain their licentious and
arbitrary Dominion.

This Universal Bondage under the worst Tyrants of Mankind, had certainly been
the issue of this horrid Conspiracies success: But, O happy Day that alarms the
Notice, that into that dismal Pit, which the Traiterous Cabals had dug for
us, they are fallen themselves; and that that Iron Rod, which they designed
should have entered into our very Souls, is turned into Manacles to bind those
Hands; and into Chains to fetter those Feet, that had suddenly carried us all
into the worst Captivity that ever bore that Name. O, let us bless GOD, that we
are here at liberty to celebrate our Deliverance, and that we are yet secured
by the protection of a Gracious Prince of those Laws and Freedoms, by which we
may live the lives of Reasonable Creatures, and not of Machins or mere Bodies,
(as Slaves are rendered, Apoc. 1813.) and that we may enjoy our Houses and
Places without a Superior Lord in Buff, to whom, as to a new Imperious
Proprietor, we must have forfeited whatsoever is Dear unto us, even to our very
Lives, upon any Displeasure, that is, upon the least Suspicion of being Honest.
-- O then, let GOD have the Honor of this Blessed Day, and with an Universal
Consent, let us praise Him for his Goodness, and declare the Wonders he does
for the Children of Men.

Thus I have endeavored to offer you a short, but a prodigious prospect of
those several kinds of Calamities, which would inevitably have befaln the
Monarchy, Church, and Nation in general; if this Treason, as actuated by
Phanatic Zeal, had brought the Conspiracy to its designed effect. And this I
have done, that every Man may learn in this day of Public Thankfulness, how to
Tune his Soul with Reasons to oblige him, by all possible Expedients, to
declare and publish the Glories of the Divine Providence, that has so signally
preserved us in all our Civil and Religious Enjoyments and Blessings.

But there is another Argument yet behind to be pursued, for a further advance
of our Grateful Sense of what God has so marvellously done for us in this
Famous Deliverance, and where the Wonders of it are to be specially remarked;
and that is from a Consideration of the great likelihood of this Conspiracies
success, by the many Advantages which the Treason had attained, to secure its
Completion.

And those Advantages on the Conspirators side, were these Five; which I shall
endeavor so to represent, that we may see what Dangers were upon us of an
Universal Ruin, and what reasonable Hopes the Traitors might have of their own
Success, to the intent that so the Mercy of the Deliverance may appear so much
the more Wonderful, and the Divine Hand of Providence be the more specially
Remarked.

1. The first advantageous Point was, that the Conspiracy had got a great share
of that Power and Encouragement, upon which the Barons Wars (as that Rebellion
was then called) commenced and proceeded so far, as to Control the Monarchy
with such various Successes, and by such a vast Expense of English Blood: That
is, that in the first Rise and Process, and to the nearest approaches of its
Consummation, this Treason was not only Countenanced and Abetted, but really
managed and acted by a considerable part of the Nobility; who having affronted
Majesty by Petitioning, Protesting, and Caballing, gave the Seditious Factions
a full Assurance that they Owned and Headed their Cause. And the Danger was,
that the Greatness of Nobility in Conjunction with such desperate Multitudes of
the Abused Vulgar, might easily persuade the Conspirators to believe, That they
were Powerful enough, if not wholly to overturn, yet at least to perplex and
disorder the Monarchy in its present Figure.

But, O Unfortunate Gentlemen, (or Wretches rather,) that they should
condescend to be Tools, and to creep in the Dust, to humor a Peevish and an
Unworthy Faction: That they should go about to blend and extinguish that Light,
whence they borrowed their own Luster; and choose to fall from their own Starry
Orbs, to turn blinking Meteors in the Musty Regions, to shine only by the
favor of an Vnjudicious and Unconstant Multitude.

But notwithstanding this Great Advantage the Treason had attained to secure
the reason and hopes of its Execution, GOD has graciously cut in sunder that
Powerful Combination; and that so signally upon those Unhappy Peers that were
engaged in it, that a very Narrative of Particulars, would look too like a
Revenge upon the Ashes and Blood of Some; upon the Cowardice of Others, who are
sneak't from Justice; and upon that Brand of Shame, that lies upon the Honors
of the Rest, who acting their part of Disloyalty under the Umbrage of
Moderation, and of a Healing Temper, (as it was to be accounted) gave Warmth
and Respit to the Treason, and perhaps contributed as much to the strengthening
and furthering the Conspiracy, as most Others, that were principally engaged in
it. O let us therefore, on this Account, praise God, etc.

2. The next Point of a promising Advantage, which this Treason had attained in
Common Belief (if it were no more) was that, upon which the Fatal Wars in the
York and Lancastrian Quarrels at first commenced, and were so long continued,
with so many various Events and frequent Turns in the Succession; and which in
the late Rebellion might only be thought to be wanting, to promise a better
Security to their Successes; and which our New Traitors were resolved to amend
(if possible) as a Defect in the Counsels of that Time: And that was, Our
Conspirators were so Impudent, as to create a Belief (how Cunningly soever they
did insinuate it,) That they had sprung a Title to the Crown, in a Person
Accomplished for his own and the Nations Honor, had he not miscarried in his
Duty to his Most Gracious Sovereign; but how far in this Point he had given his
Counsel or Consent, it were Presumption in me to offer at so much as a
Conjecture. But its certain, that the Conspirators boldly managed such a
Pretense; That if His Sacred MAJESTY were deprived by Death or otherwise, and
His Royal BROTHER Excluded, they had One ready to have taken upon him the
Government, and that should have freed the CAUSE from those Perplexities, which
the Fundamental Constitutions of it, occasioned in the late Rebellion for want
of One in that Capacity.

How did our Presumptuous Traitors endeavor in their Seditious Pamphlets to be
offering at the hammering out such a Title? And how very much they had affected
the Disloyal Factions with a Belief of it, to serve their own Ends, is as
obvious as any in other the many Expedients they made use of, to imbroil the
Government.

Though herein their Traiterous Subtlety was considerably defective, in that
they were not consistent to themselves, in fashioning that Mysterious Project.

Howsoever, it was no small Advantage to the Conspirators Cause, that such a
Contrivance was to be dispersed and credited: and our Dangers on that account
were undoubtedly greater, than of which so tender a Point will permit an
enumeration.

But blessed be the Great Disposer of Thrones, and let the Wonders of his
Goodness to this Nation be for ever Magnified, that the detection of this
Horrid Conspiracy has marvellously defeated this long and dangerous contrived
part of the Treason, which might, if ever they had gained that Point, have
entailed War and Blood to our unborn Posterities. O that Men, etc.

3. The Third great Advantage, which the Treason had got to promise and promote
a likelihood of its Success, was, That there were so many yet Alive, that were
engaged in the last Rebellion, as that (as His MAJESTY's Declaration observes)
there were in Town, at the Time determined for an Insurrection, an Hundred Old
Officers, to Head and Conduct those Seditious Multitudes.

Now by the Conspirators gaining that Point, were our Dangers greatly
multiplied. For first these Men must be presumed to be perfect Masters in the
whole Art of Rebellion, and well blooded and hardened for the work, from their
former Guilt and Experience. Secondly, Those Men were able to account, and knew
how to amend the Defects of their former Proceedings; and to rectify those
Errors, upon which they in the End miscarried, of what they expected, and for
what they had fought so many years together. But then Thirdly, That which did
most especially increase our Danger on this account, was, That we must presume
them now to undertake the Work, and go into the Field with Souls full of
enraged Shame, and with a Malice completely unsatiable. There was not now in
their Minds, as before, a bare Discontent for the supposed Miscarriages of
State, to remove Evil Counselors, or to get a little Money by a Trade of War;
but now we must believe them to have acted with a deep and bloody Revenge for
their Parties former Miscarriages, and for their own baffled Expectations.

And now Excuse me, if I shall tell you, what these Old Saints may be presumed
to say to their New Brood, in one of their Tub-Academies:

What? were we once Gulled out of our Victorious Cause, and tamely dismounted
from that Honor and Ascendency, which we had so Triumphantly attained? Were we
once Fooled out of the Lands of a Forfeited Crown; and of those in which we
were seized, by the just Title of Reforming the Church; and from the Estates of
such, as so malignantly opposed the Cause of God? And were we at last turned
off with a Portugal Enterprise, or an empty Snap-sack; or at best condemned to
an Irish Bog, or a contemptible Retirement?

Well! we may even thank our selves for all this. That is, That we should
suffer a Musty Magna Charta, and a trifling Dispute at the Bar among the
Lawyers, about Titles and Settlements, to call in question the indispensable
right, of what our Swords had so fairly possessed us? And then, that we should
be such Tonies, as to permit the Universities, those Nests of Antichrist and
Mischief, to flourish, and under our Noses to bring up a Generation, very
commonly of our own Children, to fly on our Cause 's Face, and to dispute the
Justice of our Reformation, and of all other our Actions; which we know they
did as soon, as our Backs were turned.

Had we listened to the Counsels of our wise Agitators, or gone on with our
Major Generals: Had we Shipped away all the Cavaliers, when upon that Design,
they were carried away and imprisoned in the Seaport Towns: Had we never
suffered the Loyal Gentry ( as they would be accounted) to dwell in their
Houses, and upon their Estates; and even the worst of them for a trifling
Composition, and the Flea-bite of a petty Decimation: Had we taken away all the
Tithes (of which we made a happy Experiment in Wales,) demolished the Relics
of Popish Superstition; and instead of Men in Black, executed the Preaching
Humor with wandering Itinerants: I say, Had we taken this course, We and our
Cause had not gone off the Stage with so much Shame and Disappointment.

Well! what is past we cannot recall nor help; but If ever (O unhappy If) we
shall once more recover the Sword into our hands, we will mend those Errors in
our Politics; we will strike home, if at all. -- And we are not out of hopes of
that neither, It Is but getting to us in every place some of the Discontented
Gentry, and a parcel of Stout Atheists, ( you know they generally are our
Friends in that Affair,) and then get the Humouring Neutralists to go along
with us, at the Choice of our Representatives, ( you know they once did the
work for us, if we had managed it as we should, and may do it again:) Let us
but get London once more into the hands of the Sober Party ( you know whom I
mean;) and then let us but take a couple of Obstinate Brothers out of the way,
or so, we cannot want neither Money nor Friends; we can muster Men enough out of
the Conventicle Seraglio's, and, which is as good for our Business, out of the
Congregations of Popular and Partial Conformists, or of such as insinuate, how
uneasily they can endure the Conformity, by which they keep their Livings, and
we shall be presently at our old Work again, we hope to a better purpose than
before.

Thus I have opened the Heart of an Old Seditious Phanatic, and shown the
Figure of our Danger from them that acted in the last Rebellion, and are now
Alive.

But, O blessed God, This happy Day tells us, that their Flaming Revenge is
stifled, their Old Officers fled or hid, and their New raised Regiments in the
Clouds. The Conspirators may now keep their Caballs in Newgate; and erect
their Trophies at Tyburn. And that instead of our near approached Woes and
Lamentations, we can take Joy into our Hearts, and the Praises of God into our
Mouths. O let us then, on this dangerous Account, solicit one another to
declare the Wonders, etc.

4. The Fourth, and never to be sufficiently lamented Advantage, which the
Treason had attained, and which seems to me to declare one of the greatest
Wonders of our deliverance from it, was, That too great Numbers of the Common
People have been unhappily betrayed into a strong suspicion of the Governments
degenerating into Arbitrary Tyranny in the State, and Popery in the Church. And
for the better promoting this Popular Madness, all possible Arts and undirect
Contrivements have been made use of, to fix such a Jealousy in their Credulous
minds. Libels againts the Government, like Almanacks in the beginning of the
Year, are constantly dispersed into all Parts of the Nation; Conventicles
insinuate a belief of it, by their leering Whines, and melting Complaints of
Sad Times to come; Coffee-Houses smoked with the Noise of it; and now and then
comes forth some compter Artifice in Print, such as the Popish Successor,
Julian, and the like, upon design, first that the ordinary sort of the
Prejudiced People might be supported with a Belief, that they have not only the
dull repeated hints of Fears, and slight Stories of improbable Prodigies (which
their News-Mongers daily invent for them) to uphold their CAUSE, but that they
have Wit and Learning also on their side: And then, that the more knowing part
of Evil Men, who are wilfully bent to maintain their Disaffections to the
Government, might be enabled to discourse their Seditious Thoughts more
Formally and Artificially.

Now when a Peoples Heads are once actuated with such a Hurricaning Passion as
Jealousy, and that too of their precious Liberties; what can stop their Rage
from attempting any thing that is most Daring and Mischievous; or from
believing any thing, that is most unreasonable and contradictious, to the
common sense of their own good?

How stoutly may Men be presumed and persuaded to act, when they are
perpetually affrighted with the noise of Tyranny at such a rate, as if they
were presently ready to purchase a little Salt with a considerable portion of
their Labors and Revenues; or as if their Children were immediately to be
ravished into a Seraglio, or themselves to be instantly driven to an Algerine
Mill or Oar? I say, what a Champion must every Man be presumed to be, when he
is thus persuaded of such Tyrannick Consequences from the Government he lives
under?

But, O Unfortunate Vulgar! that the fatal Enemies of their Freedom, should
persuade them to entertain Fears of the loss of that Liberty, of which no
Nation under the Heavens are more secure; and that they should be so befooled,
as to mind and undertake such Expedients for a pretended preservation of it, as
must necessarily dash them upon as severe a Rock of Tyranny and Slavery, as if
they were presently brought into subjection to as many Colonies of Barbarians,
as ever the Romans had once planted to enslave this Nation.

But then the highest Instance of our Danger from the abused Multitude, lies in
their power of Electing their Representatives in Parliament, and that because
they will be sure to struggle, Body and Soul, to choose such as are of their own
Complexion, and that will stand by them in all their own Seditious and
Schismatic Tempers and Designs against the Government.

Its hence, that the Monarchy has this last Century contended with so many
Difficulties to preserve it self, and all that while has stood in such a
hazardous Defense of its own Safety: with which Perplexities being in time
wearied and overborn, it was necessitated to give way to the last Ages
Rebellion, which, by several steps of Incroachment and Conquest, brought the
best of KINGS at last to the Block.

And hence it is, that our present most Wise and Gracious MONARCH, has of late
felt the Rage and Seditious Persecutions of that impetuous and restless
Faction, which has endeavored, all that is possible, to make His Majesty Cheap
abroad and Contemptible at home, by Arraigning the Justice of His Government,
by offering to remove from him the very necessary Guards of His Royal Person;
by precluding (if it had been possible) the very advantage he might make of His
own Revenues; and by running Him and all his Loyal Friends down (only a little
faster) to the same woeful or worser Evils and Events, into which the hopeful
Senate of -- 41. had brought this their Miserable Church and Nation.

Now when a Multitudinous Rout of dissenting and discontented People shall but
apprehend, that they have any favor, or so much as a Countenance from any
thing, or bit of a thing, which they can call a Parliament, their minds shall
admit as solemn an Encouragement to act, as if a Voice from Heaven had enjoined
them what to do.

But blessed be our Good GOD, that a Seasonable Declaration, a good Royal
Revenue, and the Wisdom of a Mighty Prince, has given so fair a Respit to the
People for their entertaining Wiser thoughts; and that the wonderful and most
evident Detection of this last horrid Conspiracy (we hope) will so perfectly
undeceive every Mind, in which there is the least grain of Honesty and of the
English Genius, that we may no more split upon that Fatal Rock. O let this
remarkable Instance of GOD's Delivering Providence in this respect oblige us
for ever, to praise God, etc.

5. The last Advantage, with which the Treason was attended, to secure the
Hopes and Reason of its designed Success; and that thereby we may further
advance the wonderful Mercy of the Deliverance, was, That it was supported
under the Pretense, and by the obliging Name of Religion.

Now, as Religion bears generally the most powerful Charm in the Minds of Men,
and influenceth them to the highest resolution of Acting, be the Attempts never
so difficult or hazardous: so must the danger of any Evil proceedure be
increased, that has gained such a prevailing Abetment. And such was our Case.

For though the Cunning Heads, that molded and managed the Conspiracy, might
easily be presumed not to be much affected with Religion, especially with such
a silly One; by which Vulgar Minds are ordinarily captivated; yet to serve
their own base Ends, they complied with, and countenanced every wild Humor of
Religionizing, on design to gain a Belief in the Peoples weak Heads, That they
were the only Patriots of their Religion, and that they minded nothing but the
CAUSE of GOD.

Religion is in Danger, say they; Popery is flowing in upon us; the Court and
Clergy do but Maskarade, and are Popishly Affected; The Government of the
Church is Antichristian, the Worship Superstitious.

Now when these dismal Representations are once fomented and believed, what can
such prejudiced Minds refuse to attempt for the Prevention of such Woeful
Events? But that which chiefly adds to our Danger on that account, is, That all
the Factions, though in other things they may irreconcileably disagree, yet
concur in this one common Principle, That every Man's Religion is his own
private Conscience, which he is to believe to be the immediate dictate of God,
and which he is bound indisputably to follow.

Now when this Notion of Religion is entertained, it sets up in every Factious
Mind an uncontrollable Tribunal, which governs with a power superior to all
humane Reason, Laws, and Authority; and gains such an Ascendant over such men's
Thoughts and Actions, that like the Commanders power in the Gospel, it says to
one man, Come, and he comes; and to another Go, and he goes. And then what
can such a Conscience refuse to do, when it commands an Observance?

Go, says Conscience, fetch me a Chain to bind this King, or these
Iron-Fetters to tie down those Nobles; It Is dispatched without dispute. And if
then it says, Go and pluck down these Idolatrous Structures, and let those
Superstitious Ministers be cast out of them; if such a Conscience be but
tinctured from Scripture, that those are Groves and High Places, and these are
Baalitish Priests and Dumb Dogs, the work is done in an instant.

When this Sovereign Conscience enjoins this Oath to be taken, another to be
superseded or broken; such a Jury to be packed, and such a Verdict to be given,
let an Innocent man's life, or even the Safety of a whole Nation lie at Stake,
he can no more suspend his Duty, than violate his Credit of his being of the
Godly Party. Nay, if Blood lies in the way of Reformation, it is but whispering
into Conscience a Text or two, and it bids the Man (let it be against whom it
will) Go, and utterly destroy those Sinners the Amalakites, and fight against
them till they be consumed, (as he finds it 1 Samuel 15.18.) Or if he reads,
Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord negligently, and that keeps his
Sword from Blood, (as he is told from Jer. 48.10.) Or if he but hears a Curse
ye Meroz, unless you raise a Regiment to fight the Lords Battles; The Man of
Conscience can no more resist such a Call, than if a Revelation from Heaven had
set him a work.

Now, can you think that we were not in the greatest Danger that was possible,
when such a wild and destructive Principle as this, may be presumed to have
possessed the Minds of our Numerous and Seditious Factions, whenever the
Change of the Government should come under design, and be attempted?

O, surely this gave (as in reason it might) the Conspirators a great assurance
of Success in their Treasonable proceedings.

But, O Blessed God, whose watchful Providence broke forth in Mercy to us
through this Dismal Cloud also; and has cast this Operative Principle at
present into such a Dead Sleep of Shame and Abhorrence, that we hope and pray,
that it may never be awakened more, to be made an Engine to assist any future
Attempts, for our common Ruin, as it has done hitherto: And that the
detection of this horrid Conspiracy, (as it must be abominable to all Mankind)
should accomplish the Prophecy of the ROYAL MARTYR, when he told his Son, (Our
Sovereign LORD) That when the Mask of Religion should be pulled off the Face of
Rebellion; -- He might then see Happy Days.

And certainly this Day proclaims the removal of that deceitful Vizzard, with a
plainer Evidence to undeceive the Cheated Vulgar, than the Faction ever met
with, since they acted their Seditious Designs against the Government in Church
and State. O, let us on this account discover the greatness of our Danger from
the late Conspiracy, and thereby take occasion to see more and more the Wonders
of Gods Goodness to us. This the last.

Now if we shall but seriously Consider, and take a full prospect of these
several Instances of our imminent Danger, from the concurrence of so many
Advantages, which the Conspiracy had met with and attained, to secure its
Success; And then look back upon the most prodigiously Calamitous effects it
would have produced, had it succeeded upon those Advantages; it cannot but melt
our whole Souls into a holy Joy and Love, to think of what our Most Gracious
GOD has done for us in preventing all those Evils, and defeating all those
Advantages: And at the same time, how can we but be transported with the most
amazing Admiration of his Goodness, that His tender Providence should have such
regard to an Ungrateful Nation? And then, how can we not but be affected with
the unaccountable Manner of His acting that Providence; that is, that God
should choose the Intervention of an ordinary Contingence, to make a kind of
Necessity to his Sacred MAJESTY to escape from his Danger, in contradiction to
his own Resolution of staying where He was, till every Circumstance had been
fitted for His destruction?

O, what Joy must it needs create in every Loyal mind, when this Day tells him,
that he did not live to behold (as was designed) a Gracious KING and his Royal
BROTHER weltring in their Blood; nor the Three Kingdoms imbroyl'd in the most
Unnatural War, or which is worse, made Slaves to the most Unnatural Tyrants!
That we have heard no News of Cities laid in Ashes, nor of Fields covered with
the Slain; nor that the Innocent and the Loyal are made every where a prey to
satiate the Malice of a Revengeful Faction! And that for their sakes the Nation
is not once more become the Reproach of Christianity, and Scorn of Mankind!

O, what shall we render to the LORD for these mighty Mercies! Where Is such a
Cup of Salvation to be found, as may answer the dimensions of such a Wonderful
Blessing! Where are all manner of grateful Expedients to be had, that not one
of them may be omitted on such a mighty Occasion! O let us study to do every
thing that may make us officiously grateful to Heaven; and then heartily wish,
that if it were possible, we might offer to our good God in Sacrifice, All we
have, and all we are; and then sincerely think it all too little.

In the mean time let the Horizon Echo our Joyful Acclamations; Let the Roofs
of the Temple return back the Loud Voice of our present Praises: Let the
Streets be filled with Melody, our Houses with Cheerfulness, and our Tables
decked with Gladness. And then let us humbly acknowledge, that we owe them all
to God anew; and that the Reason of this Days Solemnity, gives another Title to
all we enjoy, or that our Posterities can ever with comfort inherit.

Finally, Let us Wish, That the whole World might have Notice of this Days
Wonder, and that all Christian Nations might know and affectionately resent
this Mighty Salvation of our GOD; and with them and us, let us Wish also, That
the Holy Angels in Heaven, whose station is Joy and Love, might concur with us
in our highest Hallelujahs; and particularly in this Days so often repeated
Anthem: O that Men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness: and
declare the Wonders he does for the Children of Men.

SERMONS Printed for Walter Kittilby at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
DR. Smith's Unjust Man's Doom; as Examined by the several kinds of Christian
Justice, and their Obligation; with a particular Representation of the
Injustice and Danger of Partial Conformity. Octavo.

-- Two Sermons Preached at two Public Assizes for the County of Suffolk.
Octavo.

-- Two Sermons preached at the Cathedral Church of Norwich; the one upon the 3
d of May, being Wednesday in Rogation Week; the other upon the 29 th of May,
being the Solemnization of His Majesty's Birth and Restoration. Quarto.

-- A Sermon preached on the Fourth Sunday in Lent, in the Cathedral Church of
Norwich; Representing the great Sin and Danger of Neglecting the Holy Communion.

Dr. Hicks's Sermon at the Act at Oxford.

-- before the Lord Mayor. Peculium Dei.

-- Notion of Persecution.

-- on the 30 th of January.

-- Moral Shechinah.

-- strongest Temptations conquerable by Christians. Dr. Sharp's Sermon before
the Lord Mayor.

-- Sermon at Spittle and Yorkshire-Feast.

-- Sermon before the House of Commons, Apr. 11. 1679

-- at the Election of the Lord Mayor, 1680.

Dr. Thorp's Sermon before the Lord Mayor.

Dr. Woodroff's Sermon before the Lord Mayor.

Mr. William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor.

Mr. Lynford's Sermon before the Lord Mayor.

Mr. Bryan Turner's Sermon.

Mr. John Turner's Sermon of Transubstantiation.

Mr. Gaskarth's Sermon at the Funeral of Duke of Lauderdale.

Dr. Butler's Sermon before the King at Windsor. Quarto.

Mr. Lamb's Sermon before the King.

-- before the Lord Mayor.

Mr. Brown's Visitation Sermon.

Dr. Fowler's Sermon at Gloucester.

Mr. Cutlove's Two Assize Sermons at St. Edmunds-Bury.

Mr. Inet's Sermon at the Assize at Warwick.

Mr. Edw. Sermon's Sermon before the Lord Mayor.

Mr. Resbury's Sermon before the Charter House Scholars.

-- at the Funeral of Sr. Allen Broderick.

Mr. Smith's Sermon concerning the Doctrine, Unity, and Profession of the
Christian Faith, Preached before the University of Oxford, with an Appendix
concerning the Apostles Creed.

Dr. Calamy's Sermon at Bow-Church, on the 29 th of May, 1682.

Prosecution no Persecution; or the difference between suffering for
Disobedience and Faction, in a Sermon on Phil. 1.29. preached at Bury St.
Edmunds in Suffolk, on March 22. 1681. by Nath. Bisby, D.D.

-- Modern Pharisees; or a Sermon on Matthew. 23.15.

Mr. Evan's Sermon, or Moderation stated.

The Original of Rebellion; or the Ends of Separation, in a Sermon preached
Jan. 30. 1682.

Samaritanism Revived, in a Sermon preached on the late Thanksgiving-Day, Sept.
9. 1683. Both by Luke Milbourne.

Mr. Wagstaffe's Sermon preached at Stow in the County of Bucks, on the late
Thanksgiving, Sept. 9. 1683.

The Unlawfulness of stretching forth the Hand to Resist or Murder Princes, in
Two Sermons; the first preached upon the 30 th of January last, the other upon
the late Thanksgiving, Sept. 9. 1683. By William Pain, Rector of S. Mary
White-Chappel.

Ahitophel's Policy defeated, being a Sermon on the 9 th of September, 1683.

Mr. Hopkin's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Sept. 2. 1683.

Mr. Fox's Sermon at the Herefordshire-Feast.

FINIS.

