Universal Love. In which a Visitation flows through the Creation, that all
people may be informed into the Truth, and in their several places come to walk
in the Truth, and live in the Truth, to be a good savor unto God, and honor
God.

1. To Parents of Children. 2. To Masters and Dames of Families. 3. To Servants
in their places. 4. To Aged People. 5. To such as live a single life. 6. To
young People. 7. To Children. 8. To such as are in outward Government. 9. To
Ministers of Parishes so called. 10. To such as practice in the Nations Law 11.
To such as trade in Weights and Measures. 12. To such as buy and sell in
Markets or in any other places.
With a General Exhortation. Also something concerning Faith, and Hope, and
Love, and the Word, and Man's restless part, and the Election, and a particular
Place of bondage opened. That all may come to the Light of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and to his Life and Power, and Wisdom; through which all people may
love one another, and be at peace one amongst another, and deal justly one with
another upon all occasions; that Justice and Mercy, and Equity, Sobriety,
Moderation, Chastity, Temperance, Righteousness, Holiness, Peace, and Love, may
have a free, and an universal course, and the Creation may be set at liberty,
which yet travelleth in pain, and bears the burden of all disorder. William
Smith.

The Second Edition. Printed in the Year 1663.

A Table of the Principle Heads contained in this Book.
1. TO Parents of Children. Page 2. 2. To Masters and Dames of Families. Page
3. 3. To Servants in their Places. Page 22. 4. To Aged People. Page 29. 5. To
such as live a Single Life. Page 35. 6. To Young People. Page 41. 7. To
Children. Page 48. 8. To such as are in outward Government. Page 57. 9. To
Ministers of Parishes, so called. Page 67. 10. To such as Practice in the
Nations Law. Page 82. 11. To such as Trade in Weights and Measures. Page 92.
12. To such as buy and sell in Markets, or in any other places. Page 99. 13. A
General Exhortation. Page 106. 14. Concerning Faith. Page 112. 15. Concerning
Hope. Page 117. 16. Concerning Love. Page 121. 17. Concerning the Word. Page
127. 18. Concerning man's restless Part, and the Election. Page 134. 19. A
particular place of Bondage opened. Page 143.
An Epistle dedicated to the Measure of Light and Life in all People.
THis Book is dedicated unto the most noble, and honorable, and worthy of all
things, the Principle of God in every man, knowing that it is the ^ost
excellent in virtue, and that from the (...) has loved the best things, and
deligh^e^^ i^ the plain simple path of Truth, and has no^ at any time
cunningly devised inventions; it has ever been virtuous in goodness, and a
true Lover of such as has loved uprightness, it has ever despised vice and
vanity, and never could join with any evil thing; it has ever been of an
humble meek nature, and tender in compassion to all people; it has ever been
of a peaceable disposition and condescending to the lowest state; it has
always loved the good, and delighted in the best things, and in innocence and
simplicity the most perfect, and in wisdom the most excellent, and it is most
renownable in glory, and full of all riches and treasures, the graces and
excellency of its virtue and beauty, does far excel the praise of men. And unto
this principle alone, is this Book dedicated, as being unto me the most lovely,
renownable, and for ever honorable; for it is that unto me which is the
chiefest good, and it does communicate from it self, the riches of it self, and
that to the glory and honor of its own power and wisdom over all; and the
matter which in this Book is contained, being received and accepted by it, I
shall rejoice in my labor, however men distinct from it, may esteem it, for it
is not the praise of men that I seek, howbeit I am moved to labor in the work
of the Lord; but I desire to be manifest to every man's Conscience in the sight
of God, and to be approved by his pure eye that sees secrets; and let all
glory, and honor, and praise, and renown, be given unto him alone, for ever
and ever: and unto the measure of himself in every man, I commend this Book in
all humility, reverence and fear.

W. S.

To the READER.
Reader,
WHen thou set thine eye to read this Book, set the fear of God before it,
and be not so hasty to read, as diligent to understand; for there is much
communicated, and from the life of God published, that is not read in that from
which it is given forth, but run over with a hasty mind out of Gods fear,
through which the benefit that might be received is lost, and the labor of
those that would do good, does not become so effectual; for when people do not
read with a sound mind, they do not weigh the substance of the matter, nor do
not prove their own present states, but hastily read without understanding, and
then the matter slips out of their minds, and the profit is lost, and the good
intended is not reaped.

Therefore Reader, be thou careful, and first set Gods fear before thee, and
read with that of God in thee; and consider through the several states, which
in this Book is opened, and try where thou can find thy own place, or unto
which thou art nearest; for thou may certainly know with that of God in thee,
and with that thou may feel, when thou read'st thy own state; for the witness
of God will find thee, and will come close to thee, when thy state is opened,
and will manifest how it is with thee in thy place, and what order thou art in;
and read with a single eye, and a simple mind, and then thou will profit: And
do not charge the matter in this Book, to lie too much in duty, or to stand too
much in outward things; for if thou read it diligently, thou may observe,
that there is nothing pressed in duty, but what is required by the principle,
unto which the duty ought to stand in all things; and though there be much
which lie outward, yet the information reaches to the principle inward, unto
which thou joining, thou will know that all outward things that is not
manifested from it, will be reproved by it, unto which reproof thou art to
yield thy self in obedience; and by obeying the principle which reproves
unrighteousness within, thou will find that all unrighteousness without must be
denied also, and that in obedience to the principle within; and thou may
observe, that salvation is not published through any thing done, but by Jesus
Christ alone; yet there must be obedience given unto him, before salvation be
witnessed by him. So be sober and vigilant, and judge nothing rashly, but weigh
things cooly, and the answer will be given unto Truths testimony, by that of
God in thee; and whether thou will hear and obey, or neglect and contemn, yet
the Truth will find a witness in thy Conscience, unto which this Book is
commended; and if thou be careful, and keep in Gods fear, and choose the good,
then may thou find profit, and peace, and comfort to thy soul; and if it so
come to pass concerning thee, whoever thou art, I shall therein rejoice.

W. S.

Universal Love.
THe Wisdom that is pure from above has the good order in it, and by its
government the Creation stands in its place and service, and all things come
to be used and ordered in the fear of God, and in this wisdom people are fitly
disposed, and are in a right capacity to order the Creation, and every one in
their place does yield a good favor unto God, for the wisdom from above is
gentle, and peaceable, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and goodness,
and truth; and this Wisdom being received, the mind is fitly disposed to order
those things which are committed to trust and charge, and every one in their
place comes to see their duty in their place, and how they are to answer God
through those things which he commits unto them, and in their several places
where he sets them, and comes to see the great weight that lies upon them, to
perform with care and diligence such service as in their place God requires;
and so the Wisdom from above does order every man in his place, and he becomes
a good favor in his place both to God and man, and through the Righteousness
that proceeds from such a man, the Lord God is glorified; and this is that
which all people in their respective places are to mind, and in what thing they
are called to serve the Lord, in that thing, and in that place to be careful
to answer God, and to honor God; and such who have children are in this thing
very deeply concerned, for the charge upon them is exceeding great; and
therefore they are to mind the just and holy principle of God in themselves,
that they may receive the wisdom from above, and in that to nurture and bring
up their children in the fear of the Lord; for how can Parent bring up their
Children in the fear of God, when they walk not in the fear of God themselves?
and how can they inform their children into that which is good, when they
themselves live in that which is evil? and such Parents do usually teach their
children to be vain and to follow that which is evil, and so covetous parents
teach their children covetousness, for their own minds being in that thing,
they press their children to the practice of it, and yet not under a show of
covetousness, but under a show of carefulness and providence, at which door the
mind goes forth into the world, and reaches it self to compass the wealth and
riches of it, and such Parents give encouragement to their children in this
place, and smile upon them with a cheerful countenance; and so the child runs
in delighting, and with pleasure exercises it self in covetous practices, and
strives after the earthly treasures to please its Parents, and the Parents
account such children, careful children, and provident and witty, and the
children are hereby tempted out of the path of honesty, and so run in cozening,
and cheating, and defrauding for gain, and that is counted policy, and the
Parents will smile upon their children, and in such things delight in them, as
being witty, and so teaches them and instructs them into such practices; and
how are children wronged in this place for want of good nurture in the fear of
God! And when wealth and riches are heaped together, then the mind is lifted up
in pride, and the Parents they exalt their children in haughtiness and pride,
and then they must have things suitable to their outward condition; and so
first teaches them to be covetous, and then to be proud, and poor children are
lifted up in their minds at the beholding their costly apparel, and their gay
clothing, which by their Parents are provided, and for want of good nurture in
this place they run out of Gods fear, and out of true order, and then their
Parents train them up in such things as they look at to be suitable to their
conditions, and so they put them to learn music, and dancing, and singing, and
with such like vain things poor children are wronged by their Parents, who
should keep them in good order, and in the fear of God; and how do Parents
allow their children liberty to sport and play and to be vain, and informs them
into the expertnesse of such practices? and how are children exercised in
vanity? and how do they spend such days in vanity, which they pretend to be
holy days? and do not all such days which they observe to be holy, end in
profaneness and vanity, and wickedness? and are not children at liberty upon
such days to satisfy their vain minds in pleasures, and in sports, and run
into headiness, and wildness? and the rest of days which they do not count
holy, they turn their minds into covetousness and deceit: And are these things
commendable for Parents, or for children? or are these things like Christians?
and how are poor children, for want of good nurture in time, carried away into
all manner of vanity, and so taken captive at the will of the Devil, who holds
them fast after he has taken them, and so vanity becomes natural to children,
who know no better from their childhood; and what a dishonor is this to
parents, who should be grave, and wise, and sober, and stayed, for them to
encourage their children in such things, and behold them in the practice of
such things with delight? such things do not become a Christian profession in
no place, and to be sure it is not a Christians practice, for it is unsavory
to God, and grieves his spirit, and all that are guided by his spirit; and it
is a trouble to Christians to see vanity flow in as a natural stream, from
generation to generation, and the mind of people to be so seated in it, as they
study from time to time how to advance it, and to train up their children in
it, for if children were not encouraged in vanity, and trained up in it when
they are young, they would be more innocent, and simple, and stand more in the
true order, for as they are children they are innocent and harmless, and a
child, as it is a child, is more in the innocence, than it is all its life time
after, except it come to the Spirit of God, by that to be regenerated; and
therefore it must needs be a great weight upon Parents in this case, for by
training up their children in vanity, they draw upon themselves the child's
iniquity, and by how much they do encourage their children in vanity, by so
much the more do they wrong both themselves and their children: Therefore it is
of concernment for all Parents of children to weigh the matter, and in time to
consider it, for certainly the Lord is grieved with evil deeds, and with the
disorderly walking of all such as are out of his fear, and that Parents would
be more mindful of what they are entrusted with, and to order it in Gods fear
and Wisdom, that all they have under their charge may be a good favor unto
God, and bring honor to his Name; for if it be not so, all his gifts are
abused, and his Name dishonored, and there the Creation is out of order.

Now all Parents must come to that of God in themselves, before they can
instruct their children in the fear of God; they must come to the Light in
their own Consciences, and in the Light behold their own present state, for
being from the Light of Christ they cannot walk in Gods fear themselves,
neither can they teach their children so; and is not that a grievous thing,
when a whole Family is out of the fear of God, and both Parents and children
exercised in vanity? and how does wickedness flow like a flood from generation
to generation, and one generation goes and another comes, and with every
generation sin appears, and evil is practiced, and grows from one to another
in full strength, and this is the ground, because that children are not trained
up in Gods fear, for if that was so, sin would dye, and in every generation it
would grow weaker and weaker, and in time it would be rooted out, and the
practice in it would cease, and it would not be had in remembrance.

Therefore all you Parents of children, mind the fear of God in your selves:
and come to the Principle of God in your own Consciences, and yield your selves
unto that, and obey it, and then you cannot see your children run into vanity,
and suffer them to go unreproved, if you once hearken to the voice of God in
you, and mind the Testimony of his witness in your Consciences, to know in your
selves unto what reproof belongs, and what the Lord allows, and so to
answer the Lord in obedience, and come to know your selves changed, then you
will be able to instruct your children in the same path, and cannot suffer them
to run into vanity, much less to train them up in it; and so in the principle
of God you will receive Wisdom from above, and know the nature of it, in which
Wisdom is the pure order and good government; then you cannot let your children
lie, and swear, and curse, and play, and riot; and be vain in pleasures, and
games, your eye will be over them in Wisdom, and in the gentleness you will
reprove them, and in meekness instruct them, and when they do go amiss you will
feel grief come upon you concerning them, and when you are grieved for them in
that state, then take heed you do not fall into passion, and anger, and wrath,
and in that exercise your wills upon them, and use your hand in severity
toward them, but in wisdom wait to be guided, that not any fault which comes
to your knowledge may pass unreproved, neither any fault be too severely
punished, for they are both out of true order, and you may know that when you
have exercised your hand upon them in passion that you are not free from
trouble afterward, when you come into coolness again you will be judged in
your selves for your rashness, and then you will have trouble in your
Conscience, and there is no profit to your children by that hand, because
wisdom does not order it.

Therefore ye Parents, who would have your children to do will, and to be
happy, wait to be ordered in wisdom toward them, and keeping to the Light of
the Lord, you will know both how to spare, and how to correct, and so with a
meek and gentle spirit bring them into order, and bend them in their
tenderness, before the bad part grow stubborn and be strong, for in their
tenderness it will be easy, and whilst they art young and green the witness
lies near them, and reproof soon reaches them, and if there be but an eye upon
them in the wisdom of God, the witness will answer, and the bad will be
presently judged in them, which growing into more strength, for want of timely
order the darkness thickens over them, and then the witness lies at a farther
distance, and that which at first might have been rebuked with a look, will not
then be brought down with a blow; and here Parents both wrong themselves and
their children for want of wisdom; for they give way to their children whilst
they are young, and so lets up the bad part into strength, and when they come
to behold things far amiss in their children then they would bend them, and
cannot, and so lets up the bad nature over their own heads, and then beholds
their children with mourning, which in wisdom might be timely prevented. And
this is a great wrong both to Parents and children, and brings grief and sorrow
upon them both: Therefore order is a sweet thing, when Parents have wisdom to
govern their children, and to nurture them in the fear of God, and to keep them
in duty and submission in the fear of God, then there is a good savor both in
Parents and Children, and a comely order beheld in the wisdom, and to come into
this comely order is a sweet savor; and to inform children to the Principle of
God in them, and to teach them the fear of God, and learn them to behave
themselves modestly and soberly unto all people, this is good education, and
also a good portion, and there is the good breeding, and the good manners,
which is decent and orderly, and is an order approved of God; but to let them
run at liberty, and bring them up in the foolish vain Customs, and teach them
to observe Traditions, this is not orderly nor decent, though they be taught to
observe all Customs, it is not good breeding, nor good manners, for those
things are come to pass in the degeneration from the good, and to teach
children to bow, and scrape, and to put off their Hats to respect persons, this
is not good breeding nor good manners, for good breeding and good manners is in
the fear of God; but he that respects persons commits sin, and is out of the
fear of God, and such things are not approved of God, and that which he does
not approve, he does condemn; and to teach children to observe Traditions in
matter of Worship or otherwise, it is not good order, nor decent; to teach
children a formal Worship, or a formal Prayer, or any formal practice
accustomed by Tradition, and does not proceed from a present manifestation of
the Spirit of God, it is not good order, nor decent, for the Lord does not
allow of any traditional practice, which stands in form distinct from his
Spirit, and what he does not allow, he does reprove. And therefore the matter
is weighty upon Parents every way, to keep their children under nurture, and
teach them the fear of the Lord whilst they are tender, and in all things to
inform them to the principle of God in their Conscience, that with the Light of
Christ they may be guided, and with the Light of Christ they may be taught, and
by it ordered in all their ways, and in all their doings; then would mercy and
truth spring in children, and righteousness and holiness would naturally branch
forth, and children would become a sweet savor in their Generation, and in
their places would fear God, and honor God, which now grieves him, and vexes
him with their ungodliness and unrighteousness, vanity and prfaneness.

And so all Parents, mind your places and your charge, that you may account to
God with joy, and not with grief, and always inform your children to the Light
of Christ Jesus in their Conscience, the Light that shows both them and you,
your thoughts, and words, and deeds, and reproves for all evil, which is the
principle from which good order is brought forth; and be not hasty with your
children in any matter, nor let not bitterness arise at any time against them,
but in all meekness instruct them, and in wisdom watch over them, so you will
know when to rebuke and when to cherish, when to correct, and when to spare,
and the Rod will then fall in its right place, and in minding the Lord God, and
receiving his Wisdom, with that Wisdom order your children, so you will have
comfort in them, and they will bless you in time to come: but if you suffer it
to be otherwise, you will have grief enough in your own days, and in time to
come your children cannot remember you with joy, and that is a sad state every
way. Therefore walk in the fear of the Lord God, and love the Light of Christ
with which you are enlightened, and in the Light you will receive Wisdom, in
which Wisdom is decency and good order every way, and in every place and this
will be your peace, and your childrens happiness, and they will grow in Gods
fear, and come up in his power, and so from Generation to Generation
Righteousness will spring, and truth will spread abroad.

To Masters and Dames of Families.
RUle not in Lordship over such as are in place to serve you, but walk in
wisdom to-towards them, and be tender over them in their places, that they may
serve you with joy, and not with grief; and consider that God made of one blood
all Nations, and such as have the lowest place distinguishable amongst men, if
they walk in Gods fear, they are accepted of him; and you are not to exercise
your selves in your own wills over them, though they be your servants, but are
to order them in the wisdom of God, by which all things were made and created;
in which wisdom you will see the use and service of all things which you have
under your hands, and will see the Creation in its service in every place, and
so come to know the end for which you have servants to serve you, and the
service of that which you have to employ them in. And therefore let your care
be to instruct your servants in the fear of God, for that is your right place
as Masters and Dames, and keep them out of vanity, and in that let your care
and diligence be manifested, for that is a good favor: And how do you wrong
your servants and your selves by giving way to their liberty in vanity, for
that causes them to run out of the fear of God, and thereby wrongs themselves,
and it causes your business to be neglected, which they ought to be careful
in; and when by their carelessness you see your business neglected, then your
passion rises against them, and it may be hard words and speeches you may give
them, and be full of fury and wrath, and thereby disturbs your own peace; and
this is a great wrong to your selves, First, to have your business neglected,
and Secondly, to have your peace disturbed, which by your timely care in your
places, might both be prevented; for did you but stand in Gods wisdom, you
would not let your servants run into vanity in any case, but keep them in
obedience to your just commands, and in the fear of God to answer their places,
and not suffer them to run into wildness, and sports, and plays, and upon those
days in which they do not follow labor, to keep them in some good exercise in
the fear of God, and in all things, and in every place, to inform them to the
principle of God in them; that which reproves sin in the Conscience, that
searcher which tryes the intents of the heart; this would bring them into
stayedness, and soberness, and coolness, and keep them out of looseness and
liberty at all times, and in every place, and when they were free from your
labor, they would be exercising themselves in something that is good and
wholesome, and walk in the fear of God, and not run into madness, and sports, and
spend their time worse in those things, then if they were at labor: And what
good does the observation of those days, when they are observed in vanity and
madness, and folly? had not servants better be at their honest labor, than be
at football, and cudghils, and dancing, and revelling, and drinking in
Alehouses, and exercising themselves in all manner of vanity? Do they keep
that day holy to the Lord, that practice such things? or do they not pollute it
more then those days in which they follow their true labor? And is not these
things generally practiced upon the first days, which is called Sunday, or
Sabbath Day, or Lord's Day? and is not more sin and vanity practiced on that
day, and that principally by servants and children, then all the six days
besides? except some day that is observed as a Holy Day, in which ordinary
labor ceasing, then vanity comes into agitation; and Masters and Dames not
eying their servants in wisdom, and to keep them in some good exercise and
practice, the minds of servants hunts after vanity, and they come together, and
will say one to another, Come, What must we go do to day? And is not this a sad
state, for a day to be observed as a holy day, and people knows not what to do
upon that day? and so not kowning the good, they run into evil, and brings
forth wicked practices after their own ungodly lusts, and some pleases
themselves with one thing, and some with another, and so runs headlong into
vanity; and then if you have but a little needful business to be done, your
servants are to seek, and then it may be you are angry and frets against them,
and charges them with carelessness and negligence, in your business; which in it
self is true, but are not you your selves the greatest faulters, who keeps them
not in subjection, to do those things which are good, and to follow that which
is honest in the sight of all men; and is not labor an honest and a just thing
in the sight of all men? and is not vanity the contrary? for when people are in
their honest labor, they are bold, and cares not who sees them, but when they
are in vanity, there is a shame comes upon them when sober people beholds them,
and sometimes they lurk into secret places to be out of sight when they
practice vanity. And does not the observing such days after such a manner, do
more hurt than good every way? is not both Masters and Servants wronged in the
end of it, and the Creation burdened with it, and Gods Spirit grieved?

But some may say, If Servants have no liberty they would be discouraged and
cast down, and their slavery would be great, if they were always kept to hard
labor.

This does not diminish any thing from their liberty, but adds unto it, for
that which is pretended for liberty proves their greatest bondage every way;
and they are far more in bondage to their vanity, than to their labor, because
the mind and delight being in it, they are not so well satisfied, as when they
are in the practice of it, and if they be at any time restrained, then they are
in great bondage and trouble, and so the unruly vain mind works over the
good, and if it be not satisfied they are in bondage to their own heart, lusts;
for by their vanity and wicked practices their souls are oppressed, and there
is bondage within, and by the exercise of their bodies in vanity, they will be
so wearyed, as sometimes they cannot follow their labor for some days after,
and that is bondage to the body; then where stands their liberty, but in their
vanity? and so uses their liberty as an occasion to serve the flesh; for if
Masters and Dames did order their servants in Gods wisdom, and if servants were
kept in the fear of the Lord God, then there would be as true liberty as any
service might open for their liberty, and it would not stand in observing days
or times, but as any needful occasion might offer it self, for the servants
benefit, then they might have true liberty on their own behalf, and in their
own business, as need required, and not be gainsayed, and they would not expect
or desire any liberty beyond that, in any case, if they were but brought into
Gods fear and good order; and they might then have liberty allowed them to
serve the Lord, and to wait upon him, and to exercise themselves in the worship
of his Spirit, at any time, or upon any day, as there might be occacasion; and
not to keep a day as a holy day, and pretend a worship to God upon that day,
and profane that day, which they pretend to keep as holy, that is not good
order nor decent; for to pretend the observation of a day, and a worship to God
upon that day, and to go to a Steeple-house a few hours, and observe the
practice of such Ceremonies as is there observed, and then to run into vanity
and wickedness, the remaining part of the day, these things grieves the Lord
from day to day.

Therefore you that have servants under you, First mind the principle of God in
your selves, the Light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences, and receive the
testimony of it, and do not gainsay its reproof in your selves, then you will
know what to reprove in your servants; and coming to the Light of Christ in
your selves, with the Light to be guided and ordered in your own particulars,
then you will be good patterns and examples to your servants; for you being
from that of God in your selves, which would guide you, and lead you into truth
and righteousness, you become bad patterns to your servants: And how can you
reprove or reform their evil practices in any place, when their eyes behold you
in the practice of the same thing, which you in words may reprove in them? nay,
many times you exceed them in vanity and profaneness, and so are out of order
in your selves, not being guided by the Light which is pure: And who are
convinced of profaneness, and in your selves are ordered into moderation and
soberness, and have some desires after God, and sets up a practice in your
Families, of reading or expounding Scriptures, and prayer, and singing David's
Psalms, which you call Family Duties, Take heed you be not ensnared in that
place, for there is a danger lies near, though your practice may have something
of a show of godliness in it, for though at first you may practice such things
in some tenderness toward God, and perform them as necessary Duties, and in
that place standing faithful to God in what is made manifest, and not a further
manifestation opened to you, your practice is not condemned in that place; but
this is the danger, when the observation of a practice centers the mind in the
form of what is practiced, and so in time is content with the observation of
the form only; this is a place where many loses the life and the savor of it;
and that which at first was truth in it self, in the manifestation and
practice, does in time become false, through the observation in the form only,
and there the Kingdom of God is not found, nor true peace enjoyed.

But some may say, Is not Family Duties good Order?

Yes, they are so, but not as they stand in the observation of a form only, for
such a practice may be observed and continued, when there is not any thing of
God to move unto it; and that observation cannot then stand in the order of
God, but in the disorderly part of man's own will, who sets his own time, and
speak his own words, and in that performs something as a service unto God.
Therefore who are in this state, and would have your Families come into good
order in this place, keep your minds to the Spirit of God in you, and wait to
know the motion of it, and it will show you the time, and will give you words
(if there be need) in the time, and will move to prayer as there is need, and
will teach you how to pray, and what to ask, for the Spirit knows your
infirmities, and makes intercession with groans many times, when never a word
is spoken; and when the Spirit of God moves you to a Duty, either on your own
behalf, or the behalf of your Family, in any place, then neglect not that time,
but call your Family together, and sit down in Gods fear, and wait upon him,
that in his spirit you may discharge your Duty; and then if any thing be out of
order in your Families, by which you are grieved, there will be a word of
Reproof given in the Spirit; or if there be need of Exhortation, the Spirit
will give a word of Exhortation; and when it is a time of Prayer, the Spirit
will move to prayer, and give words in Prayer: And this will stand in Gods
order, and out of your own wills, and you will have comfort in it, and this
will sweeten your Families, and make you a good savor in your places, and the
Lord will be amongst you, and do you good.

So in all things mind that of God in you, the Light which shows sin in the
Conscience, and reproves the evil-doer in all his ways, that in the Light you
may receive the wisdom that is pure, and in that wisdom to order all things you
have in charge, to the glory and praise of Almighty God.

To Servants in their Places.
YOu that are called to serve, be you diligent in your places, and in all
things, and in every place learn to serve the Lord, for that is good and
acceptable with him; and if ye serve the Lord in singleness of heart, then you
will discharge your duty in your places; and have regard to your places out of
the eye-service, for if you only serve well whilst your Masters eye behold
you, that is but a service performed in awe to your Masters eye, and is no more
but an eye-service; but if you mind the Principle of God, and stand in the fear
of God, then will your care and diligence be to serve the Lord, and to serve
your Masters as in the sight of God, for the Eye of the Lord is always present
and beholds you; and whether your Masters eye be over you, or absent from you,
your care should be to serve the Lord, whose eye beholds you in all places, and
at all times, and the intents of your hearts; and if you have thoughts at any
time to neglect your Masters business, when you know that he is absent from
you, is there not something in you at that time which does manifest those
thoughts unto you, and shows you that they are amiss? that is the light of
Christ in your Consciences, and is always present to behold whatever you
intend; and if you be at any time neglecting your Masters business which you
are entrusted withal, and that your Master come and find you so doing, are you
not then judged in your selves, and stand guilty of your offense before your
Master? and that which judges you and reproves you, is the Light of Jesus
Christ in your Consciences, for you do bear judgment in that case, and are
certainly reproved in your selves, though your Master speak not a word unto
you; and unto that you are to keep your minds, that with it you may be guided
in your service, and then there will be no need of your Masters eye, no fear of
your Masters coming, for you will be found serving God in the Light, and in his
fear you will be doing your Masters business, then you will stand clear before
the Lord in all things, and there will be no shame come upon you, whosoever
beholds you, or takes notice of you, for man needs never be ashamed before men,
that stands approved unto God in what he does; and if he do not stand approved
unto God, then he has a guilt upon him, and the witness of God condemns him in
himself, then if men but look at him, the witness condemns him, and the shame
comes over him, for he stands guilty before God though man cannot accuse him,
and so in the Light you will be found serving the Lord, and doing your Masters
business justly, truly, and faithfully, as in the sight of God, and as if your
Masters eye were over you, and this will be a good savor both to God and
honest men; but when your minds are from that of God in you, then carelessness
and negligence attends your places, and whether you serve or serve not, you are
not careful, or whether you labor or labor not, you do not much regard, if
your Masters eye be not over you; and here you are out of your places, and with
that of God in you, which is just and true, you will in that place be reproved,
and you can never be just not true indeed, but as you come to the principle of
God which is just and true, with that to be guided, which in all things you are
to mind, for there is not any that either rule well, or serve faithfully, but
such as come to be guided by the Light of Christ Jesus in themselves, and if
you mind that when it does at any time reprove you, then will Gods fear come to
be placed in your hearts, and the awe of God will be over you, and that will
keep you in carefulness and diligence, to serve God and please God, and your
service to your Masters will be performed faithfully at all times, and in all
places, whether your Masters be present or absent, and you will not need to use
deceit to cover your faults from your Masters and Dames, but in singleness of
heart approve your selves to God, in all things wherein your service lies to
your Masters; for when any fault is done by you for want of taking heed to the
Light of Christ in you, and that the Light reprove you in your Consciences for
it, and you with the Light come to see wherein you have done amiss, and that
you have not performed your service faithfully to your Master; and when your
Master comes to blame you for it, then to seek out covers by deceit, and to
forge lies for your own defense (though with the Light you see you have done
amiss) this is a very great evil, because it doubles the offense in the sight
of God; for first to do amiss, and then to seek a deceitful cover, and make
lies your refuge in that case, this is sharply reproved with that of God in
you, which is just and true, and neither the first nor the second in which you
can approve your hearts to God; though by deceit and lies you may blind your
Masters eyes, and keep your selves from blame as unto him, yet the Lord
beholds you, and you cannot clear your selves before him: And this is
weighty on your parts who are called to serve, and then take heed of vanity in
every place, and do not use your liberty when you have it to satisfy the
flesh, nor do not seek to please your selves in foolish sports, but in the fear
of the Lord improve your time in his service, and when at any time you have
liberty from your labor, then be serious in your minds, and take heed to that
of God in you, and consider for what end that time is allowed you, that when
you have it, you may improve it in some holy exercise, according to what you
know, and not to spend it in Alehouses, and in sports and pleasures; and in
the Light read the Scriptures, you that can read, and wait to understand them,
and meditate upon the good things of God, and consider what you are in your
selves withour Christ, and what your end will be if you dye in sin, and in the
Light waiting, whether you can read Scriptures or no, your minds will be kept
to God, and you will redeem the time which you have vainly spent: and do not
close with traditions in any place, but join to the Spirit of God in your
selves, and in that worship God, and serve God, and serve your Masters
faithfully in your places, and be content with such things as are provided for
you, grudge not at your meat nor drink, nor strive not after costly apparel,
but having food and raiment be therewith content, and be not sloathful in your
business, but with a ready mind answer your places diligently, and cheerfully,
so will you be a good savor in your places, and you will have comfort in the
end: And be subject to your Masters commands in all things that are just,
knowing that you are to serve; and do not aspire into equality with your
Masters, for that brings up pride and haughtiness, and is foolishness; nor do
not contemn any business, as below you, but stoop down to the lowest, and do it
willingly, if you be ordered to do it; and do not seek after new places, and
fresh services, that will draw you into a restless state, and finding some
differences in places, your eye will be toward that where you have best
pleased your selves, and when you meet with any thing contrary in another
place, then you are displeased with that, and then is ready to say, it is but a
Year; and so your minds are gone from your place, before you be well come to
it, and carelessness comes upon you, and your Masters service is neglected by
you; and here you are not right in your places, but unsettled, and unstayed, and
so would every year be removing, if not sooner, and wandering and trying; and
this is a giddy head that runs out of the fear of God; for if you come to the
Light of Christ in your Consciences, and come to walk in the Truth, you will be
settled and stayed, and where you come to be placed you will not have a desire
to remove, but to observe your place diligently and carefully, and let not your
minds look out for ease in any place, so that you be not oppressed above your
strength, for many do themselves wrong by looking out for ease, and so refuse
service wholly, though able to perform it, and so falls into a way of labor of
their own industry, and provides for themselves at their own hand; and this is
something that would not be under command, but would be at liberty, and at
ease, which does not answer the Light of Christ, neither stands approved by it.
So wait for Gods wisdom, that with it you may be guided to stand and serve in
your places unto which you are called, and depart not from the Counsel of the
Lord.

To Aged People.
GRavity is comely and honorable, it is worthy to be respected and reverenced,
but if you count your gravity from your gray hairs only, then you err in
judgment, and do not understand what gravity is; and from hence many are
accounted grave men, and do account themselves so to be, because they have
passed over many years, and by the course of nature their hairs are changed
gray, and they are come into an aged state, and so you would be respected and
honored because of your gray hairs, and because of the multitude of your
years, and do esteem your selves to be the chiefest in wisdom, and of the
deepest understanding, and of the greatest knowledge to order things aright.

Now this is not the thing which makes you grave, or sets you in a right
capacity for true order; for an old man may have a strong will to advance
something in his own eyes, and to set up something from his own apprehensions,
and from this ground in himself he would not meet with an opposer, for he
counts himself grave and wise, and of a deep understanding, and if any thing
meet his will in opposition, then he is displeased, and the fretting froward
nature rises in the passion; and this manifests that he has not the Wisdom of
God, that is peaceable, and so is not in the true gravity, nor in that which
gives sound counsel, which is grave and honorable.

Therefore I write unto you old men, who have passed over many years, and now
draw nigh to finish your days, and yet know not the true gravity, though you
be full of gray hairs for gravity is in the sound and perfect wisdom of God,
by which wisdom all things were made and created, and in that is the ancien^ of
days sitting, and there is gravity, in the Life, and the Power, and the Wisdom
which created all things in right order, and beheld them very good, in that is
the gravity and the sound wisdom; therefore unto that yo^ must all come, who
yet do not know it, that you may feel the ancient of days sitting in you^ with
his Wisdom to guide you, then will tru^ gravity beautify you, and make you
honorable in your latter days, in which gray hairs over spread you; for look
back to the beginning of your time, and behold the swiftness of the years that
are past, and consider whether you have assurance of Gods Salvation in your
latter days, and whether you be redeemed out of the world, with all the vain
customs and traditions that be in the world, and whether you have Everlasting
Peace sealed unto you in the Covenant of God: Consider this with your selves,
and be serious, for it is high time for you to awake, and that the time past of
your lives may suffice, in which you have wrought the will of the Gentiles, and
that now you may come to redeem the time which you have spent, for many of you
have spent much time, but few amongst you that has redeemed it, and through
the custom which you have observed in your time, you are bound up in what you
practice, and it is a very hard thing to pluck up your root, because it had a
long time to spread it self in the bottom, and it is very hard to cut down your
branches, they have had so long time to grow in strength; and you having seated
your selves in the depths of customs and formality, it is a very hard thing to
remove you out of your habitations, and you have much to say in your own
defense, and can plead the antiquity of your standing, and the multitude of
your years, and so you would uphold such things as has been accustomed to you,
and you can hardly believe that any other thing can be so right and good as
what you practice, and you fear your selves in this persuasion, because you are
old men, and so you love your Church, and you love your Ministry, and you love
your worship, and you can plead antiquity in your years, and for your
practices, and can say, thus it has been all my time; but consider your
present time, and how it is with you now, for many years may bring many things
to pass, and that which seemed right in the beginning, may prove wrong before
the end, and so you may err in your observations and customs, for God is not
limited to time or person, but manifests himself after the good pleasure of his
own will, and you are to mind the present manifestation of God in you, and in
that wait to know the mind of God in your present day, for regeneration must be
wrought in you, or you cannot have a part in Gods Kingdom; and it is a little
child that is heir of the Kingdom, a child born again not of flesh, nor of
blood nor of the will of man, but of God, and the child is the heir, and was
before your days, though many years you have passed over; for before Abraham
was, I am, says Christ, who is the first and the last; and here is Christ
before you, and Christ after you, and without Christ your days will end in
sorrow, and your latter end will be grief.

Therefore come to his Light with which you are enlightened, the Light that
manifests your sin, and reproves you for your observed traditions, and wait to
recieve Christ in his Light, and do not cast his reproof behind you, then will
you know the ancient of days, who is the first, and he will be born a little
child who is the heir of promise, and of the Kingdom, and life without end; and
this is gravity, when Christ rules in man, and his wisdom governs man, then
are gray hairs made comely, but it is the wisdom which is honorable, and the
fullness of this age will end in joy and peace. Therefore mind your day, which
at the longest is but very short, and think not to say with your selves, we
have lived many years, and we have seen many things, and we hope that God will
show mercy, this will not be a sufficient stress to uphold you; nay though you
may say you believe in Christ, and that he is your Savior, yet in your latter
end he will not stand by you, whose works deny him, for he is pure, and holy
and righteous altogether, and there is no unclean thing can come into his
Kingdom; therefore you must deny your old things, and your ancient customs,
which you have lived in after the flesh, and believe in the Light and Power of
Christ, in which Power a new birth is born to inherit the Kingdom, and except
ye enter the Kingdom of God as a little child, you can in no wise come therein:
So you must believe in the Power of Christ manifest in you, which is a
reproving Principle in your Consciences, and checks you for evil thoughts,
words and deeds and by believing in the Power, the times past will dye, and all
the observations and old customs will dye, and the world and all the things
that are in it will dye, and all your old affections and lusts which you have
loved and delighted in, in the world, they will all dye, and a new life you
will then know in Christ, and his life and his wisdom will cloth you, and then
you will know the first, who is the ancient of days to sit in you, and by his
wisdom governing, and that is gravity which is honorable: So spend not your
days any longer in customs and traditions, but make haste and redeem them, and
delay not to turn to the Light in your Consciences, the next reproof which you
will certainly feel, the next evil thought you think, or word you speak, or
deed which you do; and by turning to the Light, and obeying the Light, you will
come to receive Gods wisdom, and in that to order all things to his glory, and
so to be a good savor to God, and leave a good savor behind you when your
days are finished, for the eyes of many are upon you, because you are old men;
and if any miscarriage come to pass by you, or any thing be acted or done that
is amiss in any place, then many receive strength in the same thing, and are
encouraged to practice it, because they have observed the same thing to be done
by you; and this does not honor your gray hairs, when you are a bad savor in
your generation; but it brings a stain and a blot upon your name, and you will
pass away with an ill savor. So in all things be circumspect, and redeem your
time, for you have but a little, that you may finish with joy.

To such as live a Single Life.
SIngleness is a good state, and in that state Temptations may be resisted as
easily* as in any state whatsoever out of the Life, and they that walk in the
Light, and with the Light, are kept single every way; they may receive much
peace and satisfaction in their condition, for there is not such a necessity of
outward care lies upon a single life, as upon such who are outwardly joined;
and so Temptations may be the more easily resisted in many places; for
Temptations come the strongest when the mind is cumbred in much carefulness;
and there is an opportunity in that place for darkness to strike in and enter,
and to be amongst the multitude of thoughts, and in thoughts cumbred in caring,
in that place Temptations lie near, and proffer themselves unto that part which
is cumbred in the care; and it is a common thing amongst people that are not
redeemed, nor have not faith in God, nor cast not their care upon God in every
condition, to let forth their minds into much carefulness, and so into the
cumber; and in that place they are rolled up and down in the cares of this
life; and it is much nearer unto a people who are outwardly joined, and have
Families of children to provide for, then it is to those that live a single
life; so that a single life is outwardly the freest state, as it stands related
to its own singleness, yet not such a state as can be said is wholly free from
Temptations, but lies exposed to many dangers and snares, notwithstanding it
may be a single life in its own relation outwardly, and is a state which may be
passed more easily through than a joined state; yet such have need to set their
watch in the Light, lest their enemy steal upon them unawares, that whilst they
serve themselves through their singleness, he do not come upon them another
way; for if they stand free from care in relation to their singleness, which is
a state that few come unto; but if it be so with any, and that Temptations do
not point at carefulness, yet they may point at ease and security, and there
may be a sitting down in an easeful state; and being well provided for in the
outward, and having enough on that hand, and no charge to look after, or to
take care for, there may be a sitting down in a secret joy of their own
happiness. And now mark, though Temptations do not here point at carefulness,
yet they point at security and ease, and being joined unto on that hand, there
is a sitting down in the fullness of what is possessed outwardly; and so no
exercise in the mind, either by faith in God, or trust in him, but an easeful
state, in which state God is the soonest forgotten; and in this place people
may sit, and not have God in all their thoughts; and therefore it is not how a
single-life stands in relation to it self, but how it stands in relation to
God; for it may be single in relation to it self, and yet in that state falls
into the greatest snares, and entanglements: and where there is a full state in
a single life, the mind not being redeemed out of the world, there is a
Temptation lies in that place; and that part which is alive to the World, that
part would heap up the Worlds Riches, though such a one do not know who shall
possess them; and in this place a single life may be deeply entangled in the
World with the care and deceitfulness of Riches, and then by Riches and Wealth
there is a seeking after honor and esteem amongst men, and to be honored
because there is fullness of Riches, and that exalts into pride and
haughtiness, and there may be also in such a one an eye open toward a joined
state; and by his Wealth and Riches so gathered, he would be accepted into an
answerable Condition of the same, and so through his single life, is seeking
advancement into a Joined state; and this is a great evil and bondage: So a
Single life may run as far from the Kingdom of God, as those that are Joined
together, and have Children and Families to provide for; and it is not how any
man or woman stands related to a Condition outwardly that makes them accepted
of God, but how they stand to God with their hearts and minds in every
condition: So all that be in a Single life outwardly are to be careful how they
stand in relation to God, and how their minds are exercised, and in what; that
whilst they are Single in relation to the outward, they do not fall under the
powers of darkness within, and so be taken and snared with their minds amongst
many entanglements, and yet look at themselves to be freest in their Single
life; for that which makes all people happy, and every condition sweet, is to
answer the Light of Christ Jesus manifest in their Conscience, and then however
they stand in relation to an outward state, they will have peace with God, and
comfort in their places; and whether Joined or Single, the fullness of the Lord
God will measure forth a portion unto such, and they will possess his blessing
both inwardly and outwardly; so to be Single to God in the Light is a joyful
state.

And all you that are Single in your life as to the outward, and are in some
places freed from cares and cumbers, which some that are Joined may be in; take
heed of ease, and take heed of covetousness, and pride, and turn your minds to
the Light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences, and with the Light you will see
that you have need to be careful, and to be watchful; for except you be
Regenerated and born again, you are at as great a distance from the Kingdom of
God as those that are Joined; but if you come to the Light and Power of God,
with the Power to be born again, then you will come into Freedom by the Son,
and will be free indeed; and then will your hearts and minds stand Single to
God, and your care and confidence will be cast upon God* and his Power, and
Life, and Wisdom will cloth you; and you will then be a good savor in your
places, and will be ready to do good with that you have, and to honor God with
what he gives you; and so a Single life in the outward, and a Single mind to
God in the inward, may here clap hands with Joy: and whether Single or Joined,
or how people may stand related to such outward states, that does not put a
difference to the inward Joy, and Peace, and Comfort of the Lord; but being
faithful to the Light, and walking in the Light and Fear of the Lord, and so
to be born of the Seed Immortal of God, there is a Single, upright, innocent
mind known, and whether outwardly Joined, or Single, the Seed of God is felt,
in which is the Blessing.

To Young People.
YOung Men and Women, the prime of your days are now present with you, and the
days past you cannot call again, nor the days to come you know not; and now
as you have a present time, and a present day, mind the Lord God, and his fear,
that the days to come may not slip away from you, and end in sorrow; for
though you be naturally in full strength, and in the prime of your days, yet
the Lord can cut you down in a moment, and bring your days suddenly to an end,
for he is God, and there is not another, it is he that formed you in the womb,
and has brought you forth in your Generation, and hitherto has prolonged your
days; and he has not only brought you forth in a natural Generation, but he
has also placed in you a measure of Light that is pure of himself, and is
immortal, which in your Consciences does manifest it self in brightness, and is
a true and faithful witness for God: And this has the Lord God done for you,
and therein his love is manifest unto you; and you are to mind that principle
of God which is pure, above all things, and to keep your minds stayed in it,
and when you are reproved with it, then do not start aside, but close in with
it; and with its light you may behold your selves amiss, for as your minds are
from that of God in you, you are exercising your full strength in vanity, and
spending the prime of your days in folly; and the further you go forward in
that path, the longer will be your return, and the sharper will be your
judgment. And what profit does vanity bring you, when you have been in the
mirth of it one day? does it not pass away from you the next day? and do you
not feel that reproof overtakes you, and that the witness of God in your
Conscience smites you, and you many times are brought to mourn in secret? and
does not your joy and mirth in vanity here end in sorrow? for being in your
full strength, you pursue vanity with eagerness, and you sport your selves as
if you could never sport enough, and the diversities of vanity your minds run
into; and with such things you grieve the Lord.

Therefore consider your day and your present time, and spend not your full
strength in vanity, and say in your hearts, God shall have our latter Age; but
this is our prime time, and if we do not now rejoice and be merry, we shall
never have such a time again. This is your own way, and you please your selves
in it, but know, that for all these things God will bring you to judgment. And
what if he cut you down in your full strength, and in the height of your
vanity? then as Death leaves you, Judgment will find you, and in the grave
there is no Repentance.

Therefore, young people, Consider your present day, and let all your vanity
go, it will never bring comfort in the latter end; and to live in that, and
please your selves in that, which will not give you peace in the end, what is
the profit you reap by it? Surely no more but the satisfying of your vain
minds, which God will judge, and that is a sad state: And now your full
strength being naturally upon you, and the bad nature being at liberty in you,
you must needs run in the swiftest stream of vanity, and that mind seeks to
please it self, and to behold it self in the excellency of its own form; and so
you adorn your bodies with costly apparel, and broidered hair, and many
foolish, needless things, which are of no use nor service, but to please your
haughty minds.

Therefore, Young people; Remember your Creator in the days of your youth, and
whilst you be in your full strength, give up your selves to serve the Lord, and
turn to the Light with which you are enlightened, and be obedient unto the Light
in all things, and when it reproves your vanity in any place, then love it, and
part with your vanity for it, that you may walk in it, and that will reform
your ways and doings wherever they are amiss, and will do you good in your
latter end; and by loving the Light, and denying your selves to your vanity and
pleasures, the Light will lead you and guide you in a way that you do not know,
a way of true Joy and Peace, where no unclean thing can walk: And this will do
you good, and in the Light you will have an understanding given to discern
things that be amiss in every place, and you will come to see, that those
customs your Parents trained you up in, and taught you to observe, that they
are all vain, and not worthy to be observed and so wherein you have been amiss,
in the vain Customs and Traditions; if you love the Light it will reform your
ways and your doings, where they are amiss, and that will dye which you have
observed out of the Truth, in any Custom or Tradition which you have been
accustomed to, and have been taught by your Parents to observe; for many young
people that comes into such a custom of things in their infancy, being taught
to observe them by their Parents, that in their youthful days they are natural
to them in practice; and so young people are much wronged in their infancy,
whilst they are not capable of any more then what they receive from others, and
follows that in the custom and practice as a right thing, and so walks by the
Traditions received from their Fathers, and not after Christ the Light, the
Truth, the Power and Wisdom of God: And therefore young people, take heed to
the Light, for that is the thing you must all come unto, if you come unto God,
and depart out of all your vain customs, and fashions, and traditions, your
pride, and vanity, and false worships, and learn of Christ who is meek and
lowly, that he may baptize you into his Death while you are young, and that he
may raise you up in his Life to bear witness to his Name in your Generation; so
you will be a Generation in time to come, and will be good patterns in your
places to the young Generations that are to succeed you: And as evil has
entered by disobedience, and flows into Generations as a natural stream in
vanity, in Customs and Traditions, so by Christ Jesus righteousness may spring
and flourish, and flow in from Generation to Generation; and then will all
Generations be blessed in their Generation, and have the power and presence of
God amongst them. So you coming to be ordered in Gods Wisdom in your
Generation, and walking in meekness and humbleness of mind in your Generation,
and in love and peace unto all people, you will then be a sweet savor in your
Generation, and your savor will descend to Generations to come, and then will
the Lord delight in you, and multiply your Peace and Joy, and fill you with his
blessing. So young people, fear the Lord God in your day and time, that it may
be well with you in your latter end.

To Children.
LIttle Children, there may be many of you at present, who are not capable to
receive Information, which in time may grow into that state, as to be sensible
of your conditions; and as you that are not now capable do come into a
capacity, let your minds be kept to that of God in you, so will you in your day
come to the truth, and walk in the truth with those, which in this present time
are in a capacity to be informed into it, and are made willing to receive it;
for, Children, there is but one Truth, and that Truth is Christ Jesus, who
through all Generations is the same, and the Truth is the Way to God, and leads
to God; and so Christ Jesus is the Light, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and
there is none comes to the Father, but by him; and Christ says, Learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly, and you shall find rest for your souls. So you must
mind the Light with which Christ enlightens you, which Light is in your
Consciences, and with its Light it will let you see when you think any bad
thoughts, or speak any bad words, or when you do any thing amiss, if you tell a
lie it will show it unto you; if you swear, it will let you see that you have
done amiss; if you be angry, or froward, or perverse, or hasty, the Light will
let you see that you should not do such things, and will make them manifest
unto you to be evil; then when you see the evil with the Light, love the Light
that shows it; and if you love the Light, the Light will guide you, and lead
you in the way of peace; and if you keep your mind unto it, and love it, then
you will not walk in darkness, nor run into the evil deeds of darkness; and
this will be your peace. And upon the first days, which the Heathen calls
Sunday, do not run into wicked practices, but seeing it is a day in which
people do not follow their labors, be careful that in keeping of it, you keep
it to the Lord; and take your books, and read in that which is good, you that
can read; and when you do not read, and you that cannot read, keep quiet, and
be still, and sit in the fear of God, and do not run into vain sports, which
upon that day is practiced and observed, for then you will grieve God that made
you, and he will correct you as disobedient children: And when you read the
Scriptures, read them in the fear of God, and not with a vain mind, and wait to
understand what you read, for the Scriptures was given forth from the Spirit of
God, and you cannot understand them, though you read them, and get them as they
are in words into your Memory, but as you come to a measure of the Light and
Spirit of God in your selves, which is the same in you, according to measure,
as was in them that gave the Scriptures forth; for the Scriptures, which from
the Spirit of God was given forth, they are true and faithful sayings of the
holy men of God, who knew God in his power, and in his life, and in his wisdom.
But children, the Scriptures are spoken to diverse states, and lies in diverse
administrations, and yet all from one Spirit given forth; and as you read in
places, then consider with your selves, what that administration is in it self,
and unto what state it is spoken, and whether you can witness that state in
your selves; and as you read in the Light, and wait in the Light, the
Scriptures will open to you, and you will come to know the Scriptures fulfilled
in you, and then you will understand them, and have comfort in them, or
otherwise they will not do you any good to read them. So when you read any
place of Scripture then weigh it well in your minds, and consider, whether that
Scripture be fulfilled in you, and how your state stands in relation to that
state which the Scripture speaks of: for you may read in the Scripture, that it
is said, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; then consider that
Scripture well, and examine your selves, and try whether you remember your
Creator; or forget him, for if you do evil, then you forget your Creator; if
you do not walk in his fear, you do not remember him; if you tell a lie, or be
froward, or sport your selves in vanity, you do not then remember your Creator,
and you err from that Scripture, and from the Spirit that gave it forth; and
then what good will the Scripture do you to read it? for people have read them,
and heard them, and the Priests have been giving meanings to them long enough;
but what better are such for reading and hearing them, or for the Priests
meanings either concerning them, who are from the Spirit in themselves, from
which they were given forth, and so knows not the fulfilling of them. And you
may read in the Scriptures, that Christ said, I am the Light of the World; he
that follows me shall not abide in darkness. Then consider where you are, for
if you be come to the Light, and follow the Light, then you dare not lie, nor
swear, nor be froward, nor proud, nor heady, nor vain in any thing; for if you
live in such things, you are in darkness, and under the Power of the Devil, and
does not follow Christ the Light: then what good will the reading of the words
do you? or what is the profit which you reap by reading the Scriptures, and to
read that Christ has spoken such words, and to have a belief in you that the
words are true, and you your selves be in darkness, and under the condemnation
of the Light, because you do not follow it? you have no profit at all by
reading the Scriptures. Again, you may read in the Scriptures, that Christ
says, Learn of me, I am meek and lowly. Now if you be heady and hafty, then
you do not learn of Christ; so you are from both the Scripture and the Spirit;
then what do you profit by reading them? And so of all the rest of the
Scriptures in their places. Wait to understand the administration and the
condition, and not only how it might lie to others then, but how it lies to you
now; for the Scriptures says God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble. Now there is two states spoken of in those words, and also two
administrations, the one of resisting, and the other of giving, for God
resists the one, and gives grace to the other: So to understand this in your
selves; for if you be proud, and exalted in your minds, and make your selves
merry over the witness of God, then does God resist you in that state, and you
cannot come unto him, but lies under the administration of his Justice, and
under the condemnation of his Power; but if you be humble-minded, and bow to
the Light, and obey the Light, then God will give his grace unto you, and you
will be partakers of the administration of his grace, and his grace will save
you from the Devils power, for pride is the Devils work; (...) soever your
minds do advance into; or are lifted up in, wherein you seek any glory or
praise to your selves, that is the work of the Devil, and is resisted of God;
but your minds being kept humble before God, that is his own work, and he does
not resist that, but gives his grace freely to it, and his grace saves; and
then you will know that Scripture fulfilled in you, where it is written, By
grace ye are saved, through faith So by believing in the Light, the mind with
the Light is kept humble to God, and he gives his grace, and by grace is
Salvation known through Faith; and then you will come to know that Scripture
fulfilled, where it is written, He that Believes is saved; for your belief
standing in the Light, and you coming to obey the Light, as it manifests it
self in your Consciences, then you come out of darkness, and out of sin, and so
from under the Devils power, and follows Christ your Savior; then you will
know Christ to be your leader; for if you obey his Light, and follow his Light,
then he becomes your leader; and you will come to see what he turns your minds
from, and what he leads you out of, and also what he turns your minds into, and
what way he leads you in.

(So mark children,) when you are in sin and vanity, the Light of Christ does
secretly check (...) love you; then standing still in obedience to the Light
which reproves you, the Light turns your minds from the sin, and from the
vanity, and gathers your minds to it self, in which there is no sin; then you
yielding to the drawings of the Light, and loving the Light, it leads you out
of that which it does reprove you for, and so you come from under the
condemnation, and receives the mercy, and the Light leads you into holiness and
goodness, and justifies you. So Christ turns from the sin, and then leads out
of the sin, if you yield your selves to obey him; and he also turns to that
which is good, and leads to the enjoyment of it. And this is the way of peace,
and this is the way where the truth is found, and where life and durable riches
are possessed; and in this state you will know Christ the Light, the Way, the
Truth, and the Life; then you will know that which is good, and will live in
that which is good; and then you will be servants unto God, and not servants to
the Devil; and then God will love you Children, and he will show you favor;
for all that live in sin, are servants to the Devil; all that are proud, and
heady, and high-minded, all Drunkards, and Swearers, and Liars, and profane
persons, all that sports, and plays, and follow; vanity, they are all servants
of the Devil, and that is his work they are doing, and rejoicing in, and such
are out of the favor of God: But all that obey the Light, when for such things
it does reprove them, and with the Light comes to be drawn out of them, then
they depart out of such evils, and cannot serve the Devil any longer, but
yields themselves servants to obey Christ, and follows Christ, and he leads
them in humility and lowliness of mind, and he teaches them to be sober, and
to speak truth, and to do justly, and to walk always in fear before him: And
when you come into this state, then you are servants of Christ, and knows his
power that has redeemed you from under the power of the Devil, and so you come
from darkness to the Light, and from the power of Satan to God; and then you
know that Scripture fulfilled in you, and are come to the power which remits
your sin unto you; for Children, you are conceived in sin; and though you may
not have committed much sin actually, because many of you are young in years,
and in the state of infancy, yet you bring the Root of sin with you into the
world; (mark,) the Root of sin is in you from your natural conception, and as
you grow in your natural state; from that root are all the evil branches
nourished, and so springs up, and is manifested by you, and then sin is
actually committed by you, and the guilt comes upon you, which before you was
clear of, though the root of sin was in you. All people that are out of the
truth, may learn what this means, though it be written to children; for sin
lies in the root from your conception; and then you coming to be acted by the
Devil, who in that root is lodged, you actually commit sin, and comes under
condemnation; and by how much you actually commit sin, by so much the more does
the body of it grow and increase, and the greater the body grows, the harder it
is to be broken.

Therefore, little children, I write unto you in much love, because many of you
are yet innocent, and knows not your right hand from your left, that you in
time may be careful, for in your tender years you are as young Plants, easily
bended, but growing up into a fuller strength, you will not so easily be made
subject; for if you come to be wrapped into the root of sin, and delight your
selves in the action of it, there will be sharper Judgment from the power of
God rise against you, and be executed upon you and greater will your
condemnation be; for, as I said before, that the greater the body of sin is,
the greater will be the Judgment, and it will fall with a greater weight upon
you, and the hand of the Lord will be more sharp in severity against you. So do
not increase your own burdens, by increasing the body of sin, for every sin
actually committed by you does add to the body of it; but whilst you are young
and tender, mind the Light of the Lord God, and his power in you, and you will
be kept clean in your infancy, and so come to be planted into the Root of Life,
whilst you are young, and be nourished in the love of God, and spring up as
tender plants in the hand of God, and he will beautify you with the holiness
of his Life, whilst you are young, and you will be unto the Lord a chosen
Generation, and Generations to come will call you blessed.

And so, Children, mind the Love of God, for God has much love unto you, for
you are not so much defiled with sin, as many others in whom the body of sin
stands; and the Lord would not have you to commit sin, and to defile your
selves with it; but his love is to you in Christ Jesus the Light, that you
might be cleansed whilst you are young, and be kept clean throughout your
days; and if you mind the Lord, he will do you good, and make you a blessing
in his hand, and you will be a good savor in your present Generation, and so
truth and righteousness will naturally flow unto Generations to come, and the
Seed of the Evil-doer with his evil branches will be plucked up, and rooted
out, and the pure Seed of God will spring and increase, and bring forth its
natural fruit of holiness, and mercy, and all goodness; and the glory of it
will spread abroad through Generations, and it will become a covering over the
earth, as waters cover the Sea. And now, children, you being careful to walk
in the fear of God, as you are brought forth in your natural Generation, so to
pass your days in all humility and fear, that your favor may be sweet in your
Generation, and that the end of your days may close in the righteousness and
holiness of God, that the next Generation which is to come may feel the
sweetness of your savor, and that you may leave a sweet savor behind you in
the Life of God.

So little children, I have briefly informed you in many places, and in much
plainness I have spoken truth to your capacities, that you may feel the Witness
of God in your own Consciences give an answer, which if you take heed unto you
will do well; therefore be careful, and the Lord God Almighty give you an
understanding in all things, that you may be a sweet savor to God, and honor
God throughout your days; so he will make you children of his Kingdom, and
heirs of his blessing for ever.

To such as are in outward Government.
THe Wisdom of God was the first in Government, and by Wisdom the whole
Creation was brought forth in a holy Order, and by Wisdom was governed in its
created state, and the whole Universe stood subjected in that state unto
Wisdom's Government, and there was no disorder nor confusion throughout the
whole body of the Creation, but every thing as it was brought forth in Wisdom's
time and order, so it was subjected under the power of Wisdom's Government; but
when man degenerated from the Wisdom of God, by which all things were made and
created, then he went from under the power of Wisdom's Government in himself,
and became actually disposed in his own wisdom, and thereby lost his Dominion
in Gods Wisdom: And this was his fall, he fell from the Wisdom above, that is
pure, into the wisdom below, that is earthly, and sensual, and devilish; and
there the disorder came into him, which by his own wisdom he could not
rectify. And since the orderly Government of Wisdom has been lost, there has
been disorder order amongst the Sons of men, and so there has been a setting
up of some, who have been appointed for the work of Government, and to rule
with their power to keep order amongst men, and to keep them in peace one
amongst another, and to preserve every man every way in his proper state
wherein he outwardly is placed: And in this place Moses was appointed and set
to govern Israel in the Wisdom of God; and it is said, that Moses was the
meekest man upon the earth, and he governed Israel in meekness, and in wisdom,
and was a Magistrate for good unto them; and the Law that was given him of God,
he was faithful in the execution of it, and the transgressor came under his
power, and the righteous was set free, for the Law was not made for them,
neither did Moses execute it upon them. And in those days true Justice had a
free course from the wisdom of God in Moses, and he was a praise to them that
did well, and a terror to the evildoers: And here he had the Sword placed in
his right hand, and it went over the head of the transgressor, and brought the
transgressor into subjection: And this was true Judgment, and righteous, and
the execution of the righteous Law, stood in the righteous principle of God,
which principle did endue Moses with wisdom and with meekness to govern. And
the Scriptures mention diverse Governments, which in Ages past have been set
over the people, and some of them ruled in righteousness, and under them the
people had peace; and some that ruled in cruelty, and in their days the people
had trouble; and such Rulers turned against the righteous, whom they should
have protected; and then there was a complaint that justice was turned
backward, and equity could not enter, and that justice was fallen in the
streets, and that the righteous was become a prey; (Mark,) the righteous was
become a prey, and such were wicked that made a prey upon the righteous. And
these things came to pass, either as the Rulers received the wisdom of God, or
contemned it; for without the wisdom of God, it is not possible that any should
rule for God, or should decree judgment in righteousness, or minister it with a
good understanding; for Solomon, who was endued with wisdom, and ruled in
wisdom, whose Memory does not perish, but is a good savor this day, he says,
The fear of the Lord is to hate evil, pride, and arrogance, and the evil way,
and the froward mouth do I hate. Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am
understanding, I have strength. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice;
by me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. I love them
that love me, and all that seek me early shall find me, Prove. 8. Now mark, the
fear of the Lord is the first step into true Government, and the fear of the
Lord is to hate evil, pride, and arrogance, and the evil way; so both the evil,
and the evil way must be hated But where such are in Government as do practice
evil, and delights in evil, and walks in the evil way, and in pride, and
arrogance, then they do not walk in the fear of the Lord, and so are not come
into the first step of true Government, for such cannot have the counsel, nor
found wisdom, nor understanding, nor strength, and such can never be a terror
to the evildoers, who love the evil way themselves; neither can they be a
praise to them that do will, until they hate the evil, and the evil way in
themselves. So it is the weighty matter to get wisdom; and wisdom proffers her
self in kindness to all that seek her early, and makes a promise that she will
be found of such; They that seek me early shall find me; I love them that love
me: This is Wisdom's voice, but the evildoers regard it not, neither do they
seek her, or love her; for, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,
and the fear of the Lord is to depart from evil: Then where the evil is loved
and practiced, where pride and arrogance is advanced, wisdom is not sought nor
regarded; and such cannot decree and establish their Laws in righteousness, for
in wisdom alone is the true Order and Government, it is by Wisdom that Kings
Reign, and Princes Decree Justice.

So all ye Rulers, by what name soever distinguished, Let it be your care and
diligence to get Wisdom, seeing that without Wisdom no Decree can stand
approved unto God; and therefore its of the greatest concernment to get Wisdom;
for Riches and Honor are with Wisdom, yea durable Riches and Righteousness;
her fruit is better than Gold, and her revenues than choice Silver; she leads
in the way of Righteousness, (Mark) Wisdom leads in the way of Righteousness,
and in the midst* of the paths of Judgment, that she may cause those that love
her to inherit substance, and fill their treasures: And here is Wisdom, and her
portion to her children, a portion that is durable and Everlasting; and this is
a flourishing state, and a standing Government; but without Wisdom every Throne
stands unstedfast, and all Nations are like the waves of many waters.

Therefore ye Rulers, Consider, and lay it to heart, both all that are present,
and all that are to come, for this is to Generations; and you that are present
mind your day, time is precious, and but a little remains unto you; therefore
turn to that of God in you, for you cannot be free from its Reproof; it is a
Principle that does not respect your persons, for it is in it self the most
Worthy, Noble, and Honorable, and no man is truly Honorable but in it, though
outwardly he may be set on high; it does not regard any man for his greatness,
but Reproves him for his sin, how Mighty soever he be amongst men; this
Principle which is of God in man, has a sure Testimony against that man which
does evil, and faithfully reproves him in his Conscience without regarding his
greatness: And this is the Light of Jesus Christ, with which you are
enlightened, the Light that is present with you every where and in every place,
beholds your thoughts when you are upon your Thrones; and when you are together
in Counsels, and upon your Seats of Judgment, the Light is with you and amongst
you, and is in your Consciences a Witness for God, and if you err from it your
Decrees can never be established, for there is nothing can stand but that which
is of God; and from hence proceeds the works of men's own Wisdom, who Decrees
Statutes, and executes Judgment, and not in the Counsel of God, their power and
strength has been overturned, and their Decrees has come to naught; and so
shall it be henceforth and for ever, says the Lord, who does all these things.

Therefore if you desire that your work may stand, and that it may not be
rooted out and come to naught, then mind the Light of Christ in your
Consciences, in which Light the Wisdom of God is received, and you minding the
Light with the Light to be guided, it will lead you in the way of sound
Judgment, and bring forth Truth and Righteousness, which God is setting up, and
with his Arm defends it; and so in the Wisdom of God you will stand in your
right places to Rule; for the Counsel of the Lord is amongst such as receive
his Wisdom, and he gives his Counsel in his Wisdom; but such as are out of the
fear of God, they are far off from Wisdom's path, and so cannot walk in the way
of true Judgment; and such as do not hate the evil, and the evil way, but loves
the evil, and the evil way, and the evil-doer, they are far off from Wisdom's
path, and have more need to be Ruled, than to be Rulers, for they can never
Decree Judgment in Righteousness, nor Minister it in Truth; then the Sword
goes backward every way, and turns against such as it should protect, and
protects such as it should fall upon, and so both the Decreers and
Administrators are out of Wisdom's path, and can never keep good order under
their Government; and though some Decrees might formerly stand right in their
places, as they were Decreed in relation to an outward Government, and at that
time might be justly executed upon such as were principally intended; yet the
execution of such Laws now may be perverted, and by those that are to Minister
them may be wrested out of their proper place; and when the Ministers of such
Laws do put them in Execution, touching any matter which may relate to the
Consciences of people, though that Law may stand right in its place, as it was
Decreed, yet the Execution of that Law otherwise ministered, than by that Law
was intended, that Execution and Judgment does not run in Wisdom's stream; and
in this place there be many Laws diverted, and in the Execution is wrested out
of their place, and in the practice of the Law there are many false streams
crept in, which by the Law it self was never intended; and so in many cases
honest people are wronged, who are made the only objects of the eyes of the
Administrators of the Law, against whom the Law it self does not appear
Intentionally; and here justice is turned backward, and the Righteous is made a
prey, and both the Execution of some Laws, and also the practice in them are
perverted, and poor men they are wronged, and know not which way to do
themselves right by the Law, though they be free to use the Law; for first,
being imbodyed in an unknown tongue to most men, they are not in a capacity to
understand them; secondly, the head of them being only at one place, poor men
cannot attend their own business, but are forced to employ and entrust
Strangers with it, who many times prove negligent, and for want of care on
their part, many poor men suffer loss: Thirdly, the many curiosities that stand
in the practice of the Law, which by poor men cannot be attained, and so are
constrained, if they make use of it, to buy it at an unreasonable dear rate;
which if the Fountain and the Stream did spring and issue forth in the Wisdom
of God, it might be otherwise, and might every way be reduced into better
order: But touching the practice, there is something opened more fully in
diverse cases, in a Book entitled, The Standing Truth.

So let every man in his place be diligent, that you may Redeem the time that
is past; and from high to low, who have a hand in any place to Rule, Take
Counsel of the Lord in all you do, whether it be in Decreeing, or Executing,
and let not any Law be decreed, or stand in force that is decreed, which in any
place may bind the Conscience, but break them down, and lay them waste, for
they bring distress and sorrow every way; for many innocent people come under
hard usage in outward sufferings by them, and such as makes them, and Executes
them, they come under the hand of God, and his rebuke, and in that place they
do themselves most wrong; for they go heavily in themselves, whilst Judgment
is their Cup to drink, and it does assuredly fall, and will remain for ever,
without speedy Repentance.

So to be in the Wisdom of God is a High state, such are in a capacity to Rule,
for they Fear the Lord, and hate both the evil, and the evil way, and in the
Wisdom of God they are worthy of Honor, and the hearts of the Innocent can
give it them, and they will not expect any thing more; and in the Wisdom good
order is brought forth amongst all people, and love, and peace, and unity will
grow and spring under that Government, and universal peace will spread over all
the Earth, in the universal love of God, then Kings will Reign, and Princes
Decree Justice, and the Vine will over spread, and there will be a sitting down
under it without fear.

And now, O ye Rulers, be wise in your places, for the concernment is great
unto you; there is one above you whose Judgment is true for ever, he is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, strong and powerful is his Arm, who dwells in the
Heavens that is higher than all, and in his hand you are but as Potters clay:
Therefore fear before him, and wait for his Wisdom, that you may bring all
things into right order, in such places and matters as you have power to order,
that quietness and peace may be settled, and the issue of blood stopped, that so
you may get your selves a name, which unto Generations to come may be a good
savor; but if you seek not the Lord in your day, and set not his Fear before
your eyes, then will your names fall, and the Remembrance of them will cease in
your Generation; therefore, again I say unto you all, who are in Government
this day, prize time while it is present.

To Ministers of Parishes, so called.
TO be an able Minister of the Spirit, is a place to be honored and esteemed,
for such does labor truly in the Word and Doctrine, and what is made manifest
in the Spirit, and from the Spirit declared, such a one is a true Minister, not
of the Letter, but of the Spirit, and such does not speak words which man's
wisdom teaches, but in the Demonstration of the Spirit, and in Power; and here
stood their preaching, who were endued with Power and Wisdom from on High, and
in that went forth to gather the scattered, and the dispersed both of Jews and
Gentiles, and to bring them into one Spirit; and they did not go forth until
they had received Power, and were endued with Wisdom from on High; but they
were to tarry at Jerusalem, and wait for it, and in waiting for it the gift
came upon them, and they received it, and were able Ministers in it; then they
having received the Power and Wisdom from on High, in the Power and Wisdom they
received their Message, and there was a necessity laid upon them to preach
that unto others, which they had received of God; and they were the good
Stewards of the manifold grace of God; and these were sent of God to Proclaim
the glad Tidings of Peace through the Gospel, and that Jews and Gentiles might
be converted and turned unto God, who were separated and alienated from his
Life, and they went forth in the Joy of Gods Salvation, and preached Salvation
by Jesus Christ, and declared the Glad Tidings of the Gospel of Peace; and in
the Power and Wisdom which they had received of God, they were made manifest to
every man's Conscience in the sight of God, and there was no enticing words
amongst them, but plainness of speech as became the Gospel: And these were true
Ministers, who sought the Salvation of Souls, and preached Jesus Christ the
Salvation of God; these were moved in the Power and Wisdom which they had
received, to travel in hunger, and cold, and nakedness, and perils; and to
suffer and endure stripes, and buffetings, and bonds; and as they were ordered
in the Power, so they went from place to place, and from City to City, and from
Country to Country, to make known the Glad Tidings of Salvation, and to preach
the Gospel of Peace; and in this stood their service for God, and they gathered
many unto God, who where alienated from him; and when Jews and Gentiles had
received their Message, then they were converted and turned unto God, and came
to believe in Jesus Christ, and to know his Salvation; and then they did not
abide amongst the unconverted Jews and Gentiles, but come out from amongst
them, and came into unity, in the Spirit, and in the Truth, and came into the
Faith of Christ, and were true Believers; and so they met together in the Fear
of the Lord God, and Worshipped him in his Spirit, and in his Truth, which they
had received; and when they thus met together, then the Church was met
together, and Christ the Wisdom of God was amongst them, and ordered them in
the performance of all their services, and he had the pre-eminence in all
things, and in the motion of his Power and Wisdom they Preached, and they
Prayed, and they Edified and Comforted one another, and there was no limitation
of the Spirit amongst them, but whether Son or Daughter, in whom the Spirit
moved, they performed the Service faithfully, as the Spirit required, and if
any thing was revealed to another that sat by, the first was to hold his peace;
and this was the Church Order, where Christ the Wisdom of God, had the
Government and the pre-eminence.

And here was the true Church, and the true Church Order, in the Wisdom of God,
here where no Parishes, nor Parish-Churches; here was no set maintenance in
particular places, but a free Declaration of Gods Eternal Love, by Jesus
Christ; and they Preached the Gospel freely, and neither money nor price was
expected for it; and this was found Preaching, and Praying, and Worshipping; and
they had the Power and presence of God amongst them, and they rejoiced in his
Salvation, and drunk the Cup of his blessing freely: And these Ministers were
not by man, nor of man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, (Mark,) by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, and Christ Revealed the things of God freely, and
he said, Freely ye have received, freely give; and they were faithful to his
Command, and did not enquire how they should be outwardly provided for, but
they trusted the Lord, and it was well with them; so did they gather Flocks,
and the Flocks gave them Milk; they planted Vineyards, and the Vineyards
yielded them fruit, and they did eat the fruit of their own labor joyfully,
and were truly contented; this was a pure Gospel-Ministration, and these were
true and faithful Ministers of it, whom the Lord God sent forth in his Living
Power, with the Message of Eternal Life; and they preached the Gospel, and did
live by the Gospel, (Mark,) they that preached the Gospel did live by the
Gospel; this was pure refreshment and nourishment unto their Souls, and the
River of Living waters did flow out of their bellies, and was a refreshment to
many thirsty Souls in that day.

But Oh ye Ministers of Parishes! how are you degenerated from this Living Way,
and from this glorious dispensation of the Love of God to the Sons of men? What
is the Message that you have received? and what is the Tidings which you bring
unto people? and what is the practice that you observe? Oh that you would once
lay it to heart, and Consider it seriously! How many in all your time have you
converted unto God? and how many have you brought to the Faith in Christ Jesus?
and what is the peace that is reaped by your Gospel? How many sit complaining
for want, who yet know not the Salvation of God, but sit mourning and cannot
find a resting place? Your Balm does not heal, your water does not refresh; you
are unskilful Physicians at the best, and you cannot relieve a distressed soul,
you do not receive your Gospel freely, but spend some Years before you get it,
and with great sums of money you come to obtain it, and so it is your own,
and not the Lords; and his Way you do not know, but have invented your own
devices, and sell your Gospel for what you can get, and Preach it at the
greatest advantage to your selves, and so you buy and sell, and reap the
profit: But what does the soul reap by your Ministry? and where is the
refreshment that supplies the needy? poor souls may cry and mourn under you,
and never meet with satisfaction from you.

Oh, grief and sorrow, that proud, heady, high-minded men should be appointed
for such a service, and should be maintained after such a manner, when they are
so far degenerated from the Life and Truth of God in themselves! and what
sadness it is to Innocence, to see many thousands of people carried away with
their windy Doctrine, which in the cunning craftiness they have invented, and
with that deceives poor people, and tosses their minds to and fro at their own
pleasures: If you that are Ministers will but look into your selves, and into
your practice, you may behold (though your Eyes are very dim) that you are
exceedingly degenerated from the way of Truth, and Gospel Ministers, and also
the Gospel it self.

Therefore be not Obstinate and Rebellious in your minds, but submit to the
reproof of the Lord Jesus Christ, for his Ministers you are not, neither do ye
bring true Tidings of him, and therefore you are reproved by him, which he
would not do if you were his, and it would be better for you to look into your
own houses, and make things sure at home, before you take upon you to Preach to
others; for you that have not the Joy of Gods Salvation in your selves, can
never bring others to sit down in it; and every wise man would know his own
standing to be safe before he go forth to build up others, for if you your
selves be cast away whilst you are Preaching to others, what will the end of
your Labor be? and what will be your reward? surely much grief and sorrow.

Therefore consider your present time, and think not to say with your selves,
we are Christ's Ministers, and it will be well enough with us; this will not
bring peace in the latter end; for both you and your hearers must all come to
that of God in you, before you come into peace with God, and you must know a
war against the corruption that imbondages Gods Creation: there is much work to
be done in you, before you can come into peace with God; there is a body of
self stands in you, which you must deny in every place, and there is a daily
cross to be taken up, and a strait Gate to enter, before you can know your
peace sealed. And where is the man amongst you that is willing to deny himself
for Christ? He that has hundreds a year for his preaching, let him deny
himself in that place, and manifest his love to Christ: But this is a hard
saying to the easeful part, that would feed upon the fat: and if you were
following in some other places, yet this would put a stop to many of you, and
you would rather choose to draw back from Christ, than to part with your great
livings for him: And what a distance does this make betwixt you and Christ,
consider, and how far off you walk to pure Gospel Order, or Gospel Ministers.
It is the Light of the Lord that is the Way of Truth, the Light that is pure,
with which you are enlightened, and that Light you must come unto in your own
Consciences, and own its manifestation, and obey it, or unavoydably it will be
your condemnation; for none can be saved, but in the Light with which Christ
Jesus enlightens them; and if you outstand the manifestation of that Light, you
are undone for ever; but if you turn to it, love it, and obey it, then it may
go well with you, though you have very much to account for; for your sins, if
considered, are the heaviest of many others, and the Seed of God bears the
burden of them; for you do not only err your selves, but you are the cause
that makes many others to err with you, and with the dark devices of your
imaginations, you keep them closed within your deceit; so that you have the
weight of others to bear in diverse places, and this will be too heavy for you,
except you speedily re^^^^^ and surely the Lords compassion is much manifested
in sparing you until this time; how many offenses does his love cover! and how
many faults does he behold in you! and yet passes by, and does not exercise
severity, though with his Light he reprove you in every place, where you are
amiss. And by this you may know that you are none of Christ's Ministers, for
whom he sends forth he justifies, but who runs when he sends them not, such he
does condemn; and you may be sensible that you are reproved in many things, and
guilt does fall upon your Consciences in many places, for the Light is a swift
witness against all that you practice as Ministers, it does not allow of you
nor your practice in any place for you have not received the power and wisdom
from on high, but have received your message from your inventions, and you
preach it for your own profit; and here you run when the Lord sends you not,
and speaks when he does not open your months, and sets your time when he does
not appoint it; and how can you in those things stand justified? Surely you are
the farthest amiss of all people, because you pretend a spiritual office, and
to have understanding in divine Mysteries, and from thence are set up to be
Teachers of others, when you have never known the work of Gods power to change
you from your carnal state, and so knows not divine Mysteries revealed by Jesus
Christ, nor are not set up by him to proclaim the Gospel of his peace: And
therefore in these things you say you are what you are not, but are found
liars, as some was in times past, who said they were Apostles, and were not,
but was found liars, and no lie is of the truth, but with the truth is
reproved; and a lie is a bad message in the mouth of a Minister, and yields a
bad favor amongst honest people, to say you are that which you are not, and to
say you are sent of God, when you are not, and to say you preach the Gospel,
when you do not, neither indeed can ye in the state of your carnallity: Were it
not better for you to speak the truth, and not to lie? and whether you had not
need to repent of these things? Consider in time; for the Scriptures declares
that the Devil is a Liar, and that he has been so from the beginning, and that
he is the father of lies, and all liars must be cast into the Lake. And this
may make you tremble to consider, who say you are Ministers of Christ, and are
not, but are found liars; let not that Proverb be used any more amongst you,
nor do not report such things of your selves any more, for you are fathomed
with the Light, and with the Light you are made manifest; and being seen with
the Light to be so far amiss, you are pityed; and from the same is this written
unto you: and though in some places it meet you with sharp reproof, yet it is
in love to your souls, and in the love there is much coveted and passed by,
which does belong to you: But what is written is written to inform you wherein
you are amiss in many things, and also that you might turn to the Light of
Christ in your day, and receive the testimony of the Light in your own
Consciences, and hear the voice of Christ within you, and love it when it
reproves you, for there is a message of love from God in the reproof, and by
that you may know he would not have you perish, for he reproves the evil, that
you may turn from the evil and forsake the evil, out of which the Light will
draw you, if you stand still and obey when reproof comes; and if you do but
receive this pure Principle of Light which is manifest in your Consciences,
which is the Light of Christ Jesus; then you must come down into his
sufferings, and be made conformable unto his Death, and be buried with him in
Baptism, and then your raising up will be in his Power, and in his Life, and
you will know the Gospel in him, and the peace of the Gospel through Christ
unto you, and the Joy of his Salvation in your own Bosoms; and then will his
Life be as a Well of water, and the streams of his Love will overcome you to
love him again; and then you will know what the necessity is to Preach the
Gospel, and to proclaim the Glad Tidings of it unto others that want it: And
there is the true Ministry in the spring, and in the virtue of his own Life;
and then you will know neither money nor price can buy it, neither money nor
price is to be paid for it: And this makes able Ministers, whose state it is
not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for in this Power and Wisdom that is in
Christ Jesus, stands the true Ministry, and whatsoever is not of this is false
and reproved; and if this you come unto, then you will know that you receive
your Message from him, and that you are sent of him, and his Love constrains
you to proclaim the Glad Tidings of Salvation, which in your selves you know to
be in Christ; and this will stop your own mouths in every place, and you dare
not open them to speak of God and Christ, but as a necessity is laid upon you,
and as the Love constrains you: And so you must first learn silence, and stop
your mouths from speaking your own words, and keep your feet from running your
own way, and come to know Christ your own Teacher whithin you, and learn the
divine Mysteries of his Kingdom, before you undertake the Office of Ministers;
and if you do not come to this, you are dead whilst you live, and are but as so
many withered branches of a dead root, which yields no fruit unto God.

Therefore be wise in time, and receive instruction, and choose Wisdom before
Riches, and get Wisdom before great Livings, and come out of your
Parish-Churches, and out of all your formal practices, and worship no longer
the works of your own hands; but deny your selves in every place, and answer
the Light in obedience, and take up the daily Cross and follow it, so will the
Power crucify your wills and wisdoms, and empty you of all your old things,
and cleanse you from your defilements, and then will new things spring up in
you, and a new heart and mind will be placed in you, and a new tongue will be
given you, and translation will be perfected by the hand of the Almighty, and
through Regeneration you will come to know the Kingdom, and then you will not
set up the Kingdom in words and observations, but in your selves will feel it
to be righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; and then you will
know settlement in the Kingdom, which is a better inheritance then your
settlements in Parishes; and except you be regenerated and born again, you
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; and that you are not yet regenerate is
evidently manifested through the old things that are yet alive in you, with
which you are carried about and tossed, and rouls in the air as clouds of
darkness, that eclipses the brightness of the Sun's glory: And so you are
wandering Stars in the changable motions of your own wills; but who are fixed in
the same stands firm for ever.

Mark that, and learn it, for if you be not born of God, you are yet in the
flesh, and in the flesh dwells no good thing, neither can any in the flesh
please God who is a Spirit; and all flesh is grass, and the glory of it as the
flower of grass; the grass withers, and the flower thereof fades away, but
the Word of the Lord endures for ever.

Therefore let all flesh be silent before him. And there be many that have seen
an end of all flesh, and are come to the Word of the Lord, that endures for
ever; and they are taught by the word, and edified and comforted in the word,
and they know every strange voice, and cannot follow a stranger, and they are
set in the Kingdom which changes not, and inherits the peace of the Kingdom,
and such cannot observe your formal observations, nor drink of the streams of
your poluted fountain, for they have sweet water in the spring of blessing, and
their souls rejoice in the River of God: Therefore ye Ministers of Parishes,
give over your Ministry, and stand still, and behold what God is bringing to
pass this day; for he is bringing a famine upon your Land, and desolation upon
your Country, and he is laying waste your habitation, and spoiling your goodly
buildings; and he is bringing forth his own work, and spreading abroad the
glory of his wisdom, and his own Seed Reigns, and his sure defense is
stretched forth over it, and no weapon formed against it shall prosper:
Therefore be you silent.

To such as practice in the Nations Law.
CHrist Jesus is the Lawgiver, and his Law is holy, and just, and righteous;
and this Law is good if it be used lawfully, it takes hold upon all
transgressors, and goes over the transgressor in judgment; and this is a pure
administration of Judgment, when Christ sits upon his Throne, who judges right
in every place: and this Judgment must every man come unto in himself, before
he can minister true Judgment unto others; for until man come to the
Judgment of God in himself, and know Judgment brought forth unto Victory, how
can he sit upon the Throne of true Judgment? or how can he be in a capacity to
minister true Justice unto others? it is not possible; for man as he is in
himself, can never answer the mind of God; and whilst he remains
unregenerated, he is but himself, and is a carnal man, filled with carnal
reason, and a carnal mind; and that part can never minister true Judgment,
because it does not know the things of God; and until the things of God be
perfectly known, there is error in Judgment; for it is not possible that any
man should judge in truth, who is not come to the truth in himself; and none
does come to the truth in themselves, but who comes to the Light with which
they are enlightened, which Light is Christ the Lawgiver, and that which is not
received in this Principle, and executed in this Principle, it is not of
Christ, but of man; and so men do make Laws, and puts them in Execution after
the manner of their own wisdoms, and in their own way, when Christ the Wisdom
of God is not known amongst them; neither have they his counsel with them,
either in making them, or executing them. And though some Laws, in some
particular cases, may be intentionally good, according to the knowledge of
those that makes them; yet through the execution of them they are many times
perverted, and a wrong use is made of them, in the wills of such as have power
to execute them; and by such practices there is wrong done many times unto
those unto whom the Law intends right; and there is also many Laws, which in
themselves do err from the good and sound Principle of Truth, and do not stand
consistent with the present manifestation of Truth in this day, nor with the
present temper and constitution of men; for that which in Ages past might stand
answerable to the Constitution of that present Generation, wherein they had
their Institution, yet the continuance of them, and the practice in them, in
Generations following may not so fully answer the present time then, as in the
time when they were first Instituted; so that through the execution of such
Laws, out of their time and place, do many times fall heavy upon some, which
was never intended by such as first instituted them; so that every Geneneration
is to be ordered and governed by such Laws as may answer the present temper of
men, and the present manifestation of Truth in that present Generation; for to
bind any man's Conscience now by such Laws as were made hundred years ago, is to
set bounds to the Spirit, and to limit God if it were possible; and then for
such Laws to be put in execution by men who can search no further than the
letter of the Law directs them, this is a practice that stands only by
Tradition, and not from any present manifestation of God through which true
Judgment is ministered. And this makes the yoke to be grievous upon the necks of
innocent people, where old Laws do stand in force, touching the Conscience in
any place; and it is not reasonable, that such Laws that were made in years
past, should in this day be executed upon any people in point of Conscience,
and that for this Reason, Because there is no limitation of God, but he
manifests himself through Ages and Generations, according to his pleasure; and
if Ages past did make Laws which might relate to things different amongst them
in point of Conscience then, yet that is not a sufficient ground to continue
that Law in force, and to put it in execution in relation to the Conscience
now, or in Ages that do succeed; because the Lord may make known himself in a
more fuller manifestation in this Age, then in Ages past; and every man is to
be faithful to the present manifestation of God in his own day; and therefore
not reasonable by any old Law, to suppress him from the exercise of his
Conscience toward God, nor to bind him to any thing, of which he is not
convinced through the present manifestation of truth in himself; and besides,
it is not reasonable that men should make Laws in their present Generation,
which may in any case relate to the Consciences of any People, because in the
same Generation there may be diverse manifestations of Truth according to
measure; and for any Law to be made, and executed upon such as differ in
Judgment, and practice from those that have the present power, it is not
reasonable, because such as may come under the punishment of that Law, may
stand faithful to God in that which he makes manifest to them in that day; and
therefore not reasonable to make a law to punish them for their obedience to
God, nor to put that law in Execution against such a people.

Therefore, ye that Rule this day, Consider it, and all that practice in the
Law, weigh things coolly, that you may come to know Christ Jesus the Lawgiver,
whose light is manifest in all your Consciences, which gives true Judgment in
you upon all transgression; and you must come to the light, with the light to
be guided, before you can come to the true Judgment Seat, for whilst the light
is contemned by you, you Judge, and Judge amiss, and so punishes the Innocent,
and lets transgressors go free; and not understanding the things of God in
your selves, you call light, darkness; and truth, error; and good, evil; and
not discerning, you proceed in Judgment against the truth, as if it were error;
and because you call it so, you conclude it is so, and from that ground give
your Judgment against it. And was not this the rash conclusion of the Jews,
who said that Christ was a deceiver, and a Prince of Devils; now their saying
so, did not make Christ the wisdom of God to be so; yet having said it and
concluded it in their dark minds, they made a law, and then they said, We have
a law, and by our law he ought to die, and by that law they condemned and
Crucified the holy and the Just one, and spared a murderer, now whether was
this law and the Execution of it Right on their parts, who acted in it? I tell
you nay, for Christ Jesus was the light, and the truth, and the life and the
power, and the wisdom of God amongst them, though they closed their Eyes, and
stopped their Ears, and hardened their hearts against him, and so spoke
reproachfully of him, and by wicked hands Crucified him. And so it is needful
for you to consider, lest seeing, you see not, and lest by thinking you see,
you be blind, and so stumble at the light which would do you good, and turn
against the truth it self under the name of error. And this is for you to
Consider in seriousness, both high and low that are concerned in the Execution
and practice of the Law, that you may stay your Judgment in such cases as
pertain to the Conscience, and let that thing alone, for it is peculiar unto
God, and it does not at all belong unto you, nor to your places, for in this
case every man must stand or fall to his own Master; and you may condemn a man
in this case by your law, when the Lord Justifies him and cleares him in his
own Conscience from all offenses; and does not the Scripture say, It is God
that Justifies; Who shall condemn? and who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods Elect? Now if you charge Gods Elect, and condemen them by your law, may
not you be called in question for so doing? and may it not be said, who are you
that does thus? it is God that Justifies; and surely he does Justify all his
Elect and chosen ones, who of his Seed are born. But this is a mystery to you,
and if you turn to the light of Christ, it will show you, that the Conscience
of another is without the compass of your Laws, and all Judgment that you give
in such cases is but from things that do appear, and you are not to Judge
according to the appearance, but to Judge Righteous Judgment, and that is the
Judgment brought forth in the principle of God, which principle finds out the
heart, and lays Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet; and so
begins at the bottom, and cleanses out the corrupt ground in the heart; and
this is true Judgment and Righteous. But you are Judging things that do appear,
and so one sets up, and another pulls down, and one cries lo here, and another
cries lo there, and one is for one form, and another for a contrary form, and
your difference lies about forms only, and your Judgment goes forth against
such as differ from your form: and this is your own Judgment, which the Lord
Rebukes; for the principle of God is a heart-searcher, and does not Judge
according to the appearance only: and this principle is within every one of
you, and with it you may see how you stand in practice every way, and how your
minds are disposed, and what is the Intents of your own hearts, for there is
much wrong done to an Innocent people through these things, which, in some
particular cases in matter of practice, is mentioned in a book, Entitled, The
Standing Truth, which I shall here pass by, for I now speak more generally, and
in the universal love of God, in which I have much pity to all sorts of people
that are out of order in their places, who have not the wisdom of God to guide
them in what they are called unto, and so run in confusion and disorder in what
they practice, and giving Judgment of things in their own way, which is not
approved in the sight of God.

Therefore ye Rulers and Lawyers, keep your watch at wisdoms post; and if you
would flourish in your days, and leave a good savor behind you when your
days are finished, then receive wisdom in the light, with which you are
enlightened, turn your minds thither, and be diligent, that so the Judgment of
the Lords power may go over the transgressing part in your selves, and that the
spirit of Judgment and burning may cleanse your old habitations in every place;
then you will know Christ in you, and the law which proceeds out of his mouth,
which law is holy, and righteous, just and good, and you will know his throne
of true Judgment, and behold him sitting upon his throne in your selves, and
judging down all your evil thoughts, words, and deed; then you will know the
Lawgiver, and the hand that executes it in Righteousness upon the
transgressour; and there is, Christ the wisdom of God felt and known, in which
wisdom deep matters are found out, and the secret things which lies hid in the
heart they are discerned, and Judgment goes forth against the transgressor.
And this makes Rulers wise in their several places, and fills them with gravity
and sound Judgment, and makes them honorable in their generation, and in
wisdom good order will be brought forth amongst you, which now is wanting for
want of wisdom; for if the practice in your law was traced thorough, how many
bypath might you be found in who are concerned in it, surely very many, and
being many, you smother them amongst your selves by your own practice, and
being so that the practice lies amongst your selves, you can answer one another
in your own ways, and there is none can discern you; but who walks in the
light of the Lord, which makes all things manifest, and sees thorough the
hidden things of darkness. So be wise in your day, as becomes men, be sober
and moderate, and cool and quiet in your places, that is comely amongst men,
and receive Christ Jesus the wisdom of God; thus you may be a good savor in
your generations as becomes Christians, and that the meek, pure, holy humble,
righteous principle of God in you, may dispose you in the power and wisdom of
it self, and change you into the purity of its own nature, and that it may
manifest the virtue of its own life, and bring forth its own fruit in all
godliness, justice, mercy, equity, and truth; so will your names abide, and
ages to come will feel the sweetness of your savor; but if you reject the
wisdom of God, and yet go on in your own way, a blot will fall upon your names,
and ages to come will tread upon you as not worthy of Remembrance, and God will
raise up others to do his work.

Therefore in your day mind the Lord, and his fear, and be just in all things,
and let not gifts blind your minds, nor Rewards turn away your Ears from the
poor; cast bribery behind you, and tread Covetousness under your feet; for
whilst such things are entertained, true Judgment must needs be perverted, and
in that place your own Souls lies in bondage to Corruption, and you are
destitute of Gods Salvation, which is the saddest state that any man can be in;
for the soul is of more value than all the world, and a wise man loves his own
soul, and waits to know the Redemption of it, which cannot be Redeemed by any
corruptible thing, as Gold and Silver, though you had never so much of it, but
with the precious blood of Christ Jesus; and what will it profit you to be in
great dignity, and high in honor amongst men, and to possess much of the
worlds Riches, nay, if you had all the world, and lose your own souls? you are
undone for ever, and surely your way does tend to the chambers of death.
Therefore I say again to you all, be wise in time, and look to your particular
places, and let the streams of honesty and equity run amongst you, and do not
pervert things which in themselves are honest, but follow the thing that is
good in all you practice, that you may have peace in your latter End.

To such as trade in Weights and Measures.
AN Equal Balance with a just Weight is approved of God, and a true Measure in
all things is a good favor unto God, and in such just and equal practices God
is well pleased, and his Name his honored; for that which is just and equal
and honest, that yields a good savor; when every man and woman walks with a
Conscience void of offense toward God and men, and deals justly and equally
with every man they have dealings with in their places, this is comely and
commendable amongst men, and is justified before God, and it keeps the
Conscience clear from stain and guilt, and brings true peace to every man
whose practice stands in any place: for when every man answers his place
faithfully unto God, then does he possess the peace of God. And if people do
not deal justly and equally in their respective places, they cannot have peace
with God; for if they do not answer their places faithfully as unto God, they
err from their calling, and goes out of their place in which God has placed
them: If they have deceitful Weights and Measures, and an unequal Balance, and
do not yield the full weight and measure to every man they deal withal, they do
not answer their places faithfully, for the Lord appoints unto men their places
in their Callings, and he makes some capable of one place, and some of another,
and does require of every man faithfulness in his place; and if he do not
perform his place faithfully, then he grives the Lord; if he do not strive in
singleness to perform his place faithfully, his Conscience does offend both God
and honest men, and in that place the peace of God cannot be his portion; for
the Light of the Lord in his own Conscience does pursue him, and is a swift
witness against him: if he have an unjust weight, and balance, or measure, and
thereby defraud, and cozen, and deceive such as he deals withal, he stands
with a guilty Conscience before God, and receives Judgment from the righteous
Principle of God in himself; for all deceit, and fraud, and guile, and
cozening, and cheating, and dissembling is in the fall, and with the light of
Christ Jesus is reproved, and with the light you may see in your selves, when
you deal falsely, either in weight or measure, or any other way: then consider
what that is which discovers it, for it cannot be any thing of self, because
self seeks the advantage by such dealings; then it must needs be something of
God that discovers it, and reproves it, and it is the light of Christ which
does so make manifest your dealings in every place; and with the light you may
see when you intend to defraud by your false weights and measures, and your
unequal balance, and when you do not allow weight and measure in such things
as you deal withal in your trading, and you may see that it is not right on
your part when you stand in any deceivable practice, and is defrauding and
cheating of others; neither can you have peace with God in that place, for God
does not allow of any thing, but that which is just and equal; and if any of
you act or do otherwise, with the light in your Conscience you will be
reproved, and by that you may know when you transgress, and sin against the
Lord; and when you seek to please your selves, and to gain to your selves by
defrauding another any way, or in any thing, either by an unjust weight and
balance, or measure, and you may see when your hand would deal deceitfully in
weight or measure; and you may see that you have not a sound and right mind in
that thing, but a covetous end which would get profit any way. And how much are
these things practiced this day amongst men, who are from the Principle of God
in themselves, and are not come to know it to be their guide, nor to stand in
awe of it? they think if they can but hide their deceit from men, and that men
do not complain of them then all is well enough; and this party is a
self-seeker, and a man-pleaser; first, seeks profit by deceit, and then would
please men with fair words, to get a good report, and such does not regard the
Lord, not his fear; and so men sets up wicked practices, and by lying, and
swearing, and cheating, and deceit, they seek their own gain by them; how will
many men commend that thing which they have to sell, and will not fear to pass
their word in the praise of it, when they know in themselves that it is not so,
as they speak of it; this is a great evil, and grieves the Lord. And how is
covetous practices exercised amongst men in their dealings one with another!
and how does deceit and guile abound in such dealings! and how do men study
deceit, and with all their strength strive to advance! and surely the Lord is
grieved with it from day to day.

Therefore all People that are concerned in such practices, mind the light of
the Lord in your own Consciences, that is a good Principle always present with
you, though you in your wicked practices be distinct from it, and does not
regard it, yet it is within you, and is a witness against you, and you cannot
hide your secrets from it. You may hide your deceit from men, and may please
them with fair words, though you do deceive them in your dealing; but you
cannot hide deceit from God, neither can you please God, but in doing that
which is just and equal every way; and if you do not so, you grieve him, and
draws his hand forth against you, with which he corrects you in secret. And if
you now be diligent, and obey the reproof of the light, and join to the light,
it will guide you in the fear of God, and will teach you to do right in all
things, and upon all occasions, and do as justly in secret as if men did see
your dealings, and you dare not do otherwise, for the fear of God will be
placed in your hearts if you love the Light; and this is a righteous guide, and
all that follow it are guided in righteousness, and so comes to deal
righteously, and equally, and justly with all men; and so the practice of
truth, will stand in the principle of truth, and that is a sure foundation; and
such seeks to please God above all things, and to stand approved unto him; and
so from the righteous principle of God you will come to measure justly, and
weigh equally, and your balance, and measures, and weights, will be all true
according to their places, and your hearts will be true, and your hands true;
and here you will come to discharge your selves in your places with a good
Conscience toward God and men; and you will not regard the eyes of men, but
the Principle of God; and this will be just dealing, and righteous in the
ground; for it is the righteous Principle that brings it forth, and it will
answer to the same Principle in another. And if in this you stand, then will
honest men speak well of you, and God will approve you, and you will then stand
with a Conscience void of offense toward God and men; and here you will have
the answer of a good Conscience, and peace with God; and you will be a good
savor unto God, and honor God in your places, and so will finish your time
with joy and not with grief; and that will be the the greatest profit unto you,
for the desire of money is the root of all evil, which whilst some covet after,
they pierce their souls through with many sorrows. Therefore be warned if you
love your own souls; and those that be your Prentises, be careful over them,
and order them in the Wisdom of God; and first teach them the fear of God, and
keep them out of vanity and bad company; for many are enticed to do evil in
their youngness, and so does themselves wrong, and does wrong to you whom they
ought to serve faithfully; and this many times comes to pass through your
allowance of liberty, in which liberty they run into vanity, and falls into bad
company, and then temptations they are presented, and there is a readiness to
join with them, and to put the thing in practice, and so there is wrong done
every way. Therefore keep your eye over them in the Wisdom of God, and be not
hard nor severe with them in their places, but meekly instruct them in the
thing that is good, and allow them that which is convenient to their places,
and learn them to deal justly upon all occasions, and not to defraud any man
upon any account; so will your savor be sweet in all places, and you will reap
more profit every way by so doing, then by practicing deceit; so in all things
be diligent, for it must so come to pass concerning you, that time will cease,
and be no more unto you in this world, and then you must stand before the Lord
as you are: and if you have obeyed the Lord, and done well in your time and
places, then you will have your reward; but if you have disobeyed the Lord, and
dis-regarded his counsel, and have spent your time in deceit, then in sorrow
you will lie down, and your latter end will be bitterness: Therefore remember
your end.

To such as buy and sell in Markets, or in any other places.
MAn was created upright, but he has sought out many inventions. And through
inventions disorder is come amongst men, and by defrauding, and cozening, and
cheating one another, they run into confusion and distraction, and so are gone
from the created uprightness into subtilty and inventions, and with that subtle
part they invent their wicked practices, and studies how to gain their own
advantage in their dealing. And from this ground arises all deceit amongst men
in buying and selling, and trading; and they will commend their Cattle and
their Commodities above what they are, and above what they know them to be, to
gain advantage; and though they know that their Commodity be not at all worthy
of commendations, yet the subtle part inventeth how to commend it, and how to
set a great price upon it, and by subtilty thinks to overreach another, and it
may be will ask much more for such a Commodity then he intends to take for it;
and from thence many vain words arises amongst men in their dealing, and in
their bargaining; and not only so, but also many oaths, and cursings proceeds
out of their mouths, and all to set forth that thing which they know is not to
be so commended; and here men stands in swearing and cursing, and multitude of
words before they can come to close, if they do close at all; and this practice
is not in the created uprightness, but from the subtle inventions, through
which man is carried out of Gods fear and order; for the created uprightness is
a pure, just and holy state, a state that stands upright to God, and unto all
men, it is not a subtle Inventer, but a simple Dealer in all things, it cannot
lie for gain, nor swear for profit, nor curse for wealth, it cannot deceive,
nor defraud any man in dealing, though much outward profit might be seen in the
end, it cannot commend a thing above what it really knows it to be, it cannot
make many words in bargaining; for it is an upright state; and speaks things
uprightly and justly, and speaks no more than it knows to be true, and not that
neither at all times, for many words is a burden to it, and it is weary of
them, it prizes the worth of things according to discerning, and according to
discerning it speaks a standing word; it has no reservedness in it to take or
ensnare another by deceit, for it is upright in all things. But how is man
degenated from the Created uprightness! and how has he sought out the subtle
Inventions! and how does every generation grow more cunning in their dealing!
and more deceit and guile breaks in upon generations, and they degenerate more
and more from the Created uprightness; so that it is a grief to behold how one
man deals with another in trading, and how Markets are filled with multitude of
words, which stands wholly in deceit and guile, and what a noise does people
make in Markets, and runs in the pursuit of gain with such Eagerness, as the
whole Course of nature is set on fire, and the anger and the passion, and the
unruly nature will sometimes be so let up, as one man will strive with another
about their dealings: and how will one man deceive another, and defraud another
with buying things one from another, and many times forestalling things before
they come into a Market, and many times by Engrossing things into their hands
which they have no need of, but to lay them by, and keep them for advantage;
and this wrongs the poor, and the needy, that when things are at a reasonable
price, then the Rich Ingrosses them, and by that means keeps it at a dearer
price in plenty, than otherwise it would be, and then in scarcity the poor must
either buy it at their dear prices, or be in want; and this grinds the poor
every way, and is a disorderly practice, and is filled with Covetousness, which
the subtle Inventer finds out to get wealth and Riches; and thus men run, and
knows no stay for their minds, they would be dealers in every thing, and
counted great dealers in all things, and would have a name, and so are always
in the thronged part, and in the cumber about many things, in which they all
offend. But who Remembers the Lord? or who chooses the better part? or who seeks
the Kingdom of God first, and trusts the Lord to add all things else unto him?
and who serves the Lord with fear? not the subtle Inventer, but the Created
uprightness, which under all such practices and wicked devices lies grieved and
pained; for though man be gone into the Inventions through the temptations of
the subtilty, yet there is something upright remains in him, which did preserve
its own being, though man degenerated; and this is a pure principle in man,
which does not allow of deceit; for that which is upright, and that which is
deceitful, has no agreement together in any place; so that when deceit is
practiced, uprightness reproves; for it bears the burden of it. Therefore all
people who are concerned in these things, take heed to your ways, and to your
doings; for they are very bad, you cannot but know your selves, that there is
much amiss in you, and that you do run many times after dishonest gain, and
that which lets you see is it the light of Christ, and that you must come unto
if ever you come to be upright men? for though some may be qualified in some
things, and in their natural temper do manifest more moderation than others,
and that there be more reservedness in their ways, and that they do not appear
so passionate, nor angry, openly so deceitful; yet there is a self-end lies in
the bottom of such a man, and he will reach forth himself to make his end
secretly; for if the mind of man do not come to the light, with the light to be
guided, he does not come into the upright state, but lies amongst the many
inventions, where none can please God. And now your day is with you, who are
buying and selling, and trading; and the Light of Christ is manifest in you, to
show you wherein you err; and if you do not turn when it repoves you at any
time, and come to repentance, you will wrong your selves for ever. Therefore
make haste out of your way, and turn to the Lord and receive his wisdom in the
light, that his wisdom may order you in all your places and services; then you
dare not use many words in your bargaining, but speak a standing word,
according to your judgment in that which you have to sell or buy, and you dare
not speak in the praise of any thing for any end to your selves; and this
practice would stand in uprightness, and would answer Gods witness in every
man, and then you would be out of fear to be cheated or deceived, because the
uprightness deals plainly and simply, and speaks of things as they are, and not
otherwise, and cannot conceal any fault, if it know it to be a fault; and then
there would be a closing in few words, as the Commodity was liked, and yea and
nay would stand on both sides. And in this is the good order, and is comely and
commendable amongst men, and a good savor unto God, whereby he is honored.
And when you have done your markets, then repair to your outward dwellings, and
do not sit and drink and revel in Alehouses, for by that you many times
doubles your offense; and when you have gotten some dishonest gain by deceit in
bargaining, then to sit at an Alehouse until you have spent it, and it may be
much more, then had you not better been without it every way, for it adds sin
to sin with grief. Therefore be careful, and eschew such evils; and when you
have refreshed your selves as need requires, then do not run into excess; for
many are taken and wronged in that place, who goes to use the creatures only
for refreshment; and when they fall* into company, and the strength of drink
does begin a little to strike upon their naturalls, then they are overcome to
continue until they wrong themselves every way. Now the light of the Lord Jesus
Christ guides out of all those evils: If that you mind it, and obey it, it will
guide you from lying, and learn you to speak truth; it will guide you from
drunkenness, and learn you soberness, and so will change you from all those
Evils wherein ye walk, as it has done many in this day, who sometimes were
such in some degree, but now are washed and changed by the light, and walks in
the way of peace with God, and can commend it unto you from a certain ground,
if you can but receive the report; and they can tell you in truth, that it is
better to walk one day in the light, though it be in the Cross unto themselves,
than to satisfy themselves by gaining the world through Invention; and this is
the Word of the Lord God unto you all people, forsake your way and live and
walk in the way of understanding, that you may honor God in your generation,
and that you may be a good savor unto God, and unto one another; and in all
things choose the good and let the evil go, then will your days end in peace,
which otherwise will end in sorrow; and in that day you will remember the time
you have misspent, which then you cannot recover again, though you may seek it
with tears; therefore whilst you have it, prize it, and do not spend it vainly,
for you have spent too much after that manner.

A General Exhortation.
NOw as there is a view taken of this great body, and every particular state
being seen in its several place how it lies, and an Information being gone
forth in the universal love of God unto them all, whereby they may behold their
error from the Created uprightness in every place, and may also behold a way
open to come in again into the good and blessed state of Innocence, and to be
gathered into the way and path of simplicity, where no deceit, nor guile, nor
hypocrisy can have being, and so to come into the holy and good order of
wisdoms Government, and to stand as so many branches in their several places,
to be a good savor to God, and honor God; for if there were unity in the life
and power of God through the universe, how sweet would every one be in their
place! and what a good savor there would be through the Creation! and then the
Creation would be set free from that which now burdens it, and God would have
honor, and glory, and praise in his own work, and his goodness and his
blessing would rest upon it, and there would be plenty to every man in his
particular place, and he would rejoice in his own portion; and then no deceit,
nor guile, nor lying, and swearing would be used amongst people to get
dishonest gain; and how would such a generation honor God! and how amiable
would such a generation be in their places! how amiable a thing would it be to
see parents of children to bring up their children in the fear of God, and to
nurture them in the wisdom of God, and to train them up in love and peace and
unity together! and to see Masters and Dames of families to order their
families in Gods wisdom, and to keep them in good order every way! and to see
servants in their places serve with diligence! and to see aged people filled
with sound wisdom and gravity! and to see single people wholly given up to
serve God, and to see young people remember their Creator in the days of their
youth, and to see children fear the Lord in their infancy, and to see such as
are in outward Government to be clothed with the wisdom of God, and to see
Ministers of Parishes deny deceit, and come into the truth, and to see Lawyers
in true Judgment and Equity, and to see all Tradesmen with Just Weights and
Measures, and to see all Buyers and Sellers in the created uprightness; then
would hearts and minds come near together in the one principle of God, and
unity and peace would abound amongst people: And therefore as one body, you are
all exhorted to fear the Lord God, and turn to his light with which you are
enlightened, and yield to obey it, when in your Consciences it does reprove you;
hearken diligently to that voice, which calls you to return, and do not reject
the Counsel of the Lord in any wise, but be still and quiet, and bow to the
light in every manifestation, and believe in it, as it does manifest it self,
that with the light, the disorderly nature may come to Judgment in every
place, and that through Judgment the Creation may be delivered, which at this
day travels in pain, grief, and sorrow; for the disorder is above, and by
disorder you are all out of your places, and so runs in wicked practices with
which you dishonor God, and wrong your own souls. Therefore you are all
exhorted to mind the Light which would do you good, and do not run your selves
wilfully into eternal misery; for the Lord would not have you perish, but would
that ye might come to the truth and be saved: And this is his compassion
toward you, and his patience and forbearance concerning you; for who amongst
you that have not deserved cutting down, if the Lord should not exercise his
mercy? every instant of time he may justly smite you, and bring your days to
an end in a moment.

Therefore consider for what end you are yet a breathing Generation, and have
yet time given you; is it not that you may behold Gods goodness, and come to
repentance, and that you may know the Light with which you are enlightened, to
be your redemption from your vain conversation; and your Salvation from your
vain traditions, that every one in your places might honor God, and be a good
savor unto God? for what good does your observations of days, and your
preaching, and praying, and all your worships and services, and all your talk
of God, and of Christ to be your Savior, and the hope which you say you have
by his merits; what good will all this talk do you, whilst you live in sin,
which is contrary to God? and so are under the condemnation of Christ, and not
in his salvation; for he does not merit any thing for the sin, but for the
sinner^ And consider how this lies, for you want understanding, Christ Jesus
does manifest his light in man, and with his light he lets man see his sin, by
which sin man is separated from God and he reproves the sinner, and calls him
to repentance; then the mind turning to the light, when the light reproves,
and answering the light faithfully, then does the light begin to separate him
from the sin, and to draw him out of the sin; so Christ saves the sinner from
the sin which he has lived in, and through his judgment he purges the sinner,
and makes him clean through the water of Regeneration, and then he reconciles
unto God the Father by himself, and merits the love, and the life, and the
peace for the sinner, which in the sinful state was separated from God, but now
in the clean state is reconciled to God by Jesus Christ; and so man is not
reconciled as a sinner in the sin, but a sinner washed, and bathed, and
cleansed by the pure water which takes away the filthiness of flesh and
spirit, and so reconciled to God, who is holy, in the holiness of Christ
Jesus. And here man comes to Christ, and to his Salvation, and salvation is the
work of Christ alone, and by him is perfected through Regeneration; so that it
may here be understood by this short Testimony, that the Free Grace of God by
Jesus Christ is held forth for Salvation, and not the Covenant of works; for
though it be so, that people must come to repentance and amendment of life, and
that they must deny their evil ways in obedience to Christ, who is pure, yet
there is no act which by them is done, that brings Salvation, though in their
way they do meet with Peace from God through obedience; but the Salvation is in
the Free Grace of God through Christ Jesus; and the Grace of God that brings
Salvation does appear to all men: [mark] the Grace of God does appear to all
men; and where does it appear? why, in their own Consciences; and what does it
appear against? why, against the body of sin in every place; and what does it
appear to do? why, to destroy the Devil, the Author of Sin; and what will it do
further? why, it will teach to deny ungodliness and worldly lust; so [mark] the
Grace of God that brings Salvation, does appear in man against ungodlines, and
teaches man that does receive it, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; and
these things must be denied in obedience to the Grace. Yet the Salvation does
not stand in the thing done, but in the Grace alone, which requires the duty,
and teaches to deny that which it appears again't, and then it takes away the
sin, and saves from the sin which has made man unclean; and what will the
grace do further? why, it will teach to live soberly, and righteously, and
godly, in this present evil world. So [mark again] here is a change wrought in
man by the Grace of God, the Grace as it does appear being received, the
ungodliness and worldly lusts they are denied, and soberness, and
righteousness, and godliness, they are brought forth and manifested by the
Grace; and here is the Free Grace in the Free-Love of God by Jesus Christ, who
is Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, to all that in him believe. But people
does not know him, and so lets forth their own belief into an imagination of
him, and looks to find him in their own way, and they having formed him in
their own belief without them, they neglect the manifestation of his Light
within them, and the body of sin remains unremoved; and such knows not his
Salvation, but with sin is defiled and polluted, and with that unclean body his
Life is pressed, and there the Just suffers for the unjust, and the load of sin
is heavy upon him, which in his patience he bears, though with his Light he
place Judgment upon it every way. And thus it is opened what the Grace is in it
self, and what it is unto man that receives it, and believes in it, that all
may mind the grace that brings salvation, and close with it in its appearance,
that they may come to salvation by it, which in it self, is free.

Therefore all People ponder these things in your hearts, and wait to know what
time will bring forth in order to your salvation, and do not neglect the time
which you have present, but day by day consider Gods goodness toward you, that
his goodness may overcome you to repentance, and that you may come to Jesus
Christ, and know your salvation by him alone that his peace he may seal unto
you in his own Covenant, and that in his life and wisdom you may walk as
becomes Christians, in all sobriety, and honesty, dealing justly, and loving
mercy; and then you will be a good savor unto God, and Generations to come
will rejoice at your remembrance; and this is an Exhortation unto you jointly,
that you may come to the light of Christ particularly, which light is but one
in you all; and if you mind it to obey it, you will know the good order in it,
and every one in your particular places, being brought into good order with the
light, you will have peace and comfort in your places; and in the light which
is but one, you will in one be joined, and there will be but one heart and mind
amongst you, and then as one body you will stand in Righteousness to glorify
God; and this will bring peace in the latter end; but if you refuse to hearken,
and to obey, your destruction will be of your selves, and God will be clear
when he judges: Therefore consider it seriously, and neglect not to close with
the tenders of Gods love; for to day it is unto you, but to morrow it may be
hid from you, therefore lay it to heart.

Concerning Faith.
CHrist Jesus is the Author of Faith, and by his Resurrection he brings it
forth in himself; it is a pure substance which is holy, and does proceed from
the life, and with the life is strengthened, and through the life it has its
growth by degrees; and this is true Faith, and is but one, not divided from the
body of the Author, though in its manifestation it may appear diversely; for the
diversity of its manifestation is to be understood in its degrees, according to
the Resurrection of the Seed; for the substance and matter of Faith being
wholly in the Seed, it cannot be otherwise known, or received, but as the Seed
rises and reveals it; so that Faith is the gift of God, and is revealed by the
Resurrection of the Seed; and this Faith goes through the body of darkness,
and gets victory over darkness, whereby the Seed comes up into a more glorious
liberty in the Resurrection, and Faith comes to be advanced into a higher
degree, and is strengthened with the vertrue of Christ, who is the Author of
it, and so it goes on into a more full perfection, through degrees. And this
Faith works by the Love in which it is nourished and strengthened, and by this
Faith the Just lives, through all oppsitions, and victory over the world is
obtained by it; For this is the victory that over comes the world, even your
Faith. For the world is an enemy to the Lamb, and from the foundation of it,
the Lamb has been slain; and the world warreth against Christ, the Author of
Faith. Now Faith coming up through the Resurrection of the Seed, and standing
in the power of the Author; with this Faith is victory obtained over the world,
through which victory the Lamb comes into liberty, and the Seed that is pure
ascends, and the Faith ascends into a higher degree in the Seed; so that
the Conscience comes to be cleansed from that which has defiled, and the Seed
of God which is pure takes the Dominion in the Conscience; and the Conscience
is made pure through the Resurrection of the Seed, and the Mystery of Faith is
then held in a pure Conscience; (mark) the Mystery of Faith is held in a pure
Conscience, the Seed which ever was, and is a Mystery to that part which would
live by knowledge; and as the Mystery of Faith comes to be held in a pure
Conscience, so the fruits of Faith is manifest from the Mystery, and branches
forth in all purity, according to the nature of the Mystery; and this Faith
purifies the heart with its purity, and makes the inside clean, and the
inside being clean, the outside is clean also. And this is the Faith of Gods
Elect, and does show it self by its own work: For as the body without the
spirit is dead, so Faith without works is dead also. And this is not an
imagined Faith, but a revealed Faith, and by the Resurrection of the Seed it is
brought forth; and this is one Faith, in one life and power, and it stands in
the power, and by the power is preserved; And without this Faith it is
unpossible to please God; neither can any come to God, neither can any be
justified before God; for true Faith is in the Son, and with the Son the Father
is well-pleased; and by the Son must all come to God that comes unto him; and
in the Son is Justification, for Faith in the Son makes clean the heart, and
gives victory over that which is contrary to God; and with the power of the
Son, in whom the Faith stands, the polluted part is cast out, and by the Son
there is access to God. Now there are many beliefs in the world, and many
imaginations, yet but one Faith, and that Faith is revealed, and none can know
it but in the Resurrection of the Seed; for Faith in it self is a Mystery, and
is hid in its own substance, and none can see it, nor know it, until they join
to the light, and wait in the light, to feel the rising of the Seed, and Faith
by the Seed revealed. So true Faith does not stand in the wisdom of men, but in
the power of God, which power kills the unrighteousness, and reveals the
righteousness from Faith to Faith; and then by Faith there is Justification
known in the Righteousness, and there is peace felt with God through Jesus
Christ. And this is purifying Faith, and saving Faith, and is but one Faith,
which has its work in man; and the good fight of Faith being fought, the
course comes to be finished with joy; and this is a standing Faith in the
standing power of God, which goes over the unbelieving part, in which Faith,
there is perfect unity and concord, and all born of the Seed meets together in
it, and stands in one perfect body, according to the degrees in one perfect
Faith, and with one perfect heart and mind they rejoice in God their Savior.
So whatsoever belief man has made to himself, and whatsoever he has set up
through that belief, to be the object of it, he must unloose his hold, and
break his Idol down, or he cannot meet in the unity of the Faith with those
that are born of the Seed, neither will his belief, save him, neither will his
belief abide in the Furnace, nor endure the trial through affliction, so can
never be found to the praise and glory of God; but Faith in the Power is
preserved in the Furnace, and strengthened in afflictions, and in the power is
kept to the end, and so goes through all by believing; and Christ who is the
Author of Faith, he also is the Finisher of it; and the trial of this Faith is
much more precious than Gold that perishes, and is found to the praise and
glory of God; and the end of this Faith is everlasting peace. And this Faith is
the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; and by
this Faith the Elders obtained a good report; which Faith is now known again,
and the just men's spirits in it, and there is an universal unity amongst the
Just from the beginning. And this is true Faith.

Concerning Hope.
THe hope which gives satisfaction is Christ Jesus; and this hope stands firm
and sure, and it is answered with peace in hoping, for the living hope is in
Christ; and though many oppositions may rise against it, yet the hope does not
fail, but reaches to attain the end, and hopes to the end; for hope reaehes to
something, and hopes for something that is not yet attained; for when that
which is hoped for comes to be enjoyed, then the hope is satisfied, and ceases
hoping, and enjoys that which it has hoped for; for whilst it is hope, it
waits to be answered with that which it hops for, and so hops over all that
which stand in opposition, and it is answered with peace in hoping, though the
full enjoyment of that which it hops for be not yet attained, and it still
presses forward to its desired hope. And this is Christ in man the hope of
glory; (mark) Christ the hope of glory, the hope that lives, in which hope man
knows a part in the life, and with the least measure of hope in Christ the
life, he breaths after more life, and hopes for more enlargedness in the life,
which hope does still Press into the life, and here Christ is the hope, and
Christ is the life; yet whilst the life is in bondage to any thing, the hope is
exercised in hoping, because in that place there is not perfect liberty, which
the hope hops for; and all that feels this hope, they feel Christ, and they
breath in his hope for perfect liberty in his life, and waits to be delivered
by his power from under the bondage of corruption, and waits for the glory, and
hopes for the glory, and so the hope is kept in the life, and breaths in the
life to come into the glory; and in due time there is an answer given, and it
comes to a full possession of that which it hoped for, and so comes to its
satisfaction in the glorious liberty; for it is to be understood, that whilst
the Seed is in travel in any place, that there is something of the oppressing
nature over, and then the hope is exercised through Faith, and the Faith
believes over it, and the Hope hopes in the Faith; and in that state there is a
hope to be eased, and a hope to be delivered, and a hope to come into the
glory, and a hope to be established in rest; and here Faith and Hope have their
unity together, and are exercised together, and Faith is the substance of
things hoped for; and by the power in which it stands, it makes way for the
hope, and brings in the evidence of things not yet seen; for Faith and Hope are
united in the ground, and Faith goes forth in the power, to make way for the
liberty of the hope, and through the Faith, the hope overcomes oppositions, and
comes to the enjoyment of that which it hops for, and so Christ is in man the
Author of Faith, and also the hope of glory; and this is a living hope, and a
standing hope, for it is begotten in the life to breath after life, and hopes
for the full perfection of life, and the glorious liberty in the life, which
being attained, the hope is then satisfied, and possesses the thing which it
has hoped for, through the travel; and there the hope is fully answered and
satisfied, and then faith and hope rejoices in the glorious liberty of Christ
the fullness. And this hope is not like the hypocrites hope that perishes; for
the hypocrites hope is generated in the airy part, by the motion of
imagination, and it is like the Spiders web, which by her own labor she makes
to her self. And how many have created their own hope, through their own
belief, and has something which the hope looks at to be its satisction in the
end; but that hope perishes, and the end of it is misery. For how do people
deceive themselves with a vain hope, and how much are many persuaded of
assurance of life through their own hope? and yet know not Christ in them the
hope of glory, but through imagination have created an object, and their belief
stands in that, and their hope reaches to that, and no further; for is it not
the cry of many people, that they hope to be saved, and they hope God will show
them mercy, and they hope he will pass by their offenses, and pardon their
sins? and so in a vain hope enclose themselves as a Spider in her web, and
there sleeps at ease, as if there were no danger. And this is the hope of the
hypocrite that perishes, who knows not Christ in him; for there is no hope that
is created through an imagination, or that reaches to any thing which the
imagination frames, that can give satisfaction to the soul: for the soul being
immortal, there is not any thing below life and immortality that can satisfy
it; and life and immortality is in Christ Jesus, the souls Savior; and there
can be no assurance of eternal life through any other faith or hope, but what
stands in himself; then how miserable are such, that have neither faith nor
hope, but what they have created to themselves! and has no further Seal of
eternal life, but what they draw to themselves through their own belief and
hope; which being created in the perishing part, there must an end come, and
both the object of the belief and hope, and also the belief and the hope will
fall and perish together. But Christ is for ever, and the living Faith and Hope
is in himself, and he alone is the object of that Faith and Hope; and this hope
gives peace in hoping, and gives assurance of that which is hoped for; and
through assurance there is satisfaction in the travel, and in the end there is
perfect rest in Christ. And this is a true hope.

Concerning Love.
GOD is Love, and Love is his Nature, and it is in God the fullness; and as it
is in God, it is unmeasurable every way; the heights, and depths, and length,
and breadth, is past sinding out; and it is a secret in it self, unto which no
mortal eye can approach: for it does contain it self within its own perfect
body, and there is in it self in everlasting fullness, and by its own motion,
and in its own pleasure it manifests it self to the Sons of men universally,
and spreads it self as an unbounded River, which has its natural course from
the body of the Sea, and in its passage does refresh the thirsty, and returns
into the body of the Sea again; even so it is with love, which in it self is a
pure perfect body, containing it self within its own body, as to its own
fullness, and yet is always sending from it self many sweet and pleasant
streams of virtue, which refreshes and waters all that are athirst for it,
and all the streams that proceed from it, they have their course and passage,
and returns into their own natural body again, and so love is in it self an
incomprehensible being, and from Eternity to Eternity it stands unchangable,
and it is the greatest of all things, and its virtue is the chiefest good, it
is a fountain which abounds in largeness, and fullness, and in freeness, it
opens it self in tenderness, and with its own virtue it does supply the want of
all that thirst for it, and it gives forth a measure of it self, in the
openings of it self, which as a stream of pure water does reach the thirsty
soul; and this is love in it self, which disposes of it self by measure,
according to its own pleasure and with this love God loves the world, and he
sends his only begotten Son into the world, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life; and with this his love he reaches
all people through a manifestation of light, which light is Christ the only
begotten of the Father, and with this light of Christ is every man Englightned,
that comes into the world, and with this light the sinner is sought, and for
sin reproved, and that is love which does reprove; and who do not answer the
reproof, they do not answer the love of God, neither does receive the love when
it is tendered; but who answers the reproof, and loves the light which does
reprove, they answer the love, and receives the love, and then with the love
they are drawn to love God again; and so there is not any people in the fall
that first loves God, until he have manifested his love unto them by Jesus
Christ, which love is certainly manifested through Christ unto all people;
which love being received, it draws to its self, and begeteth a love to it
self, whereby man comes to love God; not that he loved God first, but that God
first loved him, and gave his only begotten Son for him, and through his own
love manifested in Christ Jesus, he begets man to love him again; and as man
receives Christ Jesus in the reproof, he receives the love of God, for if man
do not join unto Christ when he reproves him, and close with the tender of love
in that dispensation, he is an opposer and a rejecter of Christ, in whom the
Fathers love is made manifest, and so will not come to Christ to receive the
love, and the life that is in him: and hence it is that so many are destitute
of God and Christ, and wants the salvation, and the peace, and the virtue of
love, because they are more in love with those things that are reproved, than
with that which does reprove; and though Christ do come to do the Fathers will,
and tender the love of the Father in himself, yet many do reject him, and
outstand him, and proves rebellious against him, and though he wait to show
mercy, and from time to time does manifest his kindness in tendering, yet there
is not a readiness of receiving, but rather of despising and contemning; and
here he comes to many, but they receive him not; and here he wooes many, but
they will not come unto him, that they might have life in him; so do many turn
their backs upon him, and with their rebellious nature grieves him, and causes
him to draw his love into his own bosom, and so they lie destitute of love,
though in it self it be large and full, and in its manifestation universal.
And* such are miserable and wretched, who rejects the love of God which is
tendered in Christ Jesus; But to as many as do receive him, to them he gives
power to become the Sons of God, even to as many as believes in his Name; which
are born, not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of God.
(Mark) they that receives Christ Jesus, they come to be born of God, and Christ
gives them power to become the Sons of God; and this is a state beyond the
birth of flesh and blood, and the will of man, for that birth hates the light,
and loves darkness rather, and will not come to the light, left the light
should reprove its deeds; but they that love the light, they bring their deeds
to the light, and they are manifest to be wrought in God; and such grows in the
love, and springs in the love, and is nourished with the virtue of the love,
and the love is the babes consolation, for the babe bring new born in the love,
it is brought forth a little child filled with Innocence, and it waits for
nourishment from the breast of love, and waits to grow in strength through the
nourishment, and it has no will to any thing, but delights to do the will of
the Father only; and thus God is known to be love, through the measure of his
love manifested and received in Christ, and all that have received Christ, they
have received the love of God, and in that love they love God again, and are
born of God, and knows God, for every one that loves are born of God, and
knows God; and there is the true knowledge of God, and of his love by Jesus
Christ: and they that do not thus know God, they have not yet received Jesus
Christ his Son, and so neither knows the Father, nor the Son, with a true
knowledge, neither do they walk in the way of peace, nor feels the virtue of
the streams of love; and all such are dry, and withered, and only please
themselves with their own imagined way. But the birth born of love, drinks in
the streams of pure water, and it knows the fountain that holds it, and it
grows up to the enjoyment of the fountain, and so comes to the spring, and
drinks full draughts of an overflowing cup of blessing, and rejoices in the
possession of its portion. And thus to know God is life Eternal, for all born
of love, they know the Son, and the Son reveals the Father, and is the way to
the Father; and they that have the Son, they have life, and are in the
possession of life, which can never be compassed by the wisest part of man, nor
fathomed with all his wisdom, but to an innocent babe it is revealed, and the
babe knows the secret, and gives thanks to the Father, that he hid those things
from the wise part which would have gained them for knowledge out of the life;
and this is the greatest attainment; who are born into it, such knows the End
of all flesh, and sees faith, hope, and love remain, but the greatest of all is
love, and if love be wanting, there is nothing profitable; though a man should
give all his goods to the poor, and his body to be burned, if he want love it
profits him nothing, so that the greatest of all is love; for there is the
fullness known, and there is the Inheritance sealed, and that is the End unto
which faith looks, and for which hope hops in the travel, which being
possessed and enjoyed, then the End of faith and hope is fully answered, and
the salvation of the soul is witnessed, and the heir rejoices in the fullness of
his portion which is love. And here is faith, hope, and love briefly opened,
and in themselves are in one perfect body united, which in every manifestation
there is comfort found according to measure, but the greatest of all is love,
and in love the Babe sits down, and is in co-heirship with Christ, and in the
Kingdom Everlasting, and in the Power of an Endless Life, it possesses the
durable Riches and Treasures, and is filled with joy and peace, and blessing,
and crowned with glory and renown for Ever.

Concerning the Word.
THe Word is pure, and the whole Universe is upheld by the Power of it; all
things that were made, were made by it, for it was in the beginning with God,
and was God, and it has never changed from what it was in the beginning, Adam
heard it in the Garden, and Abraham heard it in his own Country, and it called
him forth, and he obeyed and followed it, and he was blessed. Moses heard it in
the Mount, and he received the Law from it; the Prophets heard it, and they
prophesied in it; and in fullness of time the Word became flesh, and dwelt
amongst men, and they beheld it as the glory of the only begotten of the
Father, full of grace and truth. And the Apostles had the Word, and they
preached the Word, and that was their Message, and they knew it to be the Word
of Faith, and the Word of Eternal Life; and the Word is the same this day, and
the glory of it is seen, and the virtue of it is felt and fed upon: for as in
the beginning it generated, and generation was brought forth by it; so now it
does regenerate, and the new born babe desires the sincere milk of it, and the
Word feeds it and nourishes it with its own goodness; so the babe feeds upon
the Word, and receives the milk of the Word as its natural food, and it does
not live by any other thing; and whilst it is a new born babe the Word gives
it milk, but when through nourishment it grows into strength, then it eats the
flesh; for the Word is made flesh, and the flesh is meat indeed, and this must
people eat if they have life in Christ; for Christ is the Word, and Christ is
the Life, and they that do not eat him have no Life in him. And this is a hard
saying to all unbelievers; for such said in times past, how can this man give
us his flesh to Eat? and this is the bread that comes down from Heaven, which
if a man eat he shall never dye; they are blessed that believes in this, for
Christ is the Bread of Life, and all that hungers after him in truth, he feeds
them according to his own pleasure: and here is living water felt from Christ
the fountain, and here is meat known that endures to Everlasting life, and with
his virtue and goodness the soul is replenished and comforted, and this is the
Word which is near every man; who shall ascend to fetch it down from above; or
who shall descend to fetch it from below? but what faith it? the Word is night
thee, even in thy heart, and in thy mouth, to obey it, and do it; and there
must man know it, and obey it, if ever he come to feed upon it; and he must
first know it as a reprover, and then as a hammer and a fire, to break down,
and burn up all that drossie nature that is in him, and the rebellious part
that stands in opposition against the Lord. And this is the Word which is nigh
unto every man, always taking hold upon the transgressor in Judgment, and as a
swift witness overtakes the transgressor in all his ways; and in that place it
is quick and powerful, and sharper than a two Edged sword; if a man commit
Evil, the Word has a quick motion to find him, and is powerful to judge him,
and sharp to wound him, and the hairy scalp of the wicked is wounded by the
sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God; and so it manifests it self in
man according to the present disposition of a man; if darkness dispose him, and
that he be in the Evil, either in thought, word, or deed, then the Word stands
against him, and is quick, and powerful, and sharp, and a hammer, and a fire,
and man may feel it to be so in its operation; for it is to be understood that
the Word in it self is an unchangeable being, and one pure perfect entire body
of love yet the manifestations of it appears diversely as man stands before it,
and it has its operation in man according to man's present disposition; for if
he sin, he is quickly overtaken with Judgment, and that which overtakes him
and Judges him is the Word, and there he may feel it powerful and sharper then
a two Edged sword; and through his obedience to it in that manifestation, then
it becomes a hammer and a fire in its operation, and it is as a fire in his
bones to consume the fleshly part in every place. And by this a young man may
cleanse his ways; for if a man take heed to the Word when it manifests it self
with Reproof; and when it shows him the outgoings of his mind, and his
wandering thoughts, and vain imaginations, and the body of sin and death that
is in him, and does defile him, and separate him from God; if he take heed to
the Word when it manifests secret Evils, which is its nature to do, then it
will become a light to his feet and a lanthorn to his paths and he will find it
to be a true guide unto him, yea in his lowest state, it will be a light to his
feet, and guide his feet, and then man does not err; when he comes to the Word
in himself, and takes heed unto it, then the Word becomes a light to his feet;
for the Word is light, and man following the light, and walking in the light,
he does not stumble, but walks safely, and with the light of the Word he sees
his way, and sees all dangers as they lie. And he that thus takes heed to the
Word, and answers the Word, and comes to obey it when it reproves him, then the
Word lifts him up, and sets his feet in the way, and so becomes a light to his
feet, to guide him that he may not err, and the Word gives man strength to
follow it, and then he begins to travel out of the dark Corners of the Earth,
and out of the Earthly habitations, and follows the Word, and believes in the
promise of the Word; and this is an Express Word in every man, it speaks
Expressly in his Conscience according to the state it finds him in, and so it
may be known, manifesting it self as man's present state and condition is; and
as man takes heed unto it, he takes heed to the light, and the light guides his
feet out of all perverse ways, and crooked ways, and froward ways, and
guides him, and leads him in the way of peace, and so it is a cleansing Word,
who takes heed unto it are cleansed by it; for a young man may cleanse his ways
by taking heed to the Word, and by obeying the word; and man that takes heed
unto it, and obeys it, the cleansing water of the word goes through him, and it
cleanses out of him all the corrupt and bad nature, that has defiled him, and
made him unclean; then man may feel the water of the word to wash him, and the
water of Regeneration to renew him: and here the word plunges man in its own
pure water, and washes him, and makes his inside clean, and so his heart is
washed and made clean, and his mind is made clean, and his body clean; and here
is the Baptiser, and the baptising, which does not lie outward for the taking
away the filth of the flesh, but makes a man clean within, and renews him in
the spirit of his mind unto God, and so washes away the filth of the old
nature, which has loadned and burdened the tender Seed. And this is the water
of the word which flows in man, as man takes heed unto it, and obeys it; and
then man is sanctified by the word, and the word is truth; and being thus
cleansed, and washed, and sanctified by the word, then it becomes the word of
reconciliation, and the word of eternal life, and it brings man to God in a
clean washed state, and reconciles him unto God in its own holiness and
righteousness; and then man knows peace with God through Jesus Christ, and
there the clean enters the Kingdom, and all the unclean, which cannot enter, is
washed away; and then man knows Christ his Redeemer, his Savior, and
Intercessor, and has access to God the Father by him, and so comes into the
Kingdom, and sits down in the Kingdom, and inherits the joy, and the peace, and
the blessing; so it is to be considered, that though the manifestation of the
Word be diverse, yet the nature of its self in its perfect body, is an
unchangeable being, and is the same this day as it was in the beginning, and
it is the Word which lives and abides for ever; and unto it all people are to
take heed, for it never loses its Testimony; but according to the present state
and condition of man, so does it manifest it self; and whilst man is in sin it
is a word of reproof: and when he yields to obey it, then it is a hammer and a
fire, and has an operation for to break down the Mountains and the hard Rocks,
and to sever the dross, and burn the chafe, and then it becomes water to
cleanse and wash away the filthiness of flesh and spirit; and then it
sanctifies in its own Righteousness, and so brings man to God, and reconciles
him to God; and then it is the Word of reconciliation, and the Word of Eternal
Life unto that man, for he lives in it, and dwells in it, and feeds upon it;
and there Christ is known the Word of Eternal Life, and his Flesh, and his
Blood is fed upon with joy. And this is substance which does endure, and never
decays, nor changes.

Man's restless part, and the Election.
SEarching, hunting, and comprehending to know, is an uncertain state, and
genders to bondage in every place, and no assurance or true satisfaction that
any can receive through that labor, for the end of those things is death; and
whosoever searches after life, and not in the Light through which life is
revealed, they run over the innocence, and hunts above the simplicity and the
house of bondage is their place, and in that place there is no certain peace;
for if the restless part be not bruised down, and kept under in every place,
the Seed of the evil doer does rejoice over the Seed of God; and it being of a
contrary nature, the weight of its nature falls heavy upon the just, and sorely
oppresses the holy one and when a man is overcome by any thing of that nature,
and falls under the power of it, he is in bondage to that very thing; and
though much may be put down that has ruled, and unto which man has sometimes
been in bondage, and under the power of which he has known grief, and then
comes to feel ease given by the removing of it, and in that place may sit in
peace; yet notwithstanding something may remain, untaken away, unto which he is
in bondage, and in that place he has grief, and not peace; for unto what a man
yields himself servant to obey, he is a servant unto that very thing; and if it
be a presentation from the body of darkness, if he yield unto it, he serves it,
and comes under the power of it, in which place he sits in bondage: And here
many are taken unawares, whose minds are not stayed upon God; for by searching
into things, and not in the measure of God, and by running before their
measure, and in the hunting part would compass something to themselves; in that
very path the snare is laid, and in that state they have not a clear eye,
neither can they distinguish things that do appear; and being upon the search
before the light, and pursuing the search with eagerness, darkness transforms
it self into the likeness of that thing which the search is after, and then
holds it forth and presents it to the hunting part, and that part being hunting
out of the light, it cannot discern the danger as it lies in that presentation;
but coming transformed in a likeness, and presenting it self to be true, the
hunting part joins unto it, and a belief closes in with it, and it is received
and treasured up for the true matter: and in this place yielding, man becomes a
servant to that very thing with which his belief is closed, and is under the
power of it, and in bondage to it. And these lying signs which are transformed
and presented from the body of darkness, does overcome the hunting part to
believe in them; and so darkness rules, and the Seed of God bears the burdens,
and in that place there is no peace; and though there may be liberty taken
through such a belief, and that part which has joined may in that place
rejoice, yet neither is the belief, nor the thing believed in true, and
therefore it is sin in the ground, not being in the true Faith. And here many
please themselves in those things with which their belief is closed, and in
that very place rejoices over the witness of God, and does not regard when
reproof comes, because a strong persuasion stands in that thing with which
their belief is closed; and such casts reproof behind them, and does not look
at reproof to belong unto them in their place; and being in that thing closed
through a belief they conclude that it is not to be condemned as evil in them,
because it is their faith; and being their faith it is not evil in them; and by
such a belief in it, they create a peace and a joy; but in that place the Seed
of God is grieved and afflicted, and that which creates a peace and a joy over
the Seed, must all come down into mourning and bitter lamentation; for all such
rejoicing is vain, and there is no peace given of God unto that part.

I having a deep consideration of these things; and beholding how many are
entangled, and having my self been a traveller amongst such dangers, I am moved
in compassion to the elect of God, to open some snares and dangers, and to hold
forth a certain way of recovery unto all that are in hold. And this observe,
that when the fallen wisdom runs into a search, and with its subtilty hunts to
find out secrets, then does Nimrod begin his inventions; and that part would
build a Tower to reach to Heaven, and with its own handy work would preserve it
self in safety, and that is Babels institution; and the ground of its erection,
which in all places is confusion, and is for utter desolation and destruction
in every place, So who would be a true Searcher into the divine mysteries, and
into the secrets of the Most High, they must learn to stand still, and in the
silent state wait upon God, and keep their minds stayed in the Light; in which
Light hidden things are discovered, and the counsels of all hearts are made
manifest, and in the Light he reveals his secrets, and opens the Parables, and
declares the hard sayings, and all that fear his name, they put their trust in
him, and are contented with what he reveals unto them; and they that seek in
this, and comes to the Righteousness through it, they find the Kingdom, and the
treasure, and there is all things added; and this is Godliness which brings
great gain; and the mind being kept in the Spirit, it goes with the Spirit into
the Life, and in the Life the deep things of God are known, and understood, and
not by any other way. So who can discern the glory of the Sun, and the glory of
the Moon, and in what they differ, may clearly distinguish between that which
is revealed, and that which is comprehended; for though the Moon gather her
light from the body of the Sun yet it is not the light of the Sun, as it is
sent from the Moon neither does that light rule the day; and this is a plain
similitude. So many tender people are wronged and deeply betrayed, whose minds
are after a search into the Divine Mysteries, and in Nimrods nature hunts
before the Lord, they run into many dangers, and in many places are taken
captive by the subtle part and through a presentation from the body of
darkness, they are carried into a strong belief of what is presented, and
closes with it as a true and firm ground: And such lays another foundation then
that which God has laid which is Jesus Christ, the wisdom from above; and the
belief of man being closed with that which is presented, from that belief
diverse things are observed and practiced, and every one sets up the thing with
which their belief is closed, and into which they, are joined, and unto that
thing they stand strongly engaged, and in that part is all strife and
contention; for every man would maintain his own faith, and he cannot join, but
with such as are of his own belief; and Nimrod sitting King at Babel, and being
chief in that work, the end of his labor is distraction and confusision, and
that does consequently attend such a belief; and who do search and hunt, and
with that part comprehend, they do erect and build in their observation; and
one erects and builds his observation in his belief, and he cries, Lo here;
another erects and builds his observation in his belief, and he cries, Lo
there: And there is something of a belief in all touching the matter which they
do erect and build, to observe; and through the strength of this belief, they
strive and contend one against another; and that is Nimrods part who sits King
in Babell, and all that ever has been found out by the deepest Searchers in
the hunting part, it rises no higher than Babel, and at Babel it ends; and
whether a belief lie to something outward, or something inward, if it lie in
that which is gathered by hunting and comprehending, within the compass of man's
own wisdom, it is Babel, and bondage to the Seed; and though in some places
there may not be strife manifested, yet there may be such narrowness in that
part with which the belief is closed, as the Seed may before afflicted by it;
and in that part man seats himself, and in the strength of his belief he
defends his place and his ground, though it be a slippery place for his feet to
stand upon; and though in this place he seem to be fixed, yet the hunting part
is most at liberty in such a man, and he is in a restless state, always
searching to find something which he has a will to know; and in that place a
presentation being offered, he runs to gather it, and adds that to his belief:
But this finds not the mercy, For not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God alone is the mercy; and he shows it when he will, and how
he will, and to whom he will; (mark) it is God that shows mercy, and he shows
mercy to whom he will show mercy; (mark again) he shows it to whom he will, and
in what time he will, and it is the election that obtains it, and not the
hunter, the willer, and runner, and comprehender; he does not show mercy to
that part, neither does that part obtain it, or enjoy it, for Esau is
reprobated, (mark that:) Therefore who would know the things of God, and find
the mercy, they must stand still and wait in the Light. And this is the Word of
the Lord God to all people; for in the Light the mercy is showed, and the
Election obtains it, and there is Gods purpose sure according to Election, and
his mercy is sure to the Elected, and in the mercy the Election is raised, and
the restless, hunting comprehending part is laid waste and subjected; and so
the mercy is given to Jacob, the birth of the Seed, because God loves him, and
it is withheld from Esau, the birth of the Flesh, because God hates him; and
though Esau search in the depth of his wisdom, and hunt to the farthest end of
his imagination, yet he can never find the mercy in his way, for the purpose of
God according to Election must stand; and quiet Jacob that waits in stilness,
he is beloved, and unto him God shows the mercy, and he obtains it, because he
is Elected; but restless Esau, that hunts abroad, he is hated of God, and
rejected; so in the mercy is Jacob raised and exalted, and Esau he is put down
and subjected; then perfect freedom in the Seed is known, and mercy and peace
is possessed in that habitation.

Therefore all must cease from their own labor, in which they are wearying
themselves, and come into stilness, quietness, and stayedness, and feel the
Seed of God, with which he keeps Covenant and mercy for Ever; in which Seed
stands the Election before the worlds foundation, and there the Simple Innocent
mind in its tender breathings, receives Consolation; for in the stillness the
Everlasting Springs opens, and the mercy goes forth in freeness, and the
Election obtains it, and the Soul rejoices in it; and that is true Joy in the
Lord, yea, fullness of Joy in his presence; for now the Ransomed of the Lord
comes from Babylons Rivers, where it has sitten weeping, and in the mercy it
returns to Sion Rejoicing, and comes to be placed in Sions holy hill, and
learns the Songs of Sion; and in the true Joy of a Redeemed state, it sings the
praise to him that lives for Ever. And here is the possession in the
Everlasting Kingdom, and a sitting down in Everlasting peace, and blessing; and
this is the faith of Gods Elect which is true, and the faith gives victory over
Nimrod and Esau; for Christ is the Author of it, and in his power it stands,
and it is justified, and not condemned; and here is the one only true wise God
known, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; and all that are of this faith, they
have fellowship with the Father, and with the Son, and with one another, and so
they meet together in the unity of the faith of the Son of God, in which faith
they have peace with God through Jesus Christ, and in his peace they lie down
together in safety; and as Lambs of one fold, they rejoice under the Government
of the good Shepherd. So let none search to know beyond what is revealed in the
Spirit; for God is, and is a rewarder of all that love him: [Mark] God is, and
none can know him, but as he reveals what he is in the Son, through whom the
brightness of his glory shines abroad, and the express image of his person is
made manifest; and who are contended with that measure which is made manifest
in the Son, they receive their reward in it; and all such are blessed whose
hearts and minds are simply disposed in love to God.

A particular Place of Bondage Opened.
THe Principle of God in man is a true and faithful witness for God in every
place, and it has a sure Testimony against that spirit which works in
darkness, in which darkness the Mystery of iniquity is seated, and has a place
of Government in man, and sits exalted in strength and power over man in the
fall, and from that place does all deceiveableness of unrighteousness proceed*
and the Witness of God does stand in its place, and is in it self a holy
Principle, which has no communion with darkness, nor with the deceiveableness
of unrighteousness, which from the darkness proceeds; but with its purity it
makes manifest the secret workings of the Mystery of iniquity, and stands a
witness against that part and principle, and also the manifestation that is
produced from it; and unto which of these a man yields himself servant to obey,
he is a servant to it, and becomes actually disposed by it; and as man joins to
either, and comes under the power of either, so is his works brought forth, his
words are spoken, and his deeds are done, from the actual motion within him, by
one of those Principles; and the words and deeds are made manifest either to be
good or evil, according to the nature of the Principle unto which man is
joined; and there is a clear distinction both in the ground, and in the
manifestation; for as that of God in man is true in it self, and the nature of
it is righteous, holy, and pure, so it does declare it self distinctly from
every manifestation proceeding out of darkness, and has a sure Testimony in it
self against it in every place: for as it is certain, that man is joined to one
of these Principles, and is a servant to it; so it is as certain, that unto
which he is joined and serving, the same does actually dispose him in the
motion of it self; and he being a servant to it, and actually disposed by it,
the fruits of its nature is manifest through him, either in the good, or in the
evil. So when the wicked one brings forth his works through man, that work
comes out of man, and defiles him, and it is plain, that there is a root within
him from which it receives nourishment, and so is produced and brought forth;
and there is sometimes a war felt in man, betwixt the two Natures and
Principles, touching the manifestation of their own natures, either in good or
evil, and man in himself may know it both in words, and deeds, and he may also
know that many times he is overcome of the evil, and yields himself to its
power and motion; and the evil having got the dominion by man's yielding himself
to obey it, then does its nature manifest it self in evil words, and deeds;
then man may feel in himself that he has transgressed the good, and with the
good is reproved, and in himself is many times so judged, that he says in his
heart I will never speak such words again, nor do such deeds again; yet he
cannot thereby save himself, but as he joins to the motion of the good, with
the good to overcome evil in its conception; and then coming to be actually
disposed by the good, that which goes out of him does not defile him, for it
is good both in thought, word, and deed.

I do not hereby set up Religion in a form or practice of any observation
distinct from the Principle of God; neither dare I disown that practice which
is observed in obedience to the motion of the Principle, for they that do so
will save the worser part alive; and if man do not answer the Principle of God,
and obey it in all things that it manifests in him, either to be good, or evil;
and if he do not choose the good, and deny the evil, after it be so made
manifest, but that he love the evil more then the Principle that does discover
it, that man must of necessity come under reproof of that Principle which is
good, which with its Light discovered the evil to him, before he came to act it.

So consider how this comes to pass, and how the distinction lies both in
ground and manifestation, seeing that there is a manfestation lies outward,
according to the natures of the Principles within; and by such manfestation it
may be discerned which Principle has Government in man, and unto which he is
joined; and this Judgment does prove the Principle, and not the manifestation
or practice distinct from the Principle; and this Judgment is not concluded
upon suppositions, but upon good and sure ground, and does give a certain sound
with distinction, both to principle and practice; I say this judgment does not
conclude supposedly, as such or such a thing may be practiced in a true form
distinct from the true principle, but it gives true Judgment infallibly in the
ground. And who judges according to appearance only, and from thence conclude
supposedly, that a true practice may be distinct from the true principle, and
from that ground judge the true practice in general, which stands in the
principle, they err in judgment: for though in some things there may be a
practice manifest, and that practice may be distinct from the true principle,
and yet in practice be the same outwardly, as that practice is which stands in
the true principle; yet this is not a sufficient ground, to judge the practice
in general, as if no such practice should be manifested from the principle, nor
observed in obedience to the principle, because such a practice may stand only
in appearance, for the love of God is not so bounded, though some in their own
bowels be so straightened, and thereby keep the Seed from the universality of its
own manifestation; and such conclusions do add bondage to the pure in every
place. And I do not hereby justify any practice whatsoever, though it may
stand in a true observation outwardly, which does not come to pass through the
motion of the true principle inwardly; neither do I condemn, but do own, and
stand by that practice which in the true principle is conceived, and through
the motion of the Principle is manifested, and in obedience observed; and
whoever judges the observation of this practice, they judge the power of God in
the ground, because it is a practice observed in obedience to the motion of the
power; for as I know that Regeneration does lie wholly inward as to the work of
it, so I also know, that being wrought and perfected, the Seed of God does
manifest its own nature, which may be seen without; and where it is not so, the
Seed is in bondage, and Regeneration is not perfected. And who would know
Regeneration perfected, they must learn to stand still, and not to oppose the
power by which Regeneration is wrought and perfected, nor to reason against the
operation of the power, for in doing so, they wrong themselves; but in standing
still, and eyeing the power in its motion, and obeying the power when it
moves, the power will call the reason into silence; and having silenced the
reason, it then has a free course to work effectually; and then the belief
standing in the power, the power comes over every strong hold, and lays the
fenced Cities wast, and brings desolation upon every part of the oppressing
nature, and strikes the whole body of it with death; for with the Power all
things are possible. And this comes to pass in all that in the power believe;
and being come to pass and perfected, then is the Seed raised, and in the Seeds
resurrection man becomes wholly changed and renewed, and both body, soul, and
spirit glorifies God; then does the Seed manifest it self in its perfect
holiness, which holiness cannot own any manifestation of darkness; and in this
path is perfect peace and satisfaction; for to be regenerated and born again,
is a state beyond the strongest part of man's own reason, and is is a work which
reason can never bring to pass, and therefore lies beyond it, and is not to be
comprehended with that part; but as the belief stands in the power, so the
power works, and removes that nature which has oppressed, and the Seed is
raised in the power, and comes up in the power, and there is Gods salvation
felt and known, and all his fresh springs opens in his Love and Life, and the
birth is nourished with his virtue, and feeds upon that which is good for food.
And here is eating and living, feeding and rejoicing, the presence of the Lord
is felt, and fullness of joy in his presence, and his Love, and Life, and Wisdom
spreads abroad, and his pure Nature is manifest in all good works, and has a
Testimony against all the evil; and the Birth delights to do the Fathers will,
and does not reason against his Counsel, but (...) a witness unto the Truth,
and against that which is out of the Truth in every place. So let this be read
in the fear of the Lord God, and with a meek spirit in the love; for it is love
to the Seed. And know that the Living Stone is the sure Foundation, though the
wise Builders do reject it, and upon that the Building is fitly ^^^med, and
stands and rejoices though many tempests blows upon it: And take heed of Judas,
for he betrays with a kiss.

From a Lover of the Seed of God universally. William Smith.

THou pure Life, what is like unto thee?
Thy Path is Peace, thy Love is full and free:
(...) art the chiefest good, thy beauty does excel:
^lessed are those that in thy Bosom dwell.
(...) fullness of thy Springs do satisfy the poor ^
(...) freshness of thy Streams is always rich in store:
(...) of thy own hand does take deep root in thee:
(...) supplies its tenderness, and sets it wholly free.
(...) first and last, and there is not another:
(...) liberty in thee, they do not thy Life smother;
(...) love they spring, and in thy Power stand;
(...) in Life and Peace, and rest safe in thy hand.

THE END

