Gospel-Tydings: Wherein is showed, What the Gospel-Administration was, the
Apostasy from it, and the Restoration into it again. BEING A Message of true
and unfeigned Love UNTO All that are seeking peace in their own way, and
wearying themselves in their own wanderings, that they may come to the Light of
Christ Jesus, and be established in the Power of the Gospel, where Life, and
Peace, and rest is witnessed. With a tender GREETING UNTO THE Royal Offspring
of God.

W. S.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1662.

Gospel Tidings, etc.
THat there was a time in which the Gospel was preached and published, is a
thing which generally is confessed by all that profess Christianity; but that
there was an apostatizing from it, and a night of thick darkness came over that
dispensation, is a thing that few understand; and therefore it is, that the
appearance of the same Gospel which at this day is broken forth in light, out
of the night of apostacy, and preached again in the same power, is by so few
believed and received, for as that spirit and power does remain in people,
which led into the apostacy, and went over that glorious dispensation of the
Gospel that then was, even so it blinds their minds, that the Light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ does not shine unto them, though by the same spirit
and power in which it was then preached it be preached again; and so through
the ignorance that is in them, they are led captive in Error; having Eyes but
see not, Ears but hear not, hearts but do not understand, so are not converted
nor healed, but in darkness abides, and in darkness walks in their own way, and
such wearies themselves in an endless travel, being driven about with diverse
doctrines, which is held forth in man's cunning part that lies in wait to
deceive, by which they are tossed from one thing to another, and catches at
words and sounds, instead of life and power; and so the many Inventions have
been sought out, and set up, with which people please themselves as if they
were in the right way, though there is a cry in many which is not satisfied in
it: And these Inventions which are come up in the long night of apostacy, and
observed and practiced as if they were a Gospel dispensation, they want the
virtue with which the gospel gives satisfaction, and are found dry and empty
Cisterns which yields no refreshings; for they only lie in forms without, and
not in the light and power of God within, in which the gospel has a free
passage to the soul in its own virtue, and therefore unto that all people must
come, from which the night of apostasy has caused them to err, that they may
feel the dispensation of the Gospel in its own power and virtue; for the
Gospel is not changed into any new Invention, though people have invented many
new forms, and every one sets up their own form as a gospel dispensation, yet
their form does not make a Gospel administration, neither can any breathing
desire receive peace or satisfaction therein; for whose minds are turned
outward, and looking for the Kingdom of God in observations, they deceive
themselves with a vain hope, and runs themselves at a greater distance from the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, and by how much they place their belief
in any invented form, by so much the more they err from the power, which is the
Gospel and loses the virtue of its administration, and whilst they are seeking
the Kingdom of God in forms and observations without, they neglect the power
of the Gospel, which ministers an entrance into the Kingdom of God within. Now
as it is generally confessed, that there was a time in which the Gospel was
preached and published, so it is to be considered, in what principle their
administration stood who was the ministers of it, and how they became worthy to
be put in trust with it, for the Apostle said, Our exhortation was not of
deceit, nor of ucleanness, nor of guile, but as we are allowed of God to be put
in trust with the Gospel: even so we speak, not at pleasing men, but God which
tries our hearts, 1 Thessalonians. 2. (mark) they were blowed of God, and put in
trust with the Gospel by him, having received Christ Jesus into their hearts by
the manifestation of his light and love, and so were found worthy in Christ to
be put in trust with the Gospel for by the holy principle of Light which they
had received in Christ Jesus, they received power to Crucify deceit,
uncleanness, and guile, and thereby they became renewed in the Spirit of their
minds unto God, who put them in trust with the gospel, in that which was pure
and clean, in which he allowed them to be ministers of it, not in words only,
but also in power; so that their words which in the power was ministered, they
were spoken as in the sight of God, who tried their hearts, and they did not
frame their words to please men, but in the power by which they were made
ministers, they were made manifest unto every man's Conscience in the sight of
God: and the Apostle said, Now thanks be unto God which always causes us to
triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in
every place* for we are not as many which corrupt the Word of God, but as of
sincerity but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ, 2. Cor. 2.
(mark) they spoke in Christ, and so were manifest to every man's Conscience in
the sight of God, and the measure of Christ in every one bare witness unto
their testimony; though such as did not join to the measure of Christ in
themselves could not receive it yet the same principle in which they spoke did
bear witness to it in every man's Conscience, and so they stood approved unto
God, and not unto men: whereby it is evident, that they had received Christ
Jesus, and that he was in them; for they spoke in him, and that was the Gospel
which they preached, and which many receiv^d as glad tidings that brought life
and immortallity unto their souls, and they that did receive the glad tidings
of the gospel, and did abide in it, they became followers of the Lord, and of
the truth in the love of it; so that the savor of life in them that ministered,
did reach the life in them that believed, by which life they all came into the
fellowship of the gospel, and so they that ministered was a sweet savor in the
hearts of those that believed: and the Apostle said, My speech and my preaching
was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit,
and of power; that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of man, but in the
power of God; for what man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of man
which is in him, Even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of
God. Now we have received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is
of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God; which
things also we speak not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which
the holy Ghost teaches, comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual, 1. Cor 2.
(mark) they had not received the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is
of God, and that was their principle, and in the Spirit of God they knew the
things that was freely given of God, and in the same principle in which they
freely received, they freely ministered; and this was the preaching of the
Gospel then not according to man's wisdom, but in Christ Jesus the power and
wisdom of God, in which gospel many believed, and were saved: and the Apostle
said, Moreover brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto
you, which also you have received, and wherein ye stand, by which also ye are
saved, if ye keep in memory what preached unto you, unless ye have believed in
vain, 1. Cor. 15 (mark) the Gospel which then was preached, they that received
it, stood in it, and were saved by it, and they were not to let it slip out of
their minds, but to keep it in memory, that they might not believe in vain;
and many did so receive it in the love of it, as they did retain it, and the
salvation in it, and was preserved by the power of it, to hold fast that which
they had received; and such continued in their well doing, and persevered unto
the end, and died in the faith, having obtained eternal redemption and
Salvation by the power of the Gospel; and unto whom this Gospel was hid, it was
hid unto them that was lost, in whom the God of this World had blinded the
minds of them which believed not, least the Light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them, 2. Cor. 4. And such
perished in their gain saying, not receiving the truth in the love of it, but
gave up themselves to believe lies, which the God of this World led them into,
and blinded their minds with, and such could not see though they had Eyes, nor
hear though they had Ears, nor understand though they had hearts, and so was
not converted nor healed by the power of the Gospel, though in the same power
it was preached unto them, as unto those that did believe in it, and receive
it; and so it became the savor of life unto life in those that believed, and
the savor of death unto death in those that perished, and as there were many
which could neither see, nor hear, nor understand the glorious dispensation of
the Gospel, but were blinded by the God of this World, unto whom they yielded
themselves to obey, and so were never converted not healed, but perished in
their gainsaying, even so there were many whole Eyes were opened, and Ears
unstopped, and hearts broken; who did both see, and hear, and understand the
true and living message of the Gospel, and yet did not abide in that which they
had seen, and heard, and understood; not likeing to retein God in their
knowledge, but yielded themselves again unto the God of this World, and so
became veiled from the Light of the glorious Gospel, that they lost the sight
of that which they had seen, and the hearing of that which they had heard, and
the understanding of that which they had in some measure understood, and by the
God of this World unto whom they yielded themselves again, their hearts were
darkened, and their minds blinded; and though professing themselves to be wise,
they became fools; having put away faith and a good Conscience, and made
shipwreck of it, and though they were gone from the Gospel; and the power of it
in themselves, yet they retained the form, and became more in love with the
form then the power, and so did not only err from the power, but turned
against it, and denied it; and of this sort they were that crept into houses;
and led silly women captive, laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts,
2 Timothy 3. For they being erred from the power of God, and having made shipwreck
of says and a good Conscience, they were gone into Captivity themseves, and so
led others to follow them, and captivated them in the form in which they were
always learning, but never came to the knowledge of the truth, and so many
apostatized from the Light of the glorious Gospel, and denied the power of it,
after that they had seen, and heard, and understood something of it; and such
became false brethren, who turned the grace of God into Lasciviousness, and
denied the only Lord God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as in Jude. So that after
the Saints deceased, who by the power of the Gospel was cleansed, and with its
virtue washed from all filthiness of flesh, and spirit, and did retain it, and
hold it fast in the pure principle of life, then did the Apostasy overspread,
and the darkness of it covered the Earth, and the God of this World came into
dominion, and ruled in the hearts of people, and in darkness they conceived
what was in the power practiced, and thereby people came to be deceived, being
erred from the principle of God; and so that has been taken for a Gospel
dispensation, whcih in the unclean part has been conceived and practiced, and
in that unrighteous nature the truth has been held; for by the God of this
World peoples minds have been corrupted, and their Eyes blinded; and hereby it
may be understood, how the apostasy entered, and how the Gospel dispensation
came to be lost, and how the many invented forms came to be set up and
observed, with which people now seems to be well pleased and satisfied, and
every one according to their own persuasion observes their own for me as a
Gospel dispensation; yet in all ages since the apostasy entered, there has
been something of God stirring in some particular, that has breathed after the
enjoyment of that life which in pure Gospel times was: witnessed amongst the
Saints and Gospel worshippers but the God of this World being in dominion, it
has been Crushed and quenched in its rising and has been beaten down again by
a strong hand which the God of this World has stretched forth against it, so
that it could not come to spread abroad in the liberty of the life, but has
always been suppressed in its rising by the force of Laws which the God of this
World has invented: but now it has pleased God in the fullness of time to
reveal his Son in power and great glory, who has brought life and
Immortallity to Light by his appearance, in whoselife and power the Gospel is
preached again, and many have believed and received the glad tidings of it, who
some times were wandering in the apostasy, and seeking peace in their own way
but could not find it; for which cause they many times mourned and lamented,
and their Souls endured grief and trouble for want of Christ, whom they
earnestly breathed after: and though they had gone through many invented forms,
and tried the depths of man's wisdom in his own way; yet they could not find
him whom their Souls longed after: but when the glorious Gospel brake forth in
its own power, and came to be preached in the life, then by its strength their
Ears were pierced, and the joyful sound did enter into their hearts, and the
living witness of God was raised, and life from death was witnessed, and then
they found him whom their souls loved, and such knows the Scripture to be
fulfilled, and can truly say, How beatutiful is the feet of him that brought
glad tidings of Salvation, and published peace, who is risen in life to
proclaim the Gospel; and such do witness, that the night is over and gone, and
the day is come, and the light of the knowledge of the glory of God shines in
their hearts in the face of Jesus Christ, who is the first born of God, that
brought many Son to glory, who are now made living witnesses of his
Resurrection, and his life, and are allowed of God to be put in trust with the
Gospel, whose labor and traveail is in the strength and power of God, and in
the same they publish his message, that people may be turned from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God; that they may receive remission of
sins, and come to an inheritance amongst all that are sanctified by faith in
Christ Jesus: and whosoever does not bring this message is not to be received;
for it is the same Gospel that was preached unto Abraham, and in which he
believed* it is the same Gospel that was preached by the Apostles, and in which
many then believed, and what they had heard, and seen, and tasted, and handled
of the word of life, that they declared in the life, and so they preached
Christ Jesus, the power of God to Salvation, and there was not another Gospel
to be brought, either by Angel or man, but they that brought it was to be
accursed; for the Apostle said, though we, or an Angel from heaven preach any
other Gospel unto you then that which we have preached unto you let him be
accursed, as we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other
Gospel unto you then that ye have received, let him be accursed: but I certify
you brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, is not after man, for I
neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. Oh that they which speak of themselves would consider
this, who knows no more of the Gospel then what they receive of man, and are
taught by man, which is not the way by which the Apostle came to the Gospel,
and therefore it is evident that such have not the Gospel to preach who denies
revelation, and so they preach another Gospel then that which the Apostle
preached. But now the same Gospel is known again by many in whom Jesus Christ
is revealed, who has brought life and Immortallity to light by the Gospel, and
in his power it is preached again, even the same Gospel which is neither of
man, nor by man, but in the same power received as they received it, and in the
same power preached as they preached it, and it is committed unto faithful men
whom God has entrusted with it, who are able to teach others also; and this is
the Light which shines out of darkness, and goes over the night of apostasy,
with all the Apostates Inventions, and in power redeemes people up to God
again, from whom they are alienated in the apostasy, and such whose Eyes are
shut, and Ears stopped, and hearts hardened against this glorious
administration of the Gospel, they are of all men most miserable; for it is the
mighty power of God unto Salvation unto all that believe in it, and receives
it; but they that reject it, and are rebellious against it, they reject the
loving kindness of God, and with the Gospel are condemned and not saved; for
they that believe not, they are condemned because they believe not in the name
of the only begotten Son of God, but unto all that do believe, his appearance
brings life and immortallity to light by the Gospel, and it is evident that it
is the same Gospel that is now preached, and not another; for it has wrought
effectually in the hearts of many, and has purged and expelled the uncleanness
and filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and has pulled down
felf-righteousness, and revealed the Righteousness of God, in which many are
established: so that the life of such now who have received the Gospel, does
fully answer to the life of such then, by which it is manifest that it is the
same Gospel, and not another, having wrought the same work in the hearts of all
that have received it as in times past, and they answer to the same in life and
practice, as face answers face in a glass; so that the demonstration of the
Gospels power may be clearly distinguished from all Inventions, for though
there may be fair shows of Godliness in some particular forms, yet they are not
translated into the power and life of Christ, in which the Gospel
administration stands: therefore unto all such, who yet abide in darkness,
and are seeking peace in their own way, is this message sent in love, that they
unto the Light may be turned, by which the danger of their way will be opened
and discovered; for the Light will open that eye which has been closed, and
unstop that Ear which has been stopped, and break that heart which has been
hardened by the God of this World, and so they will come to see, and hear, and
understand what is with the Light made manifest, without which the things of
God can never be perceived; for as the Light is in it self a most holy, pure,
and Righteous principle, so it does discover in man's Conscience all
unrighteousness, which is sin, and lets him see what lovers he has entertained
into his heart; which defiles him, and makes him unclean in the sight of the
pure God, and in the Light waiting, that voice which speaks from heaven will be
heard, and the Gospel will sound into that Ear which is unstopped, and pierce
into the heart, and prick it, and with the precious savor of its virtue it
will soften it, and so the Light of the glorious Gospel will shine out of the
night of apostasy, and bring glad tidings into the Soul, which in the night of
apostasy has been captivated; and there man will come to feel the love which
God has unto him, who would not that any should perish, but that all should
come to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved; and there is no want of love
from God to save men, but there is want of love from men to close with and join
into the love which God makes manifest in the Light, and so man's destruction is
of himself, because he loves not the Light, but loves his evil deeds better,
and follows the devices of his own heart, which, with the Light is reproved;
and such obeys not the Gospel, in which the love of God is tendered, but
sollows the God of this World, and cherishes their own hearts lusts, and this
is man's own way, in which the god of this World blindes him, and keeps him in
the apostasy, where he is alienated from the life of God; therefore let all
people consider, whilst they have a day; for with whom was the Lord grieved,
was it not with those that had sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness;
and unto whom did he swear that they should not enter into his rest, was it not
those that believed not; therefore all people take heed, least you out-stand
the Lord in the hardness of your hearts, and let the day of your visitation
slip over your heads without regarding for unto which of you has he not
manifested his love, and who amongst you can truly say, the Lord has not
visited; have you not had many convictions in your Consciences, and many
convincements for your sins? have you not been reproved for the Evil of your
doings, and have you not been secretly judged for secret faults? have you done
any thing so privately that has not been manifest, or could you ever hide any
thing so closely that has not been made known; who amongst you can excuse your
selves before the most High, or which of you can say in truth the Lord has not
showed me evil, or that I am ignorant of my sin? who amongst you can stand to
plead with God in these things? Oh surely the day of account is very great, and
unto it you must all come, and the Lord will be clear when he judges, for all
his Judgments are true; and do you not draw his judgments upon your selves,
because you regard not his law: how will you stand to account for all your idle
words and ungodly deeds, in which you run at liberty as if all should end
without account? look over your lives, and with the Light of Christ in your
Consciences view your selves, and behold the fruit of your doings, and consider
whether you can stand approved unto God in secret; for your lives demonstrate,
your nature, and the fruit of your doings declares your root, the old man is
yet alive in you, and the god of this World has dominion over you, and with
his deceivable working he blindes you, and in the apostasy you are lost, when
the Gospel is hid from you, and so you remain in your fins, which the Gospel
casts out and expels, where it is believed and received; and if you will
but view your selves with the Light of Christ which is in you, though you be
not in it you will see that you are under the Law, and approved by it, and not
under the Gospel; and the Law says, Thou shall not Covet: now view your selves
and behold whether you keep this one commandment and if you do not, then you
are yet under the Law, and the Law condemns you; for it is Spiritual, holy,
just, and good, and was added because of transgression, and whilst you are in
transgression and does not keep the Law, you are under the curse, and not in
the blessing, which is a Gospel state. Now if you will view your hearts with
the Light, it will show you that you are coveting an evil covetousness, and
both the riches of this World, and the riches of Knowledge your hearts are set
upon, and these are two great evils which the holy Law condemns: and though
you may talk of the Gospel, and a Gospel-administration, and apprehend your
selves to be Gospel-worshippers, yet you are under the first Covenant, with its
curse and condemnation, being yet in the transgression and you have not
received the love in the Light, in which the Law and Prophets is fulfilled; so
it is not what you profess that makes you to be the same you profess, neither
is it what you apprehend your souls to be that makes you so to be, for the new
man does not live the life of the old; therefore let this consideration enter
into all your hearts, and ponder it in secret, that it is not such as only
profess the Gospel that are approved, but such as obey the Gospel; and
therefore you that talk so much of a Gospel dispensation, and the free grace of
God in it, and thereby would exclude perfect obedience as a duty only
belonging to the first Covenant, and say, it is not now of works; but of grace;
and run from good works, and so are reproved by St. James, you are in the
apostasy covered with imaginations; for all the children of Light are children
of obedience, and you that are not so, are foolish and disobedient; and whilst
you talk of salvation by the free grace of God without works, your selves are
found in the works of sin, and yiedling your selves to obey the God of this
world, and so you would hold two Kingdoms at once; but do you not know, that
unto whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants you are to whom
you obey; and is not here obedience to something, and does the free grace of God
save the disobedient, who yield themselves to obey the God of this world, and
denies the teachings of the grace when it appears; for the grace of God
appears unto all men, and the appearance of it does discover ungodliness and
worldly lusts in all, but who are they that are taught to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts? are not they such as obey the grace in its appearance; or can
any be taught by the grace and not obey it; you may as truly say, that all men
shall be saved, because the grace unto all men appears; but this is known and
witnessed by the children of Light, who are the children of obedience, that as
the grace appears against ungodliness and worldly lusts, so the grace is to
be obeyed in its appearance, and being obeyed, it then teaches to deny that
which it appears against; and not only so, but it also teaches to live the
life of godliness, and so the grace being obeyed it brings salvation; for it
overcomes sin, and gives victory over the God of this World, who leads in sin
such servants as obeys him; and hereby it may be understood, that salvation is
by grace, and not by works, and so it is believed and witnessed by all the
children of Light, who knovves that obedience to the grace, does not set up
the first Covenant, but establishes the second, in which the Gospel is
ministered according to the riches of his grace, who is the fullness of all
things; therefore it is manifest that you are yet under Moses, though you have
Christ to talk of, and the vail is yet over your hearts, not being redeemed
from under the Law and its condemnation, but are in disobedience to the Light
of Christ, by which the law is fulfilled, and in which the Gospel is preached
again as in times past; therefore all come to the Light of Christ with which
you are enlightened, and obey it when in your Consciences it reproves you, that
it may guide you, and lead you, and teach you, and bring life and imortality
into you, which you can never find in your own way; and therefore out of
your own way you must depart in, the leadings of the Light, if ever you come
to the life from which the Light is made manifest, and you must obey the
Light; and follovv it, and not reject it, and quench it, and by follovving the
Light in obedience, it will bring you to forsake your own way, and all your
invented forms, and will bring you into the way which God has prepared, in
which the cross is placed; upon which all worldly lusts is crucified and
condemned, and the old man with all his deeds destroyed; and as you take up
the Cross and follovv the Light, which is to obey it, then you will have true
peace in your way, and will know and understand the Gospel of God, which is
the power of God unto Salvation; and the Gospel will have a free course in you,
and not be quenched, and so the Cross is in the way which God has prepared,
but ease and fleshly liberty is in the way which man has invented; and
therefore it is that so many walks in it, and are so in love with it as they
will not forsake it, but whosoever continues in that path, and does not turn to
the Light, with the Light to be guided they will find the pit to be in the end
of it; therefore how deeply are people concerned to take heed to their way,
least their obstinacy run them to perpetual ruin; for it is not a profession
of any sort that will bring peace in the latter end, though people may be
observant in what they do profess, according to their own form, but the life
which in the Light is ministered, in that alone by which the Soul is comforted,
and sustained, and in the needful times is helped and relieved, and that is the
Gospel which brings glad tidings of peace, and glad tidings of good things,
that bind up the broken hearted, and restores joy for mourning, and gives the
spirit of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, and so the poor receives the
Gospel, and it is glad tidings unto them, but the rich reject it, being filled
with their own wealth, and so they are sent empty away as to the virtue which
the Gospel ministers; and therefore it is hard for a rich man to be saved, who
has stirred himself with the fetchings in of wealth by his Earthly wisdom, his
Ear is stopped to the joyful sound of the Gospel; but the poor are sensible of
their want, and so are always waiting to be supplied from the spring of life,
and are ready to receive when it opens and ministers, and by the Gospel they
are converted, relieved, refreshed, and strengthened; for the virtue thereof
flows in the life, unto every breathing soul that wants in the Light; and this
is the Gospel which is preached again in the Spirits power, as in times past,
and the joyful sound has entered the hearts of the poor, and thereby they are
restored into the joy of Gods Salvation, and are heirs of the Kingdom, and
inherits the riches of life everlasting, so as the testimony of the Light is
faithfully obeyed, the power of the Gospel, works by operation, and overcomes
the god of this World, and rend away the vail with which he has blinded the
mind, and then the mind enters into the power of the Gospel, and in the power
receives faith to believe in God, and by faith in the power there is a sure
standing, and a patient waiting upon God; then does the power work into
salvation regeneration and translation, beating down every strong hold, and
casting out the god of this World which has been exalted in the place where he
ought not, and so darkness comes to be Expelled out of man by the power of the
Gospel which works effectually in all that believe, by which the minds is
drawn into the new and living way, and so comes to be redeemed up to God by
Jesus Christ, in whom is life Eternal, and in whole life is the fellowship of
the Gospel; therefore all people, forsake your own way and live, and walk in
the way of understanding, that after your long time of weary wanderings in the
night season where darkness has compassed you about, you may come to the Light
of Christ in your own Consciences, and so enter into the same rest, which is
only in God.

A tender greeting unto the royal offspring of God.
RIght Dear and tenderly, beloved Lambs, in an acceptable time has the Lord
God manifested his everlasting love unto you, and in the day of his Salvation
he has sweetly visited your tender souls, and has raised you up by the arm
of his power into the glorious life of the son of his love, in whom he has
chosen you, and in whom he has set his love upon you, and made you his
peculiar ones, in whom he takes great delight, and unto you his love does
freely run without ceasing, and his life does flow with pure streams of sweet
refreshings; for in his Covenant he has gathered you, and in his Covenant his
virtue has free passage to you, in which you spring as plants of his own hand;
and in his hand he keeps you, that none can pluck you out; for with his hand
he has done valiant things since the day he set his love upon you, and you are
made witnesses of his mighty power, by which he has preserved you in your
greatest afflictions, it is none but he alone that could do that for you which
has been done, and therefore he alone is worthy of all the glory; for the work
is of him, and the glory belongs unto him over all. Therefore my dearly beloved
in the Lord, keep your Eye single to the first principle, the measure of Light
which is pure, for therein the Gospel was first preached unto you, and by the
same your Eyes were opened, and your Ears unstopped, and your hearts broken and
melted, and there was the hand reached forth by which you was first helped, and
by that holy principle alone you have been quickened; for it preached from the
throne of God, and from his glory, and with the same you were overcome to yield
up all to be made one with it: So that ye are made children of the Light, and
of the day, and are witnesses that this principle brought life and immortality
to Light by the Gospel, and the glad tidings did reach your mourning souls, and
you were thereby turned unto God, and became followers of the truth in the love
of it, and the Lord has been with you, and blessed you, and has made your way
prosperous, even as a people upon whom his love is placed; and as he has
chosen you, and is a God present with you, so let the desires of your hearts be
kept unto him, and to the remembrance of his name, that the pure seed of life
may be Crowned in every one, which is the birth that seeks the glory of God
alone; for as ye abide in the principle in which you are gathered, so will the
pure fear be retained, and in the low estate you will be preserved, unto which
the Lord has great regard; for the waves upon the waters does but rise to fall
again, but the low estate is fixed on the Rock, and upon the rock stands higher
then all, and there the life is fell which God does highly exalt. Oh ye tender
hearts! the Light of Christ teaches, that plainness is the path of truth, and
lowly minds walks in that, way, and simplicity is with them, and innocence
clothes them, and in that life is the sweet refreshment; for there the babe
does relish the savor of that which is good for food, and with the same is
comforted and nourished in its tender growth; therefore in the innocence keep
our station, that the weighty power of God may for ever be your defense; so
will the glory of his life rest upon you, and the plant of his hand will
flourish and be fruitful in you, and in its beauty you will be comely as the
offspring of God, and bear his Image in the seed of glory; therefore retain
the first principle which is of God, that the love wherewith God loves you may
for ever remain with you, and do you increase therein to the glory of him who
has chosen you; for there is not an other Gospel but that which was first
preached amongst you, and received by you, the sound of which was joyful in
your hearts, and made your feeble knees to gather strength, so that you could
walk and leap for joy. Oh dwell in the same my dear beloved, for it is the
weighty power of God, in which is the Kingdom and life without end.

And have such in singular love who are Fathers in Israel, who first brought
the tidings of peace by the Gospel; for they are worthy of double honor who
yet continues laboring in the word and doctrine, and nurses the birth with
pure milk, and refreshes the plant with heavenly waters; and though some be
fallen asleep, having finished their testimony faithfully, yet their life
remains with us, and in the same their glorious testimony are had in
remembrance; yea it can never be forgotten by the upright in heart, for their
labor and travel, and faithful sufferings for the Lord and his precious truth,
does stand as a sure feal of their holy testimony, which by them was faithfully
held forth unto the end, against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of men,
and all their unlawful deeds, and they are now entered into everlasting rest,
where their reward is with them in fullness; and as their precious life is
retained, so will their testimony be abundantly increased and enlarged, by
which God will yet make known his great power and glory, to the comfort of his
people, and amazement of their enemies; therefore hold fast the gift of God
which in the Light ye have received, that you with the same may be close girded
up, and in your well doing continue to the end, neither looking back, nor
turning aside to lay hold upon any other thing then what was first preached,
and in which ye believed and received, which is the gift of God into Eternal
life.

Brethren, these things I write, not as though ye had need of teaching, but in
that dear and tender love which flows to youwards, in the same to stir up
your pure minds to retain and hold fast that which ye have heard from the
beginning; and the anointing which abides in you will teach you the same, as ye
abide in it; for you have no need of teaching who are in the anointing, but as
the same anointing teaches you of all things, which also will bring to your
Remembrance whatsoever has been told you, through the holy testimony of
faithful brethren in the same life, so ye being come to that which abides for
ever, ye know the Lord to be your teacher, who by his Counsel instructs you in
the night season, and with his love does comfort you and strengthen you, when
there is not another to help you; and herein the Lord has made you to differ
from all wanderers, who are wearying themselves in their own way, and setting
up teachers in their own wills, upon whom the apostacy yet abides, so that
they hear not the heavenly voice, but gives heed to fables; which unto them is
spoken by the voice of dreamers; but ye beloved have a more sure word, being
come to the heavenly Light, in which you hear Christ's voice, and follow him as
his own sheep in his own way, where he teaches you in secret with the still
voice of his life, so that you can sit in silence and see your teacher, and
hear his voice that speaks from heaven, and receive the joyful sound into your
hearts, and feed upon the sweetness of his own virtue, and drink of the Rivers
of his pleasure freely* and this is the weighty power of God which goes over
all the wanderings and presses into the stillness, by which the seed of God
comes into dominion, and clothes the babes of its nature with the garment of
praise, and in this life the witness of God is answered in every Conscience;
and this is the life which unto you is come, and of which ye are born, ye dear
beloved Lambs, who are reconciled unto God through Jesus Christ, in whose love,
life and power he has joined you together, and made you a complete body in
himself, from whom let no man separate you, or put you asunder; but grow in his
life, in which you are purely the offspring of God, by whose power you are
regenerated, and born again of incorruptible seed, and are translated into the
nature of the lamb, whose heavenly image you bear in his glory.

So let the Word of Christ dwell plentifully in you, and in the same exhort one
another, and build up one another in your most holy faith, always keeping your
Eye to the movings of the word, that none may quench it through fear or
doubting, nor lose its motion by overrunning; but as it purely moves in it
self, and opens the riches of its fullness, so let the virtue flow from its own
life without adding or diminishing, and there you will all drink at the streams
of one fountain, and be comforted together by one spring; for as there may be a
service lost when the movings of the word is quenched, so there can be no
service done when another motion is answered, or the true motion of the word is
overrun; but when the word disposesit self in the riches of it self, the
savor of its life is to the life in which the Babes rejoice in endless peace
and unity.

Oh ye Lambs, right dear and precious you are, be strong in the faith, and look
up to God, the day of your glory yet breaks forth, darkness cannot vail it,
cruelty cannot cloud it, your innocence preaches, your patience and meekness
reaches Gods witness, the seed answers and rises, and many Eyes are turning
to your Light and life, strong desires are kindled toward you, and the hearts
of many wishes well unto you; and though they behold you a far off, yet they
love you: Oh the patient sufferings of the lambs has pierced deep, glorious
is your testimony ye holy ones; who shall oppose you to prosper, I know not
any, though for a time they may afflict you and cast you down, yet you are not
forsaken, but shall rise again* for the most high has blessed you, and your
life shall spread and flourish, whilst they that seek your hurt will run
themselves to ruin. Dearly beloved brethren and lambs, Fare ye well in the
life of Christ Jesus, who has made us one in himself, and set us together in
the heavenly places of his love, in whose bosom our joy, and peace, and rest is
sure for ever, where I right dearly greet you all. The everlasting God of power
and peace be with you, preserve and keep yon in his heavenly power, life and
wisdom, in dominion to reign, even so Amen.

The arm of the Lord in this place is largely stretched forth, to the
gathering of his elect, and the precious truth does flourish and abundantly
prosper, and many are lately joined with it, and are become followers of it in
love, glory and everlasting praises be given unto God most High. Friends in
these parts are generally well and fresh in the truth of God and meetings large
and peaceable, and in the love and Life of God both bond and free rejoices
together.

Nottingham County Jail The second Month 1663. W. S.

THE END.

