A full ACCOUNT Of the late Ship-wreck of the Ship called The PRESIDENT: Which
was cast away in Montz-Bay in Cornwall On the 4th of February last, As it was
delivered to HIS MAJESTY, (both in Writing and Discourse) By William Smith and
John Harshfield, the only Persons that escaped in the said Wreck.

TOGETHER, With all the remarkable Adventures in the said Voyage from their
Sailing out of the Sound of Plymouth, on May Day, 1682.

PARTICULARLY Their Engagement with Six Pirate-Ships at once on the Coast of
Malabar.

The whole Relation Being taken in private Conference with the said William
Smith.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near STATIONERS Hall, 1684.

An ACCOUNT Of the loss of the Ship called The PRESIDENT: Together with all the
Remarkable Adventures of her Voyage, etc.
SUCH is the Method of humane Affairs, that the greatest Hopes of Advantage are
attended with the greatest Hazard and uncertainty. Of this we have a remarkable
Instance in the late miserable Wreck of the Ship called the PRESIDENT; fitted
out at the great charge of the Company for her Voyage to the East Indies; and
with no small expectation of her advantageous Return. If we consider the
extremities to which the Persons on Board her were reduced, before they utterly
perished, together with their gallant behavior in a most desperate Engagement,
we shall scarce find Examples of either. This Account has been expected, but
could not before be fully gathered, by reason the two Persons who only
escaped, were so sick and disabled, that it was six weeks before they came up
to give the Particulars to his Majesty.

On the first day of May, 1682. the President (Burden five hundred and fifty
Tun or upwards, Captain Jonathan Hide Commander) sailed out of Plymouth Sound
in Company with the Suratt-Merchant. But as soon as she was off the Canary
Islands she lost Company with her. About three Months after the Captain found
it necessary to refresh his Men, and accordingly touched at the Island called
Mauritius. This is a Place of Parrots, and where Venison is in such plenty,
that they surprised and killed several Deer as they lay asleep. Their
continuance here was about a fortnight.

On the 28th of December, they fell in with the Coast of India, and touched at
Car-war a Factory of the English. From hence they weighed after four days stay,
and proceeded in their Voyage, having hitherto met with no considerable
Adventure.

But on the 15th of January following, on the Coast of Malabar, they met with
six Sail of Ships, whom at first they took to be Friends. These Vessels they
afterward understood to be Manned chiefly with Arabians, who had revolted from
their King and entered themselves into the Service of Savagee, a certain Prince
in those parts, who is in continual War with the great Mogull. Or rather they
were a Nest of Renegadoes there gotten together from all parts, and so
desperate as seldom to give or take Quarter. Our Men however not having the
least apprehension of Danger from them, stood with them, expecting some News
from Suratt. But it seems these Barbarians had heard of such a rich Ship upon
the Coast, and so came up with their six Sail, with great numbers of Men,
resolved to carry her or sink by her side. As soon therefore as they came
within shot they fired their Broadsides; The surprise amongst our People was
very great, expecting no such Complement, nor having so much as cleared their
Decks, or cut down the Hammocks, The Enemy taking all Advantage of their
unreadiness, immediately fell to Grappling and laying them on Board. However,
by encouragement and example of their Captain, they with cheerful shouts betook
themselves to their Work. The Encounter on both sides was with utmost
Fierceness and Resolution: though with vast odds and Advantage on their part.
Our Men therefore were very hard set till they had got out their lower Tire of
Guns, which did them extraordinary Service, for with them they sunk two of the
Enemies Ships by their side. The rest were so far from being discouraged
hereby, that they poured in their Numbers with more Fury; Their Assault was so
fierce that our Men were driven into their Fore-castle, the Enemy possessing
himself of the Steerage. The Savagees made no doubt but they should presently
be absolute Masters of the Prize. Our Captain therefore betook himself to his
last Relief, which was to throw his Grenades out amongst the Enemy. The
Barbarians at first stood staring upon them (having never seen any such Things
before) till the Balls broke amongst them with so great surprise and Slaughter
that our Decks were immediately cleared of their new Guests. Yet were they so
resolute (after a small respite) as to lay Aboard once more. Till by a chance
shot from our Vessel that carried the Wadd along with it into one of their
Ship's Powder-Room, the said Ship immediately blew up: Being foremost in the
Service and so near the President as to set her Sails on Fire. Upon this
Discouragement (two of their Ships having been sunk before) the remainder made
off with so much haste that they left most of their Men who had boarded us, to
shift for themselves: Part whereof were glad to get into the Longboat of the
President and make away in her as fast as they could. Before our Ship was quite
clear of them; the Fire that had taken hold of her Sails grew dangerous.
Whereupon William Smith (who afterward escaped in the Wreck) first adventured
up to the Main-Yard, to extinguish the Flame, receiving a Wound with an Arrow
in his Leg, but the Pile was smooth and happened not to be poisoned. The
behavior of the Captain in this desperate Service was with all possible
Conduct and Courage. And indeed the performance of every Individual Person was
so extraordinary as must render the Fate that afterward befell them more
deplorable: So that we must needs say of them (as Cicero did of Roscius after
recital of his Merits) Videbantur plane mori non debuisse. Notwithstanding the
Encounter was so sharp, yet the President lost but thirty Men, and the Enemy no
less than five hundred. The great Mogull from whom these Savages had revolted,
hearing of the Duspute that had past, immediately sent on Board the President
for a particular account of the Fight, with which he was extremely well
satisfied, and sent the Captain a Present of extraordinary rich Silks.

The next Day they bore up for Goa, a chief City of the Portugeses where they
lay to refresh their wounded Men: and in less than a fortnight after they
arrived at Suratt. Here they met with an unfortunate Accident, for as the
Gunner was clearing of a whole Culverin the Gun split in pieces by which he was
killed, together with the Armourer and two common Seamen: several others being
disabled.

About the latter end of April they weighed from India, being in company with
the Persia-Merchant, and in four months time arrived again at Mauritius. Where
they met with the Suratt-Merchant their outwards-bound Consort. But the Season
not permitting them to proceed in their Voyage, by reason of the Trade-Wind,
which at that time of the year is always contrary off the Cape bon Esperance,
they continued on the Island full three months. On the beginning of December
following they lost sight of the Suratt-Merchant, supposing her to be
afterward cast away at St. Michael's on the Western Islands.

From this time as they drew nearer home, they met with extraordinary rough
Weather; yet they judged themselves within three days Sail of England when with
violence of Tempests (the Wind blowing continually at North-East) they were
driven out again to Sea, their Provision being almost spent and their Men very
faint and sick. What Port soever they attempted to make, whether Ireland or
Portugal, the Wind was still in their Teeth.

In this Distress they continued for eleven Weeks together; their Allowance
being no more than one pound of Biscake a Week for each Man, and a piece of
Beef of about three pound for twenty Men. Their Beef they ate raw being loath to
waste any part of it in Boiling; at last they had but one Dog left aboard,
which they killed, boiling the Head and purtenance for Broth, and of the rest
they made a delicate Banquet.

They called to a Jamaica Ship as she passed them, who durst not trust her Men
aboard them with Relief, for fear they should not return, she having no more
than were necessary for her Voyage. They met likewise with a French
Merchant-Ship, from whom they had some Stockfish, but were little the better
for it, because they could get from her neither Oil nor Water. And indeed in
this want consisted their greatest extremity, which was so much more tormenting
as Thirst is more violent than Hunger. They were reduced to a Pint a day for
each Man, and that of Rainwater gathered as it ran down their Ropes, from
which it was tainted with so bitter a Taste, that they were scarce able to drink
it. From this drought their sickness increased so much, that at last there were
not above fourteen of the fourscore Persons on Board, who were able to do
business in the Ship. It is impossible to draw the Scene of Misery to the Life,
to see the poor Wretches, at such time as any Rain fell, some wringing of the
Sails, some sucking at the Ropes as it trickled down; and others too sick and
feeble to do either; but laid gasping on their backs, with their Mouths open to
receive the little Refreshment as it rained in.

After all this Distress it was their hard fortune to lose their Ship in
Montz-Bay in Cornwall on the ninth of February last. After she had struck, she
sat not an hour before she was beat in a thousand Pieces. Nor indeed could it
be otherwise by reason of her falling on the Rock as she did, with her side to
the Sea.

Of the fourscore Persons, not one escaped beside the foresaid William Smith
and John Harshfield.

This Harshfield they happened to take up in the Indies, he having been twice
Wrecked before in his Voyage thither; the last time was in the Johanna, very
few Persons escaping with him: These were his Companions over the Desert
Country from Cape de Gullis to Cape bon Esperance, Twenty and one days Journey,
in which they were reduced to the extremity of eating Grass. Yet was it his
fortune to be once more cast away, and what was more wonderful to be one of the
Two that only escaped.

These two Persons sat on the forepart of the Ship while the hinder-parts
were broken, seeing most of their Companions drowned, before they quitted their
Station. Smith at length was forced off on part of the Bow-Sprit, to which were
fastened by Rings several Ropes wherewith he enfolded himself to prevent his
being washed off by the Sea.

Harshfield followed him on a Plank, his Father being on Board and calling to
him to take him on, which for fear of being encumbered he dared not to do. As he
floated he was overtaken by a Third Person who thinking him better provided,
quitted his own Plank and laid hold on Harshfield's Breeches. Harshfield
finding himself endangered thereby, immediately loosed his Hose, letting him
and his Breeches together into the Sea.

After this he made a shift to recover Smith, who (being better mounted) haled
him up to him, and gave him part of the Ropes to fasten himself withal: without
which it had been impossible for them to have lived in so rough a Sea. By these
most difficult means they made a shift at last to get to the side of a Rock at
the Lands End, where they likewise found a Third Person arrived. With much ado
they climbed up about the height of Two Stories, the Precipice above them
being so steep that they could ascend no higher; they had now been no less than
fourteen Hours in the Sea, yet were still so much exposed to the violence of
the Waves, that the foresaid third Person was washed off again and drowned:
Smith and Harshfield very hardly preserving themselves by wedging each other
into an hollow of the Rock. As soon as the Tide was out they descended with no
small danger to the Sands; but as they were crossing over to some place that
was accessible they were inhumanely set upon by two Country Fellows, who
perceiving that they had been Shipwrecked, and supposing them to have saved
about them something that was of most Value, attempted to knock them on the
Head. Which they had certainly effected on these defenseless Wretches but for a
Gentleman (Steward to Mr. Godolphin) who was then riding over the Sands and
came up to their Relief. Thereupon seeing him approach they fled, but were
since taken and thrown into a Goal.

On the Sunday immediately following, in Sermon-Time, the People of the next
Town first heard of the Wreck, whereupon with one consent they ran out from
their Devotion to the Spoil, leaving the Parson to Preach to the bare Walls.

The Company sent down several Persons to recover what they could; which was
scarce enough to pay for their Journey. The Vessel nevertheless was of very
rich Lading, being modestly judged of no less than an hundred thousand pound
Freight; of the Companies; beside what belonged to private Persons, with much
Jewish Treasure of Pearl, and Diamonds.

The said Smith and Harshfield having received Commendation of His Majesty, are
now preferred by the Company, and sent out again to Sea.

FINIS.

