Imprimatur,

Rob. Grove R. P. Dno Episc. Land. a sac. Dom.

Aug. 8. 1671.

'AGA'PAI ASPILAI THE Norfolk Feast; A SERMON, Preached at St Dunstans in the
East, upon the 18th of July, 1671. Being the day of the Anniversary Feast for
that County, for some years omitted; but now intended to be continued. By a
Minister of that County.

Vt non decet civitatem been institutam esse sine legibus and Principe: ita nec
convivium oportet, (...) esse (...). Erasm. Ii sunt qui in dilectionibus
vestris maculati coepulantur semet ipsos ad luxum, adebrietatem immodice
pascentes. Aug. de Fide and oper Cap. 25. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Nath.
Ranew, and Jonath. Robinson, at the Kings Arms in St. Paul's Church Yard, 1671.

To the Stewards of the Norfolk Feast, and others my Worthy Friends, and
Neighbors of that County.
Gentlemen,
IT was no small admiration to me, that you were pleased (at your renewed
Festival) to nominate me for the Pulpit; whose incapacity for that service,
might have caused a jealousy in your invited Guests, that you had no great
skill in choosing a Cook; who showed so little, in the choice of a Preacher, And
I do much more wonder that your Requests (which have the force of a command)
should call my Notes out of my Study, where they were laid aside, and by chance
not used as waste Paper. The Title Page, I hope, may gratify your desires,
which declares your resolution to a continuance of your Anniversary Feastival:
And if any shall look farther; I hope they will account me a Faithful, though
unskilful Steward of the Mysteries of God. I never was (or I hope, ever shall
be) one of those Preachers, who study only to gratify the curiosity of those
Hearers, who most highly applaud the Sermons; in which there appears only the
frothy wit of a conceited Preacher; and nothing of the word of God. I love not
to court a Text, as some fond Lovers do (with Amorous words) their Silly
Mistress; or to show a Curious Art in carving it into little pieces; and
Painting every one of them with fine Flourishes; as if instead of dividing the
Word of God aright, and giving to every one his portion; I should cut Sacred,
Serious Truths, into Toys, for Children and Fools to play withal. It shall
never be my practice to help the Devil catch Sinners, by scratching their
itching Ears, till he lay hold on their Immortal Souls. Had I only presented
you with Witty Allusions, and Rhetorical Flourishes? it had been to set before
you a Dish, finely garnished, and no Meat in it; an ill president at such a
time. My business was to commend your Feasting, and to prevent those
extravagancies (of which I confess, I was more afraid, than hurt) which are the
usual concomitants of those Festivals. Your special injunction of a very short
Sermon (upon information that the Pulpit was but borrowed for a little while,
and must that Forenoon be lent to the Hampshire Preacher, upon the like
occasion) must excuse my brevity to the Reader; nor am I to be blamed, for not
enlarging it for the Press; considering my urgent occasions into Norfolk, known
to some of you; which makes me fear that the Errata of the Printer, added to
those of the Author, will scarcely permit the Reader to guess at what I
intended; if he does, let him afford the same Candor, which I seemed to have
from the Auditors; and it shall not much trouble me, that I did hereby express
my self,

July 24. 1671. Yours ready at command, W. S.

THE NORFOLK FEAST; A Sermon Preached at St Dunstans in the East, in London,
the 18th day of July, 1671. on the Public Festival for that County.
Jude Epistle, Ver. xii. the Former Part. These are Spots in your Feasts of
Charity: when they Feast with you, Feeding themselves without fear, etc.


THE Holy Scriptures are not only to be admired, as they declare to us our own
misery, and a supply through Gods mercy; but likewise as they give direction to
man in every capacity, how to behave himself; so that his outward concerns may
not clash with his inward; whilst our Bodies, like Dives, fare sumptuously, our
Souls may not be like Lazarus, wanting Crumbs. They are not only a rule of
Faith, but of Manners, and are so fully directive, that there is no opportunity
which God puts into our hands, of doing, or receiving good, but we are
furnished with instructions and admonitions suitable to the same; that as the
Apostle says, whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, we may do all to
the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31.

I must not build a large Porch to a small House; make a long Preface, being
confined to a short Sermon. Let it be sufficient to tell you, that the greatest
part of this little Epistle, is a Hue and Cry, which the Apostle sends after
some Robbers of Christianity, who had crept into, or amongst rather, the
household of Faith; or a discovery, which the Apostle makes of Impostors, who
had insinuated into the company of those Christians to whom he wrote; so that
they were not freed from their company, either in their Religious or Civil
Societies; and (which is worse) they were too ready to give them entertainment,
or free admittance; which makes the Apostle find great fault with the
Christians, accounting that they were exceedingly blame worthy, for that they
might avoid their company if they pleased; and that is the reason that he runs
through a great part of the Old Testament, and urges instances, which might
make them afraid to stain their Religion by evil practices; such as they were
liable to, if they kept the company of such persons; much more if they endured
the sight of those unchristian deportments, whereof they were guilty; and this
they did in their Love Feasts, which the Apostle here blames; These are Spots
in your Feasts of Charity, etc. I need not spend time in the Explication of
terms, (...); The word signifies any spot or blemish, which causes either
deformity in the body, or uncomliness in the garment, and so it is commonly
used: The same word signifies a Rock in the Sea, (...) trahendo coenum macula
est quae vestimento inhaerens illud deturpet, Zanch.

(...) non solum est glarea; id est, terrae species quae maculas relinquet sed
etiam coneavum saxum in littore maris seu lavum ac stumina in quam
concavitatem, tanquam in commune receptaculum sordes aquarum confluunt, Arist.


to which the filthiness which the Sea contracts, resorts.

In the words observe, 1. A Commendation supposed; They kept their Feasts of
Charity. 2. A Discommendation expressed, There were Spots in their Feasts; From
which words I observe two things.

1. Feasting is lawful; the Apostle finds no fault with the Cheer, but only
with the Guests. 2. Feasting is dangerous, for which I have a double ground: 1.
From the Guests intruding (if not voluntarily entertained) or from their
Deportment, when they were Feasting, (...) sine metu and timore: They neither
feared Gods displeasure, nor cared for his love.
I begin with the first, Feasting is lawful; had I said commendable, the
expression in the Text would have born it out, (...), in the Feasts of Love; in
which you express a love of complacency, which you take in the enjoyment of a
Christian Society; and by which you take opportunity to show your love of Pity
to those that are in want, though absent; both which are Christian Practices,
highly commendable.

I intend not here to prove the Assertion by the Instances of those Religious
Feasts which God commanded; nor shall I need, for there are instances enough
concerning civil Feasting, which though not commanded by God, yet are recorded
amongst other commendable practices of good men in Holy Writ for our imitation,
or at least to secure us, that we shall not offend God, unless it be
accidentally; as we may do in our most Religious Services. Lot Feasted the
Angels; Abraham Feasted at the weaning of his Son Isaac; Genesis 19.3. and 21.8.
and 26.30. 2 Samuel 3.20.
Isaac Feasted Abimelech and others; David Feasted Abner. These were all good
Men, who valued the favor of God above all earthly enjoyments, and were as
ready to Fast, as to Feast, and as willing to be in houses of Mourning, as of
Rejoicing; yet when there was extraordinary occasion of rejoicing, they did no
more omit that, then the other. But why should I mention these instances; our
Savior himself was present at several Feasts; nay, the leading Miracle was at
one of them; at which he did not turn Bread into Stones to dis-appoint them; by
which unlawfulness might have been supposed; but their water into wine, thereby
allowing what they did, and encouraging them in it.

More particularly it appears, that Feasting is lawful.

1. From the bounty of God; from the kindness of whose Providence we furnish
our Tables with plenty of meat and drink, whose are the Cattle upon a thousand
hills, and who gives us our meat and our drink in their season.

1. The bounty of God appears in the abundance of the creatures bestowed on
us, far more, then what are necessary for man's subsistence: Some think that
half the Creatures might be spared, if God (who made nothing in vain) did not
intend man should take delight in the extraordinary use of them: Deus multo
plura condidit, Beza.
quibus carere possumus quam quibus necessario nobis opus est. There are some
of the Creatures might be wholly spared from man's necessity; they being in
their very natures only delightful, and adorning as Oil, to make the Face to
shine, and wine to cheer man's Heart. What needs the Silk Worm spin out its own
bowels, working it self to death; when the Sheep can very well spare its Fleece
from its own back, to make man a covering for his: What need a thousand (that
is an innumerable company of) Hills be covered with Cattle, ready to be driven
down to the Slaughterhouse; when as the Corn and Herbs might preserve the life
of man, (as some think) with a more healthful constistution. Many impute the
long lives of the Fathers before the Flood, to such a kind of diet as one cause
of them. Wine is not necessary, and yet God does not only give it for the use
of man, but gives it in abundance; That as Solomon says, the presses burst
forth with new Wine, Pro. 3.10. It Is very observable, that in the forementioned
place ( Jo. 2) our Savior did not only turn the water into wine, but for the
quality of it, into that which was very good, which they might delight to drink
of: So pleasant it was, that the Ruler of the Feast wished he had had it
sooner; and doubtless, feared that there was but little of it; but he needed
not, for besides the delightfulness of it, as to the quality, there was a very
great quantity, five water-pots containing two or three Firkins a piece. I
might mention to you the abundance of that Provision, Lenten fare, which the
Sea affords; enough for ought I know to Feast all the world: I am sure it could
not but be a very extravagant expression in Moses, and proceeding from his
passion, (as meek as he was) when he said, Shall all the Fish of the Sea be
gathered together to suffice them, Number. 11.22.
although there were six hundred thousand footmen, who might probably be very
hungry Travelers.

To conclude this particular, if the great provider affords such plenty, we may
well think that he intends an extraordinary entertainment; when the great
Housekeeper lays in so much Provision, we may conclude he intends a Feast.

2. Gods bounty does not only appear in the Creature bestowed, but also in the
manner of giving, which is with delight and cheerfulness; God does not only
afford us his creatures, but bids us eat and drink abundantly, how great soever
our entertainment be, we are welcome to it: He gives liberally, and upbraideth
not (...) not telling us of our sin, of what faults we have been guilty, which
would make our meat unpleasant to us: He that did not grudge us the Blood of
his Son, will not grudge us the Fruits of the Earth: He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all. How shall he not with him also freely
give us all things, Romans 8.32. (...), he gives gratis; whatsoever we do cannot
pay God for our meat and drink, though we never Feasted; nor does God expect
any thing as a satisfaction from us; but whatsoever service and obedience we
perform, is requited in another world; we have not only our Corn, but our Money
in our Sacks. I am sure good men have little reason to question this, when they
consider the bounty of God to those that are wicked, because they are his
Creatures, and so of his Household; we are not to imagine that the worst of men
steal their Riches from God, or that their substance is disposed to them by an
unwilling Providence, but from the free pleasure of their Creator, who gives
them Portions in this life, who refuse the inheritance of the Saints in light.
The Earth is given into the hand of the wicked; Job 9.24. And the expression in
the Parable of the rich man, Luke 16. tells us, that he had a lawful propriety
in what he enjoyed; Thou in thy life time had thy good things; God does not
only give but liberally and cheerfully, He is kind to the unthankful, and to
the evil, Luke 6.35.

2. As Feasting appears lawful from the bounty of God, the great Feast hainer;
so likewise from the good that is occasioned by it.

1. It is the occasion of rejoicing; and this is no ways offensive, but
acceptable and pleasing unto God, who has caused all the Creatures to rejoice
in the good which they do receive from him. The Beasts of the field, when they
are afforded fresh Pasture, or any extraordinary Provision, they do some way or
other express that they Feast and are Merry. The pretty Birds have no sooner
filled their Crops, but they sing the several notes which their Creator has
appointed them to tune; we observe some of them rising from their turff (when
filled their bellies but with little stones, or some such contemptible fare)
singing merrily, and soaring higher and higher, as if they were going to thank
their Maker for a Feast. The Earth, when it brings forth its fruit, Sic prata
viderunt, Virgil.
expresses mirth and jollity. The Pastures are not seen in a sable hue or
mourning habit, but appealed with such gorgeous attire, that Solomon in all his
Glory, is not to be compared to one of the flowers of it, Math. 6.29.

The Corn Fields are seen with a merry countenance, when they grow near unto
Harvest; the Harvest men may hold their tongues and mind their work. The Fields
themselves make their own Acclamations, and sing their own Harvest Songs; Psalm.
65.13. Lataseges.
The little Hills rejoice on every side, The Valleys are covered over with
Corn, they shout for joy, they also sing: And if the Servants be so merry when
they bring in the Provision, how may the Master rejoice, for whom it is
provided. God will have man to rejoice in every condition; in his Religious
capacity as a servant to God: The Apostle commands the Philippians to rejoice
in the Lord always, (and then he calls for a second part to the same tune) and
again I say rejoice, Phil 4.4. When we pray unto God, we must not come like
Malefactors before a Judge, but as Children to a Loving Father, who delights to
give whatsoever is good for them; Ask in faith, and come boldly, are
expressions to cheer the heart of man, in this piece of his Religious Service.
In our Meditations it is not pleasing to him, that as sometimes did the
Psalmist, we should think of God and be troubled, but that our Meditation of
him should be sweet, as they were other while to David, who could willingly lie
awake to solace himself with the thoughts of him. In Afflictions God will not
have us dejected, but merry, accounting his rod as well as his staff a comfort;
we may well rejoice if we are accounted worthy to suffer. The adorning of our
houses with the richest furniture, should not be so pleasing, as the spoiling
of our Goods should be rejoyceing; no Music more pleasant in the ears of God,
then to hear the Apostles (those birds of Paradise) singing in their Cages: No
melody on Earth more pleasant to God, then to hear a Saint sing in sufferings,
or glorying in tribulations, Romans 5.3. And if it becomes us to be merry, when
there is seeming cause of sorrow; surely it does not please God that we should
be sorrowful, when we have an apparent cause of rejoicing: If we must be merry
and joyful when we have nothing but the bread of Sorrows, and water of
affliction, we may, and ought to rejoice, when God gives abundance; we may then
eat our bread with a merry heart, and drink our Wine with cheerfulness, as
those in the Book of Ezra, Chap. 6.22. who kept the Feast with joy, because the
Lord had made them joyful.

2. Feasting is lawful, in that it is the occasion of mutual love and
Friendship, which is so acceptable to God, and so beautiful an aspect void of
Spots, that the Scripture it self knows not how to express the splendor of it;
Behold how good and how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together
in unity. The same word which in the singular number signifies Love, Psa.
133.1. (...).
in the plural signifies Feasts; to let us know that we do not meet to eat and
drink, but to express love one to another; or as if meat and drink were mere
intruders, and that Feasting consisted in nothing but the multiplication of
Love. The Penman of the Book of Job, describing his happiness after the large
Inventory of his goods, gives an account of his comfort in his Children, and
that particularly in their mutual love, which was expressed by the brothers
Feasting in each others house, and calling their sisters to eat and to drink
with them: what their meat and drink was, is not set down, nor is there any
reason why it should. It Is enough to say they eat and drink together; and we
may suppose that they Feasted with the mutual love and embraces of brothers and
sisters. When Isaac saw Abimelech, and the two others coming toward him, his
heart began to rise, at the sight of one whom he supposed to have too little
love for him; but after some parley, Isaac makes them a Feast, which proved a
confirmation of the League made between them. Our Feasting is, or should be
some resemblance of future happiness; we all meeting to enjoy good from God,
and to love one another till we come to Feast with our elder brother in his and
our Fathers kingdom, where our Souls shall be filled with the Glory of God, as
our bellies are now with his good Creatures; where we shall drink with him of
that wine of joy, which he promised us: I will not drink of the fruit of the
Vine, till I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, Luke 26.20.

4. Feasting is good, as it gives opportunity for acts of Charity to those that
are in misery. I am a stranger to the manner of proceedings in these Festivals,
having never been either Preacher, hearer, or spectator at of any them: But I
was lately informed, that there has been upon the like occasion, a Collection
for the relief of some distressed Countrymen, a practice very commendable, and
very ancient too; for it was anciently one of the great designs of Christians,
in their Love Feasts: Our Savior observing too great a neglect of this, seems
to command that none but the poor should be invited: When thou make a Dinner
or a Supper, call not thy Friends, Luke 14.13.14.
neither thy Kinsmen, etc. but call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind:
That which is done to our poor brethren, is done to Christ himself: Better not
Feast at all, than that Christ should say, they Feasted, but there was not one
Morsel for me, I was Hungry and you fed me not. 'Twas said of the Jews, Est. 9.
ver. 22. that they observed days wherein they rested from their Enemies, and a
month which was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a
good day, in which they made them days of Feasting and Joy, and of sending
portions one to another, and gifts to the poor. There was a Feast carried on
well, a good occasion which God had given; they rested from their Enemies; good
deportment, they rejoiced, and a good conclusion, they sent gifts to the poor;
they were not so merry, as to forget those that were sad; we may drink and
forget our own poverty and misery, but we must not drink so, as to forget the
miseries of others. 'Twas no small provocation to God, that the Prophet Amos
mentions, Chap. 6. ver. 4.5, 6. where God saw men lie upon Beds of Ivory, and
stretch out themselves upon their Couches, and eat Lambs out of the flock, and
Calves out of the stall. That chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to
themselves instruments of Music. That drink Wine in bowls, and anoint
themselves with chief Ointments, but they are not grieved at the afflictions of
Joseph; And therefore he resolves, ver. 7. that they shall be the first that
go Captive: They think of their Brethren last to help them; God will think of
them first to punish them. Let me conclude this particular, with that good
advice which Nehemiah gave, Chap. 8. ver. 10. Go your way, eat the fat, and
drink the sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is provided. This
may suffice for the Explication of the first particular, the lawfulness of
Feasting; but here it will be requisite, before I pass it, to remove an
Objection or two. Solomon calls mirth madness, and looks upon all the pleasures
we take in the world, to be but vanity: He shuts the door of the house of
Feasting, and opens that of Mourning. In answer to which, we must understand,
that Solomon discovering the vanity of the Creature, does tell us, that it is
madness for us to be merry in the enjoyment of such a shadow: But so far as
Feasting gives us opportunity to bless God, and to enjoy the society of each
other, Solomon speaks not against it, if he did, we might confute him in his
own Banqueting House; where we have him Feasting many days together, (1 Kings
8.65.) And many expressions in the same Book would contradict each other, Ecc.
2. ver. 24. There is nothing better than for a man to eat and drink, and enjoy
good in his labor. But it may rather be objected, that our Savior in the
forementioned place, Luke 14.12, 13. does strictly forbid the Feasting of
Friends and Relations when thou make a dinner or a supper; call not thy
Friends, neither thy Kinsmen, nor thy rich Neighbors, lest they also bid thee
again, and a recompense be made thee. But when thou make a Feast call the
poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, etc. In answer to which, by comparing
Scripture with Scripture, we shall find, that (not) is not always an absolute
negative, but to be understood in a comparative sense; Non simpliciter sed
secundum quid, I came not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel, i. e. Rather to
Preach the Gospel then to Baptize; we must not think that Christianity does in
the least clash with Humanity: Qui putant hic simpliciter damnari convivia
partem humanitatis tollunt ab hominibus: hoc magis absurdum esset quam austerum
cognatos a mensa hospitali excludere, and solummodo extraneis dare locum; sed
ita ut pauperes non negligas. We find our Savior at several Feasts, where
probably there were rich men entertained, in that of John 2. where Christ found
wine. I cannot think that at the Marriage of a Rulers Daughter, there should be
none but poor, and lame, and blind to attend the Bride and Bridegroom; nor is
it probable that such would strive for Superiority; and so we should suppose
the former advice to be in vain; so that the assertion remains undeniable, that
Feasting is lawful. I dare not insist upon those inferences which might be
made, by which the covetous worldling might be reproved, who is so far from
Feasting others, that he starves himself. And likewise the Austere Lives of the
Popish Votaries, who deny themselves the lawful use of Gods Creatures, which he
has given on purpose to be received with Thanksgiving.

But I shall not proceed any farther in this, knowing well that our corrupt
natures have more need of a curb of restraint, than rains of liberty. I hope,
when you were pleased to invite me to this service, you did not expect that I
should strain the sense of Scripture, to the gratifying of a luxurious
appetite; that I should be a Prophet of smooth things, and deceits; or that I
should invite, or encourage any to your Feast, by Prophesying of Wine, and
strong drink, Mic. 2.11. But that I should be your Monitor, a Prophet to warn
you from God, for the prevention of those exorbitancies, whereof we are too apt
at such a time to be guilty. That you desire to imitate the Religious Customs
in former times, 1 Kings 8. When the Priests took up the Ark before the
Congregation, whilst the Feast was preparing; or that the example of the Wise
man might be our president, who first prayed with great devotion, like a Pious
Priest, before he Feasted with great preparations, like a Munificent Prince; or
that I should write after Nehemiahs copy, who devoutly read the Law of his God,
on the day of his Feasting, Neh. 8.18. Give me leave therefore to speak to the
second Observation, viz. Feasting is dangerous; it must not be without fear:
The company of our Friends and Countrymen, must not cause us to forget that we
are in the presence of God. This needs not damp our mirth in the least; the
child may be merry in its fathers company; we may rejoice, though it be with
trembling, Psalm. 2.11. or as the Common Prayer Translation, Rejoice unto him
with reverence: The Courtier is merry in the presence of his Prince; and
because he is so, though he forgets not a due reverence: It is not said that
ever Job was jealous that his Sons had sinned, but when they were Feasting. It
was at a Feast that Christ was lost, and at another that he was betrayed.

1. Particularly, Feasting is dangerous, yea very offensive, if it be at an
unseasonable time, that is, when Gods Judgments are in the Land: The Prophet
Isaiah speaks of it, as an affront offered to the great and angry God, Isa.
22.12. In that day did the Lord call to weeping, and to mourning, and to
baldness, and to girding with sackcloth. And behold joy and gladness, slaying
of Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating Flesh, and drinking Wine, etc. Such an
affront, as he resolves, shall not on a sudden be forgotten by him. That
Feasting should cost dear indeed, their iniquity shall not be purged away till
they dye. If there were now Wars in the Land, we should not then be filling of
our bellies; but complaining of our bowels, not merry, but pained at the heart;
as the Prophet Jeremiah was, because he heard the sound of the Trumpet, and the
Alarm of War, Jer. 4.19. If there were a Famine in the Land, it were most
unchristian and unnatural for us to be Feasting, when many thousands are
starving: to be faring Sumptuously and Deliciously, when many a poor Lazarus
would be glad to cheat the dog of his crumbs. If a devouring Plague were raging,
it were a dreadful thing for us to be slaying Oxen, when God is killing men; to
be carving our fine dishes, when God is tearing in pieces, and none to deliver;
to invent Instruments of Music, when we should be continually thinking, that
we hear the doleful noise of deathbed groans in every house excepting, (where
they are all dead) If this great City were on Fire, it were horrid wickedness
for us to be merry; when so many, on a sudden, are exposed to the cruelty of
such an irresistible enemy: for us to be drinking Wine, when there were more
need that our heads should be as waters, and our eyes a fountain of tears to
quench such a devouring flame; or if it lay still in its ruins, it would not
then be seemly to be walking (through that which was once a City) in our ranks,
to the house of Feasting; but at the first sight of such an amazing heap, to
fall down on our faces, and be covered with ashes, to bear it company. But
thanks be to God the case is not so with us, we have here no rumors of Wars,
but are Feasting, because God has given us rest from our Enemies. There is no
Famine in the Land (unless it be of thankfulness to God for his abounding
blessings) There is no complaining in our streets, unless it be by some
unthankful monsters of an inopem copia; that plenty makes us poor; we are not
sending our Sacks into another Country to fetch Corn; but could afford great
quantities to them that want it; we are not buyers, but sellers; we are
Feasting in a City, which has no cause to complain, either of Wars or Famine,
but to rejoice and be thankful that Reace is within her Walls, and
plenteousness in her Palaces. Nor is there now a raging Plague, but the
continuance of health to admiration. The City so replenished, that the streets
complain not for want of passers by; we have not now a destroying Angel, but a
preserving God. Nor is the City flaming, or in its heap of ruins, but rebuilt
to the admiration of all Spectators; yea, more then built, in some sense, if
the computation of those fail not, who think that the cost already bestowed,
would more then have finished it as it was. How goodly are the new Fabrics!
methinks every House calls to the Passenger for admiration, to behold how it
stands upright, like a Giant in Armor of Proof, to defend it self against the
rage of such an insulting enemy. It is said in the Book of Ezra, that at the
re-building of the Temple, the old Priests and Levites (who had seen the
former) wept, to see a narrower foundation laid, then was before, I may say by
the rule of contraries, that had they seen a probability of a more magnificent
Structure, they would have shouted as loud for Joy, as they Wept. This is our
case, we do not find now that the City is become like a Village, known by a few
scattering Cottages; but the rebuilt habitations seem to contemn those as vile,
and inconsiderable, that remain as they were. In which respect, I hope, we are
not guilty of unseasonable Feasting: I know the Nation is not without great
complaints, and many do yet feel the smart of the forementioned judgments; but
God having removed them from us, one day of rejoicing, I hope, will not be
offensive; unless we make it so by those extravagancies, which men are too
often guilty of at such a time; and this brings me to the second.

2. Feasting is dangerous, in that we are at such a time apt to exceed the
bounds of Sobriety and moderation: Gluttony and drunkenness are the usual
concomitants of Feasting; These are spots indeed, great blemishes, for they
make men look like Beasts; the same word, which signifies spots, signifies, (as
before I observed) Rocks in the Sea, because they are the receptacle of that
mire and dirt, which a troubled Sea casts up; but to the glutton and drunkard,
they may be called Rocks in another sense, in that they split their souls and
bodies against them.

1. Gluttony, a most unbecoming and beastly vice, when men meet together for
nothing but to eat; I should not have said to eat, but to devour: if the end of
Feasting, be Christian Society, such as these may well be spared, as very
unpleasant, and unsavory company, who are like those in Tertullian, Tribubus
ructantibus acessit aer, They crowd so great a quantity of the good creatures
into their devouring paunches, that the filthy belchings of their foul stomachs
annoys the Air, in which more temperate men are only fit to breath. These
persons, may be, would thank God for their Feast, but that they have eaten till
they have forgotten him; or rather, they have chosen another God, and that
their Bellies; however unfit they are for God, I am sure they are fit for the
Devil, and the service of their Lusts; like those in the Prophecy of Jeremiah,
Chap. 5. ver. 7. for whom God made a Feast; I fed them to the full; and observe
what a Metamorphosis the gluttony of the guess made, they sat down men, and
they rose up horses, v. 8. they were fed horses, everyone neighed after his
neighbors wife. The truth is, the excess of meat and drink gives too much
opportunity to men to gluttonize. There is a strange difference between the
Feasting now, and what was in old time: Feasting was formerly called only the
eating of bread: When Lot Feasted the Angels, he gave them unleavened bread, or
some say, Placentas, Cakes made a little finer, Pisc.
and more pleasant then ordinary; such entertainment might be thought very
mean, for those that came to preserve him and his family; but there was no
fault found with it.

In the 2 Samuel 6.19. It is reckoned amongst the magnificent acts of David, that
he feasted the people, and what was their entertainment; a Cake of bread, a
good piece of flesh, and a Flagon of Wine: Josephus says, he gave to every one
a morsel of roasted meat, Jos. Ant.
and a Cake fried in the pan: It was nothing in comparison of our Feasting; and
yet we find not but that the people departed very well satisfied; less meat,
and drink, and more thankfulness to God, and love amongst men, would be the
best Feasting.

2. Drunkenness is another, and a more abominable vice than the former, in that
it more readily deprives man both of his God, his brethren, and himself; and
yet some, Nabal like, cannot be merry, unless they be drunken: Feasting and
drunkenness were together; and drunkenness given as a reason of his mirth: He
held a Feast in his house, like the Feast of a King; and Nabals heart was merry
within him, for he was very drunken, 1 Samuel 25.36. And when he had done
Feasting, and being drunken, God took away, not the cloth, but the man: Nabal
that Feasts like a Prince, and was drunk as a Beggar.

This is the Emperor to which great men give place, and it strangely
tyranizeth over them, insomuch, that if I did not know my duty better,
(considering what an offense it is to the great God) I would ask you whether I
might be so bold as to speak against it: It Is a vice accompanied with so much
impudency, that there is nothing is the occasion of more mirth, or renders a
Preacher so ridiculous, as that he should tell a Christian it is not fit he
should be a Beast.

It Is a vice strangely Epidemical, and so interwoven with the common concerns
of men; as if the trade of the Nation could not be carried on without it; no
agreement made, but the parties must drink, and oftentimes in such excess, as
if to be drunk were part of the bargain: Or as if there were some Statute in
the Nation, that no bargain should be good in Law, unless the Devil were a
witness to it. However men please and delight themselves in this vice, I am
sure the consequences of it are very sad. As to God, his holy name (who
furnishes our Tables) is rent, and torn by blasphemous oaths and cursings;
they are worse to him, than the Angel was to the Devil ( ver. 9. of this
Epistle) who would not give ill words, railing accusations. And as to men I may
say (respecting general concerns) it is the destruction of whole Families. That
Country to which we belong, does too apparently prove the truth of this; a
Country which has been a long time adorned with a crowd of ancient Gentry;
persons of rare parts and accomplishments; that are able to give a reason
almost for any thing, but their extravagancies, by which some of them have
turned their bags into bottles; their money into wine; and I am sure that is the
way (contrary to our Saviors miracle) to turn their wine into water. What a
sad condition does this vice leave them in, their friend that honored them,
may make the Prophets Lamentation, they that did feed delicately are desolate,
and they that were clothed in Scarlet, lie upon the Dunghill; If the vice
destroys the body of that person, as well as his estate (which too often
happens) what a solitary Widow is there left? one whose Birth, Education, and
Fortunes, little thought of such a Devil in the world as Drunkenness, that has
robbed her, and her Children, not only of a plentiful estate, but a necessary
subsistence: She may now sit solitarily in her closet, and fill those bottles
with Tears, which her Husband (tumbled into his Grave by Drunkenness) lately
emptied of Wine. What becomes of the poor Children? they that were called
Masters as soon as they were born, must make have, and learn to be Servants
till they dye; or else they may want Bread; or have very little to eat, because
their Father had so much to drink. And this is the commendable vice that must
not be found fault with; if we consider likewise the ill consequence of it in
the time of Feasting; what an uproar it makes amongst sober persons; it does no
sooner prevail, but is a disturbance, as if the house were on fire. In the
midst of innocent mirth, the Devil commands his Trumpeter to sound a challenge,
Bacchus ad arma vocat, (and unless some more sober person can tame the beast,
and persuade him to be more civil to others, than he is to himself) instead of
meeting like Brethren, Countrymen, and Christians; with unfolded arms to
embrace each other; we had need, like the Saxons, meet in our Armor; instead
of being merry and cheerful in the house of Feasting, we must be like Paul at
Ephesus, fighting with Beasts. The Love Feasts were usually observed by
Christians, as a Preparatory to the Blessed Sacrament, some say in imitation of
Heathens, who used to Feast before their Sacrifices; others because Christ
instituted it after Supper: However, if the vice of gluttony or drunkenness
prevail; what a sad Christian Love-Feast is that, which is so far from
preparing us for the Lords Table, that it has made our own to become a Table
of Devils?

3. Feasting is dangerous, as it too much occasions us to forget our Duties to
God; Moses seemed to be more afraid of this, than ever he was of any thing,
Deuteronomy. 8.10.11. When thou have eaten and art full, then thou shall bless the
Lord thy God, and ver. 11. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God: It Is a
strange thing that empty bellies should know how to beg; and full bellies
should not know how to thank; That scarcity should make them lie howling upon
their beds for Corn; and when they have eaten, and are full, that plenty should
not make them rise up to return thanks. In the Prophecy of Jeremiah, c. 5. v.
7.8. God was never more abused, than when he least deserved it; had he pulled
the meat out of their mouths, they could not have been more base, than when he
fed them to the full: They then committed Adultery, which so provoked God, that
he seems to be at a loss for a punishment suitable to their wickedness; Shall I
not visit for these things? Questions in Scripture, are always of extraordinary
importance: This may be considered, either as an appeal to man's judgment; who
can blame my wrath if it breaks forth against those that abuse my love? or else
it denotes Great displeasure; Shall I not visit; whatever offense I leave
unpunished, this ingratitude shall not escape my indignation. And thus I have
done with the Second Particular, the Danger of Feasting: I hope you will
consider what I have said, that the first may make us merry in the house of
Feasting; and the second may keep us from Spots, in this our Feast of Charity.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. in the Margin, read (...), and for Arist. r. Aret. p. 4. line 15.1.
(...). p. 9. l. 18. r. (...), p. 12. l. 6. for appealed r. apparrelled, p. 15.
for drink, r. drank, p. 30. read. viz. Nabal that Feasted, etc. p. 28. r.
acessit.

FINIS.

