SOME ADDITIONAL REMARKS ON THE LATE BOOK Of the REVEREND DEAN of St. PAVLS.

By a Conformable Clergyman.

Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand,

Phil. 4.4. But if you bite and devour each other, take heed that ye be not
consumed of one another,

Gal. 5.15. LONDON: Printed for Nathaniel Ranew, at the Kings Arms in St.
Pauls-Church-Yard. 1681.

Some Additional Remarques on the late Book of the Reverend Dean of St. PAUL'S,
etc.
SIR!
I Have read the Reflections on the Preface to Dr. Stilling-fleet's late Book.
You have imposed another task on me, and that is, to make some Remarques also
on the Book it self.

The Learned Doctor had said in his Sermon, that he dared to say, That if most
of the Preachers at this day in the separate Congregations, were soberly asked
their judgments, Whether it were lawful for the people to join with them in the
public Assemblies, they would not deny it. This Mr. Alsop says he believes
they would flatly deny, and speaks it with confidence. To which the Dr. replies.

I think no man doubts of his confidence that ever looked into his book: but in
this matter he is so brisk, that he says, he does not question that he should
carry it by the poll; and is withal so indiscreet, as on this occasion to
triumph in the poll of Nonconformists at Guildhall, as though all that gave
their votes there, had owned these principles of separation; for which many of
those Gentlemen will give him little thanks; and is a very unreasonable
boasting of their numbers. Page 107.

This I think is one of the wildest conclusions that ever was inferred from any
assertion. The Dr. had said, that he dared to affirm, that most Nonconformist
Ministers would acknowledge (if they were asked) the lawfulness of peoples
joining in public Assemblies. Mr. A. is of another opinion, and believes they
( i.e. the Nonconforming Ministers) would flatly deny it; and says he, Let
these men be brought to the poll, I question not they will carry it; and I
suppose that though the Dr. preached in the Chapel, he never took the poll of
the Nonconformists ( i.e. the Preachers, in Guildhall) The meaning of all which
is plainly no more but this: Mr. A. believes that more of the Nonconforming
Ministers would deny, than affirm the lawfulness of joining in Parochial
Churches; and that if they were numbered, those that are for the negative would
carry it. And to rebate the Drs. confidence of the affirmative, he adds, that
though he preached in the Chapel, yet he never took the poll of the
Nonconformists in the Hall, and therefore may be out and mistaken concerning
them.

How can the Dr. infer from hence, that Mr. A. does indiscreetly triumph in the
number of Noncon's in general, when he spoke only of their Preachers? How can
he infer that Mr. A. would suggest that all that gave their votes there, did
own the principles of separation, when he spoke not one word concerning them?
Some men may want persons to libel and expose; but at this rate 'twill be hard
to want pretenses and occasions for it; and the Dr. deserves as little thanks
for traducing Mr. A. as he would have deserved if he had reported the Gentlemen
that gave their Votes at Guildhall, as friends to the principles of separation.

P. 114. The Dr. having discoursed the inconvenience of Separation upon a
conceit of purer administrations, and less defective ways of worship; and
represented the ignorance, pride, injudiciousness, and conceitedness of the
ordinary sort of zealous professors, and the ungovernable and factious humor of
that sort of people, and the pernicious consequence of complying with them in
the words of Mr. B. he enquires, And must the reins be laid on their necks,
that they may run whither they please, because for sooth they know what is good
for their souls better than the King does; and they love their souls better
than the King does; and the King cannot bind them to hurt, famish, or endanger
their souls?

To the Drs. question I shall reply, by asking another: Must the people be tied
neck and heels together, because they are proud, ignorant, and injudicious, or
because they are inclinable to faction, and ungovernable? Is there no medium
betwixt laying the reins upon the neck, and tying that and their heels
together? Betwixt permitting them a boundless liberty, and giving them none at
all? Surely methinks 'twere not difficult to see an intermediate space between
extremes so vastly distant from each other.

And let me add, Do not the people know what Preaching and Preachers do them
most good? what convinces their judgments, bows their wills, enlivens their
affections, and creates upon their souls the clearest and most passionate
resolutions for the service of God and their own salvation? If they do not know
these things, they are not men, but brutes. Do not men know which meat and
drink does best strengthen and nourish, and is least offensive to their
stomachs and digestive faculties? This I think will be granted: and may they
not know what sort of preaching does best edify and build them in spiritual
strength and stature? And is it any dishonor to the King, that the people know
these things better than he does? Or does that person lay blame upon the King,
that should affirm it? And yet this is that which the Doctor seems to
insinuate, for he enquires, Why must the King bear all the blame, if men's souls
be not provided for according to their wishes? that is, if they have not such
preaching and preachers as they would have.

But though the King be not to be blamed, that men's souls be no better provided
for, there be men in the world that are to be blamed for it, and who they are,
let the Doctor conjecture. There are Preachers in this Church that have the
cure of Souls, to whom an honest Country Farmer would scarce commit the care of
his Cows. It Is an expression of Causinus. And who gave these persons admission
into the sacred Office, every one knows.

But the Dr. proceeds, Does the King do any thing in this matter, but according
to the established Law and Orders of this Church? why did he not keep to the
good old Phrase of King and Parliament?

This is raking into old fores, and looks like a malicious insinuation, and a
design of representing Mr. B. as il-loyal, which to speak softly, becomes not
the charity and candor of the Doctor. But what if he had kept that good old
Phrase, as he pleases to call it, he had done no more than the Doctor himself
does in sense, in the lines preceding, for he says, the King does nothing but
by established Laws, and Laws are the Acts of King and Parliament.

But the Doctor goes on, And why did he ( i. e. Mr. B.) not put it as it ought
to have been, that they know what makes for their own edification, better than
the wisdom of the whole Nation, assembled in Parliament (i. e. according to the
good old Phrase, the King and Parliament,) and the Governors of this Church.

This argument were good, if the wisdom of the Nation were infallible, or it
were impossible they could be mistaken; but till that be proved, I feel not the
weight of it. It Is the Popish argument, the Doctor knows, and was pressed
against the Reformation by the Romanists. I venerate authority, and am not
willing to suspect the wisdom of it; but I must openly profess, than I am much
more moved by the proofs that they make of the wisdom of their Determitions,
than by their bare Authoritative Assertions. I value the ancient Fathers and
Councils, but it is not for what they say, but for what they prove: And the like
I do say of more modern Determinations; and he is a stranger in History as well
as Experience, that does not observe, that many Laws and Constitutions are more
the effects of Interest, Pride, Passion, and Revenge, than of Wisdom, Justice
and Righteousness. The Determinations and Constitutions of the Council of
Trent, are a sufficient proof hereof, and I wish the same might not be too
truly said of some of the more ancient and venarable Councils, yea, and of some
Laws that are of much later date than the latest of them.

Page the ^ 19th the Doctor quotes these words of Mr. B. in his Answer to his
Sermon, How often have I told you (says Mr. B.) that I distinguish and take
those for true Churches that have true Pastors; but I take those for no true
Churches that have (1.) Men incapable of the Pastoral Office. (2.) Or not truly
called. (3.) Or that deny themselves to have the power essential to a Pastor.
For (says the Dr.) one or other of these, he thinks most, if not all the
Parochial Churches in England, fall under, and consequently that the people may
separate from them. That Mr. B. does think so, he endeavors to prove, because
if the people judge their Ministers unworthy or incompetent, he allows them
liberty to withdraw and separate.

It Is a hard case, if people that have an ignorant, drunken, and malignant,
sapless Teacher, may not go to the next Congregation, yea or to a Nonconformist
that is a man of better abilities, and a better conversation, without being
reputed Schismatics; and methinks no man of p^ety, and that knows how much
men's graces and virtues are actuated by serious, lively, and vigorous
preaching, and how they languish and dwindle under that which is dry, trifling,
lukewarm and unserious should doubt of it.

But sai h the Dr. p. 1*2. God (says Mr. B.) in nature and Scriptu e has
given the people that consenting power, antecedent to the Prince's, which none
can take from them.

I cannot tell how to believe that God has given any Prince or Governor of
Churches a greater power over their people than Parents have over their
children in the choice of Employments, or disposals in Marriage. A Father may
propose an Employment or Match to his Son or Daughter, but he may not impose
them against their own consent, as is generally acknowledged. Again, if in such
cases they choose amiss, and to their apparent danger, they may for bid them;
and thus much Magistrates may and ought to do; but whether they may impose
against the consent of the people, seems to me not so clear as some men
imagine. And this is all that Mr. B. desires, which might be granted, and the
right of Patrons preserved too, for ought that I can see.

But the Dr. adds, ibid. Mr. B. makes the people judge of the worthiness and
competency of their Ministers, in case incompetent Ministers be set over the
people, though it be half the Parishes in a Kingdom, or only the tenth part, it
is no Schism, says he, but a duty, for those that are destitute, to choose
those that they judge most competent; and it is a duty for faithful Ministers,
though forbidden by Superiors, to perform their Office to such people that
desire it.

Let me beg leave to ask the Reverend Dr. whether there can be such a thing as
an incompetent Pastor set over a people? If he grants it, as sure he cannot
deny it, I would ask him again, what the people must do in such a case? if he
says, they must complain, and use regular ways for his removal; I would again
enquire, what if they be poor, and not able to bear the charge of such a
proceeding? or if after all endeavors, they cannot remove him (and I will
assure him, it is no easy matter to remove an incompetent Pastor) what must
they do? must they starve at home, or be treated as Separatists, if they go
abroad to hear a Dissenter that Preaches in the Neighborhood? If it be said,
that the people are no capable judges of a Ministers abilities; and so the Dr.
intimates in several places of his Book (page 123, 124. and passim). I answer,
the Learned Dr. allows Separation, and thinks it duty too in certain cases,
viz. 1. In case of Idolatrous worship. 2. In case of false Doctrine, imposed
instead of true. And 3. In case things indifferent be made necessary to
salvation, page 213.214.

I desire to learn from this worthy Dr. whether the people in these cases are
bound to separate? or whether the obligation lies only on the Pastors? if it
lies on both (and on both it must lie, or else the people are bound to be
damned) then the people must judge, and if they may judge in these cases, I know
not why they may not make a judgment of the competency of their Ministers. He
is an incompetent Pastor that Preaches false Doctrine or Heresy, that commends
and practices Idolatry, and makes things indifferent necessary to salvation;
and in these the people may judge by the Doctors own confession; and if they may
judge in these, they may judge in some other cases, for ought that I can perceive.

In the mean time I am not about to deny that the people, at least of them, are
ignorant injudicious, and rash; and do many times censure and condemn the
innocent and worthy. All that I design is to make it a little evident, that
there is a mean betwixt the two extremes, and that should be enquired after.
The people are neither the wisest among men, nor are they a herd of beasts. In
some things they may and must judge, in others it may be denied them.

But the Dr. proceeds (p. 123.) and says, Mr. B. bids the people not think that
he is persuading them to make no difference, but after he has set aside the
utterly insufficient and heretical (of which the people are admirable Judges)
he lays down this general rule, Any one whose Ministry is such as tends more
to destruction than edification, is not to be owned, and consequently to be
separated from.

And in good earnest, is no difference to be made of Ministers? then farewell
all lawful as well as unlawful Separation. The people are not Judges of
Insufficiency or Heresy, and therefore must swallow all that they propound,
and go along with their Pastors to the Devil; and though they preach more for
the encouragement of sin and vice, than they do for godliness and virtue, yet
the people must not separate from them. This, to speak modestly, is something
crudely spoken, and not with that usual judgment and caution as the Dr.
expresses (or should express) his sentiments.

But the Dr. says, this is directly contrary to the principles of the old
Nonconformists, and even to Mr. B. himself: for as a Casuist (says he, p. 124.)
he thus determines, 1. That a Ministers personal faults do not allow people to
separate from the Worship of God. 2. Nor ull Ministerial faults, but only those
that prove him or his Ministration utterly intolerable.

Well, and where is the inconsistency of this determination with what the Dr.
quoted from him in the page before? Did he there say that every personal or
Ministerial fault would justify Separation? I can find no such thing, he only
mentions the utterly insufficient and heritical, such as do more hurt than
good; and I think these are the same with such as prove Ministers, and their
Ministration utterly intolerable. But by this, and many other passages in this
Book, a man would be tempted to think, that some others write in haste, and
without the advice of their friends, as well as Mr. B.

Page 130. The Dr. says, that Mr. B. makes Conformity it self a scandalous
thing, and then tells the people over and over, it is no sin to separate from
scandalous Priests, especially when the scandal is notorious, as it is in this
case. And Page 131. the Dr. adds, He charge us with downright Lying, and
Perjury, and tells me of Thirty tremendous aggravations of the sin of
Conformity, among which are Lying, and Perjury, and drawing on our selves the
guilt of many thousand Perjuries.

To this I answer in Mr. B's own words of his first Plea in the Preface, I
write not this (says he) as accusing Conformists, or the Lawmakers, but as
answering their long and loud accusations and demands; and if telling what I
fear, seem a telling what others are guilty of, it is a consequent which I
cannot avoid. In his second Plea, having asserted the moral impossibility of
bringing all good Christians to believe Conformity lawful, he gives many
reasons for it, and among others this, because Conformity looks like a horrid
and frightful evil, being no less than deliberate Lying, and Perjury, and the
justifying of thousands in it, and the public renouncing endeavors of
Reformation. And then he adds, I am not saying, that all these, or any of them
are such as they fear them to be, but only, that they fear them to be such,
page 173. And in his Answer to the Drs. Sermon, these are his words, I have
only told you how many, and heinous the sins are which we fear we should be
guilty of, should we Conform, page 52. Hence it is obvious enough by Mr. B's.
words, that he accuses not others, but vindicates himself and his brethren from
the imputation of keeping up a Schism against their own consciences; and in
that very Chapter, where he reckons up the several agravations of Perjury and
Lying, he does not determine, that the Conformable Clergy are guilty of them,
but says, If they be so, such are the aggravations of their sin.

Now, I pray, let it be impartially considered, whether Mr B. has not a
difficult province to manage. If he gives no reason or account of his own, and
his brethrens Nonconformity, he and they are unconscionable Schismatics; if he
do give some reason for it, and account of it, then he is interpreted to accuse
the Conformists, and repute them scandalous, and persuade the people to
Separation, though he renounced all such accusations, as is obvious from his
words beforementioned.

Yet after all this I have said on the behalf of this reverend man, I must add
(for I am my self a Conformist) that I am not of his opinion in the
interpretation of the Subscriptions, and Declarations imposed on the Clergy.
They are of ambiguous sense and meaning; for what the sense of the Law makers
and Imposers is, who can be sure? I cannot tell; and if you enquire, some will
utterly refuse to give any sense or meaning of them; others will expound them,
some in one sense, and some in another. The case being thus, I do not think my
self obliged to understand them in the worst sense that can be put opon them,
but in a sense of favor: and such a sense (Mr. B. says) is by the most
judicious Conformists put on them, that he and his brethren themselves would
submit to them, if they could believe that were indeed the meaning of them. I
am not satisfied as yet, that I am obliged to understand them in any other;
which I speak in vindicatinn of my own and my brethrens Conformity, without
reflection on those of other apprehensions, or justifying the Impositions. And
upon this score there is a Paper Printed the last year as an account of the
London Sheriffs holding their Office, Which, if any man does honestly fear God,
so as he would in good earnest Conform if he could, but cannot in point of
scruple, I would commend to his perusal: who may perhaps see more to satisfy
him in that one (but very full, and very much considered) single sheet, in
regard to our present Conformity, than he has found hitherto in other Books
upon that Subject, though there be many which are, or which would make Volumes,
that are written.

In Page 132. the Dr. charges Mr. B. with saying, that he overthrows all
Religion, and sets up man in rebellion against God. To which I answer, all that
Mr. B. intends in those words, is no more but thus, Such is the consequence of
the Drs. Doctrine. Whether it be rightly inferred, let the Dr. and Mr. B.
determine. But this I am sure of, that the Dr. infers many things from Mr. b's.
Doctrine, which he detests and abhors, as truly as himself abhors the setting
up man above God. Such are all Principles inconsistent with Government, and all
Pleas which lay the foundation for disorder and confusion, whatsoever he says,
page 137. and 139.

The Dr. had said in the Preface to his Sermon, If it be lawful to separate on
the pretense of greater purity, where there is an agreement in Doctrine, and
the substantial parts of Worship, as is acknowledged in our case, then a bare
difference of opinion, as to some circumstances of Worship, in the best
Constitution of Churches, will be ground sufficient for Separation; and this,
considering the variety of men's fancies, is to make an infinite divisibility in
Churches. To which Mr. A. makes this reply, That though some petty and
inconsidrrable inconveniences, some litlte trouble, may arise to a Church from
the levity and volubility of men's minds, yet this is no reason why they should
enslave their judgments and consciences to others. So the Dr. quotes him, but
he expresses himself more at large, and with words of greater weight, as may be
seen in his Preface.

From these words of Mr. A. the Dr. takes occasion to enquire, what a rare
advocate had this man been for the Novatians, Donatists, Luciferians, or
whatsoever Schismatics rent the Church in pieces in former times. And
supposing St. Cyprian, and St. Austin, and other great opposers of the ancient
Schisms, to be met together: he gathers from these words, and the Principles of
Separation, that he lays down elsewhere in his Books, how he would accost them.
Page 198, Then forms an elegant Oration for him, supposing him haranguing it
before them. Page 198, 199. And page 200. these expressions he puts in his
mouth. Why do you Austin and Cyprian, and other Reverend Fathers, cry out so
often of the Sacrilegiousness of Schism? We know no other Sacriledg, but the
Sacrilegious desertion of our Ministry in obedience to the Laws; this is a
Sacriledg we often talk of, and tell the people it is far worse than robbing
Church-plate, considering what precious gifts we have.

These last words are, I am afraid, a profane jeer, and look more like words
dropped from the pen of Ben. Johnson, or Fletcher, than that of Dr. St. Has not
God endued Mr. B. (for it is on him he reflects) and other Nonconformists, with
precious gifts (for it is a Scripture-word, and I Will make bold to use it, though
I be thought to cant)? and can the Dr. deny it? or does it become his gravity
to deride them? If he must use his Sarcastick faculty, I wish he would choose
some common objects to employ it on, and not on things that are sacred and
divine; for such are the gifts wherewith Mr. B. and others of his Brethren are
blessed of God; and I believe the Dr. in his conscience cannot deny it, however
he takes liberty to deride them.

And when, I pray, and where did Mr. B. or any of his brethren say, they knew
no Sacriledg but that of the Sacrilegious desertion of their Ministry? Let this
be proved, or else it must be reputed a defamation. But peradventure the Dr.
will say, That when men play the Orator, they are not obliged to speak exact
truth; but where will he find any thing in Scripture to patroniz^ it? He
endeavors to justify an ugly sarcasm that he made use of in his S^rmon, by
these words of our Savior, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance; but I am not very certain they will serve his purpose; for some men
that the Dr. values, as well as some that he despises, give another
interpretation of them, as he very well knows; but where he will find any to
justify this Catechrestical scoff, I cannot tell: but may be he may find, or
make one do it.

But why does the Dr. add, in obedience to the Laws? Do all Laws oblige so far,
as for Ministers upon that account to desert their Office? If so, then may not
only the three children go to the fiery Furnace, and Daniel to the Lions, but
all Protestant Preachers to the flames, if they continue to exercise their
Ministry against the prohibition of Popish Laws? If not, then it is not Laws,
but the equity and justice of Laws, that lays an obligation on them; and that
is the controversy between him and his Nonconformable Brethren, in which I
will not interpose. But this is not the only place where the weight of the Drs.
Arguments is little for want of distinction, restriction, and limitation. And
this is an infirmity and weakness of discourse, that runs through a great part
of his Book, and which renders it invalid to his Adversaries, and especially
Mr. B.

But the Dr. enquires, Whether it be not a sin to break the Churches Communion?
p. 198. To which I answer, Yes doubtless, all unnecessary Separation is a sin,
and such I do esteem much of the present Separation in England. But what then?
Are all that are Schismatical, unworthy to live upon the earth? Must they be
prosecuted by Laws to Imprisonment, Banishment, and Death? Is there no way of
curing a wound in the arm or leg, but by amputation? Are not Drunkenness,
Adultery, Lying, and Swearing, sins? Yes surely, 'twill not be denied. But must
all these Criminals be injured, proscribed and sent to the Indies? This would
be thought unreasonable. And why persons of some Schismatical Principles
(provided the main of their doctrine be sound, and consistent with
Christianity) may not have as much favor as drunkards and other immoral men, I
know not.

But are there no other ways of reforming the Schismatical bumors of men, but
Gaols and Confiscations, and other like Arguments? Are there no methods of
reclaiming Schismatics, but by Rods and Axes? Are not personal instructions
and kindness more agreeable to the nature of the Pastoral Office, and the
spirit of our Savior, whose servants we are, and whose work we are to do in
the world? Methinks no man that has read the New Testament, should doubt of
it; and I do confess that I hate these Military methods of converting
Dissenters, and I never saw any good come of them.

I live in a Town where there are some Dissenters; I have always treated them
with kindness, and have avoided to exasperate them either in my public or
private discourses; and by this means they will come sometimes to hear me, and
will grant me to be a Minister of Jesus Christ; whereas had I railed at them,
or prosecuted them at Law, or encouraged others to do it, they would never have
come at me, but accounted me a Limb of Antichrist, and a Factor or Agent for
the Devil. And I must and do openly avow, that it is more easy to my mind to
think, that when they are absent from my Congregation, they are serving God
elsewhere, than it would be to think they were some of them in prisons, their
Families wanting bread, and others crying to God for vengeance on me as a
persecutor; and which is most easy to my mind living, I doubt not will be so
dying. They are persons of holy lives and upright conversations, at least some
of them; and I would not have a hand in persecuting and undoing them, for all
the Preferments this Church or this World affords.

Let me add thus much on the behalf of Mr. A. I do not believe that he either
desires or pleads for universal Toleration, or would defend all the ancient
Schismatics, or that he would open his mouth on the behalf of Socinians,
Arrians, Anti-Trinitarians, Quakers, or other like Sectarian Infidels: all that
he pleads for, is liberty for peaceable and Christian Dissenters; but I do
think that the Reverend Dr. has wrung from his words such a sense as he never
intended, or did once enter into his thoughts.

Page 273. The Dr. says, I do not see but the objections made against the
Discipline of this Church, might be removed, if the things allowed and required
by the Rules thereof (that is, Confirmation of children by the Bishop, when
they are able to give an account of the necessary points of Christian faith and
practice, and Certificate be made thereof by the Minister of the Parish) were
duly practiced, and might attain to as great purity as is ever pretended to by
the separate Congregations, who now find so much fault for our want of
discipline.

I wish with all my heart the Rules of the Church were reduced to practice,
which I am sure they never can nor will be, whilst the Diocesses in England are
of the present dimensions. He that thinks any Bishop can confirm all the
children in his Diocese, does but dream: were he never so desirous of it, and
diligent in it, 'twere impracticable; and the neglect and impracticableness of
this thing, is one great reason of the ignorance and wickedness of our Parishes
and Congregations; and thus it is like to be, till Diocesses be lessened and the
number of Bishops increased, and some effectual care taken that children be
instructed and confirmed.

Page 275. The Dr. asserts a power in the Presbyters of this Church to reject
and deny the holy Sacrament to the scandalously wicked, provided he give notice
of it to the Ordinary within fourteen days; and for this produces the Rubric
before the Communion.

I grant what the Rubric allows: but is not the Minister like to have a sine
time of it, if he must be bound to inform and prosecute all at Law that are
scandalous and unfit to come to the holy Table? The Dr. knows that all above
the age of sixteen are bound to take the Sacrament three times a year by the
Orders of this Church; and in some great Parishes the number of the scandalous
and wicked is so great, that if the Minister be bound to prosecute all whom he
accounts himself obliged in conscience to refuse, the life of a Kennel-raker
were more elegible than his; for he must spend his time in perpetual travel and
attendance upon Courts, which is a very sine Employment for a man of piety and
conscience, and that desires to spend his time in his study, and teaching and
instructing the people committed to his care.

But the Dr. enquires What, would you have every particular Pastor have an
unaccountable power? Or would you not have them bound to justify what they do,
and prosecute the person for those faults for which they exclude him from the
Communion?

I answer, 1. I think it were not amiss, if the excluded person were obliged to
complain if he thought himself wronged, and the Ministers were excused from
doing the Office of an Apparitor; but this I insist not on. Therefore I add, I
plead not for an unaccountable power in particular Pastors, but for such a
power as they may account for; which I am sure they can never do for this in
great parishes, and where the Diocesses are so large and wide; and there is no
man that will give himself the liberty to think, can deny it. The number of the
scandalous is so great, the distance from the Bishops Court in many places so
far, the tediousness and corruption of the Officers so abominable, that it is a
thing utterly impracticable. It Is impossible that any man can justify himself
in refusing to prosecute according to Canon all the scandalous that he may
justly reject. In brief, either to talk or think of exercising Discipline, or
reforming this Church, till we have more Bishops or Suffragans, and other
things altered (which might be done if our Superiors pleased, without altering
the Constitution) is to build Castles in the air, and to dream of Rocks to set
them on, among the clouds of heaven.

Page 278. The Dr. quotes these words of Mr. B. If a Minister does publicly
admonish a person by name, not censured by the Ordinary, the Lawyers tell him
he may have his Action against him. To which he replies: What need this public
admonition? Does the nature of Church Discipline lie in that?

To which I answer: No man ever dreamt that the whole nature of
Church Discipline consisted in public admonition by name. There are several
intermediate acts of Discipline; Public admonition by name is not to be
attempted till others have been essayed and tried in vain. And this public
admonition (after the fruitless use of that which is private) is that which Mr.
B. says cannot legally be performed by the Presbyters of this Church.

But the Dr. makes a second Reply to those words of Mr. B. If a restraint be
laid on Ministers by Law, the question then comes to this, Whether the
obligation to admonish publicly an offender, or to deny him the Sacrament if
he will come to it, be so great, as to bear him out in the violation of a Law
made by public Authority, with a design to preserve our Religion?

To which I answer, I do not think that Ministers are obliged to admonish
publicly all offenders after the unsuccessful trial of private means and
endeavors, though no Law forbad it. Pearls are not to be cast before Swine. If
the person or persons be such as will mischief, wound, or kill the Minister
that should so admonish him or them, I think he is not obliged to do it: but
whether out of that case, and others of like nature, a Minister may not be
obliged to do it, is another question, yea, though the Law should forbid it.
And it is another question, whether he be obliged to give such a person the holy
Sacrament, though the Law should command it: Man's Laws are not valid against
Gods. If God obliges Ministers to public admonition of scandalous and
incorrigible offenders, and to refuse them a participation in the holy
mysteries of our Religion, no man can take off the obligation.

Page 281. The Dr. says, The due exercise of discipline is a work of so much
prudence and difficulty, that the greatest Zealots for it have not thought it
fit to be trusted in the hands of every Parochial Minister, and his particular
Congregation, and for this he quotes Calvin and Beza.

To which I answer: I believe there are very few Parish Priests in England that
are ambitious of having the exercise of discipline committed to their care and
conduct; and indeed very many of them have neither piety or prudence sufficient
for the management of it. But withal I must add, I should be very sorry (and
some are very worthy of blame if it be so) if most Parish-Ministers be not as
capable of it as Chancellors, Commissaries. Officials, and Surrogates, who are
the people that exercise what Discipline is exercised in this Church; and it is
sufficiently known, that many of them are persons of none of the greatest
understandings, the best prudence, the tenderest consciences, or the severest
lives, which yet are qualifications, hugely necessary in persons that manage
the Discipline of the Church.

In brief, I condemn not the prudence of the Church of England, in not
committing the exercise of Discipline to every Parish-Minister; but then I
would humbly move, that we might have Bishops enough to do it. The Dr.
appropriates to Bishops, Government, Ordination, and Censures, and I am very
well content they have them, provided they will, or can discharge them. But of
the impossibility of that, I am past doubt; for though the Diocesses of our
English Bishops be not so great as that of the Pope (which the Dr. acknowledges
to be too great and spacious) yet I think they are too large for their
management, and that the duty incumbent on them, with respect unto them, is
utterly impracticable. Mount Athos, Polion, or Ossa, are neither of them so
great as the Globe of the earth, yet they are all burdens utterly
insupportable.

Whether the Dr. will allow this multiplication of Bishops (or Suffragans
rather, that the name Bishop may not become too common, and so become less
venerable), I cannot tell. I find him in many places of his Book, and in his
Preface, very jealous of the honor of our Reformation, and positively
resolved, never to condemn the Constitution of this Church, nor the lawfulness
of the Ceremonies hitherunto practiced in it, vide Pref. p. 89.

I have my self a very great esteem for the Reformation of this Church, and a
mighty honor for the great and incomparable Hero's, that were the Reformers of
it; but it is no disparagement to say, they were but men (though the greatest
men); nor is it any Reproach to the Reformation to say, it was imperfect, The
Learned and Pious Dr. Burnet has observed diverse defects, and imperfections in
it (and I know not how they can be denied); and to speak the truth concerning
it, is not to reproach it. And what if it should be said, that among others
'twas an imperfection in our Reformation, that the number of Bishops was not
increased so far, as that they might be sufficient for the work and duty
incumbent on them? Can a Bishop inspect the Clergy in a Diocese of the present
dimensions? can he exercise the Censures of the Church upon all the culpable
delinquents in it? can he confirm all the Children in it? can he ordain Priests
for all the Parishes therein, with that circumspection, wariness, and care,
which was observed by the primitive Bishops, and which the honor of this
Church, the Christian Religion, and the salvation of souls does require? Does
the Reverend Dr. think those things can be done by any, the most diligent and
industrious Bishop on earth? I dare say, he cannot think it possible; and if he
does not think it possible, I would enquire further of him, whether he does not
think it very necessary and desirable, that all this work were put into more
hands, that they may be capable of performing it? for till then, I am much
assured it can never be done, however necessary or desirable it may be?

These things being said, I will now add, I shall never desire the Dr. to
condemn the Constitution of this Church (nor will I brlieve many of the
Nonconformists desire him to do it), but I would humbly desire him, to put to
his helping hand, for the amendment and perfecting of it; and to perfect and
complete it, is not to condemn it; it is only to confess it a little short of
that perfection that it may attain; and what great work is perfect of a sudden,
at its birth into the world? In brief, Diocesan Episcopacy I like (and that is
the Constitution of this Church), and so does Mr. B. for ought that I can see:
but I would fain have more Bishops, not to control Episcopal Power, but to
assist in the performance of Episcopal Duty.

Page 301. The Dr. undertakes to confute what Mr. B. had said, (viz.) that
wherever there is the true notion of a Church, there must be a constitutive
regent part ( i. e. a standing governing power) which is an essential part of
it, and this he promises to do from Mr. B. himself.

How well he has done it, let the Reader judge, by what the Author of the
Peaceable Design has replied to him upon this Subject. But the Dr. infers from
what Mr. B. had said of the necessity of a Regent Head to every Church, as
follows:

And so Mr. B's. Constitutive Regent part of a Church, has done the Pope a
wonderful kindness, and made a very plausible plea for his universal
Pastorship. But there are some men in the world, who do not attend to the
advantages they give to Popery, so they may vent their spleen against the
Church of England.

To which I answer, Mr. B's Constitutive Regent part of a Church, has done the
Pope no kindness at all; for another visible Head may be assigned to the
Catholic Church, and that is the holy Jesus; he is both the visible and
invisible Head thereof; he is unto it both a Head of government, and a Head of
influence; he governs it by his Laws, and by the influence of his Spirit, and
has appointed inferior officers for the government and direction of it,
according to his own institutions: and though he be not seen by mortals here
below, yet he is visible, and that is enough to constitute him the visible Head
of the Catholic visible Church. There are some Kingdoms that never see their
Prince, and in all Kingdoms, multitudes of Subjects that never lay their eyes
on him, and yet he is never the less their Civil visible Head.

But there are some men in the world, that will take very small occasions to
signify their displeasure against Mr. B. and what has he done to deserve
their lash? and why must he be the Subject of these most twinging Satyrs? they
are the words of a late Author: and what is the spleen that he vents against
the Church of England, that makes their choler to ferment and boil?

It Is true, Mr. B. does, with a brave and generous courage, rebuke what he
thinks amiss in the gnvernours and government of the Church of England: he
speaks plainly, and without respect of persons; he flatters none, nor fawns
upon none, but indifferently reproves whatever he thinks worthy of it, in
whomsoever it be. And if this be to vent his spleen against the Church of
England, I think he has very venerable patterns and examples for it, both in
the Old Testament and the New, as this Learned Dr. very well knows.

If it should be said, that Mr. B. reproves where there is no fault, I answer,
I should much rejoice if this were true, and I believe so would Mr. B. as well
as I: but he must shut his eyes against the midday light, that thinks there is
no fault in the Government of this Church, or nothing worthy of the plainest
and most keen reproofs therein. 'Twere very easy to name many things, if a man
delighted to rake in Sinks and Kennels, I mean, the proceedings in the
Spiritual Courts.

Page 302. The Dr. tells us, that Mr. B. had said in his Answer to his Sermon,
that he would fain learn of him, what those rules and ties are which make a
National Church, whether divine or humane? If it be a divine rule, we (says Mr.
B.) are of the National Church as well as you; if humane, he enquires how
consent in these makes a National Church? and how they come to be of the
National Church which do not consent in them? and objects the differences among
the Conformable Clergy, in the exposition of some of the Articles of this
Church.

To which the Dr. answers three things. I shall take notice only of the last of
them, (viz.) There is no difference among us concerning the lawfulness of the
orders of our Church, and duty of submission to them; if there be any other
differences, they are not material* and I believe, are no other than in the
manner of explaining some things which may happen in the best society in the
world, without breaking the peace of it; as about the difference of orders, the
sense of some passages in the Athanasian Creed, the true explication of one or
two Articles, which are the things he ( i. e. Mr. B.) mentions. A multitude of
such differences will never overthrow such a consent among us, as to make us
not to be members of the same National Church.

To the first lines of this Paragraph, which concern the agreement of the
Members of this Church in the lawfulness of its orders, and the duty of
submission to them, I shall reply nothing. To the rest I say, I am perfectly of
the Dr's. opinion; and were it reduced to practice, it would heal the most of
the divisions, and put a period to most of the separations that have rent and
torn this Church in pieces for many years. Why might not the Dissenters among
us have been permitted to have continued in the Ministry, and in the Church,
though they differed in some things in their judgments from the Conformable
Clergy? Would it have broken the peace thereof, any more than the various
apprehensions that are at present among themselves? They are not all of a mind
in the five points; some of them understand and believe them after the sense of
Calvin, and others after the sense of Arminius; and I might mention many others
wherein they differ among themselves, but the thing is sufficiently known, and
there is no need of it: And are the differences among the Conformists
themselves reconcilable with peace; and those wherein the Nonconformists differ
from them (though they be no greater than the other) irreconcilable with it?
What strange partiality is this? Conformists may differ in multitudes of
things, without breaking the peace of the Church; but if those that are
Dissenters, differ from them in a few impertinent and uncertain, things, the
peace of the Church is subverted, and all things put into confusion thereby.
The Conformists doubt (at least some of them) whether Bishops and Presbyters do
differ in order or in degree, some are past all doubt concerning it, and do
affirm they differ in order and not barely in degree. This breaks no peace* The
Nonconformists cannot find that Word of God, whereby it is certain that children
indefinitely) which are baptized, dying before they commit actual si^, are
undoubtedly saved: and they are not very sure, that all children that are
baptized, are regenerate by the ^^irit, or that they may safely say of all that
they bury, that God of his great mercy has taken to himself the soul of the
deceased person, and give him hearty thanks that it has pleased him to deliver
him out of the afflictions of this sinful world: and these are such dreadful
and formidable things, that the Church cannot be safe, if the Members, or at
least any of the Preachers in it, dispute the truth of them, and therefore out
they must go; and if they attempt to exercise their Ministerial Office after
they are ejected, they are immediately the most damnable Schismatics that ever
the world did know, and Prisons, Fines, Confiscations, Banishments, and all
that is evil, is beneath their sin and trangression.

Why a difference of opinion in these things might not be consistent with
peace, as well as in others that are of as great, and somewhat greater import
(at least in my apprehension) I am not able to divine; if nothing but Reason
and Religion were to determine concerning them: but if spite, malice, and
revenge, and some other of those Antichristian passions, be called to counsel,
and permitted to judge of them, it is not difficult to give a reason of the
differing natures of these differences, why some are judged consistent with
peace, and others utterly inconsistent with it. But enough of this paragraph. I
shall conclude with one supplication to all the Conformable Clergy in England
on the behalf of the Dissenters; and it is this, That they may be permitted to
differ from them in things of no greater moment than those in which they differ
among themselves. If it be said, it is not in their power to permit it: I
answer, Time was when it was very much in their power to have done it; and I
think they might do well to use some endeavors to retrieve it; or at least
give some evidence that they wish well to it. This I think is no unreasonable
request; how it may be resented, I know not; it is the love of this Church, and
the peace thereof, that has caused me to propose it, and that shall satisfy
my mind.

But having said this on the behalf of the Dissenters, I must add a word or two
on my own behalf, and that is, That a fair and passable sense may be, and is
put upon these passages mentioned from the Rubric and Liturgy, by the
Conformable Clergy, and amongst them by my self; but what is that to those
whose judgments and consciences will not permit them to put that sense upon
them? All men's minds are not cast in the same mould; all cannot admit that
latitude of sense, and exposition in those and many other things, that some men
do and can without offense and neglect to their consciences; and must they
therefore be shut out of the Vineyard of the Lord, and denied the liberty of
working there? Certainly this is a severe method of proceeding, and hardly
reconcilable with the Laws of Christianity.

The Learned Dr. in several places of his Book represents Mr. A. as unlearned,
unread, and very weak in his reafoning and argumentations. Page 174. he accuses
him of childish trifling about (...) a Canon; and in the same page, and that
next to it, he mislikes his explication of the words (...), leaving out (...),
which he observes from Grotius is not found in one Manuscript, the sense
whereof he thus expresses; What we have attained, let us walk up to the same;
and that Greek phrase (...), which he says implies no more than minding that
very thing, viz. v. 14. pressing toward the mark: and then adds; But if he had
pleased to have read on to Phil. 4.2. he would have found (...) to signify
unanimity; and St. Paul, 1 Cor. 12.25. opposes the (...), th t there be no
schism in the body, but that all the members should take care of (...) one for
another; and therefore the (...) is very aptly used against schisms and
divisions: and adds, I should think that St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, and
Theophilact, all understood the importance of a Greek phrase, as well as our
Author, and they all make no scruple to interpret it of the peace and concord
of Christians. And although Austin did not understand much Greek, yet he knew
the general sense of the Christian Church about this place, and he particularly
applies it to the peace of the Church in St Cyprian 's case. By this taste now
(says the Dr.) let any man judge of the depth of this man's Learning, or rather
the height of his confidence, who dares to t^ll the world, that the Universal
stream and current of all Expositors is against my sense of this Text; and for
this universal stream (besides Grotius) who speaks exactly to the same sense
with mine, quotes only Tirinus and Zanchy, and then cries, in a word they all
conspire against my interpretation. And within a few lines he adds, But had it
not been fairer dealing, in one word to have referred us to Mr. Pool's
Synopsis; for if he had looked into Zanchy himself, he would have found how
sharply he applied it against Dissenters in the Church.

And in p. 203. after he had made him Advocate-General for Schismatics, by an
Oration put into his mouth, and pronounced before St. Austin, Cyprian, and
other great opposers of Schism, thus he speaks, Judge now, Reader, whether the
Causes of the present Separation, as they are laid down ^y my Adversary, do not
equally defend the Donatills in their Schism; and his making so light of
Schism, does not give encouragement to men to make more. But I shall not send
him so far back as Austin and Cyprian for better instruction in this matter;
but I shall send him to one whose Writings he is better acquainted with, even
Mr. Baxter.

And in page 304 the Dr. compares him with Andrelinus, of whom Erasmus says,
That he was a good Poet, but his Verses wanted one syllable, and that was (...)
in English brains; and this because Mr. A. had said, That National Churches
destroy the being of other Churches under them; which (says the Dr.) I utterly
deny; and there wants nothing but proof.

To all this I shall reply as follows: If Mr. A. do intermix any pleasantness
in his discourse, it is presently condemned as trifling, and he compared with
Carmen and Porters. If he give his Readers any divertisement, by intermingling
some Wit and Fancy with his Reasonings, he is scurrilous, and compared to
Martin (an Author I confess that I never had the misfortune to read; but ^e is
sufficiently famed for railing). If he intersperse a little saltness among his
Ratiocinations, he is ungentile, and a Buffoon, which is the Title wherewith a
Gentleman has lately graced him in a Reply to his Book. What shall Mr. A. do
in this case? and how shall he please these Gentlemen? Would they have him turn
fool to humor them, and lay aside his Wit (which makes his Writings the more
savoury and grateful) to do them a pleasure? I do not find that those that have
replied to him, have laid any obligation upon him to do them such a kindness;
and I think he will be loath to purchase their favor and good will at so dear
a rate.

But Mr. A. has interpreted the Greek Phrases, before mentioned, otherwise
than Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theoplylact, and St. Austin: and what then! is he
the only person that has interpreted Texts of Scripture, contrary to the
opinion and judgments of those Fathers? do not all Expositors almost do the
same? do not the Papists (though otherwise obliged by the Decrees of the
Council of Trent) do it? does not the admired Hugo Grotius do it? and I dare
say, this excellent Dr. himself understands very many Texts of Scripture in
other senses than the ancient Fathers did expound them. Whether Mr A. have
rightly interpreted the Texts in Controversy, I will not determine; but this I
will say, he may be a Learned man, though he may have expounded them otherwise
than St. Chrysostom, St. Theodoret, etc.

Whether the universal current of all Expositors be against the Dr's sense of
his Text, as Mr. A. affirms, I know not (for my Library is not furnished with
all the Commentators in the world) nor will I say, that Mr. A. did look into
lanchy himself, and not transcribe what he quotes from Mr. Pooles Synopsis; but
this I think I may say, that I see no convincing evidence that Mr. A. did not
peruse that Author himself, and transcribe the words from him, and not from Mr.
Pool; and therefore I humbly conceive the Dr. has affirmed, or at least
insinuated more than he has proved, viz. that Mr. A's quotations are
transcribed from the Synopsis Criticorum, and not from the Authors themselves.
But if Mr. A. must be a Pigmy in Learning, what honor is it then for the very
great and learned Dr. to beat and overcome him?

Let it be granted therefore for once, that Mr. A. is not the most learned or
best-read man in the world, and that there are some, yea many that have learned
and read much more than he; but what then? he may be a Master of Reason, and a
man of some tolerable judgment, not withstanding those defects (or else many
great men, and some that are in great reputation for wisdom, must be numbered
among Dolts, and sit in the Classis of Fools) he may be able to understand the
sense of a Text of Scripture, and the dependence and connection of it with the
precedent and consequent Verses, and the scope and design of the Author
therein. These things may be done by men of competent understanding (and I
think that will be granted to Mr. A.) though they never read all the Books in
the Bodleian Library, or in some that are more meanly furnished; and it is some
men's opinion, that the greatest Readers are not always the most judicious men;
and that if some very worthy men had read less, they might have understood
more. Hence I think I may infer, that though Mr. A. should not have read St.
Chrysostom, etc. nor many modern Commentators, yet he may be capable of
expounding a Text of Scripture with the probability of truth, as well as those
that have read them all.

And whereas it has pleased the Learned Dr. to entitle him Advocate-General
for Schismatics, I am not satisfied that Mr. A. has given any just reason for
it. It Is true he has said, that some little and petty inconveniences arising
from the levity and volubility of mers minds, is more eligible than the
enslaving men's judgments and consciences, and surrendering their reason to naked
will and pleasure, even as it is better to have a rational soul, though subject
to mistakes, than the soul of a brute which may be managed with a strong bit
and bridle, as you please. This is the sense of Mr. A's words in his Preface;
and what hurt is there in them? Do not all Protestants speak the same language?
And is it not better that men e^r in some things, than that they put out their
eyes, and see with those of other men, blindly following their conduct, and
submitting and assenting to all their Impositions?

But the Dr. will say, Is Separation by reason of the levity of men's minds
only, a small or petty inconvenience? In answer whereunto, I would distinguish
of Separation. There is a Separation that proceeds upon reasons apparently
true, and such is the Separation of Protestants from the Church of Rome; and
this is a great and necessary duty: There is a Separation that proceeds upon
probable reasons, which sometimes are not cogent nor conclusive, and yet they
may be such as honest and upright minded men may not be able to free themselves
from being entangled and fettered by them. This is an inconvenience, and
whether it be great or small, I know not how 'twill be avoided in this state of
weakness and imperfection, but by remedies worse than the disease. But that
which to my apprehension seems the best way of avoiding it is, Let nothing be
made necessary to Communion in Churches, but a few plain necessary things, and
this would certainly put an end to the most of those Divisions and Separations
that have, and do vex the Christian Churches, and the Church of England
especially and particularly: But there is a Separation that proceeds upon
reasons apparently false; such is the Separation of the Socinians from the
Reformed Churches, and such is the Separation of many in the Church of England.
This is intolerable, and by all prudent and Christian means and endeavors to
be repressed. By Separation here, I mean not barely refusing Communion, but
setting up new Churches in opposition to those they have forsaken.

But it may be enquired further, Whether Separation upon probable, weak, and
unconcluding reasons, be not sinful? I answer, Yes: but what if it be? there is
some difference in sins, as most men believe, and I see no great reason to
doubt of it; and it is my opinion, that neither all Sinners, nor all
Schismatics, that are truly such, must be sent to the Mines, or to the
Galleys. In brief, God will make a difference between Sinners at the day of
Judgment; and I do believe, that the Governors of Churches, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, should make some difference between them here. In the mean
time, I would not be thought either to excuse, or encourage unjustifiable
Separations. I would that the sinfulness of such Separation should be laid open
with all its just aggravations, and that all just means be used by the
Ministers of the Gospel, to prevent and hinder it, yea, and something by the
Magistrate too; but if Separation cannot be prevented (I mean such as proceeds
upon probable, but not concluding reasons) by those endeavors, it must be
endured, an inconvenience being more eligible than a mischief; and many things
are, and must be suffered in all societies, that are not, nor ought not to be
approved. Such was divorce in the Jewish Commonwealth, and some things else in
that, and other societies of men.

If it be said, that the Church of England does not impose any thing upon its
members by mere authority, as the Church of Rome does, nor does it force them
to resign their reason to naked will and pleasure, nor command belief of those
notorious falsehoods which that imperious and Apostate Synagogue of Satan does.
I answer, it is readily granted (and we bless God for it), that this Church does
impose nothing that is apparently and grossly false; it commands no Idolatrous
Worship, no opinions contrary to the common sense of mankind, no invocation of
Saints, Prayers for the dead, no Pilgrimages to Shrines, no ridiculous or
sottish Superstitions: but though it impose nothing grossly false, foolish or
Superstitious, yet some men think (and I know not how to confute them), that it
imposes some things dubious, uncertain, and unnecessary, from which the Clergy
cannot dissent, but thereby they shut themselves out of their office, and
become incapable of exercising their Ministry with the countenance and
protection of the Laws. And if the Laity doubt the truth of any of its
Impositions, and do publish their doubts, and will be pertinacious in the
defense of them, they are liable to excommunication, and all that is consequent
unto it: and in these things this Church is peremptory, and admits of no
indulgence; Subscribe, or Preach not the Gospel; speak nothing to the
disparagement of any thing in the Doctrine, Discipline, or Liturgy, or you
shall be excommunicated, and given up to the Devil. Thus it speaks, and this is
its Language.

I do easily grant, that this Church pretends not to Infallibility, as the
Church of Rome does; but in whatsoever it determines, it avows it self not
mistaken or deceived: And what is the difference in effect, between a Church
that assumes to it self the title and approbation of Infallible, and a Church
that says, I am not mistaken in my Determinations and Impositions? Suppose two
persons, one a Nestorian, the other an Eutichian; the one proposes in certain
Articles, his Doctrine, so as confounds Christ's Natures, and withal tells you,
he is Infallible, and you must subscribe to, and acknowledge the truth of it, or
prepare your self for the Axe or the Gallows: the other proposes his Doctrine,
so as he divides Christ's Person, but pretends not to be Infallible, but says,
his Doctrine is true, and he is not mistaken in it, and it is at your pleasure,
and in your choice either to subscribe it, or prepare your self for the Mines
of Peru and the Indies. The Application is obvious, and every one can make it
without my manuduction, or direction.

But let me not be said to defame this Church. I have said already, that it
imposes nothing grossly and apparently false, but only some things unnecessary,
and uncertain. I will add here, the penalties imposed upon those that refuse to
own, and acknowledge, or do defame its determinations, are not so severe, nor
sanguinary, as in the Roman Church, nor peradventure so certainly and severely
executed; but whether the peremptory imposing things doubtful, controverted,
useless, and unnecessary, upon the legal and established penalties, be not
tyrannical and imperious, would deserve a little consideration. Why must all
Ministers be obliged to subscribe to all things in the 39. Articles, Liturgy,
and Book of Ordination, as containing nothing contrary to the Word of God? Why
must they subscribe the 20th Article, concerning the power of the Church to
ordain Rites and Ceremonies? Why must they assent to the 8th Article, where
it is said, that the Athanasian Creed ought thoroughly to be received and
believed? why must the salvation of Infants being baptized, and dying before
the commission of actual sin, be acknowledged as certain by the Word of God?
and why must they assent to, and subscribe the lawfulness of the use of the
Cross in Baptism, with more that might be mentioned? Are these things certain,
and so clear and obvious, that an honest man cannot doubt of them? Are these
things necessary? Cannot a man be a Minister, or a Christian that does not, nor
cannot believe them? This cannot, or at least ought not to be imagined or
affirmed; why then does the Church of England require Ministers to subscribe
unto them? and why must none of the Laity dispute the truth of them? What
reason can be alleged for it, but its own good will and pleasure? I know no
other that can be given of it, thither it must be referred at last. And whether
this be not to exercise an Empire over the judgments and consciences of men,
and to command the surrender of their reason to naked will and pleasure, I
leave to consideration. It has the likeness and appearance of it; and how the
Church of England will fairly free themselves of it, I do not yet discern; I
would be glad to see it done; for the exercise of Empire over the consciences
of men in uncertain and unnecessary things, is a very evil and mischievous
thing, an Engine of the Devil, by which I do believe he has done more mischief
in the Church of God, than by all the Heathen persecutions; and I know no end
is served by it, unless it be to choke conscientious men; for all men of
conscience are not Latitudinarians, nor like to be in my apprehension.

The sum of what I have said in these three last Paragraphs* is this; Mr. A.
has said, some little and petty inconveniences arising from the levity and
inconstancy of men's minds, is more eligible than the prostituting men's
consciences, and resigning them to the naked wills of men, which is no more
than most Protestants have said before him.

Separations are various; some proceed upon reasons apparently true, and these
are a necessary duty; some proceed upon reasons apparently false, and these are
greatly sinful and intolerable; others proceed upon probable reasons, which
though specious and fair, yet are not concluding, these are not without sin,
yet must be endured, an inconvenience being better than a mischief: And this, I
conceive is the separation which the Dr. says. Mr. A. makes very light of,
which yet I do not beileve, unless it be comparatively, and for the sake of
which I do not think him worthy of the appellation of Advocate-general for
Schismatics.

The Church of England does not pretend to be infallible, but is as peremptory
in its determinations as if it were. It imposes nothing grossly false, and
against common sense and reason, but it requires things unnecessary and
uncertain, with an unyielding rigor, and this looks like tyranny; and if the
Church of England think it self defamed by that insinuation, it may vindicate
it self if it can.

To the Drs. insinuation, that Mr. A is not much acquainted in the Writings of
Cyprian and St. Austin, and that he has been more conversant in those of Mr.
B. I might enquire where is the Proof? and what evidence does this Learned man
produce for the confirmation of it? I have looked his Book all over, but I can
find none, nor do I imagine what has given occasion to the Dr. to think so:
it is true Mr. A does not quote those Fathers in his Book; but does it follow
from thence, that he never read them? There are many Books which the Excellent
Dr. himself has never quoted in any of his writings; but he that should infer
from thence, that he never read them, would certainly injure and traduce him,
But Mr. A. is a Dissenter, and peradventure for that reason must be an
unlearned and unread man, whose reason must be as weak therefore as his reading
is small, and there must be no more argument in his discourse, than there was
of Wit or Brains in Andrelinus his Poems; which, to speak modestly, is a
scurrilous comparison, and not becoming the Pen of the Reverend Dr.

Mr. B. had said something in his Answer to the Drs. Sermon, of the Peoples
Power, or right of choosing, or at least consenting to the choice of their own
Pastors; whereupon he says, that Mr. B. is very tragical upon this argument,
and keeps not within tolerable bounds of discretion, in pleading the Peoples
Right or Cause against Magistrates, Patrons and Laws, p. 307. And p. 329. he
says, Mr. B. is unsatisfied with any Laws that are made in this matter: and in
the same page he says, that one would think by Mr. B 's Doctrine, all Laws
about Patronage are void in themselves; and all Rights of Advouson in the King,
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and the Universities, are mere usurpations, and things
utterly unlawful among Christians, since he makes such a personal obligation to
choose their own Pastors, to lie on the People, that they cannot transfer it by
their own Act.

To which I reply, Mr. B. will be well enough satisfied, if the People may have
the liberty of consenting to the Pastor that by the Patron is presented to
them; and what is there of unreasonableness in such a design or proposal?
Blessed be God there are in England many worthy Gentlemen that take care of the
disposal of their Livings, and present sober and learned men unto them; and in
my observation, such persons are usually acceptable to the People, and they
consent to them without objection or opposition; but then it must be
acknowledged, that there are many others that take no care of the disposal of
them, some are Papists, and give their Livings to the nomination of their
Servants, and they sell them to whomsoever will give most for them; others are
profane Sensualists, and such men will present vicious, debauched persons.
Piety and a sober Conversation may preclude, but will never commend a man to
their presentation. And what if for these reasons, and more that might be
mentioned, the people had a consenting power permitted to them? are the Rights
of Patronage invaded or abdicated, injured or destroyed thereby? Has not the
Bishop power in some cases to refuse the Clerk that is presented to him for
institution? and is the Patrons right evacuated by it? Surely no, I never heard
any such thing affirmed, or pretended; and if the Patrons right may be
preserved with a power of just and reasonable dissent and consent in the
Bishop, it may be also preserved with the same power in the people: Are not
Patrons right preserved, unless they may impose upon the people ignorant and
scandalous Ministers, that are neither able nor willing to Preach the Doctrines
of Faith and Godliness? are not their rights preserved unless they have the
liberty of presenting whom they list, and sending them such Preachers, as
instead of being ensamples to the flock in Piety, Justice, Charity, and
Sobriety, shall be ensamples of Impiety, Cruelty, Injustice, and Intemperance
unto them?

If it should be said, that such cannot procure Orders, nor Institution from
the Diocesan: I answer, it is in vain to dispute against sense and experience;
and men will never believe that cannot be done which they see done before their
eyes; and the Bishops are cheated by Certificates and Testimonials, for there
are few men so bad, that cannot find others as bad as themselves, to vouch for
them.

And if this liberty were granted to the people, I am not apprehensive of those
evil consequences that the Dr. seems to fear, who tells us, Where a Parish is
divided in their opinions about Religion (as we know too many are at this day)
all the several parties, Anabaptists, Quakers, yea and Papists, as well as
others, will put in for a share in what concerns their souls, and consequently
choose a Pastor each party to themselves, and the Incumbent that is legally
entitled to the profits of the Living, may possess them, and the people may
follow the conduct of other Guides, even such as themselves have chosen.

For I would propose that this Liberty might be legally granted to the people,
and that their consent and dissent should be limited by just Rules, and upon
equitable Reasons, and that our Superiors might superintend them in the
exercise of it, and see that they do not abuse it. For surely there is some
difference between the use of Power* Liberty, and Privilege, and the abuse of
it; and one may be restrained, without taking away the other. The abuse of the
peoples liberty in the choice of a Quaker or Socinian, or a Papist for their
Teacher, may be restrained without depriving them of the liberty of refusing a
wicked, scandalous, ignorant wretch, or choosing an honest, pious, learned, and
sober man. Cannot the Learned Dr. restrain his Daughter from choosing a profane
Sensualist (whose God is his belly, and has nothing brave or generous in his
soul) or her Husband, without depriving her of the liverty of choosing a^
honest, worthy, brave, and virtuous man? And this I think is all that Mr. B.
desires, at least this would satisfy him; and I know not why the Learned Dr.
represents this opinion or desire of Mr. B. in so monstrous and odious a
manner, unless it be to make him an offense to Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Universities, and all such as have right of Patronage belonging to them.

Page 371. The Author of the Letter out of the Country (says the Dr.) lays the
foundation of the Separation upon the force of scruples, mighty scruples,
scruples of a long standing, and of a large extent; scruples that there is no
hopes to remove, without some very overpowering impressions on men's minds. To
which the Dr. replies, I am so much of another mind, that I think a little
impartiality, and due consideration, would do the business.

I cannot be so uncharitable as to believe, that none of the Dissenters do
impartially consider the things in controversy between them and the Church of
England, and which are the grounds of the present Separation, when they do
solemnly profess the contrary, with appeals to God who searches the hearts,
and tries the reins; and it is severe to give them the lie in such a case,
where it is certain we are no competent or capable judges. But suppose they (at
least some of them) should not impartially consider (and it is no easy matter
either for Consenters or Dissenters to lay aside all partiality) what will be
inferred from thence? Must they not be endured upon the earth? Are they
insufferable in the Land? If all were banished, imprisoned, or hanged, that are
guilty of no greater sins than a little partiality in consideration, there
would be few Conformists or Nonconformists left in this Nation. But
peradventure it may be no great fault to be partial in the consideration of
other things, when to be partial in considering the grounds and reasons of the
present Separation, is an unpardonable sin, and not to be forgiven in this
world, whatever it may be in the world to come.

Though the Dr. seems to think it a thing of no great difficulty to cure men's
scruples, in the words abovementioned, and in some others in the following
page; yet he speaks to a contrary sense, p. 48. of his Preface, where he tells
us of the almost invincible ignorance of some weaker people, and the uncurable
biass of some men's minds. Is the almost invincible ignorance of weak people
easily removed? yes, faith the Dr. Honest men may be cured of their errors and
mistakes. But how is it to be done? why, by bringing them to a better temper,
and to more judgment, p. 372. I thought so; but how shall we do that? Are the
almost invincibly ignorant, made judicious upon easy endeavors? And are those
that have incurable byasses upon their minds, brought to a better temper of
mind with a wet finger? I know not what the Drs. experience is, but I am sure
it is otherwise in mine, and in many others. I find it impossible to remove the
ignorance, and take off the prejudices and byasses of some peoples minds,
humanely speaking, as the phrase now is; and the reason is obvious, I can bring
them light, but I cannot give them eyes. I can propound reason and evidence
sufficient, as I think, to remove their fears, scruples, and prejudices; but I
cannot give them understandings to apprehend and perceive the cogency, weight
and sufficiency thereof. Men's understandings are of as many differing degrees
and sizes, as their faces are of differing shapes and features; and what one
man can perceive and understand, another cannot do. One man can see the
smallest needles or hairs, another cannot see them, though it were to save his
life. Besides, there are peculiarities in the understandings of men; how they
came there, I will neither enquire nor determine; but that there are such
things, cannot be denied. The Doctrine of Calvin in the five points, to some
men seems utterly irrational, and contrary to the common sentiments of mankind,
and all that they read and hear for the alteration of their apprehensions,
makes no impression or change upon them. Others there are that have the same
apprehensions of the Doctrine of Arminius in those points; and the like I might
say of many other Controversies in Religion. Men's minds seem inclined to
embrace one part of the Controversy, by a peculiarity of frame, temper, and
disposition; and in this case it is a mighty difficulty to prevail with such men
to alter their apprehensions, if not impossible. Which things being premised,
and certain, I think not those words of Mr. B. so severe as the Dr. seems to
imagine them, viz. That he that thinks his own or others Reasonings will ever
change all the truly honest Christians in the Land (as to the unlawfulness of
the things imposed) knows so little of matters, or of men, or of conscience,
that he is unmeet to be a Bishop or Priest: for is not he fit for that Office,
or those Employments, that does not know, that the measures and degrees of men's
understandings are almost infinite; and that they will never agree, unless it
be in a few plain, great, and necessary things, and that in multitudes of
lesser things they will dissert for ever; and that in this diversity of
understandings it is impossible it should be otherwise; and that under this
diversity of apprehensions, there will be some diversity of practices too,
where men fear God, and have a value for their own Consciences. and the
suggestions thereof? is he fit to bear the Office of a Bishop, or a Priest,
that is ignorant of these things? surely he is very little acquainted in the
great variety and imperfections of humane minds, that thinks, that all
Christians will ever be of one mind in many lesser things: and he is as little
acquainted with the Consciences of men, that thinks honest Christians will be
of the same practice, where their judgments are so much divided. I will
conclude this Paragraph with the following Story, which will serve to evince
the incurableness of some peoples jealousies and scruples; and I Will do it in
the words of the person that sent it to me. I know a Gentlewoman whose Parents
were of the Congregational persuasion, and such was her education; n^vertheless
after her marriage (her husband being conformable) she accompanied him to the
public worship of God, and this she did for some years; but all this time her
scruples, and her fears, and the jealousies of her Conscience did so plague and
torment her, that she had little or no comfort in her life, yea, he^ bodily
health was very much weakened, and impaired by the perturbations of her mind:
this having been her condition for some years, at length she forsook the
public and established worship, betook her self to a Congregational Church,
and now lives in peace, and tolerable heath. The Gentlewoman, I do believe, is
truly pious and conscientious, and does avow, that could she be satisfied of
the lawfulness of attending on the public way of worship, she would do it with
all her heart. Her reason and arguments may be easily answered, and she may be
silenced, and, one would think, her judgment satisfied; but her scruples return
again like a Torrent, and she cannot resist them; and, in plain English, are
incurable, without some very great and transforming impressions from above. And
this is no rare or single case, but what often occurs, as those men know that
converse with the consciences of Christians.

The Dr. returns again to the Author of the Letter out of the Country, page
376. and thus he speaks concerning him, The main force of what he says (i.e.
the Author of that Letter) lies in this, that those that cannot conquer their
scruples as to Communion with our Church, must either return to the state of
Paganism, or set up new Churches, by joining with the ejected Ministers. To
which the Dr. replies, This is new Doctrine, and never heard of in the days of
the old Puritans; for they supposed men obliged to continue in the communion of
this Church, although there were some things they scrupled, and could not
conquer those scruples; and this they supposed to be far enough from Paganism.

The old Puritans did suppose, that those that scrupled Ministerial communion,
were obliged to continue as Laymen in the communion of this Church: But what
is this to those that scruple Lay-commuion, which is the case of many now in
England? And what shall these people do? they must either communicate against
their Consciences, or join with the ejected Ministers, or live as Pagans; and
which it is the Dr. will advise them to, I cannot tell; but it is possible we
may know hereafter. If he should say, they must put off their scruples, and
communicate with the license and approbation of their consciences; I say so
too. It Is their duty to endeavor it: but what if after all the endeavors they
can use, they cannot disentangle their minds from them, what shall they do
then? I beseech the Learned Dr. to give some directions to these scrupulous
persons in this case.

In the same Page the Dr. desires to know, whether as often as men do scruple
joining with others, their separation be lawful?

And I do desire to know, whether all unlawful separation be intolerable? and
whether all Schismatics, that are truly so, must be imprisoned, ruined and
undone, or sent to Cancasus, and the Caspian Mountains? When the Dr. has
answered this enquiry, peradventure he may receive and Answer to the other, if
he cannot answer it himself.

The D. adds in the same, and the following Page, If it be lawful to separate
as often as men scruple the lawfulness of joining in communion with out Church,
it is in vain to talk of any settled Constitution, whether Episcopal,
Presbyterian, or Independent; for this Principle overthrows them all.

To which I answer, I do not think it lawful to separate as often as men
scruple joining in communion; yet I do believe it lawful to tolerate some
unlawful separations, yea and necessary too; but let no unnecessary occasions
of scruple and separation be given. Let no separations for the sake of
undoubted truths, and the great essentials, of Faith and Godliness be allowed.
Let the Congregations in the Nation be furnished with pious and holy Ministers,
and some discipline exercised in them, and 'twill be found that the number of
Separatists will not be great, and a stop will be put to the progress and
increase of them, and a few years will reduce them almost to none: for if the
Causes of Separation be looked into, they will be found to be the imposing and
requiring of unnecessary and doubtful things, ignorant and scandalous
Preachers, and undisciplined Churches. Whether these things will justify it, I
will not say; but that they are the main Causes of it, cannot be denied by any
considering man. And if these be not removed, Separation will be continued,
unless the Popish method of Cure be undertaken, (viz.) Fire and Faggot, Racks
and Tortures, Confiscations and Punishments, which certainly are Remedies that
were never taught by Christ Jesus, the Lover and Savior of mankind; but by the
Devil, the great enemy, hater and destroyer of them.

And let me add further, that I see no reason to infer, that toleration of
Separation upon tolerable scruples, will destroy all Government in the Church:
for I think there was a Government in the Church, when the Novatians were
tolerated both at Rome and Constantinople for some hundreds of years, as the
Doctor very well knows; and I hope we have a Government in the Nation, though
some men transgress the established Laws thereof, yea and are permitted so to
do with impunity. Yet I would distinguish between Separation in the bud and
blossom, and Separation ripe and grown, as it is with us in England; and I
would say, that some things may be done, and some severities used to crush and
prevent the increase of it when budding; which may not be done to extinguish
and root it out when its grown and increased, and the number of those that
separate, is very great and numerous. Some few single Schismatics (not that
are made such by unnecessary Impositions, but such as make themselves such by
unreasonable and unwarrantable scruples and objections) may after the use of
admonition, teaching, and instruction, and a patient waiting for the success of
them, be treated with some rigor and moderate harshness. But thousands and ten
thousands are too many either to be laid in Gaols, or sent to the barren
deserts of Arabia, or other Countries at lesser distance from us.

Page 378. The Learned Dr. wonders that none of those who have undertaken to
defend the cause of Separation, have taken any care to put stop to it, or to
let us know where we may fix and see an end of it: which scruples are to be
allowed, and what not; and whether it be lawful to separate, as long as men can
go on in scruples, and say they cannot conquer them

Mr. B I suppose, is one of them which the Doctor believes has undertaken to
defend the cause of Separation; and I wonder the Doctor should not observe that
he has taken care to put a stop to it, and let us know what scruples are to be
allowed, and what not. Has he not said over and, over, even to times without
number, That a difference is to be made betwixt tolerable and intolerable
scruples and errors; betwixt scruples that may be defended by probable reasons,
and such as have nothing to be pleaded on their behalf, but apparent and
obvious falsehoods; betwixt scruples about unnecessary and disputable things,
and such as are about necessary and undoubted truths, and so owned and
confessed by all Christians? and in saying this, he has told us what scruples
are to be allowed, and what not; and where to put a stop to Separation. It Is
true these are but general rules to direct us by, in judging of allowable and
unallowable errors and scruples, and where and when to put a stop to
Separations; but the application of them to particular cases, is not difficult;
and since errors and scruples are infinite, I hope the Dr. will not, nor does
not expect that Mr. Baxter should name all particularly that are tolerable and
intolerable; this were to set him and Employment that might last to the worlds
end, if he could live so long, and would prevent his writing of Books to the
offense of his Conformable brethren; but, I think, would please many of them
very well, who are willing to be rid of him and his Books.

But Sir, I have, in obedience to your commands, put my Sickle too far into
other men's Harvests; and therefore will here put a period to my Remarks.
Besides, I hear Mr. B. has replied to the Learned Dr. and that his Book is
abroad in the world, though I have not seen it as yet, living as you know, at a
great distance, and in a small Village that has little commerce wit London. I
know you will pardon all the faults and imperfections of these hasty Lines; and
when you have read them, do what you please with them. I am,

SIR, Your very true Friend and Servant,


