Some Considerations Humbly Offered, against Granting the Sole Trade to GUINY
from Cape Blanc^ to Cape Lopez, to a Company with a Joint Stock, exclusive of
others.
A Company with a Joint Stock Exclusive, is a Monopoly; which has always been
esteemed a great Grievance in matters of small Moment, and will be much more so
in a Trade of so large Extent, and such vast Importance to this Nation, in the
Export of its Woollen, and other Manufactures; and to the Plantations, in
furnishing them with Negroes, by whose Strength and Labor all their
Commodities which come from thence, as Sugar, Indigo, Cotton, Ginger, Tobacco,
etc. are produced, and whereby the Navigation and Revenue of this Kingdom is so
greatly Increased.

And such a Company so established will have all the Mischiefs of a Monopoly.

I. They will buy the Woollen, and other English Manufactures, proper for
Guiny, at their own Rates, having no Competitors, and will sell all the
Commodities they import from thence into England, at what Prises they please.

II. In such C^se they alone can carry such Negroes to the West Indies as are
fit for the English Plantations, which are only to be purchased between Cape
Blanco and Cape Lopez, and so will make their own Prizes for them, and impose
what Terms they please on the Planters, as heretofore the African Company have
done: and by buying Negroes dear, less of the West India Commodities have been,
and will be produced, and at greater Charge; whereby other Nations have already
had an Opportunity, and have too well made use of it, to Vye with us in those
Commodities; to the great Abatement of the Advantage of this Kingdom; and it
may prove the Ruin of our Colonies: For if the Company have produced such
Mischiefs by the Authority of a Charter only, What may be expected from them,
if they should be established by a Law?

III. Such a Company having no Competitors, will buy as Cheap, and sell as Dear
as they please; and so will get as much by One Thousand Pounds, as would be
good Profit to Private Persons trading with Three times as much; and therefore
it is not their Interest to enlarge the Trade, but to get as much as they can
by the small Stock they employ; whereas many Buyers would Enhance the Price of
English Manufactures at home, and occasion a great Exportation of them, and
lower the Price of Foreign Goods in England, and bring Negroes much cheaper to
the Plantations, and thereby the Trade would greatly Increase.

And though the Company now offer to content themselves to be limited from Cape
Blanco to Cape Lopez, and to leave out Angola, yet that does not at all help
the matter, for these Reasons:
1. It is humbly conceived, That all the Subjects of England have an Equal
Right to all parts of the Guiny Trade.

2. The Extent of the Coast between Cape Blanco and Cape Lopez, is about 3000
Miles, besides up the Rivers in the Inland Country; and includes the whole
Trade for Gold, Teeth, Dying Wood, and for such Negroes as are fit for, and
desired at the English Plantations: For although there are Negroes to be had at
Angola, and such as the Spaniards like, yet the English will not buy them,
unless a few for their House Service; they being a lazy sort of Negro, and very
rebellious: And the safety of the Plantations depends upon having Negroes from
all parts of Guiny, who not understanding each others languages and Customs, do
not, and cannot agree to Rebel, as they would do, and has by sad Experience
been found, when there are too many Negroes from one Country.

3. This would exclude all the rest of the Subjects of England from buying the
Manufactures of this Kingdom proper for the Guiny Trade, very little of the
English Commodities being vended in Angola. For when a Ship is sent thithe^, in
a whole Cargo there is not above 2 P^ Bays 1 Ct weight of Pewter, 1 piece of
Cloth, a few Muskets, some Anabasses, and about 5 l. value in Knives; all the
rest of the Cargo are either Commodities from the East Indies, or Goods from
Holland: Whereas in a Cargo for those parts, from which the Company would have
the rest of their Fellow Subjects excluded, there is sent from 1500 to 2000
pieces of Perpetuanoes, 150, or 200 pieces of Says, 6 or 700 Dozen of Knives,
besides great quantities of Gunpowder, Boysadoes, Welsh Plains, and Pewter.

And if it should be pretended, That the Company will furnish the Plantations
with what quantity of Negroes they desire, and at such Rates as shall be
thought Reasonable by the Parliament, or any other Persons to be appointed from
time to time, yet that would be no more than what they formerly engaged to do,
when their Patent was granted by King Charles the Second, and in a more
especial manner for the Island of Jamaica: But it is to be Observed, That
whatever fair and specious Pretenses they made, they were far from performing
them; and neither supplied the Plantations with the quantities of Negroes, nor
at the prices they were obliged to do; nor ^ould they hereafter comply any
better with such an Agreement, if it should be made, for they know in case of
their Nonperformance, the Planter would be no more able to Contend with their
Joint Stock now, then formerly, and the Governors of the Plantations, being
the Companys Factors, the poor Planters must be content with their Treatment,
whatever it be, because the Remedy to obtain Redress, would be worse then the
Injury they suffer.

As to the Forts and Castles whereby they pretend to have Recovered the Trade,
and to have secured it to those they call Interlopers.
1. The Trade to Guinea was greatest, when it was open, more Goods of the
Growth and Manufacture of England were Exported for Guinea, and the Plantations
Better and Cheaper furnished with Negroes, than since the Company have been
settled.

2. At all the Chief Places of Trade for Negroes, there is neither Fort nor
Castle.

3. Where there is any Fort or Castle, they cannot secure the Trade, or annoy
any one that would disturb it, out of the reach of their Guns.

4. One or two Men of War would be a much better Security to the Trade than all
their Forts and Castles.

5. Although the chiefest Castle the Company have, belongs of right to the
Nation, and not to the Company, being taken by English Men of War, with the
loss of the Blood of those that did not belong to the Company; yet that, and
all others, were they more considerable might be paid for, and with ease
Maintained by a Regulated Company, with a small Imposition on the Trade out of
England, and on the Negroes Imported into the Plantations.

And that there may no room be left to doubt hereof, there are persons who will
engage to Raise a sufficient Fund to pay for their Forts, etc. and to defray
the future Charge of Maintaining them, and will receive their Reimbursement out
of the Duties which may be appointed to be Raised on the Trade, as it shall
come in. And therefore it is humbly hoped, the Guinea Trade will be settled in
that manner; and the rather, considering the great Discouragement those
Merchants and Planters have lain under by the Mortality in the West Indies, and
the Earthquake at Jamaica, and the great Losses which they have sustained in
this War; and by the settling the Guinea Trade in a Regulated Company, Ingenuity
and Industry would be Encouraged, that Trade would be Secured and Enlarged,
more Gold and Goods from Guinea would be Imported into England, the Plantations
would be better and cheaper supplied with Negroes, whereby the Revenues of the
Crown, and the Navigation of this Kingdom would be greatly increased, and all
the Inconveniences and Mischiefs of a Monopoly would be avoided.

All which is Humbly Submitted to the Consideration of the Honorable House of
Commons.


