THE Solemn Mock-Procession: OR THE TRIAL and EXECUTION OF THE POPE AND HIS
MINISTERS, On the 17. of Nov. at TEMPLE BAR; WHERE, Being brought before the
Figure of Q. ELIZABETH, he receives his first Sentence; and afterward led
before the Statue or Tribunal of K. CHARLES the Second: on the other side, he
receives his Final Doom and Downfall, viz. to be burnt with all his FRY into
Ashes, and the same to be scattered about, that thence might never spring
hereafter in England one Popish PHOENIX.

London, Printed for Nath. Ponder, Langley Curtis, Jonathan Wilkins, and Samuel
Lee, MDCLXXX.

THE Solemn Mock-Procession: Or, The Trial and Execution of the Pope and of his
Ministers, on the 17th. of November at Temple Bar.
IT is not any empty popular Applause, or mere sporting and insulting Fancy
that puts us on this Yearly Trouble and Charge of leading this Man of Sin as it
were in Triumph to his deserved Funeral Pile; we have more serious Inducements
thereunto. For we intend to declare hereby, that the Pope is the Archi-Traitor,
and the Head-Ingeneer not only of our Civil Combustions, but also of the
Lamentable Firing of this Famous Mother-City of our Country; and that though he
in his Emissaries made his Escape then, from Justice (perhaps by the connivance
of some) yet it is but just that while we on the one hand do Solemnize the
Memorial of our Restoration, we should as often remember them of that Shameful
Fact, and that all the Bloody Crew of them should be thus led as Criminals
through our Renewed Streets to Atone for that Villainy, and that they deserve
to be burnt in Effigy at least for the sad burning of Houses, and
Heart-breakings they have cruelly caused in this very Place. We would likewise
hereby (in these ambiguous times) renew a Holy Indignation in all True
Protestant Breasts, and a just Abhorrency even in all impartial Spectators of
those Persons and that Religion, whose Essential Tenet it is to propagate and
maintain it self by such unchristian, inhuman, and destructive Practices. But
we would further manifest by this Solemn Custom, That though that Savage
Religion has of late found such Potent Favorers and Abetters in this Nation,
yet that there are many more stout unbyassed Protestant Spirits that will
appear as in this, so on any other more solemn occasion in defense of their
King, Conscience, and Country, to confound any of the rebellious, and
superstitious Exorbitances of the Romish Religion; which may it be said, not by
way of vain provocation, but rather for the keeping of them quiet within bounds.

In Fine, The main Motive of our exposing of this Mock-Procession of the Pope
in all his Toyish Jollity, is to undeceive the Rational, or even the weaker
sort of Papists and the Favorers thereof, and to fetch to them whom the
ridiculeness of this Foppish Religion they would be at: Silly Fancies deserve
not a serious Refutation, and Erasmus's Satirical Drollery was found to be as
effectual to bring down the Romish Pageantry, as Luther's Gravity of Argument.
For can any man of sense (if he will but a little suspend his Prejudices)
imagine, as they do, that the Essential and devotious part of Divine Religion
consists in these poor Rags, Forms, Shapes, Garments, Copes, Cooles, Myters,
Crosses, white Shirts, Beads, and such other accumulated Trash of human and
late Fancy: For as Gods Nature is Spiritual and Immense, so reason it self
dictated so much Gospel to the considering Pagans, Deo sacrifica semper ingenio
probo: Neutu albam vestem magis quam mores induas. Menand.

Casto jubet Lex adire ad Deos animo videlicet in quo sunt omnia. Cic. 2. de
Legib.


as to believe that all the means of Worship that lead to his Knowledge and
Adoration must be of a suitable Nature; and that he needs not for Decency and
Glory borrow Colors of Men to set him out in any of their Antic Dresses, and
all these things are but as if you would put Clouts, Pictures, Vailes, and
Clouds before your Eyes, the better to see the more splendid Body of the Sun.
But it is not our part here to preach to them, but thus much by the way to
rectify theirs and other Persons misunderstandings of our Design, wherewith I
hope we shall not need to trouble our selves or the World ever henceforward.

In the Front of this Procession marches the Captain of the Popes Guard on
Horseback; there follow him ten Pioneers in Red Caps and Coats, in Ranks, with
Staves and Truncheons, to make way for the Main Body.

Next walks a Bellman ringing, and saying in a loud doleful Voice, Remember
Justice Godfrey.

A dead Bloody Corpse, representing Sir Edm. Ber. Godf. is carried on horseback,
supported by a Jesuit behind, who has a Bloody Dagger in his Hand.

After this sad Prelude, a very large Banner is carried betwixt two,
representing on the one side, The Cabal of the Jesuits at Wild-House all
hanging on one Gibbit; and among 'em another Twelve, that would betray their
Trust or Conscience. On the other side is represented Gammer Celliers with a
Bloody Bladder, and all her other Presbyterian Plot Forgers; and Protestants in
Masquerade; and all this in Colors on a Cloth.

The First Pageant.
In the forepart of the first Pageant is a Meal-Tub, whereupon Mrs. Celliers
leans, she being on the one Corner, and having a Narrative in her Hand. On the
other Corner of the Pageant is one in Black, standing bare-headed, and playing
on a Fiddle. Behind these there stand the Figures of four Protestants in
Masquerade, all in Bi-partite Garments of White and Black.

After this Pageant there follows an Abhorrer on Horseback with his Face toward
the Tail, with an Inscription on his Back, This is an Abhorrer.

Another rides after him with a Banner having this Inscription, We Protestants
in Masquerade usher in Popery.

The Second Pageant.
On this Pageant are represented four Franciscan Friars in their proper Habits,
whereof two are Capuchines in Gray Russet, with a Cord tied about their Middle,
and long Cowls coming on their Head, and thence hanging behind with a Tail like
Hypocrates's Sleeve. The other two are Minorites, which is a Diminitive Species
of these Franciscan Birds, and they are clad in a Cinamon-colour'd Habit, with
shorter Cowls. And know that their Devotion to the Rules of St: Francis is
greater by far than to Christ's Gospel, which they think to be a Rule of less
Perfection: And some of their Divine Poems do confidently say, That what Christ
did for our Redemption of old, Francis does of late, the Blood and Merits of
this latter saves now, as well as his did then; Qui modo Christus erat, nunc
Franciscus erit; with a great deal of more blasphemous stuff that I have an
horror to mention.

The Third Pageant.
Here are two Augustine Friars in Black close Habits, with a Leather Girdle,
for there is a great deal in that; and whereas Augustine associated to himself
but some few for to study and live together in a friendly, retired, and free
manner; these since made it an Order, as if the Order and Name of Christians
were not Holy enough for them. Enter after these, two Dominican bouncing Friars
(where note, that the worthier of Orders comes always last) these are clad in
Black and White Garments, and are otherwise called Brothers Preachers, taking
that and the former Nickname of one Dominick, who for preaching ten years
against the Innocent Albingenses (the first Disclaimers of the Popish Errors in
France) was for that and raising a Cruisado or Holy War against these Martyrs,
made a Saint by that See, which deems such Cruelties very Holy and Meritorious
Works.

The Fourth Pageant.
Here strut out four Jesuits in a black Hue and Garb, suitable to their Manners,
with high Collars mounting up about their Necks lik a Pasty-Crust; the Lives
and monstrous Actions of these are so well known, that we need not enlarge
thereupon; only that these are two main Engines of their Kingdom as wicked as
Hell can make them: first, that by the Invention of a new Frame of the Easy
Devotion, they corrupt the unalterable bounds of Morality and Christianity, and
by a pliable Scheme of Policy, suitable to every Princes Lust, they destroy all
Governments where they have Entrance.

The Fifth Pageant.
Here are Mounted Two Bishops, a sort of Disciples of Christ, that pretend to
take place of ordinary Dukes and Princes: Behind them are two Popish
Archbishops in their Pontificalibus; they differ in their Crosiers, being such
Names and Habits as I never read of in the Gospel.

The Sixth Pageant.
Two Patriarchs with two-forked Crosiers, in Bishop-like Vestments, and two
Cardinals do ride in this Pageant in pure Scarlet Habits, wherein the Pope will
not be beholden to Christ for their Institution or Robes, being next Cousins to
the Scarlet Whore of Babylon in every Point.

Next follows his Holinesses Master of Ceremonies, carrying the Popes Triple
Cross, which he scorns to bear himself, distributing of Bulls, Pardons and
Indulgences, and crying aloud, Here you may have Heaven for Money.

She Seventh Pageant.
Here comes Antichrist himself; for neither Christ nor Peter ever took such a
worldly prodigal Grandeur on them; he is all arrayed in Scarlet-Robes, Furred
with Ermines, and covered with Gold and Silver-Lace, with a triple Crown, on
the Front whereof is writ, MYSTERY; he holds 2 Keys in his hands, which are
pretended to be of a Place where he is never like to get in himself; two Swords
stand at his Right Hand, typifying that of Excommunication, and of the Civil
Dominion he claims over Kings and Princes; wherefore there is the poor Emperor
Frederick sprawling under his feet; on whose Neck he insolently trod at
Venice. Many other Crowns and Scepters lie at his Feet; whereof he arrogates
the absoltte Disposal and Sovereignty. Therefore there is a Page of his in
White at one Corner of the Throne, brandishing a Banner, whereon is writ, This
is the KING OF KINGS; and as if that were not sufficient, another Page on the
other Corner holds a Streamer, on which is, Thou art our GOD the POPE; which
Sayings are in the Roman Canon Law, and Ceremonial, to be said at his
Installation, and Pope Martin could calmly hear the Sicilian Ambassadors make
Homage to him, saying, Thou art the Lamb of God that take away the Sins of
the World: So it is plain that it is he that sits in the Temple of God, exalting
himself above all that is called God.

The Eighth Pageant.
Here comes the Empress Donna Olympia, who was the Popes Mistress by her Lust,
and consequently the Worlds in her time; she is surrounded by four Nuns, to
whom it is less honorable to be Whores, than to Marry, for Pope Gregory
himself, that ordained this goodly Vow of Chastity for Priests and Nuns, had
some thousands of Infants Skuls brought before him, that were fisht out of a
Pond surrounding these Holy Vestals Monastaries; and many such are recorded to
have been found here in England in Times of Popery. On this Pageant is a
Streamer inscribed, Curtezans in Ordinary.

The Ninth Pageant.
Hitherto you have tasted but of the Honey that surrounds the Cup of
Abomination; now you come to the bitterest of the Potion; for they Usher in
their Religion with taking Fineries; but the Sting of the Inquisition lies in
this Serpents Tail. Here indeed is the main Scene of Antichrist's Cruelties
against Christians and Martyrs that dare see or speak against his Errors,
abominable Pride and Wickedness. In this Pageant you see a Seat of Judicature,
whereon sits a Bishop as Inquisitor-General, and is surrounded by other Monks
as Inquisitors-Assistants; there stands a poor Martyr condemned, before them,
dragged to a Stake, environed with Faggots to burn him, and then put a
Sanbenite-Cap on his head all painted with Devils; and all the Theater round
about is strewed and hemmed with Racks and Instruments of Cruelty.

In this Fatal Pomp the Procession sets out from White-Chappel-Bars, and on
through Bishopsgate, through Cornhil, Cheapside and Ludgate, till it comes to
Temple Bar, where it receives its Sentence to be Burnt before Queen Besses
Throne; and in remembrance of her happy Days, and for the Victories that God
gives us in our Days against the Pope and his Emissaries, the Solemnity is
closed with Fuzees and artificial Fires.

The full Manner of this Procession is lively represented to the Eye on a
Copper-Plate, and to be Sold by Jonathan Wilkins at the Star in Cheapside next
to Mercers-Chappel.


