SOBER AND Seasonable Queries Humbly offered to all GOOD PROTESTANTS IN
ENGLAND, In Order to a Choice of the New Parliament.
I. WHether the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, are not designed for
Destruction by the Hellish Conspiracy of the bloody Papists, as has been
declared by two Parliaments, and sufficiently proved by the King's Witnesses
before the Judges of this Kingdom.

II. What posture of Defense extraordinary is the City of London and Nation in
at the Discovery of so Hellish a Plot, to defend themselves from the
Insurrection of Papists at home, and Invasion from Papists abroad suitable to
the desires of a Loyal Parliament.

III. Whether Prorogation and Dissolution of Parliaments at such a time as this
does not fill the hearts of Protestant Subjects with evident fears of
Destruction, and gives the cursed Plotters too to much ground to believe that
their day is coming.

IV. Whether have we not great reason to fear that the Papists will not hereby
take encouragement to proceed in their Hellish Design to Murder the King, who
they know is sworn at his Coronation to maintain and defend the Protestants
Religion (and so is solemnly engaged against them) whereby they may subvert the
Government, by bringing in a Popish Successor, in whom is all their help and
hope.

V. Whether any Speeches to, or in Parliament, in favor of a Popish Successor,
is not of direct tendency to prepare the Nation to make Trial of it again, as
if the dreadful Effects of Queen Mary's Reign were, or ever can be forgotten,
whose great promises was sealed with Fire and Faggot.

VI. If so, what are we to think of them that have or shall discountenance, or
endeavor to corrupt the King's Witnesses: or that do indulge arraigned
Traitors impudently to asperse the Justice of the Land.

VII. Whether it is not the indispensible Duty of all Protestant Magistrates
whatsoever, with the People of England, to consider with themselves, and
consult the Learned in the Laws what Power God and the King, and the Laws have
put into their hands for the prevention of Popery and Slavery, both from
themselves and posterity, lest their Ignorance and Security bring Destruction
without Recovery.

VIII. Whether it will not be for the perpetual Honor of the Magistrates of
London, to be first in this work, forasmuch as that famous City has woeful
experience in their many dreadful Burnings, that the tender mercies of the
Papists toward them is Popish Cruelty.

IX. Whether that Costly Monument erected near London Bridge, is not to be a
perpetual Land mark for all English and Foreign Protestants, forever to remember
1666. Septsmber 2. when those cursed Plotters began to set Fire at a
Baker's-House in Pudding-Lane, which by these Emisaries was conducted on, for
four days together, till it laid in Ashes thirteen thousand two hundred
Proufes, laying waste three hundred seventy three Acres of Land within the
Walls, and above sixty three Acres without the Walls, with eighty nine
Parish-Churches.

X. Whether the Spanish Invasions, 1588. and the Gunpowder-Treason, 1605.
together with the cruel Murders and Massacres on some Hundred thousand
Protestants, Men, Women and Children, in the Netherlands, Ireland, Piedmont,
and the Albigenses, be not a sufficient Warning to England. That they beseech
their God and their King, and their Parliament, That no Papist, of such
destructive Principles, may dwell in our Land?

XI. Whether such a Day as this, does not loudly Call for Repentance, that
Protestants have been persecuting each other, and for Unity in Affection among
all Protestant Subjects, whether Conforming or Dissenting in some lesser
Points; And that as Brethren they unite in such a Combination or Conjunction as
was in Queen Elizabeth's time, with good Success to defend the Crown, Religion
and Kingdom, against the common Enemy of Mankind; Forasmuch as the Episcopal
Protestants, as well as others, must lie down in the same Bed of Flames
together, if the Pope and his Party get the upper-hand.

XII. Whether it be not the Duty of all Good Protestants, to pray for the Long
Life of the King, That He may Live so, as becomes the same Religion, it being
an Enemy to all Vice, and the Maintenance of all Virtue; Forasmuch also, That
the Removing of the King, (as the Papists call it) is the most likely way to
let in Popery, and a Thousand other Miseries upon this poor Kingdom?

XIII. Whether it be not high time for all the Protestants in England, to
Resolve, as one Man, That they will stand by and maintain the Power and
Privileges of Parliament; Together with the Power and just Rights of the King,
according to the Laws of the Kingdom, so as the one may not Entrench upon the
other?

XIV. Whether it be not the Duty of all Good Protestants, to be heartily
Thankful to God, for the timely Discoveries of this Hellish Plot; And also to
pray, That God would preserve the King and Kingdoms Witnesses, that they may
finish their Testimony, to the well becoming so signal a Work, and humble
Behavior before Almighty God, the King and Kingdom; That they may obtain Mercy
at the Hand of God, and not be Cast-aways to themselves, while they are of such
public Use and Benefit to these bleeding Nations?

XV. Whether all the Counties, Cities and Corporations in England, are not at
this time more highly Concerned than ever, to make Choice of such for
Parliament Men, as may not Sell, but Save them, to the Happy Settlement of our
present Protestant King and Government?

XVI. Whether therefore it be not the Duty of the People, to choose such as are
well known to be Men of good Conscience and Courage, thorougly Principled in
the Protestant Religion, and of high Resolution to maintain it with their Lives
and Fortunes?

XVII. Whether all true English Men ought not seriously to consider what they
trust the Parliament with, viz. their Estates, Liberties, Religion and Lives,
And should they be undone in any of these, when it is too late, they may Lament
themselves, That they are undone by making such a Choice as have undone them by
Law?

XVIII. Whether it should not be the great Care of all Counties, Cities and
Boroughs, to consider who have been formerly Pensioners or Farmers of Popery;
And whether they are fit again to be Entrusted with their Religion, Lives and
Liberties?

XIX. Whether you are not bound to consider those worthy Members of the late
Parliament, who have already Faithfully served you, and the whole Kingdom, with
their Persons and Estates; And now show your Esteems of them, and Acceptance of
their former Services, by an Unanimous Choosing of them again, Forasmuch as
they are best acquainted with the Deplorable state of these Kingdoms?

XX. Whether it be not your indispensible Duties, to endeavor to make their
Elections easy, by bearing your own Charges, and the Charges of the meaner
sort of Freeholders, lest such as would Heartily serve you, be in time
Discouraged, to undertake that great Work of preserving you and your
Posterities, in your lawful and undoubted Rights?

XXI. Whether may we not, without breach of Charity, conclude, That if known
Pentioners do now Buy Seats in Parliament, they do not intend again to make
Merchandise of all that is dear to us? And whether will not all Freeholders and
Electors, be deservedly accounted Infamous, and the Betrayers of their
Country, who shall Resolvedly, after such Discoveries of our Dangers, and such
Opportunities of being, by God's Blessing, delivered from them by honest
English Parliaments, Sell themselves, their Wives, Children and Estates, for
one of Esau's Morsels?

XXII. Whether it be not the hearty Prayer of all good Protestants, That the
King would be pleased to hearken unto, and rely upon the Advice of His
Parliament; and avoid all such, who seek to make themselves Rich, by making the
King and Kingdom Poor: Forasmuch as the Parliament are the Great Council of the
King and Kingdom; and by them the King is supplied, out of the Purse of the
Kingdom; and they Command and Encourage the People to venture the shedding of
their dearest Blood in any Just and Righteous Cause, to maintain the King and
Kingdoms Power and Greatness?

XXIII. Whether if you will believe the Jesuits and Priests at St. Omers. That
there was never any such Man as Sir Edmund-berry Godfrey born; And if you will
believe what his Murderers said at their Death, that they did not Murder him,
then you must not believe there was any such Man as Sir Edmund-berry Godfrey in
England?

XXIV. Lastly, Whether if Popish Treasons and Murders, render the Papists' at
their Death, as Innocent as the Child unborn, who would not be a Murderer, and
Popish Traitor?

FINIS.

