SOME CONSIDERATIONS OFFERED against the Continuance OF THE Bank of England, In
a LETTER to a Member of the present PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
Though it may be justly thought, that you have Sacrificed your Judgment to your
Affection, in your commanding my Opinion concerning the Bank, whose Genius
carries me so little either to Trade or Politics; yet by what I am able to
lay before you, who am so ill qualified to meddle with this Subject, you will
easily guess what might have been said, by those that are of greater
Penetration, and more conversant in Themes of this nature. Nor do I merely obey
you from the respect and deference I bear to your Merit and Authority, but upon
the Motives of that love and regard, which are inseparate from me to my
Country. And it being unbecoming the Wisdom, and inconsistent with the Justice
of a Parliament to prefer the Interest of a single Society, or of a few
Individuals, to the Welfare, Profit, and Opulency of the Nation, it must needs
awaken new and second thoughts in the Members of the Two Houses, when they find
that the Bank is only subservient to the Benefit of a few, with a direct
Tendency to the subversion of Trade, and the impoverishing all Ranks and
Degrees of Men besides themselves, as well as to the paving away for the
alteration of our ancient and legal Constitution.

I presume not to reflect upon the method of raising Money by the granting large
and long continuing Funds of Interest; though there be those that both think
themselves, and are believed by many others, to have demonstrated that such
ways of supplying the Government, are the most ruinous, as well as imprudent,
that can be fallen upon. Much less am I displeased at the Constitution of
Commissioners, for taking the Subscriptions, receiving the Quota's of the
several Contributors, and for applying the Fund provided by the Act to the
paying the Proportions of Interest, as they become respectively due; for as all
that is indispensably necessary, and wiesly adjusted, on the Supposition of
taking that course to support the Government: So it imports Loss and Damage to
none, whatsoever advantage may accrue by it to some, which I am far from
envying.

But that which I crave liberty to complain of, is the Erecting a National
Bank, and the Incorporating such a Number of Persons for the Conduct and
Management of it; seeing as it is already felt of what destructive Importance
this is to the Kingdom, so I cannot avoid apprehending, what Great and National
Inconveniences, as well as inevitable Personal Mischiefs, are entailed upon,
and must necessarily accompany it.

However, I design not to arraign the Prudence, and Prospect of the Parliament,
that a Clause attended with such pernicious Consequences, should have come to
be inserted in the Act. Seeing as the Bill was brought in toward the End of a
Session, when there were fewer Members in the House, than either should be, or
usually are; when Matters that affect the Kingdom and Posterity in so signal a
manner are Debated and Determined; So the Expedition they were obliged unto, in
providing and dispatching the Funds for the support of the then approaching
Campaign, may have prevented that Sedate Examination of every Clause, and the
ballancing Conveniences and Inconveniences that may ensue upon them, which at
more leisure they are accustomed to do, and which I do not doubt, but that
having now a sufficiency of time, they will reassume the Consideration of.

Nor does it look favorably upon the Constitution of the Government, that all
National Banks have hitherto been peculiar to Commonwealths, and that this the
First of the kind that ever was erected under a Monarchy, and that obtained a
legal Foundation in a Regal Government. Nor can Models convertible with
Republics, have a good effect upon Crowned heads, or be found consistent with
a Monarchichal Constitution, but either the King will swallow up the Bank, or
the Bank supplant the King.

And besides the naturalness of this Reflection, a perusal of the Lift of the
Subscribers, with a view of those, that are Principal Directors of the Bank,
will render the Observation the more necessary as well as Just: And if the
Scene lay elsewhere, it would be very Comical, though as it appears in England,
it raises melancholy Apprehensions, to find the Zealots for upholding the
Bank, and some of the Chief Trustees in managing of it, to be such of whom it
may be pronounced without doing them Injustice. That their Bias was never very
remarkable toward Kingship. But should I be so favorable as to allow the
Guardians and Administrators of the Bank, not only to equal, but to exceed
others in Zeal for Kingship, and Loyalty to Princes, Yet this can be no
Protection to the Regal Constitution, nor give a durable Security to any King
that sits upon the Throne. For there being so many warm Republicans in the
Nation, and many of them as plentifully furnished with Money as their
Monarchichal Neighbors; How easy is it for them, where Shares are transferable
to the highest Bidder, to Engross in a little time the largest Proportion of
the Bank, and to Monopolize it to the Party.

And Money being the Sinews of War, and they always in a condition to get Men,
who have wherewith to pay them, How uneasy, as well as impolitick is it, to
countenance an Establishment, by which such as are not friendly to our Form of
Government, may come to be possessed of, and have, the managing of most of the
Money of the Nation.

And as a National Bank in a Monarchy may endanger the degrading the Sovereign,
and the lessenning the Just rights of the Monarchy; so it is not impossible on
the other hand, but that one time or another such a Prince may ascend the
Throne, as may make the Bank subservient to the overthrowing the Laws of the
Kingdom, and the trampling upon the People's Liberties. For as an ill King, and
one that is ambitious of being Despotical, may easily introduce his own
Creatures to be the Chief Managers of the Bank, by furnishing them with Money
out of the Exchequer to out-bid all others in purchasing of Shares; so having
once gotten the Conduct and Administration of it into their Hands, and by
consequence having All or most of the Money of the Kingdom at his own Command,
and under his Disposal, What may he not attempt and accomplish against our
Rights, Laws, and Liberties? Nor can any thing on such a Supposition, hinder
his making himself Absolute, and reducing Us to be Slaves; and then instead of
Frequent Parliaments which are Guardians of our Laws, and the Barrier against
Oppression and Tyranny, we shall have none at all, because no Prince after that
will need them: For few Kings ever called Parliaments to relieve their People,
but themselves; and whenever they can supply their own Wants without them,
they will never Assemble them to Redress our Grievances. And as a Prince who
has Engrossed the Money of the Nation into his own hands, may Raise and keep on
Foot what Forces he pleases; so few Kings that can Rule by a Military Power
will have the Moderation and good Temper to Govern by a legal. Yea the very Act
by which the Bank is Established, has chaulked out a way by which the Bankers,
and by their means a King, when he pleases, cannot avoid getting most, if not
all the Money of the Kingdom into their hands in a very little time. Seeing it
not only obliges the Governor and Company of the Bank of England to pay into
the Exchequer the Sum specified in the said Act, but it Authorizeth them to
advance by way of Loans upon all other Acts to the extent of those Funds, as
shall be agreed on in Parliament. And their Grasping already while the Bank is
yet in it is Infancy, not only at the payment of the Army, which must give them
possession of the Money, necessary for the doing of it, but to draw into their
hands all the Tallies, that are or shall be struck upon the Standing Revenue,
or upon any other Parliamentary Grants, shows of what malignant influence upon
King and Kingdom, such a Corporation may prove in time; and that there seems to
be something already in Embrio, either to the prejudice of the Rights of the
Crown, or to the endangering the Liberties of the People.

Nor is it unworthy the Consideration of those, that either have, or intend to
place their Money in the Bank, that there never was a National Bank, though in
Republics, where they are not only managed, with as much Industry and
Prudence, but with more safety from being broken in upon, than they can be in
Monarchies, but that it came vaftly more indebted than it was worth. Nor is
this to be denied either in reference to the Bank of Amsterdam, or that of
Venice, though they have, and that deservedly, the best Reputation of any in
Europe. It Is true, their being indebted ten times more than they are really and
intrinsically worth, does not render the disposing Money into them hazardous, or
discourage wise Men from doing of it, because the whole Province of Holland,
and the whole State of Venice are Responsible for whatsoever is lodged in any
of those Banks. So that whilst those Governments stand, every Man's Money is
there safe, and may be had when called for and demanded. And if those States
should come to be overthrown, every private Man's Money will be lost, though
Hoarded up in his own Coffers. For it is in vain for any Particulars to think
of saveing their Cabbins, when the Vessels in which they are, sink, and are
swallowed up. But the Case of the Bank of England is much otherwise, seeing
beyond the making good the Interest of 1200000 l. neither the Government nor
the Kingdom are obliged to see one Farthing either Principal or Interest paid
of all that this New Corporation Erected into a Bank, shall obtain Credit, and
become indebted for. Nor is there the least connection betwixt their subsisting
as a Bank, and the Nations continuing safe and opulent; yea the sooner that
comes to be dissolved, the more flourishing the Kingdom will be, and only such
as have trusted them will be affected by their Fall.

It deserves also to be seriously thought upon, by all that lodge Moneys in
their hands, that when they think they have Trusted a Corporation, they may
find that they have no such Body Corporate to implead for what they have Lent,
but must be forced to sue so many Distinct, and several Individuals as are
Contributors to the Bank, Seeing the Act provides, That as a Corporation they
shall not borrow, nor give Security by Bill, Bond. Covenant or Agreement, under
their Common Seal, for any more, further or other Sum or Sums of Money
exceeding at a time the whole Sum of 1200000 l. So that, in case they do, they
shall not be sued as a Corporation, but that all and every Member or Members,
etc. shall in his or their respective private Personal Capacities be Chargeable
with, and liable in Proportion to their several Quota's, and Subscriptions to
the Repayment of such Moneys which shall be borrowed and taken up. From whence
it is obvious that in order to a Person's recovering one single 100 l. he may
be to Sue and Implead four or five hundred several Men, and that by distinct
and separate Actions, which is infinitely worse, than to sit down contentedly
with the Loss of the Money.

And there being so much Chichanery in the Law, and most People Habituated to
Trick and Deceit, it will be questionable in a very little time, whether they
can be impleaded as a Corporation for any Farthing of all that shall be Lent
unto them: For not being Suable under that Character, and in that Capacity, for
any. Sum or Sums after they have borrowed 1200000 l. How difficult, if not
morally impossible, will it be for any that shall Trust Money in their Hands, to
make legal Proof that they were not so much indebted antceedently to their
becoming possessed of what those Persons Lent unto them. For though we should
suppose, that every one who lends them Money, will previously to the doing of
it, demand and obtain a view of their Books (which very few will have the the
Direction and Foresight to do) yet what will a single Testimony amount unto,
and that in his own favor against a Body of Men befriended by the Government,
and furnished with a Purse?

And it being provided by the Act, That they shall not be impleaded as a
Corporation for any Money borrowed by, or Lent unto them, but what they shall
give Security for by Bill, Bond, or Covenant, under their Common Seal; the
Method of their Practice in many if not most of the Bills which they have
issued and granted out, for security of the Money that has been Lent to them,
puts them out of the reach of being su'd as a Corporation for the Recovery of
it, and disables the Lenders from impleading them, as an Incorporated Body.
Seeing of that vast Number of Bills emitted for Moneys Entrusted, Lodged, and
Deposited with them under the Notion of a Bank, there is scarce a Moiety of
those Bills that have the Common Seal of the Corporation annexed and affixed
unto them, the rest having no more to secure the Payment of what they are given
in Security for, but the bare hands of Servants and the Directors. And as their
departing so early in this Particular from the observation of the Statute by
which they are Erected and Incorporated as the Bank of England, shows what may
be Justly apprehended and feared from them hereafter, as to their Acting with a
neglect and disregard of all the other Provisions and Limitations of the said
Law; so it proclaims aloud, That they neither are nor can be Suable as a
Corporation for much of that Money, which they are already become Possessed of
by way of Loans.

And the Conditions of Men being liable to so many Contingencies, and those who
can Lend to day out of their Superfluities, not knowing into what Straits and
Necessities they may be reduced to morrow; it might serve to discourage a great
many from advancing into the Bank with that Zeal, and Profuseness that they do.
Seeing whatsoever may come to be the Circumstances of those that shall
Contribute to the Advance of the 1200000 l. into the Bank, and be their
Cravings never so urgent, yet they are precluded all Hope of Recovering the
Principal, and staked down to the bare and naked Interest of 8 per Cent. unless
they can relieve and reimburse themselves by the Selling and Transferring of
their several and respective Shares; and as that depends upon the Credit and
Reputation that the Bank may continne in; So the Honor and Security of that
Corporation bears upon a Thousand of unforeseen Accidents. Nor is it so
advisable as some imagine, notwithstanding the Temptation of a large Interest,
for any to lodge their Daughters Portion, and the Fortunes of their Younger
Sons in the Bank, seeing they can have no moral Certainty, that the Principal
shall be recoverable at such times and seasons, as those Concerned may stand in
need of it. And we have Presidents within the Memory of many Men living, how
that Thousands who thought they had Lent their Money upon Good and Natinal
Security, yet found themselves disappointed, and reaped nothing of all the Money
they had Lent, but Poverty to their Children, and Repentance to themselves for
their Liberality and Zeal.

To which let me add the shutting of the Exchequer, which was not only ruinous
to many of the most Reputable, and opulent Goldsmiths of London. but of
Thousands of Persons, who had Trusted and Lent Money to them upon Interest, and
that upon the Countenance and Encouragement, which those Lombard Street
Gentlemen had given them by several Acts of Parliament, for Granting Loans to
the Government; So the breaking of the Chamber of London, which had a constant,
and not to be obstructed, Supply coming in to answer (as was apprehended) all
its Payments, and Issues has impoverished a vast Multitude of all Ages, Sexes
and Degrees.

But that which should most Alarm the Nation in reference to the Bank, and
provoke every man to endeavor in his respective Station to get it Suppressed, is
that in the way, method, and extent, which the Directors have begun, and
proceed to manage it, it is nothing else nor less, than an open, direct, and
avowed Monopoly. And as every Monopoly (though but of one Commodity) is a thing
extremely odious in the eye of the Law; so, whenever any thing of that nature
has been either Authorized or connived at, by our foregoing Princes, it has
been not only complained of as a Grievance, but fallen upon by the
Representatives of the People, with the same warmth and resentment, as they
have used to attacque a common Nuisance. Nor either can, and much less ought, a
Monopoly to escape the common Hatred, or be covered from the Wrath and
Animadversion of a righteous and wise Parliament; because as it is both a
Discouragement, and a Supplanting of Trade, and the Investing a few with an
Authority and Right to Oppress, Impoverish, and Insult over the Body of the
Kingdom; so it circumscribes and confines the Bounty and Favor of the
Government to a handful of the Subjects, to an exclusion of the Bulk of the
People from being partakers in that Care and Kindness of the Magistrate, which
by such a Project he only vouchsafes and exercises toward some. Neither can
any thing be more threatening to the Public Peace, than for a Government to
exasperate in a manner the whole Community, against a single Corporation, and
to provoke the Natural strength of a Society against the Artificial; that is to
administer ground to the Body of the People, to quarrel with, and assault a few
Individuals, countenanced either by Law, or by a Charter Establishment, to
undrmine, pillage, and impoverish them. And as this has too freqnently been the
Consequence and Result attending Monopolies; so it will hardly fail to be the
effect of such an Establishment, which has that latitude and extent of
mischievous and ruinous Operation, as this new erected Bank of England has.

For this is Notionly molded and framed to affect a few Inferior and little
Dealers, but it will infallibly enfeeble and cripple all that are either
Employed in Manufactures, or exercised in Trades, but most especially the
Merchants, who Export the Superfluities which the Land produces above our
Consumption, and who Import the Productions of other Countries, that we either
need or can make benefit by. Now Trade being the Chief Mean, if not the only,
by which any Nation comes to be Enriched, and consequently to be Powerful; and
England having advantage above all other Countries, by its Situation, Ports,
and Manufactures, and the Ingenuity and Industry of its People, of enlarging
and improving Trade; it does naturally follow, that whatsoever does either
lessen and diminish Trade in General, or which Engrosseth it into a few Hands,
must needs lie in a direct Opposition to the true Interest of the Kingdom, and
will be found subservient to the rendering it poor, weak, and despicable.

And to begin with the Engrossing of Trade into the Hands of a few, which the
present Directors of the Bank appear not only to be Grasping at, but which, it
seems the Bank was unwarily Calculated and Established for; Can any thing be
more demonstratively Evident, than that whosever stand privileged and
authorized (as this Company plainly does) to Engross most of the Current Money
of the Nation, especially that which circulateth in and about London, which is
the Mint and Source of our Money, and the Center of the whole Trade of the
Kingdom, but they may unavoidably reduce Trade into as few hands as they
please; and that they being of the Principles of most Men, which is to seek to
promote their own Wealth, and Greatness, they must (having it so fairly within
their Power) make it their Aim and Design. For though the Act, does provide, That
they shall not Deal or Trade or permit, or suffer any Person or Persons, either
in Trust or for the Benefit of the Company to Deal or Trade with any of the
Stocks-Money in the Buying or Selling any Goods, Wares, Merchandises whatsoever
Yet how easily will this be eluded by consigning Money into the hands of
private Men, as if it were Lent, and thereby enabling them to Engross and
Monopolize what Goods they have the best prospect of making the greatest Profit
by; and then the Directors of the Cerporation, or at least some of them, upon
granting a little Allowance to them they had employed as Managers, will have
the Chief benefit of the Goods.

But should I allow the Conductors, and Administrators of the Bank to be
Persons of that Honor, Virtue, Justice, and Self-denial, as that they will not
go Shares in the Profit of any Goods that shall be purchased and engrossed, by
Moneys that they have either cause disburse themselves upon Wares and
Merchandises; or that they have lent unto others to capacitate them to
Monopolize the most Mercantile Goods; yet it is undeniable that it is in their
Power to entrust their Friends and Relations with such Sums as shall enable
them to Engross what Goods they shall have a mind unto, and to forestall
Markets when they please, which is equally destructive to Trade, as if
themselves were either the Sole or Principal Transactors. For a Monopoly is a
Monopoly, whosoever be put into Capacity, and encouraged to practice it.

And there is already a Notorious and known Instance, (as unquestionably there
may be many more though not discovered) of the Bank's having qualified a certain
Dealer in London to Engross all the Coffee that is not in the hands of
Retalers, so as thereby to enable him to raise that Commodity to 18 or 20 s.
the Hundred Weight, which was commonly sold before at 5 or 6 s. per Hundred.
For whereas the Sum requisite to the purchasing the forementioned Goods, was
too large to be obtained, or reasonably hoped for, from private Persons, the
Directors of the Bank have Furnished the Gentleman with Money sufficient for
doing it. And as we may be sure, that they have not been thus kind,
Neighbourly, and Generous, merely to benefit the Dealer, and much less to
endamage themselves; so nothing can be more evident, than that it will be to
the Prejudice of Hundreds, that must unavoidably suffer, by one Person's being
enabled to Engross all the Coffee in the Kingdom, that is indisposed of. Nor is
it less apparent, that as other Persons may by the same means be enabled to
Monopolize all that shall hereafter be Imported, and thereby make the Consumers
of it pay four times the price, which they might otherwise have bought it for;
So there is no sort of Goods either farbiqu'd at home, or brought from abroad,
but which by the Bank's pursuing the like Method, may be Monopoliz'd into the
Hands of any single person, whom they shall please to favor with the Advance
of a large Sum of Money unto.

And it is extremely surprising, that whilst the Parliament endeavored to have
the Act so penned, as that this Corporation might be prevented from becoming a
Monopoly, yet that they at the same time by the Insertion of one Clause, have
Established and Authorized them to be one. For by dispensing with, and
empowering them not only to sell all Goods, Wares, Merchandise, that shall be
deposited with them, but to deal in Bills of Exchange, and to buy and sell
Bullion, Gold and Silver. they do allow them to Engross and Monopolize a great
part of the Trade of the Nation, and to disable and preclude all others from
being in a Condition to Trade, not only in what is there specified, but in
every thing else. Seeing beside the Right which is hereby vouchased and granted
unto them, of breaking in upon the Comerce, and Traffic of Merchants,
Goldsmiths, and Money-Scriveners, and both of supplanting them in, and worming
them out of those ways of Dealing and Subsisting, to which they have been bred,
and wherein they have usefully served and promoted the Interest and prosperity
of the Kingdom; the being thus Authorized to deal in Bullion, and to buy Gold
and Silver, will in the natural and immediate Consequence of it, undermine all
other Dealers whatsoever, through an Engrossing of that which is the only Medium
of all Trade, and of Comerce of every kind. So that upon the Bank's being
privileged to possess themselves of the Bullion, Gold, and Silver, no
particular Trader whatsoever, will be capable in a little time, of supporting
himself is his proper and respective way of Dealing.

And as the Bank will be ruinous to all Trade, by Engrossing the Money
wherewith it should be upheld and carried on, and through their thereupon
Monopolizing what Goods, Wares, and Merchandise they please; so should they not
so much as meddle directly or indirectly with the Buying and Selling Goods of
any kind, yet the Bank will be extremely and inconceivably pernicious to the
whole Comerce and Manufacture of this Kingdom, by draining the Money out of the
Channel of Trade, and diverting it another way. For as upon the one hand,
nothing can be more obvious to such as give themselves the liberty to think,
than that the more our Money is employed in Trade, the more we increase in
Wealth and Strength at home, in Reputation and Honor abroad, the more is our
Manufacture encouraged and enlarged, the higher is the Price of Land, and the
better are Rents paid; so it is no less evident on the other hand, than that
the Bank has already, and if continued and supported, will more and more for
the future, draw the Money out of the Canal of Trade, and thereby not only
abridge and narrow, but enfeeble, cripple, and starve it. Can any thing be more
evident, than that as much of the Money, which was formerly lent by those who
were not Traders, to such as were, at 5 per Cent. has been called out of their
hands, and upon the tempting Gain of 8 per Cent. put into the Bank; so likewise
that too many Tradesmen and Merchants, who formerly employed their whole Stock
in Traffic, and to carry on Manufactures, have put much of their Cash into
this new Fund. And though the Interest given by the Bank, for all Money lent unto
and deposited with them, beyond the original 1200000 l. be not more, and may be
not so much, as was heretofore given by some Merchants and Tradesmen; yet by
reason that so many Dealers have of late broke and become Bankrupt, through
Losses and Obstructions of Tade at Sea, and through high Taxes and decay of
Traffic at home, most Persons who have Money by them disposable abroad upon
Interest, will choose rather to place it in the Bank at a low and moderate
Advantage, than to venture it in private hands, upon the offer and promise of
greater Profit.

And the Trade of England will be the more sensibly affected, and brought under
the greater Decay by the withdrawing Money out of that Channel, and by denying
the wonted Credit to Dealers, in that when most of the Money of the Kingdom was
employed in Traffic, it was not enough and sufficient to carry on Trade to the
measure and degree, that the Nation is capable of. And if we were always crampt
and crippl'd in every kind of Trade, and forced to neglect and abandon several
ways of Comerce, for want of sufficient Stock to support and improve them, when
Money was most employed to the encouraging and promoting or Traffic, what must
the Trade of england dwindle and sink into, when so much of the Stock and Cash
of the Nation that was formerly employed in it, comes to be withdrawn from it,
and committed to the Husbandry of a Bank? And though it be scarcely imaginable,
either to what a degree those Trades and Manufactures that have been most
cultivated, may yet be advanced; or how many new Species of profitable Trade
and Manufacture might be fallen upon and carried on, were the Kingdom Stored
and Furnished with more Money than it has, and it applied (as it uses to be)
to Traffic; yet how easily may we conceive, that the drawing the Money out of
Trade and Manufacture that has been employed in them, must unadvoidably lessen
and starve them, and render the Traffic of England a Prey and Sacrifice to
those Nations, that Court it with more Iudustry, and expend more in it, than
this Bank Project will suffer is to do. Nor is it unworthy the being thought
upon, that no Nation which was once possessed of Trade, and came to lose it,
could ever recover it again, at least not with that ease it was first gained.

And Sir, Suffer me to add, that as Trade must unavoidably be ruined, by the
drawing so much Money out of it, as this Corporation occasioneth the doing of,
so it must be extremely prejudicial to Trade, that Men's Minds are diverted
from thoughtfulness about it, and taken off from Contriving how to conduct, and
manage it to Advantage; and instead of this, they lavish away their time, and
wast their Thoughts about Bank-Stock, and the Rates it goes at. Trade is like
Coy Mistress, that must not be coldly, but warmly and importunately addressed;
and to follow it with success, requires most of a Man's time, and the best of
his Parts. Nor can any thing give a more melancholy Prospect of Trade, than
that instead of any conversation about the supporting, carrying on, and
improving of Trade, the whole discourse now of those that were formerly
considerable and industrious Dealers, is about who has, or who will transfer
Bank-Stock, and at what Price. And it is both of fatal Prognostic to Trade,
and will have a destructive Influence upon it, that the Humor and Genius of
People, is taken off from it, and diverted another way.

Now though these general Hints may be sufficient to convince a Person of your
Great Vivacity and Judgment, Candor and Penetration, that the Bank, if upheld,
must needs not only undermine, but destroy Trade; yet for the setting it beyond
all Control with the most obstinate, as well as with the least thoughtful, I
shall exemplify in some few Particulars, how, and by what ways and means, the
Bank must unavoidably have that ruinous operation and effect upon Trade and
Traders. For first to those that are already embarked in Dealing, and who may
be, have been Managers of Trades for diverse Years, they will be necessitated
either to give wholly over, or to reduce, and narrow their Trade to the
proportion of their own Stock. Seeing as few do, or can carry on their Trades
to any considerable extent or Profit, without borrowing of Money, and taking up
Sums upon Loan, it is now come to this, that instead of the thanks they used to
receive from your Monied Men for accepting Sums from them at moderate Rates of
Interest, and upon reasonable Security, what they had is by reason of the Bank,
called out of their hands to that degree, that as diverse who could not recover
their own Debts, for Goods they had trusted abroad, with that expedition their
Creditors demanded the Payment of what they had Trusted them with upon Loan,
have been forced to give over, and to Sanctuary in the Marshalsea, or in the
White-Fryars, and those who have been hitherto so fortunate, as to weather the
Storm, have been obliged in orderto the doing of it, to reduce their Dealings
to the circle of their own Cash.

And as the Bank is thus mischievous to those who are actually embarked in
Trade, it is more fatal to those Young Gentlemen who have served their
Apprentiships, and are about to Set up and Begin. For whereas Young Gentlemen
have been able to launch into Business, and to pursue the respective ways of
Dealing that they had spent Seven Years to be Bred up unto, without much Stock
of their own, Yea sometimes without any, save that of a Good Reputation
acquired by their Virtue and Diligence during the time of their Service, and
all this because of the readiness of Monied Men to lend them such Sums as they
might stand in need of; Matters are now arrived at that pass, that let Young
Gentlemen's Charactor be never so good, as to their Sobriety and Industry, they
are nevertheless by means of the Bank, put out of all capacity of Borrowing
what they want to Begin the World with: For how or where should they obtain
Credit for Money, seeing as they of whom heretofore it was easily had, have
placed their Money in the Bank, and consequently have none to Lend to the
hopesulest Beginners; So you may be sure that the Directors of this New
Corporation will not Lend to Young Gentlemen, when they have so vast Advantage
by Employing their Money another way. Nor w^ll it be in the power of any Young
Beginner to give that Security unto the Bank for Money, which they will exact
and demand; neither will the Directors of that Society be contented with such
Interest as Trade will bear and allow the giving of, when they can have, 10,
12, and more per Cent. of the Government upon Security of Acts of Parliament.
And whosoever views the Town, and observes the courses which those newly out
of their Time are forced upon, will be soon convinced, how prejudicial the Bank
is, and if upheld will continue to be, to those Young Persons I have been
speaking of. For instead of Setting up to pursue, and manage the ways of
Dealing which they have been brought up unto, they employ themselves, and
consume their Time about Lotteries, Stock-Jobbing, and Purchasing, and Selling
Bank-Stock; And as this, if there were nothing more, must necessarily divert
the Minds of Men, both from all Foreign and Domestic Trade; So the success as
well as the extent and largeness of all Foreign Traffic, arising from, and
owing it self unto, the great Number of Traders, the vast Sums employed in
Traffic, and the lowness of Interest, it must infallibly ensue, that through the
drawing large Quantities of Money out of Trade; through dimunishing considerably
the Number of Merchants, and Dealers; and through the raising of Interest to a
height, much above what it is in other Tradeing Nation; all which are and will
be the Effects of the Bank; I say it must from thence ensue, that poor England
will not only dwindle and become speedily crippl'd in all its Foreign Trade,
but go nigh to lose it, boyond possibility of Recovery. And answerable to the
Decay of our Trade abroad, must our Manufactures at home lessen and abate. I
suppose it needs no proof, that they who employ 100000 l. in Trade, and have
Money at 3 or 4 per Cent. must not only outdo, but supplant those that apply
not 20000 l. unto it, and are forced to give 10 or 20 for every Hundred that is
Borrowed to carry it on. And it is as demonstrable, that the Bank has already
made this vastness of difference in the Matter of Traffic, between us and our
Rival Neighbors, and if that Corporation be Supported, it will increase their
Advantages over us daily.

And as the Bank through the Drawing Money out of Trade, and heightning of
Interest, has the forementioned Fatal Operation upon Merchants that Traffic
abroad, and upon all those that are large Dealers in Cities and Corporations
here at home; so has no less mischievous Influence upon Country Retalers,
without whom to take off what is imported from abroad, all Foreign Comerce
would not only be soon crampt, but the Produce of one of our own Counties not
be applicable to answer the Wants and Necessities of another. For as the
Scarcity of Money, and the narrowness of Stock, which the Bank occasioneth,
will not suffer those in Cities, who Deal with Country- Retalers to allow them
long Credit (which is the life of Retaling) so they will be tempted to stint
them to a shorter day of Payment than their Stocks render necessary, upon the
prospect of so much per Cent. a day from the Bank, which as it will compel the
Retaler not to Sell in the Country, but where he can have ready Money; so it
will oblige him not to buy more at a time of City Dealers, than he has a
prospect of Disposing in his respective (...) on the said Terms. And I suppose
the Inconveniences are easily discovered, that will attend both the one, and
the other. For as few Persons up and down the Kingdom have at all times Ready
Money to lay out for what they need; so not one Retaler of forty can pay in
hand, for what he has both an Inclination to buy, and may really want.

Nor will the operation of the Bank upon Manufactures of all Sorts be less
malignant and prejudicial, than it is upon Merchants and other Dealers. I need
not tell you that it is our Manufacturers who furnish us not only for Foreign
Markets, but with a great deal of what we vend and dispose of at home. Now
besides that Manufacture will be affected in proportion to the prejudice done
to Trade in general. and bear its share in all the Damage done by the Bank
either to Merchants or to other Dealers; there are two particular Mischiefs,
that will overtake and fall upon Manufacturers by means of this New Erected
Corporation. One is that in the Fabricking of Goods, they will be forced not to
exceed their own Stocks; and the other is that the Payments they are to have
for the Goods they make, will be slower, and at longer days than heretofore.
For as the Bank's getting possessed of most of the Money of the Nation, will
necessitate the Manufacturer not to go beyond his own Cash in working of Goods;
So the 2 d. per Cent. a day which the Merchant and Draper, etc. may have of the
Bank, will tempt them to greater Delays both in Payment for Goods, and in
discharging of Inland Bills, than the profit and reputation of Clothiers, and
other Manufacturers will allow them to bear. And having mentioned this 2 d. a
day offered by the Bank for every 100 l. lodged with them, I fear I may add
that the greediness of it, will not only render all Payments very slow, whether
upon Goods bought or sold, but occasion the Collectors of Taxes and Public
Revenues, to delay their Payments into the Exchequer as long as they can, it
being notorious already that the Gentlemen of the Bank by 2 d Reward make daily
Applications to all Public Receivers of the Land Tax Customs, etc. to transmit
their Money through their hands, and begin to prevail so far with some, that his
Majesty pays 8 per Cent. per Ann. for that which is 3 per Cent per Ann. Gains
to his Receivers.

I suppose it is not needful to tell you, that proportionably to the
destructive Operation, that the Bank has upon Trade, and upon Manufacture,
will its influence be upon Lands and Houses both in their being sold and hired,
as likewise upon the Price of Wool, and of all Native Productions. So that
whatsoever some Men might design the Bank for, yet the Effect of it will be the
impoverishing all Ranks and Degrees of People in the Kingdom, save those alone
that are immediately interested and concerned in it. For answerably to the
Scarcity of Money, the decay of Trade, the lessening of Manufacture, the
advance of Interest, and the delay of Payments, will both the Rent of Lands,
and of all home Productions dimunish. and abate. From whence it will
unavoidably follow, that neither will Gentlemen be able to live in true
Splendour, and to spend in that Plenty as they used to do, nor to provide, and
dispose their Sons, or marry their Daughters as heretofore they might; neither
will their Lands yield them that Price, should their Circumstances oblige them
to sell them, as they could before have obtained without difficulty. To all
which I may subjoin, that as Manufacture and Trade abate, so will both the
Customs, and all other Branches of the Revenue, lessen and decay; and according
to the degrees that the Fabric of our Woollen Cloth, etc. is narrowed and
reduced, so will both our Exports and Imports be dimunished, and thereupon our
Navigation, and by consequence the Number of Seamen. All which will serve to
render us poor and necessitous at home, contemned and despised abroad, a grief
to our selves, and a prey to our Enemies And through the going abroad of so much
Money as there does, and of necessity must whilst the War continues; and through
our being deprived of the Means of bringing in of Bullion, by reason of the
decay in our Manufacturers, and a narrowing our Exportations, we shall be
reduced in a few Years to be glad of Tinn, Brass, and Copper, instead of Silver
and Gold, if not to manage all our Comerce at home (after the being shut out
from Traffic abroad) by the Exchange and Barter of Commodities.

Sir, I might farther add, of what Detriment the Bank will be to the Nobility,
Gentry, and Freeholders of England, not only as it will occasion an abatement
and decay in their Rents, and in the Price of their Lands, but as it will
subject them to grievous Inconveniences, in case they should be necessitated
to borrow Money at Interest, which it may be justly feared, many of them through
the greatness of the Taxes, will be forced to do. For tho the Directors of the
Bank have given Notice, That after the first day of January next, They will
Lend Money on Mortgages, and real Securities at Five per Cent. per Annum, Yet
this is but a Shooing horn, and being but a Law of their own making, can be
Repealed when they please and in all likelihood will, as soon as the present
Sessions of Parliament is over, provided they be suffered to continue as a
Bank. Nor can I believe that having assured prospects of getting 10 or 12 per
Cent. of the Government, they will be so Generous as to furnish their
Fellow Subjects with Money at 5. However it is already come to this, by the
reason of the Bank, that no Man can borrow Money, be his Necessities never so
pressing unless of them, all, or at least most that used to be kept ready for
such Occasions, being lodg^d and deposited there; and none can borrow of them,
without having their Names Registered in their Books, that lie open to all Men's
View, which will have a pernicious influence upon their Credit, as well as
detect and expose the Condition that their Estates are in. And if for
preventing of that, all endeavors of getting a Public and National Register
have been frustrated and with-stood; here we have one that will produce none
the Advantages that a General one would, but which will have all the ill
Effects upon those that come to be concerned in it, that have deterred from an
Universal Register. Nor yet can it miss being grievous to Persons of Quality
and Freeholders, That would borrow Money upon the Security of their Lands, to
find themselves so circumscribed, as that they must take it up of the Bank, or
not at all. But that which is yet worse, and will indeed prove intolerable, is,
That the Money of the Nation being Deposited in the Bank, and not to be had in
any proportion elsewhere, and the Directors of the Company at Liberty, to call
in the Money they have lent upon Land and real Security when they please, the
poor indebted Gentleman and Freeholder must thereupon become necessitated, to
let the Bank have his Land Estate at what Rate and Price the Creditors of that
Society shall think fit to allow, or else to see himself ejected, and cast out
of it in a way of Law, and barred and foreclosed in Chancery from all Right and
Equity of Redemption.

Nor will the Condition of those that shall be reduced to borrow Money of the
Bank upon Goods, Wares, or Merchandise be less wretched and miserable, than
that of the Freeholder and Gentleman. who had Mortgaged his Land. For as that
Corporation will never Advance Money upon Goods and Merchandise to near the
Value of them; And it heing provided by the Act of Parliament, That if the
Goods, etc. be not redeemed, at the Time Covenanted and Agreed upon, or within
three Months after, that then they shall be Forfeited, and become the Company's
to be Sold and Disposed of them as they please, how ruinous must this be to the
Merchant and Dealer, that are forced to take up Money to answer their
Necessities in that method, and upon the giving that Sort of Security, seeing
nothing can be more obvious, than that they who have Pawned their Goods in the
Bank for Money may not be able to redeem them, within the Accorded and Fixed
Season for Payment. For how frequently may it come to pass, that either through a
fall of Markets, by reason of the Flushness of that Commodity brought into the
Kingdom, or through a Scarcity of Money, and a Scantiness of Buyers, the Merchant
or Dealer who had laid his Goods to Pledge in the Bank, may not be able to sell
them at such a Mercantile and Gaining Price, as to be in a Condition to pay at
the Day Covenauted, what he had borrowed upon them. Yea should the Goods Pawned
there by the Merchant, be never so much needed, yet the Shopkeeper and Retaler
will forbear Buying them, unless much below their Worth, as knowing that the
Owners must be contented to Sell them at the Rates, the Buyers are willing to
give, or else choose to Forfeit them to the Bank for what they lie Pawned and
Deposited. Nor is there any mean, but the Original Proprietor must be contented
to sell at a vast ruinous Loss, or else to let the Bank swallow up his Goods at
the Quarter or Half value, which is most that is likely to be advaneed upon
them. And as the Bank is hereby made a Lombard, and a Society of Pawn-Broakers;
so whatsoever is Deposited with them which is not Redeemed, within 3 Months
after the Time Agreed upon, becomes Lost and Forfeited, without Right of
Redemption. Nor is it here as in other Cases where the Chancery can relieve a
Man, seeing the Statute has precluded, and shut out the Borrower and Pawner
from all such Help and Benefit,

But I seem to forget, that I am writing a Letter, and not a Volume, and
therefore as I will omit all further Reflections at this time, So I humbly
submit what I have laid before you, to your serious Consideration. Being
hopeful that there is enough offered, to show the Necessity as well as
Reasonableness of Suppressing this Newly Erected SOCIETY, from being any longer
a BANK; and that they be only continued to Receive the other Advantages
Conferred upon them, and Due unto them upon the foot of having Advanced 1200000
l. Nor is it to be questioned, but that if they should complain of this as an
Injustice and Severity, there will be those found, who will take of all the
respective Shares, of the several Contributors, and comply with, and answer all
the Ends of the Act, without desiring to be Incorporated or Erected into a
National BANK. I kiss your Hands, and am,

Sir,
FINIS.

