SOME BODIES ANSWER To a Letter sent from No Body in the City, TO No Body in
the Country.

Written at the Request of SOME BODY.

Printed by Some Body, for Any Body, 1679.

Some Bodies ANSWER TO a LETTER, etc.
Dear Brother,
IF I was ever able to feel the Pulse, or examine the Constitution of the
Country; I must needs tell you it is at present much Different from that of
the City; our Plow-jobbing Rusticks are very incredulous, and we cannot thrust
it into their thick Sculls, that such a thin Airy Ficticious gentleman as your
self could ever be guilty of those doughty Atchievments they Attribute to your
Arms. No indeed my dear Brother, I cannot but with much grief acquaint you,
that I more than share with you in the Calumney; we have very few Poer or such
exquisite ingeniosi's as can dandle a Chymera, play with a Thought, or muffle
up a Fancy till it frights them, and then run away from it, and call others as
clear-sighted as themselves to admire the Prodigy; Their Course Faith wags not
a step beyond their Senses, and they Love to Trace Actions, and their Actors,
as they do Cony's from their first Track, Gradually along till at last they
Arrive at their Holes, or Burrows; of which, hear a Remarkable Example.

A Prosperous Towns-man of ours Happening to live Next door to an envious, and
unfortunate Neighbor, who knowing he had for diverse years bin blessed with a
Plentiful Flock of sheep, (from whose wealthy Backs he had often Shorn such
ponderous Fleeces as had inricht his Coffers) Resolved with some others of his
Fraternity, to destroy them, and bad by his Malicious industry Collected such a
Ravenou^ regimemt of Wolves, and Foxes, as had they been ^air^ly let loose, in
one night might have devoured them all; but being over-big with Universal
Malice, and too impatient to time his design, and yet willing to whet his
Appetite with an earnest of his designed Vengeance, he espied one Lamb among
them more promising than any of the rest and resolved, that should immediately
fall, as an earnest of the Destruction of the whole Flock. The impious
Resolution was easily effected, and when they had taken the Innocent Creature,
and Strangled him, and towr'd and plumed themselves over the Pitiful
Conquest, they Stuck a Knife into his Body, and threw him in that sad Manner
over a great ditch of water into another man's Field; where the owner in two or
three days time found him; and after he had Communicated the Treachery to his
Neighbors, they presently concluded, that the Lamb was too innocent, had it
lain in his power to kill himself; that there being no blood seen near him, be
must necessarily have been Butchered before either the Knife entered his Body,
or he was brought to that Place; also finding his Fleece and Feet, dry, as if
he had newly come out of the Sheep-sold, I say, by all these Circumstances they
unanimously concluded, that Some Body had despitefully killed him.

Alike Positive were they, when they heard of the Barbarous Death of that Loyal
Knight, Sir E. G. They all cried out SOME BODY had Murdered him; that SOME BODY
shared Four Thousand Pounds for the Fact -- That SOME BODY offered Violence to
his Dead Corpse, that SOME BODY had much ado to bend the Stubborn Protestant
(who seemed incorrigeable ever after his d^^^^^e) to a Compliance with a
Papistical Sedan; that SOME BODY Carried him as Butchers do Calves, before them
on Horseback to Primrose Hill, where SOME BODY Thrust a Sword through his
Lifeless Body, Robbed him of his Pocketbook only, and left his Silver, Gold,
Watch, Rings, etc. in his Pockets, on purpose to persuade EVERY BODY that NO
BODY had Murdered him

And with this belief, for a while, I hear they viciated your Credulous Town,
but 'Ile assure you it never touched the Piamater of a Rural Brain. Nothing
would persuade the Country but SOME BODY did it, and that SOME BODY knew of
it, besides those EVERY BODY suspects.

But to Clear you, and the Deceased, they Positively affirmed, that it was
alike impossible that it should be done by NO BODY; as it was, that he could do
it Himself; and therefore SOME BODY must be guilty. And to show you their
unparrelled inveteracy, Particularly against me, although they were assured
that SOME BODY was Apprehended, Arraigned, and (as they say) deservedly
Condemned, and Executed, for that most Horrid and Inhumane Act; yet, as if I
were Immortal, or had more Lives than a Cat, I am still Summoned like a
Conjurers Devil, to answer every impertinent Interogatory; and remain
answerable for every Extravagancy, or Villainy, that is daily Committed.

Nay, these late Transactions have (to my great disadvantage) obliged the World
to take a more severe inspection into my Pristine Misdemeanors. The Spanish
Invasion, the Gun-Power Plot, the French and Irish Massacre (say they) were
Certainly Hatched and Designed by SOME BODY: if by the super Annuated Hawk with
a Tripple Hood, (who as one lately observed, Successively Degenerates into
Kites and Buzzards) me thinks the Two last mentioned seasons of Prey, might
have Gorged him almost to a surfeit, when so many Thousands of Pious and
Moderate Christians, were squeezed under the gripes of his unmerciful Tallons.

Did the Articles of my Impeachment rest here, yet I were within some glimering
hopes of a Vindication, as having the Prerogative to be born of Remarkable
Parents; there is SOME BODY of my Relations and Acquaintance, whose gilded
Treachery passes for Loyalty; who with an admirable dexterity Can set a Geneva
look on a Roman Face, and seem any thing but what he is; from him I might then
expect all the exemption immaginable: But alas, those Insolent, and Inquisitive
Heretics still continue the Fatal Quest; and having had a Smatch of our
Reeking Guilt, persu'd us even in the Pursuit of our Royal Game, they follow us
to Windsor, and though we went thence with a full Cry to New Market, they Crossed
our Way and Spoiled our Sport, Who otherwise in feirce and lowed Carreer
Had Caesar fallen, ere he had fallen his Deer.
when this came to be discoursed on in Coffee Houses and Taverns, every one
could Whisper that SOME BODY Would have done it; and indeed my Friend, SOME
BODY has bin fairly examined, and as fairly Trust Up about it, though by the
subtle insinuators of SOME BODY, the Implicit Zealots, as you very well
remarked, equivocated their Necks into Halters, and by a Fatal Precipitation of
the Tyburnian Jennet foolishly adventured their Everlasting Bliss.

But since this, we have bin busied with nimble Revolutions, the Dissolution of
the last Parliament much heightened our Expectations; Although we could hardly
squeez in sufficient Interest to Disappoint their Scismatical Elections; yet we
have not failed, as far as in us lay, in our continual Itinerations through
every City, Town or Village, to asperse the most remarkable of the Members of
Both Houses as great Courtiers, and Friends to France, etc. Next, we make it
our Daily business to obstruct the Raising of Money, for National uses, by
Whispering such Unreasonable demands as cannot be granted without a palpable
breach of Royal Prerogatives: Thirdly, we rub up forgetful Episcopals with the
Fair pretenses used about Forty One, and by Confidently affirming, there is no
such thing as a Plot, give them reasons to fear the Serpentine Rump is again
joined to its Fulsome Body; and having almost these Twenty years Silently
recruited under the indulgent Beams of a Merciful Monarch, intend now, to
Relaps into their former Rebellion.

By such Subtleties as these, we thought to have set Caesar and his Senate at
Variance, and have introduced Some body, who under pretense of taking up the
Quarrel, (like the Kite in the Fable) should have Snatched up both the Warriers.
But these our Expectations are now utterly Frustrated; though the Difficulty in
pitching on a Speaker, somewhat revived our Dying Hopes; we lately heard our
Old Friend -- is likely after all his Eloquence, to be Crowded into Limbo, as
our Immortal C. was to Tyburn, Though both of them might have been match more
welcome to Some body. --

To Conclude, if we may Credit the discourse of the Country, the King and
Parliament go on hand in hand, and are in all probability likely so to do; But
if they should differ about Trifles, wast their little time for preparation
against Foreign Enemies in a needle Debate of Prerogatives and Privileges, or
prefer private Agrievances, before public Complaints; I will not say who will
have greatest reason to Repent it, though I could name.

Some Body.

FINIS.

