A Sober and Seasonable Vindication, OF THE MODEST PRESBYTERY.
WHen by the providence of God in the Year 1640. the late Unfortunate KING, by
the serious Advice of his gravest Counselors for a Remedy to the then menacing
Grievances of the People, had the Third of November called a Parliament, and
therein given from the Crown many precious Jewels voluntarily, (not to be
retorted from his Ancestors by a continued series and concatenation or Blood
and Treasure expended in a long and tedious War, (the Name whereof yet too
freshly bleeds in the late renewed distractions;) yet such was the rage of the
then regnant Party, that under pretense of a disagreeing humor, not
immediately jumping with their Fancy, there began a deficiency in the Main
under which the Nation for a long time labored; and after many strong
convulsions and griping pains was delivered of a Personal Treaty, the then only
thought conducing means to Resettle the disturbed Nation,) and herein indeed
were included the Major part of the Parliament, whose original aims never
tended any further then to Reform the Abuses of the then present Power, not an
Extirpation either of the Governor much less Government.

We need not run to Antiquity to maintain this Point, that most worthy and
learned Gentleman Mr. Pryune has so cleared the way, that he has left nothing
for a poor gleaner; however in vindication of the Truth, and as a poor Imitator
of his Virtues, give me leave to Inform the whole English Nation.

That when the burden of Dissension (by its too frequent decission in the
Field) had made the people pant for want of breath, that they were even ready
to fall grovelling in the dust, then as a Moses in the Gap did the far Major
part of the Commons House, joined with the then sitting Lords, conclude
themselves within the reasonable limit of amending abuses, not engrossing the
public Revenews of the Nation into private and single hands. But although the
unwearied endeavors of some ambitious Heads, wrought effects even beyond
expectation, as to an Oligarchical Democracy; yet the uncessant labors of the
honest and modest Presbyter could never be beaten off, but even when the sword
it self with an usurped Majesty cut the Gordian knot of their Rule, they yet
kept their heart; and notwithstanding the decollation of the Head, maintained
that ancient Maxim of Cor'ultimum moriens; for indeed had they not been all
heart, the whole from thence could never have received a new strength and vigor.

To these therefore all Freeborn Englishmen owe their Liberties, Magna Charta
had died if the Members secluded in 1648. had not survived, the Law had ceased,
and every man might have done what seemed good in his own eyes, as when there
was no King in Israel; or as at the time when the Committee of Safety
domineered in England, whose constitutions used only to the calm of a Southern
Brize, was not able to endure the storm of a cold Northern blast.

But such is the well-tempered constancy of the not to be altered Members, that
maugre Malice and Envy, they still continue in their first resolved temper,
Namely, a regulated Monarchy, according to the Concession in the Isle Wight, a
Democratical House of Commons in its primitive Original, soon joined to the
Fountain of Honor by an Oligarchical Peerage; which Three (without blasphemy
be it spoken) resemble the Deity, and each of them on the other so consistent,
that though there be Peace in the circumference, yet still they unite in the
Center.

It is therefore a sin to doubt a Defect: in them whose realities cure the
Imperfections of the Nation; the worst that can be said of them being only
this, that having deviated, they now return into the right Path. A good
President to the whole Kingdom.

With what Triumph and Exaltation did the Streets Ecchoe and Resound at this
Restoration, as already confident of a Settlement from them in Power, whose
promises were so rich while laid aside, I really hope the fullness of our
Expectation shall from them receive the desired satisfaction; so shall they by
all, be justly Entitled, Patres Patriae, The Fathers of their Country; The
Repairers of Breaches, and the Restorers of Paths to dwell in.

Printed for Henry Marsh. 1660.


