SOBER ADVICE TO CHURCHWARDENS, IN A LETTER TO A CHURCHWARDEN IN LONDON, From
his Friend out of the Country, And may serve indifferently for Constables, and
others, who are required to make Presentiments for not going to their
Parish-Churches, and Communicating, etc.

Id Tantum possumus quod Jure possumus.

LONDON, Printed for F. Smith Senior, at the Elephant and Castle, in Cornhill.
1683.

Kind Friend,
I Received yours, and am heartily sorry to hear of the severity used and
intended against Protestant Dissenters, for their Nonconformity; because I am
thoroughly persuaded many of them are sincere and harmless in their Dissent, and
give as good Testimony of their being so, as we generally do of our sincerity
in our Dissent from Popery; however cannot be condemned to Penalties without
Infringment of our Protestant Principles: But since some of our Ecclesiastical
Rulers and Judges are not of this mind, but requires by public charge that all
Persons Aged above Sixteen Years, should take the Sacrament now at Easter, or
to be presented by the Churchwardens or Minister of the place, to be proceeded
against by Excommunication, with all its grievous Concomitants and Consequents,
whereof perpetual Imprisonment is now in the least. You desire my advice; What
you, being sworn Churchwarden, should do in this case? You are very loath to
have so great a hand in the Ruin of your honest Neighbors for their Conscience
toward God, and on the other side you must be true to that Duty, which you
have obliged your self before God to perform. You know (my Friend) I am not one
of the Learned in the Common nor Civil Laws, and therefore can only tell you
what course my self a private Person, willing to keep a good Conscience toward
God and toward Men, would do in such a case. And you are pleased to tell me,
you therefore desire my advise, because that I being of like condition, and in
like circumstances with your self, am more likely to give advice fit for you
than they whose education has enured their minds to Subtilties and Quirks of
Law. I can easily grant the Reason you give of your Choice to be good, but I
cannot allow your application of it to me; for though I am resolved in the
power of God to be honest, yet there is another quality wanting to make me a
fit adviser in so nice a case, to wit, an understanding well exercised in
discerning between good and evil, and things indifferent: But I may remember,
you only desire to know my opinion, you do not oblige your self to follow it,
neither would I have you to do so, without better Judgments then I can pretend
to, except you find my Reasons to be convincing.

In the first place I am sorry you have taken the Churchwardens Oath, which
obliges you; to Execute the Office of a Churchwarden in your Parish for the
ensuing Year, according to his Majesty's Laws Ecclesiastical, for its a
difficulty scarcely to be overcome by the most Skilful, to resolve what
Ecclesiastical Laws are in force, what not, therefore beyond your capacity to
execute according to what you know not, and give me leave to mind you by the
way, that Reason, Equity, and Religion requires, that we should never proceed
to imputation of Crimes or Executions of Penalties in doubtful Cases. In
matters of favor and benefit we may be liberal, but in matters of hurt and
damage to our Neighbor, we should be so far from any thing of that nature in a
controverted point, that we should not go to the utmost the Law allows, though
in a most clear Case. Now if the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. chap. 2. be revived by
Repeal of that Statute which Repealed it, the Ecelesiastical Persons ought to
use the Kings Name and Seal to their Processes, and their holding Courts in
their own Names is contrary to Law. However, it is at least doubtful, whether
they have any legal Power, and likewise whether any of their Cannons have any
force of Law; If then you make presentiments to those Courts, whereby your
Neighbor is vexed and indamaged, you know not but you may therein be injurous
to your Neighbor without legal Authority, which no wife and conscientious Man
will venture.

But, Secondly. I conceive that a Man chosen Churchwarden, may lawfully refuse
that Oath, as being contrary to Law, as may appear by a Statute made in the
Thirteenth of this King, chap. 2. and incited in the prohibition for
Waterfield, where it is enacted that it shall not be lawful for any
Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar, General Chancellor, Commissary, or any other
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or Minister, or any other Person
having or exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to Tender,
Offer, or Administer to any Person whatsoever, the Oath usually called the Oath
ex Officio, or any other Oath whereby such Persons to whom the same is Tendered
or Administered, may be charged or compelled to confess, or accuse, or purge him
or her self of any criminal matter or thing whereby he or she may be liable to
Consures or Punishments. But I am persuaded that no Man that makes Conscience
of an Oath, but will find himself obliged by the Laws Ecclesiastical (supposing
all those to be in force which the Official says are in force) burdened and
compelled to confess, or accuse himself of some criminal matter or thing, and
therefore such Oath ought not to be Administered to him. However, having taken
that Oath, you must endeavor to perform it as well as you can without breach
of the Laws of God, or Laws of the Land, which latter must always give place to
the former, and by them be made new or interpreted.

In the next place as to the business of presenting those of above Sixteen
Years of Age, that come not to the Sacrament at Easter. First, I say it is
contrary to Christianity and all civility of Neighborhood, to present a Man as
a Criminal, so to expose him to so dreadful a Sentence as Excommunication, and
all Calamities that attend it, without first discoursing their Neighbor to
know what he can say for himself in Vindication, for in this Case the
presentment of one or two Churchwardens, is of as much force, and more
dangerous consequence than the presentment of Twelve or more of the most
substantial Men of the County, in civil Cases, and therefore the least that the
Churchwarden can do, is to hear what his Neighbor can say for himself, before
he put him into so much trouble and danger, as such an accusation amounts to.
For there may be diverse lawful and reasonable Excuses of a Man's not coming to
Church such a Month, or not coming to the Communion at Easter; as for instance,
suppose a Man be Sick and not able to come, or have had business abroad for
One, Two, or Three Months together at the time of Easter, are not these and
such like lawful Excuses? I remember the Statute of Eliz. 23. chap. 1. (to
retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience) made against
Papists, (but now put in use against Protestants) says, That every Person above
the Age of Sixteen Years, which shall not repair to some Church or Chapel, or
usual place of Common Prayer, but forbearing the same contrary to the Tenor of
a Statute made in the First Year of Her Majesty's Reign, for Uniformity of
Common Prayer, etc. shall forfeit, etc. now that Statute referred to, has this
exception in it, (viz.) Having no lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent,
which plainly shows there may be lawful or reasonable excuse of being absent
from Church for a Week or Month, and consequently of not taking the Sacrament
Administered at that time, therefore I conclude the Churchwarden or other
Officers, who present any of his Neighbors as guilty of such a Crime before he
have heard what he can say for himself, is Unjust, Unchristian, and
Unneighbourly; Unjust, because the light of Nature will not permit it that any
should be condemned unheard; Unchristian, because the Law of Christ commands us
not to Judge least we be Judged, and consequently Unneighbourly, because
somewhat more of civility ought to be showed to Christians that are of the same
Vicinage, then to Men as Men, or to Christians barely as Christians.

Perhaps you will say, it is sufficient for you to ground an Information or
Presentment upon, that in Fact a Man did not come to his Parish Church, or did
not take the Sacrament there at Easter, and that if he have any lawful or
reasonable excuse, he must urge it upon his Trial before the Judge or
Commissary. But Sir, would you be so dealt with? Be charged with a Crime that
has heavy Penalties attending to it? Be put to the trouble and expense in
Defending your self in a Court where some Men love none more than their own
Souls? When if their Officer would but take the pains to speak with you, you
would easily Vindicate your self from that charge? Besides, it is to be
considered that all Juries, Grand Juries, and others, are chosen out of the
Neighborhood, as being therefore supposed to know what may be known of the
Innocence or Guiltiness of a Person they Accuse or Condemn, and they are Twelve
at least, sometimes Twenty One of a Grand Inquest, that if some be Ignorant,
others may be knowing in the Matter and Person brought before them, and they
must be honest and free, and legal Men, such as the Law in every circumstance
requires, if there be but One in Twelve, otherwise their proceedings will be
null and void.

But Sir, Your Presentment, as I have said, has the validity of the
Presentment of a full Grand Inquest upon Oath; Nay more, (except when the Cause
of Recusances come before a Grand Inquest) for upon your Presentment the Bishop
or his Official concludes your Neighbor Guilty, and will perhaps not admit of
his lawful excuses, not as in other Cases, bring Witnesses face to face to
prove him Guilty; for you have already convicted him by your Presentment;
again, in numerous Parishes, such as you have about London, it is impossible
for you to know whether every one did Communicate, and therefore you can only
say, that so far as you know such a Man or such a Woman did not Communicate,
and that shall create your Neighbor no small vexation, though at length he
proves that he did Communicate in his own Parish, or in some other Church or
allowed Chapel, and that you are mistaken in your sworn Presentiments.

But you will now ask me, is it my place to Judge what are lawful or reasonable
excuses, must not I leave that to the Ecclesiastical Court, whose Duty it is to
determine such matters.

I answer, I have already showed you that in your Presentment, you are
presently both Accuser, Witness, and Jury; So that the Proceedings in that
Court are of the Nature of a Plea, after Conviction, as is in another Court
brought against the Sentence ready to be passed, for as in a Civil Court the
Party found Guilty, is asked what he has to say, why Judgment of Execution
should not pass upon him? So here the Spiritual Judge does but in effect asle a
Man what he has to say, why the Penalties of such a Crime should not be
Executed upon him? And since you are in a real Sense a Judge, all the Reason of
Mankind will oblige you not only to hear, but to determine concerning the
circumstances of the Action you are to Judge.

Is it reasonable or consistant with the Liborties of English Men, that a Man
should be liable to suffer so great Vexation and Damage, as the Presentment of
the Churchwarden puts him to, and the Churchwarden not at liberty to Judge of
his reasonable Defense against that Vexation? When in a Civil Court for a Crime
or Trespass, to the value of a Groat, a Man shall have First Twelve at least of
his Sworn Neighbors to pass Judgment upon him; every one of which must be
satisfied the Accused Party has no reasonable excuse, that is, every one must
be satisfied that there is sufficient Evidence of his Guilt by their own
Knowledge, or credible Witnesses, or Oath, and after that the Accused Party and
the Witnesses must be heard together, to the satisfaction of Twelve Jurors
more, who must every one agree to the Condemnation or else he shall be cleared,
but in the Spiritual way of preceending the business of the First Twelve or
Grand Jury, perhaps of Twenty Three, and of Witnesses, is all done by the
Churchwarden, that is most manifest, and the Verdict of the other Twelve, or
Pettit Jury is also given by the Churchwarden; and the Spiritual Judge has no
more to do but to pass Sentence, as the Civil Judge does when the Verdict is
brought in. For his admonishing Men thrice in a Breath, is in it self a Penal
Sentence, being but a Prologue to Excommunication and Imprisonment, especially
when things impossible are required; but that is impossible, which a man cannot
do without Sin.
The vast difference between those two ways of Proceeding, shows, that the one
is of Rome, the other of England. But must the Churchwarden do the Work of two
Juries toward the Ruin of a Man and his Family, and not judge of a man's
reasonable Defense against his Sentence?

Thirdly, If the Churchwarden must not judge of lawful or reasonable Excuses,
but must present Men, merely because of Omission to take the Sacrament at
Easter, then how comes it to pass they can dispense with their Obligation of
presenting those that notoriously offend in other matters, and even themselves
for the most part, if not all of them, to which Presentment they are equally
obliged? For by the 109. Canon, supposing them in Force (which is a great
Question, or rather out of Question, not being confirmed by any Act of
Parliament) they are obliged to present those that offend their Brethren by
manifest Drunkenness, Swearing, Usury, or any other Turpitude or Wickedness. By
the Statute of 1 Eliz. chapter 2. All persons are obliged to endeavor themselves
to resort to their Parish Church, or some other place, having no lawful or
reasonable Excuse to be absent upon every Sunday and Holyday. Now I persuade my
self, that in ordinary, there are but few People, or Church wardens themselves
that are not guilty of the Breach of this Statute most Holydays in the Year:
And the Churchwardens know it perfectly: How is it then that they do not
present them, except that they either know or presume they have some lawful or
reasonable Excuse to be absent, and if they take upon them to judge of
reasonable Excuses in this Case, so as to excuse, themselves from the Breach of
their Oath, why not in other Cases also, and particularly in the case of
Communion at Easter, wherein they certainly know there may be the like Excuses?
And the same Argument will hold in the case of those that come not to Church,
etc. in a Month, contrary to the Tenor of this Statute, who are punishable by
the Forfeiture of 20 l. a Month, by the Statute of 23 of Eliz. chapter 1. made
against Papists.

Fourthly, This Statute of 1 Eliz. makes it not absolutely criminal, Not to
resort to their Parish, or some other Church, but not to endeavor themselves
to resort, etc. Now a man may endeavor to resort, etc. though he do not perform,
being hindered by some lawful or reasonable Let; Nay, I am well assured, that
many who resort not to their Parish Church, etc. do endeavor themselves to
resort, more by far than those that do: They read, confer; study and pray more
for Satisfaction in the Lawfulness of it.
so that a Churchwarden that presents a Man for not coming to his Parish
Church for a Holyday or a Month, without consulting with him whether he had any
reasonable Excuse of being absent, or whether he was not at some other Church
or Chapel; and without judging of reasonable Letts, is injurious to his
Neighbor beyond the Statute; and if he may not judge of lawful and reasonable
Excuses; but must present a man notwithstanding, he makes a false. Presentment,
because he does not know whether it be true or no that a man did not endeavor
to resort to Church, It may be false; and if it be true, it is more than he
knows, though upon Oath he pretends to know it; so commits Perjury: He swears
neither in Truth nor Judgment, nor Righteousness, Jer. 4, 2. And why may not a
lawful or reasonable Let come in a Man's way at Easter, as well as at another
time? Which if it were so, the Churchwarden ought not to conclude him guilty
of a wilful omission and therefore ought not to present him.

Fifthly, In crimes there is the matter or fact, and the manner or
Circumstances of that fact, the matter or fact is for the most part neither
good nor evil, but according to Circumstances which make it the one or the
other. So under the Law of Moses, God commanded to rest on the Sabbath day, but
if a man had fallen into a Ditch on the Sabbath it was evil to rest, and not
Labor to lift him out, for it was lawful to do so for an Ox or a Sheep, so in
our Law, one may kill a Man, and be Innocent when he does it in his own
Necessary defense; but if in malice he is guilty of Murder: So to take a Man's
Sword from him on the Highway is robbery, if it be done with a Fellonious
intent; but to keep a Man from doing himself and others a mischief it is good
and lawful: In like manner, he that will present a Man to a Court to be punished
as a profane Offender, (as the Bishop of London speaks in his Order) for not
coming to Church and receiving the Sacrament at Easter, ought first to be
assured that he did it with a profane Mind, and had no lawful or reasonable
Let to excuse him.

Having now, my Friend, showed you that your Presentment has the force of a
Verdict, and the refore you ought to hear what your Neighbor has to say for
himself before you bring in the Verdict of your Presentment to the spiritual
Judge for him to pass Sentence upon him: Having also clearly proved (as I
suppose) that you are to judge of lawful and reasonable Excuses, and that you
do it most frequently in other cases: It remains now that I say something of
lawful and reasonable Excuses: The first Rule I shall lay down to discern them
by shall be general, even that general Rule of our Savior, Whatsoever ye would
that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them. If your Neighbor give as
good Testimony of his Sincerity in the Christian Religion as you your self, or
at least no Cause to the contrary, that which you would have to be judged a
reasonable excuse in your own case, that ought you to think in his case. I
describe your Neighbor here to be in Appearance an honest and true man,
because you are to believe what he says in his own Defense; which if he were a
man of ill Fame, you could not reasonably do; but if a man be of as good Credit
as your self, or you hear nothing against him, I see not how you can avoid
giving the same credit to him you would have another give to your self. (This
is to be understood of such causes, as, admit not of outward Evidence besides a
man's own Testimony) How otherwise do you love your Neighbor as your self?
which the Ap. James says is the Royal Law according to the Scriptures; and
Christian Charity is that which believes all things, hops all things; to
wit, which he has no good Grounds to disbelieve and doubt.

I prosume then that you and every Churchwarden will judge, that Sickness of
the Party, or any Relation, whom he or she cannot in duty Wave without great
danger, or also journeying in forreinparts about a Man's necessary Occasions, or
in our own Country about sudden business that will not admit of delay, are
reasonable excuses for not presenting ones self and communicating at his
Parish Church at Easter; and there may be many other excuses of the same
Nature, which I will not Trouble you to enumerate: But from hence I assume, If
the manifest danger of ones Health, or the very probable damage of a Man's
worldly Estate, Credit or Liberty, be reasonable excuses to be admitted by the
Churchwarden; how much more reasonable and to be allowed is that excuse of
sinning against God by doing that which he cannot do in Faith or with a
persuasion of its lawfulness when divine Authority says, Whatsoever is not of
Faith is Sin? For it were better for a Man to lose all his Estate, his Credit,
his Liberty, yea and his Life too then sin against God. But he that judges any
thing required of him to be sinful and does it, he certainly sins: For he that
in the Apostles time eat of those meats, which were lawful to be eaten, judging
them to be forbidden, or even doubting whether they were lawful, that Man was
guilty of sin and liable to be damned for the same. He that doubts is damened
if be eat, because: he eats not of Faith, Says the Apostle Paul, Romans 14.23.
I will grant that it may so fall out that a Man may be so minded that he sins
both ways, whether he do that which is required or forbear it; but that is,
when he his absolutely obliged by God to do it, and he through an Ignorant or
ill informed conscience thinks it unlawful; but in the case we discourse of,
our Bishops and Ministers acknowledge that in the things doubted of, by those
that do not frequent their Parish Churches there is no obscure command of God
why they should be done, they become a Duty (say they) by Humane Authority,
which may be withdrawn, and being withdrawn they are no longer any Man's Duty,
now how it comes to be in the power of Christians, to imposer upon their Fullow
Christians, to do those things which no Law of God or Christ oblige them to,
and which their Fellow Christians account unlawful or doubt of; and to punish
them for Disobedience, when their Obediance would be a sin against God, I leave
you to determine. But if neither you, nor your Minister, nor yet your Bishop can
remove the doubts of these Ghristians, and if they behave themselves as
Christians in Obedience to all things that Christ requires of them, in
Profession of Christian Faith, in Christian Worship and Prayer, in the
Celebration of the Lords Supper as they understand Christ to have commanded it,
etc. If you will not admit these People to be reasonably excused of their
absence from their Parish Church, I doubt Christ will not exchse you of
injustice and uncharitableness at the great day: I confess the Prosecution of
these People with penalties is not so great a Sin as the Apostle Paul caused
Christians to commit when his Name was Saul, before his Conversion; for he
compelled them to Blaspheme; and sinning against ones own conscience in a
matter of Circumstance is not so bad as blaspheming of Christ against ones
Conscience, but the same Apostle says in a less case, When ye sin so against
the Brethren and wound their weak Conseiences ye Sin against Christ. 1. Cor. 8,
12. now that which you Brother cannot do without Sin, and that which you cannot
prosecute him for not doing without Sin, should (me thinks) be a reasonible
excuse both for him and you.

Obj. You will perhaps urge against what I have said, that there is no other
way, but this of presenting them for not coming to Church, to convict Papists
of Recusancy; and that they also as well as Protestants may escape upon the
pretense of Conscience, so the Laws in these cases provided, be made of no
effect.

Ans. To which I answer, that the case of Protestant Dissenters and of Papists
is not the same, but far different: For the reason why Papists do not
communicate with Protestants in Parish Churches is, Their acknowledgment of a
foreign Power and Authority Superior to that of the King and the Laws of the
Land, namely, the Authority of the Pope of Rome, who is the declared Enemy of
the King, and the People being Protestants whence it is that their not coming
to Church is an effect and indication of that acknowledgment, and against them
were the Statutes of the 1st. and 23d. of Queen Elizabeth made, the last
whereof is: An Act to retain the Queen Majesty's Subjects in their due
Obedience, and the Presace gives this as the reason of making that Act, viz.
That diverse all disposed Persons have practiced, by other means than by Bulls
to withdraw diverse the Queens Majesty's Subjects from their natural Obedience
to her Majesty, to obey the usurped Authority of Rome and in respect of the
same, to persuade great numbers to withdraw their due Obedience to her
Majesty's Laws established for the due Service of Almighty God.

For it is observed by the Lord Coke in his charge at Norwich, and by others,
that not any Papists, during the first ten years of that Queens Reign, did
refuse to come to Church; that Cornwallis, Beddingfield and Eylyard, were the
first Recusants in the beginning of the eleventh year of her Majesty's
Government: And then Pope Pius Quintus being informed by some English Jesuits,
that such was the number of Roman Catholics here, is if he would Excomunicate
her, they would presently enter into an open Hostility, with force sufficient
to depose and utterly supplant her Highness, and re-establish the Roman faith,
whereupon the Pope does Excomunicate her, and Plots with the King of Spain to
invade her: Then did the Papists withdraw themselves from our Churches: Thus
you see it was not Conscience of Duty to Christ as it is in the Protestant
Dissenters, who own no Authority on Earth but the King and the Laws; but
Veneration to the Authority of the Pope the Queens Enemies and implaceable
hatred of all Protestants, that led Papists together to forsake the Church and
their Allegiance, and still contiuues them Recusants; so that it is the true
intent of the Law, that it should be executed against Papists; upon this Ground
it was, that (as I am well informed) a Grand Jury of Middlesex, having
Presentiments brought against several great Papists, would not find the Bill
against them for not going to Church till the Constable or Witnesses had given
Testimony that they were commonly reputed to be of the Roman Religion, and that
the Clerk had inserted in the Bill of Indictment, Pontificiam Religionem
Profitentes, wherein (I judge) they did pursue the true Intent of the Law, in
that case provided.

If you shall still insist, and say, that Papists do religiously give this
Authority to the Pope, I answer, First, that that Opinion is so manifestly
contrary to Reason and Christianity, that every man that uses Reason, or owns
Christ's Religion, except Papists themselves, must condemn it. Think you that a
Mohammedan, or a judicious Heathen, upon a fair Hearing of both Parties, would
judge the Pope's Pretensions to his Infallibility and Supremacy reasonable, or
in the least doubt of their Invalidity? But, Secondly, They that would have
Liberty of Religion and Conscience, do not pretend to such that is incosistent
with the Sovereignty of Independent States and Kingdoms, in things necessary to
civil Society; much less to such a Liberty as shall permit Religious Enemies to
cut their Throats whenever they can by Watchfulness find an Opportunity? Such
is that Conscience which this Objection pleads for, as may appear by what I
have said above: And the very thing I am pleading against, is, The depriving
Men of their Properties and Liberties upon any Pretense whatsoever, saving for
a Crime that is inconsistent with common Liberty and Property: But the
Consciences of Dissenters require nothing but a Liberty to that, which if it
were not forbid, would be so far from being hurtful to the Commonwealth, that
it would rather be a Virtue, nothing detracting from, but conducing to the
Common Good. And I hope every honest Man will make a difference between those
Laws that are necessary to the common Cood, and those that are made merely for
the Pleasure of the Lawgivers; and which others, as wise and Christian as they
would either null or make contrary. Surely the Consciences exercized about the
Obedience of these two sorts of Laws, are far different one from another: And
that our Penal Laws, so far as they respect Dissenters, are of such a Nature,
as that they are not now to be pressed upon Protestants who have the Opinion of
the House of Commons in the last Parliament at Westminster, Gentlemen of as
good Credit for Wisdom, and Love to Protestantism, and for Estates and Interest
in their Countries; as perhaps ever was seen in England; wherein it was
resolved nemine contradicente, That the Persecution of the Protestant
Dissenters upon the penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the Subject, a
weakening to the Protestant Interest, an Encouragement to Popery, and dangerous
to the Peace of the Kingdom. Jan. 10.

And now methinks, Sir, you should have as great Respect to the Opinion of the
whole Nation of Commons in Parliament, as you have to the Opinion of his single
Grace, my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, from whom this Order for prosecution
of Protestant Dissenters by Presentiments, Excommunications, etc. issues in flat
Contradiction to the Opinion now mentioned, especially considering withal the
Doubtfulness of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Laws; and all the rest that I
have said and argued in this Case, which I presume may have some Influence upon
you and any rational honest Man. I pray you consider in the Fear of God, in
Honor of Christ and his Religion, and in the Love of your Christian Neighbors;
and do what such Consideration shall direct you to. Take the safer Course,
which is always the more moderate in penal Matters. Be sure you act not against
Conscience, neither compel others so to do.

Your affectionate Friend and Servant.
April 14. 1683.
FINIS.

