SOME Considerations: Humbly Offered to Demonstrate How prejudicial it would be
to the English Plantations, Revenues of the Crown, the Navigation and general
Good of this Kingdom, that the sole Trade for Negroes should be granted to a
Company with a Joynt-Stock exclusive to all others.
THe great and unspeakable Advantage the West India Plantations are to England,
is so well known, that it needs no demonstration to prove it. The only thing
Necessary, is to endeavor to improve and increase this mighty advantageous
Trade, by securing them from the Insults of their Enemies, and enabling them to
make larger quantities of the Commodities of those Colonies.

Now the means most conducive thereunto will be to make the Trade to Africa
open and free for all the Native Subjects of England, which Trade for Slaves is
chiefly from Acra to Angola, and contains about 1200 Miles Sea-cost, in which
extent the present Affrican Company have neither Fort, Castle, nor Factory; so
that they have not the least color for a Pretense to an exclusive Right of
Trade into those Parts.

It is well known, that the Riches of the Plantations consists in Slaves
chiefly, by whose strength and labor all their Commodities, as Tobacco, Sugar,
Cotton, Indigo, Ginger, etc. are produced; and the more Slaves those
Plantations are supplied with, the more Commodities are made, and the stronger
they are to defend themselves against any Insults. Neither can there be any
more danger of being over-stockt with Negroes, than there is that too much
Tobacco, Sugar, etc. should be sent to England; for it is a plain consequence,
the more Negroes the more Goods will be produced, the more Goods the more
Custom paid, and all those Commodities rendered here at home so cheap as will
enable this Nation to send them abroad cheap also, to the great discouraging of
the Plantation-Trade of all other Nations. Wherefore it is very plain, that a
large supply of Negroes will not only bring great Riches to this Kingdom, but
will also greatly Increase our Navigation.

Whereas on the contrary, should the Affrican Trade be enclosed, and confined
to the Wills and Powers of a Company, the consequence would prove as fatal to
the Plantations as a Power given to one Person in England to supply the
Gardners with Servants, and the Farmers and Carriers with Horses: It is not to
be doubted that the one would be constrained to pay yearly for his Servants as
much as his Years product would amount to, and the other for his Team as much
as the Rent of his Farm, which would prove great Discouragements to their
Labor and Industry. This may we reasonably suppose would be the Case of the
Planters in the West Indies, were there but one Person that must supply them
with Slaves, they being so extremely Necessary, that it is impossible to live
without them, every Man being rich or poor according to his Stock in Slaves. A
Man that may be Proprietor of 10000 Acres of Land, would still be poor had he
no stock of Negroes to employ upon it.

It might be fairly Objected, That the present Affrican Company have carried on
their Trade but very imperfectly as to their own Advantage, (notwithstanding
that was all the Design they aimed at) as may be plainly proved from the Care
they have taken to supply all the Plantatitions, it being very well known that
they have not for these 20 Years or more sent one Ships-loading of Negroes to
Virginia nor Maryland, which are two very large Countries, and capable of
making twice as much Tobacco as they now do, were they but well supplied with
Negroes.

Every Negro that is sent into those Plantations, makes as much Tobacco yearly
as pays from 30 l. to 40 l. Sterling. Custom, but the Company think that is not
material to their Stock: They understand the People are generally poor, and
therefore will not venture to trust them; whereas at the same time private Men
have, (though with the hazard of being seized by the Companies Agents) and had it
not been for that Supply those Countries had been in a much worse Condition
than at present they are.

To further demonstrate what before is hinted at, that the Company have no
Forts, Castles nor Factories from Acra to Angola, nor do they suppose them
necessary to carry on the Slave Trade, is plainly proved from their own
Practice and Management of that Trade, for when they design a Ship to trade for
Slaves, they put a Lee-ward Cargo (as they term it) on board the Ship, and give
the Master or the chief Officer of the Ship full power to dispose, barter and
sell the said Cargo for their Accounts, allowing them a Commission of 4 per
Cent. for disposing of the said Cargo, taking on board the Negroes, and
delivering them to their Factors in the Plantations, who have usually been the
Governors of those Places, who have disposed of the Negroes not always to the
poor Planters liking, but necessity has no law, so must submit to the Will and
Pleasure of their Superiors.

Now this great and growing Evil can only be prevented by permitting more
Sellers of Negroes than one, wherefore since it is evidently demonstrable, that
it is no charge to carry on and manage the Slave Trade, and of what great
Concern it is to encourage and support the English Plantations, whereby the
Navigation of the Kingdom, Revennues of the Crown, and the General Good of this
Nation is so much advanced, therefore it is humbly hoped that the Trade from
Acra to Angola inclusive may be henceforth judged and allowed to be free and
open for all the Subjects of this Kingdom.


