A SOBER LETTER, Touching Predestination AND OBDURATION. Sent to a MINISTER IN
The City OF BRISTOL.

LONDON Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

A SOBER LETTER, TOUCHING PREDESTINATION AND OBDURATION.
Sect. 1.
Sir,
ALthough the Doctrine of God's Eternal Predestination be an offense to many,
some abuse it to carnal liberty, and others to despair; yet it is a necessary
and useful Doctrine, which upon all occasions ought to be uttered with much
reverence and circumspection, to the praise and glory of God (as the same is
held forth in the sacred Scriptures) without some taste of this Divine Doctrine
of Predestination, there can be no true Faith; but either a doubtful and
wavering Opinion leading to Despair, or else a vain presumption of feigned
Holiness, whilst men rest upon their own Works and Performances, and not upon
the Free Grace of God. There is no Doctrine that does more beat down the pride
of the Flesh, that does more exalt the Riches of God's Grace, or more establish
and support the Saints in the Assurance of the Love of God, than this Doctrine
of God's Eternal Predestination, if rightly apprehended and improved. The
Scripture does usually allege the Eternal Purpose and Decree of God for
strengthening and confirming our Faith and Hope of Salvation; and does not rest
in second Causes, or in the Fruits of our Faith and Vocation; but ascends up
to Christ himself: In whom (as in the Head) we are elected and predestined to
Grace and Glory: Yea, it raises us up to that everlasting Purpose and Decree
which was in God himself before the Foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
Matthew. 11.25, 26. Romans 8.29, 30. Romans 9.11, 16, 18, 23.2 Tim. 1.9.2 Tim.
2.19.1. Pet. 1.20.

Sect. 2.
As in other Points of Divinity, so more especially in this great Mystery of
Predestination, we should avoid vain and curious Questions and Speculations;
using such words and expressions concerning the same, as are most agreeable to
the Holy Scriptures (for who so fit to reveal the mind of God in this great
Mystery as God himself?) and not according to our corrupt fancy and imagination
In this case it is best and safest for us to ascend from the lowest degrees to
the highest, as St. Paul does in his Epistle to the Romans: speaking first of
the Law of God, and the Corruption of Man's Nature; and so proceeding on to the
Remission of Sins, and Justification by Christ; and from thence, to the sublime
Mystery of God's Eternal Predestination. Whether we go up from the lowest step
to the highest, or descend from the highest to the lowest, we must take heed
that we run not from one Extreme to another; omitting and passing by the middle
Causes or Means of Salvation and Damnation; which ought to be duly considered
and placed between God's Eternal Decree, and the final Execution thereof. Nor
should the Decree of Praeterition or Reprobation be applied to any Sinner in
(particular) so long as he lives, without special extraordinary Revelation,
seeing God (whose Grace and Mercy is infinite and boundless) may call and
convert him, even at the eleventh hour, though his sins be never so great and
heinous. It Is observable, that all those Acts in God, which, in the matter of
Reprobation, go before sin, are described, rather after a negative, than
positive manner in the Scripture; as the Not writing their names in the book of
life. Rev. 13.8. They are not found written in the book of life. Rev. 20.15. Ye
are not of my Sheep. Joh. 10.26. I never knew you. Matthew. 7.23. The Election
has obtained it, the rest (i e. those who are not elected) were blinded. Romans
11.7.

Sect. 3.
God's Decree of Reprobation is not the cause of sin, but Man himself is the
cause of sin; Eccles. 7.29. Ezekiel. 36.31, 32. Jam. 1.14. Reprobation being part
of the Decree, and the Decree nothing else but God himself decreeing, cannot be
the cause of sin: which is so contrary to God (who is Holiness it self.) His
Decree may be said to be the Antecedent of Sin, and Sin to be the Consequent of
the Decree, not the Effect of the Decree. Upon this occasion, we should always
remember that approved distinction between a proper Cause, and an Antecedent:
Life is the Antecedent of death, and sight of blindness. And, as it is
impossible that there should be Death where there has not been Life, or
Blindness where there has not been Sight foregoing; so it is as impossible,
that either Life should be the cause of Death, or Sight the cause of Blindness
following. God wills not Sin as Sin; therefore Reprobation is not the cause
of Sin: God wills the Permission of Sin; therefore Reprobation is the
Antecedent thereof. For the better guiding and regulating our Judgments in this
great point, we must consider three distinctions. 1. Between God's Willing Sin
as Sin, and his Willing the being; or permission, or the ordering of Sin for
the Glory of Divine Justice and Mercy. 2. Between a Cause and an Antecedent. 3.
Between a Consequent and an Effect.

Sect. 4.
Sin is the cause of Punishment and Damnation; God punishes no man, condemns
no man, but for Sin; Original, or Actual, or both; Genesis 2.17. Romans 5.12. Ezekiel.
18.20, 25, 28. Though Sin be not the Cause of the Decree of God (for that which
is temporal cannot be the cause of that which is eternal) yet it is the only
proper cause of Punishment and Damnation. We must distinguish between God's
Decree of Non-Election, or Reprobation, and his destinating men to punishment,
or preparation to punishment; which is usually called Praedamnation. As for the
former, it depends solely upon the sovereign Will and Pleasure of God: but
the latter is an Act of God's Justice. The one flows from God, as he is a God
of absolute Power and Sovereignty; the other flows from God, as he is a God
of Justice. The Decree of Election and Reprobation is an Immanent Act in God
alone, as in the Subject; and from God alone, as from the Original Cause. But
Damnation is neither originally from God, nor subjectively in God; but is a
transient Act of his Justice. God being infinitely wise, propounds to himself
the Manifestation of his own Glory, as a most certain and infallible End;
appointing and making all things to be subservient thereunto: The Lord has
made all things for himself; yea, even the wicked for the day of evil. Prove.
16.4. And thus the Decree of God is described by the learned Bishop Usher, and
other Protestant Divines, to be that Act whereby God, from all Eternity
(according to his Free Will) did, by his unchangeable Counsel and Purpose,
fore-appoint, and certainly determine of all things; together with their
Causes, Effects, Circumstances, and manner of Being, for the Manifestation of
his awn Glory, Nor should we go about to subject this Divine Decree to our
shallow Capacity, or measure it by our depraved Reason; considering that the
Will of God (from whence the Decree comes) is unsearchable. It Is true that all
things come to pass necessarily, according to God's Eternal Decree; they shall
not come to pass in any other place or time than he has ordained. But yet this
Decree of God does not infer a necessity of Constraint, but only of
Immutability: nor does the Decree take away, either Liberty from the reasonable
Creatures, or Contingency from second Causes; but only brings them into a
certain order, that is, directs them to the determined End: whereupon the
Effects and Events of things are contingent or necessary, as the nature of the
second Cause is: Thus Christ (according to the Divine Decree) died necessarily;
Act. 4.28. Act. 17.3. But yet willingly. If we respect the Temperature of
Christ's Body, He might have lived longer: and therefore, in this respect, May
be said to have died contingently.

Sect. 5.
The Doctrine of God's-Eternal Predestination (rightly understood) is so far
from being a prejudice or hindrance to the Use of Means tending to Holiness and
Sanctification, as that the use of the Means is the proper Effect and Fruit of
the Decree of God: the right Knowledge and Consideration whereof is a most
effectual Motive to a constant and conscionable use of the Means. And
therefore, that is a most wicked Speech (which implies a mere Contradiction)
If I be elected, howsoever I live, I shall be saved: And if I be not elected,
live I never so well, I shall be damned. Satan, by this wicked Suggestion,
divides the End and the Means asunder, which God has joined together. The
Decree of God consists not only of the End without the Means, nor of the Means
without the End; but of both together. God having chosen us to salvation,
through sanctification: of the sprit, and belief of the Truth. 2 These. 1.13.

Sect. 6.
The Command and Invitation of God in the preaching of the Gospel, is the Rule
of our Faith and Obedience; and not the secret Decree of God. Nor must we
confound the Decree of Predestination with the Precepts of Faith and Obedience:
God's revealed Preceptive Will shows what the Lord approves (as good in it
self) and what ought to be performed by us: Not that every one that hears the
Gospel preached, shall have Effectual Grace to perform it; but yet it is the
duty of every one to repent, and believe on Jesus Christ, and obey the Voice of
God in the Dispensation of his Gospel. The Doctrine of Predestination (as set
forth in the Scriptures) is commanded to be taught and learned; and being
soberly and wisely handled, is very useful, both to the Godly and the Wicked.
But the personal Application thereof before Faith, in point of Election; or,
during this Life, in point of Reprobation; is unwarrantable, and many ways
hurtful. And truly, it is a great Sin against the Grace and Mercy of God in the
Gospel, for any man or woman to conclude that he or she is a Reprobate, because
final Unbelief and Disobedience (the Consequent of Reprobation) cannot be known
before Death. No man knows who are reprobate but God, and those to whom God
reveals it in his Word. But the Reprobation of any particular person (now
living) is not to be found in the Scriptures, nor is it revealed in an ordinary
way to us.

Sect. 7.
All the Elect of God, first or last, shall truly believe on Christ, and be
converted to him (Saving Faith being the Effect or Fruit of Election.) All that
the Father has given to Christ, shall come to him. Joh. 6.37. Joh. 10.36. Whom
he did predestinate, them he also called. Romans 8.30. The Election has obtained
it. Romans 11.7. And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed. Act.
13.48. It is called the faith of God's Elect. Tit. 1.1. It is according to
Election. Romans 11.5. In which respect, it is as certain, that all the Elect of
God (though many of them are yet Unbelievers) shall believe and be saved, as it
is certain that they are saved who are already in Heaven. As for others, God
(who may do with his own what he pleases) justly witholds from them Grace to
cure their Unbelief and Impenitency: To them it is not given. Matthew. 13.11.
Moral Impenitency, and Enmity of Man's Will against God, is common, both to the
Elect and Reprobate (they being alike sinful and corrupt by Nature:) only God
is pleased to cure the one, and not the other, of their Natural Unbelief and
Impenitency. Touching the latter sort, God may be said to be the Physical Cause
(not of their Unbelief, but) why their Unbelief remains uncured: As a
Physician, able to cure a Disease (which yet he is not bound to cure) is the
cause, not of the Disease it self, but why the Disease is not cured: yet is he
not the Moral and Blameable, but the Physical and unblameable Cause thereof,
because he is not bound to cure it. This Cure cannot be effected in the
Unregenerate, only by outward Means, without the Internal Efficatious Operation
of the Spirit of God. The Israelites had seen with their Eyes the great Signs
and Miracles which God had wrought for them: yet withal, it is said, that God
had not given them a heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear, unto
this day: Deuteronomy. 29.3, 4. that is, he had not cured them of their Spiritual
Blindness and unbelief, by the inward Illumination and Operation of his Spirit:
for, as Augustine says well, Quantam libet praebuerit patientiam, nisi Deus
dederit quis apat penitentiam? Contr. Julian, Pelag lib. 5. c p. 4.
Though God afford never so great patience (in respect of outward Means) yet,
unless God give Grace, who can truly repent of his Sins? And this Grace he
gives to one, and not to another, according to his good pleasure. The blessed
Apostle, in answering that great Objection, Romans 9.19. Why does God yet find
fault with the Hardness and Rebellion of Man's heart, seeing no Man can resist
the Divine Will, nor can he cure himself of this hardness of heart? has
recourse for satisfaction (not to the ill desert, and sinfulness of Man, but)
to the Sovereignty and Dominion of God over his Creatures; which surely is as
great and absolute, as that which the Potter has over the Clay; who makes
Vessels of what fashion he will, and for what end he will. So, God has mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens: and who art thou, O
Man, that replyest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed
it, why have thou made me thus? It becomes not the Creature to quarrel with
God, or dispute with him concerning this matter (though the Creature cannot
comprehend the reasonableness thereof.) This may well satisfy and silence us,
that the Apostle does not go about to justify God's Courses (here mentioned)
from the Consideration of Man's Sinfulness, but only from the Consideration of
God's Sovereignty, and Supreme Dominion over his Creatures. And, as God freely
gives the Grace of Faith and Repentance to some Men, and not to others, to
raise them out of Sin; so God gave corroborating, confirming Grace to some
Angels, and not to others, to preserve them from Sin, according to the
Sovereignty of his Will, without reference to their desert. This Grace God
granted to the elect Angels; who has one of the Ancients duly observes) were,
Amplius adjuti, more assisted by the Grace of God than the other that fell: and
what reason can be alleged for this, but merely the absolute Sovereignty, and
free Pleasure of God? And here we must acquiesce after all our vain and tedious
Disputes. Behold, in this thou art not just, God is greater than Man, why do
thou strive against him; for he gives not account of any of his matters. Job
33.12, 13. Will thou condemn him that is most just? Is it fit to say to a King,
thou art wicked? How much less to him that accepts not the persons of Princes,
nor regards the rich more than the poor? Job 34.17, 18, 19. Yea, indeed, this
great God (who governs all persons and things) is most just; his Will being the
eternal Rule of Righteousness. Justice may be considered two ways; the one is,
when things are carried toward Men, according to their Works. The other is,
when a Man does no other thing than he has power to do; as in executing the
power that God has given him over the inferior Creatures. Thus we are just,
though We kill Sheep or Oxen, etc. not in reference to any Works of theirs; but
only in reference to our own necessary use, and that lawful power which God
has given us, to make use of these Creatures, and to serve our own turns of
them. And thus, God is not unjust or unrighteous, but most righteous and just
in showing Mercy on some, and not on others; in giving the Grace of Faith and
Repentance to some, and not to others, when there is no difference between them.

Sect. 8.
It is the great duty and Concernment of all those persons to whom the Gospel
is preached; be they rich or poor, noble or ignoble, learned or unlearned,
moral or profane, to deny themselves, and believe on Christ for everlasting
Life and Salvation, without questioning the secret Eternal Decrees and Purposes
of God concerning them in particular. When Men are in danger of drowning, if a
Rope be cast out, with a Command that they should lay hold on it for their
safety, will any of them be so foolish as to neglect the means of their safety,
till the secret purpose and meaning of him that cast out the Rope be
particularly known concerning them? Or if a rich Man throw Money amongst the
Poor, requiring them to accept of it; will any of them refuse it, till he
certainly know the secret intent and purpose of the rich Man concerning him in
particular? Although the Gospel does not exprefly fignifie, that this or that
Man shall, In the Event, actually believe on Christ, and be saved; yet the
Gospel makes known to the Sons of Men, that it is their duty to accept and
embrace the Lord Jesns, as he is freely offered to Sinners; and that whosoever
will be justified and saved, must believe on him: He that has the Son has
life, but he that has not the Son has not life: He that believes on Christ
shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. Faith and Salvation
are so indivisibly joined together, that wheresoever the one is, there the
other necessarily and infallibly follows. Consider, 1. That where God affords
the means of Grace, there the outward Dispensation of the Gospel is alike to
all, both Elect and Reprobate: We invite, we woo, we entreat all to come in,
and be reconciled to God, not knowing in particular who are elect of reprobate
in respect of the Eternal Decrees of God; we offer Christ freely to all that
will come: Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17.
Christ is tendered as an All sufficient Savior to all that hear the Gospel,
with a Command to believe; and a promise that, Whosoever (none excepted)
believes, shall be saved. And though none can savingly believe without God's
Special Grace, yet all those that finally reject this Tender of the Gospel are
left without excuse. 2. As none of us are expressly mentioned by Name in the
Gospel, so neither are we excluded by Name. There we find, that Christ died for
the world, for sinners, for the Ungodly, for Enemies. Romans 5.6, 8, 10. Joh.
3.16, 17.1 Tim. 1.15.1 Joh. 2.2. Which words are comprehensive, and will take
in all sorts of sinners that will heartily receive and embrace the Lord Jesus.
Him that comes to me (says our blessed Savior) I will in no wise cast out.
Joh. 6.37. And what though our sins be exceeding great and heinous, yet let us
remember, that forgiveness and pardon of all sins of what number or nature
foever they be) is freely offered and promised to every one that shall
cordially accept thereof. So that it matters not so much, what our Sins have
formerly been, as whether we are now heartily willing to close with Jesus
Christ, for pardon of, and power against Sin. 3. We cannot perform a more
acceptable Service and Obedience to God, than to believe on Christ, and
heartily embrace the offer of his Grace (as being poor, lost, condemned Sinners
in our selves) Joh. 6.29. Without this, all other works are but dead works.
Heb. 9.14. Heb. 11.4, 5, 6. He that believes not, does what he can to make God
a liar. 1 John 5.10. And he that believes on the Son of God, sets to his seal,
that God is true, Joh. 3.33.4. Such as have truly repented of their Sins, and
do cast and roll themselves (in the sense of their own unworthiness) upon the
perfect Righteousness and Merits of Christ (as held forth in the Promises of
the Gospel) have the witness in themselves of their Election, Justification and
Adoption, and are free from the danger of Reprobation and final Obduration;
though at present they are sensible of, and do groan under much hardnss of
heart and corruption. It Is God that justifies, it is Christ that died for them:
Who therefore shall condemn them? who shall lay any thing to their charge? Romans
8.1, 32.

Sect. 9.
Whereas God is often said in Scripture to harden the hearts of Men, Exodus
4.21. Exodus 9.16. Deuteronomy. 2.30. Romans 9.18. Certainly God does not harden Men's
hearts (as Augustine rightly observes) Infundendo Malitiam, but Non Infundendo
Gratiam: It Is not by infusing any evil into the heart, but by witholding, and
not communicating his Grace to it. As the Water is congealed and frozen by the
absence of the Sun: how? not by imparting coldness, but by not imparting heat
and influence. Hardness of heart, as it is Sin and Rebellion against God, so
God has nothing to do with it; but it must be put upon the Score of Satan, and
the Corruption of Man's Nature. God hardens not the hearts of his own people
as he hardens the Reprobates: for though he hide his face, and suspend the
comfortable Influences of his Spirit from them for a moment, to try and humble
them under the Sense of their Corruption; yet with everlasting kindness he will
embrace them; Isa. 54.8. God is said to harden in withdrawing his Grace, and
ordering and disposing even Men's evil Actions to that end which he has
propounded to himself, and in using the means which the Corruption and
Malignity of Man's heart and nature perverteth to his own destruction. Thus
God, in his wise Providence, orders and over-ruleth the Action of Hardening,
but Man himself is the Cause of the Obliquity and sinfulness of the Action. In
Scripture we find that God hardens, Satan hardens, and Man hardens his
own heart: Man as the instrument, Satan as the Worker and Efficient; God as the
Supreme Judge, overruling every Action, and disposing of it to his own Glory,
either in a way of Mercy or Justice. As in a Ship, Man is as the Mariner that
works; Satan the evil Spirit, as the Wind and Weather that tempts and
moves; and God as the Steers-man, that directs and governs all. Like as
then the Sun hardneth the Clay, and the Rain brings forth Weeds, not of it
self, but by reason of the Nature of the Soil which it influenceth: So, by the
Providence and Operation of God, after a most secret (yet just and holy manner)
the hearts of wicked men come to be hardened more and more; but the only
culpable Cause thereof is in themselves, and in the Corruption of their Nature,
and not in God.

Sect. 10.
Hardness of heart is either natural and inbred (which we bring with us into
the World) or else it is acquired and voluntary: and this is an extinguishing
of that common Light, and Knowledge, and Ingenuity which is in Men; whereby
they make their hearts as hard as an Adamant Stone, and wilfully estrange
themselves from God; or else it is an Additional Hardness inflicted by the just
hand of God upon them, as a punishment of their Sin: Thus God hardened the
hearts of Pharaoh and others, giving them up to a reprobate sense, and the vile
lusts of their own hearts. Romans 1.24, 28. Again, Hardness of heart is either
felt or not felt. The Reprobate (who is given up to hardness of heart, and
searedness of Conscience) is not sensible of that dreadful spiritual Judgment
which he lies under, nor does he bewail it: but hardness felt, when a Man sees
and feels, with grief and sorrow, the deadness, and hardness, and benummedness
of his own heart, which does not relent (as it should do) at the threatenings
and promises of God; nor is it thawed and melted with the Mercies and Loving
kindnesses of God: such a sensible hardness is incident to God's own Children;
who often complain of it, and groan under it, as a great and heavy burden. O
Lord (say they) why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our
hearts from thy fear. Isa. 63.17.

Sect. 11.
Are we sensible of the hardness and stonyness of our hearts? and would we be
cured of this great Evil? Then 1. Let us diligently search and examine whether
we do not indulge our selves in some secret Sin or other; which being
unrepented of, will harden the heart. 2. Let us consider the greatness and
goodness of that Divine Majesty, against whom our hearts are hardened: this will
be a means to soften them. Deuteronomy. 10.16, 17, 18. Job 23.15, 16. Psalm. 95.3, 8,
9.2 Chron. 30.8, 9.3. Above all other things, let us meditate on Christ
crucified, and lay our hard and frozen hearts before the hot Beams of the Sun
of Righteousness. Mal. 4.2. that they may sensibly feel the force of his
gracious influence; and so, looking up to him by Faith (whom we have pierced
with our Sins,) we may thereupon melt and mourn for our sins, as one that
mourns for his only child. Zach. 12.10. It Is observed of the Diamond (whose
extreme hardness cannot be mollified, either by the force of Iron, or the
violence of the Fire) that if it be steeped in the hot blood of a Goat, it
presently dissolves. The Iron Hammer of the Law will not melt and soften our
hard and stubborn hearts; but if, by true Faith and Meditation, we bath and
plunge then in the precious Blood of the true Scapegoat, the Lord Jesus Christ,
this will break and melt the heart (though it be as hard as an Adamant.) The
sacred Blood of the Physician cures the Disease of the Patient.

O rare Physician; thou that shedst thy Blood,
And gav'st thy Life to do poor Sinners Good.
FINIS.

