SOME Considerations About the Raising OF COIN.

In a Second LETTER to Mr. Lock.

SOME Considerations About the Raising OF COIN.

In a Second LETTER to Mr. Lock.

Principes Commercii fundamenta prima, Pondera, Mensuras, Monetas, si
Rempublicam salvam volunt, ne attingant. In specie utilitatis praesentis fraus
multiplex latet. Mar. cap. 8. Doctor. in Can. Quanto de juris. LONDON, Printed
for A. and I. Churchill, at the Black-Swan in Paternoster Row, 1696.

SIR,
THE favorable Reception with the Public, that the Inscription of your Name
has procured to my Letter about Coin, incourages me to make use of the same
Artifice in this second Attempt, which common Fame tells me is yet Necessary.
It seems that notwithstanding all you have said, and which I have but briefly
hinted at, there are some Men who artfully carry on the Design of having our
Coin raised (as they call it) the next Session of Parliament; And others that
are too weakly drawn to a Concurrence in it. It Is strange. For if there be any
one Truth in what I have writ, (if Two and Two make Four) I cannot see but both
the Absurdity and Iniquity of that Design are as evident as the Sun at Noon
Day. But however, since there is yet some appearance of a little remaining
Doubt, I beseech you, Sir, give me leave once more to shelter my self under the
shadow of your Name, whilst I propose to all Men, a little more fully, my
thoughts upon that Subject.

Methinks there should not need many words upon it. For the whole Matter seems
to me to divide it self naturally into two (and but two) Branches: First, An
Enquiry into the meaning of the thing: And then the Consequences of it. In
which, I am persuaded, a regular Progression will make all plain and easy.

What can be the meaning of raising of Coin? It would indeed be a real raising
of it, if (preserving its old name and fineness) some proportional Degree of
Weight were added to every individual Piece. Then every Piece would be properly
raised: It would be increased in Worth: And without any Law, it would quickly
be esteemed accordingly by all Mankind, both at home and abroad. But this is by
no means the thing intended. This, these Projectors will be apt to say, would
be a present extravagant Profusion of the Nation's Treasure. And they are in
the right. For, though after a very little while, when every one came to know the
true value of the Money that he had, he would in all his Bargains expect
proportionable Penny-worths; Yet at the first, the Nation would infallibly lose
all that additional weight, in the Sums that it happened (at the time of such a
change) to be indebted to Foreigners. And this I know no body either generous
enough, or foolish enough to propose. Yet this (this making of Pieces of the
same Denomination to be either more weighty or more fine than they were before)
is the only possible way in Nature of doing what can properly be called Raising
of Coin.

But since this is not the Case, since Use (Quem penes Arbitrium est and Ius
and Norma loquendi) has established another Signification of the Term; let us
talk improperly with our Neighbors. Raising of Coin, say those that have their
Chests full of it, can be understood by no Man of common sense otherwise than
of the raising the value of it, by a Law, without altering any thing either in
its weight or fineness. This their Sense (which lies wonderfully quick in their
Fingers Ends) tells them would be very advantageous to themselves: And they
laugh at our Criticisms. Now this is as much as to say, in plain English;
Either clip a Shilling to the weight of Sixpence, and let that diminished Piece
go for a Shilling still, as it did a Year ago; Or let our curious new Milled
Six-pences pass for Shillings, and other Pieces in the same proportion. Either
way the Coin is raised: For every Man that has Money will be just twice as Rich
as he was before: And by consequence the whole Nation will be so too. I doubt I
have put this supposition, of Doubling all, a little too grossly. They are not
so unreasonable: But a quarter part Advance, Threepence in the Shilling, may
be very convenient. That Convenience I shall examine by and by. At present I
look no further than to agree with them about the meaning of the thing.

This then is the signification of raising of Coin, in our Modern Dialect. It Is
some way or other an altering the present established Measure between the
Weight and the Name of every individual Piece. Whereas Eight Drams now make an
Ounce, and one Ounce (I suppose the round Sum, though not exact, only for
clearness) makes a Crown; The raising of a Crown is, to call four Drams (the
Half-Crown) by the Name of the Whole; and other Pieces in the same proportion.
However I turn my thoughts upon this Matter, I can find no more in it; Nay, I
beg leave to say positively, there is no more in this great Mystery of raising
of Coin, than merely the change of a few Names, at first given Arbitrarily to
certain Pieces of Metal of different weight and fineness, And since continued
so, for the ascertaining of legal Contracts, and the general Convenience of
Commerce.

I suppose we are agreed in this Signification. It Is a Change in the Name only,
and not in the thing. For a change in the thing, the addition of more weight to
a Piece of the same Name and same Purity, every body sees is prejudicial.
Whereas the Deduction of any Proportion of weight from such a Piece does seem
to some, or at least is pretended to be, so far as it reaches, advantageous.

Let it be so then. To overcome all the Pecuniary Difficulties that this Nation
now labors under, we are to raise our Coin: That is, we are to give new Names
to the same proportional Pieces of Metal. A Half is to be called a Whole, etc.
If this will do the Business, it is an excellent Knack: And it is pity an Hour
should be lost in delaying the Execution of it. But let us now enquire a little
into that pretended Consequence of this Glorious Project.

This is the Second Branch into which I said the Matter divides it self. It
will require a larger Examination than he first. But before I enter upon the
particular Heads of that Enquiry, methinks it would not be amiss to consider
what Effect an arbitrary Change in the settled Names of any other things would
produce, as well as in Coin. Let me beg Liberty to suppose an Assembly of the
Wise Men in the Country of Gotham: For I dare not make so absurd a Supposition
in any other place. These Grave Senators finding, that, by the Licentiousness
of the times, the Practice of Adultery was grown so rife amongst them that they
could not preserve the Matrimonial Chastity of their Wives; And having long
endeavored ineffectually to reform this Evil by the Severity of Laws; At last
one of them, whose Musical Ear fansied something more harmonious in the Sound
of the Word, Gallant, than in the Word, Husband, proposed that they should
change the Terms, and (by a legal Fixation of the pleasing Sound, Gallant, to
themselves, and of the harsh Sound, Husband, to those lewd Debauchees that
offended them) try to regain their Wives Affection, and reform their Practice.
The Proposition seemed easy; And therefore these Wise Men, to free themselves
from a troublesome Deliberation, enacted it accordingly. But every one sees,
however the Terms might be changed, the Nature of the things (in this
Supposition) remained yet the same: And that notwithstanding this Law, the
Person that was agreeable to the Wife before would be so still; And he that was
disagreeable would be despised.

Perhaps this Supposition, to some Readers, may appear rather Nauseous than
Pleasant. I am sensible of it. But I desire them to consider whether there be
any thing more grave and solid, or whether there can be any thing more useful,
in changing the Signification of the Word, Half, into the Sense that we now
understand by the Word, Whole; (Which is the Proposition of those that labor
to promote the Project of heightning our Coin) than there is in the supposed
Decree of the Wise Men of Gotham. Something more mischievous indeed there may
be: But more useful there cannot. For a Law can neither make a disagreeable
Husband to be sincerely loved, nor a Half to be really the whole. But those
Mischiefs (in our Case) I shall consider more particularly by and by. Here I
only note, that upon both these changes of Names, a Confusion in Speech would
immediately follow: But no manner of Benefit.

And that I may now draw nearer to my Matter; Let us suppose, in the next
place, that some other People, a Degree wiser than our selves, should advance
this Project of ours a Degree further. Observing that, whereas we have formerly
called an Ounce of Silver a Crown, we have now learnt the way of doubling our
Wealth, by calling half an Ounce by that Name; They thereupon proceed to the
same Practice in all other things. And to do it at once effectually, without
tying themselves to this or the other particular Commodity, they enact in
general, that henceforwards Half an Ounce or Four Drams shall be called an
Ounce, and Half a Yard or Eighteen Inches shall be called a Yard. Thus they
double not only their Coin, but all the Merchantable Commomodities in their
Country, all together. But would these Wise Men, any more than those of Gotham,
find any manner of Advantage by this Chimera? Every Body sees, in this Case
also, that nothing but Confusion could follow.

And will any Body now say that there is any other Difference, between the
heightning of our Coin alone, and the heightning of all other things; Or
between the heightning of our Coin a Fourth, a Fifth, or a Sixth Part, and the
heightning of it a Half; than only the Difference between the less and the
more? Whatever Evil there is in the largest of their Suppositions, will
evidently hold its Proportion in the least. Nay rather, I may confidently
affirm that by how much wider the Change is, it will be so much the more easily
perceived, and the Mischiefs attending it, though great, yet so much the shorter.
And on the contrary, how much less perceptible the Change is in this Rise of
Coin, it will be apt to produce, if not so great, I am sure so much more
lasting Inconveniences.

I will now insist no longer upon Generals; But come directly to the Subject of
my present Deliberation; Which is to enquire into the Consequences of the
Proposition of heightning our Coin. The Noise of the pretended Advantageous
Consequences attending it is so great, that one would think there were a great
many of them. Yet now that I reflect seriously upon it, I can find but this
single one, that carries with it any manner of Appearance of the least
Advantage to the Nation: Which is, That it would be a means to draw our
National Treasure out of the private Hoards where it lies now useless to the
Public; And so procure us a greater Plenty of Current Species, for the
carrying on of our Commerce and all other current Occasions. What Solidity
there is in that Pretense of public Advantage will best appear upon a View of
the whole. And therefore, without making any previous Judgment, I will consider
the Heads that shall occurr to my Thoughts, indifferently, whether they are, or
to whomsoever they are, either for the better or for the worse. My general
Topics are, Justice or Injustice: Advantage or Disadvantage: And to whom. Yet I
intend not to treat the Matter under those distinct Heads, but to remark any or
all of them, as Occasion shall require.

That the heightning of our Coin, as is proposed, would be one Occasion of
dispersing some few more Species amongst us, for common Use, I readily grant.
The taking away the Expectation of it, would indeed do the same thing, and much
more effectually. But however, it must be owned, that by this Method of raising
our Coin, all Men that have hoarded Treasures, not their own, (when they found
that by paying out Coin raised one Half, or one Quarter, they could gain such a
proportion upon the whole Sum of the Debts that they owe) would without all
Doubt, readily issue out so much of those Treasures as would serve to that End.
That is, they would pay, Or rather (under the color of a Law) compound for
their Debts, at 25 or 50 per Cent. Profit to themselves, and Loss to their
Creditors; as the Proportion of this heightning of Coin might be regulated.
Whether they would issue out one Farthing more; Whether they would afford the
Public the Use of any thing that is properly their own; Depends upon quite
different Considerations. They will certainly never do it, but at the most
exorbitant Interest that they can possibly procure: And whilst they have any
ground to think that the locking up of their Coffers may be a means to heighten
the Price of Money, they will temporize, and issue out their Treasures so
sparingly, as to continue, and (if possible) increase our Difficulties.

If our Manners, our Laws, our Government, be so desperately depraved that
there is no means left of making those that are the most Opulent, and best
able, pay their just Debts, but by the allowance of so great an Injustice, the
Case is sad. I hope our Senators, at their approaching Meeting, will find other
Means to invigorate the Spirit of our Constitution. Nothing is impossible in
England to a Parliament. If the Laws already made extend not regularly to the
Punishment of such gross Villainy, our Senate may (if they see cause) make new
ones. But whatever Provision they make for the Future, methinks they should not
suffer this bypast Iniquity, so heinous and unparalled in all the
Circumstances of it, to pass without some severe Animadversion. A perpetual
Brand of Infamy is the least Degree of Punishment that it deserves: On the
Person, I mean, as well as the thing. Wherever the Guilt is found notorious,
God forbid that the Guilty should be allowed to shelter themselves under any
whatsoever Pretense of Place or Privilege. Nay the greater any such Pretense
is, the more exemplary ought to be the Animadversion. Privilege to defraud our
Neighbors! Who can bear it? O, that I could see a little of this invigorating
Power break out amongst us! Then I would hope for some Effectual Reformation in
every part of our corrupted Body. Then, at least, I am assured there would be
no need of heightning our Coin, for an Inducement to make Men pay their Debts.
A Vigorous and Rigorous Honesty in the Executors of all Public Offices, though
it did not punish, yet it would so discountenance such fordid Practices, as
would be sufficient to stifle them. Nay, if we had but here and there a little
of this honest Vigor intermixed with our natural Stupidity (shall I call it
so, or Depravity?) That little would not fail by degrees to diffuse itself,
and make us happy. You see, Sir, my Zeal has here transported me. But however,
I will now conclude it, in heartily beseeching Almighty God to grant us this
inestimable Blessing: This, I mean, particularly, of a Reformation of Manners.

For all this Zeal, I have not yet forgot the Subject that I have in hand. The
heightning of Coin, I have granted, would oblige some Men to pay their Debts,
who are not otherwise much disposed to do it; And by Consequence would furnish
the Public with so much Current Cash. I have pointed nevertheless at another
way, which (in my opinion) would do it much better. But admit no other way
could be found, in this Conjuncture; And that we were now to deliberate what is
fit to be done upon it: Truly Sir, I that write now for no other End but my
Country's Service, and who have nothing to guide my Thoughts but the natural
Consequences of things, as they follow one upon another; I say, if I were asked
my Advice upon the Case thus stated, I would propose that those who desire such
an Advantage should have it: But upon condition then, that they should set down
their Names and their Sums. And so the Preamble of the Act (without any Sham)
should express the true Ground upon which such and such things are so enacted.
As for Example; Suppose it were expressed, That Whereas it is notorious that
the present Wealth of this Kingdom, in Lawful Gold and Silver Coin, is
abundantly more than sufficient for our Current occasions of Commerce, Markets,
and Expenses; yet nevertheless by the Locking up of those Treasures in private
Hoards, our Commerce is clogged, our Markets are stopped, and the whole Body of
the Nation is exceedingly straightened in the Course of their Ordinary Affairs; Be
it therefore enacted, etc. for the Encouragement of those that shall in this
Conjuncture contribute to the Public Ease, by the Payment of their just Debts,
in Lawful Money of England, That an allowance be made unto them in manner and
form following, That is to say, that A. B. for the Sum of 1000 l. in which he
stands indebted to C. D. shall upon Payment of 500 (or of 750 l. as you please
to suppose it) be entirely discharged from the said Debt.

Item, For the Sum of 2000 l. in which he stands indebted to E F, etc.

And so on, with the rest of his Creditors: And at the Foot of his Account, let
the Sum Total be added up, amounting to perhaps 100000 l. for which he is
required to pay but 50 (or 75000 l. and in consideration of that Service (such
as it is) to the Public, his several Creditors are obliged to allow him 50
suppose (or 25000 l.)

After him, let others follow, with their several Beadroles: One amounting to
50000 l. Another to 150000 l. and so on.

Let those, I say, that desire this Advantage, fairly set down but their Names
and their Sums, that the Nation may know what Obligation it has to each of
them in particular; And then, with my Consent, let them have it. But if any Man
be a shamed to have his Name recorded as a Pretender to this Advantage, I think
he ought much more be ashamed to argue for a general Allowance of so shameful a
thing. What! He would have a hardship put upon the whole Nation, only for a
Veil to his own Practice! It Is hardly conceivable: But I doubt it is too true.
The Allowance to be made in this manner to some Men, if they would so accept of
it, for certain limited Sums, might possibly be set in some proportional
degree of Comparison (how small soever) in balance with the Convenience that
the whole Nation would receive by the Cash which they should produce. But the
Difference between that Convenience, and the Consequences, whatever they are,
that would arise from a general Law for the absolute heightning of our Coin, in
the manner proposed, is too vastly wide to admit of any Comparison; At least,
without a very particular Examination.

I proceed therefore. The heightning of Coin in this manner would spread just
so much Money amongst the People as the Sum of these Hoarders Debts amounts
to: (A Considerable one I doubt not) But not one Farthing more. It would enrich
them, by a manifest injustice, in the Ruin of their Creditors: These perhaps
worthy Men, that wish well to their Country; Those the Blood-suckers of the
Nation, that have nourished themselves at the expense of our Vitals. This
Consequence I think is very clear from all that I have yet said both in this
Letter and my former, viz. That Coin however raised in Denomination, can be of
no more real Value than the weight of the pure Metal that it contains. Whatever
proportion it is raised in, any other way, is just so far an absolute Fraud put
upon all the Creditors in the whole Kingdom.

This Consideration opens to us a much wider Prospect than that of those few
Persons whose Coffers we have been endeavoring to unlock. For them, I have
allowed an Excuse, though a bad one: Or an Expedient, I should rather call it, if
they will please to make use of it. But for giving such an Extravagant
Advantage to all the Debtors in England, without any Merit at all in them
toward the Public, is unsufferable. The thing is evident. If half an Ounce,
or three quarters of an Ounce, of Silver should by Law by made to pass for a
Crown of Lawful Money of England; Then in the Payment of all Debts for
Bargains, Bonds, Mortgages, Rents, or however else they may arise, the Debtor
would gain and the Creditor would lose the half or the quarter that is deducted
from the ancient Standard. Can this be born? Is the Interest of ill Men so
strong, that we have any great Reason to apprehend it? However confidently they
talk, I would yet hope better things. This House of Commons, I am sure,
consists of a great many worthy Men, who are also Men of considerable Bulk and
Fortune in their Country. Surely the Indigent, (I should rather say the Rich)
Debtors in that Assembly, are neither so numerous as to carry this against
them, nor so artful as to draw them in to vote it against themselves. I have
said here the Rich Debtors; Because (in truth) it is only they, (those that have
Cash lying ready by them, but will not pay it because of their Expectation of
this very Advantage) that can receive any Benefit at all by the proposed
Alteration of our Coin. The Indigent, that have not such superfluous Cash lying
by them when this Alteration happens to be made, however they find Money
afterward, will be obliged to receive it with one Hand in the same manner as
they pay it with the other. So that they will have no manner of Profit by the
matter. But nevertheless the Rich Creditor will on all all hands certainly lose.

I know not whether this need any Explanation. But I beg pardon of you, Sir,
and of the Public, if I am more afraid of Obscurity than of Tediousness: And
if I hazard therefore upon so important a point to offend rather in Length than
in Brevity. My Thoughts are these. When the Alteration in Coin is once made, in
the very same moment an Alteration in the real Value of every other thing goes
along with it. Not that any thing, for that reason, will be worth more Ounces
of Silver than it was before: But by continuing to be worth just the same
Number of Ounces of Silver that it was before, it will be worth more Shillings
or Crowns; proportionably as those pieces shall be either diminisht in Weight,
or raised in Name. Now this Alteration in those things, if the Alteration in
Coin be great, will quickly be perceived by every one: If it be small, it will
be the less perceptible; But then the Consequences of it will be so much the
more lasting. Now the Wealthy Gentleman that receives in his Debts in this
raised Coin, if he have occasion to pay it away the same moment for the
Satisfaction of another Debt, neither gets indeed nor loses by that single
Transaction. But the Indigent Man, who is to provide himself Necessaries with
the Sum that he so receives; And the Wealthy Gentleman also, that lays by his
Sums till they grow great enough for some Bargain that he has in prospect, or
that keeps them only for the current Course of his ordinary Expenses; will both
of them certainly lose. For the Rate of every thing rising proportionably to
this Alteration in Coin; Whatever either of them have occasion to buy will be
so much dearer than it was before, as their Money is now worse. And so much
they therefore really lose.

But this is not all. The Consideration of the Landed Man's Rents (whether he
be really Opulent or Indigent) reaches much further. It Is not only one single
Payment, but a continued Course of Annual Payments that he is to take Care for.
Supposing Coin raised (as it is called) a Half or a Quarter part; He will not
only lose so much, by the first Quarter's or Half-year's Rent that he receives;
But for all Leases, Rent-Charges, and other fixed Payments whatsoever, he will
evidently go on to lose, Quarterly and Annually, in the same manner, for the
Future, as long as the Terms of those Contracts continue. Nay, without
restraining this Consideration to Leases and Rent-Charges, even for all Lands,
let Year by Year without any such fixed Stipulation, he will continue to lose
considerably for a long while together.

Those that will answer any thing, pertinently, to this last Suggestion, (for
to the first nothing can be answered) I am bold to say, have no other way to do
it than by maintaining that the Rents of Lands must of Necessity rise also, as
well as Commodities; in proportion to the Diminution, (which they call the
Heightning) of Coin. But in doing so, they show manifestly the Absurdity of
their own Project. For to what purpose should this Alteration be made in Coin,
when every thing else will thereupon alter accordingly, and return in a short
while to bear the same proportion to the new Names, Weight, and Fineness of
Coin, as they did before to the Old? It Is visible there is no other End in it
but the enriching of a few Money-mongers: And that the Nation can receive no
Advantage by it, more than the Use of so much Cash as they shall graciously
please, upon such a Bribe, to issue forth toward the Payment of their own
Debts. I am obliged therefore to grant, by my own Principles (and I am glad our
Antagonists are thus far forced to agree with me) that in Consequence of this
Raising of Coin, the Rents of Land must of Necessity rise also. But I desire it
may be observed, that the Rise of Rents is a thing that proceeds very
gradually. The Farmer will not easily be brought to own that the Advancement
which he will find in the Price of his Commodities, after the Raising of Coin,
proceeds from that Reason. No, Master, says he to his Landlord, though this have
been a pretty good Year to us, the like has been many times before, and the
next following it has been a bad one. God knows but it may be so now. Therefore
I hope your Worship will not be hard with me. I have been a long while a good
Tenant to your Family, etc. Such things as these repeated over and over again,
without any notice taken of the Reasons offered to the contrary, will weary out
many a Landlord's Patience, many a time over, before their Tenants will be
brought to make new Bargains. It Is true, that in the End they must infallibly
come to it. But I believe all Landlords are sensible that this must be a Work
of time: And whilst this Suspense and Contest lasts, the Landlords must
certainly go on losing, Annually, by the Alteration that I argue against.

However, since I am here struck upon this fatal Rock, which (if our Coin be
raised) will be unavoidably very ruinous to all that have any manner of Debts
due to them upon Ancient Contracts; I cannot omit to communicate to all Men
what I am informed has of late been practiced by many, by way of precaution
against such like future Inconveniences. The thing I mean, is a few words added
to the Condition of Bonds, (of which, printed Copies are to be had at the
Stamp-Office, by those that will require them) and to all other Contracts for
Payments, in this Form. -- Pay to -- the Sum of -- of Good and Lawful Money of
England, of the Weight and Fineness of the Standard established by Law, at the
time of the Date hereof, for the Silver Coin of this Kingdom; Without any
Deduction or Ab^tement whatsoever for or by reason of any Act of Parliament
which shall or may be made, or for any other reason or cause whatsoever. This
Advertisement is perhaps needless, because the thing is already pretty
generally known, and has been some while practiced by many: Yet since it may be
of Use to some, I hope others will excuse me for having here inserted it.

The next Consideration that occurs to my thoughts, is the Consequence that
this heightning of Coin may have upon His Majesty's Exchequer and Revenue. I
confess, that I am not acquainted with any Secrets relating to that Matter: And
therefore, though I were inclined, yet I am not able to entertain my Reader's
Fancy with curious Discoveries of what ought to be kept hid. But things that
every body sees, I suppose, I may be allowed to speak of. That the Crown and
Kingdom are at this present vastly in Debt, no body is or can be ignorant. Now,
suppose a Law were ready drawn, and a Party of Men prepared to favor it, so
that the very first Week after the Parliament's Meeting (let us say the First
Day of November next) it should be enacted that from that day forwards a
Crownpiece of Silver, now worth Five Shillings, should in all Payments
whatsoever pass for Six. What may such a one as I, (who am not able to see far
into a Millstone) observe that His Majesty would be like to gain or lose by that
Contrivance?

It is plain, that whatever the Debt of the Crown be (suppose Six Shillings,
Six Pounds, or what you please) if the King had Five of them now treasured up
in his Exchequer, He would by that Act be enabled with those Five to pay the
whole Six. That is, he would gain one sixth part upon whatsoever the Total Sum
of his Debt amounted to: And his Army, his Navy, the City, the Country, All,
that upon the Public Faith of Acts of Parliament have Lent their Money for the
Support of the Government, would lose it. But can so mean a Brokage as this be
thought suitable to the Dignity of Kings? Avaunt, all those that have the
Impudence to propose it! They are bold Men, if there be any such, that dare
advise a thing at once so dishonorable to His Majesty, and so injurious to all
those that compose the Strength and possess the Wealth of England. Let it not
be told in Gath, let it not be published in the Streets of Askelon; (lest the
Philistines rejoice). That ever the Morality of England was sunk so low, as to
bear the least Debate, in any Assembly whatsoever, upon so sordid and unjust a
Proposition. I say, in any Assembly whatsoever; But least of all in our August
and Venerable Assembly of Parliament. The Thought of it is not to be born, that
any Man in that Assembly should have the Face to propose a thing which all
Mankind must have in so great Abomination: The Breach I mean (and I say it
again) of all those solemn Engagements of the Public Faith, upon which so many
Millions of late Years have been advanced for Public Service. And as for His
Majesty himself; If this were indeed the Case, that his Exchequer were now
replenished with many hidden Millions, capable to pay off the whole Debt of the
Crown, immediately after the foresaid Law should be enacted; Yet both the
Injustice and the Infamy of the thing ought sufficiently to assure us He would
abhor the Thought of it. And this being the only Supposition that can be put,
of any Advantage possible to accrue to His Majesty by the raising of Coin; they
must, I say, have a very extraordinary Stock of Confidence, that would dare to
propose it to him, even in this its best appearance.

His Majesty will certainly propose to himself the most worthy, and such as are
therefore the most glorious Examples, for his Imitation. The excellent Italian
Poet Dante, whose Works will live, has fixed a lasting Epithet of Reproach upon
the Memory of Philip le Bell, King of France, calling him Falsificatore di
Moneta; The false Coiner; Because he was the first that debased the Coin of
France, by commanding it to be received upon a higher foot than it was worth:
Which, says the French History, caused great Troubles and Disorders in that
Kingdom, and made him repent when it was too late. I might set down also as an
Object of Aversion the Name of Imminuere Principes: Omnium maxim Nero.
Harduin. de Nummis, p. 560.
Nero, who diminished the weight of the Roman Coins more than any other of
their Princes: And add many others of the like Nature. But I take more pleasure
in looking upon what is lovely than what is odious. Bouteroue Les Princes les
plus passionnez pour le bien de leurs Sujets, voyant que le course de la fort^
Monnoye estoit la richesse de leurs pays, ont tousjours fait fabriquer leurs
especes les plus approchantes qu'ils ont pu de la purete naturelle des Metaux;
Et ont pris de ce soin le titre de RESTAURATEURS de la Monnoye, qu'ils ont bien
voulu joindre a celuy de Vainqueur, d' Auguste, et de Pere de la patrie.
Recherches Curieuses des Monnoyes de France, pa. 7.
in his Curious Treatise of French Coins, Dedicated to the present French King,
tells us, That those Princes who have most passionately intended their Subjects
Welfare, observing how much the Purity of their Coins contributed to the Riches
of their Country, have always caused them to be made as near as possible to the
natural purity of Metals; And, from the Merit of that Care, have taken to
themselves the Title of the Restorators of their Coins which they joined as an
addition to their other Titles of Conquerors, August, and Fathers of their
Country. This Author has so strenuously asserted and maintained the Necessity
of keeping up the Purity and true worth of Coins, that his words in many places
deserve a more particular Translation than I dare presume to insert in this
Letter. This however further I beg leave for. Le Course de la Monnoye doit estre
une loy inviolable, parce qu'il est le fondement et la regle du Commerce. G'est
un contract de bonne foy, que le Prince fait avec ses Sujets. Les Casuistes
tiennent que les clauses n'en peuvent estre changees sans un consentement
reciproque; Qu'il n'est pas le Maistre, ni le proprietaire des especes, quoy
qu'elles portent son visage et ses arms; Et qu'elles appartiennent a ses
Sujets qui les possedent. C'est pour cette raison que ceux qui ont affoibli
leurs Monnoyes d' authorite absolve pour en tirer du profit, ont tousiours este
blamez comme ayant usurp un bien qui ne leur appa^^^noit pas. Id. Pa. 9.
The regulated Currency of Coins, says he, ought to be a Law inviolable;
Because it is the Foundation and Rule of Commerce. It is a fair and plain
Contract that a Prince makes with his Subjects: The Clauses of which, Casuists
maintain, ought not to be changed, without mutual Consent. He is not the
Master, nor Proprietor of the Species, although they bear his Image and his Arms.
They belong to his Subjects, who possess them. And it is for this Reason that
those who by their Absolute Authority have diminished the worth of their Coins,
for their own Profit, have been always censured as Usurpers of a thing that
they had no Right to. To this I will add only one other Authority, to confirm
what has been said of the general Sense of all Men upon the different Conduct
of Princes or Magistrates in this particular. It Is that of Cicero, Who tells
us, That the Iactabatur enim temporibus i^lis nummus, sic ut nemo posset scire
quid haberet. -- Ea res et magno honor^ fuit: Omnibus vicis statuae factae
sunt, ad eas thus and cerei. Quia multa? Nemo unquam multitudini fuit Charior*
Cic. de Offic. l. 3.
Money of Rome being so corrupted (it was in the Sixth Century from the
Foundation of that City) that no Man could know what he received or paid, a Law
was made for the remedying of it; Which was a thing of so great Honor to him
who got the Credit of it with the People, that in every Street they erected
Statues to him, offering Incense, and burning Tapers before them. In a word, no
Man was ever dearer to them. This Reformation of Abuses in Coin, and an exact
Justice in maintaining their true worth both in purity and weight, under the
established Denominations, being things that in all Ages have been most
acceptable to the People concerned, and have rendered the Names of their Authors
most honorable to Posterity; Far be it from me to doubt that our present
Prince (though the Temptation of his own Interest were never so strong, as it
is the contrary) could ever be persuaded to infringe these Rules of Equity, and
violate a thing so Sacred. I add this word, Sacred: Because the Wisest of the
Ancients did ever esteem the business of their Money to be so; Or at least
thought fit to imprint such a Reverence of it in the People: And therefore they
either Coined it in the Temples of their Gods, or erected Altars in the place
where they did it.

But it is time that we now consider this Matter, not by Suppositions only, but
as it is in reality. And what shall we then say of those Projectors, that under
the Color (no Color) of raising Coin, promote a thing that will be so
considerably prejudicial to His Majesty's Interest? All I can say of them is,
that whether they do it ignorantly or designedly, the Mischief to His Majesty
is the same; And it ought to be obviated with utmost Care, by all that have
Capacity and Opportunity to intermeddle in it. It Is too notorious to be
dissembled, that the Exchequer is not now replenished with any Treasure: So
that if such a Law (as I have supposed, to take place the First of November
next) were past, the King could have no manner of present Benefit by it: And
for the Future he would lose at one stroke the Sixth part of all his Revenue.
The Case is the very same (if not yet harder) in respect of the King, that I
have shown it to be in respect of Wealthy Gentlemen, who have their Estates out
either in Money upon Bonds and Mortgages, or in Lands upon running Leases.
Whatever there are of Crown Lands, no body will think that the Rent of them
will be either more speedily or more easily raised than those of private
Gentlemen, but much the Contrary. But, however, the great and fixed Branches of
His Majesty's Revenue, Excise and Customs, are too considerable to require any
other Instance to be joined with them, and too obviously within this Case to
admit of any Dispute. They are settled by Acts of Parliament, and will continue
to be paid accordingly. So that if our Coin should now be raised (as it is
called) one sixth part; the King's Revenue would be just one sixth part
diminished. His Majesty has much Obligation indeed to the Promoters of such a
Design.

It would be pleasant to hear them argue (the only thing that can be argued
against what I here maintain;) That the Parliament may raise those Duties so
much higher, or give the King something else equivalent to the Loss that he may
sustain in them. This is just according to the Old Proverb; Make Work and have
Work. But, Cui bono? Why all this Noise? Why all this Bustle? Why all these
Changes? When we are to be brought round to the same Point from whence we set
forth? For it is even so. And in the same manner, the Answer to these Questions
brings me round also. Why; All this is for the sake of a few Money-mongers.
There is neither more nor less in the Matter. They, and They only, that have
enriched themselves by the several Steps that we have hitherto seen, will be
able to get any thing by this finishing Stroke. Finishing I mean, to their
prodigious Wealth; And at the same time (if not absolutely finishing) I am sure
too strongly leading to the fatal finishing of England's Ruin.

Our Apprehensions of Public Ruin, upon such an Alteration, will appear more
obviously reasonable, if we add this further Reflection upon the present
Circumstances of the Nation. Every body is sensible how much the last Year's
intended Supplies fell short: And how very great a Sum will therefore this
Year be necessary. I presume not so much as to guess at it. But all Men know it
must needs be so much as to exceed all possibility of being raised upon the
People, any way whatsoever, in one Year. We have no way in the World to
maintain our selves but by settling some Funds or other, as we have done of
late Years, and borrowing the Money upon it by way of Anticipation. Now this
being our Case, if we should at this time, by raising our Coin, do so great and
so manifest a wrong, as I have shown this would be, to all those that have
hitherto contributed to our Support; whose Estates in the different Funds
already settled, would thereby become just so much less as our Money should be
raised; I say, if we should now but show our selves capable of so much
Ingratitude and so much Treachery, from whence could we expect any further
Support of the like kind? We should certainly be abandoned by all Men; We
should deservedly sink into utter Ruin; And our Destruction must be owned to be
our selves. I am not willing to think that any Man is capable of giving this
Counsel designedly for this End: But (I say again) the Consequences of this
Practice appear to me so dreadfully ruinous, that it ought to be avoided with
the same Care as if it were evidently so designed.

I come now to consider the Consequences that this raising of our Coin can have
upon the whole Nation collectively, with respect to all those with whom we have
any manner of Dealing abroad. The Pretense is, that if our Coin were raised,
our Money would not be carried Beyond Sea. That is the thing we are now to
enquire into: But, I protest, I am almost ashamed to go about it. Those that
have any manner of Sense, and know in the least how the World goes cannot but
be satisfied, that by one single Calculation in my former Letter, I have
demonstrated that there is no such Matter. Our Money is not carried Abroad; Nor
could it, nor can it be, upon account of private Gain; Whilst the Exchange was
(as when I writ last) at Thirty three Skillings, and much more whilst it is (as
now) at Thirty Six. Nay, nor ever can it be carried Abroad at all, if our
different Coins were once brought to an Equality, (which the Use of Scales
would effect in a moment) unless the Total Sum of our Debts to Foreigners
amounted to more than theirs to us. Whenever that happens (which can only be by
an Over-balance in Trade, when we consume more of their Commodities than they
do of ours; Or by some great occasion of State, the Expense of a Foreign War,
or the like) I say, whenever this happens, there is no Remedy for it: Money
will go: And the raising of its Name can no more keep it, than the Gothamers by
a Hedge could keep in the Cuckoo.

What carried our Money Beyond Sea, a Year and two Years ago, to so great a
Degree, was only the Inequality of it. Surely that has been made plain enough
already. How often must I inculcate the same thing; That the Cure, therefore can
consist in nothing but the Equality? After that is perfectly effected, let but
Trade be carefully inspected and duly promoted, (Trade which is of more
Importance to us than Mines either of Silver or Gold) and the Expense even of a
Foreign War (if also duly managed) would not be so overburdensome and ruinous
to this Nation as we are apt to think it.

But let us however examine over again our present Circumstances, in relation
to the Exportation of Coin, as I did before. The Exchange I have said now is at
36 Skillings Flemish per Pound Sterling (I speak within compass) which is
between 9 and 10 per Cent. more favorable on our side (that is more
encouraging to the Importation of Money, and discouraging to the Exportation of
it) than it was then. If there were considerable loss therefore, by the
Exportation of it at that time, there would be much more loss now. So we may
conclude certainly that it is not done: And the pudder made about raising of
Coin, is but as the preparing of a Remedy for a wrong Disease. ( Fortasse
Cupressum scis simulare. Quidhoc; Si fractis enatat exspes Navibus, aere dato
qui pingitur?) It Is nothing at all to the purpose.

Further, That Bullion is now probably imported, at least not exported, is
manifest, by the best of Arguments, the Acknowledgment of the most considerable
Dealers in it; Amongst which are some that, against all Sense but their own
private Interest were formerly very eminent in maintaining Principles which
their present Desire contradicts. The thing I mean, is very clearly expressed
in the Order of Council of the 24th. September, Printed in the Gazette of the
28th. These Gentlemen desire that Liberty may be given for the Coining of Gold
(of which, they say, they have considerable Quantities) at their own Charge;
Because, They cannot export it, by reason of the present Course of Exchange,
without great Loss. How comes it to pass that Guinea's, which, Six or Nine
Months ago, were by some Men maintained to be intrinsecally worth 30 s. can now
by the same Men be afforded to be coined at 22 Shillings, and they also pay the
Charge of the Coinage? The Guinea's must be coined still of the same Weight and
Fineness. And there has been no new Mine of Gold found any where in the World
(that we hear of) to cause so vast an Importation of Gold into Europe, as to
alter the Value of it very near one third part. The thing is plain. Habemus
confitentem Reum. The former Pretenses of these Men were all Juggle, and
founded on nothing but the very basest Degree of Private Interest; That by
which any one particular Man preferrs, not his Life, not a Competency of
Estate, but a little Superfluity of Wealth, before the Riches, the Happiness,
nay, the very Subsistence of his own whole Country. Out of thy own Mouth I will
judge thee, thou wicked Servant. Thus it is probable that Gold has of late been
brought into England; At least it is evident, that it has not been carried out.
The Matter of Fact is undeniable. And therefore, I say again, the Raising of
our Coin is now nothing at all to our Purpose.

But it may be objected, that both my former Calculation, and what I have now
added, relate only to Gold: So that, for any thing I have said, Silver may be
exported still. To that, one single Word may be sufficient to answer. Gold and
Silver bear the same Proportion in Value to each other throughout all Europe,
as they did some Months ago: And the General Course of the Exchange, between
any one Country and another, is not singly grounded upon, or regulated by, the
Plenty or Want of either of them separately in this or the other Place; but by
the Total Sum of both (considered as Money) and the Want or Plenty arising
from thence, in this place, with respect to the same Total, and the concomitant
Circumstances and Occasions, in another place. I see, I must explain my self by
an Example. Gold and Silver bear the same Proportion in Value to each other in
Holland as they did: And the like in England. Now if in England there be a
plenty either of Gold or Silver, which is either wanted in Holland, or by any
Occasion of State or Trade becomes due to Holland, (or Vice Versa) The Sum of
this Gold or Silver, so much as is either wanted or due, must either be
transported in Specie, or remitted by Exchange: And whilst their proportional
Respect to each other remains fixed, it is no matter at all which of them is
either received or paid. The Rise or Fall of the Exchange depends entirely upon
the Remittance of so much Money, more or less, whether it be Gold or Silver.
And therefore when I have proved that in this present Course of Exchange, Gold
cannot be exported from England into Holland, I have at the same time proved,
that Silver cannot be so transported neither. This, I say, still taking the
Proportion between Gold and Silver to be fixed; Or at least, to vary so little
as not to answer the Charge and Hazard of sending both the one and the other
backwards and forwards by Sea: Which (I add) is our present Case. For though the
Rate of Guinea's, at 22 Shillings, be a little above their true Proportion in
respect to Silver; that Difference is not so much as to countervail the Charge
and Risk of sending Silver into Holland for to bring over Gold hither. So that
it remains evident, after all, that our Money of any kind is not now exported,
and that therefore we have no occasion at all to raise it, upon that Account.

But nevertheless, I will not leave the Issue of the Matter upon this single
Consideration. Let us suppose (though at this time not true) that our Money were
exported; And now examine how the raising of it would prevent that
Inconvenience; Or what other Consequences it would or could have, with respect
to Foreigners. The Raising of Money I have shown to be nothing but the changing
of some Names: For the applying of old Names, to Pieces of different Weight
from what those Names were formerly applied to, is the same thing. No Body
thinks of Recoining once again all our Species, and mixing them with a greater
Allay of Baser Metal than what they now contain. It is proposed therefore, that
our Shillings, our Crowns, etc. shall remain just as they are; But a Crownpiece
(for Example) shall be made to go for Six Shillings, and other Pieces in the
same Proportion. This is, according to the Sense of these Projectors, a raising
of the Crown one Fifth part in respect of what it was at first, Or one Sixth
part in respect of what it shall now be made to signify. He were a powerful
Prince indeed, or that were a powerful State, that could impose a Law of this
kind, with any real Effect, upon all the World. But I believe no Government
whatsoever will find its Authority in these Matters, to extend any further than
its own Dominions: And even within them too, I have shown it (at best) to be
very useless.

But let us see, upon the Supposition of this Change in England, how the
Merchants and Bankers in Holand would manage their Affairs. Advice of this
Change arrives there on the Morning of the Post-Day that they are to write for
England: And the Course of the Exchange must be regulated at Noon. That Course
was, suppose, at the Receipt of those Letters, at 35 Skillings (for it is and
must of Necessity be always something lower there than here.) Hereupon those
that have occasion either to remit or draw, if it happen that they cannot make
the Computation in their Heads, lean a while upon the next Shop-stall, and
having pondered a little upon the State of the Case, they find it to be thus.
England, say they to themselves, has divided its Crown into Seventy Two Parts,
or Pence, which before they divided but into Sixty: And have enacted, That
Sixty of these Seventy Two shall pass in Tale for a Crown, as the whole Sixty
did before. Then, with their Pencil on the Back of some Letter, they set
themselves this plain Question, by the Rule of Three. If Seventy Two of those
New Pence contain but Sixty Old ones; Then how many Old ones are contained in
Sixty New Ones? And they find the Answer to be Fifty. So, say they next; Since
English men for Sixty will give us but Fifty, how many must we give them for
Thirty Five; which should have been the Rate of the Exchange this Day, if they
had not altered the Measure of our Commerce? And to that they find the Answer
to be Twenty Nine and One Sixth: That is 29 Skillings 2 Pence Flemish, for One
Pound Sterling. Thus the Exchange will infallibly settle that very Hour. And he
that the foregoing Post received, for the Bills that he drew there, after the
rate of 35 of their Skillings for one of our old Pounds, shall now receive but
29 ss. 2 d. of theirs for one of our New ones. And after this Settlement, the
future Course of Exchange will always continue on (altering up and down as
other Occasions influence it) in the same Proportion.

What need more words? Thus it has been, in all Places where the like
Alterations have been made. Thus it was with us, when we had nothing but
Clipped Money going. And thus it always will be, in the like Occasions, all the
World over. I would have the Projectors of this Alteration hereupon sit down,
and consider with themselves, when the Post shall return from Holland with
Advice of this New Course of Exchange, what Advantage they will find England to
have got by their Project. The Bankers will have eluded the Design of it first:
Next, the Merchants will follow, and sell us their Commodities (as we shall
certainly force them to buy ours) so much dearer: Every thing will alter in the
same proportion. And thus we are once again got round to the Point from whence
we first set out. And you are very Welcome, Gentlemen.

All this is trifling Foolery. But that my Writing upon it may not be so too, I
must now own that there remains one Case, wherein it seems as if the Nation
might gain considerably, upon Foreigners, by the raising of our Coin: I should
add still, (provided they will suffer us to do it). It Is just in the same
manner as I have said the Rich Debtors amongst our selves might gain by it upon
their Creditors. That is, in plain Terms, we might effectually cheat all
Foreigners of such a proportion of the Debts we owe them at the time we play
this Trick, as is the proportion in which our Coin is raised. We could not
contitinue to do it any longer; Because they would immediately alter the
Exchange (the Balance of Commerce between them and us) and set future Accounts
upon a right foot. But for the first time, it is true, we might catch them, and
make a brave Advantage by it.

Is not this Excellent Work? What Prince, what State, would treat, or have any
manner of Dealings with us; If we should thus infamously break our Public
Faith, at the same time with one another at home, and with all the World
Abroad? Nay, can we doubt but all Foreign Princes and States would immediately
settle Methods for taking Reprizals upon us one way or other? Let us reflect
what we should be apt to say upon an Enemy that might do the same, or any thing
of the like Nature. The Case is too odious to be supposed of an Ally, or of a
Friend. But what if this Absolute King of France, before these Wars, when his
Country had so vast a Trade, and many Foreigners, English, Dutch, and others,
residing in it; What if he, I say, observing then the insignificancy of the
Project of raising his Coin to his own Subjects amongst themselves, should
instead thereof ( by his Certain Knowledge, Absolute Power, and Royal
Authority, as his Style goes) have ordained, out of his great Desire to promote
the Advantage of his own Subjects, that all of them who were indebted to any
Foreigners should be obliged to pay but four Fifths of their respective Debts,
and that in doing so, no Action should lie against them for the Remainder? Had
He done thus; What Names would he have thought bad enough, to have given him? I
will not foul my Paper with things so indecent. But let us, for shame, consider
that what we talk about raising our Coin, has neither more nor less Justice in
it, with respect to the Debts we shall happen to owe Foreigners at the time
when the thing is done; But a great deal less Wisdom than this supposed
Ord'nance of the French King; Because it will cause us a great deal more
Trouble and Confusion amongst our selves.

I hope, Sir, I have now said enough upon this Subject. But if it be too much,
as is most likely; And that I have tired you with it; Instead of concluding, I
will yet take the Liberty to add one thing further, for a Farewell Gusto. It Is
the Copy of a Letter that has been sent me, writ by a Person altogether unknown
to me, who lived in Spain in the Year 1686. when the King of Spain endeavored
to raise his Piece of Eight one Fifth part, by calling it Escudo. The Case is
so parallel to our Project, and this Gentleman's representation to the
Consequences of it so ingenious, that I cannot think but I shall divert you in
transcribing his very words. They are as follows:

SIR,
I Have received yours, wherein you desire me to remind you of some Passages
which I have formerly told you happened in Spain whilst I was there, upon that
King's endeavoring to raise the Value of the Coin of that Kingdom one Fifth
part; which it was believed would infallibly hinder the Exportation of it.
Accordingly in the Year 1686. a Proclamation was Published commanding all
Persons to take the Piece of Eight, (which to that time had passed for eight
Reals) at ten; And that for the future those Pieces of Eight should be called
Escudos: Because New Pieces of Eight were Coined which were one Fifth part less
in weight than those. These were subdivided into Halves, Quarters, and Eights
which they called Reals, and the other small Pieces which had been Halves,
Quarters and Eights to the old Pieces of Eight, bore then the same relation to
the Escudo.

The Gold was not altered in Name, but only in the supposed Value: Supposed I
call it, because it soon appeared to be impracticable to make any other than an
imaginary Alteration in the Value of Coin by Proclamation; As the following
Relation will, I doubt not, demonstrate.

The Proclamation strictly commanded that no Person should advance the Price of
any Commodity with regard to the Advance of the Coin, but that every Man should
be obliged to Sell all sorts of Merchandise at the same Prices which they Sold
for at the time of the Proclamation. And the Magistrates had strict Charge to
take due Care* that no Person might go unpunished, who should refuse to Sell
according to this Order: By which means every Trader was compelled to deliver
as many Goods for Four Pieces of Eight, as he had lately Sold for Five; Though
there was no reason for the falling of the said Commodity.

This Rigor was used for some time in most Parts, if not throughout the whole
Kingdom; Insomuch, that the Foreign Merchants residing in Spain, applied
themselves to their Ambassadors in the Court of Spain, and home to their
Principals in each Foreign State, complaining of this Abuse; And till they were
permitted to Sell their Goods for what they could afford them, they appeared
not in their Houses, for fear they should be obliged to Sell them to Loss.

For they all understood that an Escudo sent into their own Country, would not
sell for more than when it was called a Piece of Eight. Neither would it long
Purchase any more in the Markets of Spain it self: For every Seller in the
Kingdom soon perceived the Fraud, and would not part with this Goods till the
Buyer had agreed to pay an Escudo for what he used to buy for the same Piece of
Money when it was called a Piece of Eight: And then there was as much advantage
by Exporting the Gold and Silver as before. So that it plainly appears, that
Kingdom received no other Benefit by the Project of changing the Name of the
Coin, except the unjust gain of a Fifth part of such Debts as were then due
from the Spaniards to the foreign Merchants that traded with them. The King,
indeed, by paying his Debts, according to the Rate of the Proclamation, brought
great Losses upon many of his own Subjects, as well as Foreigners; which
unequal dealing, was retaliated upon him by the Farmers of his Revenues, and
others who stood indebted to the Crown.

By what has been said, it may easily be guessed, that the Landlords in that
Kingdom, together with the Merchants, as well Natives as Foreigners, who
generally give credit for greater Sums than they owe, could not be persuaded
that it was just, that they should be obliged to discharge their Tenants and
Debtors, for four Fifths of their Debts in Money, and one Fifth in
Proclamation; which in a little time, would not purchase any thing in the
Market.

When this News reached England, the Merchants were very unwilling to abate one
Fifth of their Debts, or to be obliged to part with their Goods for less than
they cost; And in all their Letters to their Agents in Spain, reflected upon
the dishonesty of the Spaniard. Nay, some of that People perceiving the
Injustice of this Usage, though the Law would have allowed them to have paid
Eighty for a Hundred, could not prevail with themselves to do so much Injury to
their Creditors; but like honest Men, paid so many Escudo's as they intended to
pay Pieces of Eight when they contracted that Debt: Because, said they, we are
satisfied, that our Creditors designed to have so many of those very Pieces
which were called Pieces of Eight at the time when they parted with their Goods.

The same just dealing I my self met with from a Trader there, to whom I had
given credit before the Proclamation: And when he told me he came to pay his
Debt, I expected to have received it with the same D^mination as others
generally did; and that he would have taken all the Advantage the Law allowed.
But he was so just, that he paid me as much Silver as I expected to have
received from him at the time I sold him my Goods. For which when I thanked
him, and told him he had done me a piece of Justice, which I did not expect; he
gave me for Answer, That if he had found the King could have raised the Value,
when he altered the Name of the Coin, then he would have paid me according to
the Proclamation; but since he was sensible he could not make his Escudo
purchase more at Market than when it was called a Piece of Eight, he thought
himself obliged to pay me as many of them as I understood I was to have, and he
contracted to give me, before the King changed their Name. For, said he, the
King's altering the Name of the Piece of Eight, seems to me to be as if we
should suppose my Neighbor Peter to be possessed of Ten Thousand Ducats
Estate; and me, who am called John, to have but Two Thousand; and that the King
should by Proclamation, cause me to be called Peter, thereby designing to make
me worth Ten Thousand Ducats also: For unless, at the same time, he would add
to my Estate, I fear nay Purse would not be heavier than when I was called
John. And therefore, though the King has obliged me to discharge my Debtors, if
they pay me four Fifths of their Debts, yet I don't think it just for me not to
pay better: And I am not willing to be sent to the Devil by a Proclamation.

Thus, Sir, I have given you the best Account I am capable of, what passed in
Spain whilst I was there, upon their Endeavors to raise the Value of their
Coin; and methinks, the bad success they had in the Experiment of this Project
should be sufficient, when impartially considered, to convince us that it is
not possible to raise the Value of Gold and Silver otherways than in
Imagination; And that the attempting it would not serve to any other end than
to give opportunity to every Debtor to cheat his Creditor, and every tenant to
defraud his Landlord throughout the Nation, and to confound the Trading People
in their Accounts.

I am, etc.

And now, pray, Sir, What think you of paying Debts, and of being sent to the
Devil by Proclamation? I am,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant.
October. the 3d. 1696.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by A. and J. Churchill at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row.
SEveral Papers Relating to Money, Interest and Trade, etc. Writ upon several
Occasions, and Published at different Times. By Mr. John Lock.

A Discourse upon Coins. By Signor Bernardo (...), a Gentleman of Florence*
Being publicly spoken in the Academy there, Anno 1588.

A Letter of Advice to a Friend about the Currency of Chip-Money, wherein all
the Material Clauses contained in the several Acts made in these two last
Sessions of Parliament, for the Cure of that Evil, are recited. The Second
Edition. To which is annexed the Declaration published by Queen Elizabeth, upon
her Reforming the COIN.

A Review of the Universal Remedy for all Diseases incident to Coin. With
Application to our Present Circumstances. In a Letter to Mr. Lock.

Some Considerations about the Raising of Coin. In a Second Letter to Mr. Lock.

Sir William Petty's Quant ulum cunque concerning Money


