Some Considerations Offered touching the East India Affairs.
THE Advantage of the Dutch Iyes only insetling this Company, because never any
former conduct of the English Company aspired to, or attained any Empire, or
Dominion in India worth mentioning, nor built such a number of Warlike Ships.

The English East India Company is (or should be to support themselves against
their neighbors) a Sovereign Commonwealth, under and subject to the Crown of
England; meliorated and improved by the successive Wisdom of several ages past,
and never was at such a height of perfection as it is at this instant, to the
envy and admiration of all European Nations, and Indian Princes: And it is
justly feared, the pulling down this Company to set up a New one, may prove as
unsuccessful, as it would be to grubb up a flourishing well grown Orchard, in
the strength and prime time of its bearing Fruit, to Plant a New Orchard in the
same Place, in hopes to have more and better Cider: Whereas a New Plantation
yields little Fruit and the worst Cider. Besides which, he understands but
little of India, who thinks that notwithstanding all the caution, the
profoundest Wisdom can provide, Foreigners will not make an irretrievable
advantage, and England suffer an irreparable loss; between the drawing off of
the Old, and the entrance of a New Company, which for the first seven years, by
reason of contrariety of opinions, inexperience, and for other causes will
rather run backwards, than forwards as this Company did at first, to such a
degree, that after six or seven years Trading, the Stock which cost One hundred
pound, was generally sold for sixty or seventy pounds, and all interest lost.

But to follow the former Metaphor, some worthy Gentlemen (abused by Flatterers
that hope to gain by the public prejudice of their Country) say, they design
not to cut down the Old Orchard, but to graft upon it, and that they are
persuaded to believe may be done, with safety, not considering, that whoever
will graft upon an Old Orchard, must first cut off the Top, and Fruit bearing
boughs, and few Wise men, will do that, when their Orchard thrives better than
any of their Neighbors, and is at the most profitable height of bearing that
ever any Orchard was, especially considering the uncertainty, whether the New
Cyons being grafted upon Old Stocks, will thrive, live or dye.

The unsetling this Company any way, is as much as the greatest Emulators of
the English prosperity in India do design, or desire, whether they be English
Interlopers or Foreigners, well knowing that the business of India is not
merely Trade, but a constant mixture of Trade, and Warefare, Fortification,
Military prudence, and Political Government, which must be adapted peculiarly
to the genius of those People, and of those Places; (not conformable to the
Laws of England) in imitation of the Dutch Wisdom in those Countries, which
eminently transcends all other Nations, and must unavoidably force them all, to
give up the little remainder the Dutch have left amongst them, if the English
be not armed with the same Wisdom, as well as with the same power, as the
States General have most wisely conferred upon their East India Company, where
their Committee Men, are not upon Rotation, but for their Lives, and style
themselves, as they ought to be, The Seventeen; representing the Sovereign
state of the Netherlands East India Company in India: And if it were so in
England, it would be much better for the Public, and be found in the
augmentation of the value of Land, which can only be increased by Trade, and by
that of the East Indies, more available to that end than any other; which makes
the Wise Dutch Nation cherish and defend it, with the same zeal and affection,
as they would their Wives and Children, and were never yet known to part with
one inch of ground got in India.

It is the work of a long Life, fully to understand how India is to be
governed, and improved for National advantage, and such a Drudgery and Expense
of Time, in converse with all sorts of People, and of all Nations, and reading
such Voluminous Books and Records, that very few Men in any Age, have ever
applied themselves to, and is as different from the easy way of sending out
Ships, and bringing home returns, in the common course of Merchandise, as the
Government of many great Kingdoms is, from the Government of one single Cottage.

It was for want of such powers to the English East India Company, That the
Dutch Company have got, and the English lost the possession, and Trade of all
the Spice-Islands; Japan, and many other places in the last Age, and Macassar
and Bantam in this; and which enabled them to bring Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, and
Cinnamon, entirely into their own hands, and to sell Nutmegs, which cost them
in India less than One Penny per pound, to all the Indian World, as well as to
Europe, Africa and America, at about six shillings per pound; and all other
Spice in proportion. And if it had not been for the late enlargements of power
to the English Company, which animated the Committee to that chargeable attempt
on Sumatra, the Dutch in probability had immediately on the surprise of Bantam,
made themselves Masters of all the Pepper, and if they had done, or shall ever
do that hereafter, England may too late lament, and bewail their misfortune,
but shall never recover it; no more than they can or will the Spice Islands.
The gain by that single Commodity of Pepper, if it were in one hand, being
sufficient to maintain Fleets, to fight any Royal Navy in India, or in these
Seas: for we may truly compute, that all the Pepper consumed in Japan, China,
Tartaria, Persia, Arabia, Egypt, and in all other Places of the three aforesaid
Quarters of the World, does not amount to less than Six Thousand Tons,
Communibus annis; which may be bought, if the Trade were in One Nations hand,
at about a penny a pound, and sold to the rest of the World as dear as Nutmegs,
being about Six Shillings per pound; to which penny and Eleven pence for
Freight, and Garrison and other charges, the profit will be Five Shillings per
pound, which upon Six Thousand Tons, amounts to Three Millions, Three Hundred
and Sixty Thousand pounds sterling per annum. And we can apprehend nothing to
be abated thereof, but so much as shall be lessened of the Expense of that
Commodity in all parts of the World, as may be occasioned by such an increase
of the price.

Although it is unreasonable to destroy, or Graft again a flourishing thriving
Orchard, the best may need Pruning and Cultivating; but both must be done by a
skilful hand, for fear of cutting off Bearing, instead of Superfluous Branches,
or prejudicing the Roots, which is a proper Subject for the Wisdom of
Parliament, when they know and have deeply considered the Laws, Methods and
Rules the Dutch Govern their Trade and Colonies by in India, and for those out
of Parliament which think them too Arbitrary, the Remedy is easy: Such Persons
may stay at home under the shadow of our Native Liberty, as it is better Ten
Thousand Men of that Mind should, than that England should loose their Trade
and Dominion in India.

If the Exercise of Martial Law be denied the Company, it will be impossible to
preserve the Dominion of India, of which St. Helena is a pregnant Instance
having rebelled four times before they paid one Penny charge to the Government,
Church, Poor or Highways, Custom or Excise or any other Duty.

1. It is likewise seriously to be considered, whether it be not safest to
proceed in an Affair of this vast Import with great deliberation, and whether
this be a proper time for so hazardous a Change as some would make in the
East India Affairs, before the three Kingdoms are so firmly settled, as all good
Men desire, and hope they will be within a small space of time coming.

2. Whether it would not be Wisdom to hear first from India, how the Dutch
Company will behave themselves there upon this great Revolution, that has
lately happened in these Kingdoms?

3. To consider how the Companies great Ships should be employed between the
New and Old Company, whereof four are in their Majesty's Service; three at home
that will carry from Seventy to Eighty Guns each; Eight or Ten more that are
suddenly expected Home, and very many more left in the Country. Because, If the
present Company must be dissolved, four or five years hence they can employ but
few of them, because their business must be to bring in, not to scatter their
Estates. The New Company whatever men may pretend cannot have a Stock to employ
half that Number of great Ships in many Years to come, and those great Ships
must in Consequence be broke up, for no other Trade will find them bread but
that of India.

4. Whether Grafting upon the Present Company, or making a new one will not
necessarily cause Division and Confusions in the Committees Councils, which can
never happen at so ill a Time as this, when it is said, The Dutch Company have
already this Year sent very great Forces, and are sending out a far greater for
India, while at the same time the English cannot get to Sea that single Ship the
Herbert, which has lain three Months at Gravesend full Laden with Necessaries
for the Companies Forts, Seamen and some Soldiers on Board her, by reason of
the present Press and Embargo.

5. Is it not extremely necessary, That before any hasty change be made, the
English Nation should see what use the Dutch Company in India would make upon
the great overbalance of Power in India they are like to have next Summer by
reason of the advantage they have at present of getting many Ships to Sea,
(while this Company cannot get out that single Ship aforesaid) if they should
attempt any of the Companies three Pepper-Forts in their own Names, or in the
Name of the young King of Bantam, or any of their Confederate or Vassal Indian
Princes, would not England Repent too late? And if any of those Garrisons
should fail or desert for want of Supplies from Europe, or upon News of the
Companies being out of Favor in England, which the Interlopers and Dutch
Company will not fail to aggravate and magnify to the Natives, will not such
an Error be fatal to this Kingdom? How can it hereafter be mended, or who shall
do it the old Company being mortified by the late discouragements they have met
with after all their great Services for their Country, and the New One whatever
is pretended will never be able to do it.

6. If the Dutch Company by reason of the Discouragement and Interruption given
the English Company, should arrive at the sole Engrossment of Pepper, would not
the next Commodity most proper for them to engross, be Saltpetre, and what will
be the Consequences thereof? After they have once all the Pepper, they may do
all things, and every thing they have a mind to in India at their own good Will
and Pleasure without possibility of prevention. And we dare confidently aver
and think it our bounden Duty to God and our Country before it be too late to
affirm positively, That if the English Company be not armed with the same
Authority and Privileges as the Dutch East India Company are; The English
Empire and Dominion in India will certainly and quickly be lost, and the loss
of the Trade must follow that in a short time after, or as soon as the Dutch
Company please. That Nation being so wise in the Affairs of those Eastern
Countries, that they never made any Change of their Company after it was once
settled nor abridged them of any Power, but rather increased their Authority.


