SOME CONSIDERATIONS Relating to the Enlarging the RUSSIA TRADE, And the
Contract for Importing Tobacco into that Country: Humbly Proposed by the
Contractors.
IT is observable, That Inquisitive and Disinterested Vide Sir Ios. Child's New
Discourse on Trade; in the Preface, and also in Page 105. of the 2d. Edit.
Printed 1694. As also a Discourse of Trade, Coin and Paper Credit. page 90.
Printed 1697. supposed to be wrote by Mr. Polixfen; and the Discourse of the
Public Revenues and Trade of England, by the Author of the Essay of Ways, and
Means. Part the 2d page 82. Printed School.
Persons, who have lately Publicly treated of Trade; have looked upon the
Trade of Russia as almost wholly lost to this Nation, either by ill Management
or Negligence.

Since therefore, the Observations of these Authors are also confirmed by our
own Experience: It may be high time to find out some proper Methods to recover
that Trade.

It is an undoubted Truth, That Arts, Manufactures and Foreign Trades, make the
greatest Improvement, where there are the greatest numbers of Hands and Stocks
to carry them on, and where there are no Clogs or Bars to Industry: Of this
Holland is a sufficient instance; for though the English were the first
Discoverers of the Russia Trade, and had a Charter to incorporate them, and
that confirmed by an Act of Parliament, yet the Dutch without the advantage of
any Company at all, but with a full liberty to every one to Trade to Russia
have (with their numbers of Hands and largeness of Stock) drove the English
almost quite out of that Trade: They have increased their Trade to Forty five
and Fifty Ships, sent thither yearly; and we with our great Fines and
Impositions have dwindled our Trade thither to Four or Five Ships yearly. They
have for many Years (and do yet) engross all the most considerable Commodities
of Russia, as Masts, Pitch, Tarr, Pottashes, Deals and Firr Timber, and we
(with our few Traders) drive no Trade at all in Masts, Pitch, and Tarr etc.
Nay, are often forced to buy our Pottashes at second hand from the Dutch.
Surely, this consideration alone is of weight to make the entrance into that
Company as wide and easy as possible, that so by the increase of Hands and
Stock in that Trade, we may retrieve what we have lost for want of them, and
what the Dutch by those very means only have gained from us.

If the Russia Company are at any Charge to support their Corporation, other
Traders that come in, will help to bear it, and ease them: For suppose this
Company do (one Year with another) expend 300 l. and trade for 20,000 l.
Yearly, then the charge upo^n the Trade would be 1 per Cent? But if they admit
others for a small Fine, the Trade will probably increase to 200,000 l. (for
the Tobacco Trade alone may be 150,000 l. of it) and then instead of paying 30
s. Impositions on every 100 l. according to the above supposition; they will
not need to pay above 3 s. for 100 l. and this they must own will be a great
ease to them: But the true reason why they so strenuously oppose the admission
of others on easy terms, is this, That (as they are) they have but very few
Traders, and those do so well understand one another, that they can manage that
Trade, to as much advantage to themselves as they please, without regard to the
Public good, but when others may Trade thither also, they cannot combine
together, and though their Profits will be less, yet the Kingdoms will be greater
by the increase of our Exportations; this is the only true Reason that makes
them strive so hard for great Fines for Admissions, knowing that as that has
been, so it will always be an effectual means to keep Men out of their Company,
few being willing to give a great Sum for liberty to drive a Trade they have
not been acquainted with; and the Company have taken care to keep all Men but
themselves as ignorant of the Russia Trade as possibly they could.

It cannot well be imagined, that the whole necessary charge of the Company can
be above 300 l. a Year, for they seldom are at any expense abroad, and here at
home their charge is chiefly in Salaries to one another, and good Dinners;
which charge they have raised yearly by Impositions on Goods Imported from
Narve, which are mostly brought home by Eastland Merchants, and others not free
of the Russian Company.

A Liberty to Import Tobacco into Russia, has been long wished for by all Men
that understood and desired the welfare of England, as knowing it would be
better to us than Mines of Silver, by increasing our Shipping and Seamen, and
turning the Balance of all Our Northern Trades in Our favor; that whereas we
have hitherto been forced to send great Sums in Specie to pay for the Product
of those Countries, over and above all our Exports: This would in a little time
turn the Scales, and we should rather have Species from them, then send any
thither.

This so long wished for Liberty is now obtained at the expense of a great Sum
by private Men, who are Strangers to the Trade of Russia, and have bought up
several Parcels of Tobacco fit (as they are informed) for that Country, and
they are ready to Export it thither, in case they may have Liberty to do it,
and to run the hazard, whether they shall gain or lose by it; but they hope it
will not be thought reasonable they should pay any great Fine, for their
Admission into the Company, to drive a Trade of such great and certain Profit
to the Kingdom, and so doubtful and hazardous to themselves. For since they
entered into the Contract with the Czar, for the Importing so great a quantity
of Tobacco Yearly into his Dominions, they have been mightily discouraged by
the Russia Merchants, who allege the Contractors have engaged in such an
affair, as will destroy the greatest part of the Sum their Subscriptions amount
to; and that if the Russia Company were concerned in it, they would choose to
lose One half, nay, Nine tenths of what they had Subscribed, rather than stand
to the bargain. Such Discourses, with the other difficulties in the passing of
the BILL, has so discouraged the Subscriptions, that ever since those
difficulties were made, there has not been One penny Subscribed, tho the Roll
has lain open all the while, and there is not Subscribed one half so much, as
may be employed in the Tobacco Trade. These are great discouragements from
People who pretend to know so well the State and Nature of the Trade and People
of Russia.

It seems strange therefore, That the Russia Merchants should in their
Proposals demand a Fine of 500 l. and besides that, a certain Imposition of One
per Cent. upon a Trade, that they are sure will be destructive to the
Undertakers, tho they do acknowledge it will be very advantageous to the Nation.

These Undertakers are willing upon their Admission into the Freedom of the
Company, to bear their share of the Charge of the Company, by paying
Proportionable Impositions to what other Traders pay; but to pay more, they
think very hard for the Reasons mentioned above.

How small soever the said Imposition of One per Cent. upon the Importation of
Returns for Tobacco may seem, it will amount in Seven Years (the Term of the
Patent) to above 10000 l. by a modest Computation; which Sum, as there will be
no occasion for it to defray the necessary Charge of the Company; so it will
discourage the Undertakers from proceeding on the Contract, while they see so
little probability of advantage by it. Now to what end are the Russia Merchants
so earnest for great Fines and Impositions, since they do not Trade in a
Joynt-Stock, nor have Power to divide those Fines and Impositions among
themseves? Certainly what they receive more than they spend, does and must lie
as a dead Stock by them, so that (as is observed before) their main Design by
it, is to clog other Traders, and to keep Men out of their Company: For
certainly the greater Trade is driven, the less need their Impositions be.

Besides, as to their Act of Parliament, tho none of the King's Subjects can
Trade to the Dominions of the Emperor of Russia without their License; yet is
there not the least word therein-mentioned that gives them any Power to take
Money, for such Licenses.

This Nation has by this Grant from the Czar an opportunity to increase its
Stock 150,000 l. a Year (besides Employing some Thousands of the Poor in
Manufacturing the Tobacco) and the World may think it strange if we hesitate or
make difficulties about the embraceing and improving so advantageous an offer.
And if we cannot make use of the Grant, we must part with it to those that will
pay us for it: And the Nation may hereafter have time to repent the loss of so
great a Jewel, which no Art nor Expense may be ever able to recover.

There is another National Advantage, That a great Trade to Russia would give
us, and what the Dutch find by it, Viz. That all Naval Stores and other
Commodities Imported from Russia, would be brought home in our own Shipping
(the Russes having none) whereas all those Naval Stores from Sweden and Denmark
and the Ports of the Baltic, are Imported chiefly in Shipping of those
Countries, which is a double Charge and loss to this Nation; besides the Dutch,
by having an opportunity of being supplied with Masts, Deals, Hemp, Pitch and
Tarr from Russia, need not depend on Sweden and Denmark for them, and by that
means can better keep those Two Princes in awe, with respect to Commerce, which
we cannot do, having at this time our sole dependence on those Two Kingdoms for
all our Naval Stores.

To conclude, The Contractors for Importing Tobacco into Russia, are so far
from engrossing to themselves any Profit, that may be thought will arise from
that Grant, that they do yet keep open their Subscriptions for every one that
has a mind to be concerned with them therein, and they are willing rather
wholly to lose that advantage they propose to themselves by the Contract, than
that the Nation should be totally deprived of the Tobacco Trade. And therefore,
in case they cannot be admitted into the entire Freedom of the Russia Company,
to drive that Trade on equal Terms, with all other Members of the same, they
are ready and do offer to part with it to the Russia Company, upon the
repayment of the Money they have paid and expended about it.

And surely the Russia Merchants will not be (like the Dog in the Manger)
neither carrying out Tobacco themselves, nor suffering others to do it, who
would; since the doing of it will bring so many advantages to the Nation, which
its humbly hoped, will be always preferred before the private Interest of Ten
or Twelve Persons.


