SOLON SECUNDUS: OR, SOME DEFECTS IN THE English Laws; With their Proper
REMEDIES.

By a hearty Lover of his Country.

LONDON, Printed for the Author: And are to be Sold by John Whitlock, near
Stationers' Hall, 1695.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To all hearty Lovers of their Country, zealous Assertors and Pursuers of the
known and certain Interests thereof; and, in a Word, without any more
Distinction, To all True English Men.
Gentlemen,
IT IS to You I recommend this small Treatise, of plain, easy, and profitable
Politics; it is to You alone I dedicate it, and it was for your Sake, and the
Service of my dear and entirely-belov'd Country, I have engaged my Pen, and
appear in Public at this time, when we have something else to do, than to
write or publish Books: News is now the only Theme, and by it is Noise drowns
all other Talk; the French the Spaniards, the Savoyards, the Dutch, the
English, France, Flanders, Catalonia, Italy, and the Rhine, employ all our
Tongues, and almost our very Thoughts too. The Sea and the Land-Services give
full Employments to, and Entertainment for our Noddles; the Coffee-Houses are
crammed, the Exchange crowded, all the cry is News, the Streets echo nothing
else; the Town is diverted, and so is the Country too! After this manner, the
Bath, Astrop, Tunbridge, and Epsom, all filled with Inquirers of this kind.
Quelle Novelle? is now the Salutation. The Ladies are in too, they attend the
News with impatience, the Post is too slow, and the Wind too calm, and too
contrary, to hinder the Packet-Boats return, and to detain them so long on that
side. Nay, the Fair Sex are become most exquisite Geographers, and can give an
Account where Cales and Catalonia are, where Cazal and Pignerol, as well as
most Men; they can hardly attend the mutation of their Modes; and, as a Witty
one among them said, when asked why the Fashion continued so long, and with so
little alteration? Truly the French, the usual Fashion-Mongers of Europe, were
now otherways employed. The strong Stream, and chief Current being now wholly
bent upon News, what hopes can a new Author have of being handled or read? Oh,
there is time and leisure enough for that, in the intervals of News and
Business; besides, now the Summer is past, and the Autumn and short Days with
long Nights approach; the Town will suddenly fill, the Men of Business will
haste hither, Soldiers, Statesmen, Scholars, Merchants, all come here, this is
the Rendezvous, the Winter Quarters; then the Word will be, What new Books have
been lately printed? The Answer returned, but few, Trading is dead, Paper and
Printing dear, and Money very scarce, and bad into the Bargain, sad Times
indeed! But, pray when were we without Complaints and Murmurings? And, though
they may generally have Reason now, I hope they had the less then, in those
glorious Days of Peace and Plenty; but there always was, and ever will be
Repiners, none Rich or Great enough, not content with their State and
Condition, always uneasy, never satisfied or long pleased. But here, lo here is
a Piece of Politics, not drawn from Cabinet or Copy of the great Richelieu, or
greater Mazerine, no nor from the Florentine Secretary: Here are no Politics
laid to increase, but to conserve Empire; not to make new Conquests, but to
secure old Ones; not to invade and destroy our Neighbors Dominions, but to
permit them peacefully to enjoy them; not to subvert, but to preserve a
Kingdom; not to depopulate, but to well-people an Island; happy in it self, the
happiest in the World, surrounded with Salt Water, environed with floating
Bulwarks, invincible in the Courage of the Men, and renowned for the Beauty of
the Women; but, above all, famed for the Mildness and Lenity of its Government;
no Absolute and Arbitrary Treatments here; all bounded by Laws, Prerogative,
and Privilege, have their Limits, their ne plus ultra: Noble and sweet
Constitutions, no Wooden Shoes, no Dragoons, no Galleys, no Stat pro Ratione
voluntas, no sic Volo, sic Jubeo, but the King Commands with Sweetness and
Gentleness, and Rules by Law; and the Subjects Obey with Cheerfulness, Duty,
and Affection. And, though we are not for changing all, yet we are for mending
some of our Laws, which will apparently tend to the Public Good; and for that
very Reason will freely admit of some Alteration, and preserve our People, much
exhausted by Wars, and other Means.

Gentlemen,

As I told You at the beginning of my Dedication, so I now confirm to You, it is
to You alone I write, no Jacks, no Haters of their Native Country, no Lovers of
Lewis the Fourteenth, with his Mahumetan League; but to the Lovers of WILLIAM
the Third, who Wish, Talk and Fight for the Prosperity of Old England; You
merit my Services, my Pains are Your due; indeed You deserve my best
Endeavors, You shall have more, You bear a true Love to your own Country, You
are an Honor to it; and the poor, sneaking, whining Jacks a Shame, Scandal,
and Discredit to it: They are Vipers, Monsters, unnatural Births; they
enfeeble, but You strengthen the Hands of the Government, to carry on the
sharpest, bloodiest, and most expensive War that ever Britain was engaged in;
or, after this, I hope, ever will be: You bravely stand by your King and
Country; some with your Swords in your Hands; others with your Purses, full,
drawn, and wide open, to defend our Native Land, our Darling Religion, and our
Civil Rights: Alas! our Liberty is above Price, beyond Value. And, as for those
silly and contemptible Wretches, that whine and bawl, and seem to long for
French Government, or King James's, which would be much at one, for he copied
exactly after the Versalian Original; he set up too soon for Omnipotent, he had
not served seven Years, his Apprentiship, to his Master King Lewis; besides, he
run too fast, was soon out of Breath, he was too hasty, too fleet to hold long,
and his Horse was resty. Alas! the People of England are not Beasts of Burden,
Asses to be rid upon; let the Romish Priests find out their Men of Patience and
Phlegm in other Countries, with easy flat Backs, and tame servile Tempers; they
were mistaken in their Men, the English are too mettlesome to be Slaves, they
have not been used to Servitude, and cannot endure it, they will kick and wince,
and fling their Rider, as they did their late King: Nothing but Quo Warranto's
and Mandamus's; the King will have it, I Will make ye know I am your King; as he
told the Fellows of a certain College; though, as it fell out, they did not know
him very long: It Is dangerous to violate and break in upon Establishments, it
has ever been fatal to the Aggressors: Charles II. of England, that begun that
Work, had like to have been unhors'd, the Times were violent, and had like to
have broke out into Civil (as they call them, though I think they are Rude)
Commotions: Lucan the Pharsalian Poet calls them Plusquam Civilia Bella; and, I
think, he is in the Right.

My Tenderness to my Countrymen has brought forth this little Piece; it is the
Genuine Issue of a plain, honest, and innocent Noddle: I have often with
Compassion and Humanity beheld Numbers of likely, able, and comely Men and
Women ride up Holborn-Hill alive in Carts, who never came that way gain alive;
I have pitied them from my very Heart, and wished it in my Power to mitigate
their Doom, to change their rigid Fate; to spare their Lives, and punish their
Carcasses by Confinement and Labor; which would most effectually reduce them:
I am not for that violent Quack-Physick, which Cures all Diseases: Ketch is a
cruel hard-hearted Doctor, kills all his Patients, and, like other Physicians,
by Law forsooth. If it should be alleged, That the Conservators of our Liberty
are too tender of it, to take it away from us by such Methods as these; it may
be answered, That what they do, we do, and consent to it by them who represent
us, and who sit there by our Breath; I mean in St. Stephen's Chapel, for 'twas
our Votes sent them thither, we are the Electors; and though they are not
obliged, as the States-Deputies in Holland, to go home, and consult with their
Principals, being vested with an unlimited Power, yet so much in Reason and
Justice we may expect from them, to receive an humble Proposal from their
Fellow Subjects, and to consider upon the vast Advantages that will accrue to
the Kingdom, by putting this very Thing into Practice; ever reflecting how
easy it is to destroy, but how impossible it is to retrieve Life. The Romans,
whom all the World will allow to have been a gallant, victorious, and wise
People, were always very tender of their Citizens and Subjects, ever preserving
their Lives with due regard; well knowing, that in them consisted the Glory and
Safety of their mighty Commonwealth. We need not be ashamed to take Pattern by
them, it is from their Prudent Practices I have collected some of my Notions,
which I have enforced with the best Arguments I am Master of; and, which I am
sure will go down with all sensible Men, and for the rest I don't value at the
Price of a Prune; I write not to, or for them, away with their profane Hands,
and empty Heads; I Will not take Pains to make them Wiser; it is cleansing the
Augean Stable; I Will send for old Hercules to undertake them, I am not
Phlegmatic enough for that Service; besides, it is too difficult a Province for
me to undertake, and therefore I shall desist.

And now to wind up my Bottoms, I shall detain You no longer from looking into
the Book it self, where, I question not but You will meet with an ample and
entire Satisfaction, and join with me, in your good Wishes, and use your best
Endeavors to have these Matters brought about. We have a King that will Concur
in any thing for the Good of the Nation; and so great a Lover He is of the
Honest, Loyal English, that He desires not the Death of one of them, no not of
those ungrateful Plotters and Conspirators against His Person, and Government;
to whom He has showed a Clemency never sufficiently to be praised, being beyond
all Example.

SOLON SECUNDUS, etc.
THAT the Greatness of a Prince consists in the number of Subjects, and not in
the extent of Territory, is a State-Maxim agreed to by all mankind; and that to
pursue the certain, constant, and true Interest of the State, is another as
universally believed, tho not at all time reduced into practice; which is often
occasioned by the weakness of the Prince or his Ministers; I mean their
incapacity, or want of qualifications to Govern.

That the Court-Party and Country-Party are silly and unhappy Distinctions,
tending to the begetting Jealousies and mutual Distrust, are wholly
inconsistent with the Good of Commonwealth; whose Interest is the same with the
Kings, and so is his with hers, inseparably, indivisible, and ought to be
immutable: And that when Princes take any other Measures, or pursue any other
Interests than those of their own Kingdoms, which are plain and apparent; they
are often embroiled, sometimes banished, or put to death. Such fatal Ends
usually attend imprudent Statesmen, and their Masters, who pretend to set up a
different Interest from that of their People; which no Body can deny. That the
Church, Presbyterian, Independent, Popish, Jacobite, Irish, French, Spanish,
Scotch, Dutch, or any other Faction, are of pernicious Consequence to the
State: That there be no Whig and Tory, no Fool and Knave, no Parties, nor
Factions at all in the Court, Country, or City, nor in Councils Ordinary or
Extraordinary, Privy or Parliamentary: but a happy Harmony, calm Concord, and
universal Tendency, in all Persons, to the true Interest of the Community, it
being the whole, and every Individual's apparent Honor and Advantage, to
contribute all they and he can to the Advancement of the Peace, Wealth, and
Glory of the Republic; without the least touch or tincture of any mean Care,
or sordid Application to that of the Re-private. No Self-Interest should have
admittance here, no particular Benefit aimed at, but so far as they are
interwoven with that of the Body Politic. Great Complaint has always been made
of want of Publick-spirited Men, of Honor, Honesty, and Integrity: It has been
urged, that most Men are much inclined and strongly addicted to the heaping up
of Wealth, and making their own Families (as the heaping up of Wealth, and
making their own Families (as they call it) without due Regard to, or Respect
for the Public Good; which must be confessed: However, we cannot fail of
having, even among us, some Men of noble and enlarged Minds, who will one Day
step into Posts of Power, Profit and Honor, and show the World the quite
contrary Practices, and raise the Glory and Interest of their Native Country,
beyond what it ever was, especially so great a Step having been made, and so
good a Foundation laid in our happy Revolution and Settlement; and seeing that
we have so good and gracious a King, that, if we are not wanting to our selves,
will contribute all in his Power to make this Kingdom, and indeed all his
Dominions, the most thriving and most flourishing Part of the World, in
retrieving our Military Honor, Naval Strength and Reputation; preserving,
increasing, and re-establishing our Foreign Commerce, and chastising the
Insolence of all those that dare invade our Trade in any Part of the Globe;
nay, the very Dutch themselves, (though his Countrymen) if they should be so
hardy to attempt it, as they have with good Success, and to their great
Advantage formerly done, when we had less vigilant and less active Princes on
the Throne. These are the best and truest Politics, far exceeding and
excelling those so famed of France; the Violent prosecution of which has
brought that once rich, glorious and flourishing Kingdom, to its present mean
and deplorable State; I may say, almost ruinous Condition: And such fatal
Effects must and will always attend such foolish and impolitick Practices;
bring shame and Co^^^sion to Prince, Damage and Destruction to the Commonwealth.

The preservation, increase and welfare of his Majesty's (King William)
Subjects, and consequently of his Greatness, Glory, and Renown; and of his
Kingdoms true Interest, Riches, Honor and Safety, is the sole Aim and Intent
of these following Sheets, which will evidently appear to all those that read
them with Candor and Ingenuity, being without an sinister, evil, or private
Design of the Author's; but rather of a great deal of Good, solid Good!
Cheerfully and heartily recommended to the Public, for its Sake of Advantage
alone.

That the slow, deliberate and intelligible Reading of the established Laws of
this Kingdom, Capital, Corporal and Pecuniary, (of which two last it is wished
there were more, and those certain, stated and six'd, not lest to the
Arbitrary; Breath of the Superior Judicatories, who are too often bias'd, and
influenced by the Court-Royal) on the Sunday-Afternoons, in lieu of double
Sermons (of which many are very dull and insipid) this, without Reflection or
Churches of Conventicles, would do more Good than they; besides, one Sermon is
enough in one Day, and more than the People will remember eight and forty
Hours: I say, this Reading of the Laws in all the Collegiate and
Parochial-Churches, would bring no dishonor to Religion, and they are very
silly that fancy it, but would mightily tend to the Private and Pubick Good,
as shall be clearly evidenced by and by. I don't see that the People have been,
or are much the better for all the Preaching and Printing, that has been in Use
for these many Years past, though it is their Fault and not the Clergies, who are
Learned, and Laborious, and who are an Honor who our Nation, and vie with (and
in my Opinion excel) all the Foreigners in the World in their Qualifications,
of pure Doctrine and of holy Life, of indefatigable Application to the
Ministry, in their Care of Souls, in their Charity, Good Works, and Pious
Examples; though whether the People will be ever the better for all this, I shall
not pronounce; but this I may and will affirm, and I hope without the least
Offense, That there is at present very little likelihood of it. And, if they
cannot do any Good with them in their Religion, why should not we try what can
be done in mending their Morals? Which, if my Proposal be received, may be
accomplished; and if by this they should own) become the better Christians; so
that it is the Clergies Interest (which is a thing they love and pursue as much
or more (with Respect be it spoke to their Order and Function) that other
Folks) to engage their Power and Authority to have this established by Law.

This cannot be denied by any, the most silly, stubborn, or wilful, but that
the greatest part of the Nation, Noble, Gentle and Simple, Clergy and Laity,
are in a great measure very ignorant of the Laws of this Land, which is a great
deal of pity they should; for although it seems to be a peculiar and particular
Province, a Profession and Employment of it self, yet all Laws being founded
upon Reasons, (or at least such as was then, when they were enacted, thought
so) and solely intended for the Good and Behoof of the People, why should they
be unacquainted with their Virtue and Power? And so lose their Benefit and
Advantage of them, by ignorantly falling within the Lash, and Teeth of them, to
the hazard, and sometimes loss of their Lives and Estates, and to the ruin of
their whole Families, who are undone, and reduced to Extremities through the
Miscarriages of their unfortunate Principals, though they did not in the least
contribute to it themselves; which is really a Hardship and Severity. Now by
the frequent reading and inculcating these Constitutions into their Heads, they
would look before they leap, think before they act, and be very cautious in,
and tender of violating the Establishments, for which they know they must pay
so very dear. And seeing that great Numbers of People (too many I am sure!)
being altogether ignorant of the Laws of their Native Country, though made by
their Voice and Representatives, yet not one in five thousand ever reads a
Capital Statute; I say, by this means they are often led or fall into Crimes
that cost them their Lives: Now, it is for the Public Interest to prevent their
death, and save as many as we can from that ugly way of dangling by the Neck;
there need not be one in ten hanged of them that are: Is it not a shame and
scandal to us as much as it is to them? Is it not a thousand Pities that so
many handsome, jolly, lusty, brisk, young Fellows, in their very Bloom, should
be tied up to that cursed Tree? No less pitied by the tenderhearted Ladies, in
whose Service they had rather they should die, than lamented by most Men of
Sense, as an irreparable Injury done to the Commonwealth: These poor in
fortunate People, both Men and Women, might other ways expiate their Crimes,
save their Lives, quit their former foul Practices, abandon their bad Company,
and fall to Business, in some civil Employment at home or abroad, or in
Military Affairs attend the King in his Wars, either by Sea or by Land, in the
Defense of his Sacred Person, and their dear Country, and bravely sell their
Lives at a Rate uncommon, and as their Countrymen (to their immortal Honor be
it spoke!) usually do in their renowned Battles and Sieges; whose Hearts and
true-bred Courage are more brave than their Enemies, more firm and more solid,
than the Walls of Stone or Earth they batter, or the Ships of Oak they bore. Oh
whither will my Zoal for my own Country and Countrymen Old England, and those
tight Lads the Englishmen, transport me! The Subject it self inspires me, and
I can hardly give over; it is no Digression, yet, if I carry it too far, it will
be.

Public Executions will never heal these Breaches of Laws, or prevent the ill
Consequences of them; the loss of Fortune in the Prosecutor, and of Life in the
Criminal: And of this we may be convinced, by the fruitless, though frequent,
nay, almost Monthly Repetitions, for the Sessions are often held in this City:
This public Hanging does not deterr the People; it is made a kind of Jest, a
Game, a Rendezvous of Mob, Shouting and Hallowing, a sort of Holy Day or
Play-Day, at least an Idle-Day, (as the Fast-Days used to be) nay, and while
the very Notion universally received among them continues in force, and
operation, viz. That Hanging is nothing at all! only a wry Face, and a pist
pair of Breeches; nay, I my self have lately, attended on Ladies, curious to
see the Execution, especially when some extraordinary Business happened, and a
Man to die for killing his Wife, which the whole Sex look upon themselves
concerned in, and deep, their All being wrapped up in their Life; we got as near
the Gallows as we could, and heard and saw all that past; and when the Cart
drew off, the Women in our Coach asked, And is this all? As much as to say,
Hanging is nothing at all. Nay, I remember a Drawer, some Years since, at the
Rose-Tavern in West-Smithfield, was hanged for murdering his Wife, though he saw
a Fellow hanged for the same Crime but two Days before he did it. So little
Impression it made upon him! So little Terror it had in it self; I rather
believe it seemed a most easy Death to him, (as indeed it must be, for the
Suffocation stifles and stupifies the Spirits, and cuts off the Communication
between the Vital and Animal, and is much gentler, and less painful than
Bed-death) else he would not have carried his Wife abroad the Sunday following
the Friday on which the the other was tied up, and, almost in view of Tyburn,
knocked his Wife on the Head with his Master's Walking-Cane: A scurvy way of
treating Wives, when they walk abroad with their Husbands! It Is in every Body's
Mouth, that Laws were made in terrorem; Pray how was he terrified? He was
rather emboldened to the perpetration of that cruel, horrid and bloody Act, by
the small Pain he thought was felt. But then you will say, What will do? If
laying down their Lives to atone their Crimes will not! Life being, in the general
esteem, the most valuable thing in the World, yet by many it seems to be
thought slight and worthless; A merry Life and a short, is a Tune of an old
Date, yet every Day sung. So that sharper Deaths, and more Solemn, or loss of
Liberty, by a long if not perpetual Imprisonment, might much more reform the
English; for Life is not valued by them, so much as by other Nations; they are
more lavish of theirs than any other People; though Liberty (which they prefer
to Life) is in high esteem with them; they are more Choleric than some, and
less Phlegmatic than others of our Neighbors, viz. French or Dutch; they (I
mean the English) prize their Liberty at a high Rate; witness the Blood and
Treasure they have lost and spent to preserve it. An English Man in Prison and
Chains, resembles that noble Man-like Majestic Creature a He-Lion, Sovereign
of Field and Forest, when newly taken and made close Prisoner. And certainly a
deprivation of Liberty would be much more irksome and intolerable than Death it
self, though attended with the usual Formalities.

You see plainly all our Hanging has not been able to clear our Roads from
Highway-Men, or our Paths from Foot-Pads, those bloody and, barbarous Villains,
universally dreaded and detested. What frequent, what continual, nay, almost
daily, Robberies of both those kinds have we? And this without any Redress,
notwithstanding the great Care and Application of our August Senate in
re-inforcing our Laws, and giving great Rewards to the Brave and the Hardy that
shall seize upon these nimble Vermin, these Banditti, these Bog-Trotters, these
Wills with a Wisp, that ride over Hedges and Ditches, in uncommon, unbeaten and
untrodden Ways.

Transportation will not do the business, though that is a great deal better than
Hanging, for the Commonwealth suffers by their death; that is, it is a loss to
the Public: So that Pecuniary and Corporal Punishments would soon cure these
Evils, and remedy these Disorders: Working will do more than Whipping; and that
at the Cart's tail, with a Dog-whip, through the Streets, is barbarous and
Beastlike, and no where practiced but in England: At Amsterdam they whip them
upon a Scaffold, and with Birchen-Rods; it is sharp but short, and then away to
the Rasp-House. I warrant ye you will precisely cry out, I arraign the Laws of
the Land, than which there are (say you, and a great many more that know no
better) no wholesomer Laws in the World, being adapted to the Humor and Genius
of the Nation. I find no Fault with our Establishments, they are Good in the
main; however, they would be better, if mended a little; I hope they are not,
like the Medean and Persian, eternal, immutable; there may be Times and
Seasons, Occasions and Mutations, which may make it absolutely necessary to
abolish some, and enact others. We in England have been, and are in the Wrong
in some things, our Civil Conduct has some Flaws; which is visible by the
Statutes of every Session; for none but the Laws of God and Nature are
constant, certain, and unchangeable. While we are in this World we shall see
Reason for the redressing some Things which will be always amiss, and out of
order: There must be some Reformation, (I don't mean in Religion, for that is
well enough, if we can be quiet,) and the Dangers and Difficulties that attend
such a Change, may be thought by some soft and weak Heads, to be vastly Great
and Insuperable, though we shall evince the contrary, and make it clear even to
Demonstration, that our Constitutions may be improved and altered to the vast
and apparent Benefit of the whole Nation: Each Member of the Community will be
for it, as having a share in the Safety and Welfare of it, and will be careful
to prevent the Evil, and zealous to procure and promote the Good of the Body
Politic, (I am sure if he is a Politic Body he will.) And what if we have
been, and are still in the wrong? Is it reasonable we should be always so? I
remember at a Debate in the House of Lords, the late Duke of Buckingham, was of
the late Earl of Shaftsbury's Sentiments that Day, but he changed his Mind the
next, and voted against the Earl; upon which he being a little nettled, charged
the Duke with Levity; who answered him very smartly, and said, That if he was a
Fool yesterday, he would not be so all the Days of his Life.

I am indeed utterly and absolutely against Transportation of Fellons, (though it
was thought Mercy by our Law) for two principal Reasons, and I hope they will not
be contemned by you. First, It answers not the Aim and Intent of the Law; that
is, it has not the good Effect designed by it; for they often return sooner
than they should, and fall to their old Trade of Rogueing; and if they do stay
abroad, they are seldomer made better, but often worse, their very Traveling
thither corrupts them, for most of the Seamen with which they converse in their
Voyage, are as very Thieves as themselves; and, when they arrive at the
Plantations, they are sharpened in all manner of Villainies; and learn to
cheat, and overreach one another; which they think no Crime, and make no
Conscience of, as I don't know how they should, for they have not any. The very
Quakers themselves, who go voluntarily thither, and who, while here, are pretty
exact and fair in their Dealing, when they come to America, prove the verriest
Knaves, and the sharpest Rogues in the World. I have seriously asked a Friend
(as those sly Hypocritical Rascals call one another in their Cant) what is the
reason of that Change? Who slearing and whining answered me, Truly the Air
altered 'em. When in reallity their Principles are naught, and being frequently
pinched by Necessity, and meeting with Losses and Disappointments in their
Voiaging thither, they are made ( Jew like) the more Mercurial, and indeed are
become a sort of cunning Traders and may vie with the subtle Genoese, who once
had the Fame of being the Closest and most Politic Negotiators in this Part
(at least) of the World. The Second Argument is, We are already too much
exhausted by our Colonies, which may be one Day as fatal to us as it has been
to the Spaniards, and would have been ere now, but that our Women are more
chaste and prolifick than theirs; but then what hinders us again, Marriage is
universally decried, run down and exploded; what was once counted an honorable
State, begins now to be thought otherwise; and they are reckoned Fools and
Coxcombs, and fit for nothing but to be made Cuckolds, that do venture into the
Nooze; and common Whoring is become much more Modish; which is very pernicious
to the State, and hinders the great increase of People; for those wandering
Strumpets are as dark and barren as the Grave* besides, the vast Number of gay
and gallant Youth destroyed in their Attacks, more than the Town and Castle of
Namur cost us, or Fort-Knock added to the List. I shall mention nothing of the
Court (nor Church, for I am sure it was not theirs, the Duke was in the bottom
of that blessed Business) Persecution, toward the latter end of Charles the
Second's Reign, which helped to drain us; it filled the American Colonies, but
emptied the English Kingdom; which, though an Island, is more worth to us than
that whole Continent, as vast as it is. If these Reasons against Transportation
will not satisfy, I could soon muster an Army of them. I must confess the present
Practice is much more commendable, the sending them to the Army in Flanders,
where they do their Country some Service, at least receive the Shot which might
kill better Men. If this War holds, and for ought I see it is pretty likely, it
will oblige us to be more careful and tender of our Peoples Lives, than for
many Years past we have been.

Another Malady in the State wants Redress, and that is, the Mob Rampant, who
commit strange Insolences and Outrages; gutting of Houses (as they call it,) I
suppose they will come to gutting of People one of these Days. This, if not
suppressed in time, may be dangerous to the Government, and bring about some new
Revolution. Massinello, the famed Neopolitan Fisherman began after that manner;
besides, they will be emboldened by their Impunity to attempt greater Things,
when their Stream is turned another way, which is not very difficult to be
done, a little Coin, sprinkled among them, will soon put them into a ferment,
and where and when it will stop no Body knows; if these Extravagances are past
over, or permitted, they will suspect their Betters want Power, or are afraid to
correct and humble them; which may engage them in new Commotions, and endanger
fresh Convulsions, which have sometimes fatal and pernicious Tendencies.

There have been more poor Rogues and Whores hanged for stealing Silver
Tankards out of Victualling-Houses of this City, than all the Plate in them is
worth; that is, their Lives are of more value. Now, for Remedy of this Evil, I
propose a Scheme thus. Suppose a Tankard, which is about five Pound Sterling
value, be whipped up, and the Person taken, instead of committing him to
Newgate, I would have him sent to a Workhouse, and there to remain till he
should, by his Labor, pay the Prosecutor the full Sum of five Pounds and
Charges, besides his own Lodging and Diet in the Prison, and, when all that was
paid, he should have his Liberty; but then you will say, he will to his old
Profession; let him if he please, he shall be punished, when caught, after the
same manner, which will make his Heart ache, and tire him quite out, and break
him of those Tricks soon: Liberty is not so contemptible as Life: And then, if
he would not work, he need not be beaten to be brought to it, for it is but
making a Vault with a Pump in it, and so let Water run into it, and put the
Gentleman there, and let him stand till it comes up to his Mouth, when he must
either pump or be drowned; and if he can do that Work he may do other; besides,
there is a more profitable Work than beating Hemp, to Rasp Dying-Woods, at
which they can earn more: This way no Body would be a loser, the Victualler
would have his Plate again, the Thief his Liberty, and the King his Subject;
which he must for ever lose if he be hanged, and so must the Man his Tankard;
which is a Severity in our Law, and is also a feeble or weak side in it, and
occasions the stifling of many Prosecutions, which would otherwise go on; but
People are often helped to their Goods again by the Thief-takers, as they call
the Marshal's Men; but in reallity they are the sharers, for they come in for a
snack with them; which to permit, is a shame and scandal to a Government;
besides, this I am ready to mention, shows a Defect in our Constitution; I am
robbed, and though I have irrecoverably lost my Goods, yet I am obliged to
Prosecute, which gives me great Trouble, and puts me to Expense, for which I am
much the worse, but never a whit the better.

Highway Men, Foot-Pads, House-Breakers, Shop-Lifters, Cut-Purses,
Pick-Pockets, Cheats, Sharpers, Hat, Sword, Handkerchief, Horse, Cow, Sheep or
Hog-Stealers, with the numerous Gang of Filchers and lesser Vermin, of all
sorts and sizes, would sooner be deterred from the Practice of any of these or
other Rogueries and Villainies, by Imprisonment and Bodily Labor, either for a
certain term of time, in proportion to the greatness of smalness of their
Crime, the Profits of which to the Commonwealth, or to work out the Theft as
before, and to be honestly paid to the Sufferer: This last, rather than
the other, for then no Prosecutions could or would be suppressed, but all, even the
most minute Robberies and Cheats would come before the Magistrate; I say, this
would more effectually extirpate and root out all the Crimes, Misdemeaners and
Miscarriages in a State, than Whipping, Burning, Transporting, or Hanging,
which is the last stroke, and which is, by much, the worst of them all.

And now, for Example, I will first instance in a Highway Robber: Suppose one
taken, tried and convicted of taking twenty Pounds from one Man, and thirty
Pounds from another; he should be sentenced to Imprisonment, and painful bodily
Labor, till Money should arise by his Sweat to pay the whole Fifty Pounds,
which might be easily done in three or four Years, or less time, and he
maintained, lodged, dieted, and clothed; for he may earn eighteen Pence per
Diem: This long Confinement, and hard Service, would baulk his Stomach, and
spoil his Appetite to the old way of Padding, the very Gang and Knot would be
broke and dispersed: This to an English Man, so fond of Liberty, would be more
formidable than that ignominious Death, to which they are now only obnoxious;
it would put them upon some Consideration how to get a Livelihood by some fair
and honest Method; they would to the Army Volunteers, or to the Navy
Reformades, or get some Civil Employment, or Secular Business, to prevent their
falling into these terrible Punishments: Thus would our Roads be soon cleared
of all these troublesome Vermin, and the whole Nation left to pursue their
Business, or their Pleasure, with Satisfaction and Safety of Mind, Person, and
Pocket, without the least dread of dropping into these unlawful Ambuscades;
besides, what Satisfaction is it to me to prosecute any of these sort of
Law-Breakers, when I have lost my Money, which I am sure never to recover
again, but spend more, and have a great deal of trouble into the Bargain, (of
which very few People are fond;) nay, sometimes the remaining Gang threaten to
revenge the death of their Associate on the Person of the Prosecutor; which, if
it be not always performed, yet it leaves an impression of Fear upon a Man
which makes him uneasy in his Business. It Is evident, beyond Contradiction,
that all the Methods hitherto proposed and reduced into Laws, have not been
able to suppress this sort of Cattle, so injurious to the Community; the utter
exstinction of whom should be our principal Care and Endeavor; there being
more likelihood of their increase than decay, especially when they have a
prospect of being re-inforc'd by a Disbanding of our present numerous Army,
which must be, upon a Peace, which will come at one time or another, and will
be general, and so consequently no more Work for the Sword, at least, for some
Years to come; which will put the Private Soldiers to engage in Foot-Padding,
and the Officers to the Roads, it being a rarity to hear of a Son of Mars with
full Pockets; I assure you they are seldom Usurers, or put their Money out to
Interest, they are for a merry Life and a short one; live without thought of
the Morrow, according to our Savior's Command, they let the Morrow take Care
for it self; though I believe not from a Principle of Christianity, but of
Carelessness rather: This Fate usually attends them, as it does Whores and
Witches, if they chance to escape Lead and Iron, and live to behold, which many
of 'em do, they are sure of Poverty and Pain.

Our wise Senate is at all Times, and upon all Occasions, very Tender of the
Lives of their Fellow Subjects, and are willing to receive and debate upon all
Proposals that bend that way; and who knows but this may fall into some of
their Hands? Partake of Life and Vigor by that means, and suddenly sprout out
into a happy Law; they are Men studious of the Public Good; indeed they are
the only Public and Noble-spirited People among us, they are always for the
Advancement of the Wealth, Greatness, Honor and Interest of Old England; and
we had been long since sunk into an Abyss of Ruin, and irrecoverably lost, if
our Patriots had not appeared Stout and Courageous, and in time rescued us from
the Impendent Dangers. The poor Women, who used to be hanged up for a slight
Matter, and were excluded the Benefit of Clergy, have it now without reading;
which is a commendable Consideration: And though this Method has not, had any
extraordinary Effect; that is, it has not prevented Thefts, Robberies, Cheats,
and such like Actions, yet it has saved the Lives of abundance of poor
unfortunate Creatures, and given them fair warning to have a care of a Halter;
yet if this Sizing in the Hand were converted to a Temporary Confinement, and
hard Corporal Labor, it would, without doubt, have a better Effect. The Dutch
are so very Cautious in taking away the Life of the meanest of their Subjects,
that they must have very clear and home Proof, owned and confirmed by the
Party's Confession, else they will not put them to death; I saw a little
light-timber'd Wench, who was in their Rasp-House, committed upon Suspicion of
Murdering her Mistress; and although there were all the concurring
Circumstances in the World, yet she denying of it absolutely, after she had
been three times tortured, in which most of her Bones were dislocated, she was
damned to thirty Years Imprisonment; and, I assure you, no idle People live in
those Places. And, though I am for no Dutch-Government, but a Monarchy rather
than a Commonwealth; and though, I think, we have little need to Copy after them,
yet it is not dishonorable to Correct our Constitutions, or to learn from a
Neighbor, Wisdom being to be obtained wherever we can find it. Bodily
Punishment, I mean Stripes, have seldom the good Effect intended, because it is
forgot almost as soon as over, for to be sure, when all the Pain is past, the
Punishment is no longer remembered; but loss of Liberty will make a deep
Impression, will make a hole in their Hearts, and give them a great deal of
Melancholy.

There are more Men and Women hanged here (I mean in London) in a Year, than in
Amsterdam, (which, though not so large in extent, yet it is very full of People,
and has rather more for it is bigness than our Metropolis) and all the Seven
United Provinces; not to mention what are executed in all the other Parts of
England, which, if reduced to Number, would not be found inconsiderable. Now
there are as great Rogues in Holland, and in other Foreign Parts, as in
England, but they punish them after another manner. The Romans had Pecuniary
Punishments in great use among them; and how slight and trivial this may seem
to some unthinking People, yet, as I take it, the Pocket is one of the most
sensible Places about a Man. Fines, when not Extravagant, and Arbitrary, but
(as I said before) established, and known, would be paid, rather than to lie in
durance. Nay, the Dutch Commonwealth is in great measure founded upon the same
Bottom and Foot as the Roman: The Civil Law is in Vogue with them, and indeed
with the greatest Part of Europe, England excepted, where it is run down, and
our Common Law advanced above it; the other is cramped and snub'd, and whipped up
into a Corner, and impeded mightily in its Progress and Practice.

It Is a horrid Custom we have here in England, of Arresting, and whipping one
another away to Prison, even when it is known they are Insolvent; every Body
knows Prisons pay no Debts, yet have no Mercy, no Compassion, no, nor
Consideration upon the Losses sustained by the poor unfortunate Debtor, who
being in a Way, and in Business, may retrieve his Misfortunes, and honestly pay
every Man his due; but, if he be confined, all means are then taken away of
improving or recovering a Fortune, and usually tends to the utter Ruin of his
Person, Estate, and Family; all which might be preserved if other Methods were
used; besides, there are more Debts lost by these cruel, foolish, and barbarous
Customs, than any other way; more Men undone by this means, than by all other
Accidents whatever; and it is from the Melancholic Prospect of a Prison; to
avoid which, and extreme Poverty (the usual Company in those Places) puts Men
upon flying into Alsatia and the Mint, many time before they are driven to it
by absolute Necessity; where they defraud all their Creditors, and live upon
their Money, and at last starve, pine away, and die.

In time past Witches and Wizards used to increase the Dead-List, their
Executions were numerous and very common, but have declined ever since the
People in general, the Judges and Juries in particular grew wiser; the youthful
(which if any have, are the likeliest to understand and use Charms, Inchatments
and Spells) and the aged went together; the Ignorance and Malice of that Age
spared neither, made no distinction of Sex, but were afraid of being smutted
with the Black-Art; although there be no such thing, most weak and idle People
being scared with Names and Notions, the common People, even to this Day, call
Astronomers, Astrologers, Chiromancers, and Physiognomists, all Conjurers, and
Cunning Men; when, alas, there is not one Dram of Conjuration in the Matter;
no Body wonders that the Mobile Vulgus should be thus tainted and affected; but
it is a little odd, to find Multitudes of both Sexes, of good Education and
Conversation, of the same Opinion still, and to think, nay, and sometimes to
call him an Atheist, that will not believe the Existence of Witches, Conjurers,
Necromancers, and such like Stuff; Subjects fit for a Romance, and would go
down very well in those Windmill Days, those Times of Chivalry and
Knight-Errantry, which were the drowsiest, dullest, and most insipid Stories in
the World, unhappy in being instilled into Peoples Heads while young, which
renders it difficult to exterminate them, if in their Years of Maturity,
Discretion I cannot call it, for some, nay, many never arrive at that. The
Wizard and Witchfinders had formerly a mighty Trade of it; it was some Interest
surely they had, as well as the Command, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live
in the Land, that made them so diligent and zealous in their Discoveries; I
have been told of a Parson, that, of late Years, seldom failed of providing
half a Dozen of Witches or Wizards to welcome the Judges, and employ the Court,
till his Tricks were discovered, and he (as he deserved) exposed with shame to
the Public Hatred. It Is unhappy to have an ill Tongue, much Mischief is done
thereby, which often returns upon themselves. Some fancy the Clergy keep up
the Opinion of Witches, to amuse the People, and to retain them in the Dark,
the better to put of their bad Wares: Some say it is their Interest to do thus:
But be it so or not, I shall not enter into the Controversy at this time, but
I am very glad we have not so many of that sort of poor Witches as formerly;
or, at least, that we don't hang them up so fast as we used to do, and make
Witches where we found none, which destroyed abundance of People; which was
very detrimental to the Commonwealth, who suffered very much in the loss of the
young, though not of the old Men and Women, especially of the last, who are then
very little regarded, by being thought useless and unprofitable, though the Men
are not, who, if they had Employment, might have Issue even in the last Stage
of their Lives, especially if the youthful slew not so fast from their cold
Embraces, too near an approach to, and resemblance of Death; the thought of
whom, chills the warmest Blood, and baulks, for a short season, the choicest
Pleasures of the most Gay and Airy.

Sodomy is seldom talked of, and, I hope, not practiced in our chaste
Northern-Clime; it is abominable almost to name it, so we shall dwell no longer
upon the Subject, but banish it to Italy, Turkey, and those Sunburnt Regions.
This Crime fills not the Black-Warrant, and that which follows not much more.

Rapes are rare, and seldom affect the Life of the prosecuted, because, for the
most part, it is Trick and Management, design to get a small Spill out of the
timorous and easy; besides, the Courts of Judicature are very tender on that
side, it being by most Men thought difficult to execute, if the Party be
obstinate; and, if not, it is no Rape; besides, the Sex are more melting and
obliging than formerly, are easier won, and prevailed upon to receive the
Attack, and seldom venture so far, or hold out so long to hazard a Storm.

Bastards and their unhappy Parents come in too often for a share in this
Mortal Bill of Fare; which might be easily prevented, by appointing an Hospital
at the Public Charge, as in Foreign Parts, to receive the poor innocent Babes,
and to make good Provision for them, who will soon pay the Expense of their
Education, by their Services, being in Value far above the Charge, and of great
Advantage to the Commonwealth; an Army of such would beat the whole World,
especially, if it be true, That they are made with more Heat and Vigor, with
more Life and Fire, and of better Metal than the lawful (as they call 'm, for
distinction, though Nature knows no such difference) Issue. Besides, Monsieur,
the present French King, takes mighty Care of that whole Race, and does 'em the
Honor and the Grace to call them the Children of France, and sometimes the
King's Children; By this Means they have no Murders, nor Executions of this
kind; no Embryo's destroyed to save the Reputation of the Liquorish. Common
Harlotry is (as I touched before) very injurious to the State; Bigamy,
Polygamy, or Any Gamy is better than that; but we are so Nice and Puritanical
in some things, and so Large and Latitudinarian in others, that such Doctrine
must be damned to Eternal Shades. Oh! 'twon't go down with tender Consciences,
though I am of Opinion they have neither tender nor tough; I am sure in other
things they have not; but I am loath to make old Wounds bleed anew. And so much
for that Paragraph, which is shortn'd to prevent Offense; so loath I am to
disoblige any Party, that, as I told you in my Preface, I would have no Party
at all, but all pure Love and Friendship.

And for the Clippers, Coiners, Counterfeiters, False-Money Makers, Stampers,
Melters, Exchangers of Broad for Narrow, of Good for Bad, Wholesale Men and
Retaylers, with the whole Nest; nay, rather, Army of Rogues and Jades, that
have spoiled almost all our Money, and rendered it uncurrent, difficult and
very troublesome to lay out, or pay away, single or in Sums, that indeed it is
so great an Unhappiness, and ill Accident in our State, and at this very
Juncture, and Crisis, I mean the War, that even the Taxes themselves are not so
Burdensome: And all this is occasioned by an universal Defect and Negligence,
in permitting Crop'd Money to pass at first, and in only hanging the Offender,
when caught, and fairly convicted by Proof undeniable; which reached but few of
that vast Corporation, who have not in the least been deterred from these foul
and pernicious Practices against the State; nor is it to be expected they are
ever to be scared and balked by Dangling, and though great Numbers of them
(which as I hinted before weakens the Community) have of late Years danced that
way, and been tied up from their Meat, and died in their Shoes, yet no
abatement of their Villainies; for now although the greatest part of the old
Coin (for the new is all vanished, has disappeared for a long time) is paired
very close, for they have gone over and over again with it, they are fallen to
stamp Money that resembles the old very well, but, alas! is not worth two Pence
halfpenny the Shilling, of which they make great plenty, especially now, and
ever since the Half-Crowns were impeded in their passing; nay, such is their
Condescension, that they vouchsafe to make us new Six-pences, to assist us the
easier in our Exchange; and for the old cracked Pieces which occasioned a
Provision in an Act of Parliament, they are rounded very handsomely, and made so
small that they are not of Twopence value. Now if these sort of Vermin, after
a fair and legal Conviction, were doomed to One and twenty Years Imprisonment
and hard Labor, they would be damnably put to it: One Example of this kind
would terrify them more than the Hanging of a Hundred, which is forgot as soon
as the Story is told, or read in the Public Account: This would be always
fresh in their view, and strike 'em to the Heart: What? an eternal Prisoner!
(for so 'twould happen to some, who would die there,) and a kind of Slave too!
Oh good God! say they, I Will have a Care of my Carcass, and my sweet Liberty:
How miserable 'twill be to work daily? to live and die within the Grates: Those
Iron-Barrs would frighten them more than they do, if they were to be longer in
their sight: But they are in a Sessions now, about a Month, and sometimes come
off, then with Joy they return to the old Game; I my self have been upon a
Grand Jury when there were Eight and twenty of these Varlets Indicted, and we
found the Bills against Six and twenty; and of all these there was but one (as
I was afterward informed by the Judge) executed; besides, when it is their
Destiny to die, they take it pretty patiently, they die hard, as it is now
called; that is, Obstinate and Impenitent, and comfort themselves beforehand
with the Thoughts of the termination of all their Griefs and Sorrows; and,
besides, they have imbibed this Doctrine, That it is no Sin against Heaven, but
only against Humane Laws, which they expiate by paying their Lives: Surely the
Parsons don'd take so much Pains with these People as they should.

And now to conclude, for I think it is high time, I am not for those Sanguinary
Laws, in use in Germany, Poland, Moscovy, and those colder Regions, where they
hang a poor Rogue for stealing the value of a Halter, or a Goose, or such
trivial and worthless thing; they are very sharp and severe in their
Executions, which has not the wished Effect: Though this may seem more necessary
in some of those Countries, which are often the Seats of War, and are always
(even in Peaceful Times) crammed with Soldiers, an unruly and ungovernable fort
of Gentlemen, and indeed, without a strict and tight Discipline, litte better
than a Mob; the Burghers or Citizens, nay, the Boors or Countrymen, could not
enjoy their own, nor supply the Markets, or carry on their Trades; for the
Martialists are Liquorish Forlks, and love good things, but don't care to
Labor for them, it is something beneath the Style and Character they bear,
being at their first Enlisting dubbed Gentlemen, which they retain to the last
Moment of their Lives: An honorable Bait to catch the Credulous and the Weak!

The French are hard-hearted and cruel, very rigid in their Executions; for
Murder, Robbery, or Theft, the Wheel, the Galleys, crop their Noses, and slice
their Cheeks: Theirs is a Country of Soldiers too, and under some kind of
Necessity of severe Discipline and exemplary Punishment; for, in the lowest
reform in Peace, there is maintained and kept on foot Ninety thousand Men, for
the Land-Service only: And this must be confessed, they are under the best
Discipline in the World; they are mightily to be commended for it. The French,
like the English, don't value common Hanging; I have seen a Valet dance upon
the Scaffold, just before the Hempen Ribband was put on, so little they value
that hard course Neck-cloth, though it is tied so hard it choaks 'em; but, since
that breaking their Bones by degrees, and then giving the fatal Blow, with a
ponderous Piece, of Iron, Robberies and Murders are not so common and
customary, they have been suppressed in this Reign; as has Tilting, which used to
be upon every slight and trivial Occasion, out come Toledo, or Bilboa, almost
without any Provocation.

However, upon the whole Matter, I am clearly for the mild and gentle Laws and
Government we live under, with exclusion to all other; nay, even I think it
Severity and Cruelty to confiscate the Estate, though in Crimes of Laesae
Majestatis, so to starve the Wife and Children, and ruin the whole Family of
Innocents; not so much as knowing, and, to be sure, not at all concerned in
their unfortunate Husband and Father's Follies and Miscarriages. Lenity and
Clemency have preserved many a Prince; whereas the contrary has destroyed many
a one, and involved their Kingdoms in Blood: Mercy is one of the chief
Attributes of the Deity, and when Sovereigns are so, they imitate at least, if
not come near to a God. It Is Natural and Humane to preserve rather than
destroy; and therefore I shall end with this, That if my kind Tender of my
Services to my Country were reduced into Practice, not One in Ten would be
hanged that are; which would be much to our Honor, Advantage, and Interest.

APPENDIX.
TO this may be added, by way of Supplement, The great Shame, Scandal and
Detriment that falls on the Commonwealth, by tolerating such vast Numbers of
Beggars, Bees without Honey, though not without Sting; mere Drones, Vagabonds,
lazy, loitering and idle People, that live upon the Alms of others, with the
Assistance of Pilfring and Stealing; many of which Mendicants have and do
arrive at prodigious Estates, hardly to be believed, but by fair Discoveries
known to be certainly so; others Considerable, all competent Living and
Maintenance; and this without one stroke of Work, or one drop of Sweat,
wandering from Morning till Night, from Street to Street, laying out the whole
City in proper Districts and Divisions; and what is really very mavelous, and
yet most demonstratively true, of this huge and vast Army of Beggars here and
throughout the whole Kingdom, Blind, Lame, pretenders to, and feigners of both,
for the sake of their gainful Profession, and to cully in Charity, have an Art,
by applying a certain Herb, to any sound Part of their Legs or Arms, in twenty
four Hours, will draw so prodigiously, to make it look like an old Sore, though
without any Pain: I say, of this great Army, not one dies with Hunger, or mere
downright Want, no not in the hardest, difficultest, and most tedious Winters;
they live well, and solace themselves at their return in the Evening, with good
Victuals and strong Liquors: These Varlets and Vermin (for they are no better)
might be put under a good Regulation, and made of vast Use and Advantage to the
Public; the Profits of whose Labor, might be there lodged, to bear heavy
Expenses, and attend on Emergencies; but all Endeavors will prove vain, and
want Success, unless this Treatise should rouse up some Noble, Gallant and
Public Spirit among us, (and to suppose that we want such, would be an Affront
upon the whole Nation) abstracted from the Earthy and Drossie Part, I mean
Self-Interest, the common Poison, and universal Bane of good and great
Enterprises: However, there are rich Men enough who would listen to this Offer;
because, if a Scheme like this were formed, it would turn to their Advantage,
they would deposit a round Sum, to advance such an Honorable and Profitable
Undertaking, which in few Years (it well managed) would produce great Gain to
the Corporation, even beyond what some Traders get, and this without any
Hazard, Risque, or Adventure; nay if none of this would go down, if these
Vagrant Mendicants were but imprisoned for a limited time, and put to bolidy
Labor, and thin Diet, as often as they are caught upon the March, they would
be so sick of that kind of Treatment, and so very desirous of their Liberty
again, that they would soon abandon that scandalous Life, and seek out some
honest Method of Maintenance. And indeed the Prisons, of all kinds, throughout
the whole Kingdom, ought to be regulated, their Fees and Profits established,
no Extortion or hard Usage should be tolerated there, it is Misfortune enough to
be locked up within those Walls, they need not have their Afflictions made more
intolerable.

These Vagabonds would soon fly to some of the vile Employments so necessary to
a State, and so well known, they need not be named; all cannot, though they would,
be Rich; it is pleasant to Command, and as irksome to Obey: Ease and Idleness
are more agreeable to Nature than Labor and Toil, it is much against the Grain
and Humor to Work, and nothing but Necessity could oblige any to it.

There need be no Beggary, or Poverty, (at least not extreme) throughout this
noble and renowned British Isle; there are fewer (to our shame be it spoken) of
these State-Maladies amongst our Neighbors than here: The former Gallican
Persecution, and the present War, has produced some (few) Beggars in the United
Provinces; before which not a Mendicant was to be seen; which was altogether
due to the happy Conduct of their Civil Government.

FINIS.

