Some Equitable Considerations, Respecting the Present Controversy between the
Present EAST INDIA COMPANY, and the New SUBSCRIBERS or PETITIONERS against them.
IN their Petition, they are pleased to set forth, That by the manifold Abuses,
and unlawful Practices of the present East India Company, both at home and
abroad, having managed the same only to their present Gain, the said Trade is
like to be utterly lost to this Kingdom, and to fall into the Hands of
Foreigners; and that nothing but a better Regulation on a new Joint Stock and
Constitution, can prevent it, which, whether true, as is suggested, must appear
in the Examination of the Particulars as follows:

I. Whether the present East India Company are guilty of such unlawful
Practices as is here set forth?

II. Whether if they were so, that thereby the Trade is like to be utterly
lost, or fall into the Hands of Foreigners?

III. Whether nothing but a Regulation founded on a New Joint Stock, can
prevent it?

For the first of these, the Abuses and unlawful Practices charged upon them,
they are particularly enumerated in those Thirteen Articles contained in a
Paper so styled, and delivered to the Members of the Honorable House of
Commons, to every of which there is a particular Answer already given in Print,
which is therein humbly submitted to the Judgment of those Honorable Members
of that House, and is such as is humbly conceived will give them, and with
them, all Impartial Persons such Satisfaction, as to clear the present Company,
in their thoughts, from being guilty of such horrid Crimes as they would
represent them to be in that Paper.

But then Secondly, were their Crimes so black as these Gentlemen would
represent them, which is utterly denied, and that Answer clearly evinceth; it
does not therefore follow, as the Petition does suggest, That the Trade would
be utterly lost to the Nation, without the Remedy of a new Joint Stock.

For First, Which of their Crimes there enumerated, if they were Crimes, which
they are not, are such as must by necessary Consequence, bring along with it
the loss of the Trade to the Nation: Is not that Trade now enjoyed by England,
notwithstanding all their supposed Crimes, in as ample a manner as by any of
our Neighbour-Nations? Have not the Company had, within this Eighteen Months,
Thirteen Ships with considerable Loading come home, notwithstanding the War in
India was not then made an end of? Are they not ready, and have prepared a very
considerable Fleet and Cargo for those Parts, to sail the very next Season? So
that the Trade is not yet lost, nor, God be thanked, in danger so to be, unless
occasioned by our Differences here at home, as to the management of it: Which
leads to the Enquiry into the last part of the Objection, Whether no way be
lest to preserve the Loss of this Trade to the Nation, but a New Joint Stock?
Or, in truth, whether the present Adventurers, or a New Joint Stock, are like
best to preserve it? And to make this good, they must make appear, That their
New Regulations to be put into an Act, for the Erecting a New Company, are such
which cannot be put into an Act for the Establishment of the Old; which it is
believed the present Subscribers will never be able to do: And that being true,
and the present Company having in their Petition to the Honorable House of
Commons, humbly submitted themselves to such Regulations and Alterations as
they should think meet. It is clear, That since both the Old and the New, are
equally subject to a Regulation, the Old has certainly the Advantage, both as
to the Continuance, and Preservation of the Trade to the Nation in many
Respects.

1. In that they have their several Residencies in India, both as to the
carrying on of the Trade, and the protecting of it so carried on, which, if a
New Company be Erected, a considerable time must be elapsed, notwithstanding
the greatest diligence they can make use of, before they can be so settled, as
the present Company now are. And in the mean time, the Trade must necessarily
suffer great Interruption, even to the hazarding of it to other Nations, which
they pretend would be, by a Continuance upon the Old Foundation.

2. The present Company have their Factors and Councils already fixed at their
several Residencies, so as to carry on the Trade without the least
Interruption: Whereas in a New Stock, it must require a considerable time,
though they should build upon the Foundation of the present East India Company
(which how just and equitable that would be, is left to Impartial
Consideration): And during this Interruption, while matters are adjusting
betwixt the New Stock and the Old, the Trade must necessarily suffer greater
Detriment, then when carried on upon the Foundation of the Old Stock, under
such Regulations as the Honorable House of Commons shall think fit, which is
by their Petition humbly submitted to them.

3. The Peace is now made betwixt the Great Mogul and the Present Company, with
very advantageous Articles for the carrying on of the Trade, which how far He
is obliged to make good to a New Company, is worthy Consideration, especially
if we consider the Avaritious Temper of that Court, which may reasonably be
suspected will expect a very considerable Sum of Money, call it what you will,
a Present, or otherwise, before they will confirm them, to a New Society, which
is so much Loss to the Nation, and will be saved by continuing the Old
Foundation.

In these, and many other particulars which might be here enumerated, were it
not the design of this Paper to be short, it is apparent, That the Trade of
India may be carried on with less interruption and prejudice to the Nation by
the present established Company under such Regulation and Alterations as the
Honorable House of Commons shall think fit, which is by them humbly submitted
to, than by any Establishment upon the Foundation of a New Joynt-Stock, which
can admit of no other Regulation or Alteration than the Establishment upon the
Old Foundation may, which being so clear as not well to be denied, then it
follows, That it is not because the said Trade may be better carried on to a
more National Advantage upon a New Foundation than the Old, that is the true
cause why these Gentlemen are so importunate to have the Old Company destroyed,
and one wholly New erected; but, that the Trade may be taken out of the hands
of the present Company, and given to them; which how agreeable it is to Justice
and Equity, will appear by the few following Considerations.

I. The Improvement that has been made in this Trade to the Advantage of
England, which is by all acknowledged to be very great, has been made upon the
Foundation of the present Stock, and at its Charge, which is known to all to
have been vastly great: Therefore why it should be now taken from that Stock,
and vested in a new one, since as before no Regulations can be put upon a new
Stock which may not be subjoyned to the old, is the Question: For it must be
acknowledged that the present Adventurers are in every respect as capable of
managing it to as great National Advantage, as any new pretenders can be.

II. The Pepper Trade, which is of so great Advantage to this Nation, had been
wholly lost as to England after the taking of Bantam by the Dutch, had not the
then Managers of the present Stock with great Courage and Conduct, and at a
vast Charge, regained it, by erecting a Settlement on the other side of the
Island of Sumatra at Bencoolen, otherwise called York Fort; which Settlement
alone has already stood the present Company in above 200000 l. charge, and
they have not as yet enjoyed it so long, as that the benefit to them does
amount to a quarter-part of the Interest of their Moneys: And that the present
Stock having at so vast a Charge retrieved a Trade as good as wholly lost to
England, which may in time by modest computation bring an Income to the Crown
of 50000 l. per Annum, besides other Advantages to the Nation, as to
Exportation of the said Commodity to Foreign Parts, should be now outed of it,
and the Inheritance given to another, is no ways, as is humbly conceived,
agreeable to Justice and Equity.

III. The War in India (notwithstanding all the Suggestions of their
Adversaries) was entered into by the present Company upon most just grounds, and
under a Lawful Authority; was carried on at the vast charge of the present
Stock, who neither had, nor could have any other Design in it, than to
vindicate the English Nation from the Insults and Injuries of the Indians; and
now the Peace is just made at their further charge, how far it is agreeable to
Reason and Justice, that the present Stock should be outed, and the Trade given
to others, before the said Stock has received any Advantage by it, is humbly
submitted to the Judgment of Persons unconcerned.

But it is Objected by the Adversaries of the present Company, That they have
enjoyed the Trade now upwards of 30 Years, and therefore it is fit a new
Company should be erected.

The Answer to this common Objection shall conclude this Paper; in order to
which, distinction must be made between the present Stock and the present
Adventurers. As to the present Stock, it is true, it has continued upwards of
30 Years: But therefore it does not follow, that the present Adventurers, in
whose hands they would now destroy it, have enjoyed it so long; many if not
most of them having come into it within this last half score Years, have not
made such great Advantages of it, as is generally surmised, by reason of the
late Wars both there and here. There between the Mogul and King of Golconda,
and the Mogul and Company; Here with the French, whereby their Trade has been
much obstructed; and also the great Mortality of the Indians by a late
Contagion amongst them. But that which is more considerable in Answer to this
Objection is this, That many of the New Subscribers, who would now have the
Trade taken out of the hands of the present Adventurers, and put into their
own, upon pretense that the present Adventurers have enjoyed it long enough,
are such, who having been formerly of the Company, and enjoyed the benefit of
this Stock when the Trade was of greatest Advantage for many Years. Having now
after so many Years enjoying the benefit of it, Sold themselves out at very
high Rates, and thereby put it into the hands of the present Adventurers; and
would now notwithstanding they have received their Money for it, dam it in the
hands of those Persons to whom they Sold it, which is equally just, as if one
having Sold his House to another for a Valuable Consideration, after having
received the same, should by himself, or by the means of others, cause it to be
fired: So that this Objection carries no weight of Reason in it, especially
coming out of the mouths of those who have been of the present Company, and
enjoyed the Trade themselves, before they Sold themselves out of it.

The Conclusion of the whole is, That the present Adventurers having in their
Petition to the Honorable House of Commons, Humbly submitted themselves to
such Regulations and Alterations, as they in their great Wisdom shall think
meet; and there being no Alteration or Regulation but may be made as well by an
Establishment upon the Old Foundation as any New one. They do Humbly hope from
the Justice and Equity of that August Assembly, that the present Stock shall
not be destroyed in the hands of the present Adventurers, whereby many Poor,
both Widows and Orphans will be undone, and other Persons, viz. many of the
present Adventurers, much damnified in their Estates, who have no ways merited
the same, merely to put the Trade into the hands of other Persons, who are no
ways capable of making a better Advantage to the Nation of it, than the present
Adventurers are.

FINIS.

