A REBUKE To the AUTHORS of A Blew-Book; CALLED, The State of Physic In LONDON.

Which is indeed The Black and Blew State of Physic.

Dated from the College, And Signed by Th. G. and R. M.

Written in Behalf of the Apothecaries and Chirurgians of the City of London.

By WILLIAM SALMON. Living near Blackfriars Stairs.

-- Dicere verum, quis vetat? Hor.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall. School.

A REBUKE To the AUTHORS of A Blew-Book CALLED, The State of Physic In LONDON,
etc.
I. THIS little penny Quack-Book, which they sell for Two Pence, is only a
Fardle or Bundle of Lies, containing scarcely one Grain of Honesty, or a Word
of Truth in it (except what is in its three first Lines, which either by the
Power of Truth, was extorted from them, or by an oversight was let slip from
their Pen) as by taking it to pieces, and scrutinizing it we shall make
manifest in the following Lines, to the eternal Shame and Disgrace of the
Authors thereof.

II. After this Book had been out for some time, and dispersed all over the
Town, to answer the Design it was intended for, which was to decry, abuse,
scandalize, and undo, if possible, the honest and Skilful Apothecaries, and
Ruin the whole Trade; they found it looked with a very ill Face, and that a
World of People cried shame of it, to the great Disparagement of the Knavish
Authors; and withal that probably its pernicious effects might call for an
Answer; for which reasons some of the Gang prudently put into the Post-Boy an
Advertisement, that the Persons Represented by those first Letters of their
Names, and whom every Body was ready to suggest or suppose, did not write it,
nor publish it to the World; whereby they thought by thus decrying their Right
in its intrinsic Value, they might thereby prevent an Answer thereto, or any
Reflections thereupon; and so gain their Point, of doing all the Mischief they
designed by it, and yet prevent a Detection of the Villainy contained in it.

III. But the Blind took not the effect, and their little Tricks were discerned
through it; for without doubt, if those Men, whom those Letters Represent were
not the Amanuensis of it, yet they know who were, and had a great hand in it,
and were the chiefest contrivers of it; and it is reported that the Son of the
latter, was the very Person which handed or conveyed it to the Press. However,
it owns it self to come from the College, and therefore without doubt some of
the sneaking, malicious, and troublesome Members of it (who have more Envy than
Skill or Honesty) might put their Fists to the Quill, and draw out in length
those false and malicious Lines, which are only a Rhapsody of Ignorance and
Folly.

IV. Blew-Book. The Practice of Physic before Hippocrates was in Chirurgians
hands, Page 3.

Salmon. This is the only Sentence of Truth I find in all their Quack-Book, for
so indeed it was not only before Hippocrates his time, but in his time also,
even down to Galen and Celsus, which as they were both great Physicians, were
also the most eminent Chirurgians of their Day, and so it continued down,
almost to our times: For many of our Modern Physicians, were even great
Chirurgians also, witness the famous Aquapendens, Fallopius, Hildanus,
Sennertus, Barbet, and many others, too tedious here to be named: and indeed
there is so much of Truth in it, that it is impossible to be a good Physician
without being a good Chirurgian first. A good Chirurgian may make a good
Physician; but a Man can never be the latter, without being first excellent in
the former: And if a Chirurgian is also skilful in Pharmacologia, or the
Materia Medica first, he makes so much the better a Chirurgian; so that for my
part I think, that they all three, viz. the Apothecary, Chirurgian, and
Physician, did in former times consist in one Person, and so truly they ought
to do now; and for which reason, the Apothecaries are the most proper and fit
Persons to practice Physic of any Men in the Kingdom; nor do I think that they
ought to loose their Prerogative of Primogeniture: The Quack-Doctor is but an
Intruder into the Business of Physic and Surgery; nor do our Doctors come
into their Profession by the Door, but as Thieves and Robbers clamber up the
Walls, and so break in another way.

V. Blew-Book. It consisted then only in outward Applications, Page 3.

Salmon. That this is a notorious Lie, a Man that has but turned over the
Leaves of Hippocrates can easily tell: For that great Man (who was Apothecary,
Chirurgian and Physician, all in his own Person) gives us in many places
Prescriptions of inward Remedies: But it is true, that the first Beginnings of
the Art of Physic was in Application of Externals, and from thence, as their
Experience increased, they, even the same Persons came to the use of Internals,
so that the Use of External and Internal Medicaments grew up, as it were,
together, in the very same Persons, and one and the same Person exercised all
those parts of the Art of Physic; and this was done for many Ages, yea even
down to our days. By this it appears how ignorant these Men are in the Art they
pretend to, and how little they have Read and Understood the Leaves of
Antiquity.

VI. Blew-Book. The Number of Observations and Medicines increasing, as well as
the Number of Diseases, the whole Practice of Physic became too large a task
for one Person; and so it was thought necessary, that one Person should Cure
only Inward Diseases, another Outward, and a third Prepare fit Medicines for
both, whence came Physicians, Chirurgians and Apothecaries, Page 4.

Salmon. No, it was not because it was too large a Task, that the Practice of
Physic devolved, or rather divided into those three Branches; but it was
because of the Pride, Covetousness, and Idleness of the Physicians, who being
so wonderfully sought after, relinquished the most necessary parts of Physic,
which are the Preparing of Medicines, and the troublesome part, which is that
of Manual Operation, and put it off to others whom they thought more inferior
Men: and from hence it was, that a proud, idle Physician, made an Ambitious,
Covetous, Lazy Doctor, who assumed into his Province, the Art of prescribing
Internals, leaving the rest to be managed by the other fort of Men: And thus,
in process of time, to an Ambitious, Covetous, Lazy Doctor, a fourth part was
added, viz. Ignorance; for he that designed for the Practice of Physic,
over-looking and neglecting the two prime Parts, it follows naturally, that
such a Doctor or Practiser of Physic, must be a very ignorant Fellow, for
understanding nothing Practically of the Materia Medica, nor of Manual
Operation, he, with all his Pride and Presumption, became it is true a sorry,
but ignorant Doctor, as being ignorant of any practical Knowledge in the two
main Fundamental Parts of the Art of Physic: And from these Causes proceeded
truly the treble distinction of Men professing our Art. They say. It was th^ht
necessary, that one Person should cure only inward Diseases, another outward
Diseases, etc. but I ask them when or at what time, it was so thought
necessary, and who it was by whom it was so thought necessary? I doubt it will
be either too hard, or too shameful a Task for them to tell; it was only
thought necessary by a company of ignorant scoundril Fellows, who scarcely knew
any thing more of Physic or Medicine but the Name; and by such who had no more
Right to the Profession thereof than Thieves and Robbers. From hence it
appears, That an honest skilful Apothecary and Chirurgian, are the only true
Men to make Physicians and Doctors of, as being the Men that can best and most
easily understand, and attain to the true knowledge of prescribing Internals:
And to speak the truth, the Art of Prescribing (which now makes a Doctor) is
the easiest part of the whole Art of Physic, and easiest to be learned, much
more easy I am sure than Pharmacology, and Surgery, which our pitiful,
proud, ignorant Doctors so mightily scorn and despise.

VII. Blew-Book. Our wise Ancestors seeing that not only sound Judgment, but
likewise great Learning and suitable Experience were requisite to qualify
Physicians for Curing inward Diseases, thought fit to establish able Professors
of Physic in all the Universities of Europe, Page 4, 5.

Salmon. Who your Ancestors were I know not, nor do I believe that you can
tell: But our wise Ancestors thought fit, for the Completing of a Physician,
that he should perfectly understand the Materia Medica, viz. the real Knowledge
of all the Drugs used in Physic, and truly understand the Preparing them into
Medicines; and withal be bred up in Mannual Operations; and it is the true
knowledge of these things that can give a Man a sound Judgment, great Learning,
and suitable Experience; not to skip at once from being a Pulpit-man, or a
Reader of Prayers, to be a Doctor of Physic: No, this can by no means do; at
this rate, and if these things would do, any Man may become a Doctor of
Physic; but the learned Men in the Art will tell you another Tale: Nor is it
possible to establish able Professors of Physic in the Universities of Europe,
unless they be taken out of such Persons who have before hand served twelve or
fourteen years to some able Apothecary and Chirurgian, and withal have read
over the Ancients and other Masters of our Art; if the Universities did Cull
out such as these to make Professors of (such as Dr. Barbet, Dr. Barnard, Dr.
Badger, Dr. Greenvelt, etc.) they would be able Professors indeed; and not such
Tools of Men, as many of our Blew-Book Sparks are.

VIII. Blew-Book. To hinder likewise all Persons from practicing Physic, but
such as took their Degrees, and to let none take their Degrees, but such as
their Abilities recommended after due Examination, Page 5.

Salmon. That is, in plain English, to Monopolize all the Practice of Physic
into their own hands; and that they may be empowered to abuse all Mankind, and
to Persecute all others who are not of their Class of Doctors; which I hope the
Mercies of God are such to the poor People of this City, that he will never
permit; nor suffer for the future, such ill-natured Fellows to Tyrannize or
Domineer over their Fellow Creatures, as they have of late done. But what they
mean by taking their Degrees, is hard to be understood, unless it be those of
Mandamus Doctors, Grace Doctors, Proxy Doctors, Caution Doctors, ad eundem
Doctors, Master Doctors, Half Doctors, and No Doctors, of which kind of Doctors
the greatest part of their Conventicle is composed. But if none should take
their Degrees, or be suffered to Practice, but such as their Abilities should
Recommend after due Examination; I am afraid that the biggest part of the
Warwick Lane Sparks would be interdicted the whole Practice of Physic; and
that many of the Persons whom they allow and approve of, would be found so
scandalously Ignorant, as to be an Eternal Disgrace to the Learned Men of the
Society. But it may be I am mistaken, and may not understand or know what they
call Due Examination. It may be that of Examining into their Abilities, whether
or no they are able to give eighty, ninety, or an hundred Pounds to be admitted
as a Master Doctor, Half Doctor, or No Doctor, into their Conventicle, and so
only have a License to Practice, as of late they have done some pitiful
Fellows, to the manifest scandal of the Art of Physic. I really believe, if I
was but to examine their Censors, they would be as unfit and unable to answer
me, in some Questions I could put to them in the Art of Physic, as the
greatest Novice in the Art might be unfit or unable to answer them; and that
some of them who think they bear the greatest Names, are the pittifullest and
meanest Fellows of the pack.

IX. Blew-Book. King Henry VIII. Erected a College of Physicians in London,
bestowing upon them a power, confirmed by several Acts of Parliament, to punish
Mountebanks, and all other Pretenders to Physic, and to hinder likewise any
Person from practicing Physic in London, or within seven Miles round it, that
was not legally received into this College, though a Doctor of our own
Universities, Page 5.

Salmon. Monstrum horrendum, saevissima Pestis! That ever such a sort of
Fellows, as are themselves, for the most part, either no Doctors, or but half
Doctors, Master Doctors, ad eundem Doctors, Caution Doctors, Proxy Doctors,
Grace Doctors, or Mandamus Doctors, none of which sort of Doctors ever
performed their Exercises for their Degree in any University, especially in any
of Our Universities at home, should take upon them to hinder a real Doctor of
Physic, (who has performed all his Exercises in Oxford or Cambridge) from
Practicing Physic in London, or in any other place seven Miles round the same,
and that under the pretext of a Law also; who, I say, could ever believe such a
thing. But let us examine into it, and see whether it be so or not; That they
have a Patent from Henry VIII. let it be granted, but all such Popular Patents
in themselves, which are not Confirmed by Act of Parliament, are only
Monopolies, and tend to the hurt and detriment of the Subject. I know not any
reason why I or any Body else should be obliged by any Patent or Law, to go to
them to be killed; or to repair to such Fellows, while it does not appear to
me, or another Body concerned, that they are really skilful, and truly
understand the Art of Physic in all its parts; which I really believe the
greatest part of them do not; witness their thousands of Miscarriages, a
Catalogue of many of which I have by me, and at their request am ready to make
out, with addition of both Patients and Doctors Names, and that in Print. As to
their Patent, there is also some Question whether it be a true one or not, for
it seems not to be sealed with the right colored Wax, which ought to be
yellow, and with which all true Patents are commonly Sealed. But supposing it
be a true Patent, it gives them no Power over Doctors of Physic who have
actually taken their Degrees in Oxford and Cambridge; nor have they a power to
examine such, who have accomplished all things for their Degrees without any
Grace: if so, as it will be in vain for any one to take a degree in any of our
Universities, so it will make the College the greatest Monopoly in the World;
for as much as their skill or abilities, though under so great a Probate, as the
Testimony and Seals of the Universities, can be no qualification to privilege a
Doctor of Physic to Practice in London, and seven Miles round the same. But
they say, This Patent is Confirmed by several Acts of Parliament. But truly I
cannot find yet, that ever it was confirmed by one. As for the pretended Act of
14 and 15 Henry VIII. Cap. 5. I have seen and examined the Parliament Roll it
self, but in no part of the Act, or Parchment upon which it is written, neither
on the foreside or backside, nor on the top or bottom, nor yet on either hand,
is the Royal Assent to be found, which is of absolute necessity for the
Constitution of an Act of Parliament; if this be not true, a Clark of
Parliament, who can draw the form of an Act, may at the end of any Sessions of
Parliament, thrust what Unsign'd Acts he pleases, or may be bribed for, into
the Roll, where having lain Dormant for some time or Number of years, and being
forgotten; when in after Ages there shall be occasion to overlook the Rolls of
Acts of Parliament, they being found among the Number, may by Posterity be
taken for good Acts or Laws, not questioning their Validity, or how they came
there, though design, trick, or bribery, were the very original Causes of their
being found in that place; and so at this rate a Clark of Parliament may Act
Kings, Lords, and Commons, all in his own Person, to the great abuse and
prejudice of the People of England, their Lives, Liberties, Estates and
Properties; which thing, for the great danger of it, his Majesty and Parliament
of England, I hope will for the future be very careful of; and this pretended
Act, thus obtruded upon the good People of this City and Nation, I think ought
to be looked into, and be rejected as a thing spurious and false, and
detrimental to our Constitution and Government. As for that 1 Phil. and Mary,
Ses. 2. cap. 9. it is only a Confirmation of the former pretended Act. Now if
that of 14 and 15 Henry VIII. be no true Act, then it is no Law, and so is
nothing; and so the Confirmation of it, is the Confirmation of no Law, or of
nothing, and so in pleading can be of no use. But let us examine a little
farther, and see how their Patent and pretended Act agree. Their Patent says,
That the Community shall every year choose a President out of the Community, who
shall transact all the Affairs of the College for his Year. The pretended Act
says, that there shall be eight Elects, and that every year, the said Elects
shall choose a President out of the Elects. Now let any Man of common Sense or
Reason judge of these two, and see how they agree: If a President be chosen
according to the Patent, it Contradicts the Letter of the pretended Act. But if
the President be chosen according to the words of the pretended Act, it
contradicts the very Letter of the Patent. Now what Man in his Wits is there,
that cannot see that this pretended Act, not having the Royal Assent, was only
a hasty Birth, or unconsidered medly of Contradictions, made to serve an End?
and that the Clerk not understanding possibly Latin, made that gross mistake in
wording his Act, to the very great Detriment of the wicked Design. Can any Man
believe, that so August and Wise Assembly of Men, as a Parliament of England,
which are a Choice of all the Great, Good, and Wise Men of the Nation, could be
guilty of such a Heterogene piece of Work as that pretended Act is, and word it
so Incongruously or Contradictory to the Words of their Letters Patents,
thereby destroying in the one, what is built up in the other? And so confirm a
Monopoly, wonderfully prejudicial to the Lives, Liberties, Estates and
Properties of the good People of England? Surely No. But now to show you how
much a Law this pretended Act is, we will give you four famous Presidents of
Cases tried by it, as to the very Merit of the Causes, and thereby you may see
what Validity it is of. The First Instance we shall give you is that of the
famous Dr. Trig, who formerly lived upon Tower-Wharf, whom they Sued, and upon
a fair Trial at Law were as fairly Cast. The Second Instance is that of Dr.
Read, who then Lived at the Sun in Long-Alley, near Morefields: This Man they
Sued at Law also, and the Merits of the Cause being Tried, they came as blewly
off, as before. The Third Instance is that of Sir Richard Barker, Knight. late of
Barbacan, London; whom they Arrested, and Sued in the King's Bench: This
Gentleman (as did the others before) refusing to be Tried by the Statute-Book,
as not being the Law it self, but only a Copy of the Law, requested to be Tried
by the Law of the Land, which is the Act in the Parliament-Roll; and was at the
Charge and Expense of bringing the Parliament-Roll into Court; so that the Book
was rejected, and the Roll it self only stood by: upon which the Judge viewing
the Act, and not finding any where about it, the Royal Assent, told them in
plain English, that Judgment must go against them; and that not finding the
Royal Alsent to that Act, upon which their Declaration was grounded, he could
not judge by it as a Law; that it was not in his Power to make it a Law, and
that if they would have him to try the Cause by it, as a Law, they must first
bring Henry VIII. out of his Grave to Sign it; and so the Cause went against
them. The Fourth Instance is that of Dr. Richard Fletcher, which was Tried at
the King's Bench in Guild Hall, London; Their Counsel brought their Green Bag,
wherein they had an Exemplification of some Trial or Trials, which through the
ignorance of those Defendents Lawyers, went on the College-side: But Mr.
Wallop, who was of Counsel for Fletcher, put a stop as to the Issues being put
upon their Green Bag; and desired of my Lord, that this our Cause might be
Tried by our Green Bag; which when my Lord Chief Justice demanded what it was,
Wallop answered it was the Law of the Land; and was (as it appeared to be) the
Parliament-Roll; which when his Lordship perused, and found not the Royal
Assent to the pretended Act upon which their Declaration was grounded, told the
Adversaries Counsel, that he could not give Judgment for them by such an Act,
which had not the Royal Assent to it, they fearing or seeing that Judgment was
likely to go against them, did by their Counsel pray a special Verdict, and so
it ended, and hangs to this day (almost twenty years since) in expectation of
that special Verdict, which is to put an end to the Cause, to Fletcher's very
great Honor, and the shame and Disgrace of the Fellows of the Warwick Lane
Monopoly. By these Presidents and Examples it is manifest, that four Great
Judges or Lord Chief Justices of England, when a Trial has come before them,
which has depended upon the force of this pretended Act, would not, when the
Act it self, in the Parliament Roll was brought before them, and the Subjects
of England demanded Judgment according to the Law of the Land, presume to give
a Judgment by it, against them.

X. Blew Book. This -- Society, has improved Physic, and made more Discoveries
in Nature, than all the rest of the Physicians in Europe: They have found out
the Circulation of the Blood, -- perfected the Materia Medica, Corrected the
Dispensatory, and brought Physic to a greater Certainty and Perfection since
Henry VIII. time, than their Predecessors did in Two thousand years before.
Page. 6.

Salmon. This is a wonderful Brag, and an admirable way of Boasting; and yet
after all we will prove, that there is not one word of it Truth. Nor do I
believe that they can produce any one single Discovery in Nature, or any rare
and specific Medicament of their Invention, or any other ways have added any
advantage to the Art of Physic, since they have been a Body to this day;
except that memorable Design of Degrading themselves from being Doctors, and in
earnest turning Apothecaries, by purely stealing the Apothecaries Trade from
them. I see no reason why the Apothecaries and Chirurgians may not as well turn
Doctors, and practice Physic (as having a greater right to it) as they to
steal the Apothecaries Trade from them, to which they have not the least
Pretension. But to the matter in hand, they say, That they have found out the
Circulation of the Blood: I wonder at their Impudence; when they had no more
hand in that Invention, than they had in building of the Pyramids of Egypt;
that excellent and admirable Production, was the sole Discovery of that most
ingenious Man Dr. Harvey, a Chirurgian, and a Member of the Chirurgians
Company: whom afterward, for the Honor of his great Name, they seduced, to be
a Member of their Conventicle. They say they have perfected the Materia Medica;
yet that is a thing of so large a Consideration, that it is not possible for
the Series of all Ages to perform it; but if Bragging and Boasting, and Lying
would do it, they are the likeliest Men to do it in the World: I wonder that
Men should have the Confidence, to affirmat this rate, when they know
themselves, that not one of twenty of them, knows by sight one Drug of an
hundred, when they see it, or can call them by their proper Names; much less do
they know them being Compounded into Medicines; and as for their knowledge of
the Art of Compounding Medicaments, I leave that to be judged of by the Learned
in the Art, who will give themselves the idle time to view the many silly and
unlearned Books, they have from time to time published, to the detriment of
Mankind. The choicest of all Remedies are prepared by Chemistry, which is an
Art they have from its first Invention decry'd, even almost to this present
time; how then should they become all of a sudden knowing in an Art they have
ever so slighted and despised; and since the Materia Medica is not to be
perfected, but by Chemistry, and that their Knowledge and Skill in it is so
short, and so narrow, so poor and so mean, how is it possible that the
perfection thereof, should ever lie within the Spheres of their activity? They
say, They have Corrected the Dispensatory: if so, this gives a dreadful box of
the Ear to their Predecessors, who had not Learning nor Skill enough to form a
good Pharmacopoeia, but to leave it under their Correction. But why should we
believe that these present Fellows are wiser, or more skilful than those who
went before them? And for what reason can we believe them to be honester? As
for their Dispensatory they so brag of, it is too true a Jest, to say it had
almost an infinite number of Faults in it; but as for their mending of it, it
is Tinker-like done, if ever they mended one hole in it, they made ten more for
it. But I am of Opinion, that they made faults where there were none, and
brought it forth into the World, ten times worse than they found it, as you may
easily perceive if you examine it by my Translation thereof, and my Comment
thereupon; and though therein I have Corrected it in some hundreds of places,
where the faults of it were very gross; yet a thousand other faults in it I
have left untouched, for brevity sake. They say, They have brought Physic to a
greater Certainty and Perfection than their Predecessors did in Two thousand
Years before: That is to say, to a certain Method of Quacking, which the
Ancient and Learned Physicians for above two thousand years last past, never
knew nor understood: We know by your exouisite endeavors you have brought the
whole essential part of Physic to the use of about five things, viz. of the
Cortex, Steel, Opium, Mercurius Dulc^, and Blood sucking, these you have
determined for the Cure of all Diseases, which you promiscuously use (I will
not say as the Toy takes you in the Head, but) according as your Discretion
shall direct you: This rare Method I confess the Ancients knew nothing of, it is
you that have Consummated Physic to this Acme of Perfection, and outdone, in
their own way, all the Quacks that ever were in the World before you: You have
brought Physic to such a certainty, that if a Man goes to any Apothecary, and
does but tell him the name of his Doctor, he will beforehand tell him what he
will prescribe to his Patient, let the Disease be what it will. What can the
World think now of this exquisite Certainty? What a shame is it, to all the
Ancient Doctors of our Art, that a few upstarts, Fellows but of yesterday,
should stumble upon five such admirable things, which by their own Powers and
Efficacy should be able to absolve the whole Practice of Physic? What thick
skull'd Fellows were Hippocrates, Galen, Avicen, Celsus, and a Thousand more of
them, that they should not hit upon a few things so facile and easy to be found
out? Oh no! the Honor and Glory of it was perfectly designed for the Men of
our Age, for the Wonder-working, and mighty Professors of Warwick Lane.

XI. Blew-Book. Physicians had reason to think, that neither the Lives of their
Patients, nor their own Reputation could be safe, unless they were sure of the
goodness of the Medicines they prescribed to the Sick. Page 6, 7.

Salmon. I know not what you think, nor how much you value the Lives of your
Patients, I am sure if the Miscarriages of the Blood-sucking Doctors of this
Age were but exposed to public view, it would be in terrorem to all future
Generations for ever: And if you ground your Reasons upon your own Knowledge,
or certainty of the Goodness of the Medicines prescribed to the Sick, then I am
sure the Apothecaries and Chirurgians stand the fairest for the honest and just
Practice of Physic, of any Men in the World, and so you are condemned out of
your own Mouths. I must confess I should not think any Patients Life safe,
unless it was in an Apothecary-Doctors, or a Chirurgick-Doctor's hands, all
other Doctors are truly but Quacks, and suck out the Bowels of People's
Estates, and trifle with their Lives, which is too plainly manifest by a great
many that I can name. As for Reputation, that is not to be talked of, where the
Lives of patients are of no value, or the Covetousness of the Doctor is without
Limitation or Bounds. And as for your turning Apothecaries for the reason you
give in this Paragraph, it is as vain as can be, for you are yet no more sure
of the goodness of the Medicines you prescribe than you were before, because
possibly you may trust the Preparations of them to crafty Servants; and who
knows whether they may not abstract the most valuable Ingredients out of them,
as knowing where to make a better Penny of them, and withal, that if they
should play such a trick, they are sure their Masters have not Skill and
Judgment enough to find out or detect them of the Cheat.

XII. Blew-Book. About Sixty Years ago, all the Apothecaries of London and
Westminster, did not amount to an Hundred, and at present they are above Eight
hundred, Page 7. and 8. London may be fully satisfied with Two hundred; page 12.

Salmon. The Gift of Lying is certainly an Inheritance to the Authors of this
Blew-Book; there is scarcely a Line in it, but is stuffed with a Lie, or
something worse: They say, there is above Eight hundred Apothecaries at present
in London and Westminster; and I persuade my self, and it is known to the
Company of Apothecaries, that they are but a little above half that Number. But
supposing they should be right in that; they show their wonderful Charity and
good Nature in the next Paragraph, where they say London may be fully satisfied
with Two hundred; What must become then of the other Six hundred which they
reject, their Wives, Children, and Families? why they must give over their
Trades, and go a Begging, or else starve; this is the Charity, this the
Kindness of Our Mighty Regulators of Physic; they shall come and turn
Apothecaries, and take the Trade out of their Hands; and when they have done,
turn above Six hundred Men, their Wives, Children, and Families out a-doors, to
seek their Fortunes in the wide World: But now I think of it, I will find out
an Expedient for them in this Case, which is Lex talionis, and a very just
thing; that since the Doctors will turn Apothecaries, by stealing their Trade
from them, to which they have no right at all; these Six hundred discarded and
excluded Apothecaries, shall immediately turn Doctors, and set up the Practice
of Physic as a Recompense for the Theft, and so make Reprisals.

XIII. Blew Book. The Number of Apothecaries thus increasing, it necessarily
follows, that either they must starve, or raise the value of their Drugs beyond
reason; or by their Interest, get only such Physicians employed, as have the
Conscience to prescribe more Medicines than the Distemper requires; or Quack to
sell their Drugs without a Physician's Order; page 9.

Salmon. Whatever their Numbers may do, I am sure the Course you are a taking
is effectually to make them starve: If you would but let them alone, they fear
not but to do well enough, as they have all along, hitherto done: But you are
resolved upon new measures; you will have the Honor and the gain of the one,
and the Prosit of the other; it is no matter what becomes of others, so you but
get by it, they may beg or starve for all you, you matter it not: But since
this is your Conscience, it is as reasonable that they should take other
measures too. If they do not starve, you say, They must raise the value of
their Drugs beyond reason. I find the Authors of the Blew-Book, have not only
the Gift of Lying, but also the Gift of Scandalizing, and that in Commendam:
They are resolved now to strike at the root of the Trade; and with their
Blew-Book to give a black and blew stroke to the whole Trade of Apothecaries at
once; this is a Scandal they think will bear Water, this will do their Work to
the purpose, and now they fear no Colors, but that they shall be able to carry
on the Design to the utmost, and Ruin six hundred Families at once, beyond all
retrieve, unless the Apothecaries will have the easiness and good nature to do
it of their own accords, by their special Advice and Direction. But lest this
Scandal should not take, as in probability it will not, among those who have
tried both, and do already know by Experience, that they can make use of an
Apothecary eight weeks at less Charges, than one of those Doctors one Week; I
say, wisely foreseeing that the Scandal is not Armor of Proof in their
Defense, they have another notable Stigma, which is, That the Apothecaries by
their Interest, will get only such Physicians employed, as have the base
Conscience to prescribe more Medicines than the Disease requires. I know not
who are so guilty of this Crime, as the Authors of the Blew-Book, who some of
them by their Black and Blew Practices, have in a few Years leaped from the
next degree above Begging, to Estates of many Hundreds if not Thousands a Year;
and yet these plaguey covetous Wretches, cannot be satisfied or contented, but
they would still have more, and think much at every Morsel which goes besides
their own Chops. Something is the matter that the Curing of Bodies is so much
better than the Curing of Souls; else several of our Grande Doctors would never
have left the Pulpit, to have plied an Hospital for so many Years together, as
they have done. But to tell the truth of the Business, it is not the Apothecary
that makes it his Business to get such damnable ill Doctors, but such wretched
Doctors who have continually courted the Apothecaries to commend them to their
Patients, which has been to the prejudice of the Trade, and of the whole Art of
Physic: And this practice, when the honest Apothecary found it out, and would
not Countenance it, was the true Cause of the great breach which is between
them and the Doctors, and which now is become so wide, that I hope it will
never be healed again. The last thing they charge them with is, Quacking, by
selling their Drugs without a Physician's Order; as if any greater Quacks could
be in nature than they are. I am consident I could teach a Youth of twelve or
fourteen years of Age, in ten days time, the whole Mystery of their way of
Practice, and if he understands but a little Latin, make him as able to
Prescribe as any of them; for since they have very learnedly abstracted, or
reduced the whole Art and Practice of Physic to four or five things, viz. the
Cortex, Steel, Opium, Mercurius dulcis, and Blood-sucking, 'twould be an easy
matter to sub-sume the practice of those five Essentials into so short a
Method, or into so few easy Rules, as a youth of any ordinary Capacity or
Ingenuity, might be able to get them by Heart in eight or ten days time, why
might not then an ingenious and skilful Apothecary be master of the Mystery
(whose practice it has been for many Years, by their special Directions) so as
to use it upon occasion to serve their turn? But if I mistake not, the
Apothecaries know better, and will never fetter the practice of Physic with
those few things, they knowing hundreds of others full as good, and more
essential to the Cure of Diseases in many Cases: From hence it is manifest,
that the Apothecary (if he practices) does not appear to be so much a Quack, as
the Doctor.

XIV. Blew-Book. The excessive number of Apothecaries -- likewise Discredits
that of Surgery: for Apothecaries, as likewise Barbers, Mountebanks, Quacks,
and a multitude of other Pretenders, practice Surgery with as much
Assurance, though with less Success, as the ablest Members of the
Chirurgians-Hall; Page 9, 10.

Salmon. What an Art of Colloguing these Blades of the Blew-Book have got^ see
how Hypocritically they begin to Claw the Chyrurgians! I wonder how this fit of
Love and Good Nature came upon the score; I am sure it is not usual with them,
to have such Friendship for the Chirurgians, nor to have such a Concern upon
them, for fear Barbers, Mountebanks, Quacks, and other Pretenders should
encroach upon their Profession; what can be the meaning of it? Why truly they
are the Apothecaries, yea verily the wicked Apothecaries, that stand in the
Way; these are the Men that do all the mischief; they, sincerely Friends, have
encroached upon our Monopoly already, and we plainly soresee, by the help of
our Prophetical Optic Glasses and Perspectives, with other foreseeing
Instruments, that if these Vile, I say Vile Apothecaries, be suffered to go on,
they will (Dear Brethren) make inroads upon your Profession as well as upon
ours; and these things we cannot but with Tears I say with Tears in our Eyes
give you timely fore-warning of; that you might join, at least lay your helping
hands to the laboring Oar, without which we can never think, that we shall
bring our Bark safe to the desired Port of Securit.

XV. Blew-Book. It is therefore reasonably hoped that the Parliament may in due
time take a matter of so great and general a Consequence into their
Consideration, and provide some effectual means of reducing this Company within
some reasonable Bounds, and keeping it so, page 10, 11.

Salmon. It is more reasonable to be hoped, that the Parliament may in a short
time take a matter of so great and general a Consequence into their
Consideration, as all Prosecutions at Law by pretended Acts of Parliament,
which never past the Royal Assent, and to prevent the same for the future, and
to declare by Act of Parliament, all such pretended Acts Null and Void, and to
be holden for no Law, as indeed they are none: and to provide some effectual
means of Reducing the Fellows of Warwicklane into some reasonable bounds of
Moderation; and to keep them so; that they may not in time to come, domineer
and tyrannize over their Fellow Subjects, and Ruin quiet and peaceable Men,
and the King's Liege People, by long and vexatious Prosecutions in Courts of
Judicature, against all manner of Right, Justice, and Law, under the Notion and
Pretense of such Statutes, which never yet had the Royal Assent, nor were ever
Confirmed by any King or Queen of England; nor under pretense of such Laws to
assume such a Tyrannizing Power, as when three or four of them shall think sit,
to Prejudge a Man a Criminal, and guilty of male Practice in the Art of Physic
(when it is a very great question whether they themselves understand what the
true practice thereof is, as in the late Case of the Learned and Worthy Dr.
Groenvelt, which is notoriously known) and then upon those their Suggestions,
and Pre-judging, to Act the part of a Chancellor, Judges, Juries, and Witnesses,
all at a time, in their own Persons, and so to Pre-judge him in the Penalty,
and to the Damage of 20 l. to be paid down for their own use, for the supposed
ill Management, or male Practice of their Art (as in the late Cases of Dr.
William Rivet, and Dr. John Groenvelt aforenamed, though many others more Learned
and Skilful than they, had formerly declared the same to be good and true
Practice, as in the Case of the last named Person:) and then if they refuse to
pay the said 20 l. to Commit the supposed Criminal, or a Criminal only of their
own making, to Newgate, without Bail or Mainprize, till the same be paid down
into their ungodly, unmerciful and covetous Paws; which is a Power and
Authority greater then ever any King or Queen of England ever pretended to,
over the meanest Subject; and which I hope our most August Assembly, at the
next Meeting, or Sessions of Parliament will so effectually consider of, as to
abridge them of, and punish them for, and cause them to refund, and make
satisfaction to the Injured Persons for all the wrong they have done them, both
in this, and several other Cases. But as for their hoping that the Parliament
should reduce the Apothecaries Company, is plainly to desire the Government, or
Supreme Authority to take away the Liberties, Privileges, Estates and
Properties of Englishmen; which is a desire so malicious and wicked, that I
question whether any thing beside, could be uttered so Vile as it is.

XVI. Blew-Book. It is -- likewise for more ample benefit to the Publik very
necessary, that the Lord Mayor, conjoyntly with the College of Physicians, and
Court of Aldermen, should Rate and Publish, the Price of all Simple and
Compound Medicines. Page 12.

Salmon. It Is mannerly to give the Lord Mayor the preference; but I see they
have the Confidence (I will not say Impudence) to take it of the Court of
Aldermen: but letting their ill Manners pass, we will come to the Matter in
Hand; What brave Blades these Blew-Book-men are, that they should presume to
tell the Lord Mayor his Duty, or what is necessary for him to do; as though the
Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen do not know their Business without their
Direction: But the jest of it is, that the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
should so much demean themselves, or have so little to do, as to walk up and
down the Town after their Tails; I fancy they have Business of much greater
Concern, and what is infinitely better and more necessary, as more becoming
their Honor, Places and Stations in the Government of this Imperial and Mighty
City. But what is that which the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen are to do?
Why, it is to Rate and Publish the Price of all simple and Compound Medicines:
A thing as much out of the Element, and far from the Business of the Chief
Magistrates of this City, as I am distant from Constantinople, or either of the
Indies. How should the Lord Mayor, etc. (if it was his Duty) come to know the
Prizes of Drugs, and Compound Medicines, since the Prizes of Drugsalter and
change every day? And how often in the Year must he look after it, and alter
the old Price, and set a new Price upon all Apothecaries Compounded Medicines?
I fear me, if he was to do this, and to do it justly, it would not only take up
all his time, but be an impossible Work to be done to boot, nor would three or
fourscore times a Year be sufficient to make his Reviews and Alterations of the
Prizes; (...) which they Answer, That the Co^leg^ of Physicians should be
Conjoined to them, and Assistants with them in performing this Work: And this
they think mends the Matter, which I think not; for I believe that not a Member
of that Body, nor all the Members together, are able to do this thing, to do it
truly and justly; and I question whether they have so much skill in
Arithmatick, or the Operations of Numbers, as artfully to do it; nor do I
believe, that if they can do it, that they will afford themselves the time or
liberty to undertake and perform so great, indesatigable, and endless a Task;
these are only words of Course to amuse Mankind withal, and abuse unthinking
People.

XVII. Blew-Book. Our Apothecaries -- are forced to keep them (viz. their
Medicines) too long in their Snops, and sometimes till they rot, and are only
fit to be thrown away: it will seem unreasonable to any thinking Man, that a
poor Patient must pay dearer for his Medicines, because they are rotten, and
destructive to his Body too, Page 12, and 13. -- All of them not having Sale
enough for their Drugs, they are, and still as their Number increases, will be,
more and more obliged to keep them till they rot, and to do mischief when
prescribed, no Patient being judge of the Goodness or badness of them. Page 11.

Salmon. A Man can hardly forbear Smiling, to see how these Sparks here pity
the poor Patient, whilst the hardness of their Hearts, will give them leave to
take excessive, unjust, exorbitant and unreasonable Fees of poor and mean
People, and that without the least remorse of Conscience for the same: Else how
could some who leapt from the Pulpit, scarcely worth a Groat, some few years
since, get such vast and prodigious Estates in so short a time: But to the
matter, Scandal and Detraction is all the Business of this Blew Quack-book; if
the Magistrates or the Government will not do the Business for them, they are
resolved to endeavor to do it themselves, and that by all manner of ill ways
they can imagine; as Defamation and Detraction, and taking away the
Apothecaries good Names, and as basely as may be, suggesting to the World, that
their Drugs and Medicaments are rotten, and fit only to be thrown away, and
destructive to the Body of the Patient. Supposing by such false Stories, the
People may be made to believe it; and then they think the Apothecaries Credit
will be so Wounded, that all People will at once, and in a lump (as it were)
leave them, and so come and stick close to the Blew-Book-Men. Now let us
enquire into the reason, Why the Apothecaries Medicaments are so subject to
Rot: Truly the fault is Originally in the Warwick-lane-Men, who made the
Pharmacopoeia or Dispensatory; in which they have hardly put one good Medicine,
but things of little worth, and very apt to rot and decay; so that such Faults
(it may be) are wholly to be imputed to them; and truly I question, whether
they knew any better things, or hand skill enough amongst heaps of
Prescriptions, to choose those which were best: There are Medicines to be
prepared and made, which will not rot or decay in many Ages: And such are those
in my Pharmacopoeiae Chirurgica, lately published in my Art of Surgery,
which Set of Medicaments, if they were established by Law, for the Apothecaries
to make, and furnish their Shops with, the Warwick-lane-Men could never justly
complain of ill Medicines, and such as would rot or spoil: But why the
Apothecaries Preparations should not keep as well from rotting, as the
Blew-book-Mens Preparations (which are pretended to be one and the same) I know
not; unless it be for this Reason, that the Prescriptions of the Dispensatory
are vastly numerous, and mostly made of perishing Things, and such as are very
apt to Spoil (by the Prescriptions of which Obsolete Book, they are bound to
make up all their Compositions:) And since the Sparks have with admirable
sagacity, reduced the whole Practice of Physic chiefly to the five aforenamed
things, viz. the Cortex, Steel, Opium, Mercury, and Bloodsucking; it follows of
Consequence, that the greatest part of the Apothecaries Compositions and
Medicaments for want of being Prescribed to, must spoil and rot, to the very
great Prejudice and Damage of the Trade; Whereas, were the Medicaments of the
Shops, the same with those in my Pharmapaeia Chirurgica, they would not be
dampnified by long keeping, if there was not that general Use for some things,
as there may be for others; those Preparations in respect to their Virtues,
Excellencies, smalness of Dose, and Durability, will always be as good as Plate
to lie by one, and be equivalent to the most fine Gold. They say, No Patient is
judge of the goodness or badness of them, i. e. of Apothecaries Medicaments:
True, nor is any Patient Judge, of the Goodness or Badness of the
Blew-book-Mens Compositions and Preparations; and so if they should be pleased,
or think it in their Consciences to be no Sin, to put a Cheat upon the Public,
it would be as equally impossible to discover it; I am sure their Probity and
Morals will give us no assurance to the contrary; witness their illegal and
unjust Dealings with the Learned Dr. Badger.

XVIII. Blew-Book. But we must leave to the Wisdom of the Parliament, and of
our Magistrates, to regulate these Matters the best way they will think proper
for the Benefit of the Rich. Page 13.

Salmon. I find that their chief care is, that these matters may be regulated
the best way for the Benefit of the Rich; and good reason too, because those
are the only Persons which can feed them liberally, and give them often and
large Fees, and therefore in Gratitude (though they be otherwise ill-natured
Fellows enough) they ought to wish them well. However, this they prudently
leave to the wisdom of the Parliament, and so do I, and all those good People,
whom they have basely Abused and Persecuted against all Law, Justice, and
Right: And hope the Parliament will look into the Matter, and resolve us by
their Votes, and a peculiar Act for that purpose, that all Forms of Acts of
Parliament, not having the Royal Assent, shall be holden for no Law; and indeed
it ought to be accounted no less than high Treason, to judge any Subject of
England, by any Form of an Act, not ratified by the Royal Power of some King or
Queen of England; for by such Practices, they that so judge, assume the Royal
Power of making Laws, subvert Justice, and overturn the very Foundations of our
Government. And I doubt not, but when the Parliament shall look into this
matter, and find this Form of an Act, without the Royal Assent annexed to it,
as I have said; that they will take care likewise that all Judgments formerly
past by virtue thereof, may be reverst, and where Execution has been made, that
the Blew-Book-Fellows may be made to refund, or repay, to those Persons so
abused (if alive) or to their Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, the whole
value so taken away, with the Interest thereof, for so many years as they have
unjustly kept it, and that a complete Satisfaction may be made to those Persons
to the utmost penny of their Damages.

XIX. Blew-Book. We give here a short account of the Charitable Method which
the College of Physicians, after several years Consideration, has lately
thought of, and used, to provide the poor with Medicines, cheaper than has
hitherto been ever practiced in any Country, page. 13.

Salmon. Here Is brags of Charity indeed, but what does it amount to? Truly only
to this, that if poor People have any Money, they may have Medicines of them
for it; but if they have no Money, positively, they must go without; and this
without any Circumlocution, is the downright sense of the matter: Now if the
Blew-Book-men, can thus impudently interlope into the Apothecaries Trade, by
dispensing the Medicaments they prescribe, endeavoring their Ruin and
Undoing; Why should it not be as just for the Apothecaries, to study the Art of
Prescription, and turn Doctors, and so Prescribe their own Medicines which they
dispense? I think it is no sin in the Apothecaries to make the Case as broad,
as the Doctors have made it long. But they will tell you, that the Poor shall
have Medicines cheaper, than (...) ^therto been ever prastised in any Country.
How shall I or any poor Body know that? Why, they tell you so, and you are
bound in Conscience to believe them: Now I cannot tell that, for though it may be
possible to be true, yet it is not probable that it is true: and the reason I
have for it is this, that I have taken them in so many Lies and manifest
Falsities in this Book, which I my self know to be so, that I cannot tell when
to believe them; and I cannot help it for my Life, the believing all they say
to be false, unless I know it my self beforehand, to be true; and indeed this
is that which common Liars get, by such assiduous telling of Lies, that no Body
can believe them when they speak Truth. But they say, this Method after many
years Consideration, they have lately thought of: so it seems, they have been
but lately thinking of it, yet it has been many years under their
Consideration: All that long time they thought nothing at all of it; they are
the only. Men in the World then, that I know of, that can consider with
themselves for many years, without thinking of the matter they consider of:
This is a Bull all over: what pity is it that Men of their Stations should be
able to write no better English.

XX. Blew-Book. The President, Censors, and Majority of the Members, etc. --
pitying the miserable Condition poor Patients were in for want of Remedies,
agreed -- that Medicines should be prepared at the College, and given at the
Poor at the prime Cost, p. 14. To relieve the Poor for ever with Medicines at
the Intrinsic Value, page 15.

Salmon. Here Is a great Cry, and a little Wool, as the Devil said, when he
shore his Hogs. Here is a wonderful pitying the Poor for want of Remedies; and
therefore they say, that Medicines shall be prepared and given to the prime
Cost, and this prime Cost they declare to be the intrinsic Value. It is an odd
thing, that such Men as they are cannot write good English, without making so
many Bulls in it, how are their Medicines given to the Poor, when they only
sell them, and will let no Body have them without Money? And what does all this
noise of Charity amount to, but only what I said before, viz. that if poor
People bring Money with them they may have Medicines, but not otherwise. But
they will give their Advice Gratis: Who knows that, or what Security have we
that they will keep their word, and not bring it into their Intrinsic Value?
And if they should do it, what is it worth, especially when poor People have
not Money by them to buy Bread, or other Necessaries. Something I spoke to this
Head, in an Advertisement I gave about the Town; and I hear the Blades found
fault with it, that I begun my Observations about Intrinsic Value with Item,
and not with Imprimis; now the reason of that was, because I could do no
otherwise, that being taken out of the middle of the Account. But in this place
I care not greatly, if I give you the Imprimis, which is, so much for loosing
our certain Practice, and trusting to an uncertainty, in Degrading our selves,
by turning Apothecaries, out of mere spite and malice to the Trade, because we
would have six hundred Families be turned out a-doors, and sent a Grazing or
Begging. Item so much for half a Dozen Bottles of Claret, after the Company had
drunk enough, upon Consideration, that it ought to be put into the Intrinsic
Value, for that they were then met about the Concerns of the Business. Item, so
much for debasing the College, by turning it into a Mechanick-SHOP, against the
Honor and Dignity of the Place. Item, so much for the Price of the Drugs.
Item, so much for Waste in making up. Item, so much for Laboratory Room. Item,
so much for the Use of the Weights. Item, so much for the Use of the Scales.
Item, so much for Dispensing the Ingredients. Item, so much for the Use of the
Pestle. Item, so much for the Use of the Mortar. Item, so much for Preparing
them. Item, so much for SHOP-room. Item, so much for Servants Wages. Item, so
much for the Interest of their Money. Item, so much for Spoiling, they not
being used whilst they are good. Item, so much for Prescribing (though it is
pretended to be done for nothing, the deceit not being this way discernible.)
Item, so much for attending upon the Business, only two bits of an Afternoon in
a Week. Item, so much toward the Charge of the Penny-Quack-Book, which the
Blew-Book-men put forth, and fell for Two Pence. Item, so much for the Loss of
Reputation, for doing so many things against the Dignity of the Profession of
Physic, and the Laws of Common Honesty and Morality. Now when all these Items
(with a many more) are gathered into one Sum, who knows how dear the Intrinsic
Value of their Quack-trash will be? But as it is probable they (I mean the
Blew-Book-men) may have a Dispensation for lying; so there is no heed to be
taken to them, though they should promise to sell their pitiful, nasty,
Quack-stuff Fifteen Shillings in the Pound cheaper than an Apothecary can his
well prepared Medicines.

XXI. Blew-Book. The Dispensary is the place where the Medicines are Dispensed,
or given out to the Poor: Here are all sorts of Cordial and Distilled Waters,
Electuaries, Syrups, Pouders, Pills, Plasters, Ointments, Spirits, Salts,
Tinctures, Roots, all Compound and simple Medicines; and in short, all outward
and inward Medicaments, that are, or need generally be made use of, etc. page
15, 16.

Salmon. The Word Dispensary, is Barbarous, and of the Classis in^mae
Latinitatis, not to be found in any Lexicon or Dictionary of the Greek or Latin
Tongues, but only in Du Fresne's Glossary; and signifies here no more plainly
than a SHOP: But this word, because it looks so Mechanic, and comes off with
such a degrading Sound, the Blades were loath to express in English, that they
might not fall under the Contempt of the Vulgar. This being said, the next
thing that follows, is the Rareeshow; all the Shows in Bartholomew-Fair, cannot
present you with a more Pageant like Intrcitum. What do you lack, what would
you Buy? here are all sorts of Cordial and Distilled Waters; here is the wonder
of the World, come in and take your places; I question whether the veriest
Quack or Mountebank, that ever pist, can accost you with a more Hyperbolick
Exordium: But now after all, what if you should be Cheated? why, they know
plainly you must hold your Tongue, and not complain, for fear of being Laughed
at. Just like the Persons who went to see the terrible Monstrous Beast, which
had two Heads, ten Ears and but one Mouth, without Eyes, Arms, Legs, or Tail,
which if any one struk, it would make a dreadful thundering noise like the
Roaring of a Lion: The House being full of Spectators at Half a Crown a man,
the Sight being produced, it proved to be nothing but a Drum; they were no
doubt, all vexed to be so Cheated, yet resolved not to Complain, but let the
next Comers discover it at their own Costs and Charges, as they had done; and
this they did to avoid being laughed at, and so must you. In my Conscience and
Soul, I do not think, any Quack-Bill that ever was Published, can equal this of
the Blew-Book-men; it is perfectly Quacking all over, with all the Hyperboles
that the thing will admit of: For in the first place, I do not believe they
have all sorts and varieties of the things they here brag and boast of: then in
the next place, it is a very great Question, whether they are well and truly
Prepared or no, or whether the Person or Persons which make the Mish-mash, or
Medly, have the Skill they ought to have or not; And Lastly, that the wonderful
and mighty Sight, consists of nothing but what is common and mean, like that of
the Drum aforementioned, which makes a great noise, and yet has nothing in it.
Now, if I am mistaken, and this be not mere Quacking, I would be glad to know
what is: But some Men may do any thing and be accounted honest, with all the
Applause imaginable, whilst others less guilty, if they step but awry, shall be
taken for Horse-stealers.

XXII. Blew-Book. In the next place they tell us of General Meetings, -- new
Regulations, -- Committees, -- giving of Orders, -- receiving Accounts, --
inspecting into Servants Conducts, -- preparing Matters, -- appointing
Curators, -- to see their Servants do not Cheat, -- nor the Stock be robbed, --
keeping of the Money, -- their Confusions and Disorders, -- signing of their
Bills, etc. page 16, 17.

Salmon. What is all this to the Business, what have we, or the good People of
London to do with the Blew-Book-men's fiddle-faddles, and fooleries, with the
private Concerns of their Monopoly, with their ordering and disordering their
Fools-baubles, and their tittle-tattle about nothing that Concerns us; What is
it to the Public whether they agree or disagree; join, or disjoyn; whether
they Cheat, or are Cheated; keep Accounts, or no Accounts; whether their
Servants rob them or not; and whether they have any Money, or no Money, or who
keeps it? But this is to let the World know something of nothing, and how they
manage doing to no purpose, but only to amuse themselves and others, that they
may look like Men of Business, when they have no Business, or nothing to do.
Truly all this is like Bedlam-discourse, or the wild Romances of the Madmen
there, so that it merits no farther Observations, or Animadversions thereupon.

XXIII. Blew-Book. We need not here mention where the Subscribers, (i. e. the
Blew-Book-men) dwell, nor who they are; this the Churchwardens, and the Poor,
may learn at the College; and there is hardly a Parish in London or
Westminster, where one or other of them does not live, page 18.

Salmon. And so we think, where the Blew-Book-men dwell, or who they are, is
not necessary to be mentioned, nor is it worth any Man's knowing; nor can it
possibly be worth the while for Churchwardens, or the Poor, to take the pains
to enquire: For what do they get by it? truly nothing that I know of; if they
have no Money, they must have no Medicines: and if they have Money, they must
give them for their Trash, the full of what they call the Intrinsic Value,
which how much that is, I know no Mortal but themselves can tell; it is what
value soever they are pleased to put upon it, which I believe an honest
Apothecary will afford you much better, as Cheap. I cannot help my having an
ill Opinion of men of their Kidney, for Men that will be unjust in one thing,
will be unjust in another. I am unwilling to unravel the whole Story of Mr.
Ragg the Apothecary; or that dreadful Contrivance against the Life of Dr.
Coatsworth of St. Albans, the Relations of which two Transactions, to hear
them, would make a Man's two Ears to Tingle: I am willing to spare them a
little, to see if they will mend, and not to expose them with all the Truth I
am able: A farther scrutiny of their particular Actions I will defer, and let
sleep, without a future Provocation. They go far that never return, and I am
yet in some hopes they may see their fatal Errors, and unaccountable Follies,
and amend. As for the Parishes of London and Westminster being supplied with
them, I think it to be no Blessing but a Curse; and they to be happiest, who
have least to do with them; I persuade my self, that the Churchwardens of
Parishes will never trouble their Heads with their Fooleries, whose Charities
are of no more worth than a Scotch-Mist, which if a Man walks long in it, will
do him such a mischief as to wet him to the Skin.

XXIV. Blew-Book. The Medicines are delivered out of the College, at the
Intrinsic Value, that is at the first Cost; for -- making no advantage of
them, no more is required of the Public, then what will just support the
Stock, without which it would necessarily sink, page 18.

Salmon. A learned Discourse, and just worth nothing; as if every body did not
know, that if a Man sells his Commodity for less than it stands him in, all
Costs and Charges being considered, he must be a looser by it, and his Fund or
Stock must waste, and at length come to nothing. Now let us consider, besides
the first Costs of the Drugs, there is Laboratory-room, Shoproom, Use of
Vtensils, waste in making up, spoiling by long keeping, Expenses, Servants
Wages, Attendance, and a many other things, which if they should not be added
to the Prime or first Cost of the Drugs, the Fund or Stock would in time
infallibly be lost or sunk; and therefore you must really conclude, that all
the Items in Sect. XX. aforegoing, are to be accounted for here. The next thing
which I am to take notice of, is, That they are delivered out of the College;
but this they speak by a kind of Rhetorical Figure called Auxesis, wherein they
magnify a thing, and make it greater than truly it is; for they deliver their
Slip-slops, out of a SHOP, as all Apothecaries do: but they thought College
sounded greater, and looked more magnificent than the mechanic and degrading
Term of a SHOP, as counting themselves something above it; though at the same
time they can submissively and meanly submit, to any thing that they think a
Penny is to be gotten by. But if they should make you believe, that they will
afford their stuff at the simple prime Cost of the Drugs, that is so vain a
thing, that nothing can be more foolish to be spoken, for that they tell you,
they must sell their Matters at such a price, as that their Stock may not sink
by it: And yet they have so craftily worded their Discourse, that at first
sight, a Man would really believe, that they spoke as they meant and intended,
and that there was nothing else to be understood by Intrinsic Value, but the
prime or first Costs of the Drugs; whereas upon viewing the thing, and
thoroughly scanning their words, there is nothing that they less intend; and so
a Cheat is put by Lump or whole Sale upon the Understanding. What ways have Men
to sham the World withal, and what may not they do, who think that they have
Authority to say and do what they please, be it right or wrong, good or bad?
How can any Man be safe to deal with such Persons, who seldom or never speak as
they mean; nor mean as they speak? Unless you know beforehand, that you must
understand them by the Contraries, and always take them in the opposite sense;
at least in a sense different from what their words signify.

XXV. Blew-Book. The Benefit the Public does, and may reap thereby, it is
fifteen Shilligs in the Pound; that being here afforded for five Shillings, for
which the Apothecaries exact Twenty Shillings, -- a great Relief to indigent
People, -- poor Families, and Gentlemen's Servants, page 18, 19.

Salmon. What Benefit the Public may receive by this their empty Charity, I
suppose will be invisible, like to Ghosts which haunt the Air, not to be seen
of any, but such as are furnished with Second Sights; they say it is Fifteen
Shillings in the Pound, viz. That they will afford that for Five Shillings,
which the Apothecaries take Twenty Shillings for. But it is probable the
Blew-Book-men may have a Dispensation for Lying, and so no heed is to be taken
to them: Can any Body believe it is possible, that those well-prepared
Medicines, which an Apothecary takes Twenty Shillings for, that the same should
be sold at a Quack-SHOP for Five Shillings; would not any one in his senses
believe, that they must be either defective in the Ingredients, or spoiled in
the making? But after all, how shall we know that they speak Truth, and that
the same Medicaments full as good, and as exactly and well prepared, they will
sell so much below the Price? I assure you he must have a great Faith, that can
believe such an incredible assertion, from Men of their Morals, without having
any other Assurance than their bare word, or say-so for it. They tell us, it
will be a great Relief to indigent People, poor Families, and Gentlemen's
Servants. But how, or wherein, I nor any Body else knows: Oh, they will give
them their Advice or Prescription Gratis, page 17. It Is so in words, but it is
to be supposed, that though they pay nothing down for it, that they have the
Cunning to put it into the Intrinsic Value, because he that writes the Bill or
signs it, does also put the Price at the bottom of it, and the Servants are
responsible to the Curators for the Price writ upon every Bill, page 17, 18.
This is Proof enough with a Vengeance, that they make their own Markets, even
as they please themselves, and gives a great Umbrage, that all the Items
aforementioned at Sect. XX. are true. But suppose for Argument-sake, they
should do this Gratis, what does it all amount to, to those poor People who
have no Money, to pay them their Market Price for it? Why it amounts to
nothing; for if they have no Money, or if they have some Money, and not the
full Price, they must certainly go without it; Now what this Invisible Charity
is, who can tell; I know not who it can be of Service to, but such as take
nothing, and live upon the Air. But after all, I suppose they did this to Ape
me; because I give to the Poor Gratis, so would they; but herein they and I
differ: I give to all poor People, not only my advice Gratis, but proper
Remedies or Medicines for the Cure of their Distempers freely, and that without
Money or Price. Whereas they only pretend to give their advice to the Poor for
nothing, which is as much as nothing; for it is that which costs them nothing,
and which I very much fear is worth nothing; so that from their own words, it
is manifest, that though they seem to follow me, yet they do it not the half way;
their Charity could not carry them through Stitch with the pious Design. But
when all shall be computed, considering the goodness of Apothecaries Medicines,
and their skill in well preparing them, I really believe, notwithstanding the
Blew-Book-mens boasting, that they will find the Apothecaries Shop the cheapest
place of the two.

XXVI. Blew-Book. The Physicians -- have obliged themselves -- to attend by
turns, two of them at a time, at the College every Week, Wednesdays and
Saturdays, at three a Clock in the Afternoon, to give Advice Gratis there to
all poor Diseased Persons, whose Sickness will permit them to repair thither
for help, page 19.

Salmon. What their Gratis Advice is, we have Discoursed before, so that
nothing more need be said of it in this place. But as to their Attendance, it
is very short and narrow. These Blew-Book-men, are by their own Report, to the
number of five and Forty which have subscribed, page 14. And it is strange,
that out of such a Number, no greater Attendance can be given in so great and
mighty a City as this of London is, where the poor are so vastly numerous: Not
two whole days they can afford, nor yet two half days, but only two bits of an
Afternoon, viz. only from three a Clock post meridiem, for so few hours as
their Worships are pleased to stay. Surely they expect but little Business, and
but few Patients, that so short a limited time will do their Business in; it is
very narrow and short Charity I am satisfied in, that such a Body of them as
Forty five, cannot afford to spend no more time about it. But the Brevity of
the time, agrees with the Penuriousness of their Charity, and both conspire
alike to the Benefit of the poor sick Patient, who if he has any Money, shall
have some of their Blessings, but if he has none, shall certainly go without.
Thus they feed the wretched and miserable with a bit, and a knock; whereas I
who am but One, attend upon my Charity almost whole Days, and every day in the
Week; and I believe I Cure more than three hundred poor People (I speak within
Compass) of their deplorable Distempers in a year; with a Continuation of the
same Charity every Year, which Course I intend (through the help of God) to
pursue to the utmost Period of my Life. And as to repairing to them for help,
if they have no Money, I am sure they must go without it.

XXVII. Blew-Book. It will be thought no small Relief to a poor sickly Person
-- to have thus recourse to the College twice a Week, to have his Case sedately
heard, by two Grave Physicians, and to have their advice in Writing for
nothing; and Medicines there ready made, for what they only Cost, page 19, 20.

Salmon. Here is Tautologies upon Tautologies, the same things over and over
again; their Relief if you have no Money, is no Relief, nor can you expect it,
for they tell you themselves, that you must pay for your Medicines, what they
Cost; which is in plainer terms, what they shall be pleased to set down at the
bottom of their Bill, page 17, 18. whether it be reasonable, or unreasonable,
and you must take it at a venture without finding sault: But the jest of it is,
That the poor Patient shall have his Case sedately heard by two Grave
Physicians: One would think by their foolish way of wording it, that it was
some brangling Cause to be heard at some of the Courts in Westminster Hall or
Guildhall, at the former of which places it is hoped, that some of their Cases
will be e're long heard, to their shame and Contempt. Besides, it looks by
their Discourse, as if they lived far from Neighbors, for it is always thought
so when Folks begin to praise themselves: They say, The poor Patients Case
shall be sedately heard by two Grave Physicians. Now what they mean by this
damnable hard word [Sedately] who can tell? Whether it signifies Appeasedly, or
Mitigatingly, or Temperately, or Soberly, or Calmly, or some other thing, is
difficult to be understood? But letting that very hard word alone; the Cream of
the jest is, That the Case shall be heard by two Grave Physicians; now here is
another hard word [Grave] (as for Physicians we will let them alone, because we
do not know whether they are Physicians or no, or only Fellows which call
themselves so, or whether they may not be master Doctors, or half Doctors, or
no Doctors, which may know little or nothing of Physic:) the thing which we
chiedy reflect upon is that they are Grave (not Sepulchralis, but) Gravis,
heavy, grievous, fore, dangerous, ungentle, uncourteous, and so let them go,
and glad we are rid of them.

XXVIII. Blew-Book. It is hoped the Lord Bishop of London, the Rectors,
Churchwardens, and Overseers for the Poor of the several Parishes, will, as
they have occasion, direct their respective Poor hither for Advice and Relief
-- as likewise for preventing them for going to Quacks and Mountebanks, etc.
page 20.

Salmon. I do not doubt but that honorable Person, the Lord Bishop of London,
as also the Rectors, etc. of Parishes, have something else to do, than to mind
the Blew-Book-mens fooling and trifling, especially when it is to no purpose:
And I wonder at their Impudence, that they should think that the Honorable
Person aforenamed, should so far demean himself, and stoop below his Character
and Dignity, to be an Assistant to their Deceits, and shamming of Mankind: For
to speak in sober sadness, all their whole Design is, only to ruin the
Apothecaries Trade, and to get it into their own hands, and so (under the
Umbrage of their pretended Charity) to make their own Fortunes by it, though it
is really through the Ruin of another. As to their Advice, that it will be
worth any thing, is more than any the wisest Man can say; but as to their
Relief, it is the same which we told you of before, if they bring Money they
may expect some of their Trash for it, but if they have no Money, they must be
sure to go without: this is their admirable and wonder-working Charity; but if
People should be prevented from going to Quacks, I am sure they must not then
come near the Blew-Book-men.

XXIX. Blew Book. To make this Charitable work the more easy -- it would be
requisite, that the Rectors of Parishes and Churchwardens should agree to
allow some small Contribution out of the Money paid to the poor in every
Parish, toward hiring one Room in Covent Garden, and another toward the
Monument -- without sending so far as the College of Physicians, which is near
St. Paul's, in the Center of London, p. 21.

Salmon. How? What have the Rectors of Parishes to do with the Poors Money?
This I am sure of, the Law of the Land will never permit them to dispose of it;
and by what Law can Churchwardens give that Money away, which is for buying
the Poor Bread, to Hire Apothecaries-SHOPS for the College of Physicians? I am
sure, if they-should be so silly to do such a thing, they might be made to
refund it again out of their own Purses, and that with Interest. I wonder at
the Impudence of these Blew-Book-men! They cannot be contented to act illegal,
base and ill things themselves, but they must be encouraging and prompting
others to do the like; but I doubt not, but that the Rectors and Churchwardens
of Parishes will be wiser, and not be imposed upon by such ill-minded People.
Now the World may see these Men's Charity for all their so great Profession of
it; they would have the Charity-Money belonging to the Poor given to them, to
Hire College-SHOPS withal, in which these narrow-Soul'd-Fellows may Act their
villanious designs against the whole Company of Apothecaries, to the Ruin and
Destruction of their Trade, and the undoing some hundreds of Families, and this
all under the pretense of Charity; all which they would willingly do, through the
help of the Poors Charity-Money; they have not Souls of their own large enough
to act this pretended Charity (which after all is no Charity) out of their own
Pockets. No! they are willing, and had rather have it out of the Poors Chest;
this indeed pleases them much better. But then for their direction, how to know
in what part of the City the College is: Why, they tell you, it is near St.
Paul 's in the Center of London; as if they were ashamed of its true
Situation; the true Direction is this, Situate in Warwick Lane, near our
Pleasure-House of Newgate, which every Thief knows; now judge you, which of the
Directions is the better, or nearer the mark.

XXX. Blew-Book. The Physicians (I suppose they mean the Blew-Book-men) design
to have Lectures of Chemistry and Anatomy, read in the College every Year; and
to try a great many natural Experiments; as likewise to examine Quack
Medicines, to discover and publish the Cheats of those Impostures, etc. page 21.

Salmon. As for their Lectures of Chemistry, it is so rediculous that nothing
can be more; that they should set up for that Art, they have all along from
their first Conventicling till now, dedryed and declared against as useless,
Empirical and Dangerous, is a Riddle not to be unfolded; it is like Phormio
(who never had seen or knew any thing in the Art of War) his reading a military
Lecture before Hanibal, the ablest Soldier in the World. I intend, God willing,
to make e're long Monthly Lectures of Physic, Surgery, Anatomy and
Chimistry, in Our College of Black-Fryars, in which we shall unfold the
Foundations of those Arts, and raise up Super-structures of Knowledge, as may
be of perpetual Duration, and be good for, and useful to, the Universality of
Mankind. Their trying of natural Experiments, is like a Blind Man's groaping
out his way in the dark; for not understanding the Principles of Chemistry, nor
viewing things in a true Light, it cannot be otherwise supposed, but that their
Experiments must be deceitful, like the Fallacious Mediums by which they were
found out. Then they pretend to Examine Quack Medicines, whereas their own are
nothing else, and of the worst kind too: nor have they or any of them the
Skill, to know things contained in any Composition of another making: how then
can they Examine Quack Medicines, or discover the Cheats of Impostors, the
Blew-Book-men themselves, being so great of the kind? But all this is only
mighty bragging, and Boasting of things they know nothing of, and which truly
lie above the Spears of their diminutive Knowledge, and is indeed the most
like to Mountebanking and Quacking in the World.

XXXI. Blew-Book. -- The Apothecaries Bills are generally unreasonable, page 21.

Salmon. That is, our Enemies being Judges. But if the Enquiry into this
Scandalous Assertion be rightly made, by comparing an Apothecaries Attendance
upon a Patient, with a Doctors, or one of the Blew-Book-mens, we shall find a
vast difference in the Account. An Apothecaries Attendance upon a Patient ten
Weeks together, with his Bill at end of it, will not amount to so much money as
a Blew-Book-mans will do in one week, and this I have several times observed to
be true. But you see Scandal is all they aim at, they will be sure to observe
Matchiavel's Rule, which is to fling dirt enough, for that in so doing they are
sure some will stick.

XXXII. Blew-Book. If any Enemies to the Public Good, should artfully give out
any ill meaning in this Charitable Design of the College; Time and Experience
will show, that there is nothing else intended by it, but the Relief of the
Poor, the Honor of the College and the Improvement of Physic, page 22.

Salmon. If any Enemies to the Public Good, shall maliciously give out any
ill-meaning to this our honest design of discovering what the Blew-Book-men
are; Time and Experience will show, that there is nothing else intended by it
but the eviction of the male-practises of their Monopoly, to the hurt of the
Poor, dishonor of the Society of Physicians, and Disimprovement of the Art of
Physic, as we have, ex abundanti, demonstrated.

William Salmon.

THE END.

