SOBER REFLECTIONS, OR, A Solid Confutation Of Mr. Andrew Marvel's WORKS, In a
Letter Ab IGNOTO ad IGNOTUM.
Por un Ruin Ruin y Medio.



LONDON, Printed for H. H. Ann. Dom. 1674.

SOBER REFLECTIONS, OR, A Solid Confutation of Mr. A. M's late WORKS.
In a Letter, Ab Ignoto ad Ignotum.
MArvel of Marvels, for that is the Character given you by a certain sort of
Impertinent People who love mischief; Mischief your Minion Medium, which like a
rich vein runs through the heart of all your Syllogismes, to the utter
impoverishing of their Consequences; for, from a vicious medium (as unfledged a
Logician as you are) you may Cock-sure, infer, there must necessarily follow a
vile consequence.

But, how defective soever you are in your Syllogismes, you make ample
satisfaction; nay, you supererrogate in your Dilemma's, they are as surprising
as a Welsh-hook, with Pull her to her, push, her from her; of like a Rope and
Butter, if the one flip, the other will be sure to hold. Your Similitudes are most
apposite and unparalled, V. G. even as a Wheelbarrow goes rumble-dee,
rumble-dee, so my Lord Mayor owes me Five hundred pounds. Your Examples are
without example; for Quibbles you are the very word-pecker of word-peckers, and
for Rhetorical flourishes (like a Whisler before a Morrisdance) you carry it
away from them all with flyingcolours, your Works being most artificially set
forth and beautified with choice pieces of Poetry, like a Cow-turd stuck with
Gillyflowers, most dexterously inter-woven with Natural Experiments; most
richly embroidered with Theological Notions; most magnificently Tapestry'd with
Reasons of State, hanging down in Clusters like bunches of Grapes; and most
prodigiously stuffed with Witty Conceits, thicker than Cloves in a Gammon of
Bacon at Easter. Your Style is for the most part smooth and insinuating, yet
happily diversified here and there with Jirks and short Girds, as if you had a
spice of the Stringhalt: although in your Clauses and Parentheses you are as
unhoopable as if you stood with one leg at Dover and the other at Calais.

But, to make up more roundly to you, and to enumerate your Metaphysical parts,
were not comparisons Odoriferous, I would play you off, for Cases of Conscience
and Knotty points of Divinity, to Hugh Peter's himself: Yea, you have with the
same Pharisaical Devotion, as liberally communicated your Spiritual Talent, yet
I would not advise you to follow the Precedent too far, left you fall again
into the Clutches of Father Gregory, etc. Mum's the Word, you understand me. As
for your Morality I am unwilling to harp too much on that string; thou Man of
Morals seek severity elsewhere, I dare not be thy caution. I must confess it is
enough to throw any man into a Fit of the Staggers to reflect upon your
Confidence: that you who have been your self first Graduated at Billingsgate,
and afterward Civilized in Barbary (your own Writings are sufficient
Evidence:) that you, to whom railing is as natural as habitual, a property
belonging to you ( quarto modo) should have so cauteriz'd a Conscience as to
brand your Adversary without having the least regard to his Function, with
Petulancy, want of Humanity, etc. and this you modestly term only a competent
stock of IllNature, which you always carry about you, as absolutely necessary
to self-preservation, left you should be found felo de se; risum teneatis
Amici? Is not this a pleasant companion?

How it tickles my fancy to think what a general Jubilee there would be, and
how unmercifully it would edify with your Party to see you set Doctor-
Cathedraticus in a Cucking-stool, Lording it over your Female-Auditory, the
Water- Nymphs of Wapping, Magisterially maintaining your polemical Arguments
and Debates, and tanquam ex Tripode, pronouncing your Oracles concerning the
Power of Princes; the Liberty of the Subject; the Authority of the Magistrate;
the Obedience of the People; the Duty of the Prelates and Pastors unto their
Flock; cum multis aliis: And, when you have tired your Auditors as well as your
Readers, with your frequent Tautologies upon the same subject, it is but
shifting your leg in your Gallop (left you fall into a Dogtrot) and changing
your Text, all will do well I Will warrant you.

In Faith never leave them so (like Sir Martin Marral) when ones hand's once in
there is no giving over, one Lesson more on the Lute, and then let them ring the
Bell, vociferat, and proclaim unto them, with Mouth as wide as Oyster-womens,
who stand gaping at you like their Oysters, that now they are to expect
Prodigies. Preach unto them the Wonders of the Deep, and in Confirmation of
your Doctrine, let them see that you can at the very first plunge descend
Doctor- Dodypole, and rise up again sous'd Gurnet: This Metamorphose will
doubtlesly work with them like the shavings of an Elder stick scraped upwards
and downwards. Yet, for all that, before you can have shak'd your ears, they
will have re-setled their stomachs, and then they will set out their Throats
afresh, and be bauling for a new Frolic, gratify them once more with a Cast
of your Office, convince them that you can out-dive Gretorix, play me the
Dy-dapper featly, dive me below Bridge, and rise up again visa vis de Lambeth,
that your Adversary may see, mal-gre all his endeavors, you still bear your
head above water; nor can all the water in the Thames, though at springtide
cool your courage, no more than it can wash your foul-mouth clean; dico hoc
sobria tristitia: I must unbutton my bosom, it is a very foul Mouth indeed, I
speak not in the least to flatter, but as it is really my opinion.

Mais a la Guerre, a la Guerre, Summon forth the Foe to a Sea Fight, let him
know you came not thither to fish for Todpoles, Allons courage de Tripas
Corazon; he shall find you per Mare per terras semper idem, in utrumque
paratus. What though you are neither Flesh nor Fish, nor good Red-herring, your
Adversary is not used to Otter-hunting, never fear him Man, let him come if he
dare: Oh happy if he come not, he shall soon be taught what it is to meddle
with any of the Race of Dametus hereafter.

Thus may you, by these heroical achievements, dub your self Metropolitan
Knight Errant of this Age, sileant Miracula Memphis; no more let the fabulous
relations of Monstrous Whales be read, their coming up the River will seem to
portend little, when so stupendous a Cods-head as yours has been seen as high
as Lambeth; It Is you will be the stupor mundi, and swell our Almanacks with
strange Prognostics.

And now, Marinated Sir, having thus generously maintained your Amphibious
valor, Hixius Doxius reconveigh your self ('it is done in the twinkling of a
Bedstaffe) unto the sweet Society of the Sisters of the Scolding Sodality the
Countess of Puddle-dock, they will receive you with this cheerful Antyphon,

Welcome Cloris to the Shore,
Thou shall go to Sea no more.
You Will find them so tenderly officious, that both the fore and hinder part of a
Shift shall be at your service, for the rubbing your Politic Pragmatical Pate.
But, what think you now of a comfortable importance? I am afraid in this,
critical minute you would be found minus habens, and when once a man pleads non
solvent, it is high time to put up his Pipes and go to sleep: And so for a
while I will leave you to your rest; but, when you have been well rubbed and
scrub'd, and sub'd, my dainty fine Don, we will play the other party at Tennis, or
Bandy a Ball or two and part fairly.

Bonjour, bonjour Monsieur; What, infected with your Adversaries disease, a
dull lazy distemper? a Cheval, a Cheval, I hope I have not waked you too early,
you will be froward all the day after, Naturam expellas furca licet; well now we
are upon Terra firma again, What shall we be at next? not Controversy I beseech
you, Pruritus disputandi scabies Ecclesiae. Besides, I believe you are no more
a slave to Principles of Religion (here I confess my self a Plagiary) then you
are to the Venetian Galleys: and, when once such mushrome Monsieurs as you (I
speak only as to your Politic Capacity) for I know you are a Gentleman
descended from the Stand-ups by your Father, and the Stradlings by your Mother:
When such Mountebanks shall Pirk up upon the Stage, and pretend to impose upon
Church and State, we need not consult Mr. Conjurer Lilly; there would be no
star In Faith for the Gentry and Nobility of England, no more than there would
be for the Clergy. That Parish must needs be well Governed where the Devil is
Constable, I confess my self as to the Politics (...): Yet, it may be worth
your observation, that though by the Act of Oblivion our sins were forgiven us,
yet we are not warranted by it to forget our selves: The Parish Priest ought to
remember that once he was a Clerk. It is not now as when Andreas lived. Is it
possible you should be such a Goliath as you make your self? that, like a Fly in
a Dung cart you raise such clouds of dust, that to allay them there must be
summoned in the whole posse Archidiaconatus of a Province. Is it side dignum
that the whole posse-Comitatus of the County should be on foot, and that there
should not be one Man found who dare cry Boh to a Goose. Aotos Perros con essos
huessos. If you impose at this rate, you will come to put false Nine-pins upon
us at last. Sure you imagine that in this Iron Age men have Estrich stomachs,
and can digest any thing, otherwise you would not hold forth such bold
Paradoxes, as that there can be a Calumny-Office erected, and you not the sole
Monopolist; or, that to be your Antagonist is the most dexterous, cheap, and
legal way of Simony. These are, I profess, Mysteries not calculated for my
Meridian, they leave me grovelling in the dark. I am so thick-scull'd I cannot
apprehend, that to be your Antagonist, should qualify a man for a Paritor,
much less advance him to a fat Benefice. It Is luck is all, Winter or Summer,
should it rain Benefices, 'twere a Noble to Nine pence, not one would fall on
my head; yet, give me leave to tell you, it has been broken before now (by some
Gifted with your Principles) and so has many an honest Man's besides for the
same sin, viz. taking Unsanctity'd courses, straying from the ways of
Righteousness, this was the Doctrine of that Age) and treading in the forbidden
paths of Allegiance; but let us be merry and wise, let us hear no more of those
stories; you will tell us you have had new Lights enough to lead us out of that
Cimmaerian-darkness, had we had but so much Grace as you to follow our late
Reformers; Ho Ball ho, I thank you for your love, there is Money for your
Mutton. I hold it as dangerous to follow an ignis fatuus, as to Dance the
Cushion-Dance, a man may break his shins before he is aware; Play with me but
hurt me not, via trita, via tuta. Well, plain dealing's a Jewel, whoever denies
you to have a great share of Wit, may celebrate his own Festival on
Innocents-day, and would be shrewdly suspected to want Pig sauce himself
(Brains and Sage:) But, that a man may have Wit, and yet a Fool have the
keeping of it, is no Modern Philosophy, verbum sapienti: Ergo this concerns not
you Mr. M. However, let me hint thus much unto you by the way, when ever Nokes,
You or I undertake to Act a serious part, should we be so jocund to dance the
Hay after it, 'twere as demonstrable as the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, there
would be a Galli-crista always in the middle; but, it is too late to think of
dancing now, let me re-mind you, Friend, you have had your Nap already, and I
begin to feel sand in my Eyes; wherefore, you will tie me to you with the
Cables of intolerable toughness, if you will give me leave to rest,

MERRY ANDREW, Yours in Masquerade Theophilus Thorowthistle.
Dated at my Manor of No-land in the Isle of Silly.
Postscript
IF this Modicum quid should peep forth in Print now, we should have you at it,
Resolute Bat; the License Numps, the License, Where Is the License, Ridentem
dicere verum quid vetat? Besides, to your certain knowledge, Licentia omnes
deteriores sumus: But, since this contains nothing against God nor the King,
unless it be Blasphemy to speak against your Person, I am no more afraid than
he who hid his head in a Bush, Non timeo circumspicio tantum. Although the
Woodcock hide his Bill, he is to be found by a white feather in his tail: Tirar
la piedra, y nasconder la Mano, curries too much of the Poltron along with it;
wherefore, when ever you command the Curtain to be drawn, you may see the
Effigies of your humble servant; and then, if you have skill in Palmistry, look
on my Forehead and tell me my Fortune.

FINIS.

