SOME ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE PAPER Delivered to the SHERIFFS, On Friday
December, the 7th 1683. BY Algernon Sidney, Esquire; Before he was Executed.
THE old Sophisters of the Rebellion, (since the discovery of the Plot,) have
been wonderfully industrious in spreading many inconsistent rumors, that might,
(if possible) have stifled, and discredited its Authority. That stupendous
piece of Villainy contrived by Anti-monarchical, Atheistical Re-publicans, is
represented (to the unthinking Multitude) as an airy fantom, and illusion, a
trick of State, and I know not what besides. These tricks and shams, our
projective Conspirators imagine, will undoubtedly have a great influence on the
tempers of the People, create doubts and jealousys and support the spirits of
their Party, amidst so many wonderful disappointments. Their Design is yet
deeper, they would fain amuse the World, and harangue upon their Innocence,
that they might more securely and more succesfully go on in their Resolved
attempts against the Government.

Not only the language of the Living, says, but the Dead speak, That the Plot
is at an end, that the Innocence of the late Sufferers is so very conspicuous,
that the World is strangely infatuated, if they credit the least part of this
Fanatik Conspiracy. Egregious sophisms!

I am sorry to find that this furor Fanaticus, this impetuous, preposterous
Zeal, should hurry Men, into these Acts of Imprudence, and self-justification,
even in that minute which launches them into Eternity, brings them before a
Tribunal, where there is no Corruption of Jury's, on one hand; Nor no
hypocritical pretenses and evasions on the other, that can excuse or divert the
deserved sentence.

I am concerned likewise, that the Faction are Resolved, to defend themselves
in all those manifest Acts of Rebellion, as it has been apparent in my Lord
Russel's Case, and of this late unhappy Gentleman Mr. Sidney, who directly
follows his steps in point of Justification.

I have a great respect for Truth, and Plain-Dealing; I shall therefore
modestly comport my self within the decent Rules of sobriety and calmness;
since I consider how I Am to reflect on the behavior of the Dead, who (I know)
are in no capacity to make a Vindication of their actions.

I shall not put the words of the Deceased Gentleman upon the Rack, to make
them confess more than they would; But begin to Anatomize some particulars,
which may be most pernicious in the consequence, if they are imbibed for Truth,
and received as Gospel, amongst the undigesting multitude. Passing by his
Apostolical Address [ Men, Brethren, etc.] and his excuse for not speaking
freely, because of the cold Weather and the Infirmity of Old Age, and a close
confinement, I shall consider his opinion of the present Age, which he says
makes [ Truth pass for Treason.] He would have notably stigmatized it, but he
was afraid the people would not relish such Popular pieces of scandal. [Their
ears would be too tender to hear it.] This is a wonderful fit of squeamishness
indeed, since he must needs know, that the Defenders of the OLD CAUSE, would
have made great improvement of it. Fortiter calumniari aliquid haerebit. [West,
Rumsey, and Keyling, (he says) knew him not, and others made use of his, and of
others Names to give Reputation to their designs; the Lord Howard, is an
infamous Perjured Man, who drudg'd, and forswore himself in expectation of the
promised Pardon.] It Is no wonder to hear Witnesses branded with such
opprobrious Characters, since the persons concerned, propose to themselves,
that the dis-reputation of the Evidence is an argument of their Innocence, and
that by making them Reprobates, they themselves should become Saints. It Is
politickly done I confess, but the cheat cannot pass upon all people. None but
ill persons would engage in Conspiracy it is true; but the thing once detected,
how is it possible the Principal Actors should be punished, unless their
Brother Conspirators (tho dipped in it themselves as my Lord Russel has it)
should give Evidence against them? All Treasons must of necessity be
unpunishable, if such Witnesses are not allowed.

[ The stress of the matter (he says) lies in the Papers taken in his Closet by
the Kings Officers, not proved to be his; but by the similitude of an hand
which is to be easily counterfeited.] By his leave, the matters were not wholly
reduced to the Papers, tho those are bad enough by his own confession. A small
Bill, or a compendious Letter may be counterfeited probably, and a person
hastily perusing it may be deceived; But a constant intercourse of Letters, and
diligent observing, and comparing the Characters, destroys such a Cheat.

Mr. Sidney on his Trial, denies himself to be the Author of those dangerous
wicked Principles (as he calls Filmers) contained in his Treatise, yet here he
frankly confesses the whole, and tells the World (without any haetsiation, what
his opinion and principles are; To refute which, it would take up a
considerable time, which a short reflection upon this very Speech will not
allow.

However I shall touch slightly upon it. He pretends his sheets were an Answer
to Sir Robert Filmers Patriarcha, and challenges a Liberty to express his
thoughts in opposition to Kingly Government, which Sir Robert pleads for. His
Anti-monarchical Principles are too too evident by all the actions of his Life;
his opinion, or Article of his Creed, is this, [ I Believe that God has left
Nations unto the Liberty of setting up such Government as best pleased
themselves.] Without doubt Mr. Algernon was for the people's doing again what
seemed right in their own Eyes, and for having no King in Israel. Our
Pseudo-Protestant and Jesuitical Casuist again tells ye, That the Laws give
Power to the Magistrate. Woeful experience nforms us, what sacred Blood was
spilt, upon Prosecuting this Rebellious Topique. See the Trial of King Charles
the First, and you will find Bradshaw speak the very Language of our Colonel. The
President tells his Majesty, The Law is your Master, the Law is your Superior,
Debent ei ponere fraenum. Rex est dum been Regit, and no longer, if the
Plenipotentiary's the people please. I fancy that it is equally possible to draw
a parallel 'twixt the avowed principles of our discontented Statesman, and
those of the Sophistical canting President, as 'twixt the Covenant, and
Association. Mr. Sidney allows that the people make Choice of their Governors;
if so, it is certain they can depose them ad libitum. For that which creates a
power must of necessity be Superior to that power it creates. What a silly
business then is a King? (which is or really should be Legibus solutus,
otherwise He cannot be Supreme.) I say, What a triffle is a Crown, if it can be
given and taken according to the giddy humor of a freakish Multitude? We may
deny his suppositions likewise about his Election of Kings, which must be
either by a unanimous Consent of a whole Nation; which is ridiculous: For never
was a public, General Meeting of a whole Kingdom known for Election of a
Prince; If there had been, one Dissenter would have taken away the Unanimity.
If he talked of the Major Part or Choosing by Proxy, his Arguments will be found
deficient likewise; But it is impossible to unravel all the particulars. He may
talk of the King of France's modesty, and his boasting of the happy want of
Power; yet the whole World knows how little he confines himself to these thin
Cobwebs, the Laws, which he breaks at pleasure. Take then every Paragraph
distinctly by its self, and you will find abominable Principles couch't under it;
which once believed, would be destructive of any Government whatsoever. Take it
altogether, it is a virulent Reflection and Libel against this. His Jury is
picked, who could not judge of the nature of such a Treasonable Pamphlet: There
were Persons of Understanding and Estates Returned, but his exceptions were
against them; thinking by his flashes of Rhetoric to win the others into an
opinion of his Innocence.

Bur here comes the Epitome of scandal: [ I was long since told I must Die, or
the Plot must Die.] This is fine impeaching the Justice of the Nation; What!
Does he make Abingdon Laws now in fashion? Hang a Man right or wrong. Sure no;
He had all the favor in the World shown him, that a Person in his
circumstances could expect, or desire.

But here observe Malice and Rancour mixed with Scandal: [ Lest the means of
destroying the best Protestants should fail, the Bench is filled with former
blemishes of the Bar.] Old Dogs never bite, but when they bite sure. Lord! What
horrible Days of Persecution are these! the the best Protestants, i. e.
Rebellious Dissenters are condemned like Dogs, by a parcel of Men, who
Sacrificed to the Idols of Mr. Williams' s Chair. Alas! if he means so, their
Memories (notwithstanding his detractions) will smell sweet, when the actions
of a rash Tyrannical Club of Republicans, will stink down to Posterity.

I shall not fall to the dissection of some other matters, but tell you, That
(without Innuendo's) all these dangerous Justifications (which are essential to
our True-Protestants) are purely Designed to Poison the People, to animate them
to a vigorous Prosecution of their beloved Plot; which by our Colonels Death
will not dwindle into Air, but live, and be a scandal for ever to the Party,
whom he espouses.

Now for the spirit of a Non.Con: [ Forgive these Practis^s, and avert the
Evils, etc.] [ Suffer not Idolatry to be Established in the Land.] This is much
the same with my Lord Russel's: I do believe Popery is coming into the Land.
This Bugbear is known by all of them, to be a successful business toward the
Prosecution of their irreligious ends.

Lastly, Be astonished, Reader, at that sinful security wherein he prides
himself. Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum! Was ever a Villainy so
Patronized as this OLD CAUSE in Capitals? See how he justifies the Rebellious
actions of his Youth, and makes Heaven to Vindicate 'em: As if the permission
of God Almighty were an approbation; which is a very sinful inference.

In short, I wish all People would consult their own Interest, and not follow
the footsteps of our late Resolute Rebels, who make Treason Meritorious. But if
any have been withdrawn, and seduced, let them early Repent, that they may
divert the like Fatal Sentence that is infallibly due to all Factious
Conspirators.

LONDON: Printed by G. C. for John Cox, at the Blew-Ball in Thames Street,
over against Baynards-Castle. 1683.


