SOME CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT THE New TEST OF THE Church of ENGLANDS Loyalty: IN A
LETTER From a COUNTRY GENTLEMAN; Occasioned by the present Invasion.
SIR,
I Have great Obligations to you for the continual Accounts you send me; I have
not Power, or if I had, I am not at leisure to express my Engagements. For to
tell you truly, your late Accounts of our strange Revolutions, do so fill my
Thoughts, that I am pausing upon them continually. Indeed you have all along
represented Things as became that Important Station and Honorable Character
you bore when the Crown was in danger the time before. But I must need say,
that in these latter Relations you have so Instructed me, that I am at a
perfect loss with my self whether you have been more Just or Kind: For, as
indeed the Case required, you have given me such a particular view of things,
that if I lived in London, and had those complete Freedoms which you enjoy with
so many Men of Sense and Quality, yet I should never be able to form so exact
an Idea of our Public Affairs as I take from your Paper as it lies before me.
I have also had the pleasure of Entertaining my Friends at your Expense, for so
the Honesty and Ingenuity of your Letters required I should. Besides, it was
necessary to Inform my Neighbors, that we might find out by Consultation which
were the best Methods to serve His Majesty, now His Necessity calls for our
Help again, and His Wisdom does us the Honor to Command it.

You remember, Sir, (since you made us happy in your Conversation) what a
considerable Neighborhood we have, how Persons of Honor and Quality, Loyalty
and Conformity, live thick about us, and what a powerful Influence they have
upon the Common People, I leave this to your Reflection. But it was necessary I
should put you in mind of it, in order to what I am going to say; for now I am
coming to set down those Thoughts which caused you this trouble.

And yet before I can speak directly, I must observe the Seasonableness of
these Considerations.

There is a time for every Purpose, said the Wise King Solomon, and it is made
good in this particular; for if that be the time to consider and expose False
Reasonings, when our Advesaries are bound to take notice of what we say, then
this is the very time to Vindicate our selves from those Odious Slanders which
have been outragiously thrown upon us. Particularly in May 1687. there came out
a Scandalous Paper called, A New Test of the Church of Englands Loyalty. The
design of which Paper is to prove that our Ecclesiastical Constitution, as it is
now Reformed, was Hatched, Nourished, and Supported to this day by Disloyal and
Treacherous Practices. I need not prove that this is the pretense of the Paper,
for we our selves remember it sufficiently, and the Author of it will not, I Am
sure, pretend that I Misrepresent him.

If all the Instances he brought to prove his Accusation, had been true, it had
yet been no Blemish to our Church at all.

It Is an horrid practice of these Adversaries, and they have been as loudly
told of their Reasonings against us, to the Damage, and if they could, to the
Ruin of our Common Christianity. And such amongst many others, is this M^thod
of Reasoning against Men's Practices in spite of their Principles. For what if
some of our Members prove Disloyal, it is yet no more Reproach upon our
Ecclesiastical Constitution, than the wicked Lives of Christians, if objected
by a Turk, would be an Argument against the Divine Institution of our Blessed
Lord himself?

Thus his Paper would have been good for nothing, if his Instances had been
true; But how utterly False they are, his Judicious Answerers have plentifully
shown.

These Worthy Persons have done more than was necessary in exposing this Paper,
for every common Reader discerned the Deceit of it, and therefore it is not my
Intention to add any particular Reflections; Though if I wrote to gratify any
Pique, I could not forbear, there are so many lewd things in the Paper which
have not been yet exposed. But my design is only to show our unthinking
Adversaries the plain Consequences of it, and how much Mischief this Paper, and
that which followed to Abett it, NOW does the Royal Cause, till a Mark of
Infamy be fixed upon them.

For in a word, the Dispute is not between him, and me, but between these
Rascally Papers, and His most Sacred Majesty.

For the plain Relation of the Case is thus:

His Majesty upon His coming to the Crown, did Graciously (let me add) and
Gratefully acknowledge our Loyalty: His Sacred Words are these: I know the
Principles of the Church of England are for Monarchy, and the Members of it
have shown themselves Good and Loyal Subjects.

And again at the opening of the Parliament, May xxil. 1685. What I said to my
Privy Council at My first coming there, I am Desirous to Renew to You; wherein
I Fully Declared My Opinion concerning the Principles of the Church of England,
whose Members have showed themselves Eminently Loyal in the Worst of Times, in
Defense of My Father, and Support of My Brother of Blessed Memory: Here are
Principles and Practices too. But this little Author on the contrary says, We
must Change our Old Principles of Loyalty. This surely is bad enough to be said
directly in the Face of our Royal Master; and if it were for this Reason only,
methinks the Paper should not have an Allowance to the Printing.

Perhaps they will excuse themselves, by saying as they have done, that we have
forfeited the Kings Protection, and so He may break His Word with us.

They have said so indeed, to the Kings Damage, but be sure our present
Circumstances will convince them that it is false and then there will be no
Remedy, but this Desperate Paper must be Stigmatized, or else it will fly in
the Kings Face, and deceive Posterity into an Opinion that He began His Reign
with (what I abhor to mention) a Solemn and Deliberate Falsehood in His Mouth.
But there is yet another Scene of Mischiefs which will be sure follow, if this
Paper be still protected.

We heard some Reports or Amuzements rather, about the Dutch preparations; but
when you sent the Kings Proclamation, Dated the xxviii. of September last, we
then thought seriously of things, and stood on Tiptoes, as it were, to see what
was the matter, and what Measures would be taken.

When behold we found the King so far from believing that we had forfeited our
Right to His Promise and Protection, or that we were Disloyal and Treacherous,
as this Pamphlet ^landers us, that He did not think Himself Safe till we again
were made His Life-Gard.

I might allege many things to prove what I now Assert, but I only allege
that Famous Proclamation, as Posterity will call it, Dated the xvii. of October
last, by which Proclamation the King Intrusts again all His Corporations in the
hands of the Church of England.

We thank the King abundantly for His goodness toward us: but it is not my
present business to invent for handsome Expressions, for we are now considering
the Mighty Trust, and taking notice how it flatly contradicts this provoking
pamphlet; so that a second time the matter comes to be debated, as it were,
between this wicked Author, and our dread Sovereign.

But the King as he is gracious, so he has manifested himself to be
Superlatively Tender to those of his own Persuasion; and so I shall insist no
longer upon this mischief, least I wholly lose my labor; for I am dealing with
Adversarys, who care not much for the Kings Honor, as they have shown the
World abundantly; and the King surely has too much Goodness, to insist upon it
against them.

But now if the Members of this Communion should fail him! A man that loves his
King and Country, does even shrink at the Supposition: But because there is no
harm in the bare Supposal, we'll imagine that they may. I need not be told that
we ought to do our Duty to the King, what ever Disappointments or Severities we
meet with; and by the Grace of God we resolve that we will.

But yet these men should consider, that we are frail Men, and our passions may
be provoked, till they master our Reason, and then indeed, though we shall be
Guilty, yet neither will they be Innocent; and be sure the Misery will be
chiefly theirs.

And now let us look upon those High Provocations they give us. It Is plain, if
the King may be Judge from first to last, they are all unreasonable, and that
is a most provoking Circumstance.

But I shall be so exceeding fair with our Adversaries, as to overlook a whole
multitude of Exasperations, and Confine my self to this bold Paper; and this
surely will oblige them, and so will have some good effect.

It Is twice already within the compass of seven years, that we have hazarded
our Lives and Fortunes in the service and defense of this very Prince, and by
God's goodness have been successful too, and that is an Endearing Circumstance.

But now that we are called upon for further Assistances, we shall be apt to
enquire what Returns have been made to our past Services?

I never mean from the King, but from the Papists, for they are the greatest
gainers; and being our fellow Subjects, are be sure our Debtors.

Why if this question should be asked, and may be answered, it must be replied,
that by way of Recompense we are Reproached, as Disloyal and Treacherous, in a
Paper that comes out WITH ALLOWANCE, and so is made into a Record against us,
and shall so far as they can effect it, be an Evidence to Posterity, that ever
since the Reformation, we are one continued Race of Villians.

Now this is a Carriage would amaze one beyond what any Exclamation or notes of
Admiration can discribe: But as I direct my self to the Romanists, so I shall
not attempt to move them by any Passion or Affection, or any thing less than
the Kings and their own dear Interest.

We ought indeed to do our Duty, through evil Report and good Report, as the
Apostle expresses it, and by the grace of God we will.

But yet we are a mixture, for like other Societies of Men, the Tares and the
Wheat grow up together.

What a stupid folly therefore and desperate madness is it to jear us of our
Loyalty, as in another Paper, Printed Permissu Superiorum, or to tempt and
provoke us to be Disloyal, by slandering and reproaching of us upon Record for
a Race of Traitors; notwithstanding all our eminent Services to the Crown?

I say, what stupid folly and desperate madness is it to use us thus, when if
they could prevail upon us, they themselves must perish for their Pains!

But if our reasoning upon all that is past, proves ineffectual, yet NOW
methinks when his Majesty wants and trusts too so much; NOW surely they ought
to lay all the Engagements upon us, and give us all the Encouragements that
ever they can, to obey the King, and defend them.

To say only that it is our Duty, and we are Bound to do it, is to say plainly
that they knew nothing of humane Nature: And to give yet a further proof to the
World, that they have no Skill at all in Politics.

The Wisdom of our Prince has judged far otherwise, for he has Condescended to
do, several Acts of Grace, And to renew his Promises, that so he might the more
Engage and Encourage Us to Serve him.

So that they must again go contrary to the King's prudence as well as against
his Interest, if they do not make amends for the Injuries they have done us.
This is so plainly reasonable, that suppose we agree thus far.

But here comes the Pinch of the business; what Injuries have they done us? And
what Amends would we have them make us?

I have limited my self before to Consider only this New Test, and I will keep
my method; and now that this is an Injury with a witness, is undeniable.

For unless the King was ignorant after so many years Experience of us, or
unless he began his Reign with a deliberate falsehood in his Mouth. Or yet
again, unless he is NOW so imprudent, at least, to repose his greatest
Confidence in this eminent Danger, in the Hands of those whom he knows are
false. My Reverence for the King, strikes me with a Sacred awe, whilst I do but
set down these things, but yet they are all true, or else, this Paper is a
gross, lying, infamous Libel.

And for the MISCHIEFS it does the Royal Cause, which is the next
Consideration. Now,

If dangerous Temptations and outrageous Provocations to be Disloyal, be an
Injury to the Kings Interest? Or again, if the King himself has done wisely in
his late Condescensions and Acts of Grace, that so like God Almighty, he might
allure us to do our Duty, and encouage us in it?

Why then like Satan, have they opposed the Kings Method, Discoraging and
Hindering us all they can; And if still we will be Loyal, it is because they are
not able to help it.

But then because we have so much Infirmity and Corruption about us, it is much
to be feared, that like those wicked Instruments, they will Slacken some, and
Pervert others from their Duty: And thus you see the mischiefs of this wretched
Paper, are only as great as the whole Cause it self is worth.

Perhaps you will say I aggravate the matter too far upon a single private Paper;
But then you don't Consider the Allowance, which makes it a public Authentic
Act, so far as concerns that Party, and so long as the Paper stands with this
Mark of Public esteem upon it, it is an open Declaration that they Account us
Disloyal, and must use us as such when ever they can.

So that upon the whole, it is necessary to put a mark of Disgrace upon this
Paper, and the very Refusing of it, is to stand by the Allowance, and call us
Traitors still in opposition to the King, and to all, the Damage they can do
him, by enfeebling those Hands in which he puts his greatest hopes.

Perhaps I may be asked, Why I put Men in mind of this again? But this Supposes
it had been forgotten, whereas I can assure them, Their New Test Printed with
Allowance, is still fresh in Memory, and I have not Revived it, as every body
will Answer for me. But my honest Reason for this Paper at this time, is
because that NOW is the Season to make us Amends, for if they will not do it
Now upon so reasonable a Demand, they would for certain never have done it; and
if they will do it Now, they could never have done it at a better Time.

I do not at all consider whether this be a Clergy or a Lay Allowance; let us
but have a Censure against it by any public Authority amongst them, and that
will be some satisfaction, for we shall thereby see their Wisdom and true Zeal
for the King together.

I have a long time wished, that we might Try the Ingenuity of the Roman
Catholics in a Matter where their Religion is nothing concerned; and now here
is an Opportunity put into their hands, and I hope they will use it well. They
may Account this for a private Paper, but I can assure them, the Eyes of the
Nation are Now fixed upon them, to see how they will behave themselves, as in
other Particulars so in This.

If I did not esteem them as Men of understanding, I would suggest, how it
could be no Disgrace or Shame, but an Honor and Reputation to Retract or
Disown this Paper Publicly.

And now, dear Friend, I have said what occurs to my thoughts upon this matter,
and I did it because truly I had a mind, that something to the purpose should
be made Public, and I thought it not reasonable to desire it of you, without
giving some hints of my Design; I have now done when I have only added, that
the whole is at your disposal absolutely, for I am, etc.

Just as this is coming away, we hear for certain that the Prince of Orange is
Landed with a great Army, which Confirms the Design, and strengthens the Reason
of this Paper; For NOW be sure his Majesty's Affairs do cry mightily for that
PUBLIC SATISFACTION, which every Dunful Son is BOUND to Demand, in behalf of
his Holy Mother the Church of England; and if the Romanists will not give it us
in such a Necessity; They must be considered as the worst Enemies the King has.

FINIS.

