Some Account of the TRIALS And Condemnation of Five Notorious JESUITS, Popish
PRIESTS and TRAITORS.

(VIZ.) THOMAS WHITE, alias WHITEBREAD, WILLIAM HARCOURT, JOHN FENWICK, JOHN
GAVERN, alias GAWEN, ANTHONY TURNER. and Mr. LANGHORN the Councellor.

Found Guilty of HIGH TREASON.

For conspiring to Murder the KING, Subvert the Government, root out the
Protestant Religion, and establish Popery, etc.

On a fair Trial by virtue of a Commission of Oyer and Terminer at the
Old-Bailey, June the 13th. and 14th. 1679

LONDON, Printed for Anno Domini. 1679.

AFter the Commission read, and the Juries Impannelled, and their appearances
Recorded, Six Prisoners were Arraigned, viz. Thomas White alias Whitebread,
apprehended on the first discovery of the Plot, a little Lean very old man in
mean Gray Clothes, who was Provincial of the English Jesuits, and should have
been, (had their Cursed Design hit) Bishop of Canterbury; William Harcourt
taken not above five Weeks ago near Long-Acre, an Ancient Tall man in Black
Habit with a Perriwig; a person though no good Orator, very Politic, and often
mentioned in Coleman's Trial and Letters as a grand Instrument of mischief;
John Fenwick a middle-Aged man, some what Gentilely Dressed in a lightish Wig,
and Gray Campaine Coat; John Gavern alias Gawen a Short well-set man in Gray
Clothes, and looking very plain and ordinary as a Countryman, but in truth a
person of Exquisite parts and Oratory, who managed almost the whole Defense on
the behalf of his Fellow Prisoners with a great deal of Briskness, Subtilty and
fine Language; Anthony Turner a person in Mean Habit, short Perriwig; one that
said little for himself; and James Corker, who presenting a Petition, alleging
that he had not his Witnesses ready, was put off as to his Trial till the next
day; so that the Court at present proceeded only with the five first named.

Their Trial was very tedious, lasting from before nine a Clock in the Morning,
to seven or Eight in the Evening; the particulars whereof we do not here
pretend fully and exactly to relate, as well because it is not to be done in a
single Sheet, as especially for that we are assured there will shortly by the
special care of Authority be a complete and punctual Account published, to
which we refer the more Curious Reader, only designing here to give a brief but
true Narrative of the most observable points for the present satisfaction of
the common people, that they may know what Justice was done them, and what in
general was proved upon them.

They were all five Charged in one Indictment specially drawn for High Treason,
and aggravated with all the most Horrid Circumstances immaginable. First, that
they Conspired to Kill and Destroy His Sacred Majesty, and this declared in a
threefold Overt act, by Hireing Grove and Pickering (the first for fifteen
hundred Pounds, the second for thirty thousand Masses to Shoot or Stab him, by
Hiring four Irish Ruffians to Murder His Majesty at Windsor; by bribing
Wakeman for fifteen thousand Pounds to Poison him. Secondly, To Subvert the
Government, Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and Introduce Popery, etc. Their
Jury were very Substantial Gentlemen, and they made Peremptory Challenges to
all that had been on the Trials of Coleman, or any others concerned in this
Plot.

Old Father Whitebread and Fenwick on their Arraignment insisted that they had
formerly been brought to Trial, and ought not to be twice put in Jeopardy of
their Lives for the same Fact: But this vain pretense was refuted, by showing
that though they were once called to the Bar, yet the Jury was never Charged
with them, and consequently they were never in any such Jeopardy; and besides
here was much new Matter in their Indictment, nor had they any Record to show
that they were so formerly Arraigned; with which seeming to be satisfied,
they (with the rest) pleaded not Guilty.

As to their Traitorous Design of Murdering the King, it was proved upon four
of them: that at a general Consult of Jesuits 24th. April 1678. they signed a
Resolution to that purpose; that Grove and Pickering were entertained to Kill
the King, and what reward they were to have. That four Irish men were to do the
same Villainous Act at Windsor, and that Fourscore Pounds were allotted them for
that service, and some small Addition made by Coleman for Expedition. That
Whitebread and Harcourt were particularly and principally concerned in these
Transactions, with several other Intrigues too tedious here to be specified.

It was further proved that Gavern had been appointed to manage Affairs in and
about Staffordshire, and one of the Evidences (who had not before appeared
against others, nor was Acquainted formerly with Dr. Oats or Mr. Bedloe, so
that his Testimony was wholly new, which he very Modestly and Judiciously
delivered) Proved that the said Prisoner had held Consultations in the Country
for Murdering the King, and Subverting the Government, etc. which was likewise
confirmed by another; so that upon the whole matter there were four Witnesses
against one of the Prisoners, three against another, and against all of them
two each Crime, being all of the same nature and Horrid Intention of destroying
the King, and Subverting the Government.

There was likewise a Letter produced, and proved by a very worthy Gentleman to
have been taken amongst Harcourts Papers, that purported to be a Summons to a
Jesuit to appear at the said Consult or Congregation of that Society, on the
24th of April; in which were Directions to this effect, That they should not
come up before the day, nor appear much abroad in Town, for fear of a discovery
of the Design, which its own nature required Secrecy: This Letter the said
Harcourt owned to have been written by a Friend of his, but would have avoided
the true meaning thereof with a forced Interpretation, that such Design
intended nothing but choosing an Officer of their Brotherhood: But the words
could not with any tolerable sense be capable of such Construction: And
therefore after all the fair Glosses they had put upon it, the same was
referred to the consideration of the Jury.

The Prisoners made a great deal of stir, and had procured diverse persons from
St. Omers, all Roman Catholics, and most of them young Popish Students there,
to invalidate the Evidence of one of the Principal Evidences; But as they did
not well agree in their Tale, but appeared to have been brought hither merely
to serve the Prisoners, so the same was utterly confuted by Corrobarating
Evidence for the King. For whereas those young Sophisters (ready enough to
assert any thing that their Superiors would suggest or have them to do)
maintained that Mr. Oats was at St Omers all along throughout April and May
1678. and so could not be at the Consult on the 24th. of April. He on the other
side produced several Substantial Credible Witnesses that saw him then in and
about London, and particularly one Gentleman Swore, that on the first Monday in
that May he Dined with him: Nay one that was himself a Papist, and supposed a
Priest, Swore that he then saw him at Arundel House: Nor were they more lucky
in several other of their Allegations, which occasioned sometimes great Shouts
from the people, to see how industriously, and yet how vainly they went about
to Justify themselves with pretenses equally foolish and false.

Never had Malefactors a more fair and equal Trial, nor any Court of Justice
more patience to hear and examine all that the Prisoners could allege for
themselves; nor was the method of proceeding less mild and and gentle. For
whereas they might all have been dealt withal, and justly Condemned for
Treason as Priests, that was not insisted on, so moderate are Protestants
against punishing any merely for being Priests, though that be most reasonably
made Capital by our Laws; no cause have they therefore, or any of their Faction
beyond the Seas, to complain of harsh usage or Clamor about Persecution: It
was not for their Religion they were tried, but for their abominable Treasons
which were most evidently made out against them.

So that after a full hearing of all the Witnesses they could produce, (though
all Romanists, who yet were Impartially heard and received) and whatever they
had to say for themselves (which rather consisted in flourishes and little
Captious Tricks of Subtilty, than any solid Defense to the matters they stood
Charged with,) they were all most justly, and to the great satisfaction of all
unprejudiced Auditors, Convicted of the High Treason they were Indicted for.

The next day came on Mr. Langborn the Counselor, who should have been
Advocate-General to the Popish-Army: It was proved that the Commissions were
lodged in his hands, and several other horrid things that he was concerned in;
and particularly, that he was so cursedly zealous, That when he was told Sir
George Wakeman would not accept 10000 l. to poison the King, but expected more:
he said, He was a pitiful narrow-Soul'd Fellow, that would insist on Money for
a Work that was so advantageous to the Cause; That any good Catholic ought to
do it gratis. He brought a Regiment of young Seminaries from St. Omers. to
prove Mr. Oats to have been there at the time he mentioned the Transactions to
have been at London, but as they appeared to come over only to help him and the
rest out in this pinch, so what they alleged was sufficiently disproved by the
Oaths of diverse Persons of worth and credit. Whereupon after a long hearing of
all his Pretensions, he was convict: And the other five being brought down,
they all received Sentence together to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered. And
then the Court Adjourned till after the Term.

FINIS.

