SOME Remarkable Passages IN THE Holy LIFE and DEATH OF GERVASE DISNEY, Esquire To
which are added Several LETTERS and POEMS.

-- Being dead, yet speaks,

Heb. 11. 4. LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion
in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCII.

To my Honored Mother Mrs. BARBARA DISNEY, my Dear Sister Mrs. MARY DISNEY,
with other near Relations, for whose use this Book was chiefly intended.
Ever-Honoured Mother, and Dear Sister, etc.
THE following Sheets which I found written by my Dear Brother (now in Glory)
with his own Hand, being dedicated by himself to you; I do accordingly, with
much satisfaction, humbly present then, to you. And tho they are but the
rougher Draughts of what was intended by my Brother, (he having begun himself,
and made some progress in the transcribing of them, when it pleased the Lord to
call him to himself): Yet in such a Dress I am confident they will be no less
acceptable and welcome to you, coming from that Hand that wrote them, for whose
perusal it was that they were especially intended.

The Advice which my Brother has left toward the Close of his Life (Dear
Sister) had he lived to perfect what he had begun, I believe, would have been
in every particular suited by himself to you, wherein it now differs from your
Circumstances; but my Brother not reaching so far with his own Pen, I thought
it better to transcribe it as it was, than in any thing material to alter or
vary from the Original.

And that this Book may reach the Hands of all Relations, for whom it was
designed; and may be of use to others also, into whose Hands it may by
Providence be cast, (which I am confident is yours, and I hope the desire of
all that are interested herein) persuaded much in the making of it thus
public. And upon that account I have omitted in the Poems (with some few of
the Letters) what I thought was less of public Use or Concernment. And toward
the Close of all, have taken leave to add some Hymns, etc. which I found
written by my Brother in another Manuscript of his, (I suppose more lately)
which I hope may be useful.

The Lord accompany them all with his Blessing, that they may be so, into whose
Hands soever they come; that by such Helps, surviving Friends, and all that
read them, may be more fit, and ripened faster for that Blessed State, where
Friends (united here in Christ) shall meet again, and join together in the
Eternal Praises of our great Creator and Redeemer; of which Number that so vile
a one may be, (through rich and glorious Grace) he begs your Prayers, who is,

Most Dear and Honored Mother, (Till Death) Your Obedient Son,
And Dear Sister, etc. Your Affectionate Brother and Servant D. DISNEY.
July 4. 1692.
TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IF thou be one acquainted indeed with Religion, and have so far approved of
its Laws and Principles, as to give up thy self to the study and practice
thereof; thou do not need any one should tell thee, that it is a serious, and
deserves to be a commanding Thing, and not to be played and trifled with: There
is nothing in all the World to be compared with it, because of its Excellency;
nothing to be minded above it, or equally with it, because of its Importance.

But alas! alas! how little is there of pure and undefiled Religion upon Earth?
In how few is it to be seen in its Power and Glory? A great number of Persons
have their Religion to choose, being altogether indifferent, rude Matter fit
for any Form* ready to receive any Impression; that shall be their Religion
which is most easy, and gives the greatest Latitude, and has present Safety
and temporal Advantages to commend it to them; but let the Pretenses of these
be what they will, for certain their Belly is their God.

Others are to be found, who seem to have chosen and pitched upon their
Religion, and that the true One; they have given up their Names to Christ, make
profession of him, wear his Livery; but they do so untowardly manage the
matter, that Religion receives no Honor from them, nor are they like to reap
any saving Benefit by it: And doubtless this is one great reason why it gains
so little in the World, why it strikes no more awe upon Bystanders, why it
gets no more Love and Respect, why it has no more Followers, no more to
embrace it; because though abundance of People have their Tongues tipped with it,
there is very little of it made visible in their Lives; though they love now
and then to talk of it, they do not care to be in all things governed by it;
but instead of that, are its Reproach and Disparagement, contradicting their
Holy Profession, by an unsuitable and unworthy Conversation; there is very
little, if any thing at all, of the Power of Godliness discovering it self in
them.

In the Church and public Assemblies, and during the time of Religious
Worship, there you may possibly see in them something of Solemnity, a serious
Deportment, a composed Countenance, an attentive Ear; so that one who observes
them, will be ready to conclude them really set for God, and greatly devoted to
his Fear and Service. But when that Work is over, how much are they altered
from what they seem to be? Take notice of them in their Converses with Men,
their Discourses at their Tables, their Carriage in their Families; nay could
you look into their Chambers and Closets, you would quickly find too much
reason to fear that Religion and they are too great Strangers. O how common a
thing is it to see in Men and Women, making a Profession, shameful Neglects,
frequent, if not constant Omissions of Duty, together with other great
Miscarriages, and unjustifiable Actions, notwithstanding that glorious Light
which has shined among us, those precious Ordinances which have been afforded
to us, and are yet continued, notwithstanding that Holy Communion which they
have entered into; and those repeated Obligations which have been laid upon them
both by God and themselves, besides those various and Tremendous Judgments with
which the Holy, but provoked, God has followed us in these Nations, that by
them he might humble us, and prove us, and make us better.

The Strength and Spirits of too many are exhausted, and spent upon matters of
less worth and concernment, while the Vitals of Christianity are miserably
forgotten and overlooked. O that God would be graciously pleased to pour out
more of his Spirit on those who are called by his Name, that so the old
Godliness might be restored and revived among us; and we may not only look
forth as the Morning, and fair as the Moon that has its Spots, but also as the
Sun when he is at his Meridian, in his Brightness, and Height and Strength; And
when once it comes to that, then will the Church be terrible as an Army with
Ranners.

Our Gracious God has of late been exalted in his own Strength, and triumphed
gloriously; He has done great Things for us, of which we are glad: O that we
would put on all the Strength we have, and put it forth, and go to God for
more, and be exalted in our Desires, and Zeal, and Endeavors, and do to our
utmost for God. O that all those who name the Name of Christ, would part from
Iniquity, and labor to stand complete in the Will of God, filling up their
Days, and Places, and Relations with Duty, and leading such unblameable and
exemplary Lives as may condemn the wicked World, and be expressive of God, and
show forth the Virtues of him that has called them out of Darkness into his
mavelous Light. O that I could see the Church, the Lamb's Wife, in her
Bravery, in her Garments of wrought Gold, as a Bride made ready for her
Husband; and so the Beauty of the Lord our God upon all those who own
themselves his Children, begotten to him by the Gospel.

Reader, The worthy Author of this small Piece (which is no^ put into thine
Hands, by an Hand of Love) was one of mine intimate Acquaintance; a Gentleman,
yea and more than so, a Godly Man, a Man in Christ; of a Worshipful Family, and
which is yet more, of the Household of Faith; one that could fetch hi^ Pedigr^^
from Heaven, and call God Father. He had a good Temporal Estate, the C^ou^s of
this Life having been bo^fully deal^ ^ut to him; but he did not take up with
them, nor value himself by them: for he was rich toward God, rich in Faith and
good Works.

After many Troubles which he met with, diverse tosses and tumblings which
disturbed that sweet Repose he otherwise would gladly have taken, he did by the
good Hand of God upon him fix in this City, where he had a comfortable
enjoyment of himself, sitting with great delight under the refreshing Shadow of
his dearest Lord, in the most precious Ordinances of the Gospel. It pleased God
after a considerable time, to direct and incline his Heart to join himself to
that Flock of Christ, over which the Holy Ghost has made me Overseer: In which
he was very eminent for his constant Attendance, and serious Attention, and
great Affection. He took the Sermons delivered, verbatim, read them to his Wife
and Family when he came home; and several of them he wrote out in a very fair
Hand, that he might leave them behind him for the benefit of others.

He was an humble and holy Christian, no Busy-body, not captious nor
quarrelsom, a Companion of all those that feared God, for in them was all his
Delight, as the Excellent Ones of the Earth: Most willing to condescend to, and
be familiar with Persons of low Degree; not valuing any so much by what they
had of the World, as by the Relation in which they stood to Christ, and by the
Spirit, Grace and Disposition of Christ, which discovered it self in them. He
was no Fashion-monger, Genteel, but not Gaudy, Neat, but Modest and Sober; so
adorning himself as that he might adorn the Doctrine of his God and Savior,
putting on Christ, and Mercy, and Bowels, and over all Humility; that was the
upper Garment through which the rest were seen, being immovably resolved to
keep the Commandments of God. He bid Evildoers depart from him, and was a
Companion of them that would walk with him in the Way everlasting: They and
none but they were the Men of his Choice. When our public Liberty was by our
good God graciously given us, after very long and furious Storms had been upon
us, he soon made choice of me for his Pastor; and that Flock of Christ which I
am appointed to water, and lead into green Pastures, and by the still Waters;
he did, as I said before, choose to walk in a Holy Communion with: And with
them he continued, until the Great God, in whose Hand our Times are, was
pleased to remove him to the Church Triumphant in Heaven. During all that Time,
he was very exemplary to others, and no less pleasant to me.

I being desired one Day to preach the Morning-Lecture in Southwark, he would
needs accompany me. We together crossed the Water, and either going or
returning, he got Cold, which was obstinate, and kindled in him a Fever, and
that Fever consumed him; his little Oil spent aspace, and the Lamp of his
precious and much desired Life, was soon extinguished. But O, how did he shine
and glorify God in that Fire! How sweetly did he carry toward him, without any
Quarrelling, or the least spice of Discontent* I heard not the least word that
spoke a Dislike of the Providence; No, no, his Spirit was, as it ought to be,
submitted to the Divine Will, and he at God's disposal, ready to die: for
Preparation had been his Work, and willing to die, for that would be his
Advantage. His submissive Resignation to the Holy Will of God herein, see in
the Record he left in his Diary in the beginning of his Sickness, thus; March
10, Through Mercy, this Day much better with me than my Desert, tho I find my
self somewhat indisposed by Cold, full of Aches and Pains, and Chilliness, and
sore Eyes; the Lord, if it be his Will, heal me this Night, or grant a
Preparedness for his Pleasure, and that as the outward Man decays, the inward
Man may be renewed day by day: The Lord pardon my Sin, and accept of Praise for
all Mercies. And the Night following, (which was the last he writ in his Diary)
he recorded it thus; March 21. This Day some Distemper seems to hang upon me,
tho not worse (blessed be God) than last Night; The Lord in Mercy heal me, and
recover me, or fit me for thy Pleasure: The good Lord fit me for the
approaching Sabbath, and make it a good Day to my Soul for Christ's Sake.
Pardon my Sin, and take Praise.

And God was exceeding gracious to him, for he chained up Satan so that he
could not throw one fiery Dart at him; and he enabled Conscience to bear its
Testimony to his filial State, and having led his Conversation in the World in
Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of
God; and also he lifted upon him the Light of his Countenance, shed abroad his
Love in his Heart by the Holy Ghost which had been given him, and furnished him
with such an Anchor of Hope as was fixed within the Vail, and both sure and
steadfast. And all this being done for him, it was not in the power of the King
of Terrors to affright him; but in his nearest Approaches he could look him in
the Face without any Discomposure, and not only triumph over him as a baffled
and conquered Enemy, whose Teeth were broken and Sting lost, but likewise bid
him welcome as a Messenger sent by his Father to do him a real Kindness: And
knowing whom he had believed, he could with Joy breath out his Last, and take
his Flight to the unseen World; where, as he was sure, his dearest Lord had
taken up his own Rest at the Right Hand of his Father, and there prepared a
Place for him.

That I may contract; After God had touched his Heart, He lived as one that
knew he should die, and he died as one that knew he should live better than
ever. He lived in Holiness, and be died in Faith. His Ways were Righteous, and
his End was Peace. Now he is gone to Rest, and rejoice in that God whom he
served, and with whom he walked while he was here. What Earth has parted with,
Heaven has received: His Death was a Loss to many, to me that was his Pastor;
for with him I sometimes took sweet Counsel, rejoicing in the Greatness of that
Love and Zeal he had for God in his holy Discourses, and Expressiveness of a
Gospel-Temper. A Loss to the Church of which he was a Member; in which he was
very lovely and acceptable for his Carriage under Ordinances, and Management of
himself after them. A Loss to the Poor, who found his Hand liberally, yet
withal prudently open for their Relief. But above all, a Loss to his dear
Yoke Fellow, who indeed felt the Smart of the Blow, yet was dumb, and opened
not her Mouth, because the Lord had done it. And it highly becomes her, me, and
us all, to be silent, and acquiesce in the Providence of that God, who being
infinite in Wisdom, does all things well without Miscarrying in a Circumstance.

In this Book, which is now put into thy Hands, ^ind Reader, thou have his
Picture, though indeed it is but a rude Draught; and in it thou may discern
much of the Frame of his Spirit, and see how he was wont to exercise himself,
while many of his Rank are for Hawks and Hounds, for Cards and Dice, and worse
things too. O that such as read it, would tread in his Steps, and by his
Example learn to take care of their immortal Souls, and Pains about them; for
their Interest is the greatest, and should be most minded, and first secured.
Will thou please to read it with Prayer, and an hearty Desire of being the
better for it, and then I do not question but thou will be so. The Author's
Will was, that it should be communicated to his Relations; for he was an hearty
Friend to their Souls: His affectionate and worthy Brother has rather chosen
this way of publishing it, that so the Benefit thereby might be more extensive:
And if their united Desire and Design do take, there are Hundreds that will
make their thankful Acknowledgments, and bless God. In it there are many things
worthy of thy notice: It is before thee, and I shall leave them to thine own
Observation; only a word or two.

Here thou will see how much he was afraid of Sin, which is the basest of
Evils, and does the greatest Mischief in the World. Here thou will see his
secret and daily retiring into himself, and communing with his own Heart;
though too many are, yet he was not a Stranger at home. Thou may see the
constant Watch he kept, as knowing how many Enemies he had abroad, how many
Snares he walked among, and that there was in his own Bosom a slippery and
treacherous Heart, by no means to be trusted. Thou may see his
Self-Reflections, Self-Condemnings, his Fears, his Cares, his Profiting by
Ordinances, his Conjugal Affections, his Sense of Afflictions, his Care to make
his Peace with God, and to keep up a Communion with him, and a great deal more.
The Father of Mercies bless all to thee, and make thee a Blessing to others. So
Prays

Thy Soul's Well-wisher, SAMUEL SLATER.
London. From my Study, June 3, 1692.
POSTSCRIPT.
HE seemed to have for some Months before his Doath, a deeper, and more than
usual Sense of the Sins of his Youth; which, as by his own Pen he has much
tamented, so he would then asresh frequently mention, and much bewail them. He
said sometimes, that youthful Sins would make work for after Repentance in
riper Years. In the beginning of his last Illness be expressed his Sorrow, he had
spent so much Time in Coffee-Houses; and that if it should please the Lord to
spare him, he would spend more of it in his Closet.

A TABLE to all the three Parts of my LIFE.
Epistle Dedicatory to my Dear Wife. Page iii Some Passages concerning my
Birth, my Brothers and Sisters, etc. 11 Of my Parents, and Advantages of good
ones. 23 -- My Weakness by the Rickets, etc. 26, etc. -- My being put
Apprentice. 30 -- Peculiar Sins in that Service mentioned. 30, etc. Work of
Grace begun. 36 Relapses into Sin after my Apprenticeship. 45, etc. My hopes of
Salvation, and Grounds for them. 51 My coming first a Suitor to my Wife, and
Marriage. 52, etc. Our settling at Nottingham, and Grounds for it. 55, etc.
My-Father Disney's Arguments for our living with him 62 My Arguments against
leaving Nottingham. 64 Troubles I met with upon account of Nonconformity. 66,
etc. My coming to Ollercar providential. 73 My Method for Family-Discipline,
and Reasons for it. 74, etc. My great Troubles on Monmouth's Rising, and the
Lord's gracious Appearance for me. 81, etc. Advantages to my Soul by those
Afflictions. 97, etc. Evidences for Heaven examined. 100 Eminent and Remarkable
Providence to my Self, Wife, etc. 102,etc. Good Sayings of good Men collected
from Sermons I have heard, and mentioned in my Diary. 112 The surviving Advice
of a deceased Husband to a surviving Wife. 118, etc. A Continuation of the most
remarkable Passages of my Life. 132 Passages a little before the Death of my
dear Wife. 144 A Copy of my last Letter to her. 146 A Copy of my Wife's Letter
to me five Days before her Death. 148 Copies of two Letters of Mr. Coats
concerning the Death of my Dear Wife. 149, etc. The surprise I was in on
receipt of these Letters. 153,etc. A Letter from Mr. J. R. dated Jun. 4. 1686.
159 A Letter from Cos. M. S. June 17. 1686. 161 A Letter from my Brother H.
June 5. 1686. 165 A Letter from Madam L. 166 Encouragements for continuing at
Ollercar. 170 Reasons for my removing from Ollercar. 171
LETTERS.
To a Relation, inviting him to for sake Sin, and pursue Holiness, Apr. 1685.
174 To my Mother on the Death of my Sister Stanyforth, 180 To my Sister W. on
her Husband's Death. 189 To a Relation growing loose in Conversation. 191 To my
dear Friend Mr. Whitaker. 194 To Mrs. Mary Lavet after her Marriage, December.
1685. 196 To Mr. Lob at London, Jan. 25. 1683. 198 To Mrs. Sarah Reynor, Jan.
1685. 201 Some Passages of a Letter in Answer to my Mother Disney, complaining
of decay of her Sight. 203 To Mr. Whitaker, Jan. 24. 1683. 206 To Madam L. on
the Death of her Kinsman, and Birth of her Child. 208 To my Mother, on the
Death of my Sister D. May 24. 90. 210 To Brother D. on the Death of his Wife,
May 24, 90. 212
POEMS.
MEditations in Verse on the last great Sentence at the Day of Judgment, upon
Mr. Dunton's Paraphrase of Mat. 25.41. 215 Sentence more particular, on the
Ignorant, Slothful, on Worship-Neglecters, Sabbathbreakers, Swearers, Scoffers,
Persecutors, Licentious, Gluttons, Drunkards, Adultevers, Covetous, Unmerciful,
Unrighteous, Liars, Slanderers, Ambitious, Envious, Wrathful, Moralists,
Hypocrites, Apostates, Backsliders, Impenitent, Unbelievers, etc. 222 223, etc.
Meditations in Verse on John 6. 36. by way of Objection and Answer. 238, etc.
The dying Soul's last Farewell to the World. 248 The Welcome to Heaven. 249 An
Hymn on Isa. 8. 17. 250 A Meditation on Mat. 11. 28, 29, 30. 251 A Poetical
Remembrance of Mr. John Oaks. 252 An Hymn on Mr. Slater's Subject, Ephesians. 2. 5.
256 An Alphabet in Verse. 260 An Hymn on Mr. Perriot's Text, John 14. 27. 262
An Hymn on Mr. S's Text, Col. 3. 1. 263 Another Hymn on the same Text, and on 1
Cor. 15. 20, 21, 22. 264 Meditations on Mr. S's Text, Joh. 2. 6. and Doctrines.
265, etc. Meditations on Mr. G's Text, 1 John 4. 7. 269 Meditations on several
Texts and Doctrines, from Page 270, to 279 Verses on the French King's
Persecution. 280 An Acrostick and Anagram on Mr. G. D. 291 An Elegy on Mr. G.
D. by his Nophew J. D. 293
Some PASSAGES most remarkable in the whole Course of my LIFE, collected,
taken, and methodised, by my own Hand, out of my Diary (for the most part);
though I have not omitted other Things, as they have occurred to Memory.

In which I have discovered my darker Side, in the Days of my Unregeneracy; as
also my brighter Side, after it pleased the Lord to touch my Heart with a Sense
of Sin, to awaken my Conscience, to show me my undone and lost Condition by
Nature, and my need of a Savior.

By G. Disney.
In the Month of October, 1690.
The EPISTLE, Dedicating this little Book (as my last Legacy) to my Dear Wife
M. Disney, my honored Mother, Brothers, Sisters, with other my Dear Relations
and Friends; who may have the perusal of God's Dispensations toward me, both
in Younger and Riper Years, from my own Pen: who though dead, yet thus speaks.
My Dearest Wife. etc.
SInce the Lord in his Providence has been pleased to remove me from you, by
Death, and ^all me h^me; so that I can no further, nor other ways be
serviceable to you I I must beg your Acceptance and Perusal of this the last
Legacy of your Deceased Friend, who, tho dead, you find speaking. You may now
take a Review of me (if so vile a Thing as I was, can be worth your Pains); I
have in the following Papers, given you some Passages of my Diary methodised,
in which I have endeavored, as impartially as I can (if my Heart deceive me
not) to give you the view of my Dark Side, as well as my Bright. And both for
these Reasons: By the former you may take a view of the miserable Corruption of
my most wretched Nature. You have there the very Picture and Character of one
posting to Hell; the Wiles and Subtilties of an active busy Devil; the Snares
and Baits of a bewitching World; and the mischievous Consequences of bad
Company. By the latter, you may behold the wonderful Rich and Free Grace of God
in Christ to me; to me, I say, one of the vilest and greatest of Sinners; to
me, that had hardened my Heart, after many and many a Reproof, and might upon
that account have expected sudden Destruction, and that without Remedy: To me,
that had not only sinned my self, but had drawn others into Sin too. Here stand
and wonder at Free Grace, in snatching such a Brand out of the Fire; and in
bringing me from under Satan's Slavery and Dominion, into his own mavelous
Kingdom. O that the Lord might have the Glory of the Mercy he has so eminently
given me the Comfort of!

Come then, my Dear Friends, away To my Friends that arc i^ Christ.
to Christ; and if you have done this, as I hope you have, why then stay with
him, abide here, and mend your Pace Heaven-wards; You can never, I am sure,
either mend your Master, your Work, or your Wages: Have you set your Faces
Heavenwards? O never think of looking back. Are you not far from the Kingdom of
Heaven? O yet go further; for it would be dreadfully sad to perish at the very
Gates of Glory. You have, it may be, escaped many of the Pollutions of the
World, and (...), and suffered too something for Dear Christ. Well! have a care
of lo^ing all, and falling short of the Glory of God, for want of a (...) Work,
and of holding out to the End. You have the Lamps of Profession, but have you
the Oil of Grace? You can ^ry, Lord, Lord, but do you do the Will of your
Heavenly Father? Dear Friends, persevere, have a care of Apostary, Luke^^^
(...), or a (...) Form of Godliness; hold so the end, whatever you may suffer,
(...) ^ose for your so doing; and be confident Heaven will (...) amends for all.

And if this (...) Book should (...) To Carnal Friends.
(...) by any (...) Relations, such who are yet in the ^all of (...), and in
the Bonds of I^iquity; I must earnestly persuade such (...) come to Christ.
Poor (...) Sinners, away to Christ. Come, you must at last be good; nay, you
shall be good, if any thing I can do, (...) say, may prevail. I may not Do so
(...) to your Immortal Souls, (...) to suffer you (if I (...) help i^) to
persist, and perish in a way of Wickedness; in a way you, (as well as I) (...)
^o, Hell and Destruction. It Is not (I believe) too late yet for you to accept
of Christ, freely (...) fully offerin the Gospel to the greatest of Sinners; do
but sinc^^^ ^^ (...) of Si^^ abandon your Wicked Couns^^ and Companions, give
up your selves to a (...), stric^ and serious Life; and by Faith lay hold of
Christ, as offered, and heartily implore Aid and Assistance to this purpose,
and your Work's done. Come, poor Souls, in time, for sake your Sins, and
embrace the Ways of Holiness, that Christ may be yours. I have tried both ways
my self, and can from my own Experience assure you, that the Ways of God are
abundantly the best Ways, and Heaven's Wages the best Wages. I have found more
real Pleasure, and substantial Delight in the Peace of a good Conscience, in
well-grounded Hopes that my Sins are pardoned, in serving God, and in
expectation of Eternal Life, through Christ, than I ever did, or could take in
the Follies and Vanities of an ill-spent Youth. I confess I was once of your
Mind, but can now assure you that I repent nothing more; God has convinced me
of my Folly, and I heartily invite you to taste and try with me, how good God
is to repenting, retarning Sinners.

And if what I have here (through the Assistance of Divine Grace) offered, may
be to God's Honor, and the Advantage of poor Souls; it will be a sufficient
requital of his Pains, whose hearty desire it is to meet you all in Heaven,

GERVASE DISNEY.
London, October 10. 1690.
THat I have particularly mentioned the Sins of my Youth, etc. I must acquaint
all Perusers of this Book, That I am not asbamed to do it for the advance of
Free and Rich Grace.

Some PASSAGES of the LIFE of Gervase Disney, from my first Marriage
especially: with many Particulars before, such as either occurred to Memory, or
by the help of my Diary I was capable of taking.
In which I have endeavored as Impartially to view my dark Side, as Bright;
and both for these Reasons: By the former, I discover the miserable Corruption
of my wretched Nature, the Wiles and Subtilties of a busy Devil, who goes about
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. By the latter, I would
discover the wonderful Free Grace of God to me, who was one of the worst and
greatest of Sinners, in bringing me from under Satan's Slavery and Dominion.

I The said Gervase Disney, was born Birth.
the Day of March 1641, at of Religious Parents, viz. John Disney of Swinderby
in the County of Lincoln, Esquire the Eldest Son (by a Second Venture) of Sir Henry
Disney, of Norton-Disney, Knight. and Barbara his Wife, who was the Eldest Daughter
of Gervase Lee, of Norwell-Hall in the County of Nottingham, Esquire They had nine
Children lent them by the Lord, viz. Cornelius, Elizabeth, Gervase, Mary, John,
Sarah, Samuel, Dorcas, Daniel.

Sarah and Samuel died very young: The former of the Purples, and tho Sarah.
very young, yet had a good Savor of Spiritual Things upon her Heart; and in
that Sickness a longing desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. She was
esteemed one of the beautifullest Children that ever was seen, her Hair being
Milk white, and Complexion pure white and red; yet it was judged her greatest
Beauty lay within, the Lord having betimes adorned her Soul with Ornaments of
Grace: and from the abundance of her Heart, her Mouth did often speak, to the
great Comfort and Refreshment of weeping Friends that stood about her. She
called much upon God, as her Father. My Father one Day standing by her
Bedside, and hearing her frequently cry out, O my Father, my Father, asked her
who she meant, did she mean him? O no, no, said she, it is my Heavenly Father I
cry after; you are my Father on Earth, but it is my Father in Heaven I want: You
cannot help me, but he can. Many such like Passages I have heard my Father
Disney report of her, which showed her to be more sit for Heaven than Earth.

Samuel also died young of a Lethargy, Samuel.
being removed from Earth to Heaven, when about the Age of 4 Years. He was a
Child of most pregnant Parts, and had a strange understanding in the best
Things: He was indeed a good Young Samuel, and feared God from a Child. He was
my Father's great Favorite and Darling; in his Company, and with his pretty
Talk, my Father did much delight; and would therefore usually, at his walking
Hours (which he did pretty much for Exercise) he must lead his young Samuel by
the Hand, and then could not but admire his pious Talk, his strange Questions
in Divinity; which (I have heard my Father say) sometimes he was astonished at:
and sometimes his Questions would be so deep, that lie was almost non-plust to
answer. He was extraordinary Inquisitive, and would usually demand a Reason for
every Thing under Debate.

He loved Prayer, and would not (tho so very young) be got to Bed without it;
his wonderful Ripeness in his Infancy, seemed a Presage and Prognostic, in his
Friends Apprehensions, that he was not like to be long one of this World; he
seemed indeed to be, tho a Bud, yet ripe for nipping. As soon as Sickness
seized him, my Father sent down Hill, at Lincoln, to good Old Mr. Reyner, to
desire his Prayers for him; and not long after went down himself to make
Enquiry after him: Mr. Reyner presently told him, (I believe with Sorrow
enough) that as to his Son Samuel, he must resign him to God, and prepare to
part with him, for ^he did not believe he was long for this World; and, says
he, I ground my persuasion upon this, when I pray for his Recovery, I find
strange Restraints upon my Spirit, and am much dampt and strained; but when I
pray that the Lord would fit him for himself, and crown him with Happiness to
Eternity; when I beg for the Eternal Welfare of his Soul, I am then much
enlarged. Thus the Secrets of the Lord was with that good Man that truly feared
him, for the Child died at that Time, the I suppose as likely to live,
according to Haim^^^^ Conjecture, as any of us, being all (...) of the
Smallpox at that time, but my Brother Cornelius, who had that Distemper young,
and my Sister May, who (through God's Goodness) escaped the Infection by my
Mother's removing her to S^^inder by, when we were dropping down of them one
after another.

My Brother Cornelius died of a Consumption, Cornelius.
about the Year 1664, and in about the 28th Year of his Age, at my Uncle,
Thomas Disney's at Stoke-Hammond. He went to School at Lincoln, where his quick
and ripe Natural Parts were soon observed; at School he was so extraordinary
industrious and studious, that in a short time (such was his Proficiency in
Humane Learning) the was accounted one of the ^st Scholars (not only of that
School, but perhaps) of that Town and Country. As to Grammar-Learning, his
Master (Mr. Clark) was pround he had such a Scholar to boast of, being indeed
the very Credit of his School; and would therefore usually put him upon the
most difficult* Tasks in Learning and Disputing. He was a great Improver of
Time in his younger Years: I having been credibly informed he would hardly
allow himself time for those necessary Repasts that Nature might warrantably
challenge; the spare time that he had from School, which other Scholars spent
in Play and youthful Recreations, he would constantly, with great Delight,
spend in his Study; usually rising early, and sitting up late for such end. His
great Prosiciency in Learning was such, that he proved very useful (I may not
say serviceable) to the Scholars of the same Form; for whilst they were
spending their spare Hours, with delight in Play, he would be spending his with
as great delight in his own Studies, or in the Service of those Idle Lads, who
commonly engaged his help in preparing their School-Exercises for them; they
knowing well that what he did of that Nature, would pass in School as current
Pay, for the discharge of those Debts they by their idle trifling Humor had
contracted. He was likewise very forward in the best Things, truly
Conscientious (as in Charity must be believed) in his Closet-Duties, he
spending much time there; a constant Attender upon Ordinances, both on
Sabbath Days and Week-day-Lectures. He took Sermons very exactly in Shorthand,
and repeated them as distinctly, after, in my Father's Family.

He was very useful to those of us that were Younger, and would most frequently
upon a Sabbath Day, in the Evening of it, take one or other of us to walk with
him in the Garden, where he would always commune with us of Heavenly Matters;
would enquire into our Proficiency by the Means of that Day; would try our
Knowledge in Spiritual Things; and as carefully instruct us, where he found
Ignorance prevailing: But above all, (which I must never forget) he has so
awakingly and pathetically discoursed to us about the Joys of Heaven, and the
Happiness of Souls being arrived there; that I can say, I have even longed, at
such a time, to he out of the Body, and to be with the Lord; have been filled
with hungring Desires to forsake the World's Husks, and to taste those Dainties
of my Father's House, which indeed my Brother did most lively and sweetly
represent to us: I well remember I have then been ready (with Paul) to desire
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. At other Times, he would in so sweet,
yet startling, manner discourse to us about the Pains of Hell, and the Eternal
Misery of Damned Souls; would so lively set forth Sin in its Black and Bloody
Colors, as that which brings Souls to that place of horrid Darkness, that I,
and (I believe) others of my Brothers and Sisters, were sussiciently startled
and frighted for that Time: It made me (whilst the Thoughts were afresh upon
me) much afraid of Sin; my main Reason, alas! being then only (as I well
remember) that I might escape those dreadful Miseries he had represented to us.
I can say to the Glory of God, that through his Blessing upon my Brother's
Discourse, I have had good Impressions sometimes upon me, which I must sadly
say too soon wore off again, being but as the Morning-Cloud, and as the Early
Dew. He would with some others of his School-Fellows, who were of the same Form
with himself, (such as Mr. John Reyner, that most eminent Servant of God now in
Heaven, Mr. Jonathan Robinson, that Pious Christian, now a Bookseller in
London, Mr. Thomas Peachall an Attorney, and diverse others, (then well
disposed) frequently meet together; and kept Hours, nay often whole Afternoons,
in Religious Exercises by themselves: They took their Turns for the carrying on
that Work, and usually discoursed from some Text of Scripture at such times;
and this they did from House to House, doing good (it is hoped) wherever they
came; admitting constantly of some Auditors of the House where they were. My
Brother was several Years at the University of Oxford, and a Member of
Corpus-Christi College; was an Universal Scholar, and supposed to have but few
Equals in Learning. As for Physic, he somewhat delighted in that Study, and
proved not a little useful, to some, upon that account. I remember, I my self
being much out of order and weak, tho not Sick, at about 13 or 14 Years old,
many thought I was going into a Consumption, (the Distemper of our Family) I
spit Blood, and had other Symptoms that he discovered; he perceiving me
discouraged at such their Apprehensions, told me I was not far gone in that
Distemper, and tho it should prevail, might live 20 or 30 Years. He advised me
to eat Raisons frequently, and some time to drink my own Water every Morning;
which I did for several Days, and through the Blessing of God most successfully.

Unhappy Differences (when my Brother was grown a Man) did too frequently fall
out betwixt my Father and him, which did arise sometimes a considerable height;
some thought my Father too strict with him, in his Years of Manhood, and others
thought him abundance too stubborn and rebellious in his Carriage toward my
Father: but further mention of this matter will not become my Pen. Those
Differences reduced my Brother to great Straits; and I heartily blame my self
(who too often occasioned the Quarrels) for want of Brotherly Compassion and
Tenderness toward him, when in Distress, and I my self (tho a Child) in some
Capacity, at London, to do it; (the Lord forgive me.)

My Brother John died at about the John.
Age of 16 Years, at Swinderby, of a deep Consumption: And tho I (having for
some Years before been an Apprentice in London) had not the advantage of
intimate Acquaintance with him, nor therefore of making Remarks upon him for
some Years before his Death; yet this I was certainly assured of by those who
knew him best, that he lived a very blameless and unspotted Life, and died a
most comfortable and happy Death, resigning his Soul into the Hands of God his
Faithful Creator, and leaving a vain World with Joy and Comfort.

My Sisters Elizabeth, Mary, and Dorcas, Elizabeth, Mary, Darcas.
were all Persons that had the Fear of God before their Eyes, were exemplary in
Holiness, and truly serious and gracious; they were usually under the Eye, Care
and Conduct of our godly Parents, and in this respect had the Advantage greatly
beyond some others of us, of Parental Instructions and Admonitions, being
constantly under a Religious Discipline; their good Education the Lord gave
them Hearts to improve, and Grace to answer: they were of good natural Tempers,
Lovers of God's Ordinances, conscientious in the Discharge of Duties, both
Religious and Relative, and strict in the Sanctification and Observance of the
Lord's Day.

Elizabeth married to John Hatfield Esquire of Laughton in Yorkshire. Mary to Mr.
Jonathan Stanyforth, then of Rotheram in the same County, and after of Firbeck.
Dorcas to Mr. Joshua Wigley, of Cliff in Derbyshire. All very eminent for
Holiness; had very competent Estates; kept up Religion in the strictness of it
in their Families, maintained a strict Discipline, and endeavored to train up
all under their Care and Charge in the Fear of the Lord.

These my Sisters lived but a few Years (after their Marriage) with their
Husbands, and left them for their Lord Christ, one much better.

My Sister Mary, I think, only left a Child to survive her, viz. Disney
Stanyforth, D. S.
and now under my Tuition, as one of his Guardians; he is, at my writing this,
about the Age of 15 Years; a comely Child, of sweet Disposition, extraordinary
Solidity, observant of Friends, not morose, but kind, to Enemies; and which
crowns all, one, I think, I may say truly fears God.

My Parents (for whom I bless God) Parents.
being truly religious themselves, took great care, by a religious Education,
to make us their Children so too, and that whilst young, and afterward were as
careful and circumspect in the disposing of us in Marriage and Employments, to
such as feared God. And truly God did wonderfully answer their Prayers, and
bless their Endeavors; for we were all of us settled and disposed herein, to
our Parents great Satisfaction, and our own great Comfort.

Too few, I fear, consider and improve the Advantage of a religious Education,
though certainly a most singular and distinguishing Blessing. Not to be born of
Popish, Pagan, Turkish, or Debauched Parents, must needs be esteemed a great
Mercy; and surely will be by those the Lord does savingly enlighten: such will
know how prone Corruption within, will be to incline to an Imitation of what is
bad and sinful. But now to be born of Christian Parents, yea, such who are of
the stricter sort; surely this can be no less than distinguishing Mercy. If it
be a Mercy to Children to be trained up in the Nurture and Fear of the Lord, to
be taught to be Religious by the Example of such Parents: If a Mercy to
Children to be in Covenant with God, to have a Stock of Prayers laid up in
Heaven for them, to have wholesome Counsel, serious Instructions, pious
Reproofs, refreshing Comforts, and necessary Corrections: If these things be
Mercies, (as surely none will deny) certainly then the Children of religious
Parents, have cause all their Days to bless God for such a Mercy. Here Is now
the advantage of Religious Education, when a Parent or Governor's Conduct of
Children, committed to their Care, is moderated betwixt the Extremes of an
unwarrantable Indulgence, and cruel Rigor; when Parents so deport themselves in
their good Conduct and Government, that Children may both love and honor their
Presence; when they are not too fond, lest Children should not fear them; nor
too stern, lest they should fear them too much. Well! good Parents I bless God
for.

As to my Brother Daniel, in his Daniel.
younger Years, he and I being both Abroad, and at great Distance each from the
other, I had not the advantage of making particular Remarks. He had his
Learning and Education in part, at the Lady Hussy's, with Mr. Birkitts, and
after that with Mr. Ferguson, both of them Nonconforming Ministers. He married
pretty young, Katherine, one of the Daughters of Henry Fynes of Kirkstead, Esquire
a Coheir, (by whom he had several Children, four of them yet living, and
hopeful.) She proved a most tender loving Wife, a dear Parent, and a gracious
Christian, for many Years before she was summoned from Earth to Heaven, which
was on May the 16th, 1690. A farther account of her, some Letters in this Book
contain.

I the said Gervase Disney being but Gervase.
a weak Child (while young), by reason of the Rickets I had in a high degree,
was as tenderly regarded and brought up; much Care was taken of me, especially
by my Mother, than whom, I believe there cannot be any more loving, kind and
tenderhearted breathing. I could not (by reason of my Weakness) go till about
eight years Old; but long before that, I fear, could run swiftly enough in the
Ways of Sin and Vanity. In these Years, I cannot say, that I had the least
sense of the Corruption of my Nature, and the Evil of Sin, upon my Heart:
Several Years I was carried in the Arms of one Anne Carlton, a Servant in our
Family, who constantly attended me. Bent enough I was to play, and therefore
for some Years, had a constant way of Hitching about upon a Cushion, the better
to follow and join with my Brothers and Sisters in their Sports, when by reason
of the Rickets, my Legs would not carry me.

The first Tidings of my Walking alone, was welcome Tidings to my Father and
Mother, and brought by my Uncle Lee, (then a Tabler at our House at Lincoln,
for the Benefit of Free-School-Learning.) -- It seems he, and the other
Children, were engaged in some kind of Sports, that I had an Eagerness to
pursue; when finding I could not follow fast enough by Hitching, did strangely
and suddenly adventure a trial of Skill after them, upon my Legs, holding by
Tables and Stools as I went along. But O what a Miracle of Mercy am I (to the
Glory of God be it spoken) who am now arriving the 48th Year of my Age, having
for most of these Years been healthful and strong, and little acquainted with
Sickness! when as for several Years (when a Child) I was so weak that few
thought I could live many Months. O that I should outlive Seven of my Brothers
and Sisters so many Years, who were all of them so much stronger, and most of
them so much younger than my self! But God's Ways and Thoughts are not as ours.
Surely as some times, yea, often I have thought, God has something
extraordinary for me to do, (tho the meanest and unworthiest of all his
Servants) only this I have learned (through Grace) to say heartily and
cheerfully Speak, Lord, for thy Servant desires to hear; send me, Lord, upon
any Errand, and set me about any Work, whether doing or suffering, and I thy
Servant desires faithfully to attend it: If I may have but thy Presence with
me, and thy Supports and Comforts to refresh me in my way, I shall be content.

I being in Childhood so long weak, was not sent to School till about 12 or 13
years Old, and then to the Free School at Lincoln; but did not altogether lose
my time before; for my honored and good Aunt Thorneton, who was with my Mother
mostly, from her Marrying with my Father, did instruct me in my English
Learning: Indeed to most, (if not all of us) she was both Nurse and Instructor;
my Mother having Children thickly, and nursing us all herself, was rendered less
capable; and therefore my dear Aunt's Service was much more grateful and
acceptable.

I went not to School of several Years, and when I did, made but little
Proficiency, having an aversness to-Learning, or rather to Study (the burdensome
part of it); my Inclination and Fancy working rather to other Things, as
Writing, Herauldry, Music, etc. and these Exercises I used not only as
Diversion, but spent all the Time I could ever be Master of, in them. My Father
therefore perceiving me to decline Learning, gave me my choice of any Trade: I
inclined most to a Herauld-Painter, (having by frequent Practice arrived at
tolerable Perfection in that Art.) But that Employ being judged to be too
burdensome to an Apprentice, I inclined to be bound to a Bookseller, the
advantage of many Authors, and a good Library, being to me the main Inducement:
But that, Mr. Robinson told my Father was a declining Trade. At last it was
concluded, with the Approbation of all concerned for me, that I must be bound,
for 7 Years, to my Cousin Mr. Martin Oglethorp, a Silkman, Apprentice.
and Merchant, in Lombard Street, London. And there I was placed about the Year
1661, and about the 18th or 19th Year of my Age. There alas! my Carriage and
Deportment was such, that I have cause to bewail my Folly, being not so
diligent and careful in my Service as I ought to have been, in answer to a good
Education the Lord had blessed me with.

These particular Sins (I remember) Sins.
I was too frequently guilty of, viz. wasting my Master's Time, by employing
too much in my own Service, and that generally to my Disadvantage; neglect of
Duties, Equivocation, studiously contrived, for the covering, concealing, and
hiding other Faults, which then, I remember, the Devil and my own naughty Heart
persuaded me was not Lying; yet since (through Grace) I have learnt to know was
no better, being intended, and contrived, for the deceiving of others. And thus
I have most wickedly (sometimes) for the hiding one Fault from Man, committed
many Sins against God. Another Thing for which the Lord has humbled me since,
and showed me the evil of, tho then I could not see it, was this: My Master
being by Covenant bound to find me with Meat, Drink, Clothes, and other
Necessaries at his own Charge; I finding him pretty penurious, however not
suiting my proud Humor, I did often furnish my self with some such Things at
my own Charge out of that Money my Friends sent me: Yet now and then (tho very
rarely, and never, I believe, exceeded 40s. in all) I would pay for some such
Necessaries out of the Shop-Box; which being yet done in so clandestine a
manner, I have accounted highly sinful, and (blessed be God) has cost me many a
Tear; tho since, one way or other, I believe, I have made more than double
Restitution. Another Dreadful Sin I was in that Service Guilty of (the Review
of which has been grievous to me) was this; I did not content my self to sin
alone, but did draw on and encourage John Mildmay, my Fellow-Apprentice, and
under me, to sin with me: And this I did so long, that he at last (which was
but a just Judgment) became the greatest Tempter to me; by this God has showed
me my Sin in my Punishment. But O the sad Sabbaths that we have too often kept!
sometimes having waited on our Master into Church at one Door, we have got out
at the other: And thus for some Hours have wickedly trifled away precious
Sabbath-time, by walking about from place to place for Pleasure; sometimes we
have appointed Meetings at Alehouses on Weekdays, where most idly we wasted
our Master's time, and our own Money. Once, I remember, at such a House, where
we were perfect Strangers, knocking 2 or 3 times for a Reckoning, no Body came
at us; says John Mildmay, let us be gone and save our Money; with all my heart,
says my wicked Tongue, inclined thereto by a worse Heart: But we had not got
half a Mile, before my Conscience flew in my Face for that Wickedness; so that
at my Request, we went back and paid all. Thus sinfully did we too often waste
our precious Time in Alehouses, and sometimes in worse Houses: Twice I think
we went to Syder-Houses, which proved Bawdy-Houses, which yet we did not
decline; some of our wicked Comrades having taught us (which the Devil set home
to silence Conscience) that it was a good Way sometimes to frequent such
Houses, and to associate with such Company, the better to work in us an
Abhorrence and Antipathy against the Practices and Sins of such places. This
plausible Pretense, gilded Bait, and wicked Notion, was too readily espoused
by us, young Men (tho old Sinners;) this served to stop the Mouth of Conscience
a while, till the Lord pleased to awaken it: And then I saw desperate Folly in
committing Sin, to prevent Sin; and thought of those Texts, You may not do Evil
that Good may come of it; and if Sinners entice thee, consent not: And of the
wise Man's Counsel, Prove. 7. speaking of the Harlot, O let not thine Heart
decline to her Ways, go not astray in her Paths; Come not nigh her Dwelling,
for she has cast down many wounded: her House is the way to Hell, going down
to the Chambers of Death, etc.

By unbecoming Dalliances, Glances, and Carriages with young Women, Relations
and others (in which I thought, in younger Years, there was no Evil) I fear I
too often broke the 7th Command: for tho never (blessed be God) guilty either
of Adultery or Fornication; yet since I have learned to know, that there is more
forbidden by that Command than is expressed, and that every unchaste Thought,
Word and Action, is a breach of it, the review of such youthful Follics, has
been dreadful to me, since God touched my Heart, and gave me Grace to consider.
Some Sins (whilst a Child) that I omitted before to mention, were such as
these; Playing Truant frequently, when I should have been at School; and the
better to color over and hide such Miscarriages, I seldom stuck at telling a
Lie. Thus I added Sin to Sin, (as indeed Sin seldom goes alone); I have too
often experienced it, that one Sin draws on to another: David's Sin with
Bathsheba had others accompanying it; his first Sin was Idleness, his second
Uncleanness, and then the Murder of Vriah her Husband. I was also guilty of
robbing Orchards, pilfering and taking what has not been my own from my
Brothers and Sisters, and Father; Foolish Jesting, idle Talking, slighting holy
Duties, profaning Sabbaths, Disobedience to Parents, and indeed what not? I had
so base a Nature, and so wicked a Heart, even then when I could do but little
more than go, that I boggled at almost no Sin that such Age inclined to.

These and such like Sins of Youth, made sad work for Repentance in Riper
Years; it was long before, but (blessed be God) at last, I set my Sins in order
before me, with all their aggravating Circumstances: Then I thought of the Love
and Light, the Means and Mercies, the Vows and Promises, the Exhortations and
Examples, the Reproofs and the good Education I had sinned against. Whilst I
was a Servant at Mr. Oglethorps, I was under good Family-Discipline, I had
opportunity to attend upon the best Means, had good Examples before me, was
examined on Lord's-Day-Nights, what I remembered; but alas! was too long a
Trifler under all, which I have been much more sensible of, and afflicted for,
since I left my Apprenticeship, than before. It pleased God there, to begin a
Work of Work of Grace.
Grace, which (notwithstanding too many sad Slips) I believe and hope he has
been carrying on ever since: There it was, the Lord first enabled me to set my
Face Heavenwards, and to engage me in serious Thoughts about the eternal
Welfare of my immortal Soul; most remarkably observed upon a Fit of Sickness,
the Lord was pleased there to visit me with; in a very few Days I was brought
very low in Body, begun to be serious, to think of my Ways, and of turning to
the Lord, Psalm. 119. 59. was then full of Purposes, and Promises too, that (if
the Lord pleased to spare me) I would (through Grace) mind Religion as my
Business, and follow the Lord fully. God was pleased to hear my unworthy
Prayers, and to speed an Answer of Peace to me; in a Day or two I was perfectly
recovered; and my Body being healed of Sickness, I begged hard that my Soul
also might be healed of Sin. The Lord did wonderfully bless to me the Ministry
of Mr. Brooks, (of whose Church my Master was a Member) and I therefore
frequently had the advantage of hearing him: But especially, the Lord was
pleased to do my Soul good, by setting home, with power upon my Heart and
Conscience, some Sermons of worthy Mr. Flavel, senr. (whom I must reckon my
spiritual Father); but those Sermons, with many others, to my very great loss
now, were consumed by London's Flames; Mr. Flavel himself died a Martyr for
Christ the Year before, viz. 1665, (remarkable in that dreadful Mortality by
the Plague.) Good Man, he durst not fly from it, when the Hand of God, in that
Plague, seemed to be gone out against the City. He was willing (being a
Minister) to hazard his own Body for the advantage of others Souls; and so
truly he did: for being taken at a Religious Meeting, he was carried before
some Magistrates, who, (after some debate with him) plainly told him, they
would set before him Life and Death, and leave him to make his choice. They
told him he must either promise never to preach at a Conventicle more, or they
must commit him to a Prison, (at that time) sorely infected with the Sickness.
He was too great a Champion for Christ, and a more faithful Servant to his Lord
and Master, than to stand long to consider an Answer, but readily told them, As
to their former Proposal, He did abhor the Thoughts of a Compliance, by
deserting his Savior's Service; and as to their latter Threatening, he was
freely willing to comply with the Will and Pleasure of God, and could heartily
say, His Will be done.

So that he was (O height of Wickedness and Cruelty!) committed to Prison;
there, presently took the Infection, and in a few Days, transplanted from Earth
to Heaven. After I was acquainted with this worthy Divine, and had tasted and
received some Benefit by his Ministry, (being introduced, at first, by John
Southam a Journy-man Drugster, in London, a very serious young Man, and one I
must bless God for) I became a constant Attendor upon him, wherever he
preached, either in City or Suburbs. He surely was as powerful, plain and
practical a Preacher, as I ever did, or reasonably can expect ever to hear: He
had one Practice (though exceeding useful) I think peculiar to himself, which
was this; He would at his first entrance upon Sabbath-Day-Publick-Exercises,
endeavor to raise his Peoples Affections, and to engage them to Seriousness,
by a most awakening Exhortation, pressing them to consider with whom they had
to do, the Great and eternal God, that searches Hearts; what they came about,
no less than Souls Concerns, and that for ought they knew their eternal Welfare
might depend upon their improving that Opportunity, which Prayer might prove
their last Prayer, and that Sermon the last Sermon that ever they should hear.

It was about the 25th Year of my Age, when the Lord was pleased again to check
and stop me in my Career of Sin, to awaken my drousy Conscience, to give me a
Sense of Sin's damning and defiling Nature, and of the necessity of a saving
Change; which should be accompanied with a strict, serious and holy
Conversation, if I would not eternally miscarry. Here I made a stand, and began
to consider what I had done, and what I must do! Now began I to be sensible
that I could never enough bewail the Sins of my Youth; never enough live to the
Honor and Glory of that God, who had given me to outlive those Days of
Vanity; who had bestowed upon me, not only space for Repentance, but the Grace
of Repentance too, as I trust he did about that Time. Now it was that the
remembrance of my Sins was more grievous to my Soul than the forsaking of them;
the Sins I once loved, I now loathed, and would (if that had been possible)
have given ten thousand Worlds, I had never committed them. Now it was, I by
Experience felt, (what before I would not believe) that the best of Sins Sweets
are really most intolerably Bitter. I now experienced the Truth of that Passage
I met with in a Reverend Author, (Mr. Hardcastle) says he, Let every Person
that lies under a Temptation to commit Sin, seriously consider thus; If I
commit this Sin, I must either repent of it, or I must not: If I do not repent,
it damns me; and if I do repent aright, I shall find it cost me more Pains, and
Trouble, and Sorrow, than the Sin was worth that I did commit. And this I have
often thought upon since, upon any Temptation.

Conscience now flew in my Face, and was more than a thousand Witnesses against
me; now I did (by sad experience) feel the truth and terror of that single
Text, A wounded Conscience who can bear? And this (through Grace, I can say)
that when I did not sinfully stop its mouth, it was a faithful Monitor to me.
That Scripture terrified me greatly, The Soul that sins, shall die. And here
was my Argument upon it; The Law says, the Soul that sins, must die; my
Conscience tells me, But thou, O Soul, has sinned, and what is the Conclusion?
why very dreadful, thou must die.

I set about the Work of Repentance, but must confess (till the Lord did
savingly, by his Word and Spirit, shine in upon my Soul) I thought that bare
Repentance was enough, without considering that true and saving Repentance
consisted in forsaking, as well as in confessing Sin: but here the Lord set
home upon my Heart such Considerations as these; That his holy and righteous
Law was broken, and Satisfaction must be made; that he himself was Just, and
his Justice must be satisfied: And that all my Prayers and Tears, and Duties
and Repentance, (though I should use them as means) were yet no good foundation
to build my Hopes of Heaven upon: That though I could shed a thousand Tears,
and those of Blood* for one vain Thought, they would be no better than puddle
Water to justify and save me. Now did those Scriptures st^ir me in the Face, 1
Cor. 6. 9. Know ye not that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? be not deoeived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulter^rs, nor
Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God* And that of Gal.
5. 19. Now the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like: they that do such things, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. And though, I bless God, the most of these Sins
that do entitle to eternal Wrath and Vengeance, I could not charge my self as
guilty of, yet some I could; and the least of them, in their own nature, I
found was damning, and would serve to exclude me out of the Kingdom of God; now
(through Grace) was I ready to cry out, O what must I do to be saved! and a
little seriously to enquire into my spiritual State, and after Jesus Christ,
and the way of Salvation by him. Now I began to think of the Corruption of my
Nature, and the Sinfulness of my Heart; and that all the impure Streams of my
Life had proceeded from that most corrupt Fountain, Mar. 15. 19. And that it
was not enough to bewail the outward Acts of Sin, but the inward Principles of
Corruption, leading to it. Now I came to see my need of Christ, and to be
satisfied that a single Christ would be of more worth than ten thousand Worlds;
and these were the Texts of Scripture that did much revive me, viz. That Christ
Jesus came into the World to save Sinners; and that the Gospel-Tenders of him
was to such: And that the Covenant-Terms of Salvation were attainable (through
assisting Grace.) Isai. 1. 18. Come now, let us reason together, says the Lord,
Though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow; and though they be
red as Crimson, they shall be as Wool. O what Encouragement is here, thought I,
for me a Sinner! who though but young in Years, was yet old in Sin. And another
encouraging Scripture I often thought on, was Prove. 28. 13. He that confesses
and forsakes his Sin, shall find Mercy. And Isai. 55. 7. Let the Wicked for
sake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him turn unto the
Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon. I then, to encourage my return to God, and the forsaking of my Sins,
thought of the great Sinners that had obtained Mercy; such as Manasseh, Mary
Magdalen; and some of the very Jews, that had been guilty of the Blood of
Christ, and had murdered the Son of God; yet (through Repentance and Faith in
Christ) many of them were pardoned and saved; nay Paul, (that eminent Pattern
of God's free Grace, to great Sinners) and David, and others of God's Dear
Children, (that had foully fallen) was Encouragement to me a Prodigal, now to
arise and go to my Father. Now I began to set upon a Course of Duties, which
when I found I was pretty strict in the performance of, I begun too much to
rest upon them: Now I was for believing, but hardly knew how to believe that
Christ died for Sinners, so as to throw my self, and rest wholly upon him, and
to think my Tears, and Prayers, and other Duties, will do me no good in point
of Justification.

When I had served in my Apprenticeship about four Years, my eldest Brother
Cornelius, being dead some short time before, it pleasing the Lord to visit the
City with the Plague, which began in the Street in which I lived; upon which my
Father prevailed with my Master to give me leave to retire into the Country, to
him, during that Visitation: Accordingly I came down in the Year 1665, to my
Father's House (then at Swinder by.) And then began other Sins to appear in me,
as the product or Remainders of Corruption in my Nature; I have great cause to
bewail and lament that proud Garb I came from London in, having, I do believe,
expended as much for one Suit of Clothes, as would have clothed completely 40
poor Servants of Jesus Christ. For which Equipage I contracted much Debt in
London, (which my Father after paid.) I had then so proud an Humor, that I
thought this Dress (tho excessively Gaudy) was but suitable to my Rank (tho
alas much beyond it.) This Vanity I can hardly think of without Blushing. Yet
now living an idle Life, and being dreadfully puffed up with Pride; tho alas!
alas! I had nothing in the World to be proud of, but rather to be humbled for;
I presently was under Temptation to think that I must now carry it out, and
live at the Rate of my Father's Eldest Son, and not as Mr. Oglethorp's
Apprentice and Servant. Now it was, that tho indeed I durst not much associate
with wicked Companions, that were Strangers, tho Neighbors to me; yet I did it
too much with those that were Relations, and thought that Relation would
justify that practice, not considering the Snares of it. I there made too many
sinful Slips, went often to Norton, and Norwell, where I met with such Company,
as (had not Free Grace sustained me) had certainly ruined me, both as to my
Principles and Practices. There it was I fell to the Practice of good
Fellowship, most undeservedly so called, and then have been persuaded to think
that time well spent; could sometimes most wickedly triumph in my Ability to
bear strong Drink; not considering the sad Woe in Scripture denounced against
such. At that time I learned to drink and game, and smoke Tobacco, and trifle,
etc. and spent (by Persuasion of others, tho my bad Heart was most to blame)
not only Days, but Nights in those kind of Excesses.

And here I cannot but observe how unwilling the Devil was to lose me, who so
lately had been his Prey, and led captive by him at his pleasure. But yet,
after these Relapses, (for ever magnified be distinguishing Love) the Lord
graciously gave me a Check; and after some Reproofs and Advice from Parents and
serious Friends, I again begun to consider my Ways: Conscience was startled,
and begun to do the Office of a faithful Monitor: And this Scripture was often
in my Thoughts, and sounded terribly in mine Ears, He that being often
reproved, and hardens his Heart, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without Remedy. Much precious Time I did waste and trifle away in those Days,
in sinful Delights and Pleasures, the want of which I now sadly experience.
Several Gentlewomen, one after another, I courted; being invited thereto by one
Friend or other: and too many of my Addresses of that Nature, were too
extravagant, inconsiderate, and sinful (which the Lord has humbled me much for
since.) From Swinderby, I went to Barkston, with my Father and his Family, who
went to settle there, for the sake of Mr. Trott the Minister of that Town, and
a worthy good Man; (whilst there) I went sometimes to Grantham to hear some
Nonconformist Ministers, as there was opportunity for their Preaching (which
was but seldom); much Soul-advantage I received then, through the Lord's
Blessing upon Mr. Sharp's Ministry, who was then a Nonconformist of very great
Note.

After this, my Father buying a House at Lincoln, we removed to it; and thither
the Lord in his Providence sent holy, humble and worthy Mr. Abdy, to be Pastor
of that Congregation; for which he had Liberty by the King's Proclamation, and
License of Indulgence. Here I delighted greatly to attend upon those
Ordinances, through God's Blessing upon which, and an intimate Correspondence I
held with him, I received much benefit. Then began I, in good earnest, to set
my Face Heavenward, and to mind the great Work the Lord sent me into, and
continued me in the World about. Now began I not only to observe my private
Retirements for Prayer, but to pray in my Father's Family (tho too
hypocritically) in those my first Attempts, I have cause enough to believe.
However, having cast a Look Heavenwards, Hell was presently in an Uproar, the
Devil storms at it; my old Companions begin to upbraid me for it: which yet the
Lord gave me Grace to bear with Patience, as knowing that I had much better
bear, and endure the Frowns of wicked Men, for being Religious, than the
everlasting Frowns of the great God for not being so.

But here let me stop a while, to admire the transcendent Goodness of my
Heavenly Father to me a most vile Wretch, That he should do more for me than
others, who I think had done less for him, and more against him than most
others. What, such a Brand as I snatched out of the Fire! Such a wandering
Prodigal brought home to God! O my Soul, stand and wonder! What, so hard a
Heart as mine softened! So proud a Heart as mine humbled! So obstinate a Will as
mine subdued! O amazing Goodness! This is the Lord's doing, and must always
(...) mavelous in mine Eyes.

Though alas, alas! whilst I am here in the Body, I must say with the Apostle
Paul, I find a Law in my Members, warring and rebelling against the Law of my
Mind; that when I would do Good, Evil is too often present with me. So that the
Things I would not do, I do; Corruption I find too much stirring, and even
^ainting the best I do for God.

Yet, through Grace, I have these present Grounds to hope for Salvation.

God in infinite Mercy, has made me Grounds of Salvation.
sensible, not only of my great Sins, but of the ^ileness of my Heart and
Nature; he has made me to abhor my self for my Sins, and I hope truly to repent
of them. For I do find, that what was before the delight of my Soul, is now
become as bad as Hell to me.

That God has brought me so far off from mine own bottom, as to convince me,
that all my Prayers, and Tears, and Duties are not able to save me. A Christ
alone I must have, have thrown my self at his Foot for Mercy; resolving if I
must perish, I Will perish there* I love him above all, and can (I hope, through
Divine Assistance) part with all for his Sake.

About the Year 1670, I was by many Marriage.
Friends recommended to several good Matches, but particularly by that Reverend
and Worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, my Cousin Sylvester, who providentially I
met with at my Brother Hatfield's, who there acquainted me that he had it long
and much upon his Thoughts, to recommend a Person to me he believed would make
me a good Wife; That he knew her to be a Person of great Worth, and the only
unmarried Daughter of Mr. Spateman: He encouraged me very much, that though I
should not proceed in that Affair, yet the Acquaintance of so good a Family
would sufficiently recompense my Pains and Journey. After some mature
Consideration, I returned him Thanks, and embraced the Motion; and soon after
went to that House, where (though I was then a perfect Stranger) yet through
the very great Freedom and Kindness of the good old Gentleman, I soon became
acquainted; was received with much Candor, and entertained with a hearty
Welcome. So soon as his Daughter came down, which was about 6 a Clock, to
Family-Prayers, he put us (I remember) both to the Blush, by telling her here
was one Mr. Disney come, as recommended to her for a Sweetheart. After some
short time, I had encouragement to proceed in the Affair, was much pleased with
the Family, and with the Report I had of the Person to whom I was to make my
Addresses. Providence seemed to smile upon the Transaction; our Parents, after
some Debate, came to an Agreement, as to Terms. So that when we had sought God
solemnly upon a Day, (that I desired we might keep for that purpose) by Mr.
Porter, and Mr. Otefield, we came to a Conclusion.

And that happy Union betwixt my Dear Wife, Mrs. Rebecca Spateman, and my self,
was made the 29th of June, 1671, (being Thursday.) We were married by Mr. Nixon
of Morton, at Trinity-Chappel.

And here methinks I cannot but take notice (to the Honor of God) what a Wife
he was pleased to lend me; God has made her to me the greatest outward
Blessing, and Comfort, that ever I had to the time of her Death. The usual
Properties of a good Wife are such as these, Piety, Prudence, Love,
Faithfulness, Chastity, Housewifery, Frugality, Self-Denial, Meekness,
Patience, Subjection, Simpathy and Helpfulness. I do not know any in the World
that can ^oust of a Wife exactly thus qualified; but do believe most of them to
be in mine, a valuable Portion indeed to this time, (when we have been married
14 years) I have found her first and last.

She is a truly good Woman, yet but a Woman, and therefore subject to humane
Frailties; her Spirit was somewhat too high, and my Humor a great deal too
proud, and this occasioned too often Jarrings betwixt us; but (through Grace)
we have both seen the ill Consequences of such strife, and the Lord has made us
more useful and less provoking one to another.

It was then considered, where we should make our settled abode; Roadenooke
Friends were desirous we would either be there, or near them, when at the same
time my Father and Mother Disney, desired we would be with them at Lincoln; and
several Reasons of weight were urged on both sides, which put us into a great
Strait and Labyri^th, being desirous as near as we could to please them all,
and not disoblige any: So that this Medium was by me proposed, and as readily
approved of to fix some-where between our Friends; and the Place concluded on
was Nottingham, where, though I was a perfect Stranger to the Town, and knew
not one Person in it, yet (after seeking of God in the Matter) we were
wonderfully induced to take a Settlement in that Place.

And now being resolved (and that with the Approbation of our Friends) upon a
Removal thither, we concluded Tabling would best comport with our Circumstances
at that time: We soon then enquired, and found out, (by the help of Mr. Reyner)
a Religious Family to table in, viz. Mrs. Gamble's in Bridlesmith-Gate, whither
we came the 24th of September, 1672. And I must say it was a good Providence
that brought me thither, not only upon on the account of a good Land-lady we
tabled with, and the good Society we had with worthy Mr. Secker and his Wife,
(who were Tablers there at the same time) but especially upon account of the
good Acquaintance I there presently got, and the comfortable Opportunities for
our Souls we there enjoyed. The Reasons inclining us to Nottingham, were such
as follow;

1. The very good Society there to be had, and the comfortable Ordinances there
to be enjoyed, not only on Sabbath Days, but Weekdays too. Mr. Whitlock, Mr.
Reynolds, and Mr. Barrett, being the Ministers of that Society there, that I
and my dear Wife entered our selves unworthy Members of, (blessed be God for
that;) they carried on the Work for the most part on Lord's-Days; and every
Wednesday there was a Lecture carried on by all or most of the Nonconforming
Ministers there-abouts, in the Counties round; they taking their turns in that
Work.

And O what cause have I to bless God to eternity, for the comfortable
Enjoyments of that Place! there, I think, my Heart was more carried out after
God in an Ordinance, and I did enjoy more of God in a few years, than I had
done, perhaps, all my Life before. There indeed it was we sat under our own
Vine with delight; there could we go to our solemn Assemblies, where Multitudes
with us did keep Holy Day; there did we long enjoy our Sanctuary-Blessings,
none making us afraid: There had I opportunity of conversing with those serious
Christians, in whom was my delight; (viz.) Mr. Lupton, my first Acquaintance, a
holy Christian, and one useful, loving, and assisting to me in all Offices of
Love whilst he lived; James Coats, a near Neighbor, a plain Man, but a hearty
Christian, a Person most unwearied in Labors of Love, and always active in
serving the Church of Christ; Mr. Musson, a most lively and refreshing
Companion, a Man of as meek, humble, and heavenly a Frame, as any I think I
ever observed: And the Reverend, my worthy good Friend Mr. Reyner, who was
extremely useful whilst he lived, and most heartily lamented when he died; his
Memory is precious to me, and I believe will be to all good Men that knew him;
but these are all gone to Heaven: and surely then it was time for me to leave
Nottingham, having before parted with so many Friends I dearly loved. Others in
Nottingham I soon got acquaintance with, and People of great Worth; but these
named were my intimate Friends and familiar Acquaintance, whom I especially
valued because they feared God. I bless God for this Experience, as to my first
inducing Motive to Nottingham.

2. Another Reason inclining me to Nottingham, being also very persuasive, was
this; That I should come into that Town a perfect Stranger, and was persuaded I
should find it a much easier matter to make choice of new good Companions
there, than it could be to shake off my old bad Companions at Lincoln, if I
should settle there: when the Lord touched my Heart, and set my Face
Heavenwards, I durst not again trust my self amongst the Snares and Temptations
of those near Lincoln, that had sometimes been Brethren in Iniquity with me.

I was now much upon my Watch, my Heart having too often deceived me to be much
trusted. I had found it too treacherous at London, Swinderby, Barkston and
Lincoln, and therefore durst not but guard it well at Nottingham. Though I can
say (and heartily bless the Lord for the Experience) God has wrought up my
Heart to an universal Abhorrence of Sin, and a Love to the Ways of Holiness;
sometimes indeed, and too often, Hurries of Temptation runs me into too great,
(though, blessed be God, not gross) Miscarriages; and Pride, I see, at the
bottom of all.

But O! after such Stumbles, God has helped me up again, and humbled me, and
made me more watchful and circumspect: I now experience (blesbe Free Grace) God
has given me a tender Conscience; I am now afraid of Sin, yea, of any thing
that looks like Sin. I can indeed remember the time when I could have committed
apparent Evils with less Trouble and Terror of Conscience, than now (through
Grace) the very appearance of Evil in me is accompanied with. And this I do
experience, that all the Service that Sin has ever done me, is this; I have
been, after, the more enlarged in Prayer. I have put (through assisting Grace)
greater Fervency into them, and I have been much humbled in bewailing them, and
very importunate with Tears for the Lord's Pardon.

3. The third Thing that persuaded me to Nottingham was, that my Self, Wife,
and all our Relations, did approve of our Design, when they understood the
Reasons of it: here we continued with great Content and Satisfaction at Mrs.
Gamble's, for almost a Year and half. And then we finding (through the Lord's
Blessing) our Circumstances somewhat altered and advanced, and we in a Capacity
to furnish part of a House, we then concluded to take Lodgings partly
furnished, which we did, and entered upon Rooms at Mr. Roger Ryley's as
Tennants, the 18th of February 1673. Here we had a little Family, but observed
partly the same Methods for Family Worship we do now; not only for our own
advantage, but I hope to the advantage of several of Mr. Ryley's Family too:
His eldest Daughter lived with us, and Nelly, a younger Child, came very often
to join with us, both on Weekdays and Sabbath Days; and I do trust, God made
us some ways useful to that Girl, who I observed to have a good appetite to
spiritual Things; she came to Repetition and Catechism; and indeed, was pretty
forward for Religion, and I do hope retains her Appetite, (now being a Servant
in the City of London): We continued there not quite three Years, where though
we could not expect to get much good from our Neighbors, in the other part of
the House, (they being generally too carnal) yet the Lord made it a comfortable
Settlement, in regard (I trust) the Lord so far blessed our weak Endeavors, as
that we did some good there, (as some of them, yea, Mr. Ryley himself did
acknowledge.)

But now, yet finding our Condition, as to worldly Matters, increasing,
(through the Lord's Blessing) and our Family also enlarging, I took a House of
Mrs. Smith's, over against the Castle, and entered upon it the 29th of September
1676, and that House we furnished completely; the Lord pardon our Pride in
that. After we had continued some time here, I was invited to go to Lincoln;
and my Father's Design then, being shortly to leave that City, and to live in
Yorkshire at Brother Stanyforth's at Firbeck, he did earnestly and
importunately solicit me, by several Letters, to live in Yorkshire with him.
His main Reasons for cohabiting were;

1. That I might the better be acquainted with his Business, which after him,
he told me would be mine. 2. That he might in his old Age be eased in Business
(usually very great) by my bearing a part with him. 3. That we might,
especially, be helpful one to another in the best Things; for though I had
reason enough, from the meanness of my Abilities, to believe, I could be but
little serviceable to him in any thing, yet he was pleased to think otherwise;
and would some times take notice of my Improvements in Spirituals.
Once I remember, before the Year 1680, he told me, I having prayed pretty much
with him, at that time, of my being as a Visitor at Lincoln* That God had given
me the Gift of Prayer; I replied to this purpose, (being indeed troubled in my
Mind lest Gifts were all, they being too (in my own Apprehensions) mean) Sir,
the Gift of Prayer I look upon as nothing, where there is not the Grace of
Prayer; it is that I mostly desire and wait for, and without which, Prayers
would little avail. My Father to encourage, as he thought, my living with him,
told me he would turn over his Estate to me* and help me whilst he lived in the
Management of it: but this was no Argument to me his Son, comparable to the
Commands of a Father, I being, through Mercy, not at all of late Years,
inclined to expect, or depend upon much of the World, nor ever lay under the
temptation of desiring any Friend's Death, for my worldly Advance. My Father's
most persuasive Letter for my living with him, I answered largely the 22d of
February 16^5. After I had considered and debated the Thing deliberately,
advised with Friends, sought God by Prayer, and weighed Reasons for it and
against it, (which was of late Years my constant Method for the deciding any
difficult Case) and answered him in the Negative, for the Reasons
underwritten, if he would please to approve of them, which he did.

Reasons against leaving Nottingham; such as these.
1. We came to Nottingham with the concurring Consent of all our Friends; now
by removing further from them, we must (I see) necessarily disoblige some. 2.
After my seeking God for Direction in the Matter, and keeping a Day to that
purpose at Roadenooke, we found our Inclinations more to this place than any,
though Lincoln was before most in our Thoughts, in compliance with Friends
there. 3. Here our main ends in coming have been answered, viz. the enjoying
the Gospel, and the Society of good quickening Christians; in this respect I
thought few Towns privileged like Nottingham. 4. Here God has used me as an
Instrument (though the weakest) of good to some; and I know not what further
Service he may have for me here in this Place. 5. Here we have the Love of all
sober Christians, and Favor (beyond Expectation) from different-minded
Magistrates. 6. Here God has providentially disposed and committed to me the
Education of Children, yea the Children of Religious Parents: And, I think, I
cannot so faithfully discharge that Trust, nor answer the end of him I
honored, (now with God) if (whilst I may) I have them not under my Eye,
especially whilst so young. 7. Both my Wife and my Self are very much averse to
Tabling, for many Reasons. 8. Another Reason that I thought material at that
time, was this* I can by no means away with a Country-Life* I having here the
advantage of improving my self, and doing good to others, I cannot expect in a
Country-Retirement. 9. I have some Years unexpired in my Lease of this House I
am in. 10. I have taken several Tablers.
These Reasons fully satisfied my Father Disney, and Mother; and I had their
Leave to continue at Nottingham: and here the Lord blessed me wonderfully;
though now and then I was under the rebukes of Providence, yet was stisfied all
was in love to my Soul, and to the advantage of my Inner-Man.

Several Troubles I met with upon account of my Nonconformity; though I did
believe, and did accordingly practice, that it was my Duty to go as far as I
could, with a safe Conscience, in obeying the Authority I lived under: And was
persuaded in my own Breast, That I could never take Comfort in those Sufferings
I brought upon my self, by not doing what Authority enjoined, and I might
lawfully comply with without Sin.

About April 1682, when the Spirit of Persecution grew hot in Nottingham, and
much of the Malice of the Magistrates seemed to be levelled against me; I
thought I had a Call, and was thereupon resolved (with the Concurrence of God)
to remove, and that, as sometimes we thought, to London, grounding my Opinion
of the Lawfulness of it upon some Reasons, but especially upon that Text of
Scripture, If they persecute yon in one City, flee to another. For about half a
year I sought Counsel of God in the thing, having always a desire to be where
God would have me. But having all this while, by my self and Friends, used all
the means I could to provide a convenient Habitation, I met with constant
Disappointments, as to those Houses which lay most convenient for the
Management of my Affairs; which were Shipley, Codgrave and Brameote; and as for
London, I was persuaded it was too remote from my Business, and too far distant
from Friends. On October the 19th, 1682, (Winter being far come on, and Ways
bad) I took up a Resolution, with the advice of Friends, to settle at my own
House in Nottingham, that I had bought upon the High-Pavement.

These were the Reasons that prevailed with me.

1. Most of those whom I consulted with, were of opinion, wherever I went, I
should be liable to Sufferings, if I kept from sinful Compliances, and might be
as safe in Nottingham as elsewhere. 2. God did at that time wonderfully incline
my Self and Wife to make a trial of that House. 3. It was at that time
providentially at liberty, the Tenant I had, being gone, and the House upon my
hands. And here (though blessed be God, from my Marriage, I did not neglect
Family Duties) I set upon a more strict, conscionable and methodical Discharge
of all the Duties of Religion, both Public, Family and Private, than before,
and did strive against the Sins of my Constitution, which I found were Pride of
Heart, and Passion, etc.
Many Troubles I met with, and was often disturbed, yet it was not (thro^
Mercy) for sinning against God, but serving him: Much Money it cost me to take
off Fines and Excommunications. Some Ministers were taken, being Lodgers, at
those times, at my House; as Mr. Barrett and Mr. Shelverdine.

Upon Mr. Shelverdine's Taking, I find this Memorandum in my Diary; viz. The
first Day I begun the course of having Ministers to help me in my
Sabbath-day-work, Mr. Shelverdine being that Day the Person my Sister Wigley
(who lived then by us) desired might take the first turn, and begin the Work.
He was taken by an Officer at the Lady Berresford's, who had desired some help
from him, and was committed to Prison, where he lay some Weeks, but was as soon
as might be, with Mr. Barrett, (who was afterward taken at my House) released
out of Prison by the said Lady Berresford's Kindness, who paid down 40 l. for
that purpose, they having both suffered in her Service.

And now methinks, I have cause to fear my Sins had a hand in stripping me of
such a Mercy; and O that my heavenly Father would show me wherefore he thus
contends with me! It looks, in my Apprehension, as if the Lord judged me and my
Family unworthy of such a Blessing as the Gospel is. The Lord pardon those Sins
that thus provoked him, and give me to understand so dark a Dispensation; but
in all my Sufferings, I still experienced much of the Goodness of God, in
moderating often, the Spirits of Men toward me, in raising me up Friends, and
in restraining some that had very ill Will (though without cause) against me.

Well, now I soon found Nottingham too hot longer to hold me, and my Thoughts
went much upon removing; but wither I could not tell, though a speedy: Removal
was necessary; I being under the Sentence of Excommunication, and feared a Writ
would be soon taken out* And besides, I found that there was no way to take off
that Sentence, (which I feared most upon the account of Orphans, and others
business, lodged in my Hands) but either Conformity, (which I durst not yield
to) or leaving the Town, (which I was resolved upon) as the best Expedient for
my Ease.

The Lord who has never failed me in a time of Trouble, now appeared for me in
his Counsels and Conduct. I was now upon Terms with my Cousin Clar^son, for his
House in Kirton, and was come to a Conclusion: Yet as the Lord was pleased to
order it providentially, (though I was pleased with the House very much, and my
Wife before had consented to the taking it) I would have a Day's time further
to speak with my Wife about it. And she, at that time, being at Wigwall,
thither I went; and as soon as I came, I met with a Letter from Mr. Barrett,
(my most worthy Friend, who was constantly contriving for my well-doing both in
Soul and Body) acquainting me that there was a House at Ollercarre to be det,
which might prove a convenient Seat for me; and here, (though I met with some
Rubs) yet God in his Providence seemed to point out that Habitation to me. I
went to view it, and though it was upon disadvantage, there being much
finishing work within Doors wanting, yet I liked it so well, as hoping it might
prove a quiet and comfortable Place to me, besides the Privileges appertaining
to it; That I concluded to take a Journey to Mr. Burton about it: but his
Bailiff, who lived with his Family in the House, (and as I perceived since, had
no desire it should he let) told me he would send to Mr. Burton to know his
Terms, and to acquaint him with my desire of taking it. How he managed his
Business I know not, but the answer he returned me, was, that his Master Burton
would not let it under Sixscore Pounds per Annum, which was 20 l. more than he
had before offered it to others for. This I took to be a cross Providence, and
had proceeded (I think) no farther, but for my Brother Spateman, who advised me
that nothing could be done, or known, without my going thither, who offered
very kindly to go along with me; thither we went, and in a few Days I took the
House, for 30 l. per Annum less than was mentioned, to the great grief, (I did
perceive) of the Bailiff; who (it is to be feared) consulted his own profit,
more than his Master's interest.

And truly this Providence I cannot overlook, viz. That I had not had the
House, if a Rainy Day had not prevented another going to take it just at that
time: and hither now the Lord has brought us. Men by their Fury have driven us
from Nottingham, which though they might intend it for my Hurt, God can turn it
to Good. O that I may keep in his Ways, and leave Issues to him. To the 14th of
June, 85, I find in my Diary Acknowledgments, Day by Day, that I had
experienced the Lord's Goodness, in casting my Lot into this Place; having to
that time enjoyed most comfortable Sabbaths, and for the most part very public
Assemblies, to the refreshment of others, as well as our selves. Here I find by
those Diaries, I was much carried out in praising God, and in begging that I
might be enabled to make some answerable Returns to him by a thankful Heart and
a fruitful Life.

At my first coming to Ollercarre, it was much upon my Heart to consider what I
should render unto the Lord for all his Benefits toward me and mine: I had
this serious Resolve, That I would not shut God out of my House, who was
pleased to give me Entertainment in it.

I then pitched upon this Method for Family-Discipline; On Weekdays to do thus.

1. Prayer every Morning by six o Clock, for the benefit of those Servants that
were to be abroad after, upon account of Husbandry; and this to be performed by
my Cousin Watson, or, when abroad, by some one Man-Servervant. 2. By 9 a Clock,
every Morning, to call my Family together to^ worship God, by Prayer, singing
part of a Psalm, reading a Chapter; and then Prayer. 3. To go to Dinner by 12 a
Clock. 4. To Family Prayer at ^ in the Evening, to be performed in the same
Method as in the Morning. 5. To Supper by 7 a Clock. 6. After Supper to spend
some time in reading some good Life, or other good Book. 7. By ^ a Clock every
Person to their Chamber. 8. Every Monday Night, by ^ a Clock, to catechize
Servants and Children. 9. Every Thursday night Repetition. 10. All unlawful
Games, as Cards, Dice, etc. all kind of Ribaldry, vain Songs, foolish Talking,
and idle Jesting, Swearing, Lying, etc. and all kind of Sin whatsoever are here
forbidden; no profane Persons to abide in my House, no Liar to tarry in my
Sight.
On the Lord's Day, this Method.
1. To begin the Day, as to Family Worship, with Family Prayer, by 8 a Clock in
the Morning. 2. By 9 a Clock to Sermon. 3. By 12 a Clock to Dinner. 4. By 2 a
Clock to Sermon. 5. By 6 a Clock to Family Prayer. 6. By 7 a Clock to Supper.
7. By 8 a Clock to Repetition.
This Method in my Family for most part (through assisting Grace) we have
performed, experienced the benefit of, and would commend it to others.

When I have not had this Method* I have found these Inconveniences.

1. That the mistiming of one thing has usually occasioned the mistiming of
every thing in my Family. 2. That when we were uncertain as to our time for
Family Worship, I have often found some of my Servants absent, and their Plea
usually was, that they had engaged in such Business as they could not leave
off; whenas, a stated known time for such Duties gives all advantage to
forecast their Business for it; and it must be their Faults if they do not. 3.
Want of a set-Time is usually accompanied with this dreadful Inconvenience,
that Worldly Occasions either quite justle out some part of the Worship of God,
or straiten one in the performance of it. 4. By late Prayers, either Morning or
Night, we put off our greatest and best Work, to the worst time, and give God
the World's leavings. 5. We need God's Blessing upon us, and our
Family-Occasions, as much, early in the Morning, as later; therefore should be
early at the Duty of Family Prayer; and not too late, or long at Night, for
fear of Drowsiness.
And I must not omit to add, I have every way found such Methods beneficial
too, and the Lord has enabled me in some measure to perform, my purpose, it
being (blessed be the Lord) very rare that we have mist it since we came to
Ollercarr.

Here again, at my first coming, I renewed my Covenant with God, and did desire
and beg, I might bring a new Heart to my new Habitation; and readily give God
Entertainment, where he has been pleased to give me Admission. This Place the
Lord seemed in his Providence to point out for me, and here he has blessed me: O
that, whatever others do, I and my House may serve the Lord. Here we have
enjoyed most sweet and comfortable Sabbaths, mostly by the help of Mr. Coats,
whom the Lord has made a Blessing to our Family, and sometimes other Ministers.
O the comfortable Seasons of Grace we have here had! the refreshing and rousing
Sermons we have here heard! what full Meetings (the Neighborhood, for many
Miles round, flocking hither) have we had! Here we had Line upon Line, and
Precept upon Precept, here a Little, and there a Little; nay here Abundance,
and there Abundance. Here Heaven's Dews dropped about our Tents; the Gospel
brought into our very House; Sanctuary-Blessings were restored us, which we had
sinned away at Nottingham. Here could I (through Divine Indulgence) keep open
House for God, none making me afraid. O the comfortable Sabbaths, Sermons,
Sacraments, Fasts, and Family Duties here enjoyed! O the sweet Repasts we had
for our precious Souls! Now did I begin to make a more strict Scrutiny into the
state of my Soul than ever, and was now for weighing the Reasons of my choice
of Christ in the Balance of the Sanctuary; did sit down and consider with my
self what it might cost me to be Religious, and whether or no I could be at
that Charge.

Well, but did these Halcion Days always last? Did my Sun suffer no Eclipse?
Alas, alas! we soon sinned away our Comforts; and by Sin as soon involved our
selves into the Depths and Labyrinths of Misery and Trouble.

An Account of which, take from my Diary, to this purpose; Upon the 15 th of
June 1685, (being the Day that (the first Tidings of the D. of M's Landing in
the West came into the Country) I had, by several Friends, one after another,
Information that the Nottingham Magistrates, had intercepted a Letter of mine;
in which, they found a Paper written in Characters; and presently cried,
Treason, Treason: This Paper they presently sent to many Persons in the Town,
if possibly, to get it read, but (it seems) all in vain, either they could not,
or would not read it* A very great stir they made about it, concluding it was
the D. of Monmouth's Declaration, and contained a Call to me to appear in Arms
for his Assistance.

These were their idle and ungrounded Conjectures, which put them upon
threatening me in a most dreadful manner, and sending out their Warrants to
seize me either at Nottingham or Derby, that I might read the Letter, (as was
alleged.) This Paper they never sent me, nor could I possibly suddenly know
the Contents of it* though I did understand it came from my Brother Daniel
Disney, (who was that Term in London.) I confess this Tidings did somewhat
startle me, and made me some Days then absent my self from my Habitation, as
not knowing what Injury my reading the Characters might be to my Brother;
though I knew it could be none to me, (whatever it proved to be.) I therefore
thought it best to lie incognito, till I could understand from my Brother what
he had written in those Characters; to that purpose, I sent my Cousin Watson to
London, (or to Epsom-Spaw, 12 Miles further) to find him out; which Journey he
went, and came in safety, though altogether without success, my Brother being
newly come down to his own House at Kirkstead, contrary to his former
Intentions. In a Day or two after, my Cousin Watson, (being now returned to
Ollercarre) was seized by Soldiers at my House, and presently committed
Prisoner at Derby, who by his most imprudent Answers to those Interrogatories
put to him by the Officers, did somewhat prejudice Mr. Chauntry, a young
Minister, taken at my House with him; and might have done hurt to others by
Imprudency, had not the Lord's overruling Providence prevented. The D. of
Monmouth's Army now increasing, things begun to be in a great Uproar and
Confusion; many Gentlemen of this County were imprisoned, and several of them
sent to Westchester, a Place far remote from their Habitations, and so near the
Sea, that People were filled with sad Apprehensions, concerning the further
Consequences of such a remote Consinement; many Rumors there were that I
should be fetched in immediately: Friends advised me to withdraw, which at
first I did decline, as concluding my Innocence would be a sufficient
Protection to me; but when I saw it did not prove so to others, and did
consider the Character-Paper, (the Contents of which I knew not) I took their
Advice, and did abscond about the 30th of June 1685, and (I bless God) did find
most hearty welcome and Entertainment, in the several Families the Lord in his
Providence did direct me to.

But no sooner was I gone than the Countries round (as well as Derbyshire) did
ring with Hue-and-Crys after me; great Sums of Money now offered for the taking
me, by those, who were as full of Rage and Malice as could be, breathing out
nothing but Threatenings against me, suggesting most wickedly and falsely, that I
had furnished the Duke with 600 l* had entertained him two Months in my House,
and was certainly gone to him.

Others as falsely reported, that I was taken with his Declarations in my
Pocket, and a Letter of Thanks from him for my Kindness to him, in befriending
his Interest.

At my going away from Ollercarr, I first went to Mansfield, upon the 29th of
June 1685, (that Day being their Fair) whither (as I hear since) I was followed
by the Sheriff of Nottinghamshire, and was very much in danger; many I met upon
the Road (coming from the Fair) begged of me to have a care of my self, for
great Inquiry was made after me, and search for me. A little before that time,
I being in Chesterfield upon Business with my Landlord Burton, (which
occasioned my stay 3 or 4 Hours) and had no sooner taken Horse, than (as I
understood since) Officers came to my Inn to seize me. Here the watchful Eye of
the Lord was upon me for good.

On Mansfield Fair-day at night, Soldiers came to Ollercarr to apprehend me;
others were making diligent search for me at Nottingham at a great many Houses,
giving me most reviling Language, and threatening me with Death when ever taken;
and some (as was reported) said I should never come to a Trial, for they would
shoot me, and tear Bit from Bit wherever they met me. These poor Wretches, who
I never injured, but have often served, I can heartily pity, and pray for, and
if ever I have opportunity of serving them, do hope to let them see that my
Religion teaches me to do good to my Enemies, and to requite Evil with Good;
the Lord forgive them, they know not what they do.

About this time, I was at Friends Houses not far from home, but thought it now
convenient, for greater safety, to remove further, and was directed by a Friend
(who very kindly did accompany me) into Leichestershire: Thither we went, and
(as the Lord was pleased to order it) just in time, for presently after I could
not have got away, there being strict Watches set night and day for me, in all
or most of the Towns (for many Miles) round about Ollercarr.

We traveled from one place to another, not staying long in any till we came
into Leichestershire. And the Lord preserved me in all my Wanderings, (blessed
be his most holy Name) and gave me much Favor in the eyes of those I visited,
and had with all most hearty Welcome, and free Entertainment. Many remarkable
Passages and great Providence I experienced, as I came from Place to Place,
mentioned particularly in my Diary, and therefore less needful here; only this;
Upon the 18th of July 1685, I find my Experience noted in the said Diary, That
notwithstanding my Enemies* Threatenings, and, my Fears, my Dear God had
wonderfully preserved me; so that, through Mercy, no Evil has hitherto befaln
me. O that I could take Encouragement from my Father's Goodness to live more
the Life of Faith, and to depend more upon God! upon that God that has brought
me out of many Troubles, and kept me from many Dangers; he has delivered, does
deliver, can deliver, and I trust will yet deliver me. O that in the mean time
present afflictive Dispensations may be to his Glory, to my Soul's Advantage,
and my Relations Benefit!

Upon the 5th of July, I came to Mr. S. where for better safety, I went by the
name of --; there I had most friendly Entertainment, found him exceeding good
cheerful Company himself, as those also, who were several of that Neighborhood
that came to see me: Here I had very comfortable and Soul-refreshing Society,
and Safety while I staid: And upon the 21st of July 1685, upon the advice of
very worthy and good Friends, such as Mr. S. Brother S. etc. (besides my own
Inclinations) to surrender my self to the D. of N. I came away in the Evening
from Mr. S. and therefore could reach no further than Duffeild that Night: We
got not thither till 11 a Clock, and therefore concluded it best to stay at a
little Alehouse, at the hither End of the Town, that Godfrey Batty knew,
though I did not. And here I observed a great Providence, the Watchmen of that
Town just stood at the Door where we lighted, being (I have cause to believe)
at that time, in an especial manner, directed to look strictly for me, as I
understand, all the Watchmen for many Miles round about my House were directed
to do. These Watchmen demanded my Name, but Godfrey very prudently, by telling
them his, prevented their further Inquiry; there we lighted, and the Watchmen
presently came in, who I entertained with Ale and Tobacco, and left Godfrey
with them, whilst I, in my Clothes and Boots, went to lie down upon a Bed in
the next Room, being both Sleepy and Weary; but now being under a slavish Fear,
and a disquieted Mind, lest I should be taken before I had surrendered, (for
which the good Lord forgive me) though I did get 3 or 4 hours Rest, yet not one
wink of Sleep.

In the Morning early, the Constable came, who knocking at the Window where I
lay, I verily thought I had been surprised; but it appeared, it was only to see
whether the Watchmen duly observed their Office: the Landlord asked Godfrey my
Name, which he refused then to tell him, but promised he would the next time he
saw him; which, as the Lord ordered it, did satisfy; though he told him he
could stop and secure me if he would.

By 6 a Clock, on Wednesday Morning, I got to my House at Ollercarr; and though
in the way I met with and saw several People, who (I believe most, if not all)
knew me, yet, through the Lord's Restraints, none to hurt me.

By 9 a Clock that Morning, after I had stayed about 2 Hours with my Dear Wife,
(whom I had not seen of long before, and was her self under some Trouble, and
having Warrants out against her, as was said, was a little before forced to
keep from home) -- I went to Mr. T. at Wallen-wells, who being abroad, came not
Home till 8 a Clock that Night. -- I acquainted him with my Design of
surrendering my self to the Duke of Newcastle, and desired his Company with me;
I perceived him timorous and something shy;- he told me he would not do it till
he had obtained first the Duke's leave to that purpose; upon which (by a Letter
on purpose) he acquaints the Duke with my desire to surrender my self to him.
To which the Duke made this Return on Thursday Morning; he gave him many
Complements and Thanks for his Letter, but told him that as for Mr. Disney, he
might secure him, and expected that he came along with him. Upon this startling
Answer, I began to think I had taken a wrong Method in this Surrender, and did
expect nothing less (from the Duke's Letter) than being sent to Nottingham
Goal. That Day about 4 a Clock we went to Welbeck, when I feared to find him
the more severe upon me, because of the Corporation-men of Nottingham, who (I
understood) dined with him that Day. But here I again experienced the Goodness
of the Lord, who had so wonderfully moderated his Spirit, that I found him very
calm and kind; I acquainted him, that I understanding he had sent his Warrant
out against me some time since, I was now come to wait upon him to know his
Pleasure. He replied, he never sent out any Warrant against me, nor had he any
thing to charge me with, only a great Rumor there was of a Character-Paper
directed to me, which the Aldermen of Nottingham had sent to King and Council;
that therefore it was convenient I should be forthcoming, till he had
acquainted the King and the Lord Lieutenant of Derbyshire with my Surrender;
and did not doubt but in a Week's time he should receive Orders for my Liberty.
In the mean time, he wished me to make choice of any Friend in the County to be
withal. -- I named my Uncle Lee, which he readily approved of, sent his Servant
and Letter with me. -- And thither we came on Friday Morning about 10 a Clock,
there I had kind Reception and friendly Entertainment, as also my Wife and 2
Servants with me: Here again the Devil set his Agents a-work to raise
slanderous and lying Reports of me; by some it was reported, that the Aldermen
of Nottingham were drawing up a Paper against me, to send to London; others
that I was run away privately from my Uncle Lee; some that I was a Prisoner at
Newark; others reported me hanged in the West, at the same time the Lady Lisle
was executed; others said that John Oliver of Lincoln, was just going to London
to swear Treason against me, and some others; but I might easily prevent and
stop him, by laying an Action I had upon him, and so imprison him: But this
Counsel I utterly disliked, and bless God none of these things did much move
me. A Passage in my Diary giving this Reason for it, I can heartily trust the
Lord, who has all along been my Helper; I can with Comfort enough set a single
God against all mine Enemies.

Whilst I was at my Uncle Lee's, (which was between 5 and 6 Weeks) my Uncle was
unwearied in his Pains for me; going twice to Nottingham, thrice to the D. of
N. and once to Ollercarr, in my behalf; was very sollicitous and desirous to
set me right amongst those that had aspersed me, the Lord require him more than
I can.

August 10, 1685. my Uncle Lee returned from the D. of N. acquainted me the D.
was much troubled for my long Confinement, but could not help it; that he had
sent 3 several Letters to the Lord Sunderland to know the King's Pleasure about
me, but could receive no Answer. He concluding they had nothing against me, was
willing he should upon his own Head, and without Order set me at Liberty; and
if possible afterward take advantage against him for so doing; he being
sensible they watc'd to take Pique against him, resolved he would give no
advantage: Therefore, by a fourth Letter, acquaints the Lord Sunderland, that
he was resolved he would not set me at Liberty, without the King's Order, and
desired to hear (with what speed might be) his Pleasure about it.

On August 26, 1685. being at Lincoln with my Uncle Lee, my Mother Disney gave
me a Letter, Ben. Bromhead brought from London, from my Cousin W. Disney some 3
Days before he died (who was executed as Printer of the Duke of M. Declaration)
full of earnest Desires, that I would take care of his Daughter with me (she
being both Fatherless and Motherless): The which (by the Grace of God) I shall
do, and look upon her as a Child Providence has cast upon me as my own. The
Letter bore Date the 26th of June, 1685. had lain some time before King and
Council ere it was suffered to be sent to me; but blessed be God it did me no
hurt.

August 28, 1685, being Friday, the D. of N. by a Servant on purpose, gave me
tidings of my Liberty by a Letter he sent me, which he had received from the
Lord Sunderland, to this purpose; That it was the King's Pleasure and Command,
that I should be set at Liberty, upon such Security as his Grace thought fit.
And now here is Food for Faith to feed upon, a gracious return to Prayer. Thus
the Lord was pleased to restrain the Hands of wicked Enemies, that had
threatened me Ill; and to influence the Hearts of great Men to do me Good. I
have experienced with the Psalmist, Psalm. 31. 13. For I have heard the Slander
of many: fear was on every side, whilst they took counsel together against me,
they devised to take away my Life; yet I have seen the Goodness of the Lord in
the Land of the Living. And have good encouragement with holy David to say, At
what time I am afraid, I will trust in the Lord.

My Uncle Lee, and I, then went to the D. of N. where the D. received me very
kindly; and told me, though he had nothing at all against me, yet being the
King's Letter to him had mentioned a Bail, he would advise me to enter into
Bonds for the good Behavior, my self in 2000 l. and my 2 Sureties in 1000 l. a
Man. This I declined very much, yet at the Duke's importunity (after I had
taken some time to consider on it) I very unwillingly granted to endeavor it;
and, indeed, I must say, a great many I found very ready to serve me in the
Thing: But the D. himself having named to me my Uncle Clay for one, and my
Uncle Lee having offered himself for another, I concluded upon them; and to
that purpose desired my Uncle Lee, to speak to my Uncle Clay, he being just
then going to Southwell, which he did, but sent me word by my Man, (who went
with him) that my Uncle Clay positively refused me; but (as I have since heard,
and do believe it) 'twas not in Unkindness; for he acquainted the D. of N. he
did not think me in earnest in that Request another made, having neither Letter
nor Message from me about it; but my Cousin Low, his Sonin-law, did very
cheerfully accept of piece of service for me.

We all three accordingly, went to the D. of N. to enter into Bond; but the
Duke declaring some great Pique against my Cousin Low, fell into a Passion, and
declared he would not take Low's Bond for a Groat; and since Clay would not,
Lee should not be Bail for me, but I must get two others. This proved a good
Providence, for meeting with this Cross, I took heart to send the Duke word,
that I having no ways appeared against King or Government, nor any ways
misbehaved my self, did think it very hard thus to be called to enter into Bond
for the Good-Behaviour. The Duke returned by Letter, this Answer to me, That
since I had declined entering into Bonds, he had, by Letter, acquainted the King
that no Body came in against me, that I was unwilling to enter into Bonds;
(being no ways guilty) and left it to his Majesty's further Pleasure; only bad
me remember he had mine, and my Uncle Lee's Promise to come to him (if sent
for.) And thus (through Mercy) I have escaped those ensnaring Bonds, having
heard nothing from the D. of N. to this 15th of December 1685, being almost
four Months, and I trust I may not.

August 31, 1685; This Day I returned and my Wife, and Mr. Coats and his Wife,
to Ollercarr. Upon the 6th of September, 1685, we enjoyed a very comfortable
Opportunity, being the Sabbath Day: good Mr. Coats preached a Congratulatory
Sermon for the Lord's Goodness toward us, in bringing us together again! who
had so long been separated one from another; he preaching from those words,
Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his Benefits toward
me? and raised this Doctrine, That gracious Souls have, and ought to have, such
a Sense of Divine Favors, as to be extraordinarily carried forth in Love and
Thankfulness to God for them. In the Application, he told us, We might take
some Measures of the Greatness of the Mercy, of Deliverance God had wrought for
us, by considering the Greatness of those Troubles, and the Perplexity of the
Condition we were most of us in; says he, Was it not sad for a Family, once so
united, not only in Affection, but in a sweet and delightful Society, to be
shattered and broken all to pieces?

Was It not sad that a House should ring with Oaths and Curses, that for some
time before had no such Language to be heard in it? Was It not sad! that a
Family should be quite left and forsaken of those sweet and comfortable
Sabbaths it had some time enjoyed in great security? In a word; Was It not sad,
that we, who had so often joined together in Family Worship, as Reading,
Praying, and Praising God, should be so separated one from another; that we
could not assemble together for such Worship without apparent Hazard, nay some
of us cast into such Places where there was no Worship of God to be joined in?
Here was our Misery. God give us all a lively Sense of Divine Favor in our
great Deliverance.

When God had returned me to my Family, my earnest Prayer was, I might not
return to Sin, but honor God more in it than ever, who had done so much for me
and mine.

November the 10th, 1685, (the Parliament being just met) We kept a Night of
Humiliation, by the help of Mr. B. Mr. C. and Mr. C. the Latter made a Sermon
from these words, Isai. 8. 17. And I will wait upon the Lord that hides his
Face from the House of Jacob, and I will look for him. They were much enlarged
in those Duties; and I do at this time experience (blessed be God) both in
them, and Closet-Duties, upon the same occasion, my Heart was in a good warm
Frame, and was working much after God. God has heard and answered our Prayers
most remarkably, as appeared by the Parliament's putting forward things very
beneficial to the Nation; they did, I believe, beyond either the expectation of
those who brought most of them irregularly in, or others who indeed expected
nothing of good from them.

But by this, I have learned this Lesson, that by those from whom Men expect
least, God can do most; and I fear we have lost many and many a Mercy, by
knocking at wrong Doors for them, and by trusting too much to, and expecting
too much from an Arm of Flesh.

The Lord I do find and experience, Benefits by Afflictions.
has (by blessing to me late Afflictions) done me this Good, (blessed be his
most holy Name.)

1. I have learned to trust God more in difficult Cases. 2. I see more Evil
than before in Sin, by this bitter Fruit. 3. I see a Necessity of settling
worldly Concerns, of making my Will, (which since I came home I did.) 4. Now I
am afraid of the least Sin, either of Omission or Commission; a little Sin does
more wound my Conscience, and disturb my Peace, than greater before. 5. I now
experience, that I spend more time in Duties, and that with greater delight. 6.
I am a better Husband of my precious Time, and more careful to improve it, more
fearful of mispending it. 7. I am less passionate, for God has showed me the
ill Consequences of Family-Heats and Discord. 8. Less proud, (I hope) the Lord
having showed me enough in my self, and in the present sad Times, and my late
Circumstances, to humble and abase me. 9. Now I find a greater Readiness to
sympathize with the poor afflicted Members of Jesus Christ, having my self so
lately been a Sufferer. 10. The World, and the Things of the World are less in
my esteem, having been so lately embittered to me. 11. Now have I set up some
other Duties, more than before I practiced; as Praying with my Wife, and
Repetition on Weekdays, and Reading in the Family after Suppers: I bless the
Lord for these happy Fruits of Affliction; I trust that mine has brought me
nearer Christ.
I scarce know any thing that states the Difference betwixt me and the vilest
of Hypocrites, but only this; That God makes my Distempers my Burden, and in
the Riches of his Love, inclines my Heart to hanker toward him for help.

Evidences for Heaven, which I examine my self by; more at large in my Diary;
answered.
1. Effectual Calling, is a good Evidence for Heaven; as appears by* Romans 8.
30. 2 Pet. 1. 10. the Calling I had was about the Year 1668. 2. Change of
Company, a good Evidence, choosing the Society of the Godly, shunning the
Society of the Wicked, Psalm. 1. 1. Psalm. 26. 4, 5. Psalm. 119. 115. Acts 9. 26.
My Heart answers affirmatively, for that I left Lincoln, and came to live at
Nottingham for this end. 3. Universality of Obedience, Psalm. 119. 6. Ps. 139. 2
last Verses; to this G. D's Heart answers Aff. December. 7, 1685. 4. Love to the
Godly, (as such) 1 John 3. 14. To this my Heart answers Aff. December. 7, 85. 5.
Sincere Endeavors to approve my Heart more to God, than my Ways to Men; aiming
more at God's Glory than my own Profit, Applause, etc. 2 Cor. 1. 12. My Heart
answers Aff. 6. Melting and Mourning for Sin, upon the sense of God's Free-Love
in Christ, Zech. 12. 10. 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10. G. D's Heart answers Aff. 7. Zeal for
God against Sin, Joh. 2. 17. 2 Cor. 7. 11. G. D's Heart answers Aff. 8. A Love
of, and longing for Christ's Appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Heb. 9. 6. Rev. 22. 7, 20.
G. D's Heart answers Aff. December. 7, 85. 9. Gracious Speech, Prove. 10. 21.
Ephesians. 4. 29. G. D's Heart answers Aff. 10. Blessing God for, and rejoyeing in,
the Gifts and Graces of others, Joh. 29. 30. My Heart answers Aff. 11. The
Spirit of Prayer, Acts 9. 11. Romans 8. 15. G. D's Heart answers Affi. 12. A
careful Sanctification of the Lord's Day, Isai. 4. 56. My Heart answers Affi.
December. 7, 1685.
I kept a constant Diary or Journal, recording my Carriage toward God, toward
others, and my self, and God's Carriage toward me; giving an account of signal
Returns to Prayer, and great Providence; a few here take.

The 11th of May 1674, (being very Rainy at night,) I traveling to Laughton in
Yorkshire, upon the Moore, about a Mile and half off the Town, I light into a
deep watery Place, missing the paved Bridge, my Horse slipping, fell side-ways,
I all over in the Water, and a great Mercy I was not lost, by the Horses lying
upon me; my Man drew me out by my great Chamlet-Cloak, which helped me to swim;
I rid afterward to the Town wet to the Skin, with Boots full of Water;
immediately went to a hot Bed, took something warm, prayed to the Lord, and got
a good Night's Rest; and next Morning was never the worse: This good Providence
I desire to remember, acknowledge and improve.

2. When we lived at Mr. Ryley's in Nottingham, my Wife being one Night just
gone up into a very narrow strait Chamber, being immediately to return down
again, having a Candle with her; a Gun was discharged in the Street, made an
amazing roaring, and noise all over the House; but in that Chamber such a
Noise, as much affrighted her; next Day, I coming into the Chamber, found a
round Hole in the Casement by a considerable large Bullet made, which (the
Chamber being so very narrow) it could no ways have mist her, had not a good
God wonderfully preserved her from the Danger, by directing the Bullet.

3. A good return to Prayer: 24th of February, 1674, which the Lord, in mercy,
help me to improve.

4. A gracious Return to Prayer, in my dear Wife's Recovery of such a Sickness
as most gave her over, in February 1674.

5. January the 6th, 1675, coming with my Wife from Wigwall, and passing
through a thick Wood to Roadenooke, one Bough of a Tree coming up on my Eye
with a great force, one being just gone by before, and held it back, it
(slipping from him) struck violently upon my Eye, so that I concluded it struck
quite out; it stood immediately of a Gore-blood, was ill a little time, but
(through Grace) in 2 days so well, that I could see to record this singular
Providence; which Escape and Deliverance, I desire to ascribe to Divine
Goodness, as a Return to Prayer, and desire I may use my Eyes more to the
Honor of God.

6. January the 14th 1683, I and my Man Sam. Fone, being going a Journey to
Rotheram, about seven Miles off of Nottingham, Sam's Horse slipped, and fell on
the side of a Hill with his Leg under him, which was greivously bruised and
strained, and he so full of Pain, that I was forced to return to Nottingham
with him: In my return, such a like Fall I got, my Horse lying upon me a
considerable time, for he could not rise; and had he risen of himself, it might
have broken my Leg, which lay just in a Cart-rut; and Sam. being lamed before,
could not help me; but now, providentially a Person comes riding by, just at
that instant, did help me up; and through Mercy, I got not the least Hurt,
though my Fall seemed much more dangerous than Sam's, who was lame and under
the Chirurgeon's Hand long. This is a distinguishing Mercy, which I desire to
improve to the Glory of God.

7. The 18th of June, 1677. In the Close of that Day, in Closet-Prayer, I found
my Heart so warmly carried out after God, that nothing would serve my turn but
God, and I trust God gave me himself: Blessed Lord, enable me to improve such a
Privilege.

8. My Father Disney, in his time, and I for some Years after him, were
perplexed with long and tedious Suits by John Oliver of Lincoln, a Bankrupt,
who sued in forma pauperis: He did most wickedly occasion several People to
forswear themselves against me, particularly one Jane Farrow of Lincoln, aged
about 54, a Woman ofa bad Life, and no Principles; she being subpena'd by J. O.
to be an Evidence for him: At our sitting a Commission at Lincoln for that
purpose, she the said Jane Farrow did swear positively that the Goods in J. O's
Shop at the time my Father seized them, were worth 1500 l. and therefore she
would conclude my Father was completely satisfied J. O's Debt, and had no right
to detain his Estate longer from him. Though I at the same time brought
substantial Witnesses, and Persons of good Credit and Reputation, who upon Oath
made appear just the contrary; one Mr. Snowden, in my behalf, swore that he had
a Judgment of a 100 l. upon the Bankrupt's Estate, and went at that time my
Father seized, with a design to take out Execution upon the Goods, but not
finding them of near a 100 l. value, did desist. Since this, the said Jane
Farrow has told some the Reason of her Swearing so desperately was, That J.
Oliver had instructed her, and others of his Witnesses, what to swear; had made
them all drunk, and then (as she confessed) they swore any thing.

Since, this poor wretched Jane Farrow was visited with Sickness, and died Feb.
27, 1683. and upon her Deathbed was in a most sad despairing Condition, and
cried out much against herself for being forsworn. She told those about her
that she saw the Devil, and there, says she, he stands (pointing to a Place)
ready to fetch me away: She very frequently spoke the same or the like Words.
O! says she, thou art come to fetch me; I am certainly thine, and shall be with
thee er'e long. She further added, it must needs be so, if Mrs. Disney (meaning
my Mother) and Mr. Disney (meaning my self) does not forgive me. Some about her
told her (for she had many Visitors daily) that she must call upon God for
Mercy, (who alone for Christ's Sake could forgive her) but she bad them say no
more of that; for she had nothing to do with God nor Christ, nor would she
receive any Soul-advice, as concluding she must be damned. She sent for J. O.
that wicked Wretch, who was certainly the Ruin of that poor Woman's Soul (if
the Lord showed not Mercy at last Gasp); and told him, that for his Sake, and
at his Request, she had damned her Soul, in forswearing her self against Mr.
Disney. He endeavored to pacify her, by telling her she had sworn nothing but
Truth, and advised her not to regard what any said to the contrary: But this
did not do, for she still cries out most horridly against her self, desired
those about her to pray for her Death. But says some by her, Jane, we fear you
are very unfit to die: to which she presently replied, she knew she must be
damned, and the Devil stood ready for her. And thus she lived 2 or 3 Days, and
went out of the World in a sad despairing Condition. A most remarkable Instance
indeed it is of God's Vengeance upon a perjured Person. May others take warning
by it, and such as are guilty in the same kind, repent in time.

9. An Instance very remarkable of two others I could not but here insert,
which I had certainly attested by near Neighbors, and my own Tenants at
Swinderby; One Smith and Simkin, at Harby (having been at Agle Feast, returning
home late) says Smith, Come we must gallop, Neck or nothing, the Devil loves no
Cripples; they being both upon one Horse, presently fell down one from one
side, the other from the other, both dead, and never spoke more; they received
hurt only in one part of their Body ( viz. their Necks) intimating their Sin in
their Punishment.

10. November. 26, 1684. being Saturday, at Dinner, some of our Servants
discovered Quicksilver amongst the Pudding they were eating, and we at our
Table had eaten on before; we presently concluded it must be some that had
scattered into the Chest where the Meal used to lie, in which Chest, at our
removal from Nottingham, I brought a Pot of Quicksilver that I kept by me for
Weather-Glasses, amongst other things: we all eat of the Pudding, but none of
us, through the Mercy of God, experienced the least Prejudice from it.

11. At Nottingham, whilst we lived at Mr. Ryley's House, a sad Fire broke out
the at William Stirrop's a Flax-man, next Mr. Recklises, at about 11 a Clock at
Night, which did burn and flame so furiously, by reason of the great quantities
of Combustible Matter there, that in all probability it had much endangered the
consuming the Town to Ashes, had it not been for this great Providence, viz.
That very night, and at the very time, when its likely all, or most others were
a-sleep in their Beds, We (as the Lord was pleased to order it) had a Religious
Meeting at our House, where many were assembled to serve God; Mr. Billingsley
(being toward the conclusion of that Exercise) and we (met in a Room partly
against those Flames) did soon espy them, and as soon dismissed those likely to
be serviceable at such a Work, such as Mr. Hawkins, Jo. Boot and others, who
being fresh and active, did soon (through the Blessing of God) quench that Fire,
there being very few others that appeared; which made some say, they were
consident there was a Conventicle that Night, there were so many Dissenters
about the Fire. How reproachfully so ever these might speak, I believe Mr.
Mayor (then Parker) at Hencross, was more serious, when he told me the Town of
Nottingham was much beholden to our Conventicle for the timely stopping of
those Flames.

12. The 3d of December 1685. this Night (through extraordinary Drowsiness) at
Family Prayer, I slep'd 2 or 3 times; and awaking again, did not use the best
means I could, and should, of standing up to prevent the Drowsiness; I hoped
might go off without it. Upon which (being dropped again asleep) to my
Apprehensions, something gave me a great Blow upon the Middle of my Back, which
presently awaked me in a Fright, which I did really feel paining me some
Minutes after I was awaken. I have purposed upon it, and hope (through Grace to
perform it) to be always more watchful for the future against such a Sin.

This brings to my Mind another Providence of like nature; My eldest Brother
being to repeat a Lecture-Sermon one Night in my Father's Family, I being then
very young, (and not liking that Work) cried to go to Bed, and to have my
Brother with me, in which (after some repulse) I was gratified in my Desire: to
our Chamber we went, and into Bed I got, but before I could drop asleep, I felt
the bottom of the Bed-clothes lift up, where presently something pulled me by
the Toe, but nothing there was to be seen: this affrighted me exceedingly; and
though young, I could conclude it a Rebuke to me for hindering that pious
Exercise of Repetition, and durst never do it after.

Some good Sayings of good Men, I find collected in my Diary, out of Sermons I
have heard, viz.
1. There Is few (if any) whose Joys in a comfortable Communion with God, are
not sometimes clouded with Sorrow.

2. Where the Minister's Work ends, there the Hearer's begins.

3. It shows but little Love to God in Duty, when we come with Unwillingness,
stay with Weariness, and go away with Gladness.

4. A Man may be fat in Gifts, yet lean in Grace.

5. In the want of all things, we may taste and see how sweet the Lord is.

6. It Is comfortable Music to hear the Bird in the Breast singing, whatever we
suffer for it.

7. That Repentance is seldom truehearted that is gray headed.

8. Let our Thirst to worldly things be cold to heavenly things inflamed.

9. It Is easy for Men to fly from Duty, but impossible to avoid their Account.

10. Accustom thy self to Duty, but do not Duties customarily.

11. Entertain none in your Houses, that shut God out of their Hearts.

12. Associate not your selves with those as Friends, that are God's Enemies.

13. They cannot be true to Men, that are false to God.

14. Dare not to decline Duty, to preserve Liberty.

15. Let the present Day's Practice, be still the Mending of the past Day's
Errors.

16. I fear my Duties more than my Sins; Duties lift me up, but my Sins humble
me.

17. It Is well if Rome's Relics amongst us, do not keep Possession for Popery.

18. Give not way to sleep any Night, till thou have particularly inquired into
thy Carriage the Day past.

19. Family-Passions cloud Faith, disturb Duty, and darken Comforts.

20. He never wants Comfort, that lives content.

21. That Man never wants his own Will, that makes God's Will his.

22. They need not drink of another's Bucket, that have the Fountain, nor use
Stilts and Crutches, that have Spiritual Strength.

23. Let Parents and Governors, by their Examples endeavor to influence
Children and Servants into a good Practice.

24. Sanctified Troubles are Tokens of special Love.

25. If your Houses be not Nurseries for Heaven, they will be breeding Places for
Hell.

26. Whatever Evil we would reprove in another, we must be doubly watchful
against it our selves.

27. Early beginnings in Goodness makes an easy Deathbed.

28. Put not that of to last, that cannot be done too soon.

29. We have no more to live upon to Eternity than what we lay up in Time.

30. It Is better to be reproached for being too soon, than damned for being too
late, in Heaven's ways.

31. Good Families make good Churches; and good Education, good Families.

32. The contented Man is never poor, let him have never so little; and the
discontented Man never rich, let him have never so much.

33. There are two Jubilees kept in Heaven, one at the Conversion of a Sinner
on Earth, the other at his Glorification in Heaven.

34. Bad Times to live in, are good Times to die in.

35. Afflictions are hard Meat, but Patience a good Digester.

36. The best Trial of our Spiritual Estate, is by the tenure of our Actions,
not by this or that particular Action.

37. Though a sincere Christian will not overtake a Sin, yet the most sincere
may be overtaken with a Sin.

38. Sad Conclusions might be drawn against eminent Saints, if some particular
Actions were a Rule to judge by.

39. It Is good to be as charitable to others, as ordinarily we are partial to
our selves.

40. The best of Saints would never arrive at Assurance, if it did not consist
with many Imperfections.

41. A sanctified Cross has more of Mercy in it, than an unsanctified Comfort.

42. The Company a Man keeps, is a Commentary upon his Life.

43. Persecuted Godliness, is far more eligible than prosperous Profaneness.

44. It Is the very Nature of true Faith, to make future Things present.

45. It Is very difficult for one to be angry and not sin, and very dangerous to
sin in being angry.

46. It Is good Scripture-Logick to draw Conclusions of Confidence from Premises
of Experience.

47. The poorest in the World has more than he had when he came into the World,
and more than he can carry out, when he leaves the World.

48. Duties rested in, as well as Sins unrepented of, are dangerous.

49. If Mercy be not a Lodestone to draw us nearer to God, it will be a
Millstone to sink us deeper into Hell.

50. It Is sad to lose good Men in the best Times, but looks like a Judgment to
lose them in the worst.

The Surviving Advice of a Deceased Husband to a Surviving Wife: Or, a Call
from the Dead to the Living.
Written January the 30th 168 -- and intended for my Dear Wife's Perusal, if it
shall please the Lord She survive Me.
Note, [ This was written some time before the Death of his former Wife.]

Dearest on Earth,
I Having of some late Months been employed in setting not only my Heart, which
I accounted my greatest Work, but my House in order, which I judged likewise
absolutely necessary in order to my great Change: I could not but leave a few
Lines of Advice to thee my best Friend on Earth, which whilst I live I hope to
follow with my Prayers to the great God, and our heavenly Father, for his
Blessing upon. This I was the rather induced to do now when through Mercy in
perfect Health, that I might have no Worldly Affair unsettled to disturb and
distract my Mind withal, when upon the very Confines of another World, and
lying upon a Sickbed, or Deathbed, when I desire God may have all my
Thoughts, and all my Time, and would fain be most serious and intent upon
Soul-Concerns.

This little Treatise in three Parts (containing the most remarkable Passages
of my Life that occurred to Memory, and collected out of my Diary, written in
Shorthand) as a last Legacy, I heartily commend to thy perusal, and other
Friends that survive me: In it I have endeavored impartially, to God's Glory,
to give the darker Side of a vile Wretch on Earth, as well as the brighter --.
I was long, thou see, a Wanderer from God, and in a most bewildred Condition
on that account. I knew not where to rest, till I anchored on the Rock of Ages;
had no true Peace, till, through Mercy, I closed with Christ the Prince of
Peace: Conscience then often spoke when it was not heard, and flew in my Face,
when my Study too much was, to check, stifle and hush it. I was then a Terror
to my self, and perhaps to others about me; especially observing Christian
Friends, who fain would, but then could not prevail with me to be serious,
strict and good. I was too long, God knows, in the Gall of Bitterness, and in
the Bonds of Iniquity; and O what rich Mercy was it I was not then taken from
Earth, and thrown into Hell; that through Grace I did outlive the Years of a
loose, carnal, freshly and unregenerate State. O, my Dear! I cannot express the
Sorrows, the Terrors, the Heart-break and Trouble, that my youthful Follies
cost me in Riper-years: My Closet was witness to something, and my God to more;
but alas, all too little! if Free Grace save me not, I must yet perish: but of
this I nothing doubt, through the Merits and Mediation of my blessed Redeemer,
to whom I hope in Heaven, to Eternity, to give the Glory of what he has been
pleased to give me the comfort of. The Lord has fully convinced me, that all my
Prayers and Tears, my Searchings and Watchings, can nothing avail me without
Christ: God showed me my lost and undone Condition, before I had thought of
enquiring what I must do to be saved, or of looking out after a Savior. -- And
this, through Mercy, I can say, that I could never have truly a quiet Minute,
till I was most sweetly persuaded, and powerfully enabled to close with Christ,
as offered in the Gospel. O Rich-Grace! Free Grace! And now, Dear-heart, let me
invite thee into the Embraces of blessed Jesus: Come, taste and try how good
God is to returning Sinners. I believe thou have: Well, be more and more in
love with Christ, enter into Covenant with God, and frequently renew thy
Covenant-Engagements, and labor to perform Covenant-Promises; never think thou
can do enough for that God thou expectest so much from; nay, indeed thy all,
that can either make thee happy here, or to Eternity.

Some few Heads of Advice out of tender Love, both to thy Soul and Body, I
leave with thee.
1. SEttle thy Temporal Affairs, and Wordly Concerns betimes, that upon a
Deathbed thou may not be distracted and diverted with them, from higher and
more besitting Employment. I delayed making my Will too long, which was no
small Perplexity to my Mind, till the Year 1685, (when I did it.)

2. If thou can think me worthy thy Remembrance, forget not showing some
Kindness to such Relations and Friends of mine, who I need not name, being
known to thee, who are Objects of Pity, and need thy Charity.

3. If thou do not incline to a Settlement in Nottingham, in the House I
leave thee for thy Life, then be with, or as near as may be some of thy
Religious Friends, such as may be Helpers and Promoters, not Hinderers of thy
eternal Welfare.

4. If the Lord should again incline thee to marry, dare not to join thy self
in that Relation to any that is not joined to the Lord; marry one, I say, who
in the judgment of the best of Friends, as well as thine own (which may in such
a case deceive thee) does truly fear God; nay, I would advise thee to marry one
of a healthful, strong and sound Constitution, by whom if the Lord please, thou
may have the Blessing of Children; for I have reason to suppose, that some
Weaknesses and Infirmities, whilst a Child and Young, might render me less
capable in that respect.

5. If thou should have Children, train them up in the fear of the Lord,
help to fill Heaven with thy Offspring.

6. Having married, own thy Husband as thy Head, submit to the Duties of a Wife
for the Lord's Sake; labor and pray for a meek and quiet frame of Spirit,
which is in the sight of the Lord of great price.

7. Have some eye over, and inspection into the Behavior and Conversations of
those I were some-time entrusted as Guardian for; Jog and quicken Loyterers
Heaven-wards; mind them of their Education, Counsels and Instructions, and how
hopeful their Beginnings were; and especially, regard our Child and dear Niece
Brain.

8. Be much in Reading and Studying good Books; these I commend to thee
especially, viz. The Holy Bible, with Pool's Annotations, Swinnock's One Cast
for Eternity, Barrett's Christian Temper, Heywood's Heart-Treasure, Reyner's
Precepts, Dunton's Heavenly Pastime, Case's God's waiting to be gracious,
Flavel's Fountain of Life, Bolton's Tossed Ship, R. Allen's Rebuke to
Back-sliders, Janeway's Heaven upon Earth, Swinnock's Regeneration, Love on
Heaven's Glory, etc. Flavel's Saint indeed, Steel of Vprightness, Calamy's
Godly Man's Ark, Hooker's doubting Soul, etc. Hardcastle's Christian Geography,
Watson on Contentment, Mede's almost Christian, Doolittle on the Sacrament, His
Call to delaying Sinners; most of Bunyan's Works, very useful (if read without
Prejudice.) These Books amongst others, I have had much Refreshment from, and
heartily commend them to thee.

9. Do all thou do, either in Religious or Civil Actions, with an eye at
Eternity; thus pray and hear, and read and meditate, and converse and engage in
all secular Affairs, and discharge all relative Duties with an eye at Eternity,
and this will help to make thee very serious and strict.

10. Spend thy Weekdays well, in the discharge of Duties public and private;
keep an exact Diary of any sinful Miscarriages, and be humbled every Evening
for them; take notice of God's Mercies every day, and labor to have thy Heart
sutably affected with the Lord's Goodness; observe and pen down God's Dealings
with thee, and thy Carriage and Behavior toward God; this the Lord has
enabled me to practice with good Success.

11. Esteem of Sabhath-Days, as the best of Days; these are the Market-Days of
thy Soul; make good Provision on them for it, hear the Word, meditate on it,
digest and practice it; neglect no Duties of the Day in private, but most
highly value Publick-Assemblies, God being by them most honored.

12. Redeem Time; I can from my own Experience tell thee, a Review in
Riper-years of lost Time in Youth, will prove sad, and cost dear; and be
assured, that Time's lost, that is spent either in Eating, Drinking, Sleeping,
Visiting or Sportings, more than Necessity requires.

13. If the Lord should again make thee Head of a Family, and bless thee with
Children, as well as Servants, take care of their Souls, train them up for God,
and let thy House be a Nursery for Heaven; take an account every Week of their
Proficiency in Spirituals: and always esteem of those Children and Servants
most, that love, fear, and serve God best. Travel in Birth to see Christ formed
in thine; and know that if any go from thy House to Hell, through thy neglect,
their Souls will be required at thy Hands.

14. Make Religion thy Business, and always account the serving of God and the
saving thy Soul, to be the greatest Work thou art sent into the World about,
and continued in the World for; give not Christ the World's leavings, much
rather let the World have his.

15. Get right and well-grounded Evidences for Heaven: O lay not a Sandy
Foundation for the Building that is to stand to Eternity (...) some Evidences
for Heaven thou wilt find in the first part of this Treatise, others in Rogers's
Evidences for Heaven. Examine thy State often, and impartially, and never be
satisfied till the Interest betwixt Christ and thy Soul be completed and
cleared up.

16. Sit loose from the World, and seek not great things for thy self here. My
Circumstances in the World be such, that I cannot leave thee much more than
what was settled upon Marriage; but all I could, I have: and a little with the
Lord's Blessing, is better than the great Revenues of many Wicked. Make sure of
an Estate in Heaven; live much upon Invisibles: choose Christ for a Portion,
and thou art made for ever.

17. Be content with thy Condition here, whatever it is, and expect Sufferings.
A Christian's Life here is militant. If thou continue to keep thy Face
Heavenwards, (which I trust thou will) then may the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh be frequently sallying out against thee: But O pray that thy Faith fail
not, and that God's Grace may be sufficient for thee.

18. Labor to persevere in the good Ways of God: maintain thine Integrity, and
hold out unto the end, whatever it cost thee. Be a Follower of those, who
through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises (or Things promised): All thy
Bitters here will serve to make Heaven more sweet to thee; and being Faithful
unto Death, Christ will give thee a Crown of Life.

19. Get off from thine own Bottom; place no Confidence in the Flesh; look off
from thine own Righteousness, thine own Duties, thine own Services, when thou
do the best, in point of Justification; and depend and rest only on Christ,
upon whose account alone thou can be accepted and saved: It Is Christ's
Righteousness alone imputed to thee for Justification, and imparted to thee for
thy Sanctification, that can, or will, bestead thee.

20. Be rich in good Works, and go about doing Good; hold on thy Charitable way
of doing Good to Bodies, but especially befriend poor Souls. Be always as kind
as thy Circumstances will allow, to those worthy good Ministers of the Gospel,
thou and I were always beholden to, and I am persuaded shall be blessing God
for, as Instruments in his Hand of our Good to Eternity.

21. Allow thy self in no Sin; for the least Sin loved and allowed is certainly
damning. When God has at any time convinced thee of a Sin, and Conscience has
flown in thy Face, and thou art full of Terror; go to God, down upon thy
Knees, and beg pardoning Grace and Mercy; leave him not till thou have obtained
that Blessing; and always have a care of Relapses: for though we find a David,
and Lot, and others of the dear Servants of God recorded in Scripture, guilty
of some great Miscarriages; yet we find them sorely broken for those Things,
and humbled, and not repeating and relapsing again into them.

22. Prepare for Eternity; get and keep Oil in thy Lamp, that it be not to buy
when thy Lamp should be found burning; put on thy Wedding-Garments, and be
prepared, etc.

23. Mourn not for me excessively; I am gone, but thy God and my God stays with
thee, and I trust will guide thee by his Counsel, till he conduct thee to his
Glory. I am dead, but God lives; thou have no Husband on Earth, what then? If
thy Maker be but thy Husband, thou have cause enough to rejoice. What though
they that have seen me, shall in this World see me no more? This is my Comfort,
let it be thine; he does see me, that has seen (though my weak, yet) my sincere
Yernings and Groanings after him; he sees me, that will never say I know you
not, being a God that will not forget Covenant; he sees me, who has seen my
Soul in Travel, and those Pangs of Desite after him, that no others have.
O'couldst thou but hear what I confidently hope, (through the Morits and
Mediation of my dear Redeemer) I shall, before thou ^^est this Paper, my God in
the Riches of his Mercy, saying to this effect, Yonder Is poor such a one come
to my Gate, let him in* he chose me for a Portion whilst on Earth, and gave
himself according to his weak Measures up to me, I will in no wise cast him
off. Surely this would abate thy Sorrows; surely then thou would not wish me
so Ill as to be on Earth again: well, live in the Faith of this, and walk
comfortably with thy God.

God has made thee indeed, whilst on Earth, to me the greatest outward blessing
that ever I enjoyed: O let me not want thy Company in Heaven. And now my
Dearest on Earth, I commit thee to the keeping and Mercy of the Great Jehovah.
I resign thee to that God who is thy Maker, and thy Husband, serve him, and thy
Generation according to his Will here, that thou may sleep in Jesus, and be
found in him.

Gervase Disney.

POSTSCRIPT: OR, A Continuation of the most Remarkable Passages of my LIFE,
since the other, the last of June, 1686.
SINCE my last particular View of my Diary, designed in the Treatise of my
Life, I find my up's and down's, and that I am but a poor, vile and weak
Creature, unable of my self to answer by a holy and humble Carriage the Lord's
great Goodness to me, in late signal Deliverances out of Trouble, and that upon
better Terms than I could expect. I was now no sooner at ease and rest, through
the Lord's Mercy, and at liberty, than I grew secure, and begun to be too
regardless of Soul-Concerns. I too little remembered and considered Promises
made when under Affliction, and neglected too much to pay those Vows. My
Circumstances when in Trouble, were a Snare to me in some Particulars.

In my Diary, the 19th of September 1685, I find my self blessing God for his
Protection and Care of me in my Journey and Exile, for the Friendship of
Relations at Norwell and Southwell. I am there begging pardon for sinful
Compliances; as in sitting late in an Alehouse in Southwell, where the Company
were Healthing it about, though blessed be the Lord, I drank not much; yet I
was a bad Example, in sitting and sipping with the Wicked, in wasting my
precious Time; my Prayer therefore is, that the Lord would pardon that and
continue Mercies, and give me a thankful Heart in, and a lively sense of Divine
Goodness.

The 20th, being the Sabbath Day, through Mercy, I find my self in a pretty
good Frame of Spirit, and took particular notice in my Diary of Mr. Coats's
Subject, which was, Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. I there find a Desire
that the Lord would work those Truths more and more upon my Heart by his
Spirit, that my Sins may be pardoned and my Soul prosper.

The 21st, Under some Dullness, occasioned by slavish fear of Man, which I find
bewailed that Day, with this Petition, That the Lord would enable me to live by
Faith, and that I might encourage my self in the Lord my God under all outward
Discouragements whatsoever, who has delivered me, does deliver, and I trust
will deliver me, his poor Creature. O! that my Sins may not provoke the Lord to
turn away his Face!

The 23d. Having this Day been stating Accounts with my Wife and several
others, with reference to Disbursements the three Months in the Summer of my
Exile, and Troubles in the Year 85; though I find them extraordinary large,
yet, through Grace, I find my self free from those Passions, that upon such
Accounts, I used to be prone to: my experience again there recorded of God's
gracious Appearances for me.

26th. Mercy there again taken* notice of, in the Lord's delivering me from
Trouble; and a Petition, That if it were the Lord's Will, I might be preserved
from entering into Bonds, which I and all my Friends did believe would be very
ens^^ring to me; there I find Sin bewailed, and lay heavy upon my Conscience.

27th. Manifestations made of Deliverance still from danger; I there bless God
I am still at liberty, and hear nothing from the D. of N. of entering into
those Bonds he required; I then heard of Dr. Temple's Execution, and took
notice of distinguishing Mercy, that he should be taken and I left, who through
Man's Rage and Wrath was in danger: I there bless God I was not the Man.

27th. I took notice of the many comfortable Sabbaths that I have enjoyed since
I came home, without Fear or Disturbance: Cousin Billingsley preached here from
these Words, Commune with your own Hearts; which much affected me.

28th. A like Account as to Mercy, and I remember no actual Sin that Day.

29th. The like Account with -- my Experience, that God had blessed the means I
had used for the cure of a Cold that held me.

8th of October 1685; This day I returned from Lincoln, where I had been some
time, and took notice the Lord gave me a very comfortable Journey, no sad
Providence occurred in the Journey. I am yet delivered from Enemies,
notwithstanding their Rage and Threatening, and from the ensnaring Bonds: I
begged then of the Lord, That he would continue this Mercy, and give me to live
a thankful, holy, humble and fruitful Life, and pardon the particular Sins of
this Day, and help me against it, and to perform Promises made under my
Afflictions.

9th. I there bless God for the Mercies of that Day, and beg pardon for my
Sins, and that the Lord will cause me to live better the next Day.

10th. My Sins stare me in the Face, being many and great; there I find my self
begging that I might eye the Blood of Christ, and might, through Grace, be
interested in it, being the only Sovereign Remedy for a poor Sinner; yet I am
preserved from ensharing Bonds; and enjoy (through Mercy) comfortable Liberty,
and sit under my own Vine with delight.

11th. This I find a comfortable Sabbath, when Mr. Coats did most sweetly call,
invite and encourage Sinners to come to Christ: O! that I may not stand out;
the Lord bless the Sermon to my poor Soul, and pardon my Sins.

12th. No actual Sin that I know of. I this Day begged Direction from Heaven
about the Oath of Allegiance I and others in my Family were called to take; and
next day I did take it, having observed no Intimations from the Lord against
it, but being well satisfied about it; besides, I feared if I refused, it would
be worse with us upon the account of our Meetings, which I did desire to keep
up. I beg the Lord would enable me to keep the Oath, being taken, as a sacred
Thing. I am yet at liberty, and free from ensnaring Bonds.

15th. I that Day begged the Lord would humble me under any thing of Sin that
might be in my Swearing, and taking the Oath the Day before.

16th. This Day Mr. H. acquainted me that one did say, That the Lord -- would
lie heavy upon me; that I was to give a Security by Bond of 7000 l. which would
ask a great time for me to get, and that I was only Capt. L's Prisoner at
large: Well, I find this hint in my Diary that Day, That I can trust my God who
has delivered me, and that he will deliver me still from the Fury and Rage of
Men, and the Effects thereof.

17th. This Day I had an encouraging Letter from V. L. as if the Duke had done
with me; which I begged then the Lord would grant, and enable me to live up to
so great a Mercy. For several other days after, I am blessing God for the
comfortable and quiet abode in my House, and petitioned that the Lord would
keep me from sinning away such Mercies.

20th. Wasting Time the great Sin acknowledged this Day, and a Petition that
the Lord would please to make me more active and diligent in Soulconcerns every
Day, as being every Day nearer Death.

22d. This Day, I observe from Joh. 7. 44. (in my reading) this Passage, Some
of them would have taken him; but no Man laid Hands on him: Upon which Mr.
Baxter has this Note, God binders bad Men from doing what they would do, and
they know not how he does it. I have had great Experience of this my self, the
Lord be praised.

25th. This Day God made a very comfortable Sabbath to me, and I trust will do
my Soul good by it, and set home another Sermon I then heard from Mr. Cotes,
concerning the Ease of Christ's Yoke. I am yet through Mercy continued in my
Family in Peace and Safety, enjoy distinguishing Mercy and Love; God help me to
make a right use of it, and still restrain Men that they do not hurt me; and
enable me to give thee the Glory of that Mercy thou please to give me the
Comfort of.

26th. This Day I was at Cos. R's Funeral; the Lord prepare me for my Change: I
came from thence over a dangerous way in Safety.

27th. God has this Day preserved me: I am out of Hell; I am out of a Prison; I
am not, as lately, flying before pursuing Enemies, nor absenting my self for
Security from my own House; I am not made a Prey to Enemies, but the Lord has
dealt bountifully with me; What shall I render unto the Lord?

Some following Days after, I took notice of sinful Thoughts, idle Words,
unbecoming Actions, and of the Lord's Goodness in sparing Mercy.

Nov. 7. 1685. I bless God then for returning me in Safety from my Yorkshire
Journey; and that I saw my Friends with Comfort, and found all well at my
return home; then I petitioned the Lord to continue Enjoyments to me and mine.

8th. This, God made a comfortable Sabbath; Mr. Coats preached excellently from
this Text, Remember now thy Creator, etc. the Lord do me and all that heard him
good, by his blessing upon that Ordinance, and pardon Sin; the Morning as soon
as I awakened, I was full of projecting, carnal, melancholy Thoughts, O, sad
Thoughts for a Sabbath Day! God seal a Pardon to me.

10th. This Evening, being Tuesday, by 7 of the Clock, I set apart some Hours
for Humiliation, that Night, with the help of Mr. B. Mr. C. etc. and about half
an hour after 12 a Clock, I ended in that Work in my Closet; the Sins I
bewailed, particularly, was; my not keeping Covenant and Promise with my God;
Passion with my Wife, Pride, Slightness in Duties, especially Closet-Duties,
etc.

15th. I enjoyed a most comfortable Sabbath by Mr. Coats's Help, who preached
from these words, Remember now thy Creator, etc. and this Passage I took
particular notice of, That where Youth has been devoted to God, reviews of it
in old Age, when Persons are less capacitated for Duty-Frames, will afford
sweet Comfort and Refreshing.

22d. This a comfortable Sabbath; God bless it to me; Mr. Cl. preached from
these words; Ps. 67. -- That God, even our own God, shall bless us. The Doct.
was, -- It Is a most desirable thing for People to have a God of their own:
These Marks he laid down, which I desire often to peruse and examine my self
by, by which I may know whether God be my God or no.

1. If I have a God of my own, I get what Knowledge I can of my God.

2. I get what Love I can to my God.

3. I would be loath to do that which this my God may take ill.

4. I would then serve no God but my own God, and never fall down to
Graven-Images.

5. I would take nothing ill from my own God.

6. I would love to think of him.

7. I would love to be speaking of him.

8. I could love to have my own God well spoken of.

9. I would often send to him and hear from him.

10. I desire nothing more than while i am absent from him, that this God would
visit me by his Spirit.

11. I would not live always here, but die to go to this my own God, and to be
with him for ever* And these are the earnest Requests of my Soul.

Several Days together I find a comfortable Account both as to freedom from
Sins, and great Mercies.

But on the 28th, I find Relapses into Sin, and that which aggravates it much,
is, I was just writing the Account of my Life. And O what a Mercy it is God has
given me not only space for, but the Grace of Repentence.

December. 12. Hitherto much the like Account; the Lord has preserved my Liberty
beyond expectation, and prevented my entering into ensnaring Bonds.

14th. I took notice of Mercy showed my Wife, in delivering her from most acute
Pains in the Tooth-Ac^.

Jan. 2. ^^8^. I this Day returned from a great Journey* in which the Lord
wonderfully succeeded me in all my Affairs, and preserved me from all Dange^ I
experienced Mercy in the kind Reception the D. of N. gave me on Monday to his
House* whither I went to return him Thanks for his Civility to me. He told me,
I came to him on a very proper Day, (being Innocents-Day) for that he believed
I was so in the Matters laid to my charge, and that he had now done with me;
and should, as Opportunity offered, readily serve me in any thing. He desired
me to be kind to my Uncle L, who had taken great pains on my behalf. I gave him
thereupon -- over and above other Kindness before. Here Is now a return to
Prayer; God help me to improve so great Mercy.

Passages a little before the Death of my Dear Wife, and about her Sickness and
Death.
May 13, 1686. I met with Stops as to my London Journey, by Business, and my
Dear Wife's Illness; for this very Day in the Morning she was even spent with a
Conghing-Fit: I was called from Prayer in my Family, found her very Ill; but,
blessed be God, soon grew better, and told me, I bless God* I am now pretty
well. Now I was earnest with the Lord that he would enable me to observe the
Hints of Providence, in my being stopped several times, and my way to London as
it were hedged up.

May 17, 1686. I set forward for London, notwithstanding the Cross Providence
I met with; a great Change in the Weather diverse times; a Cold that I had upon
me; a grievous Fit of the Asthma my dear Wife had, insomuch as I plainly
observed Providence against me, as to that Journey at that time: but
notwithstanding, upon Encouragement from my Wife, that if I must needs go this
Summer, (which she rather desired I would not, because of Soldiers being much
upon the Road, going to the Camp) I had as good go now as any other time; I did
set forward, and part with my dear Wife this Day, but never saw her more. The
Lord knows my Carriage at London was too light and vain. I wondered I heard
nothing from Ollercarr; waited a Fortnight for Letters, and did my self write
several; but through their miscarriage, and as the Lord pleased to order it, I
received four all of a day, most of which brought me the sad Tidings of my dear
Wife's Death, which was aggravated greatly in that I had not heard of her
Illness till I heard of her Death; and all came in Letters to me at London; at
which time, I had one under my Wife's Hand to acquaint me with her late
Illness, but that, blessed be God, she was better: an Account of which here
follows, after I have given first an Account of mine, just sending to the Post
directed to her, at that very instant, when I received this that follows.

A Copy of my Letter (the Last I ever writ, or must write) to my Dear Wife, now
(I trust) with God.
My Dearest,
I Am in great expectation of Nanny's coming up to London, according to the
Desire of my last; which Business now only stays me in Town. Thou can not
imagine how much I am concerned at thy silence, or at least, thy Letters
Miscarriage; I having not received one Letter from thee since I left thee;
(this being, I think, the fourth that I have sent.) Through Mercy, I am in good
Health, and am hourly waiting for like Tidings from thee (if the Lord please.)
I make Madam L's House my Home, who treats me with much Kindness and Civility;
and I hope the same, as to the best things, that ever thee was. I pray thee
give my hearty Tenders to all our good Friends, and accept the tenderest
Affections from

Thy G. Disney.
Let me receive thy farther Commands while in Town.



Now comes the Copy of the Letters I received, which, like Job's Messengers,
came with Tidings sadder and sadder. O, surely, surely! I have more than
ordinarily provoked a good God, who writes bitter things now against me.

A Copy of my Wife's Letter to me at London, dated 5 Days before her Death,
being May 24, 86.
My Dear,
I Received thine to day with a great deal of Joy, but especially rejoiced to
hear of thy Health; I wish I could send thee the same good News of my self:
Since thou left me, it has pleased God my Distemper did again return on me, so
that I was forced to send for Mr. Garner, and by his Advice, and other Friends
about me, Dr. Horsman. It troubles me to think I should put thee to so great
Charge, but I know thou will think it well bestowed. I bless God I am much
better than I have been, and now live in hopes to see thee again; it was a
great Trouble to me thou were so far off: On Wednesday Night going to Bed, I
was seized with a Pain in my right Arm, and so struck into my Side, which was
very troublesome to me all that Night, but it is well gone off: My Stoppage by
Fits, is yet very troublesome, but not so ill as it was: I need not pray thee
have home; if I should be worse, thou shall not fail to hear next Post. My
Dear, dear Love to thee, is all, but that I am,

Thy Loving Wife, R. D.

A Copy of a Letter from Mr. Coats, May 29, 1686. the Day of my Dear Wife's
Death, but before she died.
Honored and Dear Sir,
YOU have by this time, I suppose, received a Letter from Madam Disney's own
Hand, which I know would be more welcome than this from me. I presume she gave
you an account how it was with her then* and as she told me, promised you that
in case she was worse, you should hear by the next Post: We were much revived
with the sensible Change we saw in her for the better; and Madam Slack and
Madam Spateman, who have both been here, left her on Tuesday in great hopes of
Recovery: but yesterday Morning her Distemper returned again, and yesterday she
was worse: the Doctor by a good Providence, as we may call it, was detained
here longer than he designed, and seeing her now so weak, will not as yet leave
her: I do believe he is a little doubtful of her Recovery; but, Dear Sir, cast
her upon the Care and Skill of the great Physician, who is able to raise her
from the Dust of Death. We desire you would hasten down with what speed you
can, and it may please the Lord you may see her yet in the Land of the Living.
She has had little Rest to Night, till about 4 a Clock this Morning, and is now
slumbring; the great God, in whose Hands her Life and Breath is, still spare
her to you and us; however, help you silently to submit to his holy Will and
Pleasure. Many Remembrances here are of Friends to you, greatly longing for
your speedy and safe Return; the Lord hear Prayer on her behalf, and prevent
what we fear. The All-sufficient God be your Protector, Comforter and Guide.
This with my humble Service and Respects to your self, must conclude these
Lines from, Sir,

Your much obliged Friend, and Servant in the Lord, Sam. Coats.

A Copy of Mr. Coats's Second Letter, the same Day, giving account of the sad
Tidings of my Dear Wife's Death.
Dear Sir,
WIth a trembling Hand and Heart I now set Pen to Paper; I writ to you this
Morning, to give you account how Ill your Dear Lady and my very Dear Friend
was; but now the great Physician has wrought a perfect Cure upon her, by taking
her to himself, out of a miserable sinful World: I do know the Stroke will lie
heaviest upon you, that God has taken away the Delight of your Eyes with a
Stroke; but there are diverse others will feel much of it too. Here is a poor
sad Family indeed; and your absence at such a distance, makes it much sadder;
the Mighty God be your Support under so severe a Stroke of his Hand, and
sanctify it to you all. It is our Loss, but her Gain; she is I know at rest:
but where her Joy begins, there begins likewise your and our Sorrow. Yet, Dear
Sir, sorrow not as them that have no hope, for her who now sleeps in the Bosom
of her dear Lord Jesus. I am satisfied nothing was wanting to her that the
Doctor could do; but the Great God had a better Place, and better Company, and
better Employment for her, than a vain World could afford. We are afraid the
Post will be gone before this Letter reach Nottingham, and must therefore
conclude; begging of God to support you under so sad a Stroke; and make up your
and our Loss in a Covenant Interest in himself. I am,

Your affectionate, but sorrowful Friend and Servant, Sam. Coats.

These Letters coming all together, were very surprising to me; at the sight of
them, I felt a trouble in my Mind, though I had before longingly waited for
Tidings from my Dear Wife, whose Illness I then knew nothing of: I feared to
open them, took them up and laid them down several times before I broke them
open, which being at last opened, I was overwhelmed with Grief and Sorrow at
the Tidings, being unable to contain my self within due Bounds; my Man not
knowing the meaning of it, nor I able to tell him, asked me again and again how
all was, and particularly whether his Mistress was well; I at last told him she
was; for she was got to Heaven, but I was miserable: I then went to Madam L.
who was a hearty sympathizer with me in my Trouble; did much refresh me, and
showed indeed a great deal of Sorrow and Concern beyond Expression. That Night
I went not to Bed; next Morning by 6 a Clock set forward for the Country; that
Journey being the saddest that ever I took in my Life. I got to Leicester on
Tuesday Night, and there met Dr. H. by sending for him, who gave me then some
of many of the comfortable Passages of my Dear Wife's last Hours; that she had
one grievous Fit, after I was gone to London, but through Mercy was well
recovered; that she fell into a Relapse, and was then under discouraging
Symptoms; that she much desired to see me, and asked the Doctor, whether he
could not give her one Word of Comfort that she might live to see me? he told
her he could tell her in the Morning: but her weakness, by Asthma and Fever,
increasing, and prevailing upon her; she had some Disturbance, by Temptations
from Satan that grand Adversary of Souls, to question her right to Happiness,
etc. and whether God would accept so vile a Wretch. Yet blessed be the Lord,
through Faith and Prayer, and the never-failing Mercies of a Good God, she got
over all, baffled Satan, and was filled with unspeakable Joy in the Holy Ghost.
The Doctor prayed with her, and afterward she her self prayed a considerable
time, distinctly and aloud; and for her then Comfort and Support, many Passages
of Sermons she had heard, especially some from Mr. Coats, on that Text, Come
unto me all ye that labor, etc. came fresh in her Memory, which the Lord
helped her to improve to the great Comfort and Refreshment of her Soul: She was
now full of Heavenly Thoughts, and from the abundance of her Heart, her Mouth
was now speaking, etc. She uttered nothing but what was savoury, religious and
serious; and being spent by great Weakness, went triumphantly to Heaven, upon
the 29th of May, 1686. The Doctor told me it was the comfortablest Night that
ever he enjoyed in all his Life.

Here at Leicester worthy Mr. Clarke, the Nonconformist, waited my coming, that
he might accompany me to Ollercarr, which he did; and the Lord made him mighty
useful, by his Christian advice to me.

June 3. I got home, where I found a most sad and disconsolate Family; I that
needed others to comfort me, was fain to be their Comforter.

June 5, 1686. This Day my Diary manifests that I was grown more calm under the
Lord's mighty Hand, and the loss of a Dearest Wife; but yet too full of
miserable Complaints, and quarrelling Thoughts against my Maker: the Lord
forgive me, and compose me for the Duties of the Sabbath following.

June 6. This Day was a very comfortable Sabbath with reference to my
Enjoyments; but the want of my Dear Wife, occasioned Floods of Tears and
violent Passions; the Lord pardon my tumultuous Thoughts, and in the Multitude
of my Thoughts within me, let his Comforts more refresh my Spirit.

June 7. This Day my Dear Wife was Interred at Crich, where (if the Lord please
so to order it) I desire and intend to lie by her; the Lord pardon Sins while I
had her, and such as I have been most guilty of since I parted with her.

June 8. This Day, through Mercy, not much quarrelling with the Lord's
Dispensations; more calm than I was. O that I could be dumb with Silence, and
not open my Mouth in a fretting and repining way, because the Lord has done
what is done unto me; the Lord sanctify this sad Breach upon me to my Soul's
Good. May I remember my Sins that have provoked God, and be humbled for them,
and return to the Lord that smites.

June 9. This Day I find my Heart better fitted and framed to bear this sad
Stroke.

This Day was preached by Mr. Coats, my Dear Wife's Funeral-Sermon, from these
words, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. But I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren,
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have
no hope. Passion in the Sermon I was guilty of, when in the Commondatory Part,
he was showing what a Wife she was; the Lord pardon my unbecoming Carriage to
her.

Several days after, I gave account of the Lord's quieting my Mind under the
sad Loss sustained.

June 20. This was a very comfortable Sabbath, and the Lord gave me great
Delight under the Droppings of the Sanctuary. Mr. Coats preached from these
words, Hear the Rod, and who has appointed it: O! I would fain make
application to my self. O that I could hear the Voice of this sad Providence,
and take out the Lessons of this Rod! O that I may carry my self like a
Christian under this mighty Hand of God! I have cause to fear I did not improve
Last-Summer's Mercies as I ought, and God has made this a much more
uncomfortable Summer. O that, as ever I desire the Lord should not go on in
this way, I may better improve this Dispensation.

Several Letters I received from Friends, heartily sympathizing with me in my
Trouble; take the Copies of some of them, as follows.

A Letter from Mr. J. R. dated June 4, 1686.
Dear Sir,
BY a Letter I received Yesterday from Mr. Coats, I perceive the Letters I sent
you in Town, on Monday Night, were like Job's Messengers; one bringing you sad,
the other sadder News; but I hope you received the News with Job's Temper or
mind, viz. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of
the Lord; and God has taken away the Delight of your Eyes, and removed her out
of sight, she is in a state of Rest, and you must behold her no more among the
Inhabitants of the World; this must needs be a pressing Affliction, to lose so
near, so dear, and so pious a Companion; and that which aggravates the
Affliction, is, that she was taken away in your Absence, so suddenly and so
unexpectedly. But, Dear Sir, though God has crossed your Will herein, yet I hope
a Tumult does not arise, your Passions and Affections are not in an uproar. Why
shall not God take away his own, in his own time, way and manner? But, Sir, I
am not to teach you; God has rarely qualified you with the Graces of his Holy
Spirit, so that you know how to receive, and how to resign a Mercy; you know
how to add to Faith, Patience, as you lately heard. There is an animal Life of
a Soul void of Grace, accommodating it self to the Interests of the Flesh, to
all such things as are grateful to Sense; but then there is a Spiritual Life,
which is a Principle enabling a Soul to bear up when God takes away our
greatest Comforts; such a Principle there is in you. All I have to do, is to
sympathize with you, and to pray that God would afford you more of the
Assistances of his Holy Spirit, that you may exert that Principle now at this
time under this Loss. The truth is, it is one of the most lovely Sights in the
World, to see a Christian acting Faith, Patience, Humility, Submission,
Resignation, etc. in times of Affliction; this makes the World say, that there
is something more in Religion than Talk: but as I said, I am not to teach you.
You have the teachings of the Spirit, which will enable you to improve this
Loss to better Gains. The Lord sit us all for our last and great Change; and in
the midst of our private Losses, let us remember the Afflictions of Sion, now
sitting in the Dust. So prays

Your Sympathizing Friend, and Humble Servant, J. R.
I hope you will return up again after some Days; I think it will be convenient
to divert your self with your Friends here, some time, after you have performed
the last Office of Love to your Yoak-Fellow, etc.



A Copy of a Letter from Cos. M. S. dated June 17, 1686.
Dear Sir,
THis Letter should have reached you before this time, and had done so but for
some intervening Occurrences: I was surprised with the report of your Deceased
Consort, of whose so speedy Removal hence, there was to you and me (when last
together) so little Intimation or Presage. But Flesh is Grass, though Souls be
precious and invaluable; and God knows what he does, and why; he is no ways
obliged to let us know what is in the Womb of his Providence, till the Birth be
produced; we live to die, and die that we may better know what it is to live;
and then best know what it is to be, when gone to God. I hope you know how to
comport with Providence, and to be silent and submissive, and satisfied in the
great Arbiter of all things. Infinite Wisdom has contrived Dispensations into
the exactest Order; and he who works all things after the Counsel of his own
Will, called her home at the right time. Did you and I see the beautiful
Systems of providential Dispensations, we should both sind, and yield, that
longer had been too long for her that is gone, to live, and sooner had been too
soon to die. What occurs in 2 Cor. 7. 29, 31. equally concerns both you and me,
though as yet under different Dispensations: You must be as if you had not lost
a Wife, and I as if I had no Wife; Time is short, and Life, and relative
Comforts are transient and fluid Things; therefore your Sorrows must be
moderate for your Loss, and my Joys must be as if they were not, seeing we and
ours are to follow, and part, and pass away in our Courses.

All the Occurrences of our little Time, even boldly challenge from us the
Spirit and Posture of preparedness to resign our All to God. Methinks we are
dying whilst we live; parting while and when we seem to meet; and Providence
rings Changes all the while that we are passing to our Graves. No one's too
good to die, too needful to us to be taken from us; or too much endeared or
tied to us, to be divorced from us. But O! what wonderful Things has
Christianity laid in, to attemper us to the Divine Will, to compose us under,
and to better us by, even the sharpest Dispensations that can betide us here!
There are Ties not to be loosed, Relations that know not what it is to die,
Treasures not to be impaired, Regions above so well inhabited, so richly
stored, so wisely ordered, so freely promised, so well insured to us, and such
care taken about our fitness for them, and seasonable and effectual translation
thither under all accents of Solemnity and Triumph, as that we greatly shame
and wrong Religion and our selves, if we prove sullen o^ despondent. When God
takes from us our dearest Relations here below, all are satisfied, or should be
so; but all look not through and beyond the Grave; one glance of Things beyond
the Vail, though stolen or got by Faith, will easily counsel a Christian that
under his greatest Pressures and Sequestrations here* it is through himself, and
his great Fault, if his Joys do not surmount and swallow up his Griefs. But*
Worthy Cousin, I much forget my self, I hope for charitable Constructions of
these bold Essays: Sympathy and Gratitude, and a Concern for you, make me
transgress the Bounds of Modesty. Had but my Head and Heart the Happiness of
being botter furnished, my Pen might then afford you more profitable and
delightful* Entertainment; but though I am neither Eloquent nor Witty, yet Dear
Sir, believe me to be heartily,

Yours in Christ's Bonds, M. S.

A Copy of a Letter from my Brother H. June 5, 1686.
Dear Brother,
I Am truly afflicted with your Assliction, do beg God would make up that great
Brea^h, by clearing up your Union with himself, which is indissolvable. Your
comfortable Consort is laid up from the Evils we may be reserved for, and is
freed from Sin; the Lord stay your Heart, and bring you into a true Subjection
to his Will. I have long desired to see you together, but hitherto have been
let, and am now* so that I cannot perform what is in my Heart to have done:
Therefore do hope you will excuse me, who am,

Dear Brother, Your sympathizing affectionate Brother, I. H.
My Wife gives her affectionate Service to you.



A Copy of a Letter from Madam L.
Ever Honored Sir,
I Cannot possibly write my trouble for the Death of your Dear Lady, and my
most entirely Beloved Friend; it is a cutting Stroke indeed, yet must be quietly
born, coming from the Hand that always acts wisely and graciously for holy
Purposes and Ends. Certainly the great God afflicts not for his own Pleasure,
but our Advantage, either to expel Sin, destructive to the Soul; or increase
Graces, the Life, Health, and Prosperity of a Soul. And, Dear Sir, I question
not your endeavor to know the Errand, and to pursue the Ends of this sudden
and sad Dispensation; the Lord sanctify it to us all, that as we have certainly
lost one way, we may gain Benefit another way, and learn to place our Happiness
in him, that will never leave nor forsake his; there true Contentment and
Felicity is to be found, and no where else. I am yet as you left me, but every
Hour in expectation of a time of Trial. I beg your Prayers for Submission,
Faith and Courage to go through that Work that my Heavenly Father shall put me
to; may I but have his Presence and Assistance, and then I can pass sweetly
through the Shades of Death: I am wonderfully satisfied in the comfortable
Death of my Dear Friend, and shall prize whatever dropped from her Mouth, etc.

Well, since it has pleased the Lord to remove from me a Dear Wife, and
Bosom-Friend, and Companion; the desire of my Soul is to consider the Errand of
such a Dispensation, to hear the Voice of this Rod, and know who has appointed
it. It may be this Stroke may be upon these, or some of these Grounds.

1. It may be I was too fond of that Creature-comfort the Lord took from me;
for though by my wicked Deportments, such Fondness could not always be
observed, yet I had an entire love for her, and could seldom bear any absence
from her.

2. It may be I did not improve such a Mercy as I ought, whilst I had it; did
not enough give God the Glory of a Mercy he had given me so much Comfort in.

3. It may be I have been too insensible of the Miseries of Sin, and therefore
the Lord has brought this Misery upon me, that being afflicted my self, I might
better know and learn how to comfort others in their Straits, and sympathize
with them in their Afflictions.

4. Lesser Troubles, as that the last Summer, and others, have not it may be
done that Work upon me God intended them for; and therefore the Lord sees cause
to add this great Affliction, of stripping me of the best Creature-Comfort I
ever enjoyed.

5. My Carriage to her was too high and peevish, apprehending her too little
submissive to me as a Husband, and too ready to invade the Authority I thought
my self to have a Right to; here I might mistake, but however by it see
abundance of Pride and Corruption in my Nature, the Good Lord humble me for
that.

6. My not discharging, it may be, all Marriage-Duties as I ought, might
provoke the Lord.

7. It may be I have done this, in cumbring my self with so much worldly
Business in bad times, and when I had no need. Now the Lord seems to knock me
off from such Cumbers by taking from me her that was wonderfully assisting to
me in them.

Present Thoughts I have had with reference to my Removal, since the Death of
my Wife as to a retired Life.

After my seeking God by Prayer, about my Settlement, the Encouragements for my
continuing at Ollercarr were such as these.
1. THE Lord's Providence bringing me to this Place, more particularly manifest
in my Diary in the first part of my Life, and his giving me great Encouragement
in my enjoying Gospel Ordinances here, without very much Interruption or
Disturbance.

2. The Favor and Respect he has been pleased to give me from the whole
Neighborhood.

3. A Settlement by Housekeeping Necessaries; being concerned to take care of
some whom I would provide for according to my Ability.

4. My having a great Husbandry upon my Hands, and eleven Years Lease of this
Estate.

5. The Capacity I am in of serving this Neighborhood by the public
Opportunities the Lord has blessed me with here.

Reasons and Encouragements for Removing from Ollercarr.
1. THe Loss of my Dear Wife, upon whose account at first, I was chiefly
induced to this Place; but now very uncomfortable to me.

2. The irregular Carriages and Behavior of Servants -- in Family-Affairs, and
my Unfitness to manage and look after them.

3. In regard that I have Encouragement enough that I may let this Land, or
else manage it with two or three faithful Servants in my Absence, and it may be
more to my advantage than now.

4. The very great Unsetledness of Present-times, and my Obnoxiousness to their
Effects, seems to call me to a more retired way of Living than here at
Ollercarr.

5. The Debts which at present I am in, I am apprehensive can no better way be
soon discharged, (which I much desire) than by giving up Housekeeping, at least
for some time.

6. By a more retired way of Living, I may have greater advantage for
Self-Reflections, and more time than here I can have for the Management of
Soul-Concerns.

7. The Cumbers of the World will ill suit me in my solitary and lonesome
Condition, when the Language of present Providence seems to call me off from
these things.

8. By giving up House for a time, I shall have the advantage of Visiting,
Conversing with, and serving some Relations that need Help and Assistance, and
I have been too much wanting to.

9. Because my present Purpose (after seeking the Lord in the case) is, but to
leave my House here for the Winter half-year; it being uncomfortable enough
then.

10. Mr. Coats and his Dear Consort, whom I heartily love and honor, need be
no Losers by this Alteration; they may here keep House, take Tablers, serve
their Generation, and live at as little charge, I believe, as any where else;
and if so, then the great Objections I have against leaving this House, will be
removed, and my leaving it encouraged, and the Ordinances of God will still be
kept up here, to the Refreshment of this hungering Neighborhood.

11. I may the rather go upon this account, that Mr. Coats the last Year had
given me notice to remove from me.

The Author having gone so far by his own Hand, in the Account of his Life, to
June 86; some farther Passages since that time, to the time of his Death, be
pleased to take a view of in the Preface; written by his Worthy and Reverend
Pastor: In which Place, it was thought best to insert them, rather than to
interrupt what he had collected and recorded himself.

LETTERS.
A LETTER to a Relation, inviting him to forsake Sin, and to pursue Holiness,
April 1685.
SIR,
COnsidering the ill use you have made of some former Advice given you, I have
not upon that account much encouragement to make further Attempts of that
nature; yet knowing that the Work of Convincing and Converting is the Lord's,
and that the Wind blows where and when it lists, I may not despair but some
Good (through the Blessing of the Almighty) may yet be done upon you. I do
indeed purposely conceal my Name at present, lest you should despise or slight
the Advice, upon the account of the Adviser, whom you have too lavishly and
unjustly reproached, though I am confident I have deserved better Treatment at
your hands. But this is not the thing, such Passages I can pass by, yet sadly
bewail them in you, as knowing them to be some of the dismal Effects of your
drunken Frolicks; but remember for these and the like things God will bring you
to Judgment. I am not ignorant that many of those that wish you well, have
advised and reproved you again and again, for your sinful Follies; and would
fain have you as well remember that terrible Threatening, That he that being
often reproved, and hardens his Heart, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without Remedy. Wherein you have injured me by your Tongue, I can pass it by. I
would not return Slander for Slander, nor answer Railing with Railing, nor
Reproach with Reproach; I have not so learned Christ; I can heartily pity you,
forgive you, and pray for you, and would now fain persuade you to be good; and
what can be more your Interest than to be so? Come, Sir, if you have any
respect to a dear and tender Wife that lies in your Bosom, to a small Babe, to
indulgent Parents, to well-wishing Friends, to your own Soul, Body, or Estate,
but above all, to the Commands of a great God, you must be good; make a stand,
consider, and take up in time. It Is my Love to you makes me thus plain with
you, for I dare not flatter. Whatever you may think, or however others may
endeavor to palliate great Sins, by giving them easy Names, Sin will be called
Sin, and Wickedness Wickedness, Drunkenness will be called Drunkenness, and
Sweating Swearing, at the Great-day, and punished as such, and why not now?
Repentance is your Duty, and that can never be right and evangelical without
Reformation. I do believe* it is your desire to be eternally happy, and can you
expect it if you be not holy? Without Holiness no one shall see the Lord, Heb.
12. 14. Can you ever expect to get in at the Strait-gate, while you walk in the
Broad-way? no, Strait is the Gate, and narrow the Way that leads unto Life,
and few there be that find it? O that you may be one of those few! Will you do
the Devil's Work, and expect the Lord's Wages? it cannot be; for your Bible
tells you, What you sow, that shall you reap: and he that cannot lie, has
said, If you live after the Flesh, you shall die; but if you, through the
Spirit, do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. I am not for inviting
you to a Party, or for tying up Salvation to this or that Opinion, but I would
fain prevail with you to be good: for be of what Opinion you will, the
Scripture warrants me to tell you, That without Strictness, Self-denial and
Holiness, you cannot be saved, Mat. 16. 42. Mat. 11. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. Dear
Sir, as you tender the everlasting Welfare of your Soul, do no longer as the
most, but imitate the best, and endeavor to be a Follower of those who,
through Faith and Patience, inherit the Promises (or things promised.) Forsake
bad Company; for you know who has said, The Companion of Fools shall be
destroyed, Prove. 13. 20. Be you a Companion of those that fear God, and let not
the Wicked any longer entice you, or however, prevail with you: for the
Scripture is very clear and positive in it, That except Drunkards repent and
reform, they shall be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. That
except Swearers repent of their profane Swearing, and reform, they shall fall
into Condemnation, James 5. 12. That unless Liars put away their Lying, and
speak every one Truth to his Neighbor, they shall have their part in the Lake
that burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 20. 8. That if Company-keepers forsake
not the Foolish (that is the Wicked) and live, they shall be reckoned amongst
the Companions of the Wicked, who shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20. I charge
you not, but leave it to your own Conscience, to consider how far you are
guilty in any of these Matters, and then get into your Closet, down upon your
Knees, bewail before God your sinful Miscarriages, and beg a new Heart, and
Grace that you may live a new Life; and be assured, that what I say is out of a
sense of your deplorable Condition whilst you remain in your Sins, and a Desire
to see you return to that God who waits to be gracious: Come to Christ, and
heartily accept him, for he is offered to you. O that I could see this great
Work done! what a rejoicing would it be to all that are good about you? Then
might your Wife bless God for such a Husband, who would help her Heavenwards;
then would your pious Relations delight in your Society, and your Parents with
joy say, as the Father of the Prodigal, This my Son was lost, but is found, was
dead, but is alive* yea* the Conversion of a Sinner on Earth, causes Joy in
Heaven. That the Lord would bless this Advice to you, is the earnest Prayers of
him, who shall then approve himself always

Your Friend and Servant in Christ Jesus, G. D.

A Letter to my Mother, Mrs. B. D. upon the Death of her good Daughter, and my
dear Sister Stanyforth.
Ever honored Mother,
AT this time I have much Business upon my hands, and some that requires quick
dispatch, otherwise my coming to see you would have prevented my writing to
you; and now I should be sorry that these Lines should add weight to your
Sorrows, by setting your Wounds a bleeding afresh. I am much readier to bear a
part of your Burden, having reason enough to be concerned for, and sensible of
so sad a Breach as it has pleased the Lord to make upon us, by the Death of my
dear Sister Stanyforth. Something I would contribute to your Support and
Refreshment, under such a Dispensation; therefore desire your perusal of the
underwritten Considerations, which has wonderfully supported me; the Blessing
of Heaven render them useful to you.

1. We may and ought to consider the necessity of Dying, 2 Samuel 14. 14. For we
must needs die. Preceding Generations made way for us, and shall not we make
way for others, when God calls?

2. The Friends we lose are not so much ours as God's; God has taken but what
he first lent. This comforted Job, when amongst other things he had lost his
Children, The Lord gave (says he) and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the
Name of the Lord.

3. God has a hand in the Death of Friends; My Times are in thy Hand, (says
holy David) and is there not an appointed time to be upon Earth?

4. God in the saddest Passages of Providence aims at his People's Good; All
things shall work together for them that love God, etc.

5. God is still with us, Psalm. 46. 1. Though Friends forsake us (through
unavoidable Mortality) yet an everlasting God is where he was. There is
Sweetness enough in God to sweeten all outward imbittering Circumstances.
Though the Conduit-Pipes, through which Mercies were conveyed unto us, be taken
away; the Fountain runs still entire in God. May we have a care of doing any
thing to dim the Eye of our Faith; for Hagar (we read) had a Fountain by, but
her blubbering Eyes kept her from beholding it.

6. How great soever the Stroke and Affliction is, we yet deserve greater; our
Sins are heavier than our Sufferings; the Fire of God's Wrath is not
proportioned to the Fuel of our Sins.

7. God has taken away one great Comfort, but he might have taken away all;
Shall we receive Good at the Hands of God, and shall we not receive Evil?

8. Consider the Evil that comes by Discontent, and immoderate Sorrow.
Discontent makes us our own Tormentors, Luke 21. In Patience possess your
Souls: by Impatience we are Possessors of our Sins, and turned out of our
Understandings, Peace, and Comfort. Too immoderate Sorrow wastes the Spirits.
Prove. 15. By Sorrow of the Heart, the Spirit is broken. 2 Cor. 7. Worldly
Sorrow works Death; it greatly provokes God. A meek and quiet Spirit is in
the Sight of God of great price; but a froward, peevish Spirit is abominable to
him, Prove. 11. 20. and 17. 20. and 22. 5. Psalm. 18. 26. God may be provoked by
this Sin, to lengthen out Misery, and to adjourn Mercy.

9. God gives and takes away Relations at his own Pleasure; let us rather
praise God we have enjoyed such a Blessing so long, than repine she is gone so
soon; bless we a smiting as well as a smiling God, a taking as well as a giving
God.

10. The Breach made is sad; but herein God has, (1.) Done us no Wrong. (2.) He
has done our dear Friend no Hurt. Done us no Wrong; he has taken but his own,
his own by his Creation, by your Donation, by Purchase and Redemption, and by
her own free Resignation; And has our dear Father hurt her? Is it to hurt her,
to put her to Bed, to throw off her filthy Garments from her, to gratify her in
her own longing Desire, which was, To be dissolved, and to be with Christ, and
to enshrine her in Glory?

11. Think of the Invalidity of Weeping. If Tears could possibly bring my
Sister from Glory, would you or any of us have a Heart to invite her from so
blissful a State? Does not the Spirit of God, by several Passages of Scripture,
seem to say to us, as Judas said in another case, What needs all this waste?
Tears are a good Ingredient for Prayer and Repentance; let us not be too
prodigal of them in other cases. Humanity does allow of some Sorrow, but
Divinity forbids much. Dear Mother, refuse not to be comforted; receive the
Comforts, and refuse no longer the Creatures God affords you for the refreshing
and supporting Nature. Let David, I pray, be your Pattern in this case: he
prayed for his Child while living; he fasted, he wept; For, says he, who can
tell whether God will be gracious to me, and the Child may live? this I doubt
not but you did. But when the Will of God was signified in the Death of his
Child, 2* Sam. 12. 22, 23. Now he is dead, says he, wherefore should I fast?
can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. O
that you could do likewise! The Child being dead, he wipes his Eyes, falls to
his Refreshments, and submits to God. Let not the want of one Mercy we all
prized, deprive us of the Comfort of the many Mercies we do enjoy.

12. If we consider who we have lost, methinks our Sorrow should be abated; One
who gave most excellent Demonstrations of a good Heart, and a good Condition;
one, I trust, ripe for God, and fitter for Heaven than Earth; one panting for
Glory long before she died, and had set all in order for Eternity before she
was sick; she longed to be dissolved, that she might be with Christ. Methinks,
I still hear her; Ah, says she, how long, O Lord, how long? when will thou
come? And to Bystanders, (says she) I Am jealous you are conspiring to keep me
longer out of Heaven! And ah! what a Sight did I see in my dear Sister, when
upon the very wing for Heaven, and just ready to take her flight. Ah! the
heavenly Language she uttered, while she did speak (which was almost to the
last;) and then when she could not speak, the Movings of her Lips, the Pantings
of her Heart, the Liftings of her Eyes, and indeed, every Motion of her Body,
spoke her to have strong Workings of Heart after God, and to be upon the very
Confines of Glory. What cause of Mourning now? it is our Loss, but her Gain. She
had before a good Husband, but now, O now! the Match between Christ and her
Soul is completed. Me-thoughts she held my Father Disney's Hand so fast to the
last, as if she longed to take him with her, yet by degrees let go; as if she
had said, God has more work for you here, and I can freely let my Hold go of
best Creature Comforts, as longing to be in my heavenly Father's Embraces. I
doubt not but to her to live, was Christ, and to die, Gain; therefore, well
might she leave that to be preached on at her Funeral, and as her last Legacy
to surviving Friends, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves and for your
Children. The greatest Reason for such Weeping, present times seem to
prognostic.

My dear Mother, labor for a Christian Carriage under such a Cross. God's Rod
has a Voice as well as his Word; and it is our great Concernment to hear it, and
him that has appointed it: Let us say, Righteous, O Lord, art thou, and in very
Faithfulness thou have afflicted us. Let Us not entertain hard Thoughts of God,
but with Aaron, hold our Peace, for God has done it. Dear Mother, you know well
that spiritual Comforts are the best Comforts; Is not Christ better than ten
Daughters, than ten Sisters, than ten Children? Is not his Loving Kindness
better than Life? Is there not more in a God, than ever was or can be in a
Creature? We have no reason to sorrow as those without hope: She whom we dearly
loved, is gone to her dearly Beloved; she is reaping the Fruits and Benefits of
her Labors in the Lord, and is blessed; For blessed are the Dead that die in
the Lord, etc. Like another Mary, she chose the better Part, which will never
be taken from her. She is, it is true, taken away in the flower of her Age, and
when we most expected Satisfaction in such a Relation; but God knew it the best
time to gather such a Flower. Mr. Baxter well observes, Such have run long
enough, who have reached the Prize; have sailed long enough, who are safely
harbored; and lived long enough, who are ready to die. We have more cause to
rejoice, that once we did enjoy such a Wife, such a Child, such a Sister, such
a Niece, such a Friend, to give up at God's Call, than now to murmur that she
is so suddenly removed; she is (I doubt not) happy. God has preferred her to
Mansions of Glory before us; let us prepare to follow. God has called home
another of your Children, but you are not Childless: O take heed by Repining
Carriage of provoking God to farther Strokes; but if God should write you
Childless, you are not yet bereft of Comfort, while the God of all Comfort is
yours: If God will not let any part of your Happiness lie in Children, then let
it wholly lie in himself. The Love and Delight we placed in such a Friend, may
now be placed to greater Advantage upon Jesus Christ. That the Stream of our
Affection to him, may be so much the stronger, as there are fewer Channels for
it to divide into, is the earnest Prayyer of

Your Obedient Son, G. D.

A Letter to Sister W. upon her Husband's Death.
Dear Sister,
MY Wife being indisposed by a Cold, cannot write, but you may be assured we
are both hearty Sympathizers with you in your sad and solitary Condition. The
Breach the Lord has been pleased to make upon you, indeed is great, and such as
none can express, but those that experience it; but God having made it, (who
alone can make it up) I hope you will endeavor to be satisfied, and not to
mourn as one without Hope: If the Lord will not have any part of your Happiness
to lie in a Husband, then let it wholly and entirely lie in himself: labor to
bring your Heart and Mind to a sweet Submission to the Pleasure of your Father.
And though a Bosom-Friend be not, yet God is, who is the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever. Relations may and must die, but God lives, who is styled,
The Father of the Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow. I question not, but
you can suck much Sweetness from the many gracious Promises made for the
Encouragement of such as you. The poor Interest I have at the Throne of Grace
was improved for him, and shall be for you: That Is best for us that God does;
and this being God's Doing, you must kiss his Rod in Silence, and give Glory to
the Hand that rules it, etc.

A Letter to a Relation, growing loose in Conversation.
Dear Cousin,
THE Contents of this may seem strange to you, especially as coming from one,
so unfit and unable to be your Monitor; yet when I tell you it is out of a
sincere Love to your precious Soul, and a hearty Desire of your Well-doing, I
doubt not but in Kindness it will be received, as indeed it is intended: not
only the Relation between us, but the Rules of Christianity will oblige us to
watch over one another. And truly, Cousin, I am satisfied, that Religion never
receives a greater Wound than by the Miscarriages of Professors; Stains in
them, will prove more mischievous than the Spots of a Licentious* Age. O,
Cousin! The Eyes of the World are upon you; nay, God's Eye is upon you, to whom
you and all the World must be accountable. With much Grief and Sadness of
Heart, I have very lately heard you reflected upon for some loose Carriages,
and that particularly, by one eminent for Grace and Goodness, whose Name I am
obliged to conceal; what he acquaints me with, is in Tenderness to you, and out
of a hearty Desire I should improve my Interest in your behalf. Some indeed, of
the times, having made their Observations upon you, seem themselves very much
to condemn you, as declaring you are in the direct way to ruin your self;
instancing in these things, ( viz.) Your High-house-keeping, your Negligence in
all your Affairs, your frequent Contracting new Debts, your Excess in
Pleasures, associating your self with the Gallants of the Age, and your sinful
Compliances in high Drinking: One Person I know, whose Company is scandalous
enough, yet your Intimacy with him great: You are not, as some fear, very
likely to do him good; it is well if he does not do you hurt. Some say it had
been well if you had never left Roadnook, remembering your blameless
Conversation there, and your Zeal for God and Godliness. My Desire and Prayers
are, you may be still found in the same Paths of Holiness; remember from whence
you are fallen, and repent, and do your first Works; having begun in the Spirit,
beware of ending in the Flesh. You did run well, and who has hindered you?
Come, Cousin, we can never think of entering the Strait-Gate, by walking in the
Broad-way; and much better it had been we had never known the way of Life, than
after to walk in the Paths of Death. If we live after the Flesh, we shall die;
but if we through the Spirit, do mortify the Deeds of the Body, we shall live.
I hope you and I have so learned Christ as to know, that the way of carnal
Liberty and Looseness, the way of evil Company and Fleshliness, is not the way
to Heaven. I am not for tying up Salvation to this or that Opinion: for let Men
be of what Opinion they will, surely without Strictness, Self-denial and
Holiness, they cannot be saved, Mat. 16. 42. Mat. 11. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. O
then with holy David, labor to be only a Companion of those that fear the
Lord; for God has said, The Companions of Fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.
20. and who greater Fools than impenitent Sinners?

Yours in Christ, G. D.

A Letter to my dear Friend Mr. Whitaker.
SIR,
I Received yours by our Neighbor, by whose Conveyance, I hope this may arrive
your hands. I return you hearty Thanks for your good Society whilst with us;
for which I am abundantly obliged to you, not you to me. I should be very glad
to see you again, with good Mrs. Whitaker with you, when your Convenience and
more setled-times will encourage; for truly at present, it is a dark and gloomy
Day with us; but Light is sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the upright
in Heart, Psalm. 97. 11. Our Ministers Night and Day are so strictly watched
for, that they come not at all amongst us; many have here suffered very much,
some one way, some another; but yet truly God is good to Israel, and to them of
an upright Heart; his Ways are certainly the best Ways; however, at present,
attended with Trouble and Difficulty. Were it with us as Men and Devils would
have it, it would be much worse; but they are under the Lord's Restraints, who
triumph over us. Your kind and Christian Lines were no less seasonable than
welcome at this Juncture, when poor I find all Helps little enough to keep me
unmoved in such shaking days as ours, and to prevent Murmurings, Frettings and
Repinings, at the Prosperity of the Wicked. Dear Sir, pray that my Faith fail
not. The Lord establish our Hearts and Minds with Grace, and enable us, at what
time we are afraid (with holy David) to trust in him, and with Jehoshaphat,
under all Discouragements whatsoever, to encourage our selves in the Lord our
God. I do believe God will issue things well, and bring Order out of all
Confusion, and Light out of Darkness, and Good out of all Evil that is before
us. It will be thus in his Time, (if not in ours) His will be done.

Yours, etc. G. D.

To Mrs. Mary Lavet, after her Marriage, December. 85.
Dear Madam,
I Hope when all things are considered, you will not see much cause to blame
me, that I have not before now welcomed, and congratulated your arrival into
our Condition: Till your Letter to my Wife came, (which some ways strangely
halted in its Voyage) I knew not otherways than by common Fame, (which of late
has proved too false to trust) whether to call you by first or second Name;
however, now, Madam, I wish you much Joy in the Change of it, send a Thousand
good Wishes after you, and heartily beg, what I am sure you desire, That this
Change of your Condition may be to the Glory of God, the Advantage of your
Soul, and the Mutual Comfort and Satisfaction one of another. I need not
acquaint you (who are better able to be my Monitor) that the new Condition the
Lord has brought you into, calls for new Duties, and may be accompanied with
new Trials; the Lord ^it you and your dear Yoak-Fellow, good Mr. Lavet, for
all, and crown your Change with many Blessings, both Temporal, Spiritual and
Eternal. I hope, Madam, you will believe, though when last in the Country you
would not make trial, that my House is as much your Home as ever, and glad we
shall be at any time to enjoy such Guests. My dear Wife begs your pardon for
not answering your kind Letter, for which she thanks you, and hopes those
hurrying Circumstances we were about that time under, may excuse the Neglect.
The Lord ^it us for his Pleasure, support us in a time of Trial, enable us to
maintain our Integrity, and keep our Standing in Christianity, whatever comes;
and prevent our declining and decaying in the good Ways of God; is the earnest
and hearty Prayers of him, who needs and begs yours. And O that we and all that
wish well to Sion, may pray hard for the Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem; for
they shall prosper that love her.

I am, Madam, Your most obliged Friend, and humble Servant, G. D.

A Letter to Mr. Lob at London, Jan. 25, 83.
SIR,
I Received your very kind Letter and Christian Lines, some time since, and had
returned you my Thanks sooner, had not extraordinary Business prevented. I have
cause to bless God for your Acquaintance, and for that Christian Society I had
with you, whilst at London. O that I could be as serviceable to you in the best
things, as you have been to me. Poor unworthy Me! who needs jogging
Heavenwards. It Is with us as with others, a very dark and gloomy Day; but Light
is sown for the Righteous, (who shall reap, if they faint not) and Gladness for
the upright in Heart, as the Psalmist speaks. O that we could be (like the
Doves of the Valley) mourning after the Lord, who seems to be departing from
us. The Sons of Violence with us act high, our Sufferings many; but O that none
of these things may move us, neither may we account our Lives dear to us, if
called to lay them down for the Sake of Christ and his Gospel. If the Lord give
us but a fixed Heart that we can trust in him, we need not then be afraid of
the worst times, nor the saddest of Tidings, but may encourage our selves in
the Lord our God, under the greatest Discouragements from Men whatsoever.
Surely the People of God have greatly provoked God. O that we may repent and
return to him that smites! God will certainly arise in the behalf, and plead
the Cause of his People; he will work Deliverance for Sion; if not in our time,
yet in his: O that this may satisfy us. And that when Foundations seem to be
out of course, we may with Faith and Patience, look up to the Rock of Ages.
Dear Sir, pray for us, and for me in particular, who need your Prayers, that my
Faith fail not, that I may with Constancy and Courage own the good Ways of God,
and hold fast my Integrity, the very desire of my Soul being to keep close to
God: I would fain win as many into Heaven's-ways, and as much strengthen such
Hands as hang down, as such an unworthy Wretch as I may. What Interest I have
at the Throne of Grace, I hope shall not fail to be improved for the Church of
God, and for you my dear Friend. Being, Sir,

Your hearty well-wishing Friend, and Humble Servant, G. D.

A Letter to Mrs. Sarah Reyner, one of my Charge, Jan. 85.
Dear Mrs. Sarah,
I Received yours, which though the first received, is not I perceive the first
sent; for which, I thank you, and have according to your Desire, sent you, (by
paying it to Mr. Charleton's Clerk) 50 s. I much wonder your Sister Elizabeth
would not vouchsafe me one Line since she left the Country; but however, do
rejoice to hear, upon enquiry, you both do well as to this World; and I would
fain hope you will not be negligent in minding the Affairs of a better World,
nor dare be regardless of your precious and immortal Souls. You are both the
Children of Religious Parents, have been blessed with a good Education; and many
Prayers are, I believe, lodged in Heaven for you; so that you cannot miscarry
at so cheap a rate as others may, who have not had your Advantages for being
good. O that I could prevail with you to live up to such distinguishing Mercy!
You have, I perceive, good Settlements in the World; bless God for that: But O!
are you well settled and interested in Christ? Have you made sure of a Treasure
in Heaven? have you laid hold on eternal Life? and secured the everlasting
Welfare of your precious Souls? Be your worldly Accommodations never so great,
till this be done, your Work is not half done: You are in a City of great
Advantages, I pray attend upon the best, most powerful Soul-searching, and
Conscience-awakening Ministry you can, with the Leave of those who are your
Superi^rs. Be thorowpac'd in the Ways of God; dare not to be slighty, and
indifferent in the Family Duties, I hope you are privileged withal, nor to
neglect Closet-Duties, as Prayer, Reading the Scriptures, Self-Examination,
Meditation, and the like, at least Morning and Evening. Shun and avoid
Temptations as much as may be, considering the great Corruption and
Depravedness of Nature. Remember your Creator in the Days of your Youth; and
having set your Face Heavenward, look not back. It will be much my Rejoicing to
see you, and all of you (the Offspring of most pious Relations, now with God)
do well: and if my poor Prayers and Endeavors may any ways contribute hereto,
they are not, they have not, they shall not, through Grace, be wanting.

I being Yours, etc. G. D.

Some Passages of a Letter, in answer to my Mother Disney, complaining of Decay
of her Sight.
Honored Mother,
I Return you my humble Thanks for your welcome Lines, and do hope that the
uncertainty of my Man's last Journey to Lincoln, will excuse my then Silence.
It troubles me much to hear of your Eyes Decaying and Dimming, which as you
please to observe, is one Effect of old Age: It Is great Mercy the Lord has
given you the use of them so long, but far greater that he has given you a
Heart to use them to his Glory, and your own and others Benefit and Advantage.
I fear your too much Reading in the Daytime, and at all by Candlelight, has
and does that way prove prejudicial to you; I would therefore humbly beg you to
favor them as much as may be; and this am consident of, would you please to
take up your Abode with us, there is no Eyes in my Family but would cheerfully
and readily be at your Service, to excuse and preserve your own; which I trust
the Lord will yet continue to you. My good Aunt Thornton, I am persuaded will
not be against my improving this Argument, for the Enjoyment of your good
Companies here, most desirable to us. My Eyes I can perceive are not so strong
as they have been. O that as our bodily Eyes dim and decay, the Eye of Faith
may grow more clear; for certainly, a Look within the Vail, must be most
refreshing and supporting to a gracious Soul, and a renewed Mind. Those indeed
that see best in our Days with bodily Eyes, see en'e little or nothing, but
what has a sad and frightful Aspect, and may occasion Matter of sad Thoughts;
but by Faith, we may look into an unseen World, take a View of unseen Comforts,
and live upon unseen Riches and Happiness, which are the most pleasant things,
the most certain, and the most lasting. The worst in this World need not, nay
cannot dismay us, Whilst we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 18, etc.

A Letter to Mr. Whitaker, Jan. 24, 1683.
SIR,
THis Day I received yours, till which time I was afraid mine to you had
miscarried. I heartily rejoice at the Lord's Goodness to you and yours; and
through Mercy, can give you the same Account concerning me and mine, though a
sickly Season in many Places. We have, through the Goodness of God, of late
enjoyed very comfortable Opportunities at my House; for which, I desire to
bless God: But the last Meeting we had here, being rather too large, was
disturbed; the Mayor having notice of Peoples coming in, sent his Sergeant, who
when the People were dispersed, and the Minister gone, came in, and desired
Liberty to search my House, which (I giving him,) he told me, if upon my word,
I would say there was no Minister at my House, he would neither trouble me nor
himself: I assured him there was none; he then only went into the Garden, where
he pretended he saw 300; but however, they not being able to make a Conventicle
of it, nor a Riot, the Jury found it an unlawful Assembly; the which they
prosecute, and I intend to traverse, for they cannot make out any unlawful Act.
The Day is yet dark, and the Sufferings of many great, and Sin at the bottom of
all. If the Hearts and Lives of Professors were better, we should soon see
better Times; It Is repenting Work, and reforming Work is our Duty. O that we
could see the Hand of God in all that befalls us, and turn to him that smites!
O that we could with Faith and Patience, look up to the Rock of Ages, when
Foundations seem out of course, etc.

A Copy of a Letter to Madam L. upon the Death of her Kinswoman, and the Birth
of her Child.
Honored Madam,
I Did at the same time by the Pen of Mrs. Green, receive the sad Tidings of
the Death of your dear Kinswoman Mrs. M. and the joyful News of your safe
Delivery from the Pains and Peril of Childbearing: the one I know would be
afflicting enough to you; the other I can assure you was welcome Tidings to me;
and a Mercy, I hope and believe, you will endeavor to improve toward your
Support and Comfort, and the Glory of the great Jehovah. See, dear Madam, the
Lord's Tenderness and Goodness to you in late Dispensations; your Afflictions
are mixed and allayed with Mercies: You may experience what patient Job says,
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes; and I believe, with him likewise, you
desire to bless his holy Name. He has taken away your Kinswoman, but he has
given you a Child; has taken away one that was very useful, faithful and
necessary to you, and given you one who (through his own Blessing; upon a
religious and pious Education) you may comfortably hope he will make so. Let
not blubbered Eyes for a Comfort lost, prevent your cheerful, fruitful and
thankful Notice of what remains: pour not so much upon the dark-side of present
Dispensations, as to hinder your taking the Comfort of, and heartily blessing
God for the bright-side and Shinings of Mercy. Dear Madam, I am a hearty
Sympathizer with you in your Trouble, and desire to bear my part in blessing
the Lord with you and for you, with reference to Mercy showed you: You have now
obtained a new Mercy from the Lord, and I believe know well that new Duties are
incumbent upon you, etc.

A Letter to my Mother upon the Death of my Sister D. May 24, 1690.
Ever honored Mother,
STill the Lord is pleased to make Breaches upon our Family; the sudden and
surprising News of our dear Sister's Death came to us this Day by Mr. B. and I
could not omit sending a few Lines to you by Post this Night. I know, Honored
Mother, the Stroke lies exceeding heavy upon you; I am afraid much too heavy,
being very well acquainted with the Tenderness of your Affections, and the
Workings of your Bowels to Relations. But I pray, dear Mother, refuse not to be
comforted; I am persuaded you have no reason to sorrow as one without hope, for
her, who I believe, now sleeps in the Bosom of her, and our dear Redeemer: Our
God has done his Pleasure; let us now labor to do our Duty, and be content: We
heartily wish our selves with you, but cannot as yet accomplish that Desire,
being unprovided of Horses and a Servant, but as soon as may be we do purpose
it. The good Lord sanctify this Stroke to us all, and ^it us for our latter
End; and grant that we may be Followers of those who through Faith and
Patience, inherit the Promises. The Enclosed I desired may be sent to my poor
afflicted Brother, to whose Relief and Support, I desire to contribute
something: Though Shortness of Time suffers not Enlargement farther than to
present all our humble Duties to your self, and honored Aunt, with Service to
all Friends. I rest,

Honored Mother, Your Obedient Son, G. D.

A Letter to Brother D. upon the Death of his Wife, May 24, 90.
My Dear Brother,
I Heartily lament the sad Breach the Lord has been pleased to make upon you,
and am the more a Sympathizer with you, as knowing (by my own Experience) what
such a Stroke and Dispensation means. The Lord has I know, taken away the
Delight and Desire of your Eyes; this is your Mis^ry; but having taken her to
himself, let that be your Comfort: he has snatched at a Stroke a Wife out of
your Bosom, which certainly is most grievous; but has he not taken her into his
own? let this be your Support. She was well provided for on Earth, and had as
much Satisfaction a^, I believe, any, on account of a tender Husband, sweet
Children, dea^ Relations, and other comfortable Accommodations; but much better
now in Heaven; has better Place, better Company, better Employment t^an a vain
World ev^r did or could af^ord* What occurs in 2 Cor. 7. 29, - 31. equally
concerns both you and me, whose Conditions, in this case, have been the very
same, (though now different;) you must labor to be, and carry as if you had
not lost a Wife, and I as if I had no Wife. Time is short, and Life sho^t, and
relative Comforts are transient and fluid things; therefore your Sorrows must
be moderate for your Loss, and my ^oys be as if they were not, seeing we and
ours are to fall and part, and pass away in our Courses. My dear Brother,
labor ^or a Christian-Carriage under so sad a Cross. O that what you want in
the Creature, may be abundantly made up by a Creator; and that what you have
lost as to Streams, may be supplied from a Fountain. God's Rod has a Voice as
well as his Word; and I believe, you will labor to hear it, and him that has
appointed it. O Brother! we must have a care of ^nter^aining hard* Thoughts of
God, who does all things in Righteousness, and afflicts his Children in very
Faithfulness. My Bowels really year^ toward you, now Wifeless, and your poor
^a^^s, now Motherless; the Lord be a Comfort and Support to you all, and make
up this astonishing Breach (wherein is Rending and Tearing Work) with more of
himself, and the Influences of his Blessed Spirit. O Brother! it is one of the
bravest Sights in the World to see a Christian in the Exercise of Grace,
suitable to the Dispensation, to see him acting Faith, Patience, Humility,
Submission, Resignation and Divine Joy, in a time of pressing Affliction. This
will recommend Religion to the World, and convince the Men of it, there is more
in it than mere Talk. Heartily glad we should be if you would come for a while
to London, to divert your self here among good Men; I hope it might be for your
Advantage, and do conclude it highly necessary for you, a while, to leave
Kirkstead; we all send our hearty Remembrances to you and yours; the Lord fit
us all for our great and last Change, and in the midst of our private Losses
let us remember the Affliction of Sion. So prays

Your sympathizing Brother and Servant, G. Disney.

POEMS.
The Damneds Doom, or some Meditations in Verse, upon the last great Sentence
at the Day of Judgment; made by me Jan. 1685, upon Mr. Dunton's Paraphrase of
Mat. 25. 41. Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.
[ Dunton's Heavenly Past-time, page 96.]

Hark! hark! the Trumpet sounds, the Court is met!
Christ, (as Chief Justice) on the Bench is set;
Adorned with glorious Robes, and rich Attire,
Not now abas'd on Earth, advanced higher;
Guarded by Saints and Angels; such as they
Must all attend the Service of this Day.
He who when Prisoner here, was forced to stand,
And at a Mortal's Bar, hold up his Hand,
Was mocked at, spit upon, reproached and bled,
Must now be Judge alone of Quick and Dead:
Tho here debased, yet now Heaven rings
With Hallelujahs to this King of Kings.
Jesus.
Call forth the Prisoners then, they must appear,
To answer for themselves, tho Crimes are clear;
Hear what they will say, tho all they say, alas*
Can never ^inder the Sentence that must pass.
Sinners appear, come forth your Graves, arise,
You all are summoned to the grand Assize;
You called are into the great Court-Royal,
And may not stay, you must attend your Trial;
Make way for wretched Prisoners, there make room,
They Are going to receive their final Doom.
But now methinks, I see those trembling Souls,
Gazing about, to find some hiding Holes;
Calling to Rocks to hide them, but in vain,
For such late Calls and Cries can naught obtain:
Their Hearts were hardened in a Day of Grace,
When God did sweetly call, and give them space
For to repent; and now those rocky Stones
Has no regard at all unto their Groans;
The Mountains will not fall, to hide them from
The Wrath of him that sits on the Throne.
O what a Sight I see; the wretched State
Of Fools bewailing Folly, when too late*
From Hell and Graves, they come, but must not stay,
They are to pass Accounts, and so away.
Now Soul and Body meets, and must remain,
By Righteous Sentence, in eternal Pa^^;
They Partners were in Sin, whilst here below,
And must together groan in endless W^;
The Graves do open, and the Prisoners rise,
And now methinks, I hear the dol^ful Cries
Of those poor Sinners, who on Earth took Pains
To make their Souls as black and full of Stains,
As any could be; grudging always when
They were out-strip^ in Sin by any Men:
Methinks, I hear their Pleas, and see them quaking,
And all the little Shifts they would be making;
And all because they would appear at the Bar
Of God, a little better than they are.
The griping Usurer now looks about
To find some better Hands, than his Hands (...)
Which he does well remember heretofore
Did often by Extortion wrong the Poor.
The Wanton dare not own his wanton Eye,
I must, says he, have better, or I die;
Mine often un^hastly upon Women gazed,
And for laseivious Looks I stand amazed.
The Lawyer would reject his g^lded Tongue,
By which be Thousands in the World did wrong;
He knows that he, being fee'd or bribed, never stood
To make a good Cause bad, a bad Cause good.
The Gallant dare not own his strutting Feet,
Which often ^rudg'd thr^ thick and thin to meet
A dirty Whore, or hectoring drunken Friend,
To help him vainly, precious Time to spend*
My Feet were swift in running to do Evil,
I must have other Feet, or go to the Devil.
The Politician dares not own his Head;
Another he would fain have in its Stead;
What that contrived, he always was pursuing,
And finds his wicked Brain was his undoing.
Some they would part with Fingers, and would have,
E'ne any Fingers out of any's Grave;
So they may miss their own which was too be^^,
To sign Decrees against the Innocent.
Thieves they would part with Hands, and Liars Tongues
The Instruments of many grievous Wrongs,
Long-winded Sinners they would part with Lungs.
The Hypocrite too, has a mind to part
With his, to change it for a better Heart.
Ill-minded Sinners now would change their Mind
For any others of a better Kind;
And others, other things would swap, if then
They might hereby but pass for better Men:
Kings would disown their Crowns and Grandeur too,
And now appear in Rags, if that wo^ld do.
But O! prodigious Madness herein's shown,
E^r every one must keep what was his own;
And wicked Men must see their monstrou^ Folly,
Who would not, (whilst on Earth) be strict and holy?
Well! are the Prisoners come, then let them hear*
They must my Wrath and Fury ever bear.
Sentence.
Depart! (...) sed Wretches, never return,
Into a Fire, that must always burn,
Prepared for the Devil, and a Crew
Of wicked Wretches just like such as you.
Prisoner.
Ah dreadful Word, Depart! and that from thee,
Must needs be the upshot of all Misery.
Lord, let me stay but here, the Sinner ^ries;
My clamorous Conscience, and my blubbring Eyes,
May Tormo^^ be enough; dear God abate,
Some pity show me* for my ^retch'd Estate
Is such I cannot bear, let Sentence be
A little bated by a Sight of thee.
Judge.
Nay Sinner, ^no^, my Presence heretofore
Thou did no^ like, tho offered over and over;
Thou would and not entertain me in thy Heart,
And now my Sentence, Sinner, ^^, Depart!
An offered Christ, and Pardon, thou did slight*
And what can follow on it but dismal Night?
Prisoner.
And must I now depart, and undergo,
This dreadful hea^y Doom? yet let me know,
That tho^ ^il^ bless me Lord, and then I ca^
Refresh my Soul with this where ^'re I am.
I Am loath to go, but if I must, I crave
That I before may Heaven's Blessing have.
Jesus.
Sinner, be gone! nay more, I must thee tell,
My Curse shall go along with thee to Hell:
My Blessing thou despised for many Years,
And can not have it now, tho sought with Tears;
Thou must for ever fry and flame and rot,
Depart then, Sinner, for I know thee not.
Prisoner.
And must I be accursed, and never see,
Thy blessed Face again? then Lord let me
Find out for an Abode some pleasant Place,
What needs more Misery, than not see thy Face?
Judge.
Away thou cursed Miser'ant, it is too late,
Possess the Mis'ries of a wretched state:
To Hell be gone, let Racks increase thy Pains,
And Fiends torment thee with their dolorou^ Strains;
Here thou did wallow in thy sensual Pleasure,
And now must burn in Flames that know no Measure.
Prisoner.
Ah Lord! if I must go with Curse and Ire,
And that to such a woeful Place as Fire;
Yet let me beg this Boon, I never may
Continue any long time there, or stay;
Let me pass swiftly thr^, and then have Ease,
Let this the Anger of my God appease.
Material Fire's sad, Men kindle here,
What then are Flames that burn with Brimstone there?
Judge.
Away Wretch, stay no longer, cease thy Wooings,
Thou reapest but the Fruits of thy own Doings;
Eternal Pain, thy tortured Mind shall rend,
That has no present Ease, nor future End;
There go, contribute to those dreadful Cries,
Where Fire's never quenched, nor Worm e're dies.
Prisoner.
Let not my Lord be angry, if I take
Yet Liberty to plead, my Life's at Stake;
This dismal dreadful Doom for to depart,
From thee the chiefest Good, en'e breaks my Heart;
But yet in Flames for evermore to be,
Does fill my Torments with Extremity.
Well if it must be so, that I drink up
The bitterst Dregs of this imbittered Cup,
Yet favor me so far, as I may choose,
My own Companions there, Lord don't refuse;
May I be joined to such as may abate,
And not increase the Torments of that State.
Judge.
No Sinner, thy Companions must be such
As thou in Lifetime did delight in much;
Such who on Earth were Tempters most to thee,
Shall now in Hell thy worst Tormentors be:
Those, who to lead thee Captive here took pains,
Shall now for ever with thee hang in Chains:
You all when fagotted, shall burn together,
And these things be endured, Soul, for ever.
Ah ghastly Sight! devouring Flames to see,
With Adders, Frogs and Toads, for ever be;
To hear the Screeches of those Monsters then,
That cannot be expressed by any Pen;
All this and greater Misery, does inthral,
Yet Stings of Conscience will prove worst of all.
Sentence more particular.
Judge.
BRing forth the Prisoners, bring them one by one,
That every one may sentenced be alone;
Set them to 'th Bar, that every one may hear,
What it is they are damned for, what they must bear.
Ignorant.
Come forth besotted Souls that have not known,
The Myst'ries of the great Salvation;
That ignorant have been, tho Gospel Light
Has shined about their Tabernacles bright;
Take them then, Devils, bind them very fast,
The time they had for Learning now is past.
Slothful.
Come forth ye slothful Servants, come, make haste,
Who did not well improve, but Talents waste;
On Earth you most unprofitable were,
And well may trembling stand now you are here,
Talents I did entrust you with to use,
Unto my Glory, which you did abuse;
You either spent them vainly on your Lust,
Or laid them up in Napkins for to rust;
How could thou eat, and drink, and sleep, and play,
Before thy Work was done, Soul, what can say?
Your pleasant Morsels prove a bitter Sweet,
For take them Devils, bind them Hand and Feet.
Worship-Neglecters.
Come forth all those that Families had here,
But in them would not Gospel Worship bear;
Tho Sin and Satan have your Thresholds trod,
You had no Entertainment for your God!
You were my Creatures, and did Worship owe,
But did not pay this Debt to me you know;
And tho you Subjects were, would never bring,
The Homage that you should, to me your King.
You lived upon my Bounty every Day,
Your Charge in Keeping-house I did defray,
And yet when all was done, you would not Pray.
Tho Wrath and Vengeance threatened was to fall
On Families that would not on me call,
Yet all I find in vain, you Strangers are,
Both to your Family and Closet-Prayer;
Then rank them Devils amongst your cursed Train,
Their Prayers that would have done, are now in vain.
Sabbath Breakers.
Come forth ye Sabbath Breakers, Sinners high,
You must be tried, and all be cast and die;
You did profane my Sabbaths here on Earth,
Would not then honor me who gave you Breath;
Most vilely you have wasted those blessed Days,
By eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Sports and Plays;
By thinking vainly, or by doing ill,
By acting what was bad, or sitting still;
Instead of Walking with thy God (which yields
The truest Pleasure) thou have walked in the Fields,
To gratify thy Flesh, with vain Delights,
And have not paid to Heaven, Heaven's Rights;
Instead of Waiting at the Posts o'th Door
Of my own House, thou'st waited on a Whore;
Instead of managing thy Soul's Affairs,
By Reading, Hearing, Singing, Thinking, Prayers,
The World has filled thy Thoughts, and wasted time,
That was not thine, O Sinner, but was mine!
You thought one Day of Prayer and Praise for me,
Too much to spend on Earth, and now must see
Your selves excluded Heaven, filled with Pains,
Whilst Saints are singing here in highest Strains;
Take them to Hell then, let them hence be led,
And there be always dying, never dead:
Swearers.
Come forth you swearing Crew, who would profane,
By Oaths and Curses, my most Holy Name;
Could hardly speak a Word, but Oaths must fly*
For these thy Sins, O Sinner, thou must die;
'Twas my Command you know, Swear not at all,
Unless to end a Strife you had a Call;
But in your common Talk my Word did say,
Let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay;
And whatsoever's more must needs be Evil,
Yet less is learned by you, and taught by the Devil.
Come Sinners, come, you often have cursed and swore,
And bad me damn you if I durst: therefore
I now will swear in Wrath, you never shall see
My blessed Rest, but turned to Hell shall be;
Take them then Devils, in Torments let them lie,
Where Conscience always stings, and Worms never die.
Scoffers.
Come forth ye Scoffers, that could never refrain,
To speak of pious Souls without disdain*
Who counted Goodness, Madness, blamed their Folly,
Who seriously were strict and truly holy.
Those things you did account, (you never saw)
But Tricks and Francies, to keep Men in awe:
The truly holy, humble, pious Soul,
You did account no better than a Fool;
Then you could say, what needs so much ado?
Men may be much less holy, yet saved too:
You tauntingly could say, these holy Brothers
Would fain seem more religious than others;
The praying Saint, for sooth, has the Spirit got,
Who yonder goes, poor silly whining Sot.
Well, but who made the wisest choice? Come, speak,
They who did keep my Law, or did it break,
They who in Soul-Affairs would never delay,
To give to God the best they had; or they
Who thought such guilty of the highest Folly,
And called religious Thoughts but Melancholy?
In The World you had your good things, mine their bad,
But now mine shall rejoice, whilst you are sad:
This was your Folly, tho you would not see it,
Then take them Devils, bind them Hands and Feet.
Persecutors.
Come forth you Persecutors, now you will know
What 'twas for to oppress my Friends below;
You did not only mock, and scoff, but when
You pleased, you did imprison the best of Men.
Not only did you wound them with the Tongue,
But Scorpion-like, you many of them stung:
Some, Judas-like, you wickedly betrayed,
And others with your Treats you made afraid:
You banished some, and others spilt their Blood,
Because they durst not sin, but would be good.
Many you haled to Prison, whom you knew
In all their Prayers to me, forgot not you:
You would not walk your selves in the Narrow-way,
And such as would, you often caused to stray;
You thought herein you served me, but now see,
It was the Devil's Work, with him you will be.
Take them then Devils, let those Monsters know
Their Folly's great, who served my Servants so.
Licentious.
Licentious ones come forth, for you have been
All^vers of your selves in every Sin;
You never laid Restraints upon your Will,
But always would your Appetites fulfill;
Your Lusts must be indulged, your Sins allowed,
The least Advance on Earth has made you proud:
If others would be bad, you would not forbear,
With Drunkards would be drunk, with Swearers swear;
With haughty Spirits you could rant and huff,
And with the vilest would be vile enough:
Then take them Devils, let them ever burn
In Hell's devouring Flames, and never return.
Gluttons.
Come forth ye Gluttons, you that must be fed
With best of Dainties, and the finest Bread;
Who could for the Body lusty Morsels carve,
Whilst a neglected Soul was like to starve;
Whose Cry was always Give, come give us more,
Tho Beggars went but empty from your Door:
If Paunches were not swelled to the biggest Last,
You always thought you had a poor repast:
If Bellies were not filled up to the Brim,
And you in Liqour almost fit to swim,
You thought Provision mean, and you must starve,
Tho Scraps indeed were more than such deserve.
Well, take them Devils, give them now their fill,
Let swinish Tempers have their swinish Swill.
Drunkards.
Drunkards come forth, who did your selves besot,
By drinking Wine in Bowls, Pot after Pot;
Who did unman your selves, debase your Reason,
And this not seldom, but at every Season;
You knew you sinned by every such Excess,
That Nature would be satisfied with less:
And that such Drunkards must their Portion take
In the infernal Pit and fiery Lake;
Yet drink you would, and Drunkards you would be,
And in excuse would say, some tempted me;
Others thus pleaded, that as for their share,
They overtaken were before aware;
But these things will not do, your Pleas are naught,
And all your drunken Frolicks dearly bought:
Then seize them Devils, let them ever take
Whole Draughts of Vengeance in a flaming Lake.
Adulterers.
Come forth Adulterers, that cursed Seed,
Who were unchaste in Thought, or Word, or Deed;
For all these things by my Command, I did
Most strictly all the Sons of Men forbid;
You Wantons knew these things most sinful were,
And yet to act them, seldom would forbear;
You sought out secret Corners where to sin,
And act your lustful Wickednesses in;
You dreaded humane Eyes, and watched for Night,
That Works of Darkness might not see the Light,
But never considered my all-seeing Eye
Could Wickedness through thickest Darkness spy:
Then take them Satan, rack them in each part,
That they may ever know I search the Heart.
Covetous.
Come forth those worldly Muck-worms that took pleasure
In nothing more than heaping up a Treasure
In this vain World, but never did know why,
Or who should afterward the same enjoy:
Who fixed your Hearts on Earth, but would not know,
When God does blow on such things, all must go;
Your Thoughts were so on Earth, you never could
Think once of Heaven, at least you never would
Bestow a Thought about your future State,
And Sinners now you see it is too late:
Then take them Devils, ransack all your Hoards,
And give them Treasures such as Hell affords.
Unmerciful.
Come forth all those who would no Mercy show,
Nor pity take on needy ones below;
Who would not spare some Pence out of their Store,
But sent the Hungry empty from their Door,
And churlishly would at the Beggar scoff,
Or else would look at him a great way off:
Had Bowels always shut against their Cries,
And no regard would have to weeping Eyes.
Well, take them Devils to eternal Pain,
Let those who showed no Mercy, seek't in vain.
Unrighteous.
Come forth unrighteous Persons and unjust,
Who in their Dealings here betrayed their Trust,
Widows and Orphans by their louder Cries,
Have rent the Heavens, and have pierced the Skies;
Your overreaching Neighbors heretofore,
And grinding of the Faces of the Poor;
Oppressing some, who ever you thought fit,
And vexing others, whom you could out-wit;
All these, and other such unrighteous Gains
Is known to me your Judge; and for your Pains
Take them now Devils, hurl them into the Fire,
That Is kindled and increased by my Ire.
Liars.
Come forth you Liars that would not refrain,
To tell a Lie at any time for Gain;
Who were so much accustomed to this Sin,
As if your training up in Hell had been;
Affirming for a Truth the thing which you
At that time did well know to be untrue:
But this you often have done without a Thought,
That such a Practice loved is stark naught;
You have reported Lies, but that is not all,
You often have invented them withal:
O what a Case are you in, who as soon
As you could almost speak, were Liars grown;
Too often have you by this Lying trade,
A Fault that was but single, two Faults made.
Then take them Devils, for a common Liar
Is Fuel very proper for Hellfire.
Slanderers.
Let Slanderers come forth, and now appear,
Who always to Back-biters lent their Ear,
And then would Stories here and there soon scatter,
Which whether true or false, they did not matter.
Thus you have lived, and hereby often have taken
Unjustly from your Neighbors their good Name;
Your very Language is of such a sort,
Let Neighbors but report, and we will report.
Such Persons surely never yet well knew,
The Duty to a Neighbor that was due;
Tho know they might and ought, that in their Station
They should not blast, but help his Reputation.
Take them then Devils, down to Hell them bear,
And let them tell those Fiends what now they hear.
Ambitious.
Come forth Ambitious Persons, and the Proud,
Make room for them, they are too great to crowd;
Come, you, who built your Nests on Earth so high,
As if you meant most proudly thence to fly
To Heaven; but this cannot be, you knowing well
'Twas Pride threw Angels down from thence to Hell;
Many a dirty Step you took to the Seat
Of Honor when on Earth, to make you great;
And towering were your Thoughts and swelling Pride,
Admiring of your selves, but none beside;
Others you scorned, and always thought unfit
At any time with you on Earth to sit:
Your Hearts were proud, and Looks and Speech you know,
And Carriage unto all was also so.
Lodge them in Hell, their Pride must cost them dear,
See what they will be proud of when they are there.
Envious.
Let envious Persons now be brought to the Bar,
Whose Malice did exceed all others far;
There hardly could be any Rich or Great,
But these would quickly envy their Estate;
They soon repine, if they but see or hear
Others commended whilst themselves are there;
If Neighbors but excelled in any thing,
They Would either blast his Name, or clip his Wing*
These were the bypath envious Souls have trod,
Their Eye was Evil because mine was Good.
Then take them Deu'l, Companions to be,
They are not fit for Heaven, but for thee.
Wrathful.
Bring forth those wrathful Persons, that black Crew,
Whose Tongues contentious, wounded not a few;
Their siery Spirits have been just like Swords,
And Gall was always mingled with their Words;
Wounded they have, and lashed reproachfully,
With Scorpion-Tongues in Passion, Standers-by;
E'ne take them Devil, they are too hot to be
In any Place but Hell, take them to thee.
Moralists.
Let Moralists come forth, who loudly boast
Of their uprighter Dealings than the most;
We were (say they) in Carriage always civil,
And in appearance, we forsook the Devil.
First-Table Duties we have kept and shall,
Exactly strict and just have been to all.
Well, all is nothing still, here lies the bar,
To the Power of Godliness you Strangers are.
Take them then Devils, I will hear no more,
Better than they are gone to Hell before.
Hypocrites.
Come forth ye Hypocrites, who made a show
Of being holy, but were never so;
Have born the outward Name of true Professors,
Yet in your private Haunts were great Transgressors*
A Name to live you had, but that was all,
Your Ends and Aims were Hypocritical;
You used Religion only to disguise,
And paint but over your Deformities:
You followed Christ for Loaves, which when you got,
Tho Christ did lead you still, you followed not;
You're painted Sepulchers, and just no more,
Splendid without, but rotten at the Core:
Such blazing Comets, wandering Stars, tho high,
Were but to shine a while, and then to die.
Receive them Devils, and the Charge I give,
Let them in dismal Darkness ever live.
Apostates, Backsliders.
Backsliders and Apostates all draw near,
Attend the dismal Sentence you must hear;
You once were seeming Saints, but now alas!
Amongst the openly Profane you pass;
You seemed to love my Ways and People too,
And once run very well, who hindered you?
Was Heaven to you so unpleasant, that
You must for sake it for you knew not what?
Was my Reward so mean, you went away,
And would no longer in my Service stay?
And can the Devil give you better Pay?
What! faces Heavenwards, and then retreat?
This makes your lesser Wickedness complete;
For when you would tried both ways, a worse and better,
You vainly chose the First, and left the Latter.
Then take them Devils, who would never be wise,
And let them know what 'twas to apostatize.
Impenitent, Unbelievers.
Come forth Impenitents, and hear your Fate,
Let Unbelievers now lament too late,
That they would not prevailed be withal
To come to Christ, when he did sweetly call;
Come, Sinner, come away, both me and mine,
Upon Acceptance shall be ever thine;
You have not the Gospel credited, tho true,
And in your Mother Tongue revealed to you;
You have not yielded to me your Allegiance,
Nor lived by Faith, nor paid me true Obedience;
Nor closed with Christ, tho you did plainly see
'Twas by him only you could saved be:
Repent you would not, but your Sins did cherish,
Tho it was often said, Repent or perish.
Take them then Devils, let them rue their Birth,
Who would not turn from Sin whilst here on Earth.
Sinners farewell.
Alas, Alas! what will of us become?
Now Go ye Cursed, is our final Doom:
Both Soul and Body well may stand afrighted,
Cursing the Day in which they were united:
Devils must needs, with Fury being driven,
Seize us for Hell, being sentene'd out of Heaven;
And with their Insultation at us rage,
As tho our Torments would their own assuage:
In Flames must fry, which never cease to burn,
From whence we never may, nor can return.
Meditations upon the Sacrament in Verse, made the 28th of Jan. 85. by G. D.
ALL wanton, wandering, worldly Thoughts be gone!
It Is Christ alone i am now to think upon;
Stand off the World, and worldly Business all,
I have no leisure to attend your Call;
My Friends, I leave you; things below, adieu!
I must my bleeding Savior go and view;
My Soul's for mounting up, that I may see
My blessed Lord, who bled and died for me,
And may not stay, since Heaven gives the Call,
But hasten to him, dearer than you all.
Come then my Soul, art got alone, make haste,
Heaven's Banquet is prepared, go and taste;
Look yonder, see! how others flock and run,
And can thou linger thus? my Soul, be gone;
Touch but this Vail, climb up that Mount, then stay,
Thou art arrived at bloody Golgotha;
Pause here a while, and pausing thou shall see,
Thy Savior bleeding, dying, dead for thee:
Admire rich Grace, my Soul! O strange Decree,
That Christ must be the Prisoner, and not me.
It might have been my case, that I must sup,
Nay drink the Dregs of this most bitter Cup.
But look, he yonder goes, that now must die,
My blessed Savior suffers, and not I.
Nay, look again, my Soul, approach more near,
And see a Train of Virgins follow there:
Look, there he passes by, O bloody Jews!
That durst the Lord's Anointed thus abuse!
See how they Laugh and Scoff, and do at length
Force him to bear his Cross above his Strength;
Pressing his wearied Limbs, they wag the Head,
Make him their Sport, and thus away he is led.
Methinks my Heart does boil with Rage to see
The Folly of these Monsters Cruelty.
How could the blessed Lord, to send, forbear
Legions of Angels for his rescue here?
Why caused he not some Fire from Heaven then,
To fall upon these cursed wicked Men?
Why did he not destroy this wicked Race,
And pity more his Son's distressed Case?
But stay, my foolish Heart, thou do not know,
What Spirit thou art of, it must be so;
A Debt was due to Heaven, and must be paid,
God calls it in, and Payment must be made;
Sinners can never be safe, nor get to Heaven,
Till Satisfaction be completely given:
This Christ well knew, yet never grudged at'th Cost,
To purchase back what Bankrupt Sinners lost;
He left his Father's Bosom, tho he knew
The sad and doleful things that would ensue:
He knew he was to suffer, bleed and die,
Or Sinners must be lost eternally;
Yet having undertaken, he will perform,
For this he hither came, for this end born;
He therefore shrinks not, nor does once dispute,
He dies for the sake of Sinners, and is mute.
O sad Arraignment! when the Judge must stand
At the Bar of Prisoners holding up his Hand!
Methinks I see, and doleful Sight it is,
Judas betraying Jesus with a Kiss!
I hear them mock and jear the glorious King;
Instead of Scepter, they a Reed him bring;
They spit on's Face, and's blessed Head adorns,
With nothing but a pricking Crown of Thorns.
The Soldiers wag their Heads, and on him railed,
And forced him bear the Cross to which he is nailed;
They pierced his Sides with Spears, and at him wink,
And gave him Vinegar and Gall to drink.
I see the Virgins following with their Cries,
With Countenances sad, and bleared Eyes;
I see my Lord look toward them, and say,
Weep not for me, but for your selves, I pray;
I hear them quickly making this Reply,
How can we choose but weep, when thou must die?
Our Hearts are full, and must have some Relief,
They either now must burst or melt with Grief.
O wicked Tyrants, cursed bloody Jews!
Knew you but who it is that you thus use,
You would weep too, and could no longer grudg
To shed some Tears for him who now you judge.
Meditations in Verse upon John 6. 36. All that the Father gives me, shall
come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.
GOod News! indeed from Christ I hear,
That all the Father has given
Unto my Blessed Lord shall come,
And never miss of Heaven.
Then come O Soul, and coming, know,
Thou have no cause to doubt;
For he that cannot lie, has said
He will not cast thee out.
Object. 1.
Ah, says the Soul, I Am cloyed with Sin,
Can such an one as I,
Take any saving step to Christ?
No, surely, I must die.
By Adam's Fall I lost my Strength,
Ability and Power;
And how can I move after Christ,
Who'm sinning every Hour?
Answer.
Well, yet take Courage, thou may come;
The Master calls, Arise,
They that but come, he never will
Cast off in any wise.
Object. 2.
Tell me, says Soul, but how I may
Know when I come aright?
Resolve me this, and then (through Grace)
I Will come with all my Might.
Answer.
Well, Sinner, see thy self then lost,
And wretchedly undone,
Till Heart and Mind be both inclined
To rest on Christ alone.
Does now thy Heart work after Christ?
Is Sin thy burden, Soul?
Then come away, for now thou may
Upon thy Savior roll.
Object. 3.
Ah, says the Sinner, though I find
A willingness to come
To Jesus Christ, as being lost,
Yet all my Work's not done.
My End I fear cannot be good,
Self in this choice I cherish,
I take a Christ to give me Life,
As knowing else I perish.
Answer.
Well, Sinner, yet though this be all
Thy present End and Aim,
In taking Christ, thou welcome art,
For he has said the same.
The Argument that Christ does use,
Encouragement to give,
To Sinners to come in to him,
Is that they turn and live.
Yea, he upbraids the Jews, though they
Were now with him at Strife;
Ye will not come to me, says he,
That I may give you Life.
Come then for Life, though that be all
At present in thine Eye;
Thou do believe that Christ can save,
And therefore to him fly.
Object. 4.
Ah! but I find, says one poor Soul,
My Pace to Christ so slow,
That I can hardly sometimes tell
Whether I come or no.
Answer.
Well, we'll admit that this (poor Soul)
Be verily thy Case;
Yet can thou say, Lord draw me on,
And I shall mend my Pace?
Thy Frame in Duties thou find'st sad,
Thy Pulse beats very slow;
Yet if but beating after Christ,
Take Courage, Soul, and go.
Come on to Christ, bewail thy Sloth,
If he but see thee weeping
For those faint Steps thou take to him,
He Will welcome thee, though creeping.
Object. 5.
Ah! says another coming Soul,
Here Is this does sorely out,
I come so late, to Mercy's Gate,
I fear the Door is shut.
Answer.
Well, coming Sinner, come away,
Though thou but come at last,
To Christ you are welcome, if thou do
Come now more quick and fast.
He that came in at the eleventh Hour,
(Though idle all the Day)
Being sent to work with other Men,
At Night had equal pay. [Mat. 20.]

The Thief that hung upon the Cross,
Did late for Mercy cry;
Show Mercy, Lord, to me a Wretch,
And that before I die.
Welcome, says Christ, I Have heard thy Prayer,
And happy thou shall be;
I Am going up to Paradise,
And thou shall be with me.
He stood it out to the very last,
Yet Mercy did obtain;
O then, delaying Souls, to Christ
You cannot come in vain.
Object. 6.
Well, says another, I am fallen,
Since I began to come
To Jesus Christ, and therefore fear
For such there is no room.
Answer.
Why truly Falls, poor Soul, are sad,
They wound the Conscience sore,
And cause the Enemies of God
Reproachfully to roar.
Yet know, O Soul, thou arguest wrong
For want of Scripture Light,
Thus to conclude, because of Falls
Thy coming was not right.
If David and King Solomon,
And Peter that bright Star,
Had argued thus against themselves,
They Would mist the Matter far.
You Are coming unto God, poor Soul,
And may expect it well,
The Devil will do what he can,
To trip thee down to Hell:
The World, the Flesh, the Devil, all
Will now against thee roar;
Then wonder not at single Falls,
But that thou gets no more.
The Child in the Gospel you shall find
To Christ no sooner coming,
But the Devil threw him down and tore, [Luke 9 42.

For to prevent his running.
The Lord upholdeth his that fall,
So much he does them prize;
That though by sinful slips they fall,
Through Grace he will makethem rise.
Well, falling Sinner, haste to Christ,
Thou never needs to doubt,
But he that helps thee up when down,
Will never cast thee out.
Object. 7.
But I am dead, the Sinner says,
What Comfort can you give?
Answer.
The Dead shall hear my Voice, says God,
And they that hear shall live.
Object. 8.
But I Am a Captive bound in Chains,
And fettered by Sin.
Answer.
Yet this Word, [Shall come unto Christ]
Will quickly fetch thee in.
Object. 9.
I Am blind and cannot see my way,
Through the Darkness of my Mind;
And how can such come unto Christ?
The way he cannot find.
Answer.
Thy Blindness, Soul, cannot obstruct,
If thou thy Blindness see;
I Will lead, says God, in Paths untrod,
To bring such Souls to me.
I will make Darkness Light to them,
And crooked Things most straight,
And this benighted Souls shall find,
If they upon me wait. [Isa. 42. 16.

Object. 10.
Ah, but my Case is still far worse,
I have not sinned alone;
But others by Example I
The way to Sin have shown.
They that turn many Souls, I find,
To Righteousness shall shine
As Stars above for ever more,
But this Case is not mine.
Answer.
Well, here is yet Comfort, in those Days
Says he that cannot lie,
Iniquity shall sought for be,
But none shall it espy. [Jer. 32. 30.

Object. 11.
Well, but methinks I hear a Soul
Bemoaning thus and cry,
It Is Faith I want, and cannot come,
But here must stay and die.
Answer.
I grant, O Soul, it is Faith alone,
That great uniting Grace,
By which thou must lay hold of Christ,
The want of it is thy Case.
Well, Faith's the Gift of God thou know,
Who bids thee believe;
And true Repentance he must give,
Or thou can never live.
Well, coming Sinner, come away,
Be always of this Mind;
Thou must both knock, and call, and seek,
If Mercy thou would find.
Lord, Mercy, Lord, O poor Soul cry,
Thy Mercy, Lord, I crave,
Or here I die in Misery,
It Is Mercy I must have.
I do believe, help Unbelief,
My hold of Christ I Will keep;
If run I cannot after thee,
Lord after thee I Will creep.
Then Welcome Sinner unto Christ,
Though coming for a Dole;
This Faith, though weak, yet saving is,
Thy Faith has made thee whole.
Backsliding Sinner, come to Christ,
Do but for this Sin mourn,
And thou wilt be welcome unto him,
Who bids repent and turn.
Relapsing Sinner, come away,
And thou shall quickly see
Thy frequent Falls no let at all
To Christ's accepting thee.
Delaying Sinner, hasten now
Before the Door be shut;
He that says, Come, will make thee room:
Then, Sinner, arise up.
The hung'ring Soul may come to Christ,
And they that weary be;
The Poor that has no Price to pay,
May have him very free.
Debauched Sinner, hasten in,
Cast off thy Sins, and then
He will be thine, as well as mine,
Who di'd for the worst of Men.
Drunkards and Swearers, stay not out,
If you will but come in now;
Such have been washed, and cleansed too,
And coming, so may thou.
Soul.
O I am fully now convinced,
If happy I would be,
I must away to Jesus Christ,
My Loit'ring ruins me.
Object.
But when I come, the Devil calls,
Whither away so fast?
Thou can no Entertainment have
With Christ, thy Time is past.
Thou art not one of those, alas,
For whom he shed his Blood;
Nor art thou an elected one,
Stay here, it is as good.
Soul.
Nay, but I Will try and hasten in;
O that I Would gone before!
And if I cannot entrance have,
I Will wait at Heaven's Door.
But yet, methinks thy fierce Assaults
Encouragement do give;
If I but go, Is It be received,
And if I turn, Is It live.
The dying Soul's last Farewell to All.
Farewell the World I once did love;
I now have learned to live above:
Farewell my Friends, and welcome Grave,
I better Friends in Heaven have:
Farewell dear Wife, I cannot stay,
Christ bids me come, I must away:
Farewell my Body made of Dust,
I must to him in whom I trust:
Farewell those Sins I left before,
I Am going where i will sin no more:
And farewell Troubles at Decease,
In Heaven will be perfect Peace:
Farewell my earthly House and Lands,
A House i will have not made with Hands:
Farewell all Sorrows, doleful Cries,
In Heaven are no weeping Eyes.
Nay farewell all my worldly Stuff,
A single Christ makes rich enough;
To let all go is surely best,
To enter on Eternal Rest:
Yet do not say that I am dead,
I Am but undrest and gone to Bed;
I Am gone you see, yet do not cry,
Meet me in Heaven when you die.
The Welcome to Heaven.
God.
Welcome my Child to endless Bliss,
Heaven joys to see thee here,
Fear not, this is thy Father's House,
Taste freely Heaven's Cheer.
When thou thy Savior did accept,
This Jointure he thee made,
It Is Heaven he purchased for thee,
Accept, be not afraid.
But why ashamed? poor Soul come in;
Now you are arrived above,
Thy Soul is cleans'd, thy Sins forgot,
Think now of naught but Love.
Spread out the Cloth of richest Gold,
His Foot-cloth it shall be,
If he be dressed, then bring him forth,
He Will keep me Company.
Come all that here attend my Throne,
Put on him best Attire,
Set on the Crown that will out shine
The clearest Flames of Fire.
Well, bid him welcome to the Court,
He Is one of Royal Birth,
I must be-friend him now he is here,
He was my Friend on Earth.
He left the World, whilst in the World,
Did show whilst he had Breath,
He loved me above the World,
Was faithful unto Death.
Soul.
A Bride, a Child, a Wife, a Friend,
Ragg'd, yet adorned so soon,
My Dunghil's changed for a Throne,
My Midnight's turned to Noon.
Upon a Deathbed I did lie,
And there did toss and turn,
My Friends about me weeping stood,
But here shall never mourn.
A Hymn on Isaiah 8. 17. And I will wait upon the Lord, that hides his Face
from the House of Jacob, and I will look for him.
MY God's withdrawn, and hides his Face,
I cannot choose but mourn,
Yet still i will wait upon the Lord,
And look for his return.
Doctrine in Verse.
Sometimes the Lord not only hides
His Face from single Saints,
But other whiles on this account
Whole Churches make Complaints.
And when it is thus, bewildered Souls
Know'ng scarce what course to take;
But still they will pray, and cry, and call,
And after God will make.
I Will seek the Lord, says such a Soul,
And still upon him wait,
Who hides his Face from Jacob's House,
He Will come, though's Coming's late.
A Meditation upon Matthew. 11. 28, 29, 30.
COme Sinner, come* thy Savior calls,
If penitent thou be,
And truly weary of thy Sins,
Thou 'rt welcome, Soul, to me.
Take up my Yoke, for it is light,
Account it always best
To learn of one, in whom alone
Thou can have solid Rest.
My Burthen's easy you will find,
When you have learned of me
To have a meek and lowly Mind,
Try Sinner, taste and see.
A Poetical Remembrance of the Reverend Mr. John Oaks, who died suddenly, being
taken with an Apoplectick Fit in his Pulpit; Lord's Day, December. 23, 1688. with
some Hints of Advice to surviving Relations; composed and made by a true Lover
of him and his, G. D.
Hark, hark! what means the mournful Looks and Cries,
The pensive bleeding Hearts and blubbered Eyes;
The Throbs, the Throws, the Sighs which do appear,
With sad Complainings almost every where?
Why so much Drooping in a Halcion-Day,
When with loud Acclamations we should pay
Rather a Tribute to our Prince and Peers,
Who seasonably have rescued us from Fears?
Why so much Sorrow now? If needs must be,
Occasioned by some Depths of Misery;
I sigh to tell you, yet am hereto forced,
My Heart's so full, it must have vent or burst:
Great Oaks the famous Preacher's lately dead,
Had hardly time to undress to go to Bed;
And he must senseless be, who now forbears
To speak with Sorrow, or to write in Tears;
The Heart's as hard as Flint, that cannot weep
When such a one as Oaks is fallen asleep.
Sabbaths were here unto him a Delight,
And on that blessed Day he took his Flight
From Earth to Heaven, where he ever sings
High Hallelujahs to the King of Kings.
Tho called from Sabbaths here, he would not debate,
That one Eternal he may celebrate;
Tho Warning's short, to go he will not dispute,
A Summons from a Father makes him mute.
The Stroke's surprising, yet to such as he,
So well prepared, it could not sudden be.
O dreadful Stroke! who can compute the Loss,
That does not first consider what he was?
One of a thousand, Workman truly great,
Christian and Pastor every way complete:
A friendly Friend to all, but yet most kind
To pious Souls, yea those of different Mind
To him in lesser things, he could it bear,
When good in the main, and honestly sincere;
This gracious Temper in him God had wrought,
To love his Image where-so-e're he saw't:
His Style tho plain, yet lofty Matter, such
That none that heard him thought they heard too much:
Startling he was to Sinners, but to Saints
A Helper always under sad Complaints.
For Temper generous, of a gallant Mind,
Affable, courteous, constant, truly kind;
Here Is Loss on all hands, with a dreadful But,
There Is few are left behind can make it up.
His People's Pastorless, and Children they
Are mourning for a Father taken away,
And for the now sad Widow, she alone
Can fully paint to the Life, her Sorrow's known:
If Prayers and Tears could have prevailed, I know
He had not mounted up, but staid below;
If Means and Medicines that were on him tried
Would have preserved his Life, he had not died;
Physicians were not wanting, yet he is gone
At the Pleasure of the great Physician.
When God says nay, Physic shall give no aid,
As Saints have done their Work, they must be paid.
Well, happy Soul, thou now the Gulf have shot,
And art where we would fain be, but are not;
You Are got to Heaven, and art now above
The reach of any Mortal's tendrest Love;
Above the Malice and the Rage of those,
Who for thy Goodness-sake were here thy Foes;
Out of the reach of Tears, and Prayers, and Cry,
In better Place, with better Company:
Yet for the sake of those who do survive,
Take following Counsels from his Friend alive.
Couns. 1.
Remember who has snatched your Earthly Treasure,
It Is God who may do this, and more at's pleasure;
It Is He who has undoubted right to seize
And take your Comforts, when, and how he please:
He who first lent, does now but take the same;
Learn you to bless and praise his Holy Name.
God now has done his Will, has for him sent,
Do you your Duty, learn to be content.
This silenced Aaron that he nothing spoke,
Though two of's Sons were taken at a stroke.
'Twas this made Eli cheerfully submit
To that Affliction which the Lord thought fit
To bring on's House; to say without repine,
Let the Lord do what he please with me, and mine.
Couns. 2.
Nay further, think your Serrow to restrain,
Your present Loss turns to his lasting Gain:
It Is time to go when God the Summons sends,
To call from Friends below to better Friends.
His Company to us was pleasant here,
But he is now with those to him more dear.
Solacing in the midst of Joy and Pleasure,
Possessing, satisfying, lasting Treasure.
The Glory's now enjoyed by that Dear Saint,
Which we poor Hearts but long for, breath and pant;
And know we'st never truly happy be,
Till from the Clogs of Sin we are set free,
And happy made in that Eternity.
Couns. 3.
Well, then prepare you for to follow those,
Who whilst on Earth the way to Heaven chose;
Live we their Lives, and then both you and I
Shall die their Deaths whenever called to die:
Our Friends with Christ would not return again*
May we and ours thus in Heaven reign.
Couns. 4.
Sit loose to The World, and all things you have got,
Use them whilst here as if you used them not.
For if we Creature Comforts love too much,
We'st over-sorrow when we part with such:
And such we must part with, or they with us,
Our late and sad Experience teaches thus.
Our Friend is gone, judge well of what God's done,
And in your Heavenly Race more swiftly run.
When Stately OAKS thus fall, such Shrubs as I
Had need begin to live, and learn to die:
When such Fruit-bearing Plants are taken away,
Shall I a Cumber-ground expect to stay?
But stay, I run too fast, let all Men know
He joys Above, while we lament Below.
Farewell, Dear Saint, Farewell, I Will after haste,
That Heaven's Dainties with thee I may taste.
An Hymn upon Mr. Slater's Subject, from these Words, Ephesians. 2. 5. By Grace ^^
are saved, etc.
It Is Grace that saves, and Grace alone,
The Soul that comes to see
Himself as lost, and ruined quite,
And ripe for Misery:
From first to last the Sinner must
Acknowledge every Pace
And Step he takes in Heaven's ways,
To be an Act of Grace.
Grace does begin and carry on
This Glorious Work alone;
Lays the Foundation, builds thereon,
And adds the Cornerstone.
The Means of Grace, are all of Grace,
The Word that is preached and read,
The Prayers put up, and Sacraments,
And other Childrens Bread.
Do we repent, and then relent
The Evils we have done,
And fall to pray, from Day to Day,
That Mercy may be shown.
Renounce all this we must, as Rags,
A Savior to embrace;
For it is not Man that wills or runs,
But God that shows Grace.
Election that is of special Grace,
Hereby God separates;
And whom he early did foreknow,
Those he predestinates.
Chosen they were in Christ, before
Foundations we could see,
According to God's Pleasure just,
That Holy they might he.
'Twas not for any Worth in Man,
Nor Faith foreseen in the Case;
Not for good Works that should be done;
What can it be but Grace?
And those God chose, he also calls
Both by his Word and Spirit;
That they to Glory may be brought,
And that through Grace, not Merit.
By Deeds o'th Law, there is no Flesh can
Be justified at last,
For Persons that are tried thereby,
Are surely to be cast.
That shows indeed the Spots and Stains
Upon the Sinner's Face,
Who never can be justified
But by an Act of Grace.
Another saving Step the Soul
Obliged is to take,
If ever he would happily
Of Heaven's Joys partake.
Is Holiness in Heart and Life,
A Sanctified Estate;
And this my Soul's the Gift of God,
Who long does woe and wait.
Mourn now, my Soul, break off from Sin,
No longer do it cherish;
For they that will not here repent,
They must hereafter perish.
Pray hard to God for saving Faith,
By Nature thou have none;
Renounce whatever thou have done,
Rely on Christ alone.
Knowledge it is another Grace,
The Sinner that would live
Must be in pain, till he obtain
From him can only give.
For lack of it how many die,
And headlong post to Hell;
Study the Scriptures then betimes,
And so thou may do well.
Lord, sanctify my sinful Soul,
That Holy I may be;
Without it here in Heart and Life,
Thy Face I shall not see.
And teach me then with single Heart,
Thy Precepts to obey;
Suffer not those enticing me,
To lead my Soul astray.
And now the highest Round of all
This Jacob's Ladder brings,
Is Glorificat'on, and advance
To God the King of Kings.
Christ's laying down his Life for Man,
And God's accepting it;
His saving any doomed to die,
Who now in Heaven sit.
What can this be but special Grace?
Renounce we then all Merit;
And give we Praise to God always,
To Father, Son, and Spirit.
The Alphabet in Verse, by G. D. for Copies. August 29, 1687.
A.
AFflictive Crosses may be well endured
By pious Souls who have a Christ secured.
B.
Boast not of time hereafter, don't delay
To get prepared for a dying Day.
C.
Content's the Sweet of all, where is greatest Store,
If that be had with little, what needs more?
D.
Delight in good, shun Vice, redeem your time,
Serve God whilst you are young and in your prime.
E.
Espouse the Cause of Christ, and stand your ground,
Beware you be not an Apostate found.
F.
Faint Wishes Heavenward, can never show
A Love to Christ, O Soul, that is fixed and true.
G.
Give all that ask you something if you can,
But double Kindness to a poor good Man.
H.
High Breeding, sweet Deportment, lovely Face
Will never avail that Soul that is void of Grace.
I.
Intemperance in what we drink or eat,
Will prove the sowrest Sauce to sweetest Meat.
K.
Kind Carriage wins on all, hereby you may,
Reclaim a wandering Sinner gone astray.
L.
Let Worldlings take the World, do you with Paul,
Account a Single Christ as more than all.
M.
Modest Behavior with a Temper kind,
Does really express a gallant Mind.
N.
Nothing we here possess will lasting prove,
The only solid Joys are those above.
O.
Observe and learn what is good in all you see,
But let the real Saint your Pattern be.
P.
Pleasures that sinful are, not long do last;
The Sting remains when all the Pleasure's past.
Q.
Quit now your selves, like Christians stand your ground,
The Faithful unto Death are only crowned.
R.
Repining under Crosses we endure,
Will never lighten those, but more procure.
S.
Such who with Esau do their Birthrights sell,
Will too late see the Folly on it in Hell.
T.
Time swiftly steals away, and being gone,
Can never be recalled by any one.
U.
Unruly Passions when they have their swing,
Instead of giving Ease, more Sorrow bring.
W.
Whatever haps, be Patient, and you would see
It is (tho bad in it self) yet good for thee.
X.
Xerxes, with Sorrow, views his mighty Host,
As knowing they would soon be dead and lost.
Y.
Young ones serve God whilst young; you will make thereby
Your Deathbed very easy when you die.
Z.
Zeal in a good Cause this must needs befriend,
But lukewarm Tempers have a doleful end.
A Hymn by G. D. on John 14. 27. the Text Mr. Perriot preached on, August 87.
Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you; not as the World gives, give
I unto you: Let not your Heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.
IN love to you, Disciples dear,
Whom I Am about to leave,
A Legacy of Peace I give,
My Peace I you bequeath.
Not as the World gives, give I you,
It Is inward Peace, I say,
The which the World can neither give,
Nor ever take away.
Let not your Heart be troubled then,
My Peace shall be your aid,
Set this against your Troubles here,
You need not be afraid.
An Hymn upon Mr. S's Text, Doctrine and Reasons, Coloss. 3. 1. If ye be risen
with Christ, etc. October. 19, 1689.
LET Earthly Men seek Earthly things,
And glut themselves like Swine
Upon the empty Husks below
Of Riches, Corn and Wine.
But Lord for me, being taught of thee,
It Is better; I must have
The Things Above, I chiefly love,
And those, O Lord, I crave.
Such Treasures they will lasting prove,
Can only satisfy;
When Earthly Things soon take their Wings,
Will wither, fade and die.
These may be had, and kept when got,
Which Worldlings cannot say;
For what they heap together here,
May soon be snatched away.
We have thy leave, nay thy Command,
To fix our Heart and Love,
Not upon Trifles here Below,
But upon Things Above.
Those are the best, worth seeking for,
Deserve our greatest pains,
Will here procure the sweetest Peace,
Hereafter lasting Gains.
Seeking aright, we shall not miss
Of finding, but obtain;
And having found, we need not fear
Our losing them again.
Lord (being risen then with Christ)
Help us to seek and love,
With all our Hearts, our Soul, and Strength,
The Things which are Above.
Another upon the same Text, and two more Verses adjoining: And 1 Cor. 15. 20,
21, 22.
CHRIST now is risen from the Dead,
His Bands could him not keep,
And is to be acknowledged
First Fruits of them that sleep.
For as by one Man, Death did reign,
In Adam all did die;
By Christ the Resurrection came,
And Immortality.
If risen then with Christ you be,
Seek ye the Things Above;
And do not (though enticed thereto)
The Worldlings Portion love.
For ye are dead to Worldliness,
With Christ your Saviour-dear
Your Life is hid, and you shall shine,
When once he does appear.
An Hymn upon Mr. S's Text, Isa. 55. 7. Let the Wicked forsake his way, etc.
O Let the Wicked leave his Lusts,
The way that Sinners take;
And let the Man unrighteous,
Unrighteous Thoughts forsake.
Let him return unto the Lord,
And he will Mercy show,
To God who will abundantly
His pard'ning Grace renew.
Meditations upon Mr. S's Text, Joh. 2. 6. He that says he abides in him, etc.
HE that on Scripture-grounds can say
In Christ he does abide
He also ought himself to walk,
As did this Blessed Guide
For Scriptures they were given forth,
That to us they might ^e,
A Rule whereby, our Sat to try,
And our Conditionsee.
Then true Religion i^ its Power,
That Man has ^rely mist,
Who thinks in b^^ Profession
It only does c^nsist.
That crying out, Lord, Lord, at last,
Will save his Soul from Hell;
Without the doing of God's Will,
And laboring to do well.
Then it is not painted Guile will do,
Nor Shows that do appear;
But Truth in Heart, and inward part,
Will render one sincere.
The true Believer then is safe,
And may on Scripture-ground,
Most certainly on Christ rely,
In Christ he being found.
Behold the Man in Christ therefore,
New Creature he is made;
All Things in such an one is new,
And old Things are decayed.
Let Times be ne r^so black and dark,
Let Things go a^ they will;
The Man in Christ is truly safe,
And may take Comfort still,
Meditations on the 6th Doctrine, about Justification.
IT IS Faith in Christ that sastifies
The Sinner in God's sign;
Labor to show, and let Men kno^,
By Works our Faith is right.
Lord grant we may, who speak and say
We know the Lord most High;
Endeavor by Religious Lives,
Our Words to justify.
Doct. 7. Of Conformity to the Example of Christ.
ALL those who this Profession make,
Obliged are hereby,
To walk as Christ did whilst on Earth,
In all Sobriety.
To follow his Example just,
And to his Life conform,
Since we Profession make, we must
The Gospel thus adorn.
He is our Lord, Redeemer; and
We do profess that we,
By what he is done, are now redeemed
From all Iniquity.
His Name we own to call upon,
Are therefore strictly bo^,
To honor, not reproach the same,
His Glory forth to sound.
Do we of Nature most divine,
Pretend for to partake,
Let us in all our Actions shine,
And him our Pattern make.
Do we to's Doctrine credit give,
Labor we to adorn
The Gospel then in every thing
By suitable return?
Have we his Spirit? then we are led
With glorious Success,
To live, and act, and walk in the ways
Of Truth and Holiness.
True Faith in Christ, where 'ere it is found,
will purge and purify;
It mends the Heart, and every part,
The Life's reformed hereby.
A Love to Christ we all profess,
O let this Love constrain
Us for to live to him that died,
And now is rose again.
Christ while on Earth was undefiled,
Most Sinless was his State,
No stain or spot did ever soil
This Lamb Immaculate.
He by his Blessed Life (while here)
Did an Example give,
How we should carry, walk, and speak,
And Holy Lives should live.
In all his ways he was sincere,
Nothing could ever soil
That perfect Innocence of his,
So free from Craft and Guile.
Meditations upon Mr. G's Text, 1 John 4. 7. And every one that loves is born
of God, etc.
THe gracious Soul that is born of God,
And has a saving sight
Of what is Evil, and what is Good,
And knows God aright;
He loves God and Godliness,
And every Saint, that he
Believes God's Image stamped upon
In Truth and Verity.
Lord grant me Teaching from Above,
Illuminate me so,
That thou a God in Covenant
I savingly may know:
That Light of Nature all Men have,
It never can afford
The full Idea of that God,
Who is the Living Lord.
Nor can the best of Creatures show
(Though wonderfully wrought)
The Splendor of the God Above,
Too vainly this way sought.
No, it is the Soul that is born again,
And's by the Spirit taught,
Can only fear and serve the Lord,
And know him as he ought.
Such they will sincerely seek to God,
They call, and knock, and cry;
Will learn to pray, from Day to Day,
With Importunity.
Re thou the Portion of my Soul,
I then can be content
With smallest share of Worldly Fare,
And meanest Settlement.
Give me a Christ, or I Am undone,
Hear Lord my Suit and Cry;
Let me be thine, and Christ be mine,
Without him I must die.
Bless to my Soul the means of Grace,
Thy Institutions all;
Incline mine Ear, O Lord to hear,
And to obey thy Call.
Meditations upon Isa. 50. 10. Who is there among you that fears the Lord?
etc.
HE that does truly fear the Lord,
And's Servant does obey,
Who walk's in the dark, and sees no Light,
May yet upon him stay.
He may with greatest Confidence,
A Succor from him claim,
Who is the Lord Jehovah Great,
By trusting in his Name.
Meditations upon Luke 10. 31. By chance there came down a certain Priest that
way, etc.
ALL Mankind since the Fall are bent
To travel out o'th way
That leads to Bliss, and Happiness,
And sinfully to stray.
Both Priest and Levite here agree,
When as a wounded Man
They did espy, to pass him by
Without Compassion.
Legal and Moral Righteousness
Can never give Relief,
But dreadful Comforters do prove
To Souls oppressed with Grief:
And as for formal Holiness,
Or bare Profession made,
It never can relieve a Man
With Comfort, when dismayed.
It Is none of these that can appease
The burdened Sinner fainting;
It Is Christ alone, that such an one
Is longing for and panting.
Turn then aside, my Blessed Lord,
A wounded Sinner see;
For I am sure, I need a Cure,
Have Mercy Lord on me.
Other Physicians all, I find,
But vain as to my Case,
I must depend unto the end,
O Lord, upon thy Grace:
O thou the good Samaritan,
Compassionate and kind,
Pour in thine Oil upon my Soul,
Then healing I shall find.
Meditations on 1 John 2. 29. If ye know that he is righteous, etc.
KNowing that Christ is righteous,
Must necessar'ly show,
That he must needs be born of God,
That Righteousness does do.
A Legal Righteousness none can
Discharge since Adam's Fall;
But here is our Comfort, God accepts
What Is Evangelical.
Meditations upon Mr. F's Text, Phil. 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as
becomes the Gospel of Christ.
GOD grant our Conversations here
May ever more be such,
As may the Gospel of our Lord
Adorn and Credit much.
It presses Holiness in Life,
And teaches to deny
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
And living soberly.
The Gospel pure, and its Rules,
Do reach the inward part,
And notice take of all Mistakes
Both in the Life and Heart:
It Is Holy, Righteous, Just and Good,
Directs us to abstain
From all appearances of Ill,
From Carriage light and vain:
To cleanse our selves from Filthiness,
Both of the Flesh and Spirit,
To Avoid indecent Wantonness,
And Gospel-Rules to credit.
All sinful Gestures it forbids,
And Carriage vain and light,
The Glances of a Lustful Eye,
And Works that shun the Light.
Thy Word, O Lord's a Word of Truth,
Forbids Deceit and Guile;
Teaches to fly Hypocrisy,
And every Motion vile.
An Hymn upon Mr. C's Text, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator, etc.
REmember thy Creator now,
Whilst youthful Days do last,
Now know, love, fear, and serve thy God,
For Age is hastening fast.
The Evil Days are drawing on,
Then now lay up thy Treasure,
For being come, thou wilt find and say,
In these I have no Pleasure.
An Hymn upon Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of those things, etc.
FFar not the Troubles (Jesus says
Unto his Church below)
That thou may here be called to bear,
And forced to undergo.
The Devil by his Instruments,
To Prison some shall hale;
Yet it is but some, it is not all,
The Promise cannot fail.
A ten Days Trial such may have,
And Tribulation bear,
But (being faithful unto Death)
ACrown of Life shall wear.
An Hymn on 1 Timothy 2. 5.
ONE God there is, and only One,
One Mediator High,
The Man Christ Jesus, who for all
Did pay full Price, and die.
On 1 John 2. 1, -- 3.
IF any sin, we have on High
An Advocate, who spilt
His precious Blood, that he thereby
Might expiate our Guilt.
On Rev. 5. 13.
BLessing, and Glory, and Renown,
To him we give therefore,
That sits o'th Throne, and to the Lamb
Of God for evermore.
Psalm. 113. turned into other Verse, and a more common Tune. April 1686.
OYe the Servants of the Lord,
His Holy Name adore,
Sing forth his Praise with one accord,
And bless him evermore:
Even from the rising of the Sun,
Unto its going down,
Cease not this praising Work begun,
Give Glory and Renown.
Above all Nations God is High,
His glittering Glory count,
Does very much for Majesty
The Heavens High surmount.
Who then is like the Lord our God,
Who (though of highest worth)
Humbles himself for to behold,
Both Things in Heaven and Earth?
The Poor from Dust he raises High,
And from the Dunghill brings
The Needy, pressed with Misery,
To sit enthroned with Kings.
The Barren he does cause to bear;
Such Joyful Mothers shall
In their own Houses Children rear:
Praise ye the Lord for all.
An Hymn upon Prove. 28. 13. He that covers his Sins, shall not prosper, etc.
And upon the Doctrine raised by Mr. C. March 27, 86.
THE Sinner thinks by hiding Sin,
It shall not come to Light,
Because Man sees not, be concludes
It is not in God's sight:
But Folly great* will soon appear
In Sinners thus misled,
For he by covering Sin, pulls down
Heaven's Wrath upon his Head.
Though he that hides Sin, never shall
Have quiet in his Mind;
He that confesses, and forsakes
The same, shall Mercy find.
An Hymn upon Matthew. 16. 26. For what is a Man profited, etc.
WHAT! Can it profit any Man
Though all the World he gain,
And by his sinful carking Cares,
What Heart can wish, obtain?
If after all his Soul be lost,
What is it he would not give
To ransom his miscarry'ng Soul,
That it might ever live.
An Hymn upon Mr. N's Text, ( October. 89,) Prove. 30. 7, 8, 9. Two things have I
required of thee, etc.
TWO Things, O Lord, especially,
I beg thou wilt please to give,
Deny me not before I die,
But grant 'em whilst I live.
Remove far from me Vanities,
Make Heart and Life both sound,
Let not deceitful Shifts and Lies
Be with thy Servant found.
Lord, give me neither Poverty,
Nor Wealth in too great store;
I beg what may convenient be,
And do desire no more:
Not Riches, Lord, lest too great share
Make Pride become my Bane;
Nor Poverty, lest I should steal,
And take thy Name in vain.
An Hymn upon Mr. M's Text, ( May 29, 1690.) and Doctrine, 1 John 3. 9.
Whosoever is born of God, etc.
HE does not sin that is born of God,
His Seed in him remains;
He cannot sin as others do,
The Grace of God restrains.
He does not sin insensibly
As carnal Men are prone,
But quickly feels its smart and pain,
And under it does groan.
Through Corruption which remains,
And best of Saints have got,
They are in Sin too apt to slip,
But constantly sin not.
He does not sin presumptuously,
Nor wilfully submit,
He does not overtake the Sin,
But is o're'tane by it.
And when through Frailty he does fall,
He quickly does arise;
He dare not rest, and wallow in
His Sin in any wise.
Lord give me Grace for to avoid
The Pit the Sinner's in,
Keep back thy Servant from known Guile,
And from presumptuous Sin.
An Hymn upon Mr. D's Text, Luke 13. 24, 25, 26. Strive to enter in at the
strait Gate, etc.
STRIVE now to hit the narrow way,
And enter the strait Gate;
For not a few shall sadly rue
Their striving when too late.
When once the Lord has shut the Door,
And those without begin
To knock and cry, in Misery,
Lord, open, let us in:
The Lord shall answer them, and say,
Thus trembling at his Bar;
I never knew any of you,
I know not whence you are.
Then shall poor wretched Sinners urge,
And many of 'em say,
Lord, have we not done this and that
For thee in our Day?
'Twas in thy Presence, we, poor we,
Have ate, and drank, and sought;
We had thy Word, O Blessed Lord,
And in our Streets thou'st taught.
We Have prophesied in thy Name,
And mighty Works have done;
The Devils they did us obey,
We cast 'em out, they run.
When as the Lord shall thus reply,
Go Sinners, take your Lot;
In you I see Iniquity,
Depart, I know you not.
VERSES upon the King of France's Persecution (the Faithful Account being
published in Prose); turned into Verse, by G. D. December. 86.
IN humane Monster! what will nothing do?
But seize Estates and ruin Churches too:
Will nothing serve the turn, but tear and rend,
And break in pieces Hearts that dare not bend?
Excuse me then, if now I cannot forbear
To tell the World the Stories that I hear:
That some who stand amazed, may perchance
Humble this proud and bloody King of France.
Dragoons are called in to seize the Treasure,
And quarter upon Protestants at pleasure.
Guards they are placed at Gates, with naked Swords,
With frightful Aspects, domineering Words.
Watchmen stand lurking for to make a Prey
Of all that would escape and get away.
This was the constant cry of Troopers, Kill,
Destroy those damned Heretics at will.
Be Catholics, ye Sots, and now return
Unto our Faith, or you'st do worse than burn.
How many weeping Eyes, and Hearts do bleed,
To see their Friends (as dying) yet not dead.
Die they desire; but those Rogues in grain
Tell them they shall not die, but live in Pain.
Estates they seized, rifled Houses then;
Invented Torments new for those good Men.
Babes from the Mothers Breasts these Tyrants tore;
Such Cruelties they acted over and over.
They enter Neighbors Houses at their Pleasure,
Take thence their Jewels, Plate, and other Treasure.
They left the owners nothing they thought worth
The taking from them, and their carrying forth.
Provision that they found, they seized with Joy,
And what they could not eat, they did destroy:
They being filled, the rest must go to the Swine,
They swore the Owners should be forced to Dine
On harder Fare: Nay to complete their Grief,
They made it Penal for to give Relief
To any one of those.
The hungry Bellies, and the naked Backs,
From Doors of richer Men were forced to pack;
No Wickedness was scrupled, that might tend
The Projects of these Monsters to befriend:
Good Men were sighing forth their dol'rous Cries,
Whilst others Mouths were filled with Blasphemies.
Inhumanly they Protestants did vex,
Without regarding either Age or Sex.
Who would not yield that Popish Juggling Fools
Should have the conduct of their precious Souls,
Who would not give up Reason, and from thence,
Submit to Men that had not common Sense;
They soon did mark them out, for to presage
They were to be the Objects of their Rage:
They hung up Men or Women that they took,
Upon a Gally-bauk or Chimney-hook;
Some by the Hair o'th Head, some by their Feet:
And thus they served all they did think meet;
Smoked them with Wisps of Straw (whilst hanging there)
Till they that Torment could no longer bear.
They took them down, and if they would not then
Quickly recant, they would hang them up again.
Through Fiery Streams they caused them to wade,
In which consuming Torments many staid
Till almost roasted; this was their Intent,
New Torments for those Creatures to invent.
Many they haled with Ropes, and let them down
Into the deepest Pits in all the Town;
From whence they might not come, till they could see
By Hand and Seal, they Catholics would be.
Bound them as Criminals are tied, alas!
And thus with pinioned Fetters they must pass.
And farther still to make them change their Notes,
With Funnels forced strong Drink down their Throats;
Wine in such measure, that (for such a Season
The Fumes thereof bereaving them of Reason)
They knew not what they did, and then did cry,
They Would Roman Catholics both live and die.
They stripped them naked, and they did expose
Their tendrest Bodies to the sharpest Blows,
And added hundreds of Indignities
For to complete their doleful Miseries;
But boasted, all they felt was nothing to
The future Hardships they should undergo.
They cut their Flesh with Pen-knives they had there,
And Skin with heated Pinchers off did tear;
Beat them with Staves, and dragged them into
(The Places where they used most to go)
The Popish Churches, where their forced Duration,
Was falsely styled by some an Abjuration.
Many who in their Prisons they did keep,
They suffered neither Night nor Day to sleep;
And thus for many Days they did lie Quaking,
By Watchmen thither sent to keep them Waking.
I cannot express the sad and doleful Cries
Were heard from hungry Bellies, waking Eyes;
Buckets of Water down their Face must slide,
With other new ways to torment beside;
Upon their Heads they Kettles downward laid,
And then upon them doleful Noises made,
Till those poor Creatures having no Defense,
Had well nigh lost their Reason and their Sense.
Some who are Crazy, others sick in Bed,
Must have the Drummers rattling at their Head;
And thus for many Weeks (as those relate
Who were themselves in this forlorn Estate)
Fathers and Husbands, to Bed-posts they tie,
While Maids and Wives are forced before their Eye
To that Uncleanness, that more chaster Ears,
Can never hear of without Floods of Tears.
Rapes now were common grown, they did permit
The most unchaste to act what they thought sit,
Against poor Innocent and Harmless ones,
Who stand to hear their louder Cries and Groans;
They plucked o^^ Nails from Hands and Toes amain,
(A new Invention to heighten Pain)
They blew into their Bodies (where they durst)
With Bellows till they made them fit to burst;
And after all, whoever yet refused
For to comply with them, were worser used;
Many in Dungeons did imprisoned lie,
Others in noisome Holes you might espy;
These they inhumanly did exercise
With sharpest and severest Cruelties.
Houses they ruined and demolished quite,
And took the Lands to which they had no right;
Cut down their Woods, their Wives and Children seize,
Impris'ning of them in their Monastries.
Many of those, to keep their Conscience right
Gladly betook themselves to private flight,
Who when pursued and overta'ne in the Field,
Some being shot to Death, the rest did yield:
These were brought back to the Places whence they went,
And thence to worser Places soon were sent.
Which monstrous Hardships did not only fall
Upon the common People, but withal
Nobles and Gentry too we also saw
Enslaved, and harassed contrary to Law:
(Persons of Quality, and Ladies great
Now seeking out for Places to retreat);
Some went to Paris, and the greater sort
They took them Lodgings that were near the Court,
Concluding Officers durst never bring
Dragoons to search the Houses near the King:
But these Hopes vanishing, perplexed their Case,
They could no longer here find hiding place;
Their Hopes and Wishes did abortive prove,
When they from hence were forced to remove;
Decrees were signed, and in fifteen Days
They must leave Paris, and without Delays
Return unto their Dwellings, for it were
Made highly penal for to lodge 'em there;
Petitions sent to the King full of Complaint
Of what they suffered, and to acquaint
Him with their doleful Case and Misery,
Imploring Succor from his Majesty:
But all was nothing, for that Tyrant King
In persecuting Work would take his Swing,
Which gives occasion farther to remark
The Passages that were not done in the Dark;
At the head of those infernal Legions were
(Besides Commanders who in chief appear,
And military Forces) not a few,
Some being clad in Scarlet, others Blew,
There were Intendants; also Bishops, Priests,
Marching on this Design, through all the Streets;
Whole Troops of Missionaries, Monks and Friars,
(Not many Noblemen, but few Esquires)
Bishops and others, ready in their Station,
For to receive a forced Abjuration;
They always taking care what happened then
Might suit the Humor of the Clergymen
When any therefore turn, and did recant
His ever being a true Protestant,
It would not do, unless where those Men came,
All in the Family would do the same.
Dragoons were constant Lodgers upon those
Who could not with the Popish Foppries close,
But (when they did) these Monsters faced about,
And went to harass those who could hold out.
Thus did the great Apostasy of some
Serve to add Weight to those who would not come,
And turn Apostates also; whence you see
The dismal Mischief of Apostasy:
Yea, that they might the better carry on
The bloody Work of Persecution,
They privately prevailed with a few,
To list themselves among the ign'rant Crew;
To change their Faith themselves, thereby to gain
Over what Proselytes they could obtain.
They thus are Protestants, but in disguise,
That others may be made their Sacrifice.
Dragooners having acted over their part,
These -- with their Sophistry and Art,
Must do the rest, and thus did everywhere
Wolves in their sheepish Clothing then appear;
Exhorting those who now had nothing left,
But were of all their Substance quite bereft,
For to be wise in time, and save their Lives,
Their own, their dearest Children, and their Wives;
Obey your King, turn Catholics, and then
You Will taste the Sweet of being Loyal Men;
We once were just like you, resolved to cherish
Our inward Peace, tho the outward Man should perish;
To keep our hold of Christ, tho all should go,
But now are wiser grown than to do so:
Go then, and do likewise, that you may find
The Pleasure of a calm and quiet Mind.
(And here see farther still their Eagerness
For to arrive at the height of Wickedness,)
When the Master of a House for to get rid
Of Soldiers that were quartered on him, did
Do all that was required, and obey
In every thing; the Soldiers still must stay
Till Wives and Children, and the meanest Boar
Had done the same that he had done before.
Many such fled away, thinking perhaps
Hereby to escape those after Thunderclaps;
They tendered inward Peace, feared Conscience gripes,
Tho (being caught) alas! they would double Stripes;
Nay farther yet, those who did think it best
To yield to many things imposed, (for Rest)
Equivocating Abjurations had,
Only at first (by Tyrants) offered:
Which (being swallowed down) they by Degrees
Did win them to complete Conformities;
And when those Hell Hounds had with Joy espied
That those poor Protestants had thus complied
With what they would offered, yet they told them plain,
All they had done would prove but all in vain,
If this at last they did refuse to do,
To say they were not forced hereunto;
That all was voluntary, and that they
In perfect Duty owned the Popish Way.
A Paper to this purpose they must seal,
To which the Priests and Jesuits might appeal,
That they were Agents free, and never kn^w
(Till now) the Popish Way was right and true:
That 'twas not forced, but a free Consent,
As by their Hands and Seals is evident.
Some, alas! did it, and most foully fell,
To the Grief of all their Friends that wished 'em well.
And after all, if these did e're repine,
'Twas soon imputed to them as a Crime.
If public Mass was scrupled any way,
Or dropping Beads when e're they went to pray;
Nay if a Sigh escaped them, this vile Rout
Judged it Dislike to what they were about;
They fined them presently, and did amain
Send Soldiers to be lodged with them again.
All Seaport Towns are stopped, that none might go
To tell the dismal Stories that they know;
All hopes are gone of making Scapes by flight,
The frontier Countries watched Day and Night;
There Is now no passing by a feigned Excuse,
Unless they could Certificates produce.
It would not do, and these must also say,
The Passengers are of the Romish Way:
Vessels and Ships were searched, and Coasts thoughout,
Bridges, Highways, and Rivers round about;
Guards almost every where did lurking lie,
To see if they could Protestants espy.
Holland's required, (as it has been said)
To give up those that there for refuge fled,
And strictly charged they harbor should no more,
Nor entertain his Subjects rich or poor:
Nay, some Attempts were made to bring those home,
Who into foreign Parts were fled and gone,
That they (returning) might exposed be,
Unto the greater Wrath and Cruelty
Of hellish Monsters, who by every Dart,
Do show the greater Malice of their Heart.
Whilst these things acted were in the Kingdom round,
A new Contrivance in the Court was found,
To justify their Doings, and to fix
Their former Cruelties by new Edicts.
For the nulling of the Edicts late of Nants,
The Wits are all at work in the Court of France:
Much time was spent in drawing up the Form,
Which threatened their Estates another Storm;
Some moved the King should by his Power try,
Not only for to force the Laiety,
But Clergymen, (a Truth, tho very strange)
Their old Religion now at length to change,
And all Refusers sentenced to be sent
Into perpetual Imprisonment.
ACROSTICKS.
GERVASE DISNEY; Anagram, I Sinner saved? Yes.
JERVASEDISNEY
I Sinner saved? Yes; through Grace,
Eternally to sing,
Rich was the Love of Christ, who died,
Valuing so mean a thing.
Ah, Sinner, stop! here make a stand,
See but how once it was,
Enough thou 'lt see to humble thee,
Dejected Soul; alas!
In Sin conceived, in Sin brought forth,
So many Sins so great,
Naught to be seen but Filthiness,
Even this was thy sad State:
Yet notwithstanding, God's Free-Love
Now pitying thy Case,
Has snatched thee, Brand, ^ut of the Fire,
Admire then Free Grace.
GERVASE DISNEY; Anagram, I see Sin die ever.
JERVASEDISNEY
It Is Sin, O Soul, would ruin thee,
Ah then most constantly
Endeavor to oppose thy Sins
That thou may see them die.
Rich was the Love of Christ above
to shed his Blood for thee:
Value, O value this rich Grace,
Which thus has made thee free.
Ah sinful Soul, consider well,
And think but of thy Case;
Salvation then thou soon wilt say
Can only be of Grace.
Escaped thou art, give God the Praise,
Eternally now Sing;
Dear Christ did bleed and die for me,
For me, so vile a thing.
In Sin I dare not wallow now,
This shall be my Endeavor,
Since in my Blood God did say, Live,
To see my Sins die ever.
Now mount, O Soul, in highest Praise,
Let Heaven hear thee sing;
Endless and Matchless was the Love
Of Jesus Christ my King.
Yea, but dear Lord, I am so clogged
By Sin, the Sinner's Fetter;
I cannot praise thee as I would,
In Heaven i will do it better.
An ELEGY on my Honored Uncle Mr. GERVASE DISNEY, who died April 3, 1691.
SAints here on Earth find still no Resting Place,
Heaven ripened Souls ascend to Heaven apace;
Whilst Others do below, with mournful Cries,
Thus celebrate their Fun'ral-Obsequies.
This has been England's case long; latter Years
Often yielding Matter of fresh Grief and Tears:
How many Jewels have we lost of late,
Which did adorn our English Crown and State?
But have by hasty Death been snatched away,
Their Bodies now reduced to Dust and Clay.
Yet tho such Losses Eriends on Earth must bear,
The Saints themselves the greatest Gainers are;
Whose Bodies more refined, again shall rise,
Stripped of their Dross and their Infirmities;
United to their Souls, again shall sing,
Eternal Hallelujahs to their King.
J. D.
FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for, and Sold by Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
HEarts-Ease in Heart-Trouble: Or, A Sovereign Remedy against all Trouble of
Heart that Christ's Disoiples are subject to, under all kinds of Affliction in
this Life: prescribed by the great Physician the Lord Jesus Christ; which has
never failed those that have used it, or ever will, to the end of the World. By
J. B. a Servant of Jesus Christ. Price 1 s.

The Barren Fig Tree: Or, the Doom of Fruitless Professors. By J. Bunyan.

A Discourse of Closet (or Secret) Prayer, from Matthew. 6. 6. By Samuel Slater,
Minister of the Gospel. Price 1 s.

The Holy History in brief: Or, An Abridgment of the Historical Parts of the
Old and New Testament. By Samuel Clark, Author of the Annotations on the Bible
lately published. Price 1 s.

Christ's speedy coming to Judgment, etc. By William Bates, D. D. Price 1 s.

Christ alone our Life: Or, without Christ no Life. By Edward Pearse, Minister
of the Gospel.

A Present for Children: being a brief, but faithful Account of many remarkable
Things uttered by Three young Children, to the wonder of all that heard them.
To which is added, a Seasonable Exhortation to Parents for the Education of
their Children. Price 6 d.

The Right Method for the Proving of Infant Baptism. By Joseph Whiston,
Minister of the Gospel. Price 6 d.

The Great Concern and Zeal of a Loyal People for a good and warlike King in
the Hazards of War, and the Duty of such a People, opened and enforced in one
of our Monthly Fasts. Price 6 d.

England's Call to Thankfulness for her great Deliverance from Popery and
Arbitrary Government, in the Year 1688, by the glorious Conduct of King
William. Price 6.

Union pursued: Or, a Letter to Mr. Richard Baxter about the Agreement between
the Presbyterians and Independents, etc.

An Enquiry into the Constitution, Discipline, Unity and Worship of the
Primitive Church, that Flourished within the first Three Hundred Years after
Christ. Faithfully Collected out of the extant Writings of those Ages, by an
Impartial Hand. In Two Parts.

The Conformists Reasons for hearing and joining with the Nonconformists.

St. Paul and St. James reconciled in the Point of Justification, and the
Controversies about it among Christians amicably composed.

A Defense of the Catholic Faith, concerning the Satisfaction of Christ.
Written Originally by the Learned Hugo Grotius. And now Translated by W. H. A
Work very necessary in these Times, for the preventing of the growth of
Socinianism.

The Faithful Soldier's Reward: Or, a Glimpse of the Saints Happiness.
Discovered in two Sermons, occasioned by the Death of that truly Virtuous and
Religious Gentlewoman Mrs. Katherine Disney. By William Scoffin Minister of the
Gospel.


