SOME THOUGHTS ABOUT TRADE.
HIS Majesty having in His most Gracious Speech to both Houses in Parliament
recommended to them the Care of Trade, and favored it Himself with His
Proposal of a Bill, For the more effectual Preventing and Punishing Unlawful
and Clandestine Trading, which does not only tend to defraud the Public, but
prejudice the Fair Merchant; it will be deemed, I hope, a pardonable
Presumption in me, to offer a few Words toward attaining that great and happy
end. And I am persuaded, that since His Majesty in this Royal Care, has
continued to evince Himself truly a Father of His People, it must endear Him to
them, and cannot reasonably fail of commanding the Title of Deliciae humani
generis, as he much more deserves it, than even that great Roman Emperor it was
first Ascribed to. Nor is it to be imagined, That this Consideration can miss
of disposing that August Assembly to a solid, and unbiased Poisure of all
Proposals to that purpose laid before them. Mine may be the most
inconsiderable, but as none can be offered with greater Sincerity, or
well-meaning, so perhaps they may furnish wiser Heads with somewhat to work
upon.

There are a sort of Gentlemen who understand not much of Trade, and mind
little beside their Pleasure; that exclaim against it, and take great pains to
show to the World they care not how it is loaded: But to leave them safe in
their humor, since it is not perhaps the only Instance of their Indiscretion,
I will advance these Propositions as things so plain, that they themselves
cannot be so hardy to deny.

1st. That Trade is the Foundation of the English Happiness, and the very Basis
of the Government. 2dly, That to make it thoroughly beneficial, it ought to be
made 1st. Easy. 2dly, Extensive.

If these Propositions be true, as undoubtedly they are; the Truth of the first
being never called in Question since we knew what Trade was in England, and the
last to be made out in the following Lines, I think that man can be said to
have little of the Soul of an Englishman, or worthy any Countenance of the
Government or People, who makes slight of this National Concern; and it is not
to be doubted but those Illustrious Trustees of the People, as they have begun,
will go on to show these mistaken Gentlemen, that the Safety of that is of the
first Importance to the Public Safety.

It were to be wished it could be made easier in its Duties, that we might be
able to under-sell all our Rival Neighbors, than which nothing could be more
Honorable or Advantageous. By clogging our Trade we certainly lay more than
what we have long seemed to apprehend, a general Excise upon our selves; and if
we seem to be insensible of it, perhaps it is because the Generality of our
Gentry keeping no Accounts, they flatter themselves they are in the right; when
upon a nice Scrutiny, it would be found they pay three for two: But if this is
not to be obtained, yet that Trade ought to be made easier in Dispatch, and
freed from Encumbrances that way, is as undoubtedly true as it is practicable
--

If Business be interrupted or obstructed in the beginning, our English Proverb
says, It can never conclude well. Common Experience tells us, That Fountains of
a foul Head rarely, if ever, produce a clear Stream; and therefore I hold my
self obliged, to recommend first of all an Examination into the Abuses of the
Custom-House. Foreigners as well as we, have and do daily complain of the
Difficulties that attend the Dispatch of Business there: And it must be owned,
that though no Custom-House in Europe is so well adapted, and though we want not
Laws that threaten Punishment to Offenders; yet there is no Country of Trade,
that does not exceed us in quick Dispatch, or honest Execution.

The Cause of these Evils I take to be want of Integrity, and want of Power.
The first in most of the Officers belonging to that Place, and the last in that
Honorable Board; who formerly on Application, have told the Injured Merchant,
That they sat not there to hear Causes, but to see the King's Customs
maintained: Not to save the Merchant from the Encroachments of the Patent
Officer, or others; but to preserve the Officers in their Encroachment, and
encourage them in the Continuance thereof. Now, if this be true, that the
Merchant must either be liable to the Exactions of their Officers, or be
referred to the Law; I think it may easily be determined which is most
reasonable for him to choose, though certainly it is no great Encouragement to
Trade. There is scarce any one particular Fee ordered by the Book of Rates,
that is not advanced by the Patent and other Officers a Third Part: And yet it
is so small in every Man's Particular, and they have in their Power such ways
of venting their Displeasure, for want of a higher Power to control them, that
few Men dare stand the Test, or when they have so, have found Relief
answerable. Our wise Forefathers provided against these Encroachments (to
which Mankind is indeed but too much addicted) by severe Laws and wise
Precautions: No Man then was allowed his Place for Life, good Behavior only
had its just Reward, and under the King's Patent, Men sat not to insult the
best of the King's Subjects. He that consults the following Statutes, 5 and 6
Ed. 6.16. 1 H. 4.13. 4 H. 4.20. 13 H. 4.5. 1 H. 4.13.17. R. 2.5.14. R. 2.10.4.
H. 4.24.31. H. 6.5.31. H. 6.5.14. R. 2.20.17. R. 2.5. will find how careful
they were to encourage the Merchant, and keep him from the Encroachments of the
King's Officers. Misdemeanour by Mismanagement was then punished with loss of
Office; and nothing less can eradicate this Evil, so scandalous to the Nation
and Government. It Is true, a late Parliament provided in some measure against
it, but by not thus necessarily enforcing it, Men's Avarice rendered it
ineffectual: For while the Book was warm with their Lips, they persisted in
their old ways at the hazard of an Indictment of Perjury. But I hope for a
Review, and therefore their Abuses being too numerous, and consequently not
consistent with the Brevity of a Paper of this Nature, I shall leave them till
that Honorable Assembly shall call for them; when, I hope, by enforcing the
Penalties to an utter Incapacity of serving in any Place of the Government, and
by making the Commissioners (as they were certainly intended) Overseers of
their Under Officers, and such as are to take Care, that Right may be done to
the Merchant, at the same time they take Care that Justice be done to the King
in the Payment of His Duties, this great Evil may have a Remedy to the Honor
of the Nation, as well as Quiet of the Merchant.

I wish it were not more difficult to make Trade extensive, than it is to make
it easy: But I am sensible I shall have a large, though not very considerable
Party to cope against in my Proposal of Extension, notwithstanding I believe
the other will be assented to by all. Though I am satisfied confining the Trade
to a few, is an Error of the first Concoction, yet I am as well satisfied,
confining it to its just Number will be as beneficial. I mean, not by a just
Number, any set Number of Persons: But my meaning is, That those only, who
have been, or shall be bred up as Merchants, shall follow it, and that all
other Tradesmen shall be confined to their particular Callings, as they were
educated. If I mistake not, we are not without Laws to this good Purpose; but
like other good Laws, their Antiquity makes them exploded. But however, I doubt
not to make it evident, that it is the Interest of the Nation so to confine
Trade, and that such a Confinement is the most probable way to make it more
extensive. This may be thought a Paradox; but if People lay aside their
Prejudices, I doubt not but it will be found a true one.

I know it is a Maxim, and in a great measure a true one; that it is for the
Interest of the Nation to have all Goods sold cheap at our own Market. Though
whether it consists with the Interest of the Nation, to encourage the
Consumption of any Foreign Commodities by such a Cheapness, will bear a
Question: Or, in Strictness of Argument, it will not bear a Question; it being
undeniably true, that the less we consume of Foreign Commodities, the richer we
are. But granting it to be true, that it is agreeable to the Interest of the
Nation, that all Goods be sold cheap at our own Market; it is true with equal
Reason, that it is as much against the Interest of the Nation that all its own
Manufactures and Exportations of Foreign Goods should be sold over cheap, and
often with a Loss at Foreign Markets. It will be obvious to a common
Understanding, that here the Loss is double; and how any Merchant can long
subsist under such Circumstances, to me is a Riddle. Small Profits they may set
down with, if their Stocks be considerable: But Loss upon Loss will certainly
eat through his Principal. That this is the Consequence of every Tradesman's
running from his proper Business, will appear to any Man that half considers
the Matter; and it is as evident, that the Consequence of that will be the Loss
of, and in time an utter Ruin to Trade. If a Calculation were to be made of
Families that have been ruined by not applying themselves to the Business they
were bred in, but running into Trades they never understood, I doubt not it
would close the Argument. Now the Ruin of Families is the Ruin of Trade; for
a Country can only be said to be rich or poor, as the Inhabitants are either:
Nor does one Man, commonly speaking, fall alone, but many with him; and
therefore the Loss of a considerable Merchant falls not on particular Persons,
but on the Public.

Nor is that true, which is common in many Peoples Mouths, that such a
Restraint of Trade would be very detrimental to the Public Revenues: For though
it is literally true, that the larger the Importations are, the larger are the
Customs, those increasing by the Increase of Traders; yet in the Case in hand,
it is an Error raised by such as understand not the Nature of Trade, so well
as their imaginary Interests. For should we grant that these Underjobbers do
increase the Customs by their Importations; yet it must be granted again, that
by their clogging the Market, and forcing the Fair Merchant to seek a Market in
Foreign Countries; the Inconvenience much surmounts the Advantage. For while
these Under jobbers are forced to sell at our own Market, for want of present
Money, at what Rates they can get, and at a very great Loss; and the Fair
Merchant to avoid this Loss, is forced to take Refuge at a Foreign Market,
where he gets nothing: It is plain, the King loses the Duty drawn back, the
Fair Merchant the Interest of his Money, the Under jobber almost his Principal,
and the Nation in all. Besides, by these Under jobbers the Fair Merchant, whose
Dependence is wholly upon his Trade, as all Men's ought to be on what they were
educated under, is by the means before hinted at, often ruined; or at best,
discouraged so much, that he chooses to lay by his Stock; and consequently the
Revenue loses as much by this one Man's prudential Precaution, as it gets by a
Hundred of those small Adventurers imprudent ventring at all.

If it be duly weighed in all its Circumstances, this cannot be thought the
least of the Evils attending Trade, and which discouraging the Fair Merchant,
requires Redress as much as any: For what Wrong can any pretend, from his being
confined to his particular Calling? Certainly it cannot be thought to be at all
unreasonable, that he that runs the Danger ought to reap the Profit. I am sure
as many make use of Trade, it is only preserving them from being in a Politic
Sense, Felos de se. But on the other hand, their interfering in the Fair
Merchant's Business, is in a manner, an Invasion of his Right and Property.

If a Tradesman be allowed to turn Merchant on one side only, and to order his
own Wares, either Linens, Druggs, or Wines, to be shipped for him, and the Value
to be drawn in Bills of Exchange on him, I would fain know.

1st. What Encouragement has the Fair Merchant, who exports the Manufacture of
the Nation: And 2dly, Whether the Under jobbing Merchant ought to be
encouraged, for not exporting any of the Manufactures of the Nation: For it is
as plain as any Proposition in Euclid, that what is imported into the Nation,
not being the Product of our Exportations, is a Disadvantage to the Nation, and
the greatest Discouragement to Trade. And if every Tradesman may have Liberty
to order his own Goods, what shall the Fair Merchant, who by exporting our own
Manufactures gives a double Advantage to the Nation, and therefore deserves the
utmost Encouragement, what shall he, I say, make his Returns in? Or, where
shall be find a Mark? Besides, it is in a great measure to such mean-spirited
Souls as these, that we owe that Grievance complained of by His Majesty in His
most Gracious Speech to both Houses, the running of Goods: For though some Men's
Avarice (the Root of all bad Principles) may have led them to have done things
unworthy the Name of a Merchant, and which deserved the greatest Contumely and
Shame; yet it is here that Vice has spread, and what others have shamefully
attained to by Bribes, these by an inborn Audacity and a natural Familiarity
with those of their own low Quality, have promoted the Trade very considerably.
Undoubtedly, as this Vice ought to be timely provided against, so one great
and likely way to do so, would be to provide against the Trading of all, who
have other Callings, under which they were bred, and therefore ought to get
their Livelyhoods by. I am sure, that low Ebb that Trade is run to (especially
in the Plantations) calls for the speediest Care, unless we are willing to lose
at a Lump those Advantages we have been Years attaining to.

Clandestine Trade (in this severest Acceptance) (for it is as I have showed,
clandestine in the other) is of a dangerous Consequence to Trade in general.
Those that have used it, were never valued by Persons of Integrity. And though
one in an Age may have been said to have got an Estate under it, the Number
that found it unthriving is so much greater, that if a Man had the Gift of
Consideration, that of it self were enough to put it out of Countenance: But
hope of Success and Expectation of Gain, will not allow those fr^ilest of Men
to be wise; and therefore it is to be hoped, the Parliament will provide
against it by severe Penalties this Session. For by means of this Knavish
Practice, the Fair Merchant is not able to sell with these Vermin; who by
having their Creatures at private Ports, and running their Goods in private
Creeks, save the King's Duty (as they phrase it) and may consequently
under-sell the Fair Merchant very considerably. In my Opinion, there is not a
Punishment great enough for such Wretches. The Romans made a Crime against the
State, Death; and a Man that acted against the Interest of his Country, was
punished with the greatest Ignominy. The Present King of Persia's Father
detecting a Baker and a Flesh-Roaster in the Public Market, of Fraud, ordered
the one to be roasted, and the other to be baked, publicly. If they for
cheating a private Person (as he to them appeared) suffered such Ignominy as
well as Pain; what is due to them who cheat their Country? We are in a
Christian Nation it is true, where such Barbarities will, I hope, never have
Place: But the Tallio of the Romans was a very good Law. Nor is it altogether
impracticable with us; for I find in an Act of 14 Car. 2. That any Person found
guilty of transporting Hides to any other Places than as provided in that Act,
was by the same disabl'd for the future, to Trade in that Commodity, and
severely fined. If the Act were a little extended here, and the Person found
guilty, condemned never to use any Trade but a Handy craft, it would be
somewhat conformable to the Lex Talionis, and not in any great matter, differ
from the Act of King Charles.

But perhaps it would not be amiss to confiscate his Estate, one half to the
King, and one half to the Discoverer, be he who he will; and by all means, to
enforce the Justice of Peace to issue out his Warrant for a speedy Seizure. We
see in the Act against the Exportation of Wool, what Encouragement is given:
Greater should be given here, because the Duties being great, the running
Gentlemen can be more liberal in their Bribes and Gratuities. Nor should the
Punishment of an Officer that is conniving or abetting, be less than in former
Cases, an utter Deprivation of all the Offices he at that present does enjoy,
and a total Incapacity for the Enjoyment of any other for the future.

I cannot see that any material Objection can be made against any thing I have
said. I have made it plain, I think, that Trade ought to be made easy: And that
to make it so, the Merchant ought to meet with no Encumbrances at the Fountain
Head. I think I have made out too, the Nature of the Extension of the Trade
that is consistent with the Interest of the Nation; and that it does not depend
so much upon the Multitude, as the Ability of Merchants: For though the first may
bring Plenty, and make things cheap, it is such a Cheapness as is very
dangerous, and inconsistent with the Interest of the Nation. What the Merchant
loses, is a Loss to the Nation, one Man's Ruin commonly drawing on many
others. Gold, they say, may be bought too dear; and I am sure Cheapness bought
with the Ruin of its Authors is the worst way of buying it: But on the
contrary, Plenty with a moderate Profit is what will ever be the Honor and
Safety of a Kingdom.

FINIS.

