Some Remarkable OBSERVATIONS ON THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST Sir Thomas Armstrong,
In His Majesty's Court of King's Bench, at Westminster, Upon an Outlawry for
High Treason, etc.
AS ALSO On what passed at his Execution at Tyburn, and the PAPER then
delivered to the Sheriffs of London, and since Published.
IT is not with intention to overcharge the too Exuberant Press, or increase
the number of Prints, that these ensuing Remarks are now Published; But
considering the Age we now live in, and the Persons amongst whom, who are too
ready to take any advantage to Palliate the Treasons and Conspiracies they have
been found Notoriously Guilty of, and rather to Arraign the Laws that adjudged
them, than Confess the Guilt they are adjudged of. That I have undertaken a
little to look back on the Proceedings against, an the last Words of Sir Thomas
Armstrong.

If ever any People had cause to say they lived under a Good and Gracious
Governor, and an Equal and Impartial Government, it is certainly our selves;
for as on the one Hand we ought to bless God for the Life and welfare of our
present Monarch, so on the other for the Equal and Impartial Justice we enjoy
under him. It is not with us, as in Times un-forgotten; that our Lives,
Liberties and Estates, were at the Disposal of an Unjust and Tyrannical
Usurpation: we have no High Courts of Injustice, no unordinary Proceedings that
must be Warranted by subsequent Acts or Votes in Parliament, to avouch their
Legality: but every Man may set under his own Vine, and sing a Requiem to
himself in Peace and Plenty, well knowing that the increase of his Labor and
Industry is his own Propriety, unless he justly makes a Forfeiture thereof by
his Traterous and Criminal Actions.

Yet such are the Positions of too many amongst us, that we are apt to Quarrel
with the Benifits we Enjoy, and Calumniate those Laws that Protect us, and
those very Ministers by whose Just and Wise Disposal that Protection is derived
to us.

But I look not on it as any great Wonder to hear the Thief complain of the
Halter, and Traitor at the Severity of the Sentence; self love induces him to
Plead some what for his Justification; tho of all Men our present Sufferrer had
(on due consideration) least to say for himself which we now come to Examine,

A Horrid Conspiracy against the Life and Person of his Sacred Majesty, his
Royal Brother, and the Government, was on foot, several of the Conspirators
received Sentence, and were justly Executed for the same: others Fled; amongst
which number, Sir Thomas Armstrong, was not the least nor last that avoided
Justice: for which he stood duly Outlawed, and five hundred Pounds by
Proclamation set upon his Head, as a Reward to him who should Apprehend him.

Upon which about a year after he was taken beyond the Seas, brought over, and
Committed to the Goal of Newgate, and by Habeas Corpus, on Saturday the 14th of
this last June, brought up to the Kings-Bench-Bar, at Westminster, where he was
Arraigned upon the said Outlawry, and demanded what he could say for himself,
why Execution should not be Awarded against him upon that Attainder according
to Law.

His pretense was that he was beyond Sea at the time of the Outlawry and begged
to be Tried, urging as a point of Law, the Statute of Edward the Sixth, which
provides, That if a party Outlawed should within one year next ensueing the
said Outlawry pronounced or Judgment given upon the said Outlawry, Yield
himself to the Lord Chief Justice of England, for the time being, and offer to
Traverse the Indictment, or Appeal, whereupon the said Outlawry should be
pronounced as aforesaid, That then he should be received to the said Traverse
and being thereupon found not Guilty by the Verdict, of Twelve men he should be
acquitted of the said Outlawry, etc.

But pray let us consider this Plea, and let any Impartial Eye take a view
thereof, If such party so Outlawed yield himself, Is it for a man to yield
himself to the Law, to run away shelter and abscond out of the sight and reach
of it, to defy all Proclamations, and stand out from the legal and repeated
Summons thereof, and when at last by the care and caution of the Government he
is forcibly taken and against his will brought in a Prisoner, to offer then to
submit himself, and to take hold of what was never intended for him. If this be
a yielding according to the Statute, then Sir Thomas Armstrong might tolerably
enough pretend the same. But the Law is not to be Baffled. Had he indeed through
Remorse of Conscence, came and flung himself at the Feet of his Offended
Majesty, and humbly have submitted his Head a Forfeit to Justice, or through
sense of his Innocence, appealed to the Law and Justice of the Government; it
might have born some weight, and without all doubt he would have had the favor
of his Prince, and provision of the Law, which in this Case he was justly and
regularly A. bridg'd of. Nor could he as in a further part of the said
Proceedings, is by him urged, claim any Right by what had been offerr'd to
another Criminal in his Case. A little while a go, says he there was one in
this Place had the benefit of a Trial offered him if he would accept it; that
is the thing I now Desire, and I thank God my Case is quite another thing, this
I kn^w my own Innocence, and I desire to make it appear by a Trial. This he
meant by Mr, H^lloway, but what was offerred to him, was the Product of his
Majesty's Imparralel'd Bounty, and could never be demanded as a Debt, which was
free Grace and Favor. But their Cases says Sir Thomas Armstrong, were
different: true, the one had Confessed his Crimes, and in some measure begged
his Majesty's Mercy, but the other in a Contumelious Stubbornness, tho the same
had been ten times more palpably proved against him, stood out and disowned it,
in contradiction of the said Proofs, and even of the Circumstanses he then
stood under: for had he been Innocent, why at that time of the Day did he
demand a Trial? he might have had it before his Conscious Breast had enticed
him from his Wronged Country; or if the sense of Innocence had been so
prevalent upon him, why did it not bring him in to take hold of that benefit
the Law provided for him?

But alas! these pretenses have other meanings, than at first sight they
import; they are ad Captandum Populum, to make the P^r-blind Multitude, who can
see no further than what is before them, apprehend Hardship and Illegality in
the proceedings against the Criminal, and consequently stir them up, at least,
to a mutinous and Seditious Pity, if not a Rebellious Revenge. But thus for as
to the Proceedings, let us now look into the Words he said at the place of
Execution, viz.

Sir Thomas Armstrong, Mr. Sheriff, do you purpose to ask me any Questions?

Sh. Daniel. No Sir; you have leave to say what you please, and shall not be
interrupted unless you upbraid the Government.

Sir T. Armstrong, Sir I thank you: But I shall not say any thing by way of
Speech to the People. Pray take this Paper, which contains my Mind; and I
desire no other person may ask me any Question.

It is here Observable how cautious the sufferer was least any Question should
be asked him that might have discovered his Guilt, he was, you see, of the same
humor Dying as living, not only to avoid a free and open Confession of his
Crimes, as he ought to have made in respect of Gods Command and the benefit of
his own Immortal Soul, but also the very appearance of any method that might
have tended thereunto; But let us look into the Contents of his mind, which he
declared to be in the said Paper: And this as he left the same behind him for
the perusal of Posterity ought to bear some regard, But miserable is it to see
how many false colors the same is varnished with, as if there were no more to
be looked after in the last Speech of a Dying man than to deceive the World and
wrap up the Crimes they dye Guilty of in Subdolous and double meanings.

I thank Almighty God tho I have but a short time allowed me I find my self
prepared for Death, and my thoughts set on another World, This short time was
much more than the Horrid Conspirators would have allowed his Sacred Majesty
and than the Law afforded him, Yet I cannot but give so much of my little time
to set down in Writing my Answers to some Calumnies raised since my close
Impris^nment, as well as what Mr. Attorney accused me of at the Bar, I was told
a very great Person says I was a Spy of Olivers I shall not enter into the
contest of this report, as to it is validity or truth, nor into the further
Justification of himself upon that Head, which he pursues in the next Lines
only say if there be truth in what he pleads for his Justification it is little
to his present pu^pose and no answer to h^s present concerns in the Execrable
designs he stood charged with, for if he was then a sufferer, as he reaped the
Glory thereof in his own satisfaction, so was it a future encouragement to
engage him in Loyalty to that Sacred Person who has since honour^^ him with so
many Acts of Grace, Favor and Honor but to proceed.

In the next Paragraph he goes on to give an Account of the Proceedings agatnst
him at the Kings-Bench-Barr, and that he had urged the Statute of Edward the
Sixth to benefit himself with a Trial, which he concludes to say was denied
him, and that he was with an unordinary Roughness condemned and made a
President, tho Mr. Holloway, a little before had it offered him and could not
but think all the World would conclude his Case very different, else why
refused him: This has been sufficiently exploded in the preceding Page, tho I
cannot but observe how he calls the Justice of the Land an unordinary
Roughness, but further.

Mr. Attorney said I was accused for being one of those that was to kill the
King as he came from Newmarket, after the Fire, I take God to Witness I never
had any such design nor ever had such a thought to take away the Kings Life
neither had any man the Impudence to propose so Barbarous and base a thing to
me, neither was I ever in any design to alter the Government of England.

It is observable that in the late Horrid Conspiracy there were several parts
So Col. Walcot was to Charge the Guards, But declared no design to kill the
King; In like manner Sir Thomas Armstrong, (which he does not deny) might have
Charged the Guards and Destroyed the Person of his Royal Highness both which he
was Indicted for, and yet no design in his way against the King, nor further
says he had I any design against the Government, that is, the Monarchical
Government, for the Crown might have been Translated from the Sacred Head that
wo^e it and yet Monarchy have been still preserved. Nor does he mention in his
whole Paper any one word of the Plot it self for which he stood accused, but
evades the General in striving to Answer this one particular which how he has
done I leave to the unprejudiced.

But he proceeds, I have Lived and now Dye of the Reformed Religion, a True and
sincere Protestant; and in the Communion of the Church of England the name of
True Protestants has been sufficiently and dangerously known amongst us, under
which satisfaction, he seems confident of the Pardon of God Almighty, and so
draws to a Conclusion, I thank God I have no Repining at my Heart, for the
Condition my Sins has most deservedly brought upon me, I have deserved much
worse at the Hands of God. He would have obliged the World and himself, in the
Face of Heaven to have enumerated what those Crimes were, and doubtless we
should have had a fuither Account of his Treasons. But says he I do freely
forgive all the World, even those Concerned in taking away my Life. As for the
sentence of Death past upon me, I cannot but think a very hard one; being I
think denied the Laws of the Land. Here Is Blessing and Cursing all in a Breath;
Forgiveness of the World and an unjust accusation of the Laws and M^nisters of
Justice in one and the same S^ntence. To Conclude, says he, as I never had any
Design against the Kings Life, or ^he Life of any man; so I never was in a
Design to alter the Monarchy. The Truth of the first Clause depends upon the
latter, As I never had a Design to alter the Monarchy, so I had none against
the Kings Life. This is Cautelously Penned, he had not as before mentioned a
design to alter the Monarchy, because he only intended to Transplant the Crown
from one to another Head, and not to Destroy the Monarchy, tho he changed the
Monarch So that, If the latter be granted you must observe the Va^nish of the
former Clause.

But in the next Paragraph he tells you I Dye in Charity with all the World,
and not without just reas^n, and therefore I heartily Pray God to Bless the
Church of Christ every where, to what and how many Churches this extends, is
very uncertain, I scarce believe he excludes the Presbyterian, Independent,
with the et-caetra's of Schismatical, and Phanatical Congregations, which is
confirmed by his next Words, these Poor Nations, True Protestant Cant, and in
the last place, the Kings Majesty. whom God long preserve,

London, Printed by Geo. Croom, in Thames Street over against Baynard's Castle.
1684.


