Some Reasons why a Learned and Reverend Divine has lately taken the Oaths to
their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.
In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
I Thank you for the favor of Communicating the grateful (tho I cannot say
unexpected) News of an eminent Divine of our Church, who has a long time
scrupled the Oaths to their present Majesty's, has now at last answered all his
Doubts, and reconciled his Judgment to the Interest of the Protestant Religion,
by affording his Talent to the support of their present Majesty's, who, under
God, are now the Defenders of it, not only here, but all Europe over. I wish
your next Letter might bring me the much to be wished for Account of all our
Worthy Prelates and Divines, who have labored long under that Difficulty,
obtaining the like Victory.

And whereas you, at the same time, give me to know the Discourses of several
Men, who are no great Lovers of our Church, about it; as if this great Man
seemed to be ruled by Interest in this Affair, because he has stood out so
long, and now (as they think) all of a sudden taken it, I shall beg the Liberty
of briefly giving you my Sentiments about it.

And first, All own that an Oath is a Sacred thing, and therefore requires the
greatest Deliberation in the World before it be taken. An inconsiderate Man may
rashly venture upon an Oath, but a thinking, and an honest constant Man, will
be loath to engage himself by any Oath, till he has fully considered all that
may follow upon it, which must needs cost a Man some time: But especially, when
Scruples arise, that the Oath imposed upon, interferes with another Oath
formerly taken, then it must needs cause great Wrestlings in the Mind of a
truly honest Man, which cannot be easily appeased, which was the Case of this
Famous Divine. It Is to be feared there are too many who have taken the Oath
with little or no Deliberation, who are more to be Censured, than he, who
rather than he would take it with the minutest scruple, would run the hazard
of Temporal Inconveniences.

And in the next place, when the Oath imposed, seems to contradict former
Opinions, it must needs render a person very averse from taking of it, and take
up a great deal of time before he can divest himself of those Principles. You
and all Men know sufficiently, that it has been the Opinion of many of the
Clergy of England, that an Oath taken to a Prince, obliges the Subject to him
for his Lifetime, if he were the greatest Oppressor that ever lived. And
therefore it must needs be supposed, That this Reverend Person could not
easily, and in a short time, get free of this difficulty.

Those Persons ought rather to rejoice, that those Tenets that have been
foisted into our Church, no less prejudicial to the King than the Subjects, (as
late Experience demonstrates beyond all contradiction) are now justly
repudiated, as the principal Causes of all the Miseries we have met with, than
to vent their Spleen against a Learned Gentleman, for not having his Conscience
at their Beck.

I may likewise add, That such is the Nature of Man, that even in the best of
Men there is a Vanity of retaining their former Opinions, lest by changing
them, however prejudicial otherwise they may be, they should undergo the
Imputation of Changlings. I do not say this is the Case of any, but even a good
Man may even be Byast with this, and it may be a long time before this may be
overcome.

I shall here add some few of those many weighty Reasons or Considerations
which I humbly conceive have prevailed with this Reverend Person to take the
Oaths.

Reason I. Because it is evident, That no Rule or Form of Government is
prescribed by the Law of God and Nature; for that then they would be both
immutable, and the self-same in all Countries, but Almighty God concurreth or
permits such particular Forms which the Commonwealth appoints. Can any Man
say, That God did not concur as well with Italy when it had but one Prince, as
now when it has so many; and the like with Germany, and also with Switzerland,
which was once one Commonwealth, under the Dukes of Austria? England also was
first a Monarchy under the Britains, and then a Province under the Romans, and
after that divided into Seven Kingdoms at once, under the Saxons, and after
them of the Danes, and then the Normans, and then the French, and now a
Monarchy again under the English, and all this by God's Providence and
Permission, who suffered his own peculiar People the Jews to be under diverse
manner of Governments at diverse times; as first under the Patriarchs, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; then under Captains, as Moses, Joshua, and the like; then
under Judges, as Othoniel, etc. then under Highpriests, as Eli and Samuel;
then under Kings, as Saul, David, and so on, until the Government was lastly
taken from them, and they brought under the Power of the Romans. And last of
all, That God does concur with what Magistrate or Magistrates the Community
thinks fit to appoint, is plain by the Testimony of Holy Scripture, as when God
said to Solomon, By me Kings Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the
Earth, Prove. 8.16. that is, by His Permission they Govern, though Chosen by the
People: And St. Paul to the Romans avoucheth, that Authority is not but of God,
and therefore he that resists Authority, resists God, Romans 13. which is to
be understood of Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction in it self, according to
the Laws of every Country*

Reason II. Because Allegiance is nothing but Obedience according to Law, which
when the Prince violates, he has no right to Obedience, there being a mutual
Obligation between the King and People, which, whether it be only Civil or
Natural, tacit, or in express Words, can be taken away by no Agreements,
violated by no Law, rescinded by no Force; for a Kingdom is nothing else but
the mutual Stipulation between the People and their Kings: The Supreme
Authority of a Nation belonging to those who have the Legislative Authority
reserved to them; but not to those who have only the Executive, which is
plainly a Trust, when it is separated from the Legislative Power; and all
Trusts by their nature import, That those to whom they are given, are
accountable, though no such condition is specified. If the Subject may in no case
Resist, then there can be no Law but the Will and Pleasure of the Prince; for
whosoever must be opposed in nothing, may do every thing.

If the King Sue, by pretense of Law, and endeavor to take away my Money, my
House, or my Land, I may defend them by the Law; but if he comes Armed to take
away my Liberty, Life, and Religion, which are mine by the Laws of God and Man,
may I not secure them with a good Conscience; for most certain, every Man has a
right to preserve himself, his Rights and Privileges, against him who has no
Authority to Invade them: And this was the Case of Moses, who seeing an
Egyptian Smiting an Hebrew, he Slew him: And Sampson made War upon the
Philistines, for burning his Wife and her Father, who were both but private
Persons, who knew they could have no other kind of Justice against them, but
what the Law of Nature gives every Man.

When once the Christian Religion is become a part of the Subjects Property, by
the Laws and Constitutions of the Country, then it is to be considered as one
of their Principal Rights, and so may be defended as well as any other Civil
Right: Since that these different Forms of Government, that the Jews were
under, is no Rule for the Government of any Nation or People whatsoever. That
Cause is Just which defends the Laws which protects the Common Good, which
shall preserve the Realm: And that Cause is unjust which violates the Laws,
defends the Breakers of the Laws, protects the Subverters of the Country. That
is Just which will destroy Tyrannical Government: That Unjust which would
Abolish just Government: That Lawful which tends to the Public Good: That
Unlawful which tends to the Private.

Reason III. The Children of Israel slew Amasiah, their lawful King, for his
Idolatry, without any appointment in Scripture, or Prophecy of his Downfall;
and yet that this is no where called Rebellion, neither were they Punished by
his Son, whom they had made King in his Father's Stead. Mattathias slew the
King's Commissioner, for compelling Men to Idolatry. The Edom^^s Revolted from
Jehoram, and made themselves a King. And Lib^ah did also Revolt, because of his
Evil Government, 2 Chronicles. 21. without any appointment or foretelling of their
Revolt by God in Scripture, or being called Rebels. Readiness Subjects Swore, that
Saul should not kill Jonathan, and they rescued him that he died not, 1 Samuel
14.45. David (though a private Man) Armed himself with Six hundred Men, no doubt
but he designed to have Fought Saul and his Army, if the Men of Keliah would
have assisted him, and been true to him; when he enquired of the Lord, Whether
the Men of Keliah would deliver him and his Men into the hands of Saul? upon
the Lords answering, They would deliver them up, he and his Men departed the
City, 1 Samuel 23.23. can any Man imagine their meaning was to run up and down
the Country together, and fly before Saul and his Army, if they had been able
to cope with any number he could bring or send against them? If Resistance, at
all times, was Unlawful, and a Sin, surely David, a Man after God's own Heart,
would have known it, and then he would not have Involved the Six hundred Men
that came to his Assistance, in the Sin of Rebellion, but have told them, that
the Prince was not to be Resisted, though never so great a Tyrant. Canstantine
the Great, aided the Oppressed Christians and Romans against the Tyranny and
Persecution of the Emperors Maxentius and Maximinius, with force of Arms, with
which he Conquered those Persecutors in several Battles, Fought against them at
the Christians earnest Importunity. The Primitive Christians resisted Lucinius
their Emperor, for Persecuting them contrary to Law; and Constantine the Great
joined with them, who held it his Duty, says Eusebius, to deliver an infinite
multitude of Men, by cutting off a few Wicked ones, as the Pest and Plagues of
the Time. The Primitive Christians of Constantinople opposed Aspers being made
Emperor; but Leo being named, they consented thereto. The Primitive Christians,
under the King of Persia, resisted him for Persecuting them, and was assisted
by Theodotius the Roman Emperor, who told the King of Persia, He was ready to
defend them, and no way to see them suffer for Religion. The Christians of
Armenia the Greater, made a League with the Romans for the securing their
Persons and their Religion, against the Persians, under whom they lived. The
Novations, assisted by the Orthodox, resisted and beat the Macedonians, though
they were assisted by Constantinus the Emperor, with Four Thousand Men to drive
them from Paplelogonia. The Primitive Christians likewise destroyed Julians
Idolatrous Temple in his Reign.

Reason IV. It is not our business to enquire into the Justice of all that
contributed to this late Revolution in England, that being nothing to our Case,
who had no hand in it, and so have nothing to answer for it to God nor Man;
supposing it were an ill thing in it self, or that the Managers of it acted
upon evil Principles, took ill Methods, or had bad Ends, we may and ought to
leave this to be justified by those whom it does concern, (who have already
done it beyond all contradiction) we have performed our Oath to the late King
so long as he was in a Capacity to receive it; and many of us have had no hand
in putting him out of that Capacity: But whether his own deserting us, or the
present Kings Conquest, did Divest him, this is certain, that he is now
Divested of all Power to Protect or Govern us here, as much as if he were
actually Dead. And truly, unless there be some Cases besides Natural Death, in
which our Oath cease to Bind us, the case of Subjects may be extremely
Intolerable. Particularly in Portugal, all the Subjects must be said to be
Perjured, when they Swear to a new King while Alphonso was living: It must
therefore be granted, that Madness and Conquest may so far take off the
Obligation of a People to their living King, that they may innocently Swear to
another: And it is clear, that both these concurred in our Case.

We are Private Subjects, and must pay our Allegiance to him that administers
us Law and Justice, and does Protect us in all Capacities. If any wrong us in
our Estates, or hurt our Persons, we fly to their present Majesty's Laws for
Redress, and that seems the same thing as owning them, or Swearing Allegiance,
unless we think we may make use of this Government to serve our own Ends, and
do nothing to serve and secure it.

It is heartily to be wished for, by all Good Men, that those Reverend Persons
who still stand out, would lay aside all Prejudice; and, for the Church's sake,
in which they seem to make a Schism; for their Native Countries sake, which
they seem to expose by this Division; for their complying Brethrens sake, who
Pity and Pray for them; and for their own and Families sake, they would not let
a Notion in Politics keep them at this distance, and bring so many Calamities
on them. The Oath is short and modest, nothing but what is very necessary, and
required in all Governments; therefore why should they, for a nicety and
scruple, which may be fully satisfied and solved, endanger their Religion and
the whole Nation, and give such advantages to Papists, by countenancing them,
and to the Fanatics, by opposing the present Government, who do not fail to
represent it even to the Church's prejudice.

London, Printed in the Year,. 1690.


