Some WEIGHTY Considerations, Humbly Proposed to the HONORABLE MEMBERS Of the
Ensuing ASSEMBLY Of the STATES of SCOTLAND.

By a Lover of his Countrey's Liberty.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1689.

Some WEIGHTY Considerations, Humbly Presented to the HONORABLE MEMBERS Of the
Ensuing ASSEMBLY OF The STATES of SCOTLAND.
ALL considerate States and Princes have used Religion as a mean to sweeten the
spirits of their Subjects, and to make them obedient from Choice and Principle.

The Roman State which Conquered a great part of the then known World did so
much as they could, comply with the Religious Rites of their subdued Provinces;
and were so far from obtruding their own upon the People subjected to them,
that the Jews who averred all other Nations to be Idolatrous and Profane, were
protected in their Church Government and sacred Rites at home, in their
Synagogues, and freedom to make Proselytes in other Provinces.

But now for a long tract of Years it has been the business of the Government
of Scotland to force a Church Government, a Discipline and set of Priests upon
a devout and sincere People, to the racking of their Consciences, fomenting of
Broyls and Tumults, continuing a horrid spectacle of Executions; and in short,
to the introducing of Ignorance and all manner of Profanity.

It is expected that the Honorable Assembly of the States will consider, that
it is not only against good Policy to force Conscience, but as much against the
Rights of Mankind, as to use violence against Life or Chastity, since he who
complyeth for fear of Punishment with what is against his light, (whether good
or bad in it self) must be obnoxious to the Anger of an irresistible God, and
to the melanchollick sentences of a wounded spirit. And since the Persons and
Estates of such as stands it out, must be a Victim to the sanction of severe
Laws, for refusing to offend God and wound their Consciences; which if duly
pondered, cannot but incline the Honorable Assembly to restore to the People
their natural Rights of Worshipping God, and choosing Teachers according to
their Consciences, to instruct and rule them suitably to the Gospel of Peace,
and their Reformation from Romish T^^anny.

It has been the sad Fate of the Kingdom of Scotland to be ruined by
Parliaments (the glorious Bulwarks of our neighboring Nation) the Constitution
whereof has been manifestly perverted by various Innovations obtruded upon
them by force and fraud.

The Officers of State, at first only admitted to be present in Parliament as
Attendants upon the King's Person, have by degrees wheedled themselves into a
Custom of Voting, albeit no part of the three Estates of Parliament.

Though our Kings have had the Power of conferring Titles of Honor, yet such
Grants for several Ages gave no Right to Vote in Parliament, 'till first
approved by the Estates of Parliament. By the Invasion upon this Right of
Parliaments, the number of their Hereditary Members does now exceed the number
of the Elective, though they possess not so much as a tenth part of the
Property of the Nation, and several possess no part of it at all.

The fourteen Prelates obtruded upon the Parliaments, on purpose to secure so
many Votes to the Court, has been suffered to continue the known dead weight
of the House, though it cannot be understood what part of the Body Politic
they represent, since the Clergy pretend to the Kingdom of Chist, whose Kingdom
is not of this World, who (to give them their due) have acted suitably, in
constantly Voting for the King, whom they called their Head under Christ, in
Prejudice of the Nations best Interest.

The Lords of the Articles were Calculate to obviate the Nations reaping any
suitable fruit of Parliament.

Members being obnoxious for what they speak in Parliament, is a Plague which
consumes the Vitals of a Legislative Power.

The Imposing of unnecessary, disputable, and self-contradicting Oaths on all
Members of Parliament, and Electors of such, has deprived many of the Nobility
of their Birthrights, and the Gentry and Citizens from Electing and being
Elected.

It has done no good service to our Parliaments, that only King's Barons are
admitted to Elect, which in some Shires are very few, whereas many Gentlemen
who bear greater burden than many of them, and are as much to be supposed in
the Interest of the Country, are debarred from Electing, upon a fiction of the
Fewdall Law, whereby they are esteemed to be represented in their Superiors,
which was more tolerable while the Constitution was standing, to which the
Fewdall Law was Calculate.

It is not doubted, but the Wisdom of our great Assembly shall find out
Expedients to remove all Innovations, and settle the Parliaments on a solid
Foundation.

Most of all our Ministers of State, Judges and Privy Councellers, have been
these Twenty Eight years bypast the great Grievances of the Nation, the
Substance of the Country has been exhausted by persons of all Ranks going to
Court for Redress, universally to no purpose: Upon which account, none can
doubt but a wise Assembly, which has it in their hands to prevent such
mischiefs, shall secure to Parliaments their ancient Privileges, to recommend
persons of Integrity and Capacity for the Service of the Nation in all public
Trusts; and above all make sure the frequent assembling of Parliaments, a
sovereign Antidote against bad Ministers.

Whereas every wise Government considers by what means it can probably be
defended, and where the public Revenue of the Country is no wise sufficient
to sustain a standing Force proportioned to their defense, care is taken to
arm, encourage and model the Subjects for the security of the State.

The Subjects of Scotland have been again and again disarmed, a standing Force
has been kept on foot, to the number of three or four thousand men, no ways
suited to the Defense of the Country, but sufficient to Harass and Inslave a
disarmed people.

It cannot escape the Providence of the Honorable Assembly, to put the
Subjects in posture of Defense, under Officers no less recommended upon the
account of Integrity and Love to their Country, as upon the Account of Courage
and Experience: And take care that no standing Force be suffered to be kept in
the Kingdom without consent of Parliament, nor be Leavied to serve under other
States or Princes, without Permission and Obligation, that they shall be sent
back when the Parliament shall find it necessary for the Nations Service.

A long continued Race of both Elective and Successive Scotch Kings, have
constantly acknowledged, that they are bound to Oblige themselves by solemn
Oath, to protect their Subjects and defend their Rights, at the solemn receipt
of the Peoples Allegiance.

But to Crown the Miseries of that bleeding Nation, James the Seventh,
pretending a Right from God alone, assumed the Government, without obliging
himself by solemn Oath to the Subjects, contrary to the Fundamental
Constitution, continual Custom and Acknowledgment of his Ancestors, and an
express Statute, which is only a Declaration of the fundamental Constitution,
enlarged by what was absolutely necessary for the peace and safety of the
Subjects when Reformed from Romish Darkness and Superstition: And as his being
a bigoted Papist did render him incapable to oblige himself to his Subjects,
according to the terms of the Oath contained in the foresaid Statute, and
consequently incapable of the Regal Dignity; so his Arbitrary and Popish
Designs made it impossible he could engage himself to defend the Liberty and
Property of the Subjects: And if the Act of Succession made in the Parliament,
Eighty one, should be objected, the Answer is obvious, that that pretended
Parliament was holden by himself, whom many former Laws had rendered incapable
of bearing any Office in our Protestant Country, yea incapable of being a
lawful Subject, and so all its Acts are ipso sacto, null and void.

Again, it was not in the power of any Parliament to alter a fundamental
Constitution, more ancient then Parliaments, than it was to turn Kings or
Parliaments out of doors.

In short, his Usurping the Government, his Arbitrary management thereof; and
at last his relinquishing Great Brittan, and betaking himself to the protection
of the Arch-Enemy of Christianity, yea, Humanity it self, gives sufficient
ground to declare him an Enemy of this Kingdom, and the Peoples Right to
provide for themselves.

Since the Almighty God has raised up the Prince of Orange now King of England
(the hereditary Hercules of the latter World) to undertake so glorious an
Enterprise, as the delivering of Britain and Ireland from Popery and Slavery,
and has hitherto blessed his great and good Designs with suitable success:
Gratitude and Justice requires the Honorable Assembly to conferr the Regal
Dignity upon him, that he may be the more encouraged to accomplish the
Deliverance of these Nations, and assisted in the procurement of an universal
Repose to all Christendom.

The former prelimenaries cannot be disagreeable to a Prince who striveth with
his Subjects to put them in a Condition, that it may be in his and his
Successors power to do them good, but not to hurt them.

It is not to be doubted, but the Honorable Assembly will find it the Interest
of Mankind to pray, Let King William live for ever; and to make no otherwise
mention of a Successor, than to renew their Laws disenabling all Papists to
have any Interest in the Government of the Kingdom, and to appoint the
Parliament immediately preceding the decease of King William (whose Life God
long preserve) to assemble within Fifteen days after his decease.

It is likewise hoped, that the Honorable Assembly (so soon as the Nation's
most pressing Affairs are settled) will fall upon proper Expedients to obtain
an Union with our bordering Nation, that so the united Strength of great
Britain may be entirely laid out for the Relief of our Neighboring
Protestants, yet groaning under the Heavy Yoke of their Antichristian Romish
Tyrants.

FINIS.

