SOME WAYS FOR Raising of Money, Humbly offered to the Consideration of the
PARLIAMENT.

BY A Person of Quality.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall,
1690.

Some Ways for Raising of Money, Humbly offered to the Consideration of the
Parliament.
THE best way of all others is an Excise; under which Head the following
Particulars (or most of them) will be reduced. This Way will be the most
effectual to raise great Sums of Money, and will be the least felt: And it is
used by all wise and civilized Nations, who find it the best and easiest way.
But tho it were not so, yet now in this great Exigence, and when all lies at
stake, and such mighty Sums are wanting to preserve us, we should not be afraid
of it. It is not here meant, that we should have a general Excise upon all
things bought and sold (for that seems too troublesome and vexatious); but only
upon some things of general use, and which can well bear the Duty. I shall name
some few of them.

1. A Farthing a Pound upon all Flesh sold by retail, the Offals excepted with
effectual provision, that no Flesh shall be sold in Towns, save only in the
Market, or in the Shops or Shambles.

2. An Halfpenny a Pound upon all Candles sold. These two easy Duties would
clear six hundred thousand Pounds a Year.

3. A Sixth part of the Value, or Two Pence in the Shilling upon all Paper
imported; but so as none to pay above One Shilling the Ream. This would give a
mighty Advantage to our new Manufacture of Paper in England; which therefore
might well afford to pay the half of this Duty, or the Twelfth part of the
Value.

4. Sealed Paper and Parchment for Bonds, Contracts, and Conveyances, without
which, no Writing which requires the Seal of the Parties, to be good and valid.
Tho this Duty were made light, yet it would bring in great Sums, and would be
very easily gathered. As it is found by Experience in other Countries.

5. When the Assize of Bread is above Ten Ounces for the Penny White Loaf; the
Excess, or what is over and above, to be a Duty to the King, and the Bread to
be made at Ten Ounces.

6. An additional Duty of Twelve Pound per Tonne at the least, upon French
Wine; and this to be instead of the Prohibition. It would keep it out much more
effectually: For now, though it be prohibited, it is as plentiful as ever. And
as less would come in than does now; so that which comes in under such Duties,
would advance great Sums toward our public Occasions, yielding very small and
miserable Gains to the French Seller.

7. Six Pound per Tonne addition upon all other Wines; which they may well
afford to pay, the French paying so much more. Nor can our Friends take it ill,
if in this Exigence we increase the Duty upon their Wines, since we double it
upon our own Beer and Ale. Also by this means, French Wines, which are chiefly
aimed at, could not escape, by pretending them to be from other places; for all
Wines would now have near the same Burden. And since at the Canaries they are
grown so rich and so proud, that they will not now take our Woollen
Manufactures, nor scarce any thing else we have, so that we must carry Money,
or give them Bills to Spain; therefore there should be a further Addition of
Duty upon their Wines: for nothing will bring them down, but a Company or high
Duties.

8. Two or three Shillings per Gallon upon all Brandy imported; and French
Brandy to pay double; and their Double Brandy to pay double to that.

9. Forty or Fifty per Cent. Addition upon all other French Commodities.

These few things would bring in more Money than our great Land Tax of an
Hundred Thirty Seven Thousand Pounds a Month. And these might be for
continuance, if occasion should require. I have now two Ways to offer, which
will only advance a present Sum, and are not for continuance.

The first is, a Review of the Taxes of One Shilling and Three Shillings in the
Pound. These Taxes were the most equal of all others, had they been well
assess'd; but they were assess'd so shamefully ill, that thereby the Taxes
became the most unequal. Some Lands were assess'd at the full value, some
hardly at half, and some not at all. I heard a Gentleman of Surrey affirm, That
he knew of Three Thousand Pounds a Year in his Neighborhood, which paid not a
Penny to those Taxes. It is therefore humbly proposed, that a Review be in this
manner. Commissioners to be named by the King for each County, and changed at
pleasure. The major part to be of the same County. These to sit every Month, or
oftener if occasion be, to receive and hear Informations of Estates under
rated, and to determine them according to their Consciences. What shall come in
by this Way, to go half to the King, and half to the Informer. (for except the
Informer be well rewarded, there is no good to be done in things of this kind)
Before any Information be received, the Commissioners to sit once or twice, to
receive the Confessions of the Parties themselves; who by this means may
prevent the Informer. They that confess the true Value, to save the one half of
what they were under-rated, paying the other half to the King. No Information
to be received after Three Years. It is verily believed, that His Majesty's
share of this Gleaning will come to Three or Four Hundred Thousand Pounds. And
here will be an equal Assessment for the future, such as never was in England.

The second Way here offered is, A Composition for the Irish Estates. Which may
be thus. That all King James his Adherents in that Kingdom, who shall come in
by such a time, be pardoned and have their Lands, paying Two Years purchase of
their true Value, as it was Three Years ago. some few of the most notorious and
mischievous being excepted. To incline us to go by this Way of Composition,
rather than by Confiscation and Sale, let us consider the matters here
following.

First let us consider, that it is the more merciful, and consequently the more
Christian Way. Whereas, if we should Confiscate all these Estates, and turn the
People a begging, together with their Wives and Children; it would be the
severest Victory that has been known among Christians. Would it not seem
extremely rigorous, if we should put them all to the Sword? And the stripping
them of their Estates is as bad or worse. It were a Mercy to take away their
Lives, rather than leave them in so great Misery. This French King has lately
subdued Savoy: but we do not hear of any Confiscations or Extirpations; nor are
their Lands made a Prey to the conquering Army, but every Man enjoys his own.
The same French King, when he had settled his Conquests in Flanders, gave
public notice to the Gentlemen of those Countries, who were in the Spanish
Service, that if they would return home by a time prefixed, and become his
Subjects, they should have their Estates. They asked the King of Spain's
permission, who granted it: And thereupon, having taken solemn leave of their
Friends at Brussels, they returned home and had their Estates. It cannot be
denied, but that this was an Action truly noble of all sides. That we may look
farther back; it was one of the chief Glories of Richelieu's Administration,
that when his King had taken Rochel, and entirely subdued the Protestants; he
not only pardoned them their Lives and Estates, but likewise continued to them
their Religious Liberties, without any Diminution. We must not be ashamed to
take Example by our Enemies, in what they do well; rather we should strive to
exceed them.

Secondly let us consider, that these Peoples Crime is not so horrible as some
would suppose it. King James plainly forsook the Kingdom of England; but that
of Ireland he did not seem to forsake. He retained the Government there, first
by his Lieutenant, and then in person. And who can think it unpardonable, if
these People adhered to their natural King; being also of their own Religion,
and their constant Friend and Patron? If we will be impartial, we can hardly
blame them for what they have done. Beside, though they had such strong
Motives, yet they were hardly prevailed upon to engage and declare. They knew
there were some Men in the World, that had a great mind to their Lands; and
they were very loath to hazard them. But being left to themselves for many
Months, and to the Practices and Persuasions of King James his Agents; and no
Power but King James's appearing in Ireland; and we in England being wholly
taken up with settling our Government; they were drawn in to do that, which
perhaps wiser Men than they would have done in their Circumstances.

Let us thirdly consider, That these are the ancient Inhabitants and
Proprietors of that Country: That they are our Countrymen at large: and have
been our Fellow Subjects for some Hundreds of Years. Though many of them be
rude and wild, yet they are as we found them; and in time they may be
reclaimed. How many civil Protestant Families are there already in Ireland, of
mere Irish Extraction?

We should consider in the fourth place, That Men's not submitting to a
new-establish'd Government, is not so heinous a Crime, as the Rebelling against
a Government they were born under, or to which they have submitted. Who can
think it strange, if there be some Differences and Disorders, upon a
Dissolution of Government? And in such a Case, must nothing less than
Destruction be thought a sufficient Punishment? Suppose a part of England, in a
great Revolution, should not readily conform with the rest; must they for this
be utterly destroyed and extirpated? Or, which is the same thing, must their
Estates be made a Prey, and themselves made miserable Beggars? This would seem
to us, especially to those of us that felt it, very hard and severe. And let us
not deceive our selves in our own partial Imaginations. There is as much Mercy,
in such a Case, due to Irish-Men, as there is to Us English.

Fifthly we may consider, That the way of Clemency here proposed, will be near
as beneficial to us, as the utmost Severity. especially if we reckon how much
it will save. In all humane probability it will put a sudden end to the War,
and save the further effusion of Blood and Treasure. Since the Victory at the
Boyne, we have been fighting for Irish Lands; which, I doubt, has cost us more
already, than those Lands are worth. Let us throw away no more upon them.

Sixthly we must consider, That we have an Enemy upon us, who is ready to
swallow up all Europe. Any one may know, that I mean the French King. Let us
therefore take heed, lest by being too obstinately bent to destroy the Irish,
we be destroyed our selves by the French. There is now a mighty Confederacy
against this French King. but they have two great Diversions; namely the War
against the Turk, and this of Ireland. The Emperor was much overseen, in not
making Peace with the Turk last Winter: which Peace they that dissuaded and
hindered, did thereby great Service to the French. and we should take care not
to fall into the like Error; by continuing the War of Ireland. Which may have
so fatal a Consequence, as the Ruin of all Europe, and of our selves among the
rest. It Is a Voyage Royal into France, that must support both Us and our
Confederates. and therefore it concerns us to unite all our Forces, for a
Voyage Royal into France. which I pray God to prosper.

Lastly, we should do well to consider, what are the Desires and Sentiments of
our Friends, and likewise of our Enemies, in this Irish Affair. It cannot be
doubted, but that it is the passionate Desire of our Friends and Confederates,
that we would make up with the Irish upon any reasonable Terms: that so we
might assail the French with all the Force we can make. Which how greatly it
would advantage our Confederates, is easy to imagine. On the other side, it
must be the Wish of our great Enemy the French King, that we would give the
Irish no Terms, but prosecute them with the utmost Rigor. That thereby they
may be obliged and enforced to continue the War, and to defend themselves to
the last Extremity. And that Himself in the mean time may beat us out of the
Sea, may overbear our Confederates at Land, and even invade England it self.
When we consider these things, I hope we shall endeavor deavour to fulfill the
Desire of our Friends, and shall not do as our Enemies would have us.

There are some Objections against this Design of Mercy to the poor Irish; to
which some Answer must be given.

1. It is said (to make their Crime seem greater), That Ireland is a
subordinate Kingdom to England: and must therefore comply with whatever we do.
I answer, That this Consequence cannot hold in all Cases. For if England,
should be invaded and subdued by a foreign Enemy (which God avert), and should
be forced to submit to the Conqueror; it would not follow, that the Irish,
when they might defend themselves, must submit to the foreign Yoke likewise.
What we did in the late Revolution, was done upon Grounds so righteous, as may
justify us to all the World. But put the case, that we English Men should
without any pretense or color throw often our lawful Prince: would the Irish be
obliged in duty to do the same? Or to make the thing shorter; If England
rebel, must Ireland rebel to? and if they will not do it readily, must they
be rooted out?

2. The Irish will never be quiet. I answer, They must be quiet, since they
will not be in condition to be otherwise. From the time the Long Parliament
subdued them, they have been very meek and tame. Yet I confess, that when we
had set up Popish Kings in England, who gave all Countenance and Authority to
the Irish, and at last put Arms into their hands and disarmed the Protestants;
the Protestant English Interest was in danger. which yet had never been run
down, had they had any assistance from England in time, and had they not
suffered themselves to be fooled by Tirconnell. But there can be no danger to
the Protestants of Ireland, unless we set up Popish Kings in England. which I
suppose we shall never do.

3. We cannot live with Comfort intermixed with the Irish-Truly then we must
come away from them, and leave them in their Country by themselves. But shall
We who have thrust our selves in amongst Them, now not suffer Them to live
amongst Us? This were too insolent, and void of all Humanity.

4. Our Army must be rewarded out of these Lands. But why must Our Army, more
than all others, think to be thus rewarded? There is no other Army we know of,
that expects any such thing. Beside, they may have their Rewards as well out of
the Compositions, as out of the Confiscations.

5. They called in the French: which is never to be forgiven. But I deny that
they called in the French. It Is true, they received King James; and then King
James brought in the French: but without the consent of the Irish, and against
their Wills. But moreover, why should it be such a capital unpardonable Crime,
to make use of foreign Aid? Why should that be made a Crime in the Irish, which
all People do for their own preservation?

6. There was a full pardon once granted to the Irish; which they did not
accept, nor come in upon it. But I answer, that this was while our King was
here in England, and far from them: and when King James was in Ireland, and
amongst them, and in Power. So that we must not blame them too much, if they
did not or durst not then comply, with the gracious Offers that were. made
them. But after the Victory at the Boyne, had a full Pardon been granted, or
Conditions offered that had been tolerable; there is little reason to doubt,
but that they had readily submitted: King James himself giving them leave, when
he fled from them. And then we might have had an Army in France, before the end
of Summer. Also if we had professedly been kind to the Irish, in honor and for
the sake of our Roman Catholic Allies, it had been a high Complement. But if
after that glorious Victory, none were to be pardoned, save Laborers and
common Soldiers and the like; and they that had any thing, especially all they
that had Lands, were left to the Event of War; if all that these could hope
for, was only to save their Lives, and be stripped of their Estates, and thrown
into Misery and Beggary; who can wonder if Men became obstinate, that had been
made desperate? But by this means, while We fight to get their Estates, and
They fight to keep them; the devouring War continues: all our Forces are
employed upon Ireland: our Allies in the mean time are run down by the French,
and brought to the brink of Ruin: and we in England lie under Taxes, such as
never were known. I speak of these things with the greater freedom, because I
do well know, that our severe Resolutions (the Cause of all) were carried,
against his Majesty's merciful Inclinations.

7. They have a perfect Aversion and Hatred to the English Government, and will
never submit. In answer to this, it must be confessed; that the Irish may not
much delight in their Subjection to England. and to speak impartially, there is
some reason for it. To see the English crowd into their Country, who are
continually growing upon them and eating them out; who have also all the
Authority and Preferments, while themselves are contemptible Underlings; it may
well be, that these things are not very pleasing to them. Nor should We
Englishmen be content to be so served, by the French or any other Nation. It
must not therefore seem strange, if these People would willingly recover their
ancient and native Liberty; and shall act by the Principles of
self-Preservation, as other men do. But for all their impatience of the Yoke,
yet doubtless they will submit, to prevent a ruin. They would submit to the
Turk, when there is no remedy, thereby to save their Estates. and so would any
Men else. We may well presume, that the French Domination is odious to the
Savoyards: But yet we see they submit to it. But why are the Landed Men of
Ireland supposed more obstinate than others? And why are not they pardoned as
well as others? I doubt the World will think, that we are too much set upon the
Prey, and that the Love of their Land makes us so severe to them. And the Irish
Nobility and Gentry, who are the Men chiefly concerned, will seem to be pursued
(like the Hunted Castor) rather for what they have, than for what they have
done. It will be little honor to our Nation;, to be thought (I will not say
Beasts of Prey, but) more intent upon the Prey than other People. Even this
French King, though he has been cruel and inhumane to his poor Protestant
Subjects, yet he has not made a Prey of them, but has suffered and ordered
their Estates to go to the next a kin, that are or will turn Papists. Lastly,
if they will not submit when fair Terms are offered; they may then thank
themselves for their destruction, and We have done what becowes us. But in
Justice, they should have some Terms offered them, and in Prudence (considering
our Circumstances) such terms as they will accept. What we thus get out of
them, though it be far less then has been proposed, will be clear Gains.

Thus I have endeavored to demonstrate, that, both in Prudence and Justice,
the poor Irish ought to be well used at this time. And that the admitting them
to a fair Composition, is one of the best ways of raising Money* the finding
out whereof, or at least the offering something toward it, is the Scope and
Business of this Paper.

IT has been humbly proposed in the foregoing Discourse that high Duties be
laid upon French Commodities, instead of the Prohibition. By which means much
fewer of them would come in, then do now, and those that did come in would be
useful to the Public, by yielding and raising great Sums of Money. I shall
now endeavor to make these things more plain: especially the former. for the
latter seems evident of it self. I say then, that high Duties upon these
Commodities would more effectually clog and hinder their Importation, then
their being wholly prohibited. And the reason is, because the Duties cannot be
so easily evaded, as the Prohibition (by Experience) has been, and always
will be. The Officers of the Customs make it their business to collect the
Duties to the King's utmost Profit. and they are in great measure Judges in the
case. But to make out a forfeiture of prohibited Goods, there must be an Action
at Law, and the thing must be tried by Jury. who will expect clear legal
Proofs, which perhaps cannot be had. So that though the Officer know the Goods
to be French, and could demand and receive a Duty accordingly, in case a Duty
were imposed; yet he will not seize them as forfeited, and engage in a
Lawsuit, unless he be sure that he can satisfy a Jury. And even at best, a
Lawsuit is troublesome. We see therefore that though the prohibiting of Goods
be the severer way, yet being the more difficult in the Execution, it is the
lest effectual.

Moreover that high Duties are effectual to our purpose, we find by a late
Example. Since this War, as I am well informed, the People of Devonshire and
Cornwall found means to send over good Quantities of Tin and Lead, and some
other things into France. But the French King quickly took care to lay such
Duties upon them, as has at once put an end to that Trade. Which was also the
French way before the War. they spoiled the vending of our Commodities there,
not by prohibiting, but by imposing high Duties.

There has been a Reason omitted, why the Laws for prohibiting Goods are
slackly executed: which Reason is this. To seize such Goods, and pursue them to
a forfeiture, is to be the immediate Minister of inflicting punishments upon
Offenders. Which is an ugly Employment, not unlike that of the Hangman. So that
good men do not care to meddle with it. The Officers therefore of the Customs,
in whose way these matters lie, are apt to connive at such Goods; and to allow
of any pretense or color for them, rather then turn Informers. But the same
Officers will not-fail to collect the Kings Duties to the height: and to use
their utmost care and diligence, that he be not defrauded.

We see therefore, that it is much easier to avoid Forfeittures and elude
Prohibitions, then to escape high Duties. and Duties may be made such a Burden,
as the Commodities cannot bear: and then no body will bring them.

I have now something more to say in particular, concerning French Wines. If we
can pinch them close in their Wines, we gain a great point. But the present
Prohibition will not do. For great Quantities are still brought in, partly
barefaced, and partly under other Names. But a high Duty would be sure to meet
with them. It has therefore been here humbly offered, that beside the twelve
pound a Tonne which is the present Duty, there be laid upon them twelve pound
more at the least. At one word, the Addition (if it be thought fit) may be
eighteen pound; making Thirty pound in the whole. And if any do come in upon
those terms, the harm is not great.

They will endeavor to evade this great Duty, by pretending their Wines to be
from other Places. But if they are plain French Wines, the Officers of the
Customs will not be imposed upon: and will collect the Duty (as they ought) to
the Kings best advantage. But the difficulty will be, in case they mix them
with other Wines. And we are told, that they have already set up a trade of
brewing and disguising Wines, both in Portugal and more especially in Zealand.
To which places great quantities of French Wines are carried, and from thence
(with a small mixture or tincture of other Wines) they are sent to England.
Therefore to make sure, and to prevent all shifts, it has been further
proposed, that there be an increase of Duty upon other Wines also. that is, six
pound a Tonne upon the Wines of Spain and Portugal, and upon the Rhenish (which
go by another measure) in proportion. so that the whole Duty of Spanish and
Portugal Wines would be about four and twenty pound a Tonne. And so much French
Wines must pay; though they be so disguised as to pass for other Wines,
notwithstanding the Officers Care. But if any part be adjudged French, the Wine
to pay French Duties. This addition of Duty the Spanish Wines might well bear,
as it has been noted already, in regard the French have three times as much
added. For the French Wines being in a manner shut out by the high Duty; the
Spanish, though their Duties be increased, will come in upon better advantage
then ever they did formerly. But by this means, considerable Sums will be
advanced for our public Services, which is the thing aimed at in this whole
Discourse.

FINIS.

