Some REMARKS on the Petition of the East India Company to the House of Peers,
against the BILL sent up to their Lordships by the House of Commons, Entitled,
An Act for Granting to His Majesty Two Millions, and c. and for Settling the
Trade to India.
THEY Allege, That they have a Right to the East India Trade, by Charters from
the Crown of a hundred Years Continuance.

The first Incorporation of the Present Company, was in the Year 1657, when
they began with a Stock of about 370000 l. Out of which (since the Restoration)
they did Divide by the Monopoly of the Trade, by their War with the Mogull, and
other indirect Profits, more than Three Millions Sterling.

2. That in several of the said Charters, the Crown covenants not to grant
Liberty to any other Persons to Trade to those Parts.

This Covenant has been made good to them by the Ruin of several of their
Fellow Subjects, who warranted by the Common Law of their Country (since
^^clared by Parliament) and by the Laws of Nations, have innocently carried
Trade into those remote parts of the World; where, as well as in Europe, they
have (under Pretense of this Covenant) been most illegally treated by the
persent Company and their Agents.

3. That all their former Powers and Privileges have been confirmed to them
for twenty one Years, by Charter from his present Majesty, dated 7 October,
1693. That by like Charter of Regulations from his Majesty, they submitted to
receive Subscriptions (as an addition to their Stock) for 744000 l. And that
the same was actually paid in by the New Subscribers.

It were to be wished, That a more thorough Enquiry was made into the Methods
and the Expense by which these last Charters were obtained, contrary to the
Advice of the House of Commons, in an Address made and presented by the whole
House to his Majesty on this very Occasion but the February preceding the said
October, 1693. For Dissolving the East India Company upon three Years warning
to the said Company, according to the Power reserved in their Charter. As to
the last Subscription of 744000 l. it was made up by 362000 l. of the old
Adventurers, and 382000 l. of the new Subscribers, (of which latter Sum, near
120000 l. has been sincc Sold out by the New Members) The Submission of the old
Company to this Regulation was very remarkable: For it was this Submission that
brought them in a new Stock to trade with, after they had by unaccountable
Dividends, left themselves so bare as to be forced to borrow more than 325000
l. to carry on the Trade.

4. That since their last Charters no Breach or Forfeiture of their Rights has
been Charged upon them.

How prudently they may have managed, as to the avoiding any more Forfeitures,
their Court of Committees best know; But how honestly to their New Subscribers
will best appear by the Printed Votes of the House of Commons on the 14th. Day
of June last, when the Report was made from the Committee appointed to Inspect
the East India Company's Books, That Satisfaction be given to the late
Subscribers to the East India Company, for all Damages done them, by making
Dividends beyond the Real Value of the Company's Stock, at the Time of such
Dividend, and also by Ordering to be Paid out of the New Subscription, a Sum of
about 325000 l. Lent by the Members (...) the Old Company, by way of Increase
of the Capitol Stock, such Damage to be answered out of the Estates of the
Members of the Old Company (...) respectively, Receiving such Dividend and
Payment.

5. That since the last Subscription, they have lost twelve great Ships of an
Immense Value by the Calamities of the War.

The Company indeed was concerned in twelve Ships that were lost by the War and
other Casualties, but their real Loss was not of such an immense value, as to
exceed 450000 l. and even that was retrieved by the much greater Prices they
made by sale of those Goods which came to Market: Every other Trade has been
attended with the same Calamities, and in particular the Owners of those Ships,
and the private Traders to India, have felt heayy Losses by the War, which with
Silence they submitted to without claiming a Monopoly of the Trade as a Reward
for their Misfortunes.

6 That they have been profitable to the Public by the Payment of 295000 l. in
Customs, 85000 l. for Taxes, by the Subscription of 80000 l. toward
Circulating Exchequer Bills, and by a Supply of 6000 Barrels of Gunpowder upon
a very pressing Occasion.

If they have been profitable to the Public by their Customs, so have all
private Traders been; and much more (it is to be hoped) have both Private
Traders and Company been profited by such Returns. The Taxes they have paid,
are the best Proof they have of the value of their Stock. And yet these Taxes
(on this occasion boasted of,) came not so readily from them, but that their
Charter by a Noncompliance with a plain Law became forscited. The 80000 l.
subscribed at several times for circulating Exchequer Bills, carried with it
its own reward of 10 per Cent, which the rest of their Fellow Subjects would
thankfully have acknowledged owing to his Majesty's Bounty. And if the Company
did once supply 6000 Barrels of Gunpowder; Private Traders during the whole
time of the War have furnished his Majesty with Money and Stores both at home
and abroad.

7. That having carried on the Trade during the War, they did hope to have
received Returns of Profit in time of Peace to Answer such their great Losses.

The same Hopes, with equal Justicc, attended the Rest of their Fellow
Subjects, 'till they were alarmed by a Proposal of the Company's, of the 14th
Day of April last, wherein they offer to advance 700000 l. (repayable to them
with Interest) to have the whole and sole Trade to India vested in them by Act
of Parliament for Thirty One Years; which gave occasion to the Honorable House
of Commons, to come to those just Resolutions, which they next set forth in
their Petition, Viz.

8. That a Fund of 8 l. per Cent per Annum should be settled with the Advantage
of the Trade to India, on such as should advance Two Millions for the Service
of the Public. Whereupon the Company did agree to submit their Stock to a
valuation of 50 l. per Cent. and to open their Books for new Subscriptions
toward raising the said two Millions.

It was in pursuance of the said Votes, That a Subscription was set on foot in
London, which in few days amounting to more than 1200000 l. was presented to
the House of Commons, who thinking it more agreeable to Justice, and
advantageous to the Trade, to leave every Man to make good in Ready Money the
sum of his Subscription toward carrying on the Trade, than to oblige innocent
Men to come at any Valuation whatsoever into a Stock which had so lately
overreached 700 of the King's Subjects. The Company then proceeded to propose,

9. That 200000 l. should be Subscribed by private Adventurers, to be paid as
the first Payment, subject to make good the subsequent Payments.

The like Sum of 200000 l. will be advanced and paid down by the New
Subscribers, at the very time of their Subscriptions, subject by the Bill to
the same Penalty of making good the subsequent Payments.

10. That a Bill (past the House of Commons) is now depending before their
Lordships, which tends to the prejudice of the Petitioners Rights, to deprive
them of their Property in Lands, and their other Estates abroad, to the value
of 44000 l. per Annum, and in their Forts and Fortifications which have Cost
them above a Million of Pounds Sterling, and not doubting but to satisfy their
Lordships, That the said Bill will be to the utter Ruin of many Hundred
Families; that it will prove Destructive to the Trade and Interest of England,
and having diverse other matters of great moment to offer against it, They
therefore pray to be heard by their Council etc.

The Bill will best Vindicate it self from the bold Aspersions of the
Petitioners; it will there appear; That the Trade of three Years (the
Limitation under which they accepted their Grant from the Crown) is Continued
to them; That their Estates (of whatsoever Value they be, or however acquired)
are preserved to them. That even after the Expiration of their Three Years,
they are not excluded from such a part of the Trade, as by their timely
Subscriptions they shall think fit to qualify themselves to enjoy: The Bill
designs the ruin of no Man, unless the payment of his just Debts will be his
Ruin; to that piece of justice indeed it obliges the Old Company, as well as
whoever shall become a Partaker in the Advantages of the New Settlement: But
the Regard had to the Company by the House of Commons rested not here, they
were at last offered, (notwithstanding their disingenious trifling with the
House) the Benefits of the Bill, upon the Terms therein mentioned, which since
they have thought fit not only to neglect but to Contemn, It is, with all
possible Duty, submitted to the great Wisdom of their Lordships, whether the
present Company are the Men, who (exclusive to the rest of their Fellow
Subjects) may be thought the best Improvers of the East India Trade; or whether
the rest of the Subjects of England (not excluding even the said Company unless
they please) may not make greater Returns of Profit to their Country


