Some particular Matter of Fact, relating to the Administration of Affairs in
SCOTLAND Under the Duke of Lauderdale.
Humbly offered to His Majesty's Consideration, in Obedience to His Royal
Commands.
1. THE Duke of Lauderdale did grossly misrepresent to your Majesty the
Condition of the Western Counties, as if they had been in a state of Rebellion,
though there never had been any opposition made to your Majesty's Authority,
nor any resistance offered to your Forces, nor to the execution of the Laws:
But he purposing to abuse your Majesty, that so he might carry on his sinister
Designs by your Authority, advised your Majesty to raise an Army against your
peaceable Subjects, at least did frame a Letter, which he sent to your Majesty
to be signed by your Royal Hand to that effect; which being sent down to your
Council, Orders were thereupon given out for raising an Army of 8 or 9000 men,
the greatest part whereof were Hilanders. And notwithstanding that to avert
this threatening, the Nobility and Gentry of that County did send to Edinburgh,
and for the security of the Peace did offer to engage, that whosoever should be
sent to put the Laws in execution, should meet with no affront, and that they
would become Hostages for their safety, yet this Army was led into a peaceable
Country, and did take free Quarters according to their Commissions, and in
most places levied great sums of Money under notion of dry Quarters, and did
plunder and rob your Majesty's Subjects, of which no redress could be obtained,
though complaints were frequently made: All which were expressly contrary to the
Laws of the Kingdom.

2. In those Quarterings it was apparent, that regard was only had to that
Duke's private Animosities; for the greatest part of those Places that were
most quartered on, and destroyed, had not been guilty of any the said
Field-Conventicles complained of, and many of the Places that were most guilty,
were spared upon private Considerations.

3. The Subjects at that time were required to subscribe an exorbitant and
illegal Bond, which was impossible to be performed by them, That they, their
Wives and Children, and Servants, their Tenants, and their Wives, Children and
Servants, should live orderly according to Law, not go to Conventicles, or
entertain vagrant Preachers, with several other particulars; by which Bond,
those that signed it, were made liable for every man's fault that lived upon
their ground.

4. Your Majesty's Subjects were charged with Laborrows, denounced Rebels, and
Captions were issued out for seizing their Persons, upon their refusing to sign
the aforesaid Bond; and the Nobility and Gentry there, who have been ever
faithful to your Majesty, and had appeared in Arms for suppressing the last
Rebellion, were disarmed upon Oath; and a Proclamation was also issued out,
forbidding them upon great penalties to keep any Horses, above four pounds ten
groats price.

5. The Nobility and Gentry of the Shire of Air were also indicted, at the
instance of your Majesty's Advocate, of very high Crimes and Misdemeanors,
whereof some did import Treason. These Indictments were delivered them in the
Evening, to be answered by them next Morning upon Oath; and when they did
demand two or three days time to consider of their Indictments, and crave the
benefit of Lawyers to advise with, in Matters of so high concernment, and also
excepted to their being put to swear against themselves, in Matters that were
capital, which was contrary to all Law and Justice, those their desires were
rejected, though the like had never been done to the greatest Malefactor in the
Kingdom; and it was told them, they must either swear instantly, or they would
repute them guilty, and proceed accordingly.

6. The Noblemen and Gentlemen knowing themselves innocent of all that had been
surmised against them, did purge themselves by Oath of all the particulars that
were objected to them, and were thereupon acquitted; and though the Committee
of the Council used the severest manner of enquiry, to discover any Seditions
or treasonable Designs, which were pretended as the grounds for leading in that
Army into those Countries, yet nothing could ever be proved; so false was that
suggestion concerning a Rebellion then designed, that was offered to your
Majesty, and prevailed with you for sending the aforementioned Letter.

7. The Oppressions and Quarterings still continuing, the Noblemen and
Gentlemen of those Countries went to Edinburgh, to represent to your Council
the heavy pressure that they and their People lay under, and were ready to
offer to them all that in Law or Reason could be required of them for securing
the Peace. The Council did immediately upon their appearing there set forth a
Proclamation, requiring them to depart the Town within three days upon all
highest pains; and when the Duke of Hamilton did petition for leave to stay two
or three days longer, for some very urgent Affairs, that was refused him.

8. When some Persons of Quality had declared to the Duke of Lauderdale, that
they would go and represent their Condition to your Majesty, if they could not
have justice from your Ministers. For preventing that, a Proclamation was set
forth, forbidding all the Subjects to depart the Kingdom without license, that
so your Majesty might not be acquainted with the said Condition of your
Subjects, from making their Application to your Majesty, no less contrary to
your Majesty's true Interest, (who must always be the refuge of your People)
than to the natural Right of the Subject.

The former particulars relate to the invasion of the Rights of great numbers
of your Subjects all at once; what follow have indeed only fallen on some
single persons, yet are such that your whole People apprehend, they may all be
upon the slightest occasions brought under the like mischiefs.

The Council has upon many occasions proceeded to a new kind of punishment, of
declaring men incapable of Public Trust: concerning which, your Majesty may
remember what Complaints the said Duke then made, when (during the Earl of
Middleton's Administration) he himself was put under, and incapacitated by an
Act of Parliament; The words of his Paper against the Earl of Middleton [are
uncapacitating] was to whip with Scorpions, a punishment to rob men of their
Honor and to lay a lasting stain upon them and their Posterity. And if this
was complained of when done by the High Court of Parliament, your Majesty may
easily conclude it cannot be done in any lower Court. But yet notwithstanding,
it is become of late years an ordinary Sentence in Council, when the least
Complaints are brought against any with whom the Duke of Lauderdale is offended.

Instances of this are;

The declaring twelve worthy Citizens of Edinburgh incapable of Public Trust,
against whom no Complaint was ever made to this day, as your Majesty will
perceive more fully by a Paper concerning that affair. The true cause of it
was, that those men being in the Magistracy, the Duke and his Brother could not
get a vast Bribe from them out of the Towns Money, which was afterward
obtained, when they were removed.

The Provost of Glascow, Aberdeen and Gadburgh, were put under the same
Sentence, for signing a Letter to your Majesty in the Convention of the
Buroughs, with the rest of that Body; which Letter was advised by him who is
now your Majesty's Advocate as that which had nothing in it which could bring
them under any Guilt: And yet those three were singled out of the whole number,
and incapacitated, besides a high Fine and a long Imprisonment, as your Majesty
will more fully perceive by another Paper.

Sir Patrick Home of Polworth, being sent by the Shire of Berwick to complain
of some illegal proceedings, and to obtain a legal remedy to them, which he did
only in the common form of Law, was also declared incapable of Public Trust,
besides many months Imprisonment.

The Provost of Linlithgoe being complained of for not furnishing some of your
Forces with Baggage-Horses, was called before the Council, and because he said
they were not bound in Law to furnish Horses in such manner, he was immediately
declared incapable of Public Trust, and was both Fined and Imprisoned.

There are also 50 of the Town of St. Johnstons incapacitated upon a very
slight pretense, so that it is now impossible for them to find a sufficient
number of Citizens for the Magistracy of that Town.

2. Your Subjects are sometimes upon slight, and oftentimes upon no grounds
Imprisoned, and sometimes kept Prisoners many months and years, nothing being
objected to them, and are required to enter themselves Prisoners, which is
contrary to Law. It was in the former Article expressed, that many of the
persons declared incapable of Public Trust, did also suffer Imprisonment. And
besides these instances, Lieutenant General Drumond (whose eminent Loyalty and
great Services are well known to your Majesty) was required to enter himself
Prisoner in the Castle of Dunbarton, where he was kept one year and a half, and
was made a close Prisoner for nine months of that time; and yet nothing was
ever objected to him to this day, to justify that usage.

The Lord Cardrosse was for his Ladies keeping two Conventicles in her own
House (at which he was not present) Fined 11000 l. and has now been kept four
years Prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh, where he still remains, although he
has often petitioned for his Liberty: And Sir Patrick Home has been now a
second time almost one year imprisoned, and nothing is yet laid to his Charge.

Besides these illegal Imprisonments, the Officers of your Majesty's Forces
carry frequently Warrants with them, for apprehending persons that are under no
legal Censures, nor have been so much as Cited to appear; which has put many
of your Subjects into very great fears, especially upon what was done in
Council three years ago.

Captain Carstaires (a man now well enough known to your Majesty) did entrap
one Kirkton an Outed Minister into his Chamber at Edinburgh, and did violently
abuse him, and designed to have extorted some money from him: The noise of this
coming to the ears of one Bailey, Brother-in-law to the said Kirkton, he came to
the House, and hearing him cry Murder, Murder, forced open his Chamber Door,
where he found his Brother-in-Law and the Captain grappling: The Captain
pretended he had a Warrant against Kirkton, and Bailey desired him to show it,
and promised that all Obedience should be given to it; but the Captain refusing
to do it, Kirkton was rescued. This was only delivering a man from the hands of
a Robber, which Nature obliges all men to do, especially when joined with so
near a Relation.

The Captain complained of this to the Council, and the Lord Hatton with others
were appointed to examine the Witnesses; and when it was brought before the
Council, the Duke of Hamilton, Earls of Moreton, Dumfrize and Rincardin, the
Lord Cocheren, and Sir Archibald Primrose then Lord Register, desired, That the
Report of the Examination might be read: But that not serving their ends, was
denied, and thereupon those Lords delivered their Opinion, That since
Carstaires did not show any Warrant. nor was Clothed with any Public
Character, it was no opposition of your Majesty's Authority in Bailey, so to
rescue the said Kirkton: yet Bailey was for this Fined in 6000 marks, and kept
long a Prisoner.

Those Lords were upon that so represented to your Majesty, that by the Duke of
Lauderdale's procurement they were turned out of the Council, and all Command
of the Militia. And it can be made appear, that the Captain had at that time no
Warrant at all against that Kirkton, but procured it after the Violence
committed; and it was antedated on design, to serve a turn at that time. This
manner of proceedings has ever since put your Subjects under sad apprehensions.

There is one particular further offered to your Majesty's consideration,
concerning their way of using Prisoners.

There were 14 men taken at a Field-Conventicle, who (without being legally
convict of that or any other Crime) were secretly and in the night taken out of
Prison, upon a Warrant signed by the Earl of Linlithgoe, and the Lords Hatton
and Collington, and were delivered to Captain Maitland, who had been Page to
the Duke of Lauderdale, but was then a French Officer, and was making his
Leavies in Scotland, and were carried over to the Service of the French King in
the year 1676.

3. The Counc^l has upon many occasions proceeded to most unreasonable and
arbitrary Fines, either for slight Offenses, or for Offenses where the Fine is
regulated by Law, which they have never considered, when the persons were not
acceptable to them; so the Lord Cardross was fined in 11000 l. for his Ladies
keeping two Conventicles in his House, and Christning a Child by an Outed
Minister without his knowledge. The Provost formerly mentioned, and Baily, and
many more, were also fined, without any regard to Law.

4. The Council has at several times proceeded to the taking of Gentlemen's
dwelling-Houses from them, and putting Garrisons in them, which in time of
Peace is contrary to Law. In the year 1675, it was designed against twelve of
your Majesty's Subjects, and was in execution in the Houses of the Earl of
Callender, the Lord Cardross, the Lady Lumsden, etc. and was again attempted in
the year 1678. the Houses belonging to the Lairds of Chesnocke, Blaghan, and
Rawallane, were possessed by Soldiers, and declared Garrisons: Nor did it rest
there, but Orders were sent from the Council, requiring the Countries about
these Houses to furnish them for the Soldiers Uses, and to supply them with
Necessaries, much contrary to Law. It was against this that Sir Patrick Home
came to desire a Remedy, and common Justice being denied him, he used a legal
Protestation in the ordinary form of Law, and was thereupon kept many months a
Prisoner, and declared incapable of all public Trust.

5. There is another Particular, which because it is so odious is unwillingly
touched, yet it is necessary to inform your Majesty about it; for thereby it
will appear, that the Duke of Lauderdale and his Brother, have in a most solemn
manner broken the public Faith that was given in your Majesty's Name.

One Mitchell being put in Prison, upon great suspicion of his having attempted
to murder the late Archbishop of St. Andrews, and there being no Evidence
against him, Warrant was given by the Duke of Lauderdale, (then your Majesty's
Commissioner and Counselor) to promise him his Life, if he would confess:
Whereupon he did confess; and yet some years after, that Person (who indeed
deserved many deaths, if there had been any other Evidence against him) was
upon that Confession convicted of the Crime, and the Duke of Lauderdale and his
Brother being put to it by him, did swear, that they neither gave nor knew of
any assurance of Life given him: And when it was objected, that the promise was
upon Record in the Council-Books, the Duke of Lauderdale did in open Court
(where he was only present as a Witness, and so ought to have been silent)
threaten them, if they should proceed to the Examination of the Act of Council,
which (as he then said) might infer Perjury on them that had sworn, and so did
cut off the proof of that defense, which had been admitted by the Court as good
in Law, and sufficient to save the Prisoner, if proved. Thus was that man
hanged upon that Confession only, though the promise that drew it from him does
appear upon Record, and can be proved by good and clear Evidence: And from this
your Majesty may judge, what credit may be given to such men.

We do not at present enlarge upon other Particulars, though of great
importance, such as Monopolies, selling Places and Honors, turning men of
known Integrity out of their Employments, to which they had a good and just
Right during their Lives; the Profits of one of the most considerable of these
being sequestered for some time, and employed for the Duchess of Lauderdales
use, the treating about, and the receiving of great Bribes by the Duke and
Duchess of Lauderdale, and the Lord Hatton, and particularly from the Towns of
Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Linlithgoe, and many others, for procuring from your
Majesty Warrants for illegal Impositions within these Towns, to the manifest
and public perverting of Justice in Sessions, besides the most signal abuses
of the Mint and Copper-Coin, that are most grievous to all your Subjects. But
the number of these is so great, and they will require so many Witnesses to be
brought hither for proving them, that we fear it would too much trouble your
Majesty now to examine them all; but your Majesty shall have a full Account of
them afterward.

One thing is humbly offered to your Majesty, as the Root of these and many
other Oppressions, which is, that the method of governing that Kingdom for
several years has been, That the Lord Hatton and his Adherents frame any
Letter that they desire from your Majesty, to your Council, and sends it to the
Duke of Lauderdale, who returns it signed, and this is brought to the Council;
upon which, if a debate at any time arises, concerning the matter of the
Letter, as being against or without Law; and when it is proposed, if a
Representation of that should be made to your Majesty, then the Lord Hatton in
his insolent way calls to have it put to the Question, as if it were a Crime to
have any Warrant either debated or represented to your Majesty, which is
procured by the Duke of Lauderdale or himself, and this is ecchoed by his
Party, and by this means any further debating is stopped.

There are some other Particulars relating to these Heads, that are to be
offered to your Majesty in other Papers, which are not added here, lest your
Majesty should now be troubled with too long a Paper.


