Some Seasonable QUERIES, On the Third Head, viz. A General Naturalization.
1. Does not the Greatness and Power of a Prince consist in the number of his
Subjects, and not in the extent of his Territories, witness Spain at this day?
And can any thing contribute more to the Increasing that Number, than an Act of
Naturalization?

2. Does not the loss of so many thousand Men's Lives since the commencement of
this War, make it as necessary, to recruit the Nation as the Army? And to make
provision for the Increase of Posterity, and to invite in present Supplies,
which may in some proportion fill those Wa^^s that this fruitful Island has
still in it? It not being scarce half Peopled.

3. Is not the scarcity of People in any Country a real Poverty? A Nation
wherein there are eight Millions of People, being twice as Rich, as the same
scope of Land wherein there are but Four; for as Land cannot yield its utmost
Increase but through Men's Labor and Pains, nor can such Increase be improved
to the best Advantage but by the application of many Hands; and since there are
many Parts of England uncultivated that would maintain Thousands of Families in
way of Farming, and ten times as many in Subserviency, out of the Trade and
Manufacture that would necessarily arise from the Product of such Farms: Is it
not from hence evident? 1. That the Wealth and Trade of England would be
greatly increased, by the addition of so much more Traffic and Commerce, as
would arise from the Product of its now useless and unprofitable Part, and so
many more Hands and Purses would be thereby contributary on all emergent
occasions, to the Assistance and Support of the public Government. 2 dly, That
the Nation is deficient in the want of so much Wealth and Plenty, as might be
gained by the Increase and Assistance of so many thousand People.

4. Would not such an Act be much for the Advantage of the Nobility, Gentry,
and all Men of real Estates? Since it would necessarily Advance the Rate of
Land, by a greater consumption of the Native Product.

5. What reason can be assigned, why our very Artizans (unless under great
mistakes) should be against such an Act? Must they not allow, that the Increase
of Hands in Labor, improves and increases Manufactury, were it but by the
Expense of them that are added; since one Man that Works, may have five or six
that only Eats and Wears? And would not this Act bring Crowds of Inhabitants
from Abroad? And Crowds of People make Industry necessary for Sustentation; and
from Industry, abundance of Trade and Wealth does naturally flow; as may be
seen in the United Provinces, especially if compared with Ireland.

6. Do we not owe a great part of our Woollen Manufactury (the best branch of
our Trade) to Qu. Elizabeth's receiving in the Persecuted Protestants from
Flanders? Whose Posterity are now become Natives: And might not we likewise
enlarge our Merchandise, Navigation, Fishing, and all other useful Vocations,
if Encouragment were given to invite Protestants of all Nations to settle here,
with the same Security and Privileges as Natives? And have not the poor French
Refugees now among our selves, taught us to make those new Manufactures by
which so many Thousands get their Livelihood, and have thereby more than
Rewarded us, for our Christian Charity, and Hospitality toward them?

7. Are there not several Manufactures which we used to import from France and
elsewhere, in time of Peace, because we could neither have them Made so cheap,
nor so well in England; which, by Naturalizing French and Dutch Protestants, we
may have as cheap here, and better, than the Few that Make them in England, can
do? And if the Dutch Teach us their Way of Making, Linen, and the French
their's of Making Paper, or if they only make them themselves, Will not great
Sums which are continually carried beyond Sea for those Commodities, be spent
at Home? And if any of our own Artists should suffer thereby, Will not the good
of the Whole, be more than a sufficient Compensation for the loss of a few?

8. May not such a Loss however be provided against by the Wisdom of the
Parliament, by Incorporating our own with the Foreign Manufacturers, and making
them the Managers and Overseers of the same, if capable; or by such other
Methods, as that Great and August Assembly, shall think fit? And by this Means,
Will not the Money which used to be Exported, be kept here, and circulate among
our selves? And the Foreigners, who now live meanly, and in Garrets, be
encouraged and enabled to live at a better rate; pay House-Rent and Taxes, wear
better Apparel, and spend more liberally in Housekeeping? By which means, the
Fruits of their Labor will run through the Land, and the Nation become fuller
of People, who will help to spend the Commodities which England afford, and
which are supposed more, than can be consumed either at home or abroad, which
may convince any honest unprejudiced Person, free from the engagement of
Faction or Parties, of the great Convenience, if not the Necessity of a Bill
for a General Naturalization.

9. Would not this encourage not only the French Protestants, who are able to
purchase, but many rich Merchants in Holland and Germany, to come and plant
themselves here, where they may have all Necessaries in plenty, and the freedom
of their Religion under a Government which they love, and in a Country where
they may live free from Fear, either of the French King, or any other
Oppressor. And considering the horrible Devastations of the Palatinate, the
continual danger of the Protestants upon the Rhine and elsewhere, and the
little Ground which is to be purchased in Holland; which might otherwise be a
Sanctuary for them; How willingly would they upon any Encouragement, Flock
hither? And what I wonder, in a such a case, could be England's loss by a
general Naturalization? Would it not not rather be infinitely her Advantage; so
have their Estates spent here upon her own Product; and their assistance
otherwise upon any emergent Occasion? Would not the Wealth of the Nation, by
their Estates, and their Support of the Government by bearing part of the
Charge of it, be advanced, by bringing them into the Privileges and Immunities
of Englishmen, and which would in time make them so?

10. What can improve our Navigation, and consequently enlarge our Trade like
this? For that Seamen and Merchants rest where they find most Encouragement;
and wherever they come (except among such as oppose this Bill) they are sure to
be welcome; and when the Benefit they bring to the Country, they Trade in, is
observed, they will not want all the Inducements that can be to stay there. As
to the first, viz. Seamen.

11. Can the Naturalizing Foreigners admit of any Objection? Are we not forced
to make me of them at dear Rates, and they carry out our Money to spend it at
home? And as the scarcity of them, does oblige Merchants to advance their
Wages, so do they not thereby give advantage to our Neighbors, by cheap
Navigating their Ships, to carry Commodities to a Market cheaper than we can,
and consequently can afford to undersell us?

12. May not the want of them have a much worse Influence upon us, than the
lessening, or even the loss of our Trade, by laying us open to the Invasion of
the French, which we are no longer secure from, than we command at Sea? And if
they be alone able, to contend with Us and the Dutch united; What might they
not do, if assisted by other Allies? And therefore, is it not highly the
Interest of England to make such provision in her Naval Force, as if she were
left to her own defense, against the Power of more than the French at Sea? And
what one way more likely to compass this, than by Naturalizing Foreign Seamen?

13. Would not this in some measure ease ours from the Press, when Foreigners
are made as liable to it as they? And should we not be able to Man our Fleet
with more ease and speed, when we can, not only, impress our own Native Seamen,
but our Naturalized Foreigners too? As to the second, viz. Foreign Merchants.

14. Whatever they may be in relation to our Merchants, yet who can deny, but
they are, by their Trade and Expense, an advantage to all other Societies and
Persons in the Nation? And ought not a general Good to take place of a private?
Tho how their being Naturalized could injure our home Merchants themselves, is
not easy to imagine; for that they are allowed to live and Trade, and have all
the opportunities of improving their Estates without it: But this would bring
them under the Taxes and Offices of Charge in the Nation, which would help to
lighten our Burdens, and so far, be an advantage to our Merchants as well as
others.

14. If the opposition this Bill meets with, or the design to blast it, should
be chiefly levelled against the Dutch (as it is commonly said) How
unreasonable, how ungrateful must that Design be? They are the People, who,
under the Auspicious Conduct of the Illustrious House of Nassaw; so gallantly
struggled with, and as gloriously overcame the Power and Pride of the
Spaniards, who preceded the French in their Enmity to the Protestant Religion,
and common Liberties of Europe: Who under the same Conduct, and by their most
prudent Administration, have raised their Country to a Power and Greatness not
to be paralelled. A people upon whom Providence has had a peculiar care, not
only in preserving them against all the Designs of the French, and other
Enemies of their Religion and State; but in making them the Instruments of
doing great things in the World; especially in contributing so effectually to
the bringing about, or rather the effecting our stupendous Revolution, by
which they gratefully repaid us for the Assistance which they received from our
glorious Queen Elizabeth, and for which we owe to them, and our gracious
Sovereign, their Illustrious Stadtholder and General; the preservation, under
God, of all that is dear to us, as Englishmen and Protestants. And if those few
of them now among us, should desire to be Naturalized, it is surely what in
Gratitude we could scarcely deny; that of those who have hazarded their Lives
to save our Liberties, a small Number, at least, should partake of them with us.

15. Why may we not as well make an Act for a General Naturalization, as
Naturalize Foreigners by ten, twenty, or thirty at a time? And if no Petition
to this purpose was ever yet rejected or denied; Does it not look, as if the
declining to do it all at once, proceeded from something else, than a real
dislike to the Bill; or the dictates of a public Spirit?

16. As to what is said, or rather prophefied, of I know not what ill
Consequences or Effects of this Bill; How easy were it for the Parliament to
provide against them, and yet make an Act of Naturalization not only profitable
to our selves, but advantageous to Foreign Protestants, without planting their
Factories on us, to ruin our Trade, or permitting those who raise Estates in
this Kingdom to go and spend them elsewhere? And if any Inconveniences should
happen hereafter, that are not now within view, they can never do much harm,
since the Parliament meets now every Year, and will, after the War is over,
meet every three Years, and may either alter, or quite abrogate the Act, if it
should prove Inconvenient, or hurtful to the Nation.

17. Will not all that has been said on this Head, hold good, and every way
true as to Ireland, which at this time differs but little from a new
Plantation, and is now as a Blank in our hands, wherein His Majesty may Stamp
what he pleases: And if such Methods were thought on, as might make those that
would settle in that Kingdom, Freeholders of small Proportions of the Forfeited
Lands yet undisposed of, at easy Rents, it would be a great Inducement to
Foreigners to go and fill that Country, who would in time by Marrying into
English and Scotch Families, become British; And so those of the Interest of
England, would be Superior to those of the Irish, and Interest of Rome, and
thereby secure it from future Rebellion.

It have been told, that that Kingdom since its first Conquest, has never been
much Consulted by England in its Trade, but either left to its self, or treated
like an Enemy. The great use that has been made of it, was for needy Courtiers;
to dispose it into Grants, Employments and Offices, without any regard to its
Conveniences for Trade and Commerce. Tho it may perhaps boast of the greatest
Advantages that way, of any Country in the World: And that which continued it
under these bad Circumstances, in the Reign of Charles the II. was the
groundless Jealousies and Mistakes of England, fearing it grew too fast, and
incroach't upon their Trade; whereas it is demonstrable, that Ireland neither
interfers with, nor gains upon England, nor can any way hurt her, but where she
by her own Laws, does force it. I have been assured her chief Consumption is of
the Product and Manufactury of England, and would be to her a Mine of Treasure,
if rightly managed: And instead of being an Expense to the Crown, which
hitherto she has been, the King might even now, in her lowest Ebo, save yearly
above Seventy thousand Pounds, and the Kingdom be as well secured; and better
perhaps Governed than ever it has been yet; but this by the by.

18. What could be a greater mortification to our Grand Enemy at Versailes (who
by a thousand Barbarities has declared himself the courge and Plague of
Christendom especially the Protestant part thereof) than the passing of this
Act And to see the strenghth of England augmented by such a considerable
Accession of zealous Protestants, who by woeful Experience know the Principles
and Practices of the Papists so well, that there would be no danger from any,
natural respect to their Country, of espousing the Interest of its Monarch,
nor, upon any other score, the Interest of the late King, or of undermining, or
any way disturbing the Government of his present Majesty. Especially, when they
are no more Foreigners but Englishmen by Naturalization; and so will be obliged
to defend our Rights and Liberties, as their own: And especially against the
Efforts of the French to restore the late popish King; whom it will be always
the Interest of England to keep out, as long as the Protestant Religion is the
Interest of a Protestant Nation, and Liberty the Interest of a free people. I
shall conclude these Queries by a word or two to our selves.

Do we not pretend to, I know not, what Privileges as His Majesty's Natural
born Subjects; and very justly too? But if this be the only or best Claim we
have to them, Ought we to resent our Disappointments, or yet grudge others (tho
never so much Foreigners) that regard, that is due to their Merit and Service?

If we consult the Foreign Accounts, Do we not find on our Enemies side, what
Princes, even of the Blood, as well as the very Chief and Prime of the Nobility
and Gentry, do fight and fall in every Engagement? And had their King the
Courage to Head any of his Armies himself, would they not, all attend him as
one Man? Nor is this requisite only, as a Testimony of their Loyalty, or matter
of Complement^ but what is really necessary. Nothing can animate the Common
Soldier more, than to see the Flower of the Nobility and Gentry engage with
him in the same Hazards; and where they lead the way; the other, at least, if
Englishmen, will be sure to follow.

I am not over prone to put Men upon the hazard of their Lives, but this I may
venture to say, that our very Lives ought to be less dear to us, than the
Enjoyment of the Gospel, and the Liberties of our Country. And suppose the the
issue of this War should prove as dismal as some of the Fretting and Repining
Spirits among us seem to foretell; tho God be praised, there is no likelihood
of it, yet it were better, that the last day of our being a Free People should
overtake us doing our Duty, and struggling with our Chains, than helping to put
them on; And it were every way more Eligible, to die in the defense, than live
in the Reproach and Bondage of our Nation. But yet, this is not meant to extend
to any whose public Employs or the Affairs of State require their Presence at
home: Nor would I extend it to any Gentleman, who in his private Capacity, and
but to his own Family, might be more serviceable here than abroad; But yet,
this cannot obstruct its being a very odd sight, to see, every Year, the Court
and the Park, the Theater and the Tavern, as well as other places of Ease and
Softness crowded with young Gentlemen, the Sons and Relations of the Nobility
and Gentry, while the King is exposed to the Fatigue, the Infection, and the
Danger of the Camp: And all this, to secure their Religion, their Estates, and
their Liberties, from being lessened and incroach't on. If the
preposterousness, the undutifulness, and ingratitude of such a Course, does not
appear; It is because it is not duly Considered.

Honest Vriah would not allow himself the lawful Solaces of his House, 1 Samuel
11.11.
while his Lord Ioab, tho but his Fellow Subject was Encamped in the open
Field; especially when the Ark and Israel did abide in Tents too: But how many
among us, even such as might be spared here, and to whom the Camp might prove a
place of Improvement, choose to Caress and indulge them selves at home: while
not only the Ark, our Religion is in hazard; not only Ioab our fellow Subjects;
but even David himself, the King is Encamped in the open Field? And if our
Undutiful, Cowardly, Call them what you will, Omissions of this kind, put the
King upon a Necessity of employing and preferring more Foreigners, than
otherwise perhaps he would; may we not thank our selves?

But a word to the Wise, is enough.

FINIS.

