A VINDICATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Late Parliament, A.D. 1689.

A VINDICATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Late Parliament OF ENGLAND.

An. Dom. 1689.

Being the First in the Reign of Their present Majesty's King William and Queen
Mary.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's- Arms in the Poultrey, 1690.

A VINDICATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Late Parliament OF ENGLAND.
I. THE Proceedings of the late Parliament were so fair, so prudent, so
necessary, and so advantageous to the Nation, to the Protestant Interest in
general, and in particular to the Church of England, that all true Englishmen
must needs acknowledge they owe to the then Representatives of the Nation,
their Privileges, their Liberties, their Lives, their Religion, their present
and future security from Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power, had they done
nothing else but enacted the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and settling
the Succession of the Crown.

So that it is now, and perhaps but now, that we may call our selves the
Freeborn Subjects of England, as being fully secured, for ever, by this Act,
from the heavy and insupportable Yoke of Arbitrary Power, the necessary
Consequence of a Power of dispensing, or suspending of Laws, without consent of
Parliament.

II. Their settling the Crown upon the Head of a Protestant Prince, who is the
very Center, the chief Prop and Pillar of the Protestant Religion, secures all
Protestants not only at home, but likewise in all other parts of Europe;
insomuch that it is upon him only we ground all our Hopes of seeing, ever long,
Lewis XIV. called to a just account for all his Unjust, Arbitrary, and
Tyrannical Proceedings against his own Subjects, as likewise against his
injured and weaker Neighbors.

III. Their not acting in the least, after the example of their Neighbors,
against Prelacy, but rather favoring it by such Acts as fit only Episcopal Men
for public Employments, gives all reasonable satisfaction to the Church of
England, without any just offense, either given to the Dissenters, who, under
the present Government, enjoy, to their own Hearts desire, their long wished
for Liberty, without being liable to the lash of the Law, for serving God after
their own way: Notwithstanding all this, so hard, yea, so impossible a thing it
is to content all Parties; not a few vent their Malice in every Corner, yea,
and in Print too, against the King and Parliament, though all their Proceedings
hitherto tend so directly to the general good of the Nation, that we must
either want common Understanding not to see it, or prove most ungrateful to our
Representatives not to acknowledge such an evident truth as this is with our
most thankful returns. To proceed with some method in this designed Vindication
of the late Parliament, I shall, first, take a summary view of the late
condition of our Affairs; and, secondly, give a full answer to whatever is
maliciously suggested to the unthinking Multitude; yea, and in Printed
Pamphlets likewise, to the seducing of the simple, and to the great
encouragement of the professed Enemies and Disturbers of the present Government.

IV. If we consider in what condition we were in, the two last years of King
James's Reign, we may remember we were given up for lost by all our Friends in
Europe, and did think so to our selves, it being then impossible for us to
imagine from whence our relief should come. A Power of dispensing with, and
suspending of Laws, and the execution of Laws, was already so fully
established, that the very humble petitioning to be excused from concurring to
the said assumed Power, was Crime enough for the Commitment and Prosecution of
diverse worthy Prelates: The Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes
was a sort of Inquisition; or, at least, a certain Forerunner of the new way
of converting People, by the irresistible Eloquence of armed Dragoons: The
levying Money for, and to the use of the Crown, by pretense of Prerogative, for
other time, and in other manner, than the same was granted by the Parliament,
was nothing else but a preparatory contrivance, to try afterward a French
experiment upon the Gold and Silver of the Nation: The horrible and illegal
Punishments inflicted by corrupt Judges, excessive Fines and Bails, and several
Grants and Promises made of Fines and Forfeitures, before any Conviction or
Judgment against the Persons, upon whom the same were to be levied; and all the
other Injustices, Grievances, and Irregularities of those days, were but
previous dispositions to the new modelling of the Nation into a Frame, the more
easily to be wrought upon by the Romish Priests, in case their weak Arguments
could not prevail, as 'twas impossible they should have prevailed, in a Nation
so well provided and stocked with solid Learning, both against Error, and
Superstition.

V. If this was our condition within our selves, it was made much worse by the
dismal prospect of the threatening French Greatness: The French King's known and
close Engagements with the late King James, the sudden Growth of his Power,
both by Sea and by Land, seemed to threaten all his Neighbors with the utmost
Desolation, unless, by laying aside the use of their Reason, they acted all
like Fools, and turned Papists; which could not secure them neither from
Oppression and Slavery, since none are greater Slaves, nor so unmercifully
oppressed as the French Papists themselves: This is but a short and summary
view of the public Calamities and Miseries we lay under, till our Deliverer
came over to free us from them, by the best Methods our Representatives could
fall upon for our safety in times to come; which are certainly such as give
full satisfaction to all good Men, and Loyal Subjects, that are not still in
love with Popery and Slavery, both of Body and Soul, which always attends it:
So that the present posture of our Affairs is now such, that we have all reason
to hope, if we can but agree among our selves, this Kingdom may become again,
as 'twas of old, the terror of France. Europe never bid fairer for a level of
the French Monarch, he being now surrounded on all sides, by those he has made
his irreconcilable Enemies, by his daily breaches of Oaths, by his Oppressions
and Invasions, contrary to all Treaties made with him, either of Peace or Truce.

VI. We cannot then but highly commend the prudent measures of the last
Parliament, for supplying his Majesty with necessaries, toward a vigorous
prosecution of this present War the Nation so long wished for in vain, the
French Interest prevailing too much formerly at the Court of England, against
the Interest of the Protestant Religion, and of the English Nation. Such then
as complain of some present hardships, always unavoidable in time of War, and
would fain work the People into a belief of a happier condition under another
change of Affairs, seem not to understand their true Interest; for must we
expose our selves to a certain ruin, to the loss of our Lives and Liberties,
by not contributing liberally to the maintenance of a War, so necessary in this
present juncture of our Affairs? Our All lies now at the Stake, our Lives,
Properties, Liberties, and Religion: Should any Tax, or Impost, put us out of
Humor, and cause us to wish for a change, as if we could pretend to any
security, in case things were settled again upon the same Foundation they were
on before?

VII. Are we not sufficiently acquainted, from daily experience, with this
undoubted Popish Principle, That a Papist is obliged to break his Oath taken
not to extirpate Heresy, as soon as he is in a capacity to root out what he
thinks Heresy, under a no less pain than that of Eternal Damnation? King Lewis
has satisfied all the World, by what he has lately done, that this is no
Calumny; and King James cleared all our Doubts upon the matter, by what he
likewise really did, and endeavored to do.

VIII. But a late Seditious Pamphlet tells us a Tragical Story of the decay and
loss of Trade by this present War, That the Dutch run away with our Trade at
Sea, and the French with our Ships: This is but a mere groundless flourish,
that can only make impression upon some weak Minds, that neither understand
their own Interest, nor that of the Nation they are in; it is true, we have lost
several Ships, and that is unavoidable in the beginning of any War as well as
in this, till the Merchantmen bound homewards are informed of a War declared,
which must needs require some time; but of late we have lost none, or we have
taken the equivalent of our losses from the Enemy; and for the time to come,
his Majesty has taken such measures, that it shall not be hereafter in the
Power of the French to put a stop to our Trade, either into Holland, Spain, the
East Countries, or West and East Indies; and as for the Dutch, it is a
groundless supposition, though too often in the Mouths of such as are
disaffected to the Government, That they run away with our Trade, since the
contrary may be easily made out to an unprejudiced Mind; Do we not Trade still,
as well as the Dutch, both to the East and West Indies, to Sweedland, Denmark,
Hamburgh, and Poland? Do the French allow them free passage more than to us?
And if they send abroad greater Merchant Fleets, and perhaps under greater
Convoys than we do; by so doing they rather lend us a helping Hand, than wrong
us; because in the mean time they clear the Seas of French Privateers, which
makes of course our Voyages the safer, and great Convoys not so absolutely
necessary, as they would be at another time, when we were not in Union with the
Dutch: So that such reflections are either but idle and frothy Discourses, or
made upon a design to raise Sedition, and stir up the Nation against the
present Government: But grant that what this disaffected Pamphleteer says were
really true, as it is not, in the full measure he would have it, let us balance
our present decay of Trade on the one side, and on the other hand the
consequences of not prosecuting vigorously the present War against the French,
and we shall easily discover either the gross mistakes of such as discourse
after this rate, or their real designs to ruin their Country, by preferring a
small inconveniency of not so sull a Trade, to the very being of Liberty and
Religion, and perhaps of the Nation it self.

IX. For let us allow to this pretended Politician, the desired change of
Government he seems to aim at, this can never happen but in one of these three
ways, either by the returning of King James again, or by the invasion of King
Lewis, or by a Civil War at home; which last thing, if some do really intend,
they design nothing else but their own ruin, and that of their Country; and if
they would have King James to come again, must he come in by Conquest? If he
ever recovers England by Conquest, where are then our Properties, our
Liberties, our Religion, our Laws, and whatever Privileges we now glory in, and
that no other Subjects in the World can boast of? Would they have King James
come in again by agreement? Besides, the apparent impossibility of the thing,
upon several and obvious accounts, I would willingly be satisfied, as I was
saying before, how we can trust him after so many violations of his Word, and
since by the Principles of his Religion, he is obliged in Conscience not to
keep either Word given, or Oath taken, to protect and promote Heresy, if he is
once in Power to destroy it. If our Pamphleteer pretends to a Change of
Government, by a French Invasion, he must either be a professed French Papist,
or a very bad English Protestant, and quite of a different temper from all true
Englishmen, who have stood in opposition from all times to the French
Interest, not only upon the account of the Protestant Religion, but likewise
because of their Civil Rights, which both they must of necessity part with, if
the French ever got footing in England.

X. I confess, as things now stand, there is little or no danger at all of
their attempting the Conquest of their ancient Conquerors, the English, because
of our Union at present, against France with so many powerful Allies; but yet
if we take not hold of this opportunity by the Fore-look, I know not what may
happen in another Scene of Affairs, in case we were lest alone to deal with the
French, who by the connivance of the last two Reigns, are become so formidable
at Sea, as to be a match either for Us, or the Hollanders. Now can any Man of
reach blame the King for recommending so often to the late Parliament, the
absolute necessity of prosecuting vigorously the present War, in this present
juncture of our Affairs; or find fault with the Representatives of the Nation,
for supplying him with the necessary Sinews of War; especially, since he has
offered to give them an Account of the disposal of their Money for the very
uses they designed it for: Neither can we be jealous of his Majesty's Design in
calling in Foreigners, in order to the speedy reduction of Ireland; because
it is a matter of great Consequence, for the Humbling of France both by Sea and
by Land; together with our Allies, to put an end to our Domestic Broils, with
all possible expedition; and this cannot be better performed, than by joining
to our own Forces a Body of veterane and experienced Foreigners.

XI. But this looks, say some of our Malcontents, as if his Majesty
mistrusted his own Subjects, which if narrowly looked into, is a mere
groundless aspersion, since all his Majesty's Forces both by Sea and by Land,
an inconsiderable number of Foreigners excepted, are Natives, either of
England, Scotland, or Ireland: Does the French King mistrust his own Subjects,
because of his joining with them several Foreign Nations, as Switzers,
Italians, and both English, Scotch, and Irish, upon occasion; the true reason
of this common Practice is, that an Army consisting of Forces of different
Nations, is upon this account more formidable than it would be if it consisted
of mere Natives, that both those Foreigners, and the Natives, fighting through
emulation, leave no stone unturned to out-doe one another; the observing of
this Maxim made the Dutch a free People, to the pitch we see them in at this
day: The French likewise owe in part their present Greatness to the valor of
the English, Scotch, and Switzers, who fighting not so much out of any
particular kindness to them, as for their own reputation, were wont to
overthrow whatever stood in their way, to the great advantange of the French,
under whose pay they then were; undoubtedly this is his Majesty's design in
sending for Foreigners, that the Natives may act their parts the better by
Emulation and Example: So that though it be allowed to be true, as certainly it
is, that King William has a sufficient number of his own Subjects to reduce
Ireland, and those of an unquestionable Valor too; yet it is prudence in him
to call in Strangers, to give Life and a new Vigor to his Armies upon occasion.

XII. But in our case there is another reason not to be dissembled, why the
present Government thinks it necessary to make use of Foreigners for our
assistence, and it is this: That though the Nation be full of stout and valiant
Men, that might alone do the business, yet it is to be considered in this
unparalled juncture of our Affairs, that if we divide the three Kingdoms into
six parts, two I doubt, at least, would prove, either JACOBITES, or disaffected
to the present Government: Now what if the King raised an Army, consisting in
part of Jacobites, or of Persons disaffected to the present Government, since
it is hard to know the bottom of Men's Hearts, what if, I say, this happened,
might not such an accident as this, not altogether impossible, endanger the
whole Nation, and throw it into the greatest confusion imaginable, either by
setting up King James again, and the French Interest, or by converting this
ancient and moderate Monarchy into a Commonwealth, which would prove perhaps
no less the ruin of the Nation, than an Absolute, Arbitrary, and Tyrannical
Government? Is it not then more advisable now, and I am sure those that love
their Religion, and the present Interest, will be of my Opinion, to make use in
this juncture of Foreigners, together with the Natives, to keep a little in awe
the hidden Jacobites, and such as are disaffected to this Government, lest they
undertake to ruin the Nation, upon the first fair opportunity to execute their
treasonable and pernicious designs? This complaint of our Malcontents had
been more plausible in another juncture of time, than in such an one as this
is, which once successfully over, and a Peace concluded, we are secured by our
Laws from our own standing Forces, as well as from Foreigners. In the mean time
we ought to look to our selves, as all Wise Men ought to do, and secure our
selves against pressing and present dangers the best way we can, without
minding remoter accidents, and merely possible events, that are not yet so much
as in prospect; for upon mere Apprehensions, and groundless Fears, of what is
never like to happen, to put a veil before our Eyes, hindering us to see the
brink of the Precipice we now stand upon, is an unaccountable piece of Folly,
or rather Madness, that no Man having his Wits about him can be guilty of; yet
we must needs prove guilty of such a piece of Madness and Folly, if through a
groundless fear of what can never happen in England, as things are now ordered;
we should scruple to secure our selves by the help of Foreigners from the
Jacobites, and the Malcontents who might perhaps get the upper hand, if not
prevented in time by some good Method as this is now thought to be.

XIII. No farther encroachments upon our Rights and Privileges are to be feared
in time to come, since the bad success of all our late Kings, is an example to
all their Successors, wherein they may read their Destiny, if they understood
so little their own Interest, as to act arbitrarily, as some of their
Predecessors did, to the great disturbance indeed of their Subjects for a time,
but at last to the utter ruin of Themselves, and their Adherents: His present
Majesty is so fully persuaded of this Truth, viz. That the Sovereign's
Greatness, in England, depends chiefly and only upon the love of his Subjects;
that taking his Interest and the People's to be the same, as really it is, and
always ought to be, to shun the dangerous Factions of Court and Country, he
prudently complied with their just desires, to whatever they thought fit to be
done for the common good. I am then of Opinion, that England was never so happy
as it is now, [saying aside the consideration of the present War so absolutely
necessary,] because of the good understanding of the King and his Subjects,
though our Seditious Pamphleteer leaves no Stone unturned to divide them;
whoever he is, he must needs be a Man of a strangly disaffected Spirit, since
he blames the late Parliament for allowing his Majesty so much Power as makes
him a true King, and not the hate representation and shadow of One, an be would
really be, if according to the project suggested by this Man, he should not be
allowed so much as the liberty of choosing his own Counselors, nor of
Proroguing Perliaments either, upon occasion, etc.

XIV. The suspending and stopping, or stabbing, as he calls it, of the Habeas
Corpus Act, puts him in a great fit against the late Parliament, as having by
this suspension wronged the liberty of the Subjects; yet if before we give our
last judgment upon the matter, we consider as we should do all things
impartially, not suffering our selves to be biased by a wrong apprehension of
things, we shall easily discover, that the suspending of that Act, at that
time, was the only way to secure our Properties and Liberties, by preventing a
Civil and Domestic War, which in all likely hood had ensued, had it not been
prevented in time, by impowering the King to secure such as, because of their
Quality, or their former Engagements with the Papists, and with the then Male
contents, were likeliest to prove Ringleaders to new disturbances, in a time
when things were not as yet settled upon so sure a Foundation as they now are.

XV. But nothing more insufferable in this Seditious Pamphleteer, than his
affected jealousy of his Majesty's being a sincere Protestant, as if the
Nation should be the more afraid of him upon this Account, because for sooth
the Parliament is likelier to give him more Power, than if he were a Papist, or
of a contrary Religion to that of the Nation: This is such an unaccountable
Reflection, that I cannot but wonder to hear it from the Mouth of any Man, that
either pretends to common sense, or reason; for, First, At this rate of
arguing, it would be better for us to have a sting we hated, and feared, than
one of the same Religion we loved, and were sure of; which is such an absord
inference, that node but a Madman can propose it as reasonable. Secondly, Grant
what he says to be true, as it is not, our Religion however is secure, and
perhaps the securer, the greater Power we trust him with. But, Thirdly, As our
late Representatives gave so much Power to our Glorious Deliverer, as made him
a King, and a powerful one too; so on the other hand, they have had so much
regard to the safety of the People, as to secure their Privileges and Civil
Rights from any future encroachments of the Prerogative, as may easily be made
out by the late Act, declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and
settling the Succession or the Crown.

XVI. The Popish Subjects are generally so oppressed by their absolute
Sovereigns, that through an excessive flattery, and fear of blows, they seem to
Worship their Kings as Gods, allowing them an illimited Power, which no Man of
Sense can admit of in a Being of a limited Nature, or at least allowing them to
be the Fathers, and absolute Masters of their People, though the Kings
generally came out of the Peoples Loins, as being at first made by them, and
not the People out of theirs; and though Subjects ought not to lord it over
their Sovereigns, as Masters, yet they ought not to be their Slaves neither,
but are to enjoy under their Government such Privileges and Liberties, as may
settle them in an unalterable State of Happiness, that the Princes themselves
may not destroy at pleasure; for as nothing is more rational than that we
should submit in all things to the absolute Power of God over us, so nothing is
more unreasonable than a blind obedience to earthly Princes, as if they were as
infallible as God himself; whereas their very Kingship proves sometimes an
occasion to make them the more liable both to Error, as being often
misinformed of things, and to Sin likewise, if they are not truly Religious,
as King William undoubtedly is, because of their uncontrolled Power of doing
what they please.

XVII. For these and other reasons of that kind, though William the Third, whom
God long preserve, be the mildest and moderatest Prince that ever sat upon the
English Throne, yet our Representatives, to secure us from the encroachments of
this, and all succeeding Ages, have thought fit to declare and establish the
Rights of the People, so fully, and upon such a sure Foundation, that England
now is the securest, and the happiest Nation in the World, if the Natives can
be but sensible of their own Happiness. Foelices nimium bona si sua norint
Agricolas!

XVIII. Four things especially declared in this Act, secure us from Oppression,
Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power. First, The rejecting of either a dispensing, or
suspending Power. Secondly, All grants of Money for, or to the use of the Crown
reserved to the Parliament for the time in being. Thirdly, The disbanding of
standing Armies in time of Peace, unless the Parliament give consent to the
keeping them on foot. Fourthly, The settling of the Succession of the Crown. I
need mention nothing else contained in this Act, to show that we are the only
Subjects in the World, that can boast of Freedom and Liberty, in case our
Princes cannot dispense with our Laws, as they cannot without our leave, since
they are not to give us, for the only reason of their Kingly Actions, Tell est
nostre bon plaisir, Their Good Will and Pleasure, as the French King does; for
however the French Modes have taken with us of late, we could never yet fall in
love with so absolute a Mode as this. As our Kings must act by Law, and not
absolutely, though real Kings, they do nothing of moment but by and with the
advice of their Parliaments: Our Happiness then consists in this, that our
Princes are tied up to the Law, as well as we, and upon an especial account
obliged to keep it up in its full force; because if they destroyed the Law,
they destroy at the same time themselves, by overthrowing the very Foundation
of their Kingly Grandeur, and Regal Power: So that our Government not being
Arbitrary, but Legal, not Absolute, but Political, our Princes can never become
Arbitrary, Absolute, or Tyrants, without forfeiting at the same time their
Royal Character, by the breach of the essential Conditions of their Regal
Power, which are to act according to the ancient Customs, and standing Laws of
the Nation. If we are happy upon this account, that our Kings can neither
suspend, nor destroy our Laws, we are no less to be envyed that our Purses are
secured from the encroachments of an aspiring Covetousness, by that part of
this Act, which tells us, that levying Money for, or to the use of the Crown by
prerence of Prerogative, without grant of Parliament, for longer time, or in
other manner, than the same is, or shall be granted, is illegal.

XIX. We may easily think our Security greater than that of any other Nation in
Europe, if we reflect but a moment upon this important Article, that we are
never obliged to open our Purses, but by the order and consent of our
Representatives, whom we have trusted with the care of our Interest, which
being equally theirs at the same time, we have no reason to fear that they ever
lay any Taxes upon us, but when it is absolutely necessary for the preservation
of our Lives, Liberties, and Religion, as all seeing Men confess it to be, in
the present juncture of our Affairs, to prevent the return of Popery, and
Arbitrary Power. This Privilege has made our Government to be envyed by all the
Neighbor Nations, and the happiest that can be imagined; for there being no
surer way for a Prince to become Absolute, Arbitrary, and a Tyrant, than to
impoverish his Subjects, to that degree of Want and Misery, as may force them
for subsistence to comply with all his desires, whether just, or unjust, he is
disabled by this Act from doing them any mischief that way, I mean by squeezing
the Blood out of their Veins, that is the Money out of their Pockets, for any
design he might have of ruling over them as mere Slaves: To the want of
Privilege, we may chiefly ascribe the Slavery the French Nation groans under,
their Prince disposing absolutely of their Estates at pleasure, and laying such
heavy Taxes upon his Subjects, as leave them not Money enough to buy Leather
Shoes, instead of which they are forced to make use of Wooden ones; so that the
French are not so much in the wrong, as one would think, when in their
flattering Panegyricks they style him sometimes their God, since they in a
manner are his Creatures, whom he creates, or destroys, by the least Word of
his Mouth; for so absolute his Power is, that his Will is the only Law they can
depend upon; insomuch that when he publishes his Orders for gathering of
Money, if his Subjects cannot supply him otherways, they must sell their Goods,
and whatever they have, to give him what he demands; yea, I have known in
France poor People sell their Beds, and lie upon Straw, sell their Pots,
Kettles, and all their necessary Household Goods, to content the unmerciful
Collectors of the King's Taxes. By this little hint we may easily see how much
happier we are, as being laden with noburthens but what we are able to bear,
and enjoying securely our Estates, and whatever we can call our own, under the
protection of our Laws. Should we then leave any Stone unturned to keep our
selves as we are, by opposing to our utmost such a cruel Conqueror, as the
French King would undoubtedly prove, if he ever to our great misfortune subdued
us?

XX. But let us speak one Word to the third thing I mentioned before, that by
this Act we are to have no standing Army in time of Peace, the advantage
whereof we may easily conceive, if we look a little aside toward our
Neighbors the French; they suffer patiently in time of War the heaviest Taxes,
and would not think themselves so much to be pityed, as now they are, if a
Peace concluded with the Enemy bettered their condition; for they are then in a
worse conditon, in a manner, than they were before, because the standing Armies
empower their Prince to do what he pleases in time of Peace; it is then that he
looks about him, to consider who has got together any considerable Treasures,
that he may ease them of them, though lawfully gained, and by good services
done to the Crown; so that it is no wonder if the French Subjects choose at any
time War, rather than Peace, because in time of Peace, their King's Armies are
wholly employed against them, whereas in the time of a settled War, they are
partly taken up in opposing a Foreign Enemy. Let the impartial Reader judge
from the Premises of the Happiness of the English Subjects, compared with the
miserable Condition of the French.

XXI. The late Parliament has done another thing, without which,
nothwithstanding all our other advantages contained in this Act, our Happiness
had not been lasting, as it is now like to be for ever, and it is the settling
of the Succession of the Crown upon Protestants, and none but Protestants: The
Words of the Act are so remarkable, that I think it fit to insert them here,
before I give you my Reflections upon them.

Whereas it has been found by sad experience, that it is inconsistent with the
safety of this Protestant Kingdom, to be governed by a Popish Prince, or by any
King, or Queen, Marrying a Papist, the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, do further pray that it may be enacted That all, and every Person, and
Persons, that is, or shall be reconciled to, or hold Communion with the Sea, or
Church of Rome; or shall profess the Popish Religion, or shall Marry a Papist,
shall-be excluded, and be for ever incapable to Inherit, Possess, or Enjoy the
Crown and Government of this Realm, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, or any part of the same, or to have, use, or exercise any Regal
Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction within the same; and in all, or every such
case, or cases, the People of these Realms shall be, and are hereby absolved of
their Allegiance, and the said Crown, and Government, shall from time to time
descend to, and be enjoyed by such Person, or Persons, being Protestants, as
should have inherited, and enjoyed the same, in case the same Person, or
Persons, so reconciled, holding Communion, or Professing, or Marrying as
aforesaid, were naturally dead.

XXII. Nothing more certain than what is here asserted, that it is inconsistent
with the safety of this Protestant Kingdom to be governed by a Popish Prince,
or by any King, or Queen, Marrying a Papist: If we look back to the public
Transactions in the days of King Charles the First, we shall soon be convinced
of this undeniable Truth, since we may derive all our Domestic and Civil
Disturbances from his Marrying a Popish French Princess, who at last became so
troublesome to him, that he was forced to send home, to France again, all her
Attendants, in hopes to bring her to a better temper, by removing from her such
Popish Emissaries, as were thought to put her upon some dangerous designs,
which made the Nation jealous of her secret Intrigues with France, yea, and
sometimes of the very King's Religion, as if he had been perverted by the
Queen, or her Priests, or had shown himself somewhat too much inclined to the
Popish way of Worship; but whether things were just as the People fansied them,
or not, it is certain this unlucky Match was the occasion of our Civil Wars,
and of so much bloodshed in thee three Nations: Such another suspicion as this,
was the secret spring of all our late Domestic Troubles, during the Reign of
King Charles the Second, for though he professed outwardly the Protestant
Religion, yet the People, upon what grounds I know not well, could not be
sometimes satisfied, but that he was either a Papist, or popishly inclined; and
upon this very account the Nation was always apprehensive of French Pensioners,
of Popish Plots, of Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power: Now such apprehensions and
fears could not but be the seed of Divisions among us, of Heart-burnings, and
either of grounded, or groundless Jealousies, to the endangering the Peace and
Safety of the whole Kindgom: So true it is, that it is inconsistent with the
safety of this Kingdom to be governed by a Prince thought to be popishly
affected, but sure far more to be governed by a sincere, zealous, and professed
Papist, as we all know King James gloryed to be; how near we were the brink of
our ruin during his Reign, and how unavoidable our entire ruin was, had he
reigned longer over us, is so evident to all seeing Men, that I need not
enlarge upon the matter here. I shall only add in this place, in order to make
out the Truth of what is asserted by the late Parliament, that it is
inconsistent with the safety of this Protestant Kingdom to be governed by a
Papist, that when our Prince is a real Papist, he is obliged by the Principles
of his Religion, to do his utmost endeavors to submit his Subjects to the
Pope's jurisdiction.

XXIII. First, Because he must then of course look upon his Subjects as real
Heretics, and Schismatics, whom if he do not root out by all possible means,
he is liable to be deposed by the Pope, according to the famous and known
decision of the third Council of Lateran; How then can a Protestant Nation put
any trust in such a Prince, whose whole business is, and ought to be, to
destroy their Religion, and force them to return to the old Romish
Superstitions again? And if Subjects cannot trust their Sovereign, it is but
rational to think they will take all imaginable measures to prevent their own
ruin, and that of their Religion, always dearer to them, if they have any
Piety at all, than their very lives; but these very measures, how just soever,
must needs breed stirs in a Nation, to the general disturbance of the Natives,
since the Politic Body, no more than the Natural, can be a moment in a quiet
temper, without a free and friendly intercourse and communication between the
Head and the Members. Secondly, If a Popish Prince is obliged in Conscience, as
I elsewhere intimated he is, neither to stand to his Promise, nor Word given,
to protect Heretics, and Heresy, how can he sincerely promise to maintain and
defend our Church; or rather how can we be so silly as to believe he will
maintain it, since it is not in his Power to do it, in case he finds himself in
a posture to undertake its ruin? But, Thirdly, to be somewhat more particular,
the safety of this Nation was inconsistent with the Government of the late King
James, upon a particular account that I shall here mention.

XXIV. Of all the different Persecutions of the Church of God, none can be
compared to the late Persecution of France, both for its Cruelty, and Novelty.
The Roman Emperors, I confess, exercised all imaginable Barbarities upon the
Bodies of the Primitive Christians, but never attempted, or pretended any right
over their Souls, and Consciences; they banished them, tortured them, invented
all sorts of Death to destroy them; but the art of Dragooning Men into
Religion, was reserved to be the contrivance of Lewis the Fourteenth, though he
was engaged by the most solemn Edicts of Nants and Nime, and by his Coronation
Oath, to protect and defend the French Protestants, with all their Rights and
Privileges: Had he declared he would suffer no longer the Hugonots in his
Kingdom, and ordered them upon that account to depart out of it, if they could
not change their Religion, we had not complained so much of his severity, how
Antichristian soever, but not to suffer his Subjects to leave him, nor to live
with him, without turning to his Principle, and that not by Argument, but by
all the Wounds the Dragooning Sword could inflict, that of Death only, which
in this case was the least, excepted, is such an example of Cruelty, as is not
to be paralleled by the greatest Fury of the Roman Persecutions; and which
without doubt contributed not a little to our late happy Revolution, by
determing the English through an absolute necessity to do what they did for
their own safety; for had they not reason to look to themselves, considering
the proceedings of the French King, contrary to all his Oaths and Promises, to
maintain, defend, and protect the Hugonots; they could not but know that the
late King James was more devoted to the interest of the Church of Rome, than
Lewis the Fourteenth himself; so that they could not in prudence but take the
measures they have so successfully taken, for their own preservation, and that
of the Protestant Interest in general. In one Word, nothing could be more
terrible to the English, who are so much in love with Liberty and Property,
than to see themselves threatened to be Dragoon'd out of both, by the help of
such a powerful Allie as Lewis the Fourteenth: The late Parliament then
considering the great progress King James had made, in a very short time,
toward the bringing in of the French Method of converting People to Popery,
and what impressions such a Precedent as that of France might make upon a
Prince, that needed no spur to the promoting of his own Religion, thought it
fit, and absolutely necessary, for the safety of the Protestant Religion, and
the Peace of this Kingdom, to exclude for ever from the Imperial Throne of
England all Popish Princes, whereby not England only is secured from such
Troubles, as always ensue upon any jealousy between the King and the People
from different Principles of Religion, but likewise all the Protestant Princes
abroad, are encouraged to stand their ground against Popish Invaders, since
they may be sure of seasonable succors upon occasion, from the Protestant
Princes of this powerful Monarchy.

Though what has been hitherto said, does sufficiently justify all the
proceedings of the King, and late Parliament, to the satisfaction of all such
as are but impartial Men, and not disaffected to the present Government; yet
because some Men seem discontented at two things not done by the late
Parliament, and which they think ought not to have been omitted, as being
undoubtedly of no small consequence for the public Concerns, and Peace of the
Nation; it may not be amiss in this place, to clear all their scruples upon
these two Heads, viz Why the late Parliament neither settled the Militia of the
Kingdom, nor passed the Act of Indemnity, though earnestly pressed to it by
the King, in order to the quieting of Peoples Minds. As to what relates to the
settling the Militia of the Kingdom, it is to be considered, that how necessary
soever it may seem to be, it was neither perhaps possible as then things stood,
nor expedient to settle it, by reason of the uncertain, and unknown disposition
of most Men's Minds at first, in all great and sudden Revolutions, but more
especially in such an extraordinary and unprecedented one as ours was; for
since our greatest strength consists in our Militia, can any Man of Sense
think, or say, 'twas either fit, or secure, in the then posture of our Affairs,
to deliver up the very Bulwark of the Nation, into the Hands of such high
Officers, as the Lieutenants of the Militia are in England, till it was better
known if those who were fit for such Places, were really Men of such a temper,
as the present Government might trust to, and rely upon: For extraordinary
Revolutions of State being much of the Nature of great Waters, tossed to and
fro by boisterous Winds, do always require some time before they are settled
again, in such a calm as may encourage both private Men to follow their former
measures, and likewise those who sit at the Helm to undertake, and prosecute
the fittest Methods for securing themselves, and the People under their
Government, from new Dangers and Storms, always to be feared after a sudden and
unexpected Calm, as ours was; we were under such a dismal Cloud of imminent and
threatening dangers, a little before the Heavens cleared up from the Dutch
coast, that we do wonder at this very Day, to see our selves escaped such an
unavoidable Shipwreck, as we thought our selves then exposed to; but it is not
enough that we are got on Shore, and a terra firma to stand upon, unless by
looking nearer into the matter, we consider seriously with our selves, how to
maintain our ground, and settle what we have done upon a sure foundation; for
as our late happy Revolution was a real one, how odd soever, and unlooked for,
so considering how easily Men change their Resolutions, and because it might be
immediately. succeeded by an unhappy one after the like manner, it was a piece
of great prudence in our late Representatives, not to be over hasty in settling
the Militia of the Nation, till both they and the King were thoroughly
acquainted with those who were to be trusted with Commissions of such an high
concern; but it being impossible they should understand their real temper,
while all things were as yet on float, no wonder if they deferred the settling
of the Militia, till the Hearts of Men were known to be first settled, which
Time only could inform them of. As to the Act of Indemnity, it is clear there
was little or no inconveniency to defer it for a while; for since it relates
mostly to such as have been guilty of Irregularities, and Illegal Proceedings
in the late Reign, where is the harm if the Government keep them somewhat in
awe, by deferring their Pardons to more fettled times, lest they might prove
Ringleaders to new Changes, if they were not checked by the fear of the
punishment their past crimes deserve? For it is a groundless reflection to say,
that the not passing of the Act of Indemnity encourages them to do their
utmost endeavors toward the bringing in of King James again, since it is
clear to all Men acquainted with the present posture of his Majesty's Affairs,
both at home and abroad, that they must needs despair of ever being secure, if
they hope for no security till King James is settled upon his Abdicated Throne
again: And may not I be allowed to say, that to judge of things to come, by the
present temper of the Nation, they are in no danger at all, or at least not so
great as some would have them apprehend it to be, because of the great
moderation the Government has hitherto shown, and will undoubtedly show
hereafter, to all such as are willing to comply with the present, that is the
Protestant Interest, in opposition to Popery, and the French King's Designs
against our Properties, and Liberties, if by the help of the Irish Papists, and
other Malcontents, he were enabled to conquer us. But to mention here another
pressing particular relating to this Subject, since it is well known, that at
the sitting down of the late Parliament, the King, by the advice, yea, and
earnest request too of our late Representatives, entered into a necessary War
against France on the one hand, and against the Irish Papists in Ireland on the
other hand, I would fain know from any not designing Man, what was fittest to
be done in this case, was the time to be trifled away with the settling of the
Militia, and passing an Act of Indemnity, before any supplies had been granted
his Majesty, for maintaining this Kingdom, and his Subjects, against the
formidable French King's Fleets at Sea, and his Irish Forces at Land, commanded
by the late King James in Ireland? Sure all Men of Sense must needs confess,
that this Principal was first to be minded before any such Accessories, as
undoubtedly these were, in that juncture of our Affairs. Now it is methinks
evident, that the ordering the Sinews of great Warlike Preparations both by
Sea, and by Land then, as now so necessary, could not but take up a great deal
of time, especially when the Money is to be levied, in due proportion, upon all
the chief Subjects of the Nation; the necessary debates upon such occasions,
about the Sum it self to be raised, upon what, and the manner how it is to be
gathered, are things of such a Nature, as cannot be done on a sudden, whatever
Men's endeavors may be to bring them in a short time to a period. The late
Transactions of the last Parliament, besides the Nature of the thing it self,
are evident proofs of what I do here affirm, to all such as understand any
thing in Affairs of this kind, never done in England, otherwise than by
Meetings, Conferences, Committees, Debates, Votes, and such other like Methods
used in Parliament, upon all matters of a General, and National Concern. To
conclude, notwithstanding all that I have said, grant it was expedient, though
I have sufficiently proved it was not, to settle the Militia of the Kingdom,
and pass the Act of Indemnity, before any thing else; these so much talked of
omissions, are both inconsiderable in themselves, since we smart not yet for
them, and not at all dangerous in their Consequences, which if really hurtful,
may easily be prevented by the next Parliament.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's-Arms in the Poultrey.
THE History of the Treaty at Nimeguen; with Remarks on the Interest of Europe,
in relation to that Affair. Translated out of French.

A Vindication of the present great Revolution in England; in five Letters
passed betwixt James Welwood, M. D. and Mr. John March, Vicar of Newcastle upon
Tyne. Occasioned by a Sermon Preached by him on Jan. 30. 1688/9. before the
Mayor and Aldermen, for Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance. The second
Edition.

An Answer to the late King James's Declaration, dated at Dublin-Castle, the
8th. of May last, To all his pretended Subjects of the Kingdom of England: And
ordered by the Vote of the Honorable House of Commons, to be burnt by the
common Hangman.

A Seasonable Discourse, wherein is examined what is Lawful during the
Confusions and Revolutions of Government; especially in the Case of a King
deserting his Kingdoms: And how far a Man may lawfully conform to the Powers
and Commands of those who with various successes hold Kingdoms. Whether it be
Lawful, 1. In Paying Taxes. 2. In Personal Service. 3. In Taking Oaths. 4. In
giving himself up to a final Allegiance. As also whether the Nature of War be
inconsistent with Nature of the Christian Religion.

The History of the Plot Anatomized: Or, the late Sham-Fanatical-Plot briefly
and plainly laid open, wherein those Worthy Patriots who were charged therewith
are vindicated, from the Malicious and False Aspersions cast upon them, etc.

The Murmurers, A Poem: To which is added the Character of a Grumbletonian.

Joannis Georgii Graevii Oration de Auspicatissima Expeditione Britannica, cum
Potentissimus and Invictissimus Guilielmus Arausionensis Princeps, Angliae,
Galliae, and Hiberniae Rex inauguraretur, Die xj. Aprilis; Auctoritate
Praepotensium and Illustrium Ordinum Trajectinae Dioeceseos habita 1689.

Ad Augustissimum Magne Britannia, Frenciae, Hiberniaeque, Regem, Guilielmum
Vna cum Maria Aug. consecratum ^^/22 April. AE. Vulg. 1689. Adlocutio, Qua pro
Imperii Aeternitate and Salute Regnorum vota nuncupat Fridericus Spanhemius, F.
F.

Reasons why the Parliament of Scotland cannot comply with the late King
James's Proclamation, sent lately to that Kingdom, and prosecuted by the late
Viscount Dundee. Containing an Answer to every Paragraph of the said
Proclamation; and vindicating the said Parliament their present Proceedings
against Him.

Nosce Teipsum: Or, A Leading-step to the Knowledge of our Selves, as the
surest Foundation to true Religion in all Persuasions. In a brief Discourse of
Man's being made and undone, in order to his more happy Recovery. And also of
the Original and Nature of Man's Body and Soul; and of the Faculties, or
different Ways of the Soul's Operation in the Body. With a brief Discourse of
the Lord's Day, and of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By an unworthy (but
happy) Proselite of Religion and Morality. To which is added a Poem, treating
of Humane Reason, and the Nature, Original, and Immortality of the Soul;
written nigh one hundred years since, by Sir John Davies, Attorney General to
Q. Elizabeth, and now herewith reprinted.

The History of Self-Defence, in requital to the History of Passive Obedience.

The Dilucidator: Or, Reflections upon modern Transactions, by way of Letters,
from a Person at Amsterdam, to his Friend in London. Published once a Fortnight.

The Sighs of France in Slavery, First, Second, Third, and Fourth Memorials.

A Breviary of the History of the Parliament of England, expressed in three
Parts: 1. The Causes and Beginning of the Civil War of England. 2. A short
Mention of the Progress of that Civil War. 3. A compendious Relation of the
Original and Progress of the second Civil War. Written by Thomas May, Esquire.

A short view of the Methods made use of in Ireland, for the Subversion and
Destruction of the Protestant Religion and Interest in that Kingdom, from the
beginning of the Reign of the late King James to this Time: And of the
Suffering of the Protestants all along. By a Clergyman lately escaped from
thence.

A brief Exposition of the Church Catechism, with Proofs from Scripture. By
John Williams, D. D. Rector of St. Mildred's Poultrey, and St. Mary-Cole,
London.

The Character of the Protestants of Ireland, impartially set forth in a
Letter, in Answer to Seven Quenies; their Original, Humor, Interest, Losses,
Present Condition, Apprehensions, and Resolutions. With Remarks upon the great
Charge England is like to be at with those People, and the Dostruction of that
Kingdom by Famine, if not prevented.

The Intrigues of the French King at Constantinople, to Embroil Christendom:
Discovered in several Dispatches past betwixt Him and the late Grand Seignion,
Grand Vizcar, and Count Teckely. All of them found among that Count's Papers
seized in December last. None of them being hithered seen in English. With some
Reflections upon them.

A Vindication of the two Letters concerning Alterations in the Liturgy, in
answer to Vox Cleri, with an Appendix concerning the Remarks, etc.

The History of Gustavu. Adolphus, surnamed the Great, King of Sweden, with the
Life and Reign of his Successor, after Christina Carolus Gustavus, Count
Palatius. Sold by most Booksellers.

The Monthly Account of all considerable Occurrences, Civil, Ecclesiastical,
and Military, with all Natural and Philosophical Productions and Transactions,
etc.

Mercurius Reformatus: Or, The New Observator, is continued to be published
every Week.


