Some modest Reflections upon the Commitment of the Earl of Shaftsbury, arising
from the late Indictment against Mr. Stephen College.
IT IS long since we were assured by those to whom we owe entire Credit, that had
the Papists succeeded in their Design of Murdering the King, 1678. the
Dissenters, and such others as they proposed to register and inroll in that
number, were to have been charged with the Guilt of that Divellish and
Traitorous Assassination: But it pleased God, through a timely discovery of
their Hellish Conspiracy, not only happily to preserve his Majesty's Life, but
to deliver many thousand innocent Persons from the Capital dangers, into which
the Romish Party had contrived to have brought them, by a false and scandalous
Accusation. And therefore finding the Nation not only awakened to preserve it
self by all due and Loyal ways, but justly provoked to bring upon them the
punishments which they had deserved by that Hellish Plot against the Person of
the King, the established Government, our Religion, and the Lives of all true
Protestants; they have been endeavoring since, by all the Arts and Industry
they could, partly to Corrupt the Witnesses that had discovered their
Villainies, and deposed against them, and partly to oblige them, and such other
profligate Persons as they could hire and suborn, to swear a Sham-Plot, wherein
his Majesty's best and most Loyal Protestant Subjects should be reported to be
engaged. And though they have been detected in above twenty several Instances
of this kind, and thereupon dissappointed as to the ends which they proposed
unto themselves; yet having (...) other Game which they can play with any
probability of success, they h^ ^ued this Design with the more
indefatigableness, and having employed (...) their Policy to mould it into some
credible form, they have been at great (...) vast expense to bribe needy and
debauched Fellows to support and confirm it by horrid and unpresidented
Perjuries. For they suppose, that could they but get one Protestant to be found
Guilty upon such an Indictment as they have been providing and framing matter
for, they should then be able to involve a great many under the Suspicion of
the same Guilt. And consequently, should the King come to be Assassinated by
some Popish Hand, they would labor to render Protestants obnoxious to the
scandal of having perpetrated so abominable a Crime. However, by suggesting to
his Majesty, that His Protestant Subjects are embarked in a Conspiracy against
His Person; they do promise themselves to bring the King either to trust and
rely upon them for His safety, or to grant an Act of Universal Oblivion for the
quieting the minds of His People, and the peace of His Government. Or the least
that they do hope from this pretended Plot, is, That the same Persons being
produced as Witnesses in this Case, that had appeared to give Evidence
concerning the Popish Plot in England and Ireland, they shall come to be
dis-believed in reference to the one, through their not obtaining Credit in
relation to the other. But as I shall as present decline the Consideration of
those Reasons, why these very Witnesses ought to be believed in whatsoever they
have Sworn against the Papists; though no Faith or Credit are to be given unto
what they depose against Protestants, so I conceive the Papal Party may happen
to exclude themselves from having any share in an Act of Indemnity. by being
the Authors and Promoters of this Sham Conspiracy, whereby they would ruin so
many of the chief upholders of the Established Government, and the Reformed
Religion. Nor can there be a greater Evidence that the Popish Plot is as
effectually carried on as ever, than this late attempt to render His Majesty
jealous of His most Loyal Subjects, and to cause them to be distrustful of Him,
and thereby render Him and them naked of all Defense against the manifold
preparations they have made both at home and abroad, for the destroying of His
Person, and the Subversion of the Government.

It is beyond all contradiction out of whose Forge this Engine to endanger our
Peace, and destroy many Innocent Protestants came; seeing it appears by the
Testimony of good and substantial Witnesses, that the Priests in Flanders had
not only notice of, but divulged it to such as they conversed with abroad,
before there was any suspect or apprehension of it here. For there are several
now in Town who were not only told beyond Sea, about the 27th and 28th of June,
that my Lord of Shaftsbury and diverse others would be secured before the said
Persons could arrive in England; but the Priests who were the Authors of this
unto them, openly declared that they expected such success in their projections
and undertakings from it, as to be able to say Mass in our Churches at London
before Christmas next. Nor was it only in Flanders, where the Fathers and those
they had entrusted this secret unto were acquainted with it; but we understand
the same by some lately come through France, who also heard from the like
hands, that the Earl of Shaftsbury and many other Protestant Lords were to be
committed, before the most Inquisitive and Sagacious here, could entertain a
thought that there was any such thing intended.

But it is easier for men acted by rage and malice, to frame and contrive a
Design whereby to ruin others, than to make it coherent in the parts of it, or
give it that Face and Color which may render it probable. And as no man that
knows the Earl of Shaftsbury, will think that ever he could enter into such a
Conspiracy as he is charged with, much less can they believe that Persons of so
mean Fortunes and shallow understandings as hitherto are accused for it should
not only be acquainted with, but have the Principal promoting of it committed
unto them. For though Mr. Whitaker and Mr. College may be men very well
qualified for their respective Employments, of great zeal for the Protestant
Interest, and the legal Rights of the People, and of good reputation for their
Integrity, yet they are not Persons of those Abilities, Estates or Power in
their Country, as to be preferred before others (...) above them in
understanding, as well as in all other respects, to be cons^ ^d advised with
about the regulation or change of the Government.

But ^e apply our selves to consider the nature and quality of this Plot, as we
^et into it, and have it a little unveiled by the Indictment preferred against
Mr. Stephen College on Friday last, we shall go near to find this Protestant
Conspiracy, that some have made such a noise about, to be the most ridiculous
and Romantic Invention that ever men pretending to wit or sense suffered to be
imposed upon their belief. For by Colleges being introduced by one of the
Witnesses reviling the Duke of Monmouth, in terms as gross and opprobrious as
false, all that know the Man are sufficiently instructed what little truth
there is in all the rest whereof he is accused. For there is none in the world
that he has that known esteem for, and in whose service in consistency with
his Loyalty to his Prince, he would so soon sacrifice himself and all that he
has, as the Duke of Monmouth. And so far do all men judge him from using such
ignominious expressions as he is accused of concerning that great Personage,
that they verily think had any of the Witnesses used that Language of his Grace
in Colleges hearing, he would have taught him better manners, though with the
hazard of his life. But the Papists are so accustomed to asperse and slander
this Duke in the most ignominious Terms, that they cannot forbear the fathering
base and reproachful Calumnies of him upon such who would not forgive
themselves the Crime of having a low or diminishing thought concerning him. But
the Design of making this accused person speak thus vilifyingly of his Grace,
is too obvious not to be discerned, and so silly that every Apprentice Youth
laughs at it. The Popish Party finding that the Duke is sincerely and
unchangably fixed for the Protestant Religion; and that thereupon he has a
great and deserved room in the hearts of all true Englishmen; they would fain
endeavor to persuade him that the People do despise and scorn him, thinking
that if any thing could, this would make him less Zealous for the Protestant
Doctrine and Worship. But they will find themselves deceived; for as nothing
can abate his love to the Established Religion, so the extraordinary respect
which the People do Universally bear him upon this account is neither to be
lessened toward nor alienated from him. But when we advance a step further,
and find this pretended Plot to be no less than a National Conspiracy to
destroy a Prince whom they so unanimously restored to the Throne of his
Ancestors a few years ago, we shall find cause to disbelieve every word
concerning it; and to pity the folly and simplicity of those that have
endeavored to abuse his Majesty, and his Ministers with so ill contrived a
Sham. For according to the Evidence which Smith and others gave in Court, it is
no less than a Plot, wherein not only City and Country, but the very Parliament
are all embark't and engaged. But as the naming and interesting the Parliament
in a Conspiracy, is enough to satisfy any reasonable man that there is none at
all; so it enlightens us upon what Motive and Inducement all this is invented
and contrived. For the Papists, knowing the Villainies which they are Guilty of,
and being sensible of the Dangers they are liable unto from the Justice of a
Parliament whenever one meets and continues to sit; they have therefore no
other course to steer, but to render Parliaments suspected to his Majesty, that
he may call no more. Accordingly after they had hired a company of rascally
scriblers to desame Parliaments, especially the House of Commons; they now
assume the impudence openly to arraign them of a Treasonable Design of Deposing
the King and altering the Government. But the fellows whom they had suborned
to this purpose, though they had the Villainy to become instruments in so black an
undertaking, yet they had not the wit to conceal it till it was ripe to be
vented and improved. For besides that one had the boldness in a late Pamphlet
to advise the King to reign Arbitrarily, Smith that famous Witness is known to
have given out some time ago that he would spoil our Parliaments. But the
suffering Mercinary Persons to speak and write of Parliaments with that
Impunity they have done of late; is enough to detect and betray the whole
project and design to every rational man. And can any one think that if there
were such a Conspiracy wherein so many Persons of Quality, Power and Estates
were engaged; that his Majesty's Guards would be able to prevent their
executing whatsoever they intended? Or can any man imagine that it is for the
Kings safety and Interest, to have the generality of his People brought to
believe that he entertains such an opinion of them, as that they are United in
a Conspiracy against his Person and Government? Were not the King safe through
the room that he enjoys in the hearts of his People, and did not they apprehend
themselves protected by their own Innocence; what Smith said in the Face of so
great an Assembly as was at the Old Bailey on Friday last, and with so much
impudence, that it plainly appeared to be spoken upon Design, were enough to
blow up the Peace of the Nation, and to throw us into blood in four and twenty
hours.

But the place where this Plot of seizing the King was to have been Executed;
does further assure us, that all this is mere Fiction and Romance, and that
there was no such thing ever thought of. For as it was impossible that any
number of Men proportionable to such an undertaking could go to Oxford without
being seen and observed, so it is very well known, that the Town was much
emptier than could have been expected, considering that together with the whole
Court, the great Council of the Kingdom was there Assembled. And instead of the
Members being accompanied with a Train suitable to such a Design they denied
themselves the having those menial Servants, with which they are usually
attended else where. It Is true that some Gentlemen were honored with the
company of their Friends some part of the way thither; but it is as true that
the Persons who paid them that respect, returned quietly to their Habitations,
after they had discharged that piece of Civility, which they owed their
Representatives. And whereas it was Sworn, that they rode Armed and with led
Horses, and that this was in order to apprehend the King; I shall take the
liberty to say, that the Person who made such an Inference deserved a Reprimand
in the open Court Shall the Witness Smith ride out of Town accompanied with two
Servants martially accoutred with Fusees and Pistols, as he did on Sunday last?
And shall not Lords, Knights and the best Gentlemen in the Kingdom be allowed
to travel with a Sumpter Horse, and a man or two with Carbines, but there must
be a Conspiracy to destroy the Government? But though some men have both lost
their Discretion, and made Shipwreck of their honesty, in obtruding so false
and nonsensical a Story upon the Nation; yet are those whose Wit and
Understanding have not so far forsaken them, but that they can see through all
this, and whose Integrity will guide and oblige them to judge impartially. For
is it to be apprehended that they could entertain a purpose of seizing the King
at Oxford, who were so afraid of venturing themselves thither, and so
importunate with His Majesty, that the Parliament might have sat at Westminster.

Alas! instead of harboring any thoughts of attempting upon the King, or
others, they were apprehensive that the Papists had some design to be Executed
there against them.

Was it ever known, that when a Conspiracy was so universally laid, as this is
said to have been, and wherein so many were concerned, as are reported to have
been engaged in this, that Men would lose the only opportunity of Executing
what they had intended, knowing withal the punishments to which they were
liable should they be discovered, and how impossible it would be to conceal a
business of so high and dangerous Nature, with which so many were made
acquainted. And can there be any thing more incredible, than that there should
have been such a Plot against His Majesty at Oxford, and yet that there should
never appear the least Symptom or Umbrage of it, neither during the sitting of
Parliament, nor at, or after their Dissolution: Yea was not His Majesty so
surrounded with armed Forces, besides His having the whole Militia and Posse of
the Shire in Hands that he could trust, that the Noblemen, and Gentlemen who
are fancied to have been in this Conspiracy, bearing no proportion unto them,
the very thought of such a thing as is imposed upon them, would have argued
them Lunatic and Distracted. But what Villains were these Witnesses, if they
knew of such a Design, that they did not acquaint His Majesty with it, before
He exposed His Person to so eminent a hazard. Or how comes it if the King and
his Ministers knew it, that it has lain dormant so long since. For besides the
great danger to which they must be believed to have suffered His Person and the
Government to have been all this while exposed, if they were informed of such a
Plot so long ago; this one thing had been a more justifiable reason of the
speedy dismissing that Parliament, than all that are in the Declaration which
was published upon that occasion. It Is true, Mr. David Fitz-Gerrald spoke of
such a design the Night after the Parliament was Dissolved, with this further
Addition, That the City of London was in Arms. and that his Majesty would have
been Apprehended, had he not escaped in that haste which he did. But as the
falsity of one part of this scandalous Suggestion shows of what Metal and
Stamp all the rest is, so no Man had more reason to rejoice in the Parliaments
being Dissolved, than this Footman Metamorphosed of late into a Gentleman of
Quality and Estate. For had the House sat on that Monday to hear the Cause
which was depending before them against him, he had been made appear to be the
most Infamous Person alive, and more worthy of being sent to some place,
provided for recolving the worst of Men, than to be allowed to frequent the
Palaces of public Ministers, and the Houses of Administrators of Justice.

But if we enquire into the quality of the Witnesses, and consider not only the
probabilities, but the Demonstrative Evidences of their having been tampered
with, we shall be yet more clearly convinced, that there neither is, nor ever
was any such Plot as the Earl of Shaftsbury stands Committed for. And to Wave
the Consideration of the several Crimes with which all of them are Chargeable,
and for which some of them have been Indicted and Arraigned, I shall insist
upon some other Topics, which it may be more convenient at present to
Discourse of. It is therefore in the First place no small Inducement to think
that they have been subborned, that it can be proved upon all of them, and that
by many Persons and those of as good Reputation as any in and about the City;
that they have often declared, even since the Oxford Parliament, that they
never knew of any Presbyterian Plot, nor of any Conspiracy, wherein so much as
one Protestant was engaged. And Secondly, it contributes something to raise in
us the same Persuasion, that they delivered their Testimony, as if it had been
consigned to them to get by heart, and not as a Deposition relating to words,
which they had heard in occasional Discourse some time since, and which they
were to call over with that fear and modesty, which became Persons that were
liable to mistake and forget. Thirdly, The Garb which they are lately gotten
into, and the plenty of Money that their Pockets are filled with, increases
the belief that they have been managed by some one or other to say what they
do, and that they are well paid and rewarded for it.

For some of them that were lately in Debt beyond any probability of being ever
able to pay what they owed, have within these few days found Money both to
discharge their Creditors, and new vamp themselves. Fourthly, It creates a
shrewd suspicion how these Persons came to appear as Evidence for the proof of
a Protestant Plot; that diverse others, as will appear in due time by their own
Depositions, have been tempted to be serviceable in the same Design. Fifthly,
that all this is sham, and proceeds from Subornation is evident beyond all
control; in that same of the six Witnesses who were mustered up at the
Old Bailey on Friday last, after they had sworn such and such things in the Face
of the Court; acknowledged to the Grand Jury when the were Examined one by one,
that they were hired unto it, and that they had a sum of Money for doing of it.
Which as it vindicates the Integrity of the Jury in returning Ignoramus upon
the Bill; so it intimates unto us upon what Reasons some whom I forbear to
name, opposed their being Examined apart. For as all the persons who served in
that Jury are men of that known honesty and uprightness, that they would not
wilfully Perjure themselves to save a Kingdom; so most of them are not only
avowed Members of the Church of England; but two at this very time Church
Wardens, and a third of them an Officer in the Reformed Militia of the City.
But it being hoped that they will give the World an account of the Justice of
their own Verdict, I shall leave what may be further said in the Vindication of
it to themselves.

But what will it amount unto toward the proof of a Protestant Plot, wherein
my Lord of Shaftsbury and many other Great and worthy Persons are said to be
concerned; if some rash and unadvised words should be proved against College
and Whitaker. Shall other men, and those the best and wisest in the Nation,
under his Majesty, be immediately judged Traitors, because one or two warm and
inconsiderate persons have talked foolishly and extravagantly. We are fallen
into a strange World, if a Body of men must be made accountable for the
giddiness of some, and those such as they had little converse with. Nor are the
Phanaticks to be reproached for the unwary and Dangerous expressions of these
Persons, seeing they are not only Members of the Church of England, but
chargable with some failures, that the Dissenting Churches would not allow any
to continue in their Communion that should be found Guilty of them.

But I shall leave the further pursuit of this at the present, and only add
that the same day that the Earl of Shaftsbury was committed to the Tower, there
was a Warrant obtained of His Majesty to the Privy Seal, for the pardoning
three Oneals that are known Traitors. Which as it intimates how much His
Majesty is solicited by some ill men, so this ought to be recorded for his
Honor, that he commanded the stopping of their Pardon as soon as he understood
what they were.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in the Old Bailey, July 12, 1681.


