SOME SUCCINCT REMARKS ON THE SPEECH OF THE Late Lord RUSSEL, To the SHERIFFS:
Together with the PAPER delivered by him to them, at the Place of Execution, on
July 21. 1683.
HORA MORTIS, has been ever looked upon as HORA VERACITATIS: And though Men may
dare it out with Impudence, and attest their Innocence with all the
Asseverations imaginable, yet when this Terrible of Terribles draws near, when
this Hour that launches a Man into the Ocean of Eternity, from whence he must
never return; I say, when this approaches, it might be rationally supposed,
That no Man will then cheat his Soul of an Eternal Being, by horrid and
damnable Equivocations. Yet though this has been held as an undoubted Maxim,
such has been the practice of our Modern Traitors, (particularly our Noble
Lord) that we may certainly infer, That as the present Age transcends all that
has been hitherto in Treasons, Rebellions, Villainies, etc. and nothing of that
pristine Veracity and Ingenuity, is to be found in our Modern Times: So
likewise the present Traitors are resolved to excel all their Forerunners in
that which they call Valor, but we may safely term it Impudence at this final
hour; and think by their pretended Bravery, to create a Disbelief of those
hellish Crimes of which they are accused. But alas! they are mistaken, they do
but gull and cheat their Immortal Souls of that Felicity which they might have
capacitated themselves for, by a free and ingenuous Confession: For I dare
aver, That if all the Jesuits in Europe had laid their heads together to stuff
a Libel with Equivocations, Tricks, and Evasions, they would all have come
short of the SPEECH emitted into the World by our Protestant-Jesuite the Lord
Russel.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.

Swear, and Forswear, But the Great SECRET to reveal, Forbear.

I am sorry I am confined to such narrow Limits, that I might have dissected
and anatomized this Epitome of Hell, and showed at large what Tricks, etc. a
True-Protestant Lord could be guilty of at this very dreadful Hour, to save his
Party from the Appellation of Traitors, and some of his True Associates from
the Gallows, notwithstanding his Lordships Abhorrence of such Actions in the
whole course of his Life: However, I shall take notice of the most material
Passages which lie heavy on his Lordship, and which, no doubt, were patched up
for no other End, but to stifle this Horrid Plot, and to hinder its Authors and
Abettors from being brought to Exemplary Punishment.

But to descend to Particulars, his Lordship is pleased to begin thus:

[I have set down in this Paper all that I think fit to leave behind me.]

No doubt but his Lordship had a due regard to his Cause, and those that were
to continue it, and therefore thought it not fit to leave any thing behind him,
that might discover either of them, but to wrap it up in such ambiguous terms
as might not be understood; wherein his Lordship at once would make us believe,
that he would have us understand him, and yet at the same time would not,
otherwise (but that he is made up with Equivocations) why did not his Lordship
deal sincerely and plainly, and add, That it was all he knew: But, it seems, he
was resolved to wrong his Soul, rather than his Party, by discovering them.

His Lordship proceeds, and says:

[God knows how far I was always from Designs against the King's Person, or of
altering the Government.]

This is a pretty way of Appealing; for certainly God knows how far he was for
Designs against the King as from them, and so must his Lordships Conscience
too; but he was afraid his Conscience would be too plain, and therefore left
that Point as soon as he had begun it.

[To my knowledge, I never saw Captain Walcot in my life.]

That may be, and yet both deep in the Plot too, according to their Spheres,
his Lordship, possibly, being of a higher Club than the Captain was; for we are
told of several Cabals.

[I bless God that I was born of worthy good Parents, and had the advantages of
a Religious Education, which gave me checks, etc.]

The greater the Person, the greater the Crime; and he has no reason to brag of
his Religious Education, since he made such ill uses of it, which was no wonder
that it give him so many Checks, for acting such horrid Crimes that were
directly against it.

[I have lived, and now dye of the Reformed Religion, a true and sincere
Protestant, and in the Communion of the Church of England, though I could never
yet comply with, or rise up to all the heights of many People.]

His Lordship must certainly equivocate here, in his meaning of a Church, for
the Church of England (according to the common acceptance of it) never allowed
such Practices: And though he would fain signalize it with such a Member, yet
he must have a Reservation; for that disovvns all Equivocation, and allows
Salvation for none under his Lordships Circumstances, that deal not sincerely
in their last hour, and make a plain and full Confession of all he knows; which
his Lordship resolves against, as inconsistent with the advantage of his
Reformed Traitors.

[I think Bitterness and Persecution are bad at all times, much more now.]

No doubt but his Lordship would have them go on without Control, and not have
his Saints persecuted NOW, though it is evident to the World, that they are the
very Source and Fountain of Treasons, Rebellions, etc. but yet, forsooth, they
must not be persecuted.

[For the King, I do sincerely pray for Him, and wish well to Him, and to the
Nation, that they may be happy in one another, and that he may be indeed the
Defender of the Faith.]

Here his Lordship is pleased to lend the King a Box on the Ear on one side,
and endeavor to hold Him up on the other; I would fain know what he means by
indeed, he must certainly insinuate, that He is nothing at present but an
Hypocrite, and pretends one thing, and means another; but his Lordships
Defender of the Faith indeed, must certainly be one that would suffer his own
Throat to be cut, and say nothing: And that would see his Kingdom invaded, and
all his Loyal Subjects destroyed, to make way for such Blood-thirsty
Miscreants: But we now well know, that a Whig is that sort of Animal, that
admires nothing, and praises none, or at least but slightly, and that not
without some pity of his defects and wants; but he, forsooth, has all that
every Man has, and all that every Man wants too: So that what is the meaning of
this Religious and dying Speech, but a scandalous Libel on the King and
Government.

[I did believe, and do still, that Popery is breaking in upon the Nation; and
that those who advance it, will stop at nothing to carry on their Design: I am
heartily sorry that so many Protestants give their helping Hand to it.]

This is the old Bugbear, Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Government, have been
ever the pretensions of their Fears and Jealousies; Metuere falli, and meruere
falli: He deserves to be deceived, that too much fears it, has been ever a
politic Maxim; for certainly it is one of the greatest Follies in the World,
to make the World wiser than it is; and to suspect a Plot and Mine in every
Molehill; and it is a Hell above-ground, to be always dying, for fear of dying.
And I am of the Opinion of the learned Lord Bacon, that notwithstanding his
Lordships fear of Popery, if ever that Religion come in, (which God forbid) it
will be through the sides of Jack Presbyter: And that his Proselytes that so
much advance it now, will stick at no means to effect it, I am of his Lordships
opinion. As for his Lordships sorrow for so many Protestants being in it, it is
plain that there are none else but his Lordships Coventry-Blue-Protestants
concerned, and therefore it is feared that his sorrow was more for their being
found in it, than not in.

The next is one of the same stamp, for speaking of the Bill of Exclusion, he
says:

[As to the Limitations that were proposed, if they were sincerely offered,
etc.]

Here he as much questions the S^ncerity of the King in the management of His
Affars, as he did before of His being the Defender of the Faith indeed: So that
this good Lord, at the very instant of his going out of the World, the best
word that he can give the King, (and indeed it is no Wonder, since he has
endeavored to do much worse) is to Libel Him with the most scandalous
Reflection that was ever said by Malice it self.

Speaking of the Crime for which he was condemned, he says:

[That there was some discourse of the feasibleness of it, (i.e. seizing the
^^^rds) and that at the Lord Shafis^^^'s, there was some general discourse of
it, but he did abhor it; That the Duke of Monmouth told him he was glad he was
come to Town, for the Earl of Shaftsbury and some hot Men would undo us all,
for they will do some disorderly thing, if care be not taken; That he was at
Shepheard's, where many things were said with more Heat than Judgment, which he
did disapprove; but all this was but Misprision at most.]

Certainly his Lordship forgot what he said before, he then knew of no Plot or
Design, but here he hears it debated; he owns a discourse of the feasibleness
of it, yet knows nothing of the matter, this must be as great as ever any
Salamanca-Miracle proved. There was some disorderly thing to be committed, does
his Abhorrence intimate his Ignorance, no sure, but Guilt; for his Abhorrence
must presuppose his Knowledge of it.

The next is the greatest piece of Jesuitism that ever was hatched:

[Some infer (says he) that I was acquainted with these Heats and ill Designs,
but this is but Misprision.]

And a very natural Inference, but pray what is the meaning of your Heats and
ill Designs? his Lordship feared to be too ^p^ain, and yet something he must
say to baffle Conscience, O Tempora! O Mores!

Reader, If thou art not surfeited with unparalled Lies and Equivocations,
(though his Lordship would make us believe he ever abhorred them) I could
enumerate much more, but this may suffice, to show that a True Protestant Lord
can, upon occasion, venture the Eternal Loss of his Soul, to hinder the
Discovery of a beloved Plot so long in hatching, and the bringing to condign
punishment his true Friends the Associators.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom in Thames Street over against Baynards-Castle.
1683.


