SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON The Tickling Querie, (Viz.) Whether the admitting of a
Popish Successor, be the best way to preserve the Protestant Religion? WITH
OTHER PASSAGES TOUCHING The History of the Succession and other Pamphlets.

By a Gentleman in the Country to his Friend in London.

In illa tempora perventum est quibus nec vitia nec remedia pati possumus. Live.

LONDON: Printed for Joanna Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's,
MDCLXXXI.

Some Observations, etc.
SIR,
WE Return you our humble thanks for your constant communicating to us your
City-Pamphlets, for though generally there is neither much wit nor truth in
most of them, yet they give us some divertisement to observe how industrious
they are to sow the Tares of Disloyalty and Sedition in the heads and hearts of
the People: But, God be thanked, we do not find that it takes much effect, at
least, about us, for we knowing their Design, and having, many of us, seen the
Cheat acted once before, are not so easily prevailed upon to renounce our
Loyalty to the best of Kings, and our veneration and obedience to the best
Religion in the World, only to rescue a company of furious Zealots from those
punishments they know their ill actions have deserved, and which they think
cannot be safe but by attempting greater.

As for your Intelligences and Mercuries, that call themselves Protestant,
certainly they are the last Effort of the Pope and the Devil to make the Word
odious in the World, and certainly are as great a Scandal to the true intention
of the Word Protestant, as Popery is to Christianity. And though the Word it
self does not signify Religion (no more than the late Protestation of the
Lords at Oxford made them one jot the more Religious.) For the true and proper
distinction between us and the Papists is the Reformation, and at this day
those whom we call Protestants of France, style themselves Ceux de la Religion
reformee, and their Church, l'Eglise reformee. However time and use those great
Arbitrators of Words, have made the Word Protestant, familiar and significative
amongst us, and is not so large as, No Papist, (as some would have it) so as to
include Turks and Jews and what not: but has its sober signification, and with
us signifies, Those in the Communion of the Church of England Established by
Law at the times of the Reformation in the Days of King Edward the Sixth, and
Queen Elizabeth, and so continued down to this Day. But as for those
Sham-Protestants, those Scribling-Bermicham, and as they call themselves
Dissenting-Protestants, are no more Protestants in the true Notion of the Word,
than one that denies a thing can be said to affirm it, or one that dissents can
be said to assent. And as the Word took its Origin from those gallant
Protesting Princes of Germany against the Edict of Spire: so it were not much
matter if it were laid aside, when it is usurped by such Seditious and
Scandalous Persons, who shame the Word.

Your other Books of The History of the Succession, Character of a Popish
Successor, and such like, What do they but Rake in the Kennels of History, and
pick up all the black and unjustifiable Actions of several Ages to make good
their own Seditious Principles, and think themselves good men, if they can find
any upon Record as bad as themselves: It being as illogical from those many
Rapes that have been made upon the Legitimate Succession of the Crown, by those
several Bold Usurpers and Ambitious Pretenders to Royalty through the
Assistance of discontented Grandees and Clergymen, to prove this an Elective
Monarchy, as to prove the Lawfulness of Robbing upon Shooters or Gads-Hill,
because de Facto it has often there been put in Execution.

But it is an easy thing to persuade men that are resolved upon the Point; and
though we know they would stick at no villainy to compass their Ends were it
once in their power, yet they please themselves to see how many Gudgeons they
catch, with these specious Baits of Precedents and History, which neither they
themselves believe, nor hope they will prevail upon any thinking men, yet
knowing how willingly the Zealous Party are led by the Nose, they venture to
print any thing, rather than seem to starve their Cause, or let their Mad
Admirers cool into Soberness and Loyalty. How much more ingenuous and
beneficial to Mankind were it for these Men to have observed to the World how
Funest and Tragical both to Prince and People, most of those Usurpations have
been, though otherwise confirmed, as they call it, by Parliaments; What Seas of
Blood have been let out of the Veins of Noble and Simple, what Ruins and
Desolations have attended the Defense of their ill-obtained Regalities, where
as it is said in ill-gotten Goods, vix gaudet tertius haeres: so in these
Parliamentary Titles they never were of long continuance; but the Restless
Nation through an innate Loyalty and Secret Love and Acknowledgment of the
Sacred Right of Succession, was always rolling and never quiet, till the Crown
was Fixed upon the True and Legitimate Heir. And how little Knowledge in
Judicial Astrology would serve the turn to predict the same Effects from the
same Causes? And how easy to imagine that they may at last be Cudgelled into
that Loyalty and Obedience, which now they willingly Forfeit, and after a vast
Expense of Blood and Treasure be glad to return to that blessed Peace and
Protection we now enjoy, but do not value.

Ay, But the Protestant Religion will be destroyed under a Popish Successor?
And we are under more strong Obligations of Conscience to defend our Religion,
than we are to defend the Title of any Prince whatsoever: And it is a greater
Offense to God Almighty to introduce Idolatry than to destroy Monarchy: And
several other pretty Arguments to prepare the People to Rebel for Conscience
sake. To these and a great many more I shall not trouble my self nor you to
make any Remarks upon, as arising rather from mistaken Zeal, than from Solid
Reasoning: But I shall only touch upon their beloved, darling Querie, over
which they hug and tickle themselves, and make such an Oration, as if they had
gotten some signal Victory; Viz.

Whether the admitting of a Popish Successor, be the best way of preserving the
Protestant Religion?

Now if there can be any Rational Account given of this Paradox, or that any
one can make the Question it self consistent with Religion or Policy, erit mihi
magnus Apollo. But though I shall not undertake so seemingly difficult a
Province, as to Answer the Querie, as they term it, Categorically, yet you will
pardon me if I give you my slight thoughts of it.

And First I must dissect it into parts, As whether the Admission of a Popish
Successor be in our Choice or no? Or, Whether God Almighty has left it to the
Liberty of every People to Choose their Prince? And if so, Which of the People
is to do it? And if Religion has any influence upon his being admitted, Then
another Querie may be, Whether the admitting a Presbyterian Successor be the
best way of preserving the Protestant Religion? And so an Independent,
Anabaptist, or Quaking Successor. Then I am to Ask, What you mean by Protestant
Religion, whether that Established by Law, or some other, or all other but
that? For if we may judge by the Querents, we know there is nothing less in
their thoughts than being over solicitous to preserve that Religion, which they
brand with these ridiculous Terms of Torism, Tantivism, Masqueradism, and such
like ingenious Titles: For which Reasons the Querie might be, Whether Popery or
Presbytery is the readier way to destroy the Protestant Religion? And indeed
this is a Querie too hard for me to determine, I know the Papists have Will
enough, but the Presbyter has constantly had the better of them, as having
better advantage, being a seeming Friend and so less suspected; And indeed the
Papists despair of doing any great mischief but through their sides, and by
their assistance. And I do extremely wonder, that Men of Parts, as some of the
Faction certainly are, should be so gulled with malicious Zeal against the
Religion Established by Law, that they are content once more to be the Papists
Journey-Men and Tools, as they in their Prints confess they were, when they
would Divert the Odium of the Late Rebellion, and Murdering the Late King, of
Ever-blessed Memory, from themselves upon the Papists, who they acknowledge
insinuated themselves into their Councils, to their Armies, their Pulpits, and
what not, (I was going to say their very Beds.) So that whilst the innocent
Presbyter had no other Ends but advancing the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and
making the King a Glorious King, according to the Covenant, The Jesuitical
Independents snatched the King out of their hands (who was their King, by one
Title more than any other Party could pretend, as having bought him of the
Scots, and that at a great Rate, and some of them knew for what End too) and,
God knows much against their will, Cut off his Head; while on the other side,
the more ingenious Villains of the two, the Independents, own the Fact, but
tell them they could never have done it, had not they held him by the Hair.

Thus the King was once Murdered, and the Religion Destroyed by the Zeal of the
Presbyter, under the Conduct of the subtle Jesuit. And now we see, Since the
great Plot against the King and the Church of England has failed, having been
so happily and fully Discovered, by that neverto-be-forgotten Doctor Oats, and
the rest of the concurring Evidence, the sly Jesuit has betaken himself to his
old slights of Plowing with the zealous Dissenters, as the said Doctor Oats so
Prophetically Swore and Foretold in his first Discovery, assigning the very
places and stages on which they were to Act, as he said such and such going for
Scotland, and mingling themselves with the discontented party there, who no
doubt played their parts so well, as to stir up some Zealots to Murder the
Late Bishop of St. Andrews; others to the Late Rebellion there, which was so
happily Suppressed by the Courage and Conduct of his Grace the Duke of
Monmouth. But that which is most strange is, that it seems that the very Blood
which was there drawn from the Rebels, has by some energetick influence
infected some of those that drew it; who have ever since been suspected, at
least, very much to favor the Party and abett the Principles of those they
chastised. Mysterious Victory! where on one side their Bodies, on the other
their Minds were interchangeably led Captive. Nay more, That Victory of the
Dukes was so ill resented by that Party here that have a secret compassion for
all insuccessful Rebels, (and probably the Jesuits the Doctor mentioned and
these were all of a complexion) that some had like to have lost their Interest,
for pushing that Service farther than was intended they should have done, and
destroying so many of those daring and precious Souls they might hereafter have
occasion to make use of.

But to return to our Tickling Querie, and the little ones in the belly of it;
though indeed it is the most disingenuous thing in the World to make Queries
and lay some stress upon them, which they themselves know have no foundation in
reason or practice. For if it be as clear as the Sun that in such a Kingdom as
we are in, viz. an Hereditary Kingdom, where the Succession has been continued
down for so many Ages (saving some interruptions by Usurpers, which never
lasted long, and cost the Nation so dear as was before hinted) we are no more
concerned in the Qualifications of a Legitimate Successor, than we are in the
Frosty weather in May, or the no Rain in April: But if God in his Wisdom shall
think fit by sending us a Popish Successor (as they call him) for to revenge
and punish a sinful and peevish Nation, or for the Trial of the Faith and
Courage of those that call themselves Protestants, what have we to do but
receive him, as we should do all other Chastisements, with all Veneration and
Submission, and beg of him to give us Grace to make the right use of those
Afflictions, that is to amend our Lives, and be so much the better, by how much
the Times are the worse.

As for the Writer of the Character he has taken indeed a great deal of pains
to represent his Popish Successor in all the dismal and frightful appearances
that wit or malice could handsomely invent, on purpose to scare unwary people
out of their wits first, and then out of their Loyalty and Allegiance as well
toward the Possessor as the Successor; for to speak the plain Truth, the
Arguments as well as the Design is clearly against both, at least they know
there is no plausible way to prevent the Successor, but by using the Possessor
so ill, that he may be forced at last to yield to their importunities, and pass
such Laws as may either totally Exclude, or so modifie and shackle the
Successor, that it shall not be in his power to do half the harm the Character
threatens us with. And here naturally falls in a Question, Whether a King in
possession with the Advice and Consent of his three Estates Assembled in
Parliament (the Mint and Fountain of all our Laws) can Legally do the one or
the other, that is, either Exclude or Modifie? And though it be a dangerous
thing to question what a King so fortified may or may not do, yet we see every
day, several undertaking and determining the Question on either side, and that
positively; So that we are left, in aequilibrio, which side to take, as our
Affections and Interest most incline us. And though I will not be positive on
either side, I shall only put this Querie:

Whether if it were clear, or granted, That they could not Exclude, whether
then they could not Modifie?

I know that the Current of Opinions is, That all Modifications are ineffectual
and delusory, nothing but a total Exclusion will serve the Turn. Now if they
would be ingenuous and would Confess that they are of Opinion, That nothing but
an Exclusion will serve their Turns, I should be a little of their minds, for
being conscious to themselves how far they have provoked him, they judging by
their own Charity, conclude themselves unpardonable, and therefore for their
own Security must endeavor to wheedle the whole Nation into the same degree of
Guilt to save them harmless. But we hope the Nation is not so mad yet, to
involve themselves in so great Sin and Danger only to gratify or secure a few
discontented Republican Desperado's.

Therefore to leave that Question to them of those Principles, give me leave to
put you a Case that on this subject was urged by one of our Company (and he a
very honest man too, as we take him at least.) I would willingly be satisfied,
says he, why the King in Possession with the Advice and Consent aforesaid,
foreseeing that by a Popish Successor at any time, it is more than probable,
not only the Religion Established, but the very Laws and Government will be in
danger of suffering such convulsions as may hazard the Ruin and Downfall of
Monarchy and Religion both, whether ( says he) they may not make such Laws and
Provisions, as may in humane probability prevent or alleviate such dismal
consequences. As for instance, without reflecting upon the D. Y. whether he be
a Papist or not, nor if he were so, whether he be the worse (as the Character
asserts) for being one of the most Accomplished Persons in Europe: We are only
to enquire, says he, whether if the Religion Established by Law in England, be
a Religion worth our care, and that certainly by all lawful means we may
endeavor its Preservation and continuance among us, and its consignation to
our Costerity; And that the Religion in England is so implicated and involved
with the Laws and Government, that one cannot be invaded but the other must be
in danger, and if it be necessary to preserve either or both, and that it is
not consistent with Reason to expect this from a Popish Successor at any time;
Then whether it be not in the Lawful Power (I will not add, says he, the Duty
and Obligation) of the King in Possession with the Advice and Consent
aforesaid, to make and pass a General Law by Act of Parliament, That no Papist
whatsoever shall at any time hereafter be capable of Inheriting the Crown, with
such other circumstances as shall be thought necessary for such an Act. And
first, says he, here is no wrong done to any man (for the D. Y. is not yet
convict of being so) for if the Modes and Qualifications be lawfully laid, then
it is not the Law but you that exclude your self, and the Subjects are excused
by a Law (as great as that which requires them to take the Oath of Allegiance)
from submitting to such an unqualified Person. Now though it is urged by some (
continues he) That in Hereditary Successions, no Limitations can be laid by any
Power upon Earth to bar the Inheritance, being founded by a Law paramount to
all humane and positive Laws, viz. The Law of God and Nature: Yet give me
leave, says he, to ask these Gentlemen, whether the Laws of God and Nature have
more force here in England, than in any other part of the World? We know very
well that by the Laws they speak of, Proximity of Blood is only to be regarded,
without any other consideration, either of Religion, Manners, Sex or Age, even
to Idiots and Madmen. How then comes it to pass, that in France an Hereditary
Monarchy of the first Magnitude, the Crown is Limited to the Heirs Males, for
whether the Salique Law be as old as Pharamond, as they pretend it is, or
whether it were only made to serve a Turn to exclude our Edward from his
Natural Right to that Crown, in Right of his Mother, it will not be worth the
while to enquire at this time a day, de Facto, it is so, and has been, to the
Exclusion of all Females and their Issue to this very time. And though some
would seem to justify the practice with a Dispensation from Heaven, because
there is such a passage in the Scripture, Lilia nec nent nec laborant, yet that
will scarce pass with any but such as interpret Scripture A la mode de France.
So in Portugal, where they admit of Females to Inherit the Crown, yet they are
Limited to such as Marry within that Kingdom, and this upon pretense of the Law
of Lamego; a fresh instance of which is now upon the Stage in the Infanta of
Portugal, who being to Marry with the Duke of Savoy, in order to make their
Issue capable of Inheriting the Crown of Portugal, The States of the Nation
were Convened, and their Consent required, for dispensing with that Law for
this time, and in that Case. And by virtue of that Law the late Duke of
Braganza (Father to the present King and Prince Regent of Portugal) was
declared King, having Married Catherine, a younger Daughter, yet Married within
the Kingdom; whilst the Issue of Mary though elder Daughter Married to the Duke
of Parma, were Excluded, according to that Law of Lamego. In Poland (though it
be yet an Elective Kingdom) yet their very Elections are Confined and Limited
to one that is a Roman Catholic. And so in several Parts of Germany their
Chief Magistrate must be alternatively a Romanist and a Lutheran. Now if all
this be well done in these Countries notwithstanding the Divine, Natural Right
of Succession by proximity of Blood; And if every Nation is bound by the
highest Law to take care, Ne quid detrimenti Respublica capiat; And we see
other Countries do and have made Laws which they judge most convenient for the
good of those respective Countries even to the Limiting the Succession; How
comes it to pass that we in England are deprived of this Liberty that other
Countries take in preserving themselves and their Government entire and
unshaken.

Another Question of this nature and probably as important as the former was
urged by another Friend, viz. In Case the Wisdom of a King in Possession by the
Advice and Consent aforesaid: should make such a Law to Deprive all Papists
from Inheriting the Crown, and should Declare, That such and such Overt Acts
should be a sufficient conviction in Law to affect such Persons of being so,
and then Entayling the Crown upon the next Protestant Heir in Succession: How
then should good Subjects behave themselves in such a juncture?

And several other Queries incident hereunto we had, which I shall not trouble
you with at this time, but entreat you to give us your thoughts of these I have
mentioned, as freely as we have imparted ours. And though these sort of
Questions seem a little to confirm or favor the Tickling Querie I mentioned at
first; give me leave to say thus much to this and all other Queries of this
nature?

First, That the Protestant Religion of the Church of England, Teaches us no
other Doctrine than what was Taught by the Apostles themselves, that is,
Obedience and Submission to Kings and Governors: and that not because they are
of this or that Religion or Persuasion (as they now term it) but purely and
abstractedly for Conscience Sake, It is the Ordinance of God, and he that
resists shall receive to himself Damnation.

Next, That we ought continually to bless God for, and earnestly pray for the
long Life of our most Gracious Sovereign (never one more truly termed the Light
of our Eyes and the Breath of our Nostrils) and then these captious Queries are
needless of themselves.

But if it should please God to change the Scene, and send us a King of another
Temper, I am sure that then the best way to preserve the Protestant Religion
is, to be of the same mind still, that is to Fear God and Honor the King, and
we need not fear but that the God whom we serve, who has the hearts of Kings
in his hands, will so order things, that by our peaceable Conversation in such
a juncture, most of those dismal apprehensions we are terrified with, will blow
over, or if it should prove a storm, it will be either not violent or not long.
And this is so peculiarly the Doctrine of the Church of England, that I think I
may Challenge all the Churches of the several persuasions in the World, to say
and prove they hold this Doctrine; for certainly if it were so, Those desperate
Tenants of Murdering of Princes, etc. would never have been heard of in the
World; And whether the Jesuit or the Presbyter be most guilty in that
particular, both in Doctrine and Practice, would be a subject too long and too
odious for to be comprehended within the compass of a Letter. To conclude then
this great Case and answer this curious Querie as positively as I can, I shall
be bold to affirm, That if Almighty God in his Providence should please to send
us a Popish Prince, The best way to preserve the Protestant Religion in the
Purity of her Doctrine, is not only to admit him, but submit to his just
Authority in all his Lawful Commands. We know no Arms but those of the old
Christian Martyrs, Prayers and Tears: We are always ready to Fight for, never
against our Prince. We fear Hell more than Smithfield; And assuredly if the
Princes of the World would impartially weigh the Purity and Simplicity of the
Doctrines of the Church of England, the Innocence and Decency of her
Ceremonies, the Regularity and Decorum in her Offices and Administrations, the
Integrity and Candor of her Principles and Manners, they would not only
conclude her to be the best Transcript of the Original Copy of Primitive
Christianity that is left in the World, but the best security to Establish the
Thrones of Kings, and the best Rule for Subjects to learn and practice that due
Obedience they owe to Governors. Oh! that I could add, That the Lives of her
Professors were answerable to the Doctrines and Principles of their Profession.
For it is such a Paradox, as well as Burden of Spirit to all True, Sober
Protestants, to observe that generally those that walk most strictly in their
Lives, and pretend to have a degree of Sanctity and Holiness above other Men,
they have no proportion of Submission and Deference to their Lawful Superiors
both in Church and State, with other Men of less Sanctity or Parts. Whilst on
the other side those that pretend to have the greatest Loyalty for their
Prince, and Obedience to all in Authority under him, do commonly give
themselves too great a Liberty in their outward Conversation, and Indulge
themselves too much in their sensual enjoyments, to the reciprocal scandal one
of another; for whilst one side takes advantage and says, Look what Lives these
Loyalists lead: the other returns, Observe what Principles these Zealots hold,
thereby encouraging and hardening each other in their half-Christianity. And
without peradventure it will never be well, till one side adorns his Loyalty
with a Holy-Life, and the other crowns his Zeal with Loyalty and Obedience.
Then should we be the happiest People alive, under whatever Dispensations of
Providence we may possibly fall. Thus begging your pardon for troubling you
with our Country Conceptions, We kiss your hands and remain,

Your Faithful Servants, etc.

THE END.

