A DISCOURSE Concerning Generosity.

LONDON, Printed by H. Clark, for James Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

THE PREFACE.
SInce we find it is so difficult a thing to engage Men to the sincere Love and
Practice of Virtue and Goodness; It is but reasonable that we make use of all
manner of proper ways and means which may be deemed serviceable to that end. No
Consideration that has any weight, should be omitted; nor any fit Argument or
Motive left untoucht. It is necessary to make our Attempts upon all those
Principles of the human Nature, from which Men are wont to act, especially
those which are of great force and influence upon them; and to offer such
Arguments and Motives as are suited to work upon each of those Principles
respectively. Some Principles indeed do operate in Men more powerfully than
others: But that need not hinder us from endeavoring, by proper Arguments and
Motives, to work upon those which are less powerful: Since none of the
Principles of Action which Men naturally have, were put into them in vain.

We know that the Affections or Principles of Hope and Fear are of vast and
universal influence upon Men's Actions. Religion could not easily subsist
without an appointment of Rewards and Punishments: Nor could the consideration
of Rewards and Punishment have such force upon Men as it has, but that it is
suited to operate vehemently upon two powerful Principles in them, to wit,
their Hope and Fear. And hence it comes to pass, that nothing is more effectual
to retain Men within the bounds of their Duty, than the prospect they have of
Reward for the observation, and of Punishment for the violation of it. And this
shows, that it is upon very good reason, that the Scriptures do chiefly apply
and insist on Arguments drawn from this Topic, to engage Men to Virtue and
Piety; and that Divines and Preachers have usually taken the same Method. But
my Design at present is of a somewhat different nature. And because the Topic
of Rewards and Punishments has been; and is, copiously and fully treated on by
Divines: To them I shall leave it: To whose Province it seems more especially
to belong.

But besides Hope and Fear, there are some other Principles within us, of which
great use may be made, in order to engage us to the love and practice of
Virtue. Particularly, from the natural sense we have of Honor and Shame, we
may likewise draw good and forcible Motives to Virtue. And by adding the
Motives we draw from them, to those which are wont to be drawn from the other
Principles that are in us, we may bring our selves under a more powerful
Obligation to do our Duty. This is what I propose to my self in this Discourse.
Wherein I do not go about to detract from, much less wholly to exclude those
Arguments or Motives which are fetched from the consideration of Rewards and
Punishments, or from any other just Topic: But leaving them upon their own
bottom, am endeavoring to reinforce them with those additional Arguments and
Motives which result from the Principles that are in us of Honor and Shame. I
would engage Men to Virtue and Goodness, by working upon their natural
Principles of Self-esteem and Ambition, and of Honor and Shame: And,
therefore, doubt not but I shall be thought to act in concert with those, who
likewise design to engage Men to Virtue, by Arguments and Motives calculated to
work upon Men's Hope or Fear, or any other of their natural Principles. And
since Men are of various Dispositions, and not only different Persons, but even
the same Persons at different times, do act upon various Motives: It may be
hoped that the greater variety of just Motives are made use of, the better
success may ensue; and that, if the Arguments or Motives of the one sort do not
take fast hold of Men, those of the other sort peradventure may.

And I confess I found my self the more willing to engage my Pen on this
Subject, because Generosity is not usually taken notice of so much as, perhaps,
it ought, and I conceive deserves to be. There is but little mention (for ought
I can find) made of it, either in the Systems of Moralists, or the Instructions
of ordinary Preceptors and Tutors. And that, if I am not mistaken, is a defect
necessary to be in some measure supplied: Since Generosity is a Principle
extremely useful, and of so very extensive a Nature, that it does in a sort
pervade the whole Body of Morality; as I hope to show by and by.

In the mean time, I think my self obliged to acknowledge, That I am indebted
to the Learned and Ingenious Des Carts, for that which is indeed the
Groundwork of this Essay. I have followed as exactly as I could, the lively,
though short Description which he has given of Generosity; and some times choose
to make use of his words, not being able to find others better, or indeed so
good. But whether I have improved any of the Hints which he has given, or
represented them to advantage; that I must submit to the Judgment of others;
since it is neither needful nor proper for me to determine in the Case.

The Argument it self, I must confess, is great and noble; and requires a
better Head and Genius than I am Master of, to handle it justly. But if I have
attempted a thing above my Pitch; I am sure I have done it with a good
Intention. Nor can I, upon the Matter, blame my self for the Undertaking: Since
the cause of Virtue seems to demand an Attempt of this nature; and the Persons
best qualified have not (that I know) engaged in it so fully and particularly
as might be wished. Upon that Account, I am persuaded, the Sincerity of my
intention in this Matter (which I steadfastly avow, and of which I believe
there will be no reason to doubt) will entitle me to the Excuse of candid
People for the meanness of my Performance. And I allow my self to hope, that as
course as the Picture is which I present you with, it will serve to make the
Original appear very Amiable.

Imprimatur,

Ra. Barker, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Dno. Dno. Johanni Archiepiscopo
Cant. a Sacris.
Feb. 15, 1692/3.
A DISCOURSE Concerning Generosity.
WE live in an Age wherein there are great pretensions made to Religion, and no
less to Honor. And as these two are in themselves excellent Things, so I must
confess it is a great satisfaction to me, that they continue to bear so general
a Reputation in the World. It cannot indeed be wondered, that Things which are
both excellent in their Nature, and likewise of universal Esteem, should be the
Objects of most Men's aim and ambition; since its very natural, it should be so.
But if Men were as well agreed, what is most truly and properly meant by the
Terms, Religion and Honor, as they are agreed, that these two things deserve
their Esteem and Prosecution; we might hope for some visible Improvements both
in their Sentiments and Practice.

It is our misfortune, that we are too often carried away by Appearances; and
calling things by wrong Names, are insensibly led into error, whilst we think
our selves altogether in the right. We apply to some things the characters that
are due to others, and give magnificent Names to things that are, in their
nature, either vicious and faulty, or at best but trivial and inconsiderable.
Thus it sometimes falls out, that Men call that by the name of Religion, which
either is not Religion, or which at best has but little to do with it; and by
the name of Honor, that which either is not so, or which, at best, scarce
deserves to be considered under that Title. Now he that has, in this manner,
entertained mistaken Notions about either Religion, on the one hand, or about
Honor on the other, is nearly concerned to rectify such Mistakes; and that,
for one plain Reason, among others, to wit, Because the abuse of a very good
thing commonly produces very ill effects.

It is not my design to enter into a large Disquisition upon the Subjects of
Religion and Honor; I must content my self to touch on them incidently, so far
as they relate to my present Argument: In the prosecution whereof, I hope
nevertheless, to make some advantage of the universal Esteem which these two
have justly obtained in the World. And since Generosity has a natural Affinity
both to Religion and to Honor, I suppose a Discourse upon that Subject, will
be thought the more suitable to the Genius of the Times. But, which is of much
greater Importance, it may likewise be hoped, that the Man of Religion will be
induced to entertain the better thoughts of Honor; and on the other hand, the
Man of Honor, to entertain the better thoughts of Religion, when they shall
respectively consider, that these two have, in themselves, a natural Relation
and Affinity to each other, at how great distance soever the opinion or
practice of some Men may seem to have set them. For I am persuaded, it will be
no hard matter to reconcile these two, if we will but resolve them into their
first and naked Principles, and will but take the pains to separate each from
its abuses and the false characters attributed to it: Which being the only
occasion of the seeming difference, as soon as those are removed, that seeming
difference will vanish, and the natural agreement there is between them will
show it self. That there is really such an agreement between them, will, I
hope, be made out in the process of this Discourse; at least so far as may be
necessary to my present purpose; which I shall think sufficient.

When I speak of a conformity or agreement between Religion and Honor, it is
evident I don't mean by Religion, particular modes or distinctions of Religion,
or distinctions of Sects or Professions, which are sometimes called by that
Name; nor do I mean by Honor, temporal Dignity or height of Title or Station,
ancienty of Family, right of Precedence or Jurisdiction, Gentility, or any of
those external Gallantries that are wont to make such a glare in the Eyes of
the World; which are likewise sometimes called by the name of Honor. There is
indeed difference enough between Religion and Honor taken respectively in
these Senses. But by Religion I mean, the Law of the rational Nature, or the
complex of these Laws which are given by God Almighty unto Mankind for the
Government of their Lives and Actions. And by Honor, I mean, That Principle
residing in Men's minds, by which they are excited to choose and do those things
which are really worthy and becoming, and to refuse and avoid those which are
really base and unbecoming: Which Principle, because it gives Men the genuine
stamp of Honor, is rightly called by that name. And it is between these two,
taken respectively in the latter sense, that I affirm there is such a
Conformity: I mean a Conformity between the Rule of Religion, and the Rule of
Honor; and between the Principle of Religion and the Principle of Honor.

If we look into the Composure of Mankind, we shall find that they are
naturally endowed with a Principle of Self-love. And this Principle is found to
be of vast and universal influence upon them, and the secret Spring as it were
of all their Actions. Now one effect of this Principle is, That it disposes Men
to value themselves for something or other, and to a certain ambition or desire
of having those Qualities or doing those Actions which they account great and
admirable. This may be called Self esteem: And is a Principle which operates
variously in different Persons, according to their different Application of it,
and the different Conceptions which they have of things: Insomuch that it
carries some Men into an infinite number of Follies, whilst it proves to others
who make the right use of it, a Spur to brave and worthy Actions and Designs:
Of which more in its place.

If any Man think, that all manner of Self-esteem is vicious and condemnable;
he may please to consider, that what I here call Self-esteem taken in a
Philosophical sense, is a Principle which we have unavoidably, without our own
Choice: It necessarily results from the general Principle of Self-love
fundamentally implanted in us by Nature, and is far different from what is
ordinarily called Self-conceit. Those Principles or Dispositions which we have
in us by Nature, ought not, when considered only in their pure Naturals to be
deemed culpable; left thereby we obliquely accuse the Author and Lord of Nature
himself. It is universally allowed by considering Men, that the Affections
which are put in us by Nature, such as Love, Hate, Desire, Joy, Grief, and the
like, are in themselves innocent and inculpable; and that it is only the excess
and abuse which renders them vicious. It is not our Fault, that we have in us
the Affections of Love or Hate, for that we have naturally and unavoidably: But
our Fault is, that we Love or Hate undue Objects, or Love or Hate immoderately.
So it is not our Fault that we have in us the Affection of Self-esteem; for
that we have also unavoidably from Nature it self, so that it is impossible to
erace it out of our minds: But our Fault is in misapplying this Affection, by
esteeming our selves without just cause, or by doing it to excess; in which
case, we fall into Pride, Self-conceit, and the like Vices, which are justly
condemned by all Mankind.

Since, therefore, there is put in Man, by Nature, such an Affection or
Principle of Self-esteem; and since it is of such vast influence upon his
thoughts and actions, it must needs be of huge importance to regulate this
Affection rightly, so that it may be applied to just Objects and exerted in a
just manner: Especially considering, that it is as beneficial to use it right,
as it is pernicious and dangerous to abuse or misapply it. But we need not
think, that we are under any obligation to endeavor to extirpate this
Principle or Affection out of our minds, any more than we are, those of Love,
Desire, Joy, Grief, Hope, Fear, and such like; we are not obliged to things
impossible: But we are under the strongest Obligations in the World, to
endeavor to correct in them whatever tends to abuse or excess: And this is not
only possible, but is indeed one of the grand businesses of our Life. As for
the Affection of Self-esteem, I am persuaded, the Virtue or Principle of
Generosity, which I am about to treat of, will be of great use to regulate it,
and I think I may say, without fallacy, most of the other Affections too.

Now in handling the present Argument, I shall endeavor to do these three
things.

First, To explain the Nature of Generosity. Secondly, To show the usefulness
of the Principle, for the due government of our Actions. Thirdly, To show how
Generosity may be acquired, or afterward improved in our Minds.
First, I shall try to show the Nature of Generosity. Now Generosity may, in
general, be considered under a twofold respect, 1. As a Passion or Affection in
Man; and this is the more narrow and restrained Notion of it. And next, As a
Power or Principle immediately founded in the rational Nature; and this is the
more large and comprehensive Notion of it. So far as it is attended with a
Commotion in the Blood and Spirits, or with a Sensation more immediately
relating to the Body, so far it has the nature of a Passion or Affection. And
so far as it depends purely on the rational Nature of a Man, and is attended
with such Cogitations as immediately relate to the Soul, so far it may be
considered as an intellectual or rational Power. Nor need we think it strange,
that having but one Name, it should, under different respects, have the nature
of an Affection, and likewise of an intellectual Power. The Names we give to
things are not always adequate; and its scarce possible they should be in
Matters of this kind. There is so strict an Union betwixt the Soul and Body of
Man, and such a reciprocal operation of the one upon the other, that sundry of
his Acts are compounded, partly of Sensations referring to the Animal Nature,
and partly of Cogitations referring to the Rational. Since, therefore, those
Cogitations of the Soul, which either produce a Virtue in Man or accompany it,
are in most Cases either attended with or confirmed by some Perception or
Affection of the Animal Nature: And since, on the other hand, some Perfections
or Affections of the Animal Nature dispose the Soul to certain Cogitations
helpful to the producing in it the acts of some particular Virtues: It is easy
to believe, there will be in the effect of this reciprocal Operation, a mixture
of the Virtue and Affection; and so we find it falls out. Humility is a known
Virtue, and Pride a known Vice; yet each of these are in some sense a Passion
or Affection, as well as upon other accounts a Virtue and a Vice. Humility, for
instance, has the nature of a Virtue, so far as it is a Power or Principle
referring purely to the Soul, and producing such Cogitations and Actions as are
commendable by the Laws of the rational Nature; but is still a Passion or
Affection, so far as it is accompanied with a commotion in the animal Spirits,
or in general with any corporeal Impression. The like might be said of several
other Virtues; and, mutatis mutandis, of several Vices.

Generosity then, considered as an Affection, consists in a just Self-esteem,
whereby a Man values himself just so much as he lawfully and fairly may. And
under this respect it is a Species of the general Affection, called Admiration,
and holds the Medium between the two Passions of vicious Humility and Pride,
correcting what is amiss in each. But there are likewise certain other
Dispositions or Habitudes (worth remarking, because they are of great use and
ornament) which may be referred to Generosity; of which sort are, a masculine
Firmness and Constancy, Presence of Mind and Sweetness of Temper. This Firmness
and Constancy is of force to compose a Man's Spirits, to establish his Thoughts,
and to preserve him steady and consistent with himself; and by those means
secures him, not only from many of the Livities and Imbecilities which they are
apt to fall into, who are guided by impulse and fortuitous impression; but
also, from several of those errors and preposterous actings to which fear or
feebleness of Spirit are wont to expose Men. And so Presence of Mind, operates
in much the same manner, in case of sudden emergencies; and by preserving the
mind intrepid, undisturbed, and present to it self on such occasions, secures
the Man from being surprised into things hurtful or indecent. So, likewise, the
Sweetness of Temper which accompanies Generosity, serves to render Men
pacifick, agreeable and easy to themselves and others. And as it tends to
overcome the humorous and sour Qualities which make Men uneasy to themselves,
and disagreeable in Conversation; so it likewise disposes them to all the
decent Expressions imaginable of Civility and Complaisance.

It is true, the several Dispositions aforesaid may be many times owing to Men's
natural Temperament. But yet, if Men have them not by the gift of Nature, it is
in great measure within their power to acquire them, or to cultivate and
improve them when acquired; and to correct the contrary Qualities. Some Men
indeed have the happiness to be naturally of an ingenuous Disposition, Candid,
Sincere, Modest, and of a firm and masculine Temper; having, by the particular
vouchsafement of God Almighty, a loveliness and sweetness of Spirit which
cannot be expressed, and such a Command over their Spirits as is of
extraordinary advantage to them. They who have these and the like Qualities
implanted in them by Nature, are in a sort born to Generosity. And even they
who have them in a lower degree, are altogether unexcusable if they do not
endeavor to cherish and improve them, since the acquisition of Generosity
would be so easy, where there is such a natural aptitude for it. On the
contrary, some Men are particularly unhappy in their composure, being naturally
of a rough and feral Temper, dark and solitary in their Minds, stubborn,
haughty, or of feeble and impotent Spirits. He who is concerned in any of these
or such like ill Qualities (for one cannot with a good Grace suppose them all
in one Man) is, its true, under peculiar difficulties as to the acquiring of
Generosity. But as that ought to quicken his diligence and care to overcome
those Impediments which his natural Temper puts him under, so if he does
overcome them, his Conquest will be the more glorious: But I am not to insist
upon that in this place. But from the different Dispositions of People, we may
observe in what manner Generosity resides in Men's Tempers, and how it mixes it
self with their other Affections and Dispositions. And this, I think, does
partly tend to show the Nature of it; which is what we have been considering.

But since my design is, to consider Generosity, not barely as it falls under
the notion of a Passion or Affection; but principally, as it is a Virtue or
intellectual Power inherent in the Mind, under which respect it is of the
greatest use: I must now advance a little further. Now if Generosity be (as I
hope to show that it is) an intellectual Power of the Soul, helpful for the
good government of a Man's Passions, corporeal Impressions and Appetites, and
disposing him to prosecute that which is absolutely best (which is the
character and description of Virtue) then we shall be obliged, in reason, to
acknowledge it to be a Virtue. And if, moreover, it be (as indeed it is) such
an intellectual Power of the Soul, as serves to produce in Men the habit and
practice of several particular Virtues; then it will rather fall under the
notion of a general Principle of Virtue, than of a particular Virtue. And as
such, chiefly, I mean now to consider it; not singly as a particular Virtue,
but in a larger extent, as it is a general Principle of the rational Nature, and
the fruitful Parent of many particular Virtues.

But before I proceed further upon this Matter, it will, I conceive, be proper
to premise a few summary Considerations, for clearing the way to what follows.
It is acknowledged by all Men, who are in their right Mind, That there is an
essential difference between Good and Evil; a difference founded in the nature
of things, so that some things are essentially Good, and others essentially
Evil: That what is Good, is Eligible, Honorable and becoming Man's Nature, and
tends to advance and perfect it: And on the contrary, that what is Evil, is to
be refused and avoided, is dishonorable and misbecoming, and tends to a Man's
Shame, Reproach and Misery. That what is Good, naturally imports in it the
character of Honorable, that is, challenges and deserves Honor; and the doing
of it, cannot be matter of just shame or disgrace to a Man: And on the
contrary, that what is Evil, naturally imports in it the character of
Dishonorable, and the doing of it, cannot be matter of just praise or ornament
to a Man. And that Mankind are endued with Notions corresponding to the nature
of things in this case; and have, by the Principles inherent in their minds, an
ability of discerning, in some measure, what is Good and what Evil, what is
Honorable and Becoming, and what is Dishonorable and Unbecoming. These things
are clear in themselves; and they are likewise confirmed to us by the universal
consent of wise Men, who have, in all Ages, esteemed some things Good, and
others Evil: The former they have accounted Great, Worthy and Honorable; the
latter, Base, Rascally and Dishonorable. Hence they have called Virtue, an
(...), that is, a Resemblance or Conformity to God, that which is Fit,
Equitable, Becoming, Beautiful, Divine, and the like; giving the contrary
Appellations to Vice. Hence they always deemed the former worthy of Esteem,
Veneration and Reward; and the latter, worthy of Shame, Contempt and
Punishment. And hence such Persons as have been endowed with extraordinary
Qualifications, and have done great and worthy things, have been in all Ages
thought to deserve Esteem and Honor: But on the contrary, such as have been
vicious and depraved in their Minds, or guilty of base and infamous Actions,
have been thought to deserve Shame and Ignominy. And upon such Principles as
these, is founded the very notion of Merit, which implies in it, as well the
suitableness and congruity there is, that such as have brave Spirits, and
perform brave and worthy things, should be honored and esteemed, as likewise
the right and title they have to such Honor and Esteem, as the just reward of
their Virtue. And hence all wise Lawgivers have thought it both necessary and
just, to appoint Honors and Rewards for virtuous and heroical Actions: and
Shame and Punishments for vicious and infamous ones. The foregoing
Considerations amount to this, That nothing can be truly and intrinsically
Honorable, but what is according to Virtue: That what is according to Virtue,
is truly and intrinsically Honorable: That Praise and Honor are by a natural
and indelible Right due to true Merit; and true Merit is founded only in true
Virtue and Goodness. Thus it may be seen, what is most truly honorable and
conducing to our Happiness, and the Perfection of our Nature. And in regard we
have in us, by Nature, a vehement desire of Happiness and Perfection, it highly
concerns us to make use of that Principle for the purposes which God Almighty
appears to have designed in his implanting it in us; that so we do not abuse or
pervert a Principle which is given us for excellent ends, and which is of
mighty influence upon our Minds and Actions, and put upon our selves the fatal
Cheat of pursuing an imaginary Good, and an imaginary Felicity, instead of that
which is real and solid: But on the contrary, being made sensible in what our
true Honor and Happiness consist, we may prosecute that with our utmost
intention and diligence. And how serviceable the Principle of Generosity may be
to us in that good Design, may be worth our while to enquire.

Now I come to speak of Generosity, as it is founded in, or more immediately
relates to the rational Nature. And under this Notion it may, in like manner as
before, be considered, first, with respect to the Principle of Self-esteem, and
then with respect to those other Qualifications or Powers of the rational
Nature, which it either produces or is wont to be attended withal. So that
being now to discourse of it as an intellectual Principle, I must be allowed to
take it in a fuller Latitude than I have yet done, or could properly do when I
considered it barely as a Passion or Affection. And after I have spoken
something concerning the Principle of Self-esteem, I shall endeavor to show,
how Generosity is suited to regulate and conduct it rightly, and then shall
take notice of some particular Virtues which belong, or may be referred to the
character of Generosity.

Though the Principle of Self-esteem be common to all Men, being implanted in
them by Nature, yet it is found to operate diversely in different Persons, and
even in the same Person at different times. Being of a very lively and moving
Nature, it will exert it self one way or other, either for better or worse. If
it be not made an Instrument to Virtue, it will prove an Instrument to Vice;
and for want of being rightly managed and conducted, will carry Men into those
Extremes which are vicious and culpable. Thus it has very different Effects,
according as Men use it rightly or amiss. As, when a Man reflecting inwardly
upon himself, suffers the Self-esteem that is in him to work upon false grounds
or to exceed its just limits, and either imagines that he has in him those good
Qualities which he really has not, or swells beyond due bounds those good
Qualities which are really in him; and thereupon sets a higher value upon
himself than in Justice and Reason he ought; or unjustly prefers himself before
other Men: Then that Self-esteem which was in its pure Naturals an innocent
Affection, degenerates into Pride, and becomes justly blameable. And on the
other hand, when a Man reflecting upon himself, from the contemplation he has
of his own Imbecillities, and of his inability to conduct his Passions and
Actions aright, is depressed in his Thoughts for want of sirmness and
steadiness of Mind, aggravates his own Imperfections, and depretiates what is
really commendable in him; and thereupon sets a lower value upon himself, at
least while this Passion continues, than in reason he ought: Then his
Self-esteem (if one may here so call it) degenerates into vicious Humility or
Abjectness; which is likewise blameable. But in opposition to both these, when
upon the Reflection a Man makes on himself, he sets such a value upon himself
as is no more or less than what is just and warrantable, and poises his Mind
between the extremes of Pride and Abjectness; then his Self-esteem is rightly
tempered and conducted, and the Man is led to that Temper of Mind which is the
character of Generosity.

It will be readily acknowledged, that it is much more frequent for Men to err
by esteeming themselves overmuch, than by sinking their own value. For though
Self-contempt, as well as Pride, proceeds from the operation of Self-love, the
former being compounded of Self-love, Admiration and Grief, for the defects
which a Man finds or supposes to be in him; as the latter is compouned of
Self-love, Admiration and Joy, for the Excellencies he finds or supposes to be
in him: Yet the Self-love that is in Men, does, as it falls out, more easily
and readily produce Self-esteem than Self contempt. There is a stronger Bias
on that side than on the other. And therefore it is no wonder that Pride, which
is a kind of Self-esteem, to wit, a wrongful or excessive one, should be a more
common Error than vicious Humility which is a kind of Self-contempt. Nor will
it seem strange, that Pride should be the more growing and thriving Vice of the
two, if it be considered, that the Self-love that is in Men has not only the
greater Bias toward Pride, but likewise operates more vehemently that way;
which may easily occasion that Vice to spread further, and run more into the
extreme: As when a thing is moving, the stronger its Motion is, the further it
is like to run beyond the Lines. Upon which account, it seems necessary, for
Men to guard themselves with the greater care and caution on that side where
there is the greater danger. But since I am not advising any Body, either to
overrate himself for fear of falling into a vicious Humility, or to underrate
himself for fear of falling into Pride; but am endeavoring to point at a
Method for avoiding both those extremes: I shall think it sufficient for my
present purpose to observe, That both those Extremes are condemnable; and that
Generosity is a Remedy against both.

But in the mean time, is it really a disadvantage and snare to us, that we are
naturally more disposed to Esteem than Dis-esteem our selves? Or, may not that
natural Disposition be so tempered and applied as to be of great advantage to
us? If it be a disadvantage and snare to us, it becomes so through our own
fault; and if it be not made use of to our greater advantage and benefit, it
will likewise be our own fault. The disposition to esteem our selves, is strong
and weighing; but what is its natural tendency and use? Is it the natural use
of it, to incline us to esteem our selves upon false or frivolous Grounds, or
to esteem our selves beyond the just measure? Is the natural use of it to lead
us to Pride, and the numerous train of hateful and black qualities that are
wont to accompany it? Certainly it cannot be. These are Faults which proceed
from the gross abuse of this disposition, and therefore cannot be the natural
use of it. Or is it designed only to give us the fantastic pleasure of
Self-applause? Sure this is too low and mean a Design for a Principle of so
great and universal influence as this is upon our thoughts and actions. On the
contrary, without doubt the natural use and design of it is, To beget in Men an
emulation and ambition for Virtue, to establish and compose their Minds; and in
a word, to incite them to worthy and becoming things, and deter them from the
contrary. If Men were void of all Self-esteem, they could not be touched with
the sense either of Honor or Shame. These would take no hold of them, since
they are founded upon the esteem which Men have of themselves, and cannot
subsist without it. Now the impressions of Honor and Shame are found to lay a
great Restraint upon Mankind; and sometimes work upon them, when other
Considerations prove ineffectual. But if Men were destitute of all Self-esteem,
they would be loose from this Restraint; which I think 'tls clear would be a
great disadvantage to them: And therefore sure it is an advantage to them to
have such a Principle. So likewise, since Men are so naturally disposed to
esteem themselves; that both may and ought to be an Argument to them, to
undertake and do those things only which are really Praiseworthy. Seeing they
love and are willing to have esteem; that is a proper Motive to them to do
those things which may deserve and procure it. But the Self-esteem that is in
Men, is also of use, as it serves to compose and establish their Minds. It
brings with it a calm and serenity into the Mind, and puts it, as one may say,
into a good Humor. It produces in Men such Sentiments as give them a
steadiness and assurance of Mind, and secure them from the disorder and
embarass which the Affection of Self-contempt is wont to be attended with. And
it is likewise of great force to animate and enliven the Mind, and to dispose
Men to action and effort. For being in its operation, mixed with a kind of Joy
and Complacency, the sensations that are thereby produced in the Man, serve to
open his thoughts, and to dispose him to a lively and active temper of Mind:
Which is of considerable use. Whereas on the other hand, the Affection of
Self-despect tends to deaden and discompose the Mind; and being in its
operation mixed with the sluggish and melancholy Passion of Grief (as I before
observed) brings upon the Mind such a Languor as is oftentimes very
prejudicial. So that seems in it self rather beneficial it than hurtful to
Mankind, that they have such a natural Bias and Disposition to Self-esteem.

But you will say, this Self-esteem is apt to exceed its just bounds, and to
betray Men into Pride and an extravagant conceit of themselves. But is it
therefore in it self culpable? If it be mischievous in its Abuse, may it not be
advantageous in its right and regular use? If it produce this effect in us, it
does not (as I have already said) do this naturally and unavoidably, but by
accident and by our own Fault. There are several Principles or Propensities
that belong to our Nature, which will certainly run into extremes if they be
not balanced and rightly managed; especially those which are, as this is,
vehement and of powerful influence upon us. And if we are not wont to think
that they are in themselves culpable and unmanageable, why should we think this
to be so? Let us turn our Eyes but to a few Instances. Every Body knows we have
in us a Principle of Self-preservation: Which is indeed both innocent in it
self, and also of great and necessary use. But this is likewise apt to exceed
its just bounds. If Men should give it a lose Rein and follow without reserve
its blind Dictates, it would in all probability throw them into such an excess
of Fear and Solicitude for themselves, as would render them useless to their
Friends or their Country, as would disable them to pursue the Rules of Justice,
Charity, Fortitude and all other Virtues, the practice whereof may be attended
with danger and hazard, and would perhaps sometimes destroy the very end for
which this Principle seems designed, as it befalls them, who hurl themselves
into Danger or Death, through excessive Fear of it and Solicitude to avoid it.
There is also in Men a vehement desire of Procreation. And that Propensity is
innocent in it self, and both may and ought to be so governed, as to answer its
end without exceeding the just bounds. Yet should Men let themselves loose to
follow its impulse without fear or wit, no doubt but it would carry them into
the last Extravagancies. So likewise the innate desire of Happiness that is in
Men, is capable of being directed rightly; and we ought to make use of it, as
may be subservient to the end for which it was given us. But Men may misapply
it; and when they do so, it will, by the prevailing influence it has upon them,
carry them far into the Extreme, and inspire them with as great a Fervency in
the prosecution of a false or imaginary Good, as of the real and true One. In
short, these and other vehement and operative Principles or Propensities are
given Men for wise and good Purposes; some of which we are able easily to
discover, and if they be rightly managed will be of great use. But if we do not
endeavor to conduct them by our Reason and the Laws which God has given us
for that purpose, the blame will justly fall upon our own selves. It will not
therefore, I conceive, either turn to so good account, or so well become us, to
bequarrel and find fault with our own Nature and Composure, as it will, to
endeavor all we can to attemper and conduct the Principles and Propensities
that are in us, by the Laws of Reason and Revelation. But I am now concerned
only with the Principle of Self esteem, and therefore shall proceed to
consider, how it is mixed with Generosity, and conducted by it.

Whosoever exactly observes the Nature of Mankind, will find, that there is nothing
which can so properly and absolutely be called a Man's own, as the free
disposal of his own Will: And that generally speaking, a Man cannot justly be
either praised or dispraised, but for those Actions which depend on this
freedom of his Nature: because he has nothing else so entirely in his own
power. Now agreeably hereto, the Character of a Generous Man will be such as
follows:

The Generous Man finds in himself a Resolution to use that Freedom of his Will
rightly, and thereupon is always inclined to undertake and execute what he
shall judge best and most fitting to be done. And then, he values himself upon
nothing so much as upon the sincere use of his Natural Freedom, and the firm
purposes he makes to prosecute Virtue with an extreme application. He does not
value himself upon account of any of those things which are wont to beget Pride
in Men, such as Honors, Riches, Wit, Beauty, Success, or the like: but upon
account of that, which no Man can, properly speaking, be proud of, because it
is not an Excellency peculiar to himself above other Men, but a Property of the
Human Nature in general, to wit, The Free Disposal of his own Will. And by this
means he is secured from Pride. On the other hand, he is very sensible of the
Failings and Imperfections incident to Human Nature, by reason whereof he knows
himself to be liable to those Errors and Offenses which he sees in other Men.
And he considers at the same time, that other Men, as having the free disposal
of their own Wills, as well as himself has of his, may use that freedom as well
as himself does or better, if they be not themselves in fault. And therefore he
is not inclined to entertain big thoughts of himself, or to prefer himself
before other Men. And this preserves him in an humble and modest temper of
Mind. But in regard he finds in himself (as I have said) a steady Purpose of
using his Natural Freedom rightly, and of doing always, as near as he can, that
which is really and absolutely best, which he thinks is the main thing that
gives Men a real value or worth: He is satisfied, that he ought not to be
contemned though he want several of those External Considerations for which Men
are generally valued in the World, such as Honors, Wealth, Beauty, or the
like. Nor does he much care if he be contemned for the want of them. Much less
is he concerned, if he fortune to be disvalued for a defect in some of those
trivial things, which in the opinion of some People pass for Recommendations of
a Man; such as Garb, Air, Mien, Accent, or the like. And thus he is placed
above the reach of Contempt, and secured from a vicious Humility or abjectness
of Spirit. And when he surveys, (according to the best of his skill, be it
greater or less) both the Human Nature in general, and Himself in particular,
he becomes sensible, that he has no absolute need of any thing which it is not
in his own power, by the help of God, to acquire and keep. And therefore he is
not much disquieted, though he want several of the Ornaments and Accommodations
of Life which others have. Thus, if he have not those External Things which Men
are ordinarily valued for, he does not upon that account think himself much
inferior to those that have them: And if he have, he does not think himself
superior upon that account, to those that have them not. He has a low value
for External things; and is persuaded, that the possession of them cannot
justly advance, or the want of them justly sink a Man's real Price. And
therefore in estimating either himself or others, he is satisfied, that these
or any other things extrinsical to a Man, or which depend on the circumstances
of Men's Life and Fortunes, or for which they must be entirely beholden to other
Men, ought not to be brought to account. And by such Considerations as these he
regulates the Self-esteem that is in him, and makes use of it for good purposes.

He is likewise persuaded it would be against the Rules of Justice, to value
another Man either beneath or above what we know to be his just Desert; and
that for the same Reasons it would be against Justice to do so by himself. And
this is another Consideration by which he regulates the Self-esteem that is in
him, and comes to think of himself as near as he can, neither more nor less
than he lawfully and fairly may. But as he is careful not to undertake another,
through Envy, Hatred or other sinister Motive; so he is likewise careful not to
overvalue himself, out of Partiality and Self-love: But in the judgment he
passes either on himself or others, endeavors to make all those allowances
which Reason and Justice require. And though he does not take any more delight
than other Men in the Contemplation of himself, and is resolved to make no
other use of that Self esteem which he has in him, than only to establish his
Mind, and excite him to the more vigorous prosecution of that which is Best and
most Honorable; yet when a necessary or just occasion is offered for his
passing a judgment upon himself in this nature, then he falls into such
cogitations as carry him even between Pride and Abjectness, and secure him from
the Errors of both.

Agreeably hereunto, from the consideration of the Dignity of the rational
Nature, and of the Obligations that arise from thence to act suitably to that
Character, the generous Man finds himself obliged to make a firm and constant
Resolution, not to do any thing that is dishonorable or unbecoming. The just
apprehensions he has touching his own Nature, restrain him from doing those
things which are, in the concurrent judgment of wise Men, base and ignominious;
and excite him to whatever is excellent and praiseworthy. When he considers
the character which Mankind bear in the Creation, how that they are placed in a
middle rank between the Angelical and the Brutal Nature: This suggests to him,
that it is unbecoming and beneath him, to sink himself to a conformity with the
latter; and that it is no less worthy of his care and ambition, to aspire after
a similitude to the former (as far as may consist with the impotency of his
Nature) by a just observation of those Laws which the supreme Creator has given
the rational World to govern themselves by. And therefore he thinks, it is for
his Credit and Honor to do those things which tend to advance his Nature, as
on the the other hand it is a shame and disgrace to him, to do those things which
tend to debase it. But though he have in his Breast an extreme sense of Honor,
yet that does not operate within him as a fantastical airy Principle, but as a
Spur to virtuous and worthy Actions: For he is far from the empty humor of
Popularity or Vainglory, and places true Honor, not in the little niceties or
punctilio's of pretended Reputation and Gallantry, but in those things which
will recommend him to God and good Men, and which import a real and solid
Worth. And when (to carry this Consideration a little further) he calls to mind
the Relation he stands in unto to God Almighty himself, whose Image and
Offspring he, in some sense, is, this lets him see that he is under the
strongest Obligations in the World, of Duty, Reason and Honor, to do those
things which are Virtuous and Becoming, and to avoid the contrary. And,
whereas, by this Contemplation of the human Nature, and of the Powers and
Endowments which it has pleased God to bestow on it, he is made sensible that
Virtue is a thing practicable and within his Power: This arms him against the
suggestions of those who would discourage him from attempting the prosecution
of Virtue and Felicity, under pretense that they are things placed out of his
reach: And on the other side, engages him to exert his utmost endeavors to
attain as great a Perfection in Virtue as he can; since he sees no reason to
despair of an Improvement corresponding to his Endeavors. He is persuaded it
is in his power to become Virtuous and Happy; and that if he be not such,
'twill be his own Fault. This excites his Resolution and animates his
Endeavors, and makes him with Courage and in good Earnest set about that
arduous Affair, in which he has so good assurance of an answerable Success.
Thus Generosity helps Men to estimate themselves and others rightly, and
inspires them with such Sentiments and Resolutions, as serve both to dispose
them to Virtue, and likewise to render them vigorous in their endeavors to
improve in that Character.

Now if any Man should at first be apt to think, that Generosity leads Men to
Pride, he may, I believe, without much difficulty, see that there is no such
matter, if he will but consider well what Pride is. Now Pride, taken absolutely
or with respect to a Man's own self, consists in an unjust or excessive Opinion
or Esteem of one's self. Unjust, when a Man either values himself for something
that he really has not; which is the worst sort of Pride, and the most gross
and unreasonable: Or else for something, which properly speaking, has not in it
self any real Worth, and so cannot communicate any to its possessor. Excessive,
when he values himself more than he ought, for something laudable, which he has
really in some measure in him. But the Generous Man does not do either of
these. It is his Character, that he values himself just so much as he ought;
neither more nor less than he lawfully and fairly may. Now it is repugnant for
a Man to value himself justly or exactly, and at the same time to value himself
wrongfully or excessively. That is to be Proud, and not to be Proud, both at
once. On the contrary, if we look exactly into the thing, we may discern, that
Generosity produces the true and regular Humility, and such a one as is perhaps
both less artificial, and better grounded than any other. Thus Generous People
are commonly found by experience, more addicted to Humility and Modesty, and
the Ungenerous to Pride and Insolence. So also Pride, taken relatively, or with
respect to others, is an unjust preferring our selves before other Men; when we
falsely think we excel other Men. But the Generous Man is perhaps less inclined
than others, to prefer himself. If he has an asteem for himself, he has so
likewise, and that upon the same Reasons, for the Human Nature in general. If
he esteems himself for the Resolutions he makes to use his Natural Freedom
rightly, he esteems other Men equally upon that account. And if another Man be
more punctual in keeping his Resolutions of that kind than himself is, he finds
no difficulty to give him the preference. But in regard he does not esteem
himself for any thing which is not common to other Men equally with himself; he
is the less liable to be proud: Since Pride is grounded upon a conceit, that we
have in us something Excellent, which is not to be found in the generality of
other Men. Men are not wont to be Proud, (I might say, cannot be so) for their
having somewhat which every body else both has as well as they, and may, if he
will, use as well as they do. One may be Proud, because he either surpasses
other Men in Understanding, Strength, Beauty, or the like; or imagins that he
does so: But I never heard of any Body in his Senses that was Proud, because
Mankind at large, are rational and intelligent Creatures, or because they are
of a comely and beautiful Figure, or upon the account of those Qualities which
are common to the whole Species. If Pride be a kind of Self-esteem (as
doubtless it is) it cannot take place in these Cases, which do not relate to
our selves only, but to Mankind in general. And to do right to thegenerous Man
I must observe, that he does not desire to compare himself with those who may
perhaps come short of him, in order to prefer himself before them, or gain a
reputation from their Defects. But he rather chooses to compare himself with
those who excel him, to the end he may be thereby excited to an emulation of
their Virtue, and to a desire of equalling or exceeding them if he can, in that
which is Virtuous and Praiseworthy. In a word, if the generous Man endeavors
to value both the Human Nature in general, and himself in particular, just so
much as he lawfully may, and no more, then he cannot reasonably be thought
more, but indeed much less liable to Pride than other Men.

They indeed who are desirous to fasten upon the Generous Man the imputation of
Pride, upon any Terms, may perhaps carry the Charge a little further, and
pretend, that if he be not Proud with respect to Men, by preferring himself
unjustly before them, yet he is Proud and Assuming with respect to God
Almighty, by arrogating to himself such a freedom of Action, and such a Power
of choosing and doing Good, as they imagine does detract from the divine Grace
and Concurrence. But I desire it may be considered, that the Generous Man does
not assume to himself this natural Freedom and Choice, in opposition to the
divine influence and concurrence, but in opposition to a necessity of acting.
There is no Man more willing than he, to acknowledge, both the dependence which
Mankind have on the divine Being; and likewise, that whatever Powers or good
Qualifications they have, they receive the same from God Almighty, from whom,
as the Scripture testifies, and all considering Men acknowledge, even upon the
foot of natural Theology, Every good Gift comes. But as he is satisfied, that
both the Beginnings and Increases of Virtue and Goodness in Men, are from God
Almighty: So he is also satisfied, from his own and the experience of all other
Men, that Mankind are free Agents, and are obliged by the Laws of God and Man,
to use that Freedom rightly. And therefore he does not think himself much
concerned to determine (as some Men venture to do) in what particular manner
God is pleased to communicate Virtues and good Qualities unto Men; or how, in
particular, the divine Aids work with or upon that natural Freedom which we
have, either antecedently or concomitantly, or any, or what other way; or how
in particular the Divine Concurrence and our natural Freedom consist together.
He thinks these are things, in a great measure out of his reach: And that as he
cannot expect to acquire an entire Certainty about them; so he may be as good a
Man without the certain knowledge of them, as with it. But being on the own
hand assured, that God Almighty is the primary Author of all good, he thinks,
Men are obliged to depend on the Divine Majesty, and to ascribe to him the
Beginnings and Increases of Virtue and Goodness in them: And being on the other
hand assured, that Mankind are free Agents, he sees no reason to doubt, but
that they can and ought to use that Freedom rightly, and that that is the way
for them to become Virtuous and good Men.

To this I may add, that the current Notions which Men have in cases of this
Nature about Self-esteem; and about Pride and Humility, agree very well with
what I have before spoken touching the Sentiments which accompany Generosity.
We are not wont to blame Men, or account them Proud (nor can we indeed justly
so do) for resolving (which in the mean time supposes Freedom and Choice) to
become as Virtuous and Good as they possibly can; or for believing, that their
Resolution and Endeavor to be such, is a proper and conducive means to that
end: For thinking it beneath them, to revenge an Affront or Injury; or to
commit a vile and ignominious thing: For having an ambition for that which is
Virtuous, Decent and Venerable, and an abhorrence of the contrary, or the like.
These we esteem laudable Principles and according to Virtue. And are wont to
make use of the innate emmulation and desire of Glory, which we find in our
selves or others, in order to excite our selves or them to things of a worthy
and becoming Nature. And on the other side, we cannot reasonably, and, I think,
usually do not, esteem it a Part or Instance of true Humility, for Men to
disparage and degrade the human Nature without grounds: Torepresent Mankind as
a company of necessary Agents, or of Beings either not at all Superior to
Brutes, or (which will render them much worse than Brutes) void of all
Goodness. Humility does not require that which is against Justice or Truth. So
also we do not count it an instance of true Humility, that a Man can descend to
the vilest Actions, and thinks nothing unbecoming or beneath him. But we
rather, and no doubt very deservedly, esteem him to be in a profligate State,
who has no regard to his Reputation or Honor.

But further, as to those Virtues or good Dispositions of the Mind which belong
to Generosity, and by the Method before proposed, come to be considered next: I
shall touch upon some of them now, and shall by and by have occasion to speak
of some others, when I come to give a further Interpretation of this Principle,
by showing the Affinity and Connection there is between it and several other
Virtues of considerable Note. Now Generosity does in general draw to it all
those Virtues which bespeak a Manly temper of Mind, and produce a tenor of
Action becoming the human Nature; which Virtues I shall not go about exactly to
enumerate: But there are some which I must not omit naming particularly,
because they seem to have a nearer cognation to it than ordinary. Of this sort
are, Firmness of Mind, Goodness and Ingenuity of Temper, Liberality in
distributing Favors, Sincerity and Rectitude of Spirit, Dispassionateness or
Tranquillity, Evenness of Temper and Judgment, exact Observation of Decorum; in
a word, an extreme Love and Veneration for Virtue.

Wherein this Firmness of Mind principally consists, may perhaps be most
commodiously seen by considering the Qualities opposite to it. Now Firmness of
Mind is opposed to that impotency of Spirit which lays Men open to the
incursions of Fear and Affrightment; by which their Reason is sometimes rendered
useless to them, and the Men subjected to the Torment, Perplexities, and other
innumerable ill effects of that extravagant Passion. It is opposed to that
softness or vicious Modesty, which enclines Men to comply with others in things
evil and dishonorable (sometimes even against their own Judgment) only to
avoid their Confrontments or Reproaches. It is also opposed to another kind of
impotency of Spirit, whereby a Man for want of Judgment and of Resolution to
use his natural Freedom rightly, is either held from acting, by continual
fluctuation of Mind, or can never keep a consistency with himself in the course
of his Actions, but is oftentimes inclined to do and actually does those
things, of which he knows at the same time he shall afterward have cause to
Repent. It is also opposed to that sort of impotency of Spirit, which keeps Men
servilely under the power of Custom and Prepossession; and renders them unable
to quit those Errors which are fixed in them by Custom, Education, or the power
of fancy and corporeal Impression, though upon the clearest Reasons and fullest
Conviction that can be. There are some People, who are very unhappy in this
particular. They are oftentimes guided by Fancy and Humor; by the cogitations
which are raised in them by their Passions or corporeal Impressions, which
though never so slight and trivial, they have accustomed themselves to attend
unto; not considering so much, whether they have any solid reason for what they
do resolve to do, as whether their Humor, Fancy or Prepossession incline them
to do it: And not distinguishing the Impressions that are made upon them by
external things, or by their own Imagination, and the Perceptions which are by
these means excited in their Brain and Spirits, from the Principles of the
rational Nature, or the Cogitations that purely relate to the Soul, suffer
themselves to be carried away by uncertain and fortuitous Impressions, in so
much that they act as it were by chance, without being able in many things, to
give a tolerable reason for what they do. This habit betokens a great
Infirmity: And as it is most incident to Women and People of effeminate and
feeble Spirits, so it is directly opposite to Generosity. It is opposed also,
to another kind of Impotency of Spirit, whereby Men are unable to demean
themselves steadily and evenly in the two different states of Life: But are
either transported to an excess of Levity and Folly by Prosperity, or
confounded and dispirited by the access of Adversity. It is also opposed to
that sort of Impotency of Spirit, which discovers it self by Trepidity upon the
approach of Danger, by a dullness and drowsiness of Mind, and by an aversion to
undertake or go through those Posts and Employments which are attended with
labor and hazard. These and such like are the Qualities opposite to it. So
that if we turn the Tables, we shall easily see wherein this firmness of Mind
consists: To wit, in Courage and Constancy, in a judicious Uniformity of
acting, in the presidence of Reason over our Prejudices and corporeal
Impressions, in a constancy and evenness under every State of Life, in a
discreet boldness and activity. And since these Qualities which I have
mentioned as opposite to firmness of Mind, discover an imbecility of Spirit,
and dispose Men to act upon childish and weak Principles; the contrary
Qualities may, not improperly, be thought to belong to the Character of
Generosity.

The goodness and ingenuousness of Temper which I just now mentioned, consists
in that Candor and Humanity which renders Men peaceable, agreeable and well
humoured, willing to pass by Injuries upon reasonable Terms, and to put the
most favorable construction that may fairly be upon things; which fills Men
with sentiments of Tenderness and Compassion, and of Clemency and Mercy; which
makes them obliging and civil in Conversation; and enclines them to render not
only unto their Friends and Neighbors, but likewise to Strangers and others,
as occasion may be, the respective offices of Curtesy and Good Will, and to do
all that lies in their power to preserve and maintain amity and good
understanding with those with whom they converse. For the Generous Man has an
esteem for the human Nature in general; and therefore thinks, that all Men are
entitled to those respects and good Offices which identity of Blood and Nature
challenge from him. He remembers likewise the imbecillities that belong to
human Nature; that no Man is wise at all times; that there are a great many
accidents and emerging Circumstances which lead Men insensibly into Error,
insomuch that the most vigilant and cautious are sometime or other deceived and
intrapped: And therefore he is not apt to be severe in his Censures, or to
condemn Men of improbity or insincerity for a single unadvised Action. The
knowledge he has of his own Infirmity, restrains him in that particular, and
makes him willing to give other Men's Actions that connivance or favorable
Construction which he himself may desire or stand in need of for his own. And
when he considers, that other Men, as well as himself, have by Nature the free
disposal of their own Wills, he is disposed to believe, that they resolve as
well as himself does, to use that power rightly, and thereupon that the Errors
or Faults which they commit, are owing rather to want of Judgment or to
Incogitancy, than to ill Will or sinister Intention. And when he observes on
the one hand, how much the several social Virtues contribute to make
Conversation agreeable, delightful and orderly; and on the other hand, how much
the contrary Qualities contribute to disturb and bring it into disorder: He
thinks himself obliged by these Considerations, and likewise by the Rules of
Good-breeding and Decorum, to endeavor to exercise those Virtues which are of
so great Use and Ornament.

Liberality in distributing Favors, is another Qualification belonging to
Generosity. This is so far acknowledged by most Men, that in ordinary
Discourse, the liberal Man is most usually honored with the name of Generous.
But though Liberality does not give us a complete Idea of Generosity; for
Generosity is not to be restrained within so narrow a compass: Yet it is true,
that this is one of its Characters. Now this Liberality is, in a Generous Man,
attended with such Sentiments as these: An Esteem for Mankind on general, which
makes him look in them as proper Objects, not only of Justice, but also of
Kindness and Beneficence; a serenity of Mind mixed with the Perceptions of
Kindness and Gratitude, and a sense of Decorum; which kind of Sentiments serve
to open his Heart, and to dispose him as well to make suitable acknowledgments
of Favors and Obligations, as likewise to do these and other things in such a
manner as may seem most becoming a great Mind.

To Generosity do likewise belong Sincerity and Rectitude of Spirit: Of which I
shall have occasion to speak more particularly anon.

And to it likewise belong Dispassionateness and Tranquillity. It Is well known,
that Men's Passions and unbridled Appetites do ruffle and disorder them to a
very great degree, and by disturbing the regular use of their natural Freedom,
and raising Storms and Tempests in their Minds, impel them to the commission of
many foolish, extravagant and wicked things, which afterward bring upon them
shame, regret, remorse of Conscience, and many other Inconveniences. Now
Generosity is adapted to remedy these Evils. For the Generous Man, by the
Command he has over his own Spirit, and the Government he maintains over his
Passions and Inclinations, is the better secured in that Tranquillity, which the
regular use of Men's natural Freedom is wont to produce: And since he endeavors
to do nothing whereof he shall have just cause afterward to Repent, he is the
more likely to escape Remorse of Conscience; than which there is nothing that
gives the Mind a more sharp and tormenting Pain.

Evenness of Temper in Judging and Acting is another Property of Generosity.
This is much the same with that which is sometimes called in one word
Moderation. And is produced or maintained by that Firmness of Mind and
Tranquillity, which I have before mentioned. It is easy to discern, that the due
government of a Man's Spirit, and of his Passions, corporeal Impressions and
Inclinations, the irregularities whereof do so much pervert Men's Judgments
concerning things, and betray them into so many weak and wicked Actions, must
needs conduce very much to establish him in this even Temper of Mind.

Exact observation of Decorum, is likewise another Property of Generosity. We
know there are several things, either Lawful or at least countenanced by the
general Practice of Men, which yet are really not expedient or fitting to be
done; as being against Decency and good Grace. In such Cases, the Generous Man
considers, not barely what is lawful or practicable, but withal what is decent
and seemly. The respect he has for the Humane Nature, enclines him to conceal
its imperfections; to cover what is uncomely with the vail of Modesty; and to
submit quietly to the laws of the animal nature without violating Purity or
Decency internally in his Mind, or openly in his words or actions. He will not
offer unhandsome things to Matrons or Virgins, or put modest persons to the
blush; and endeavors in general, to avoid such words and gestures as are
ungraceful. So likewise he is not apt to be assuming, impertinent, or
troublesome in company; to put the banter and ridicule upon others; to reflect
upon them or insult over their weakness and imperfection; to pry into other
Men's secrets, or meddle with matters which do not concern him. He bears with
many things, connives at, and passes many things over in silence. In a word, he
considers his sex, his age, his station, his character, and the circumstances
of his condition, and endeavors with respect to them all, to comport himself
as near as he can by the rules of Decorum. And since Decency is a thing of a
refined and delicate nature, and the perfection as it were of Right and Lawful,
as Equity is the perfection of Justice: The Generous Man, who resolves to do,
to his power, that which is best and most becoming, and to attain as high a
degree in Virtue as he can, must neeeds find himself under an obligation to
observe the rules of Decency.

In short, Generosity imports an extreme Love and Veneration for Virtue. The
Generous Man looks upon Virtue and Goodness to be the most honorable and
becoming thing in the World, and the greatest Ornament and perfection of the
Human nature. It is to him the great index and rule of Honorable and
Dishonorable. And therefore when he looks round about him, he can see nothing
that deserves to be the object of his esteem and ambition in comparison of it:
Being satisfied, that there is nothing so worthy of his care and regard, as
that which tends to advance him to a conformity unto the supreme and most
perfect Being, and which leads him in a direct line to the truest and highest
Felicity his nature is capable of. So that when he resolves to use his natural
Freedom rightly, and to prosecute with all his might that which is simply and
absolutely best; he does so, for the sake of Virtue; That is the secret Spring
of his motions, and the Butt of his Ambition.

This may serve for a general explication of the nature of Generosity. In the
next place I am to speak somewhat, to show the agreement and affinity there is
between it, and several other Virtues which have been deservedly esteemed of
the first rank; and likewise between it, and some of those excellent rules of
conduct which have been approved by the common consent of mankind in most ages
of the World. And after that, I would consider briefly the influence it has
even upon what is more strictly called Piety and Religion. By all which it may
appear, that the sentiments and dispositions of mind which Generosity is
attended with all, do entirely correspond and are in effect the same with those
sentiments and dispositions which the most eminent Virtues and approved rules
of Action serve to produce in us. And the doing of this will, I conceive, not
only afford us a fuller interpretation of the Principle which we are now
considering, but likewise be of considerable use to us in our Practice.

Now there are six Principal Virtues, which I shall take particular notice of
in this place; to wit, Prudence, Sincerity, and Patience; which are called
Primitive Virtues: And Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, which are called
Derivative ones.

Prudence is a Virtue, whereby a Man judges rightly of things. And this no Man
can well do, who is not competently free from the power of Prejudice, Passion,
and the other imbecillities which hinder Men from the clear discernment of what
is good and true. Now it is the generous Man's constant endeavor to overcome,
and keep his Mind free from those impediments; as I have before noted: And by
that means he is very much secured from several of those errors which are
opposite to Prudence, such as Rashness, Precipitance, Levity, Credulity,
Obstinacy, blind Zeal, Partiality, and the like: And on the contrary is
disposed and enabled to judge and choose rightly. To explain this, I shall at
present only make use of the following instance, waiving others which might be
given. We find, there is a sort of Imprudence which Men are betrayed into by an
unaccountable gayety of temper that sometimes befalls them. And though this be
commonly most incident to young People, who by reason of the fire and briskness
that is in their Blood and Spirits, are most apt to be carried away by vehement
and sudden emotions; yet there are many who retain this levity and gayety of
temper, till they come to be far advanced in years. Now Generosity helps to
correct the Irregularities of this temper; as it ballasts and poises the Mind,
and excites Men to do those things only, which are grave, manly, and discreet;
that is, to act according to the rules of Prudence. And in regard it is part of
the character of a Generous Man, firmly and advisedly to resolve to prosecute,
in all his actions as near as he can, that which is ultimately and simply best:
Whilst we suppose him to do that, we must suppose him to be competently
conusant and capable of judging what is best: that is, to be at least a
competently Prudent Man.

Sincerity is a Virtue, whereby a Man is disposed, sincerely and uprightly to
prosecute that which he deems to be simply best. This Virtue is one of the
brightest characters of the Soul: It Is the life and Spirit of other Virtues;
And that which is in a particular manner pleasing and acceptable to God
Almighty, as we may judge from the nature of the thing, and as sufficiently
appears from several express Declarations in the Gospel of our Savior. So that
'twill be a great Recommendation to Generosity, if that be found to have a
Cognation with it. Now Sincerity has an especial relation to the Will. It
consists in a simplicity of Mind, and a Rectitude of Will and intention. It is
that Purity and incorrupt Chastity of the Will, whereby a Man is engaged to
adhere unto that which appears to be best. But Generosity is likewise
accompanied with the same disposition of Mind, which Sincerity produces in Men.
For Generosity has in like manner an especial relation to the Will. It is
attended with that Rectitude of the Will, whereby a Man is continually engaged
to endeavor to use his Natural Freedom rightly, and to choose and do, to his
power, in all cases, that which appears to be best. The very description of
these two correspond mutually, and enter into one another. Since that which
appears to be best, is for an inviolable Law both to the sincere, and to the
Generous Man; these two Virtues must needs have the strictest Connection
imaginable.

As for Patience, which is a Virtue of the Soul, whereby a Man for the sake of
Virtue and Goodness is contented to endure those things which are difficult and
unungrateful to the Animal nature: This Virtue evidently appertains to
Generosity; and may in partitular be referred to the Masculine Firmness of
Mind, which makes part of that character. For Patience does not reside in a
feeble Spirit; or in a Breast agitated with untamed and impetuous Passions. It
dwells in Masculine and firm Minds; which are able to endure the shock of
Hardships; and think it inglorious to shrink when they are engaged in the Cause
of Virtue. Thus also the Generous Man confirms himself in a resolution to bear
the injuries of Men and other misfortunes that may befall him; And though he
does not throw himself rashly into dangers or misfortunes; yet he resolves to
go through them with an even and undaunted Spirit. Nor indeed can the Generous
Man, without a due Proportion of the Masculine Virtue of Patience, execute
those resolutions which he makes of pursuing the highest good. Without it, the
formidable prospect of Death, Pain, Poverty, Shame, on the like, would quickly
break his Measures, and dissolve his Resolutions. And therefore he thinks he is
obliged to arm himself with this Virtue, that he may be able the more
constantly and steadily to put in are the just Resolutions he makes of acting
upon the Principles of Honor and Virtue. So likewise we may observe, that
there are a great many things which put Men into disorder and impatience, that
do befall them unavoidably and without their own choice; such as neither their
Industry or Foresight can prevent: And that on the other Hand, Men do
oftentimes, by their own folly and peevishness, create Vexations to themselves,
when it is in their power to be in quiet. And whether Men are under misfortunes
of the First or Latter sort, we find by experience, that the greatest part of
the uneasiness they endure in those cases, is owing to the impatience and
ungovernableness of their Spirits, by means whereof that which would otherwise
be easy to be endured, becomes intolerable to them. Now as to the vexations
which we voluntarily bring upon our selves, I need not say that Generosity
helps us to endure them, for (which is much better) it does really help to
prevent them. It tends to cure Men of those little freaks and imbecillities of
Spirit which are the cause of them: And so by taking away the cause, takes away
the effect. And as to the other sort of misfortunes which it is less in our
power to prevent, Generosity, which helps us to govern our Passions and
Appetites, which arms our Minds with Masculine Resolutions, in a Word, which
makes us sensible that there is all the reason in the World to submit patiently
to the sovereign and wise Government of Almighty God, whether he distribute
sweet or ungrateful things, and to suffer hardships for the sake of Virtue: I
say, Generosity which operates within us in this manner, must needs conduce
very much to beget in us a patience and constancy of Mind.

Next consider Justice, which is a constant and uniform purpose of giving to
every one his due. Now the Generous Man pursues the dictates of this Virtue.
And is willing to do right, both to himself, and likewise to every body else.
For he neither envies nor hates any body. He thinks it a dishonorable part to
do an unjust thing to another, either by detracting from his just desert, or by
wronging him in his Estate, his Bed, or his Person. And so he is kept from
several Vices, which are opposite to Justice, such as Slander, false Testimony
and Subordination, Bribery and unjust Judgment, Covetousness, Extortion,
Murder, Adultery, Rapine, Oppression, fraud, Cruelty, and the like. Nay, he is
not content to do strict Justice to other Men; But chooses to render them more
than what is in strictness due, rather than less. He relaxes and qualifies, as
far as he lawfully may, what is rigorous and extreme; and exercises Justice
with that Moderation and Equity which is indeed the Flower and perfection of
it. And since it is part of his character, that he has no mighty value for
Honor, Riches, or the like external things, he is under the less temptation to
wrong others in order to advance or enrich himself with their spoils. So
likewise he esteems it a mean and abject thing, to be ungrateful to such as
have obliged him or done him good offices: And therefore is careful to show,
upon all fit occasions, his gratitude to his Benefactors; accounting it a piece
of Justice and Honor so to do. And he is likewise careful to demonstrate an
entire Fidelity to those who have committed to him a Trust; accounting it both
unjust and mean-spirited, to be treacherous or unfaithful. And whilst he
considers the strait alliance and consanguinity there is between Man and Man,
upon account of the common nature they are all partakers of; and likewise the
just Title that all Men who are not fallen from the common Rights of their
nature, have, not only to his esteem and good will, but also to all those good
offices which it is in his power upon reasonable terms to render to them: He
finds himself engaged, even in point of Justice, to be courteous, affable, easy
of access, humane, candid, and obliging to all Men; and to exercise, as far as
he fairly may, the respective offices of Charity, Beneficence, Hospitality, and
Philanthropy, toward them. And as he thinks himself obliged to do those things
which Justice requires with respect to mankind: So he considers also the
Justice that is due to Almighty God: And this engages him to the exact
performance of the respective Offices of Piety which relate to Almighty God. So
likewise he remembers, that he ows a duty and Respect to Truth also. And this
obliges him to an entire Veracity; and makes him punctual to his promises and
contracts, as far as lies really and bona fide in his power. And considering,
that Lying, Equivocating, or Dissembling, are mean and rascally actions, and
for the most part the tokens of an abject Spirit; he finds himself obliged to
avoid these and such like little Arts, if he would pursue the Character of a
Just and Generous Man.

As for Fortitude, whereby Men are enabled, for the sake of Virtue and
Goodness, to atchieve and undergo great and difficult things, and even to
suffer Death it self with a firm and intrepid Mind: It is so nearly allied to
Generosity, that several of the Characters of Generosity have been wont to be
ascribed by Moralists to it; and to be represented under the name of Fortitude
or Magnanimity. Now Fortitude or Magnanimity consisting in that true Gallantry
of Mind which qualifies Men for great undertakings, which enables them to
encounter with a constant and serene mind, the difficulties and dangers that
attend elevated employments both in Peace and War; and all this, in general for
the sake of Honesty and Virtue, and in particular for the good and safety of
their Country: Generosity and It appear to have an undivided cognation. And as
Fortitude has in most ages been esteemed and honored in a peculiar manner;
insomuch that the other good habits or powers of the Soul are called Virtues
from the proper name of this: So the Generous Man has a Genius peculiarly
suited to make good the characters of that Virtue. And though he be as sensible
of Pain and misfortunes as other Men, yet he endeavors to keep his Spirit from
being oppressed or softened by them; and in a word, to support himself under
all, with a steadiness and constancy becoming his character.

Then for Temperance, which is a Virtue, whereby Men are restrained in the use
of sensitive pleasures, that they may the better pursue things more sublime and
noble: This is evidently of kin to Generosity; which likewise suggests, that we
ought to postpone all manner of sensitive Gratifications to those other
exercises of the Mind whereby it is led to that which is simply and absolutely
best. He cannot prosecute that which is absolutely best, with a just Vigor,
who is continually inclined to gratify the Body in its several Appetites;
because there is nothing that does, more than that, hinder Men in the pursuit
of Virtue and Goodness. But the Generous Man is sensible, that it is unbecoming
the dignity of the Rational nature; for a Man to indulge himself too much in
corporeal pleasures, or gratify the extravagant desires of the Body: That this
would be to set the Rational and the Animal nature upon the same Level, or
perhaps to prefer the Latter before the Former: And being satisfied, it is no
part of true Humility, to condescend so low, he endeavors to maintain the
dignity of that rank and order, wherein God Almighty has placed him. And all
this he does, not out of a Contempt of other Creatures more ignoble than
himself, but out of a just esteem of the Dignity of his own Order, and out of a
sincere regard to Virtue. And when he observes, how much, Voluptuousness tends
to bewitch Men's Minds, to render Men soft, terrene, and degenerate, and to
extinguish the Seeds of goodness in them: He concludes, that if he be not
temperate and discreet in the use of sensual pleasures, he shall be in apparent
danger of forfeiting those Virtuous habits and dispositions of Mind, wherein he
places his greatest Honor and Happiness. And thus he is armed against several
Vices that are opposite to Temperance, such as Lasciviousness, Excess in Meats
and Drinks, Vanity in Behavior or Apparel, and other softnesses wherein there
is any thing of Luxury or Abuse.

But further, as touching those excellent Rules of conduct, which I before took
notice of, let us see how Generosity stands with respect to them. Of this sort
there are two principally to be considered. Do as you would be done by: And,
Know thy self.

As for the former of these, Do unto others as you would they should do unto
you; and, Do not to others what you would not they should do unto you: They are
so easy to be understood and applied, that I need say no more of them, than
that they contain the Sum of Natural Justice and Equity; and being of a
comprehen five and delicate nature, do not only direct us to act according to
the Ordinary Rules of Justice, but likewise serve to guide us by the Rules of
Equity and Mercy, where those of Justice seem to be either obscure or
defective. And this is one great use of Generosity, which is also a Principle
so comprehensive, that as I have already observed, it imports in it the Sum of
that Justice and Equity which Men ow to one another, and is of so fine and
delicate a nature, that it restrains Men from doing many things, which
according to human Laws or the ordinary Rules of Justice, may appear lawful,
and enclines them oftentimes, as the circumstances of things may be, to do more
than those ordinary Rules in strictness require at their hands.

As to the latter Precept, Know thy Self. This we are told was formerly had in
great Reverence, insomuch that 'twas supposed to have been immediately
communicated unto Men from Heaven -- E Coelo descendit, (...). And it well
deserves to be esteemed and observed at this day. Now the Knowledge of our
selves is of use principally two ways: To wit. As it makes us sensible on the
one hand of the Imperfections, and on the other of the Dignity of our Nature.
First, by Knowing our Selves, and by contemplating the Infirmities and
Imperfections that adhere to our Nature, we are taught to be humble and modest,
patient, temperate, submissive to the divine Will, beneficent and merciful, and
the like. When we we consider, that our Knowledge and other Abilities are
comparatively imperfect, how many things we are ignorant of, and in how many we
err and do amiss: This and such like Considerations help to keep us from being
Proud and Presuming with respect to our selves, and from being rigid,
censorious and ill-natured, with respect to others whom we find offending or
mistaken. And, on the contrary, dispose us to Charity, Goodness, Forbearance,
Candor and Mercy toward them: Since we are thereby made sensible, that we our
selves are liable to many, or all, of the Errors and Offenses which we see in
other Men. So likewise when we observe, how helpless and impotent we are, how
unable to forsee or prevent the accidents, revolutions and changes that attend
our Lives, and either to procure to our selves many of those external good
Things which we want, or to avert those Misfortunes which we suffer or
apprehend, it suggests to us a notable Lesson of Patience and of Submission to
Almighty God, as the most effectual means to keep a serenity in our Minds,
notwithstanding all that may befall us. And further, when we consider the
frailty and abjectness of our Bodies, that being the meanest and most
despicable part of us, they do not deserve we should be so very intent upon the
gratifying of them, much less that our Solicitude about them should either
exceed or hinder our care and concern about our nobler and better Part: This
instructs us to avoid Covetousness, Intemperance and Excess in the Love or Use
of things relating to the Body. And, further, when under the consideration of
this Infirmity of our present State, we become sensible, that there are many
things necessary to the support and well being of Men, and that therefore such
as are destitute of these things, deserve to be considered by us, as far as we
are fairly able; that is an Argument to us, to give them help and and relief:
Especially when we remember, that by reason of the mutability of our condition
in this World, we our selves, though perhaps at present in a flourishing State,
may be an easy turn of Affairs, be brought into the same necessitous condition
we see others in.

But then the Knowledge of our selves is likewise of use another way, viz. as
it makes us sensible of the Dignity of our Nature; and by that means engages us
to the doing of such things as are becoming the Character we bear in the
Creation, and deters us from doing whatever is disparaging or disagreeable to
that Character. For since Virtue is in its Nature Noble and Honorable; and
Vice the quite contrary: Upon that Principle, the Knowledge of our Selves
serves to excite in us on the one hand that laudable Ambition, whereby we
aspire after those things which are Virtuous and truly Honorable, and on the
other hand that commendable Shame which deters us from things of the contrary
Nature. Now Generosity operates both these ways. It confirms Men on the one
hand in a just Humility, Meekness, Patience, Charity, and other like Virtues,
as may appear from what has been already said: And on the other hand, disposes
Men to those Virtues which are produced and maintained by the consideration of
the Dignity of the human Nature, and of the Obligations that result from thence
to act agreeably to that Character: But it is more peculiarly suited to operate
this latter way: As it excites in Men that noble Ambition, which is grounded on
the consideration of the honourble Nature of Virtue, and of the auspicious and
happy Consequences it brings after it, and that virtuous Shame which is
grounded on the turpitude and dishonorable Nature of Vice, and of the
mischievous and unhappy Effects which attend it. For the Generous Man,
according to that excellent Precept, (...), Above all Revere thy Self, would be
ambitious of Virtue, though he had no prospect of acquiring external Reputation
by it, and would be touched with a sense of Shame, if he went about to commit a
vile Action never so privately, even where he could be in no danger of public
disparagement. So that the Sentiments which are raised in Men by the just
Knowledge of themselves, agree with those which are raised in them by the
Principle of Generosity: Both serving to spur them on to virtuous and becoming
Actions, and to deter them from foul and vicious ones, from much the same
Considerations.

But Generosity enters also into that part of Religion which more immediately
relates to God Almighty; and mixes it self with the habits of Piety and
Devotion. There are three great faults, to wit, Superstition, Hypocrisy, and
Profaneness, into one or other of which, those who err with respect to
Religion, commonly fall. And Generosity is suited to help against each of
these. Against Superstition; as it excites in men's minds manly and becoming
thoughts of Almighty God, such as are suitable to the Divine Nature: By which
means it serves to rid their Minds of those light and childish conceptions
touching the Nature and Worship of God, which are the Seeds of Bigottry and
Superstition. For when Men have by the Divine aid, and by due care and
exercise, habituated their Minds to just apprehensions of the Pure and
Excellent Nature of God: They cannot think it sufficient, to express the
veneration and service which they ow unto him, by those trivial and
insignificant instances of Devotion and Worship, or that partial and reserved
Obedience, which superstitious and weak People are wont to content themselves
withal; or indeed by any thing less than an entire dedication of their Souls
and Bodies to him, in pure and ardent Devotion, joined with an entire and
hearty Obedience to his Laws; that is, by adjusting both their Worship and
Conversation unto a conformity to his most Excellent Nature And when likewise,
they have possessed their Minds with manly and Rational thoughts of Religion:
they will be the less subject to be carried away by the errors of Enthusiasm
and pretended Spirituality; which is also a kind of Superstition.

And for Hypocrisy, which is another great Abuse of Religion; Generosity is
naturally suited to cure or prevent it. For Generosity is wont to be
accompanied with such a Sincerity of Mind, as is not consistent with Hypocrisy.
And whilst it teaches Men to act upon the true Principles of Honor, it will
easily make them sensible; that it is an unworthy and base practice, to go about
to delude other Men with a Pretense of Religion, when at the same time they are
conscious to themselves, that they have nothing of that Principle within them;
and that Religion is a thing of so noble and elevated a nature, that it ought
not to be made subservient to the little ends of Worldly profit and interest.

So also Generosity helps against Profaneness. For since Generosity is founded
in the just knowledge of our selves; from the consideration, that we are
comparatively frail and impotent Creatures, and entirely dependant on God
Almighty for our Being and all that we have; it serves to suppress in us those
extravagant and big thoughts of our selves, which would lead us to profaneness
and contempt of God; and on the contrary to engage us to love and gratitude to
his Divine Majesty, from whom we continually receive so many demonstrations of
Bounty and Philanthropy. And from the consideration of the infinite distance
there is betwixt God and Men, it serves to awaken the innate Principle we have
in us, of honoring and reverencing whatever person or being appears to be
Great and Excellent; and so engages us to express that Honor and Reverence we
have for Almighty God (who is infinitely the greatest and most excellent Being)
in such ways as are most proper to signify and declare the same; to wit, by
Worship, Reverence of him, and all that relates to him, and by Conformity to
his Nature and Laws, as far as we are able. Which is indeed the Sum of Religion.

From these short instances it may be seen, that Generosity is a Principle
nearly allied to the several Virtues of the Divine Life, and likewise extremely
accommodated to preserve Men straight and even in the practice of true
Religion. And these considerations will, I conceive, serve both to explain the
Notion of Generosity, and likewise to show the intimate Agreement there is
between Religion and Honor, being rightly understood and applied. So much then
for what I proposed to speak in the Interpretation of Generosity.

But now I am well aware, that it is likely, that such persons as have been
accustomed to frame a narrow and restrained notion of Generosity, and to think
it consists only in Liberality, or what is commonly called good breeding, or
such like, may imagine, that I do amiss, in taking it in so large and
comprehensive a sense, and attributing to it such noble Characters, as I have
done. But I am persuaded, that when things come to be weighed, I shall be
acquitted of blame in that particular. I have been considering Generosity, not
barely as a particular Virtue or good quality, but chiefly as such a Principle
in the Rational Soul as is of a Metaphysical and universal nature. Now the
Principles of this kind are such that they may be applied as variously as there
are various actions in human life: And so must needs be of a large and
comprehensive nature, since they pervade the whole Body of a man's Cogitations
and Actions, and are the Principles from which he Acts, not only in some few
but in very many cases. And that Generosity is a Principle of this kind, may
appear from what I have already said. Even men's Natural Temper, discovers it
self in most of their actions, in Natural, Civil, Moral and Religious ones. And
so far as it has influence upon the Mind, produces as great a variety of
sensations and dispositions in the Man, as there is great variety of Objects
about which he is conversant. But the Principles immediately referring to the
Mind, are much more accommodated to spread through all the actions of a Man:
For as the Mind is the seat of a Man's Thoughts, and his Thoughts the Spring of
his Actions: So the Principles of the Mind, which have the nature of universal
Cogitations, are as universal in their Operation, as they are in their Root; or
if you will, as universal considered objectively, as they are, considered
formally. Thus Sincerity taken as a general Principle of the Mind, extends it
self to most of the actions of Ruman Life, to those which fall under a Civil,
Moral or Religious Consideration: And may be exerted by Men of all Faculties,
Professions, Trades, Orders and Degrees, in the actions which relate to the
several conditions of Life, by which they are diversified from one another, and
in those which are common to them all. The same may be said of the general
Principle of Prudence: And likewise of the general Frinciple of Generosity. And
if Generosity be such a Principle, as is, not only of a large and extended
Nature, but is likewise in an extraordinary manner congenial and agreeable to
the most refined Principles of our Minds, and is accompanied with, or serves to
produce in us, those sentiments and dispositions of Mind, which tend to the
advancement and perfection of our Nature: I say, if the Case be so, I am
persuaded, I cannot be justly accused of having extended the Notion of it too
far, or having given it too high Characters.

But I think I need not be very solicitous about this Matter. It Is sufficient
for me, that however some Men may dislike or quarrel with the Name of
Generosity, because perhaps they have been used to speak of those things which
make up its Character, in other Terms than those I here use, or for other
Reasons best known to themselves: Yet they cannot, without doing some violence
to their own Minds, but admire and esteem the Thing, and acknowledge that the
Characters which I have said do belong to it, import that which is really Noble
and Illustrious. And peradventure, they may discern that Mankind do universally
agree in these Sentiments, when they observe how naturally and readily Men are
wont to describe Persons or Actions that are eminent for their goodness and
rectitude, by the Name of Generous, Great, Noble, and such like Epithets, which
properly belong to this Character.

If then the ancient Philosophers and Moralists do not make mention of
Generosity under that particular Name, or, describe it with exactly the same
Characters which I have herein attributed to it, that ought not to be any
Prejudice against what I have said upon this Head. We all speak the same thing
in substance and effect, and sometimes in much the same words. What is
Generosity but an (...), a fortitude or manliness of Spirit, a (...), or
greatness of Soul? What is it but a Compositum jus fasque animi, a steady
rectitude of the Mind, a Generosum honestum, a generous Virtue? What is it but
a (...) a goodness of Temper, a (...) or divine Principle accommodated to the
human Nature, and residing in human Breasts? The like might be said in many
other Particulars.

Suppose also that the sacred Writers themselves do not make mention of
Generosity under that express Name, or under the self-same Characters by which
I have described it; neither will that, I conceive, justly prejudice what I
have said upon this Subject. If there be in Men such Principles as Self-love
and Self-esteem, as Ambition, as Honor and Shame: If these Principles may and
ought to be made use of for the purposes of Virtue: If the just use of these
Principles serves to produce Generosity in Men: If Generosity, by operating
upon these Principles and conducting them rightly, be helpful to advance Men in
Virtue and Goodness: If the Characters herein ascribed to Generosity be
consonant to the purest Principles of our Minds, and to the clear and undoubted
Notions which wise Men have all along had of things: Then the main of what I
have before offered, will not, I conceive, be shaken by a side-wind Objection.
It was not, nor is it necessary, or indeed possible, that Men in all Countries
or Ages of the World should follow just the same Modes of conception or
expression, or the same Methods of Discourse. There is, no doubt, a great
Latitude that may be fairly taken, in the manner of discoursing about the
particular Virtues, and of referring them to certain general Principles of the
rational Soul. Accordingly, we find that the Holy Writers themselves do fall
into that variety in this Case, which the nature of things so easily admits.
They often vary from one another in their Expressions, and in their Methods of
Discourse and Exhortation upon much the same Subjects. They give us diversely
the descriptions or characters of particular Virtues: Sometimes in such manner
as seems agreeable to the true nature of them, and at other times in such
manner as is mostly suited to the present Argument or Purpose of the Writer, or
to the Principles of the Mind to which they are for that time referred. Let us
for the present only take notice, how many several ways Virtue in general, or
Religion, or Holiness, or Goodness, (call it by what suchlike Name you will)
is represented to us by the several Writers of the holy Books. Sometimes it is
represented under the name and characters of Wisdom, as in the Writings of King
Solomon. Sometims under the name of Righteousness (that is, Justice or
Rectitude) as in several of the sacred Books. Sometimes it is comprehended
under the general Phrase, The Fear of the Lord, as in many of the sacred Books
both of the old and new Testament. Sometimes under that of Love or Dilection,
comprizing in it the love of God and of our Neighbor, as in some of the Books
of the old Testament, and most of the Books of the new, particularly in the
Writings of St. John and St. Paul. Sometimes under the general Term, Faith,
exhibiting to us the sum of our Duty, as in several Books of the new Testament,
especially in the Writings of St. Paul. If therefore the several holy Writers
vary from one another in this manner, we need not wonder that others should
vary from them in things wherein there is naturally so much Latitude. Admit
then that some one or more of the holy Writers intimates, that Faith is a
Principle serving to produce in Men several particular Virtues, we must not
think that that contradicts or excludes what is spoken by such one or more of
the holy Writers as intimates, that Love, or the Fear of God, are Principles
serviceable to that end. Here are now, suppose, before our Eyes four things
which may be deemed Principles of Virtue and Goodness; viz. Faith, Love, Fear
of God, and Generosity. But surely the saying that Faith is such a Principle,
does not exclude Love from being such too. And saying that Love is such a
Principle, does not exclude the Fear of God from being such too. And saying
that the Fear of God is such a Principle, does not exclude Generosity from
being such too; because they are, each of them, more or less such. Nor on the
other side, will Generosity exclude the other Principles of Faith, Love, or the
Fear of God, or they exclude it, any more than they exclude one another, or any
more than they exclude Prudence and Sincerity (considered as general Principles
of Virtue) or indeed any other general Principle besides, which serves for
producing Virtue in Men. The Principles aforementioned may be all of them
jointly and severally Principles productive of Virtue. And accordingly, to
them, as such, either to all of them together, or to any of them apart, several
particular Virtues may properly be referred. And of this we have, in the case
of Faith, a great Instance in the 11th Chapter to the Hebrews, where we find
attributed to Faith, a great number of Virtues which distinguished and
signalized the Heroes and good Men in several Ages of the World. So that upon
the Matter, the consideration of the Style, or the manner of Writing, used by
the holy Penmen of the Scripture, will not, I conceive, afford any just
exception against what I have before offered, or give any occasion to doubt but
that Generosity is such a Principle of Virtue and Goodness as I pretend it is.
But to speak freely, why indeed should we think, that none of the holy Writers
take notice of the Principle of Generosity; when we find that St. Paul gives so
lively a description of it, in which he concludes and sums up his other
particular Exhortations, Phil. 4.8. Finally, my Brethren, says he, whatsoever
things are True, whatsoever things are Honest [or Venerable] whatsoever things
are Just, whatsoever things are Pure, whatsoever things are Lovely, whatsoever
things are of good Report; if there be any Virtue, and if there be any Praise
[that is, if they be Virtuous and Praise-worthy] think on these things. And,
when we likewise find in general, that the several Virtues which I have shown
do belong to its Character, are by frequent and earnest Precepts and
Exhortations inculcated upon Men throughout their Writings, though in other Words
perhaps, or under other Heads and Relations; I say, when we find the Case to be
thus, why should we think, that the holy Writers take no notice of this
Principle? We need not be much concerned about a Word or Name, when we have the
Thing and Substance. If the Thing may in the Substance of it be found in
Scripture: Or if it be not really and materially repugnant to what is delivered
there: Or if (which is all one in effect) it may be demonstrated by rational
and convincing Considerations, to be a good and useful Principle; that ought,
as I take it, to content us.

II. In the next place I should endeavor to show the usefulness of the
Principle of Generosity for the due Government of our Actions. But from the
Interpretation of this Principle, which I have before offered, we may pretty
well discern that it is like to be of great use for that purpose. And this will
in great measure supersede what I intended to speak under this Head; at least,
will oblige me to handle it with the more brevity.

We find, there is a vast variety of Circumstances wherein Men may be placed
when they come to choose and act. Men fall at times under different Relations to
one another; and their Cases come to be diversified by Circumstances and
Accidents emerging. By which means it comes to pass, that they are oftentimes
at a loss how to choose and act, even in Cases, which, if they were stripped of
several of their Circumstances, would seem plain and clear. And thus being in a
kind of suspense, they are many times impelled one way or other by very light
Moments, and often choose and act for the worse. Men often encourage themselves
to the doing of what they acknowledge in general to be unlawful or unfitting,
by little excuses and pretenses which they fetch from the Circumstances of the
Case they are in; and being by assed and inclined to comply with their Passions
and Interests, make use of these Arts to vindicate their Reputation with Men,
or avert the checks and reproaches of their own Minds; and so insensibly
beguile themselves into base and vicious Actions whilst they pretend both to
know and practice better. So likewise, there are many Cases wherein a thing,
about the doing or refusing whereof we come to deliberate, may in strictness be
lawful to be done, but peradventure may not be expedient, fitting, or
honorable. Again, some things lie as it were between the Confines of Virtue
and Vice, lawful and unlawful. A little excess or defect may make the Action
either virtuous or vicious, as the Case may be. Now in such Cases as these, it
is of mighty use to lay before our selves some Rules or Principles of universal
extent, which will reach our Case whatever almost it be, and bring us under
their obligation, where particular ones either would fall short, or may seem to
be less clear and undoubted, or are capable of being eluded by the subtilty
which we are wont to make use of for the more secure and uninterrupted
gratification of our Desires. And such a Principle is this of Generosity: Which
they that are accustomed to put it in practice, sensibly find to be of great
and universal influence, and to be as well a Restraint upon them from
committing of many things which perhaps might upon the foot of particular
Virtues or Rules of Action, be deemed lawful, as likewise an incitement to them
to the doing of many things which particular Virtues, considered strictly, or
as they are ordinarily wont to be, may not absolutely require.

Another considerable use of this Principle is, That it easily and without
labor of Thought opens it self to our Minds; and so is always ready and at
hand for our direction. It sometimes falls out, that when we come to act, we
are unresolved whether we shall do a thing or not, and before we can well
resolve, are obliged to argue and consider with our selves (more or less, as
the Case may be) and so come gradually to a Resolution, by a train of
inductions, to the making whereof is required some intention or application of
Mind. And on the other side, it sometimes falls out, that the nature of the
thing before us is such, that it will not give us leave to spend much time in
debating the Matter with our selves, but requires an immediate Resolution to be
taken. Now it must needs be of great advantage to us in such Cases, to propose
to our selves, some such Principle or Principles, as do easily and instantly
open themselves to our Minds, and without labor of Thought suggest what is fit
to be done, It Is easy to discern, that one considerable use of that excellent
Rule, Do as you would be done unto, consists in this, that it gives us a ready
direction on the sudden, and quickly clears the thing in hand from many of the
Difficulties which our prepossessed Affections or Inclinations would mix with
it. For by making the Case our own, we quickly discern what we our selves would
desire to have done to us, and by consequence, how we should carry it to others
in the same circumstances. Thus it is with respect to Generosity. It operates
by plain, simple and easy Suggestions: It leaves us only to resolve upon the
single Point, whether the thing be decent and honorable; whether it be fit for
a Man of Spirit and Temper, to do that about which we deliberate; whether,
admitting it be lawful to do the thing, it would not be much better and more
honorable to do otherwise; or the like. It operates in Men upon these
Occasions, by such a Sincerity of Mind as disposes them to prefer that which is
best and most becoming. And though it helps them to resolve on the sudden, yet it
helps them to resolve rightly. Now I believe it will be readily acknowledged,
that a Principle which works this way, must needs be of great use. And this
will be further confirmed to us, if we consider the easiness and advantage
there is in acting by a Principle that is homogeneous and all of a piece,
beyond what there is in being guided by a great many particular Rules, which ly
broken and piecemeal in the Mind; and not having a strait connection with one
another may easily slip from the Memory when they should be put in practice, or
if we remember them, are likely in many Cases to be defective and inadequate.
Proverbs and Maxims well applied, are profitable to ripen our experience in
things, and to help us in our Practice; and particular Precepts of Virtue have
their use: But there seems to be nothing more effectual to render the tenor of
Men's Actions strait, even and uniform, than a general Principle of the Mind
that is entire and one; which operates without varying or mixing of Ideas; and
as it cannot easily be absent from the Mind when they come to act, so neither
is it likely to prove short and defective. And such a one is the Principle now
before us.

Another considerable use of this Principle, is, That it is a mighty help to
Men's improvement in Virtue. I do not mean barely, that it is in general
accommodated to serve this end, as several other things are: But if I am not
mistaken, it has something extraordinary in it, effectual for that purpose:
Insomuch that he who will pursue its Dictates, may promise himself such
improvements in Virtue, as are not to be expected from any other but a lively
and vigorous Principle. For the truth of this I may safely appeal to the
experience of those who have accustomed themselves to act upon this Principle.
But it will appear to have nothing of improbability in it, if we consider well
on the one hand the nature of Generosity, and on the other hand the course and
order wherein Men's cogitations and actions were wont to be produced and
conducted, together with the Principles they naturally act upon. We shall not
perhaps think it strange, that Generosity should have this effect, if we
consider that it opens Men's Minds to great and exact Thoughts; that it steers
and directs the Will in its right course; that it serves to represent Virtue as
a lovely thing, and puts Men into a Method of doing and repeating virtuous
Actions with Delight; and by that means, as also by exciting in them a
commendable Ambition of excelling in Virtue as the most honorable thing in the
World, engages them vehemently in the pursuit of it. But since there is nothing
so likely to convince Men in this Matter, as their own trial and experience,
that is it which I shall principally recommend to them. And there is the
greater encouragement to make a Trial, because they cannot reasonably think,
that, supposing it be not a help, it will be any impediment to them in a
virtuous course; or that the measures it puts them into will be harsh and
undelightful, when the Principle it self is so congenial, and so agreeable to
the purest and most incorrupt Sentiments of their Minds.

In sum. If this Principle were well pursued, there would in all appearance be
a great deal more Justice, Order, Quiet and good Agreement in the World, than
now there is. It is in its nature extremely accommodated to produce these
auspicious effects. And being of a very large and extended nature, it reaches
to all orders and degrees of Men. It enters into the Laws of Nature and of
Nations: Which cannot well subsist without a regard to the Rules of Humanity,
Decency and Honor. It mixes it self with the Laws of particular Polities; and
by disposing Men to a regular performance of the respective Duties relating to
Government and Subjection, tends to preserve that Order and Quiet which is the
last end of Government. Thus a Generous Prince will endeavor to administer his
Government with an even and steady hand, to protect his Subjects strenuously,
to maintain the just Honor of the Crown and Faith of the Treasury, to shun
those little Arts which are sometimes made use of to amass Wealth, or to
encroach on the Rights of Subjects or Neighbors. He will think himself obliged
to avoid whatever is mean, dishonorable. and unbecoming his Character: And by
how much he is elevated in Power and Dignity above other Men, will esteem
himself by so much the more engaged to observe, as near as he can, the Rules of
Conduct and Honor. And on the other side, Generous Subjects will not be
peevish and ill-natured toward their Prince, or rashly put on his Actions an
unfavourable Construction: They will not envy him for his Greatness, or his
just Rights and Prerogatives: They will cheerfully render him his Tribures and
Duties: In a word, they will honor his Person and obey his Commands; and where
they cannot bona fide in Law or Conscience do the latter, they will meekly
submit and pay a Deference to his Authority, though they cannot actively obey it;
choosing rather to suffer in their own private Concerns, than by opposition to
affront their Prince, or disturb the repose and tranquillity of the Public.
Thus the Principle of Generosity is of great benefit to the State.

And so it is likewise to the Church. It will dispose the Clergy to be Manly,
Grave and Discreet in discharging the Offices of their Function; to exercise
Discipline with a Courage and Exactness, mixed with Temper and Moderation; to
be vigilant and careful in looking to their respective Charges; to perform the
Offices of divine Worship with such a Decency, Order and Devotion, as may be
suitable to the nature of the thing, and helpful to maintain it in that just
esteem which it ought to have in the World; to shut out of their Discourses and
Instructions, precarious Hypotheses, pious Frauds, Pedantry and Ostentation of
pretended Learning, indecent Expressions, and whatever is disagreeable to true
Reason and the holy Scriptures; to avoid Simoniacal Arts and mean Compliances;
and, in a word, whatever is really unbecoming their Order. And on the other
side, a Generous Man of the Laity, will respect and esteem the Clergy for their
Office-sake; he will neither envy them their Revenues nor defraud them of their
Dues; he will cover their Faults, and heartily receive their Instructions; he
will not for slight and trivial pretenses make or countenance a Separation from
the Church under which he was born, or break its Communion and disturb its
Peace for the sake of things confessedly harmless and indifferent in
themselves; and as he is not in his Temper inclinable to oppose his Governors,
so he has no Temptation either to think himself exempt from their Authority, or
to imagine that a thing indifferent in it self can merely by the command of a
Superior be rendered unlawful. In short, Generosity opens Men's Minds to such
Sentiments as dispose them to Modesty, Peaceableness and Goodness of Temper:
Which cannot but be of great Benefit both in Church and State.

But Generosity is also of great use to the Public, by its suitableness to
influence all Orders and Degrees of Men. It is indeed a Principle in which the
Nobility and Gentry seem to have in some sort a more peculiar Interest than
other Men. Yet there is no Man, though of meaner Fortunes, but he is more or less
concerned in it. All Men have equally a natural freedom of acting, and are, as
far as relates immediately to the Laws of Virtue, equally engaged to use that
Freedom rightly; being equally entitled to the Rewards of using it rightly,
and subject to the Punishments which ensue the Abuse of it. And so also all Men
who are not fallen from the Rights of the human Nature, are interessed in that
Reputation and Esteem which is due to virtuous and worthy Actions; and are
concerned to maintain a Reputation accordingly. However there seem to be
additional Obligations lying upon the Nobility and Gentry, to act upon the true
Principles of Honor, which affect them more peculiarly than other Men: The
honorable Style and Titles that belong to them, as well as the Eminence of
their Station and Degree should put them continually in Mind of acting upon
these Principles, and of endeavoring to surpass others therein. For what can
be more disagreeable, than for a Gentleman or Man of Quality, to be of a
pitiful sordid Spirit, to be rough and illbred, and destitute of all sense of
Honor and Virtue. And on the contrary, it must needs be a great Ornament to
such Persons to have that firmness and rectitude of Mind, that candor and
goodness of Temper, that Civility and decent Address, and that conformity to
the Laws of Decorum, Honor and Virtue; which are Properties of Generosity. And
herein, those of ancient Families, and those of later Creation, are both
concerned. He that is Noble by Descent, has great Obligations to spur him on to
Generous and Worthy Actions: He has the Obligations that arise from the Dignity
in which he is placed, and likewise the Example of his brave Ancestors; which
ought to inspire him with a just emulation of their Virtue, and make him afraid
of incurring the Character of Degenerous, -- Magnorum indignus Avorum. And he
that has acquired Nobless by his own Merit, has, not only the Obligations which
arise from the Dignity of his present Station, but also those concurrent
Reasons which should engage him to act suitably to the Character he has gained;
lest he should afterward forfeit by Ignoble Actions, the Esteem and Dignity
which he had before so worthily acquired, and should as it were degenerate from
himself. These are Considerations which as they more particularly affect the
Nobility and Gentry, so they ought to be of great weight with them. It is true,
that the most solid Obligations of all, to Generosity, are those which result
from the Nature of Things, and which concern all Men equally of whatever
degree. For it is undoubtedly more honorable to imitate God Almighty himself,
than the most virtuous and excellent Men that ever were: And there are stronger
Reasons to engage Men to a generous and virtuous Behavior, which may be
fetched from the nature of Virtue it self, than any that arise barely from the
consideration of secular Dignity and Eminence, or the Example of Ancestors.
Nevertheless, where there are concurrent Reasons, some of higher, others of
lower Obligation, they ought all to be allowed their just force, and all made
use of to engage Men to honorable and virtuous Courses, since all the
Arguments of both sorts which can be brought, are commonly found hardly
effectual for that purpose. But as Generosity is a Principle of acting, very
much becoming Persons of elevated Character and great Fortunes; and they have
additional Arguments above many other Men, to engage them to the practice of
it: So it is easy to discern, that the practice of it is like to be more
illustrious in them, and more beneficial to the World, than the practice of the
same in Men of inferior Condition. The Vices of great Men are more conspicuous
than those of meaner Folks: And so are their Virtues. Their Character and
Station is more Public, and their Example both of greater force and of more
diffused Influence: And the greater is their Power of doing either good or
hurt, They have commonly many Tenants, Clyents and Dependents, to whom their
Generous Behavior is like to bring great Advantage, and the contrary, great
Mischief and Damage: And perhaps the well or ill-being in the World, of these
People, must be in great measure owing to the generous or ungenerous
disposition of their Patrons. So that it must needs be of very diffusive
Benefit, for Men who have high Characters or great Commands, who are Governors
of Territories, or Lords of great Demeans, or who have great Offices and
Entrustments in the State, and in Proportion, for others of lesser Quality or
Power, to be of a true and generous Temper. And this will be, not only of great
Ornament, but likewise of great use to themselves. It will gain them the
Affection and Esteem of their Dependants and Neighbors, and likewise their
Prayers and good Wishes; it will give them Power and Sway in their Countries;
it will engage all that know them to stand by them, and render them all the
good Offices they can: In short, it will procure them the satisfaction and
pleasure of Mind that attends generous and worthy Actions in this Life, and the
Rewards of Virtue in the future Life.

It would moreover be of great Advantage to the Public, if Men in their
several Professions and Employments would pursue this Principle more exactly.
And the more reputable a Man's Profession is, he has in a sort the greater
Obligation upon him so to do. Thus, for Instance, a Generous Lawyer would think
it dishonorable to betray a Cause he is entrusted in; to plead in a Cause,
after he is fully satisfied it is unjust, with that warmth and application which
is due only to a just one; to give Advice with a regard rather to his own
Profit, than either to the Law or the Suitors Benefit; to blow the Coals of
Contention, or encourage litigious and frivolous Suits which he knows
beforehand will be of no Fruit to the Party; or in more just or colorable
Causes to spend the Clients Money unnecessarily in skirmishing and playing of
Prizes about Matters wherein Justice or the Merits of the Cause are nothing
concerned; to apply the Law to the contriving or defending of Frauds and
Oppressions, or pervert it to the hurt or ruin of the innocent and honest
Person whom it is ordained to protect. These things, and such like, a Generous
Man, whether he be of higher or lower Character in the Profession, will think
himself obliged to avoid as dishonorable nourable and base. And the same
Principle will influence the Physician and Men of other Professions, in their
respective Employments. And likewise the Merchant and Tradesman in his Dealings
and Commerce. It would be a means to restrain Men from the injurious Arts of
Monopoly and Exaction, from Lying, Dissembling and other insidious and ill
Practices that are too often used in buying and selling. And as the several ill
Practices before mentioned, are dishonorable in themselves, contrary to the
Rules of Sincerity and Justice, and prejudicial to the good Order and
Prosperity of the Public: So the Virtues opposite thereunto, which Generosity
is suited to produce, are both excellent in themselves, and likewise of great
benefit to the Public.

Nor is there indeed any Body of so inferior a Station in the Commonwealth,
but what is capable of acting, in some measure, by this Principle. The meanest
Artificers and Countrymen have a Reputation as well as other Men, and are
concerned to preserve it inviolate. They are all under the Laws of Virtue and
Decorum. They have all a Freedom of Nature, and can resolve to use it for the
best Purposes. And sometimes are found to act upon better and nobler
Principles, than Men of Character and Education. It must be confessed, that
Generosity does not consist in bearing the Port of a Gentleman, or making a
Figure in the World. It is compatible with all Conditions of Human Life. And is
indeed more effectually demonstrated by submitting to a mean Fortune for the
sake of Honesty and Virtue, than by seeking a higher Character or Station at
the Price of good Conscience or Discretion. It is exercisable by all Men in
their several Degrees, whether they be in higher or lower Capacity; and serves
to distinguish Men by their Minds and Spirits, rather than by their external
Character or Station. Particularly, it may be exercised in the state of
Marriage or single Life, of Mastership or Service, of Travel or Residence, of
Plenty or Penury; in Offices Judicial or Ministerial, in Employments Civil or
Military, in Peace or in War, in Victory or Defeat, in Honor or Disgrace, in
Health or Sickness, in Safety or Danger. It is of use to preserve Peace and
good Understanding between Domestics and Kinsfolks, between Neighbors and
Townsmen, and People that have mutual Intercourse; by engaging Men to that
Civility, Complaisance and Decency of Deportment, which is of great force to
prevent Quarrels or Mis-understandings, and the ill Consequences of them; by
deterring Men from a sordid or provoking Carriage toward one another; by
cureing or preventing that Envy and Illnature which too often happen between
Men of the same Callings or of the same Families or Neighbourhoods; and which
sometimes produce mischievous Effects. It will help to give a Sweetness and
Ornament to Conversation: And make Friendships and Correspondencies delightful,
orderly and lasting. In a word, there is no State of Life, or Relation that Men
stand in to one another, which excludes the exercise of it. Thus it is very
ample and extended in its Influence, and helps Men to govern their Actions in
such manner as is very conducive to preserve Virtue, Order, Quiet and good
Agreement amongst Men. As to several other particular Uses of this Principle,
they may, many of them, be so evidently collected from what has been spoken in
the Description and Interpretation of it, which I am not willing to repeat; and
others may be so easily supplied from any Man's own Observation; that I think it
needless to enter upon detailing them. So much then for the Usefulness of this
Principle.

But after all, if any Man, upon comparing the Temper of Mind and Course of
Action of those who are or pass for Generous Men, with the Description which I
have given of Generosity, should pretend that Generosity, as I have described
it, looks rather like an airy Idea than a thing practicable by Mankind; since
it would be hard (if not impossible) to find a Man endued with all those
Qualities which I have ascribed to it: I say, if any Man should object in this
manner, he may please to observe, that I do not say, he cannot be a Generous
Man who has not every particular Qualification which I have ascribed or which
may be ascribed to that Character. A Man may, no doubt, be a Generous and
Virtuous Man, though he be not perfect in Generosity and Virtue. The Habits of
the Mind are capable of several degrees, or receive (as they speak) Magis and
Minus. There is confessedly a great deal of difference between Virtue
considered formally or in its pure Nature, and considered subjectively or under
that Allay in which it is wont to appear in human Actions. It were indeed much
to be wished, that Mankind could as easily express the Purity and Sublimity of
Virtue in their Spirits and Actions, as they can represent it in Words and
Descriptions. But this is not to be expected. For my part, I am as ready as any
one, to acknowledge the Imbecility of our Nature, since I find so many
sensible Proofs of it in other Men, but particularly in my self. And, I
believe, it is a subject of great Grief to those who sincerely aspire after
Virtue, to find so many Obstructions and Impediments in their Progress, arising
from their own Nature: To find themselves divided as it were against
themselves, so that whilst one part of them is inclined to make its Efforts
after Virtue, another part of them retards and hinders by its revulsive
Motions. This is the conflict of the Flesh and Spirit, which gives Men so many
difficulties, and renders their practice of Virtue so feeble and imperfect. But
as this shows only the Imperfection of our Nature, so it can be no just
Argument against the excellency of this or any other Virtue considered in it
self. If then we would take an Idea of any Virtue, we must not take it barely
from the practice of particular Men, or the feeble Representations which they
are wont to give of it in their Spirits and Actions, but from that and from the
nature of Virtue it self together. We are to consider the nature of things, and
to frame a Notion of the excellency of the Principles of our Minds by the
consideration of their abstracted Nature, and of their Conformity to that
Exemplar of Perfection which is in the divine Mind. If therefore we find the
Characters of Generosity agreeable to the noblest and divinest Principles of
our Minds, in conformity to that original Perfection which is in the divine
Nature it self (to which all Virtues and good Qualities that are in Men, are in
their measure and degree conformable and correspondent; otherwise they could
not be such:) We cannot reasonably deny it to be in it self of that Excellency
and Usefulness which I have mentioned, how faintly or imperfectly soever it may
be exhibited in the Spirits and Practice of particular Men. But it ought to be
thought sufficient, that all the Characters which I have attributed to it, are
to be found upon some ones or others of that Body of great and good Men which
have been or are in the World; and consequently have had, and now have, a real
Existence. From hence then we may conclude, that there is in reality such a
Principle, and that it is in some degree attainable by us. And the more
excellent a Principle it is in it self, we ought in reason the more earnestly
to endeavor to attain as great a Perfection in it as it is possible for us: Not
fainting though we cannot make good in our Spirits and Actions all the
Characters of it, but endeavoring to make good as many of them as we are able;
and laboring throughout the course of our Life (which will be a noble
Ambition) to make continually further Advances.

Having thus given a Description of Generosity, I think it superfluous to use
Arguments to engage Men to the Love and Practice of it. If it be of so lovely
and excellent a Nature, as I have set it forth to be, that is the most forcible
Argument in the World, why we should endeavor after it. One need not take
pains to incite Men to love a beautiful Object; they do it naturally, and
cannot help it. Demonstrating that a thing is such, is beyond all the
collateral Arguments of Persuasion that can be used. If in the process of this
Discourse, I have done that with respect to Generosity, there will be no need
of further Persuasions: And if I have not, Persuasions would be insignificant.

III. In regard, therefore, Generosity is a thing so excellent in its Nature,
and so beneficial in its use, it is like to be worth our Pains to enquire, How
it may be acquired, or afterward improved in our Minds. Now when I speak of
acquiring it, I do not suppose that there is any Man, by Nature, totally void
of it, or at least of some Predisposition to it. All Men have the Seeds and
Rudiments of it so far as they have a sense of Good and Evil, Decency and
Indecency, Honor and Shame. But since those Rudiments cannot properly, of
themselves, give Men the denomination of Generous; for nothing can do that, but
some degree of the habit of Generosity: He who would acquire that Character,
must improve those Rudiments to that degree, at least, which may be effectual
to denominate him such. Now to discover how this may be done, there is not, I
conceive, need of any extraordinary Art. The thing is plain and obvious to any
Man's Understanding.

First, therefore, we must address our selves in a due manner to God Almighty,
beseeching him to bestow upon us this Virtue. And, Secondly, we must firmly and
maturely resolve to do all that we can possibly to attain it. The
Consideration, that God Almighty is the Sovereign Author and Giver of all
Virtues, shows the necessity of the former: And the Consideration, that Men
cannot ordinarily become Virtuous or Happy, without their own Choice and
Endeavor, shows the necessity of the latter. And indeed the reasonableness and
necessity of doing these two Things is so evident, that I think it needless
either to insist upon proveing it, or to use Arguments to engage Men to put
them in practice. But it must be observed, that these two ought to go hand in
hand. And both must be performed with that Sincerity of Mind which is necessary
upon so just an occasion. As for what relates to our own Endeavors, the Method
we take in other Cases, will serve in this. If we would acquire a Habit of
Justice, Temperance, or the like Virtues: We steadfastly resolve, and excite our
selves, to perform those Offices which pertain to Justice, Temperance, etc. and
endeavor to avoid the contrary Vices: If we offend, we renew our good
Resolutions, and with doubled care and diligence endeavor to put them in
Execution. The like we must do in this Case. And herein we have this further
Encouragement, that the same Methods which serve for acquiring this Habit, will
likewise serve for our improveing in it. But more particularly, let us consider
briefly, in what manner our Endeavors upon this occasion may be exerted.

First; because we find it natural to Mankind to act agreeably to the Notions
which they have conceived of things: And because Men cannot Choose, nor by
consequence Act, rightly, till they can competently distinguish between things,
and know what is fit to be chosen and what is to be refused: It is necessary,
therefore, that we endeavor in the first place to possess our Minds with just
Sentiments concerning the nature of Things; particularly, concerning the
Differences between Good and Evil, Decent and Indecent, Honorable and
Dishonorable. So also, because it is found by experience, that there are many
things which Men will not set about in good earnest, till such time as they are
convinced that they are under some Obligation to the doing of them, or that it
is for their Honor or Interest to do them: It is necessary, that we represent
to our Minds with all the force and perspicuity possible, those Considerations
which demonstrate, as well the honorable and becoming nature of Virtue and its
happy Consequences, as likewise the firm and indispensable Obligation we are
under, to act according to the Rules which it prescribes. And, because, on the
other hand, it is found by experience, that it is of great use to restrain Men
from the Commission or Practice of several things, to convince them that they
ought not to do those things, and that the doing of them will be both very
Pernicious and very Dishonorable to them: It seems necessary, that we
likewise represent to our Minds, with all the force and perspicuity possible,
those Considerations which serve to make us sensible, that Vice is really Base
and Dishonorable, that it draws after it the bitterest and most pernicious
Consequences that can be imagined, and that we are under the most solid
Obligations in the World, to refuse and avoid it with all our Power. And this
is to be done so frequently, that the wholesome Conclusions we draw from these
Considerations may make a deep Impression upon our Minds, and beget in us an
habitual and immovable Conviction of the reasonableness and necessity of
acting accordingly. Having, therefore, opened our Minds to a just and exact
Consideration of the true nature of Things, and thereupon formed certain
general Judgments or Rules by which we may conduct our Actions so, as to ehuse
that which is Good, Decent and Honorable, and to shun and avoid the contrary;
and even to prefer that which is more Good, Decent and Honorable, before that
which is less so: It will only remain, that we firmly and advisedly resolve
with our selves to go, in all Cases, as near as we can, by those Rules; and
whether we be more or less knowing, endeavor to act according to the best of
our Skill and Knowledge. And by this means we shall be put in a way of making
the right and best use both of our Understandings and our Wills, which are the
two great Springs from whence our Actions do proceed.

But, further; because it is found, that Men are naturally bent to desire and
prosecute those things which appear to be lovely and amiable; It seems
proper, that we should likewise take all fit Occasions to contemplate and
represent to our selves the amiable nature of this Virtue of Generosity; that
as it is very beautiful in it self, so it may appear, in a lively manner such
to our Minds. A Beauty will not Charm, if concealed or unobserved. Nor will
Generosity appear to us Lovely, as it is, unless we turn the Eyes of our Minds
toward it. It is necessary, therefore, in this Case, that we apply our selves
as well to consider the Characters of Generosity in the Theory, as likewise to
observe, how beautiful it appears to be in such as exercise it in a just
manner; what a Charm and Engagement it carries with it; how Decent, how
Venerable, how Agreeable to our best Thoughts, it is. By this means we shall be
inspired with the Love and Admiration of it, and consequently be engaged to
pursue it with Vigor.

In a word; though it be of good use to set before our selves, in general, good
and wholesome Rules of acting, and to make general Resolutions of pursuing them,
and to strengthen those Resolutions with such Considerations and Motives as are
proper for that purpose: Yet it seems material to be observed, that this will
hardly be effectual, unless we likewise enure our selves, actually to put in
execution the Resolutions which we make, and reduce those Rules into Practice
in particular Cases. Experience shows, how heedless and unvigilant Men are wont
to be, and how ineffectual and ill usory their general Resolutions often prove:
Insomuch, that for want of confirming themselves in the Habits of Virtue by
particular and repeated Acts, they sometimes fall into the contrary Habits of
Vice, and undo all the good Resolutions they had formerly made. It is found,
that Habits are gained by the frequent repeating of particular Acts, and are
confirmed and improved by Use and Practice; nor can indeed long subsist without
it. And so in particular is the Habit of Generosity. And, therefore, we must of
necessity enure and accustom our selves to particular Acts of Generosity, if we
desire to acquire the Habit of it, or to continue or improve in that Character.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. line, 12. add 1. p. 13. l. 5. for Perfections read Perceptions. p 14.
l. 8. after [esteem] make a; p. 28. l. 8. r. compounded. p. 33. l. 24, after
that, add it. p. 36. l. 13. r. make such use of it, as that it may, p. 42. l.
25. f. undertake r. undervalue. p. 65. l. 24. f. on r. in. and l. 25. f. in r.
on.


