Some REMARKS on Captain Dorrill's Answer to Mr. Littleton's Letter, concerning
a Debt Owing to one Muttredas in India, by the East India Company.
MVttredas's Procuration and Letter to Mr. Littleton, is Dated the 15th and
19th days of January, 169^, and the Bill for the Fifty Thousand Rupees, with 12
l. per Cent, per Annum, is dated in December, 1685. To the Copy of which Bill
(sent over to Mr. Littleton,) Captain Dorril, Doctor Evance, and Captain
Bromhill, are Witnesses.

That the Company gave Muttredas a full and ample Release (the Original whereof
is ready to be produced to the Honorable House of Commons) in October 1685.
being two Months before the borrowing of this Fifty Thousand Rupees: So that if
there were such Demands by the East India Company upon the said Muttredas, as
Sir John Goldsborough was pleased to pretend; yet the same are thereby
discharged.

That Muttredas sent such a Procuration to Sir Josiah Child, and that Sir
Josiah Child made such an Award, and has now ordered such, Goods to be sent to
Muttredas, as Captain Dorrill in his Answer asserts, is modestly supposed to be
what that Generous Captain has been informed; and that may be all he intends,
when he offers to make Affidavit thereto, if required; for the Company to talk
big, and to vouch Hear-says for Truth, and believe it, is no new nor strange
thing.

Their Confidence in laying such an Account before the Honorable House of
Commons, wherein they reckon the Cost of all their fifteen Ships (when they had
Advice that the Thomas her Cargo was Invested, and sent Home from Surratt) is
singular, and it is no less, in their endeavoring to Conceal this Debt of
Muttredas in Bengall, where they pretended to owe nothing, yet are now forced
to own it with this pretty Evasion.

But if Muttredas his Letter is to be believed, he has not only this, but
greater Demands upon the Company; and so have abundance of People more.

And it will be well for all that have any thing to do with the Company, if the
Martha's Cargo Arrived in the Bay and the London Frigat's Cargo, Arrived at the
Fort St. George (two of the aforesaid fifteen Ships) have not been Invested and
sent home from those places, as was the Thomas's from Surratt. For it is
notoriously known, that the Company are in such bad Circumstances in India, as
that they have very little either Stock or Credit there; which a Worthy Member
of the Honorable House of Commons, lately Arrived from thence, can Testify if
he pleases.

Note, The Debt of Muttredas, stands in the Company's Books, of the 30th of
April, 1686. Signed by Francis Ellis, for which he is Credited in the Name of
Colliangee, Fifty Thousand Rupees at Interest.

In the Books of 1687. This Debt by Virtue of a Consultation there, is brought
from Colliangee to Muttredas his Credit, and from thence it is carried to a,
general Account of Hugley Merchants; and so remains there, as so many obsolete
Debts which the Company would discharge by such like Pretenses against those
Merchants, if the same might so pass: But whoever Ingrafts upon them, will be
necessitated (in all probability) to have the Fatiegue, Loss, and Charge, of
making up and satisfying, not only the said Debt to Muttredas, but all other
their embroiled Debts and Accounts, in the several Places they have Traded unto
in India.


