SOME REMARKS Upon the PRESENT STATE OF THE East India Company's Affairs: WITH
REASONS For the speedy Establishing A New Company, To Regain that almost Lost
TRADE, Which is Computed to be in Value and Profit one full Sixth Part of the
Trade of the whole Kingdom.

LONDON: Printed in the YEAR, 1690.

SOME REMARKS Upon the PRESENT STATE OF THE East India Company Affairs, etc.
I Shall not here go about to rake into all the Miscarriages of the East India
Company, and consequently Misfortunes of the Nation, but only touch upon, and
date them, from the time that the Stock and Sir Josiah Child were at their
greatest height and prosperity, in the Year 1682. When on a sudden he forsook
all his old Friends that first introduced him, with great difficulty, into the
Committee, and afterward raised him to the Honor of Governor, throwing them
totally out of the Management, as Sir Samuel Bernardiston, Sir John Mordent,
Sir Matthew Andrews, Sir Humphrey Edwin, Thomas Papillon, Charles Thorold, John
Page, and Tho. Canham, Esquires, for not yielding and complying with his new
Projects, which were foreseen by his said Friends and others, to be fatal and
destructive: But he was deaf to their Advice, betaking himself to new
Counselors that were very ignorant in the Trade. And having strengthened
himself with his new Party, he proceeded afterward to cast off Sir John
Banks, Sir Jeremy Sambrooke, Sir Tho. Daval, Major Robert Thomson, Edward
Rudge, and Coll. Clarke, with others, who had long Experience in that Trade,
some of whom went too far with him, and many of them did afterward fall under
his Mis-representation at Court as being Ill-affected to the Government for
Selling and Lessening their Stocks, and not Joining in Matters that the Law
would not justify; so that these Gentlemen, or so many of them that stood in
his way, being removed, the Great Ministers and Chief Men at Court fell in with
Sir Josiah, not doubting, but to have found a sufficient Fund for carrying on
any public Design either of War or otherwise: And by his great annual
Presents, he could command both at Court and in Westminster Hall what he
pleased; and thereupon a great Fleet was prepared with Soldiers and all other
Warlike Preparations; sometimes giving out, It was against the Dutch, which
Affair was managed and consulted by Sir Josiah and a private Committee, although
those Worthy Gentlemen of the said Committee often declared they knew very
little or nothing of what was transacted: But in the end, the hopeful Treaty
that was then on foot in London by Commissioners appointed from Holland for
restoring and making satisfaction for Bantam was rejected, and new Measures
taken, to the great surprise of the Dutch Nation, and the considering Men
amongst our selves, who had any cognizance of the Affair: Till at last (Matters
being not yet ripe abroad to fall upon the Protestants) all this Warlike
Preparation ended in a War with the Great and Mighty Emperor the Mogul and the
King of Syam.

THIS Storm thus falling upon the Mogul and the good King of Syam, our Ships
were employed in India for the taking and seizing of all their, and their
Subjects, Ships and Estates, even those in our Ports at Bombay, though they had
our Factors Passes for security, without either Declaration of War, or Demand
first made, which has occasioned such a Confusion and Disorder (besides the
great Diminution of the Nations Honor) that all our many beneficial Settlements
are ruined, the Fruit of which we had but yet begun to taste, especially in the
Bay of Bengall, which is the greatest and richest Province in any known part of
the Universe, being subject to the Nabab or Chief Governor under the Mogul. And
in the space of about 23 Years, our Trade in that Province alone, has advanced
from 8000 l. to upwards of 300000 l. per annum, and had not this pernicious War
intervened, it might have been by this time carried on much further by a
prudent Conduct, to the great Honor and Advantage of the Nation. But when our
last Advices came from those Parts, by the Ship Rochester, Affairs were there
in greater Confusion and Disorder than ever, occasioned by fresh Descents and
Depredations that had been committed under the conduct of Captain Heath; so
that the Breach is now much wider (notwithstanding at the last Sessions of
Parliament, Sir Josiah Child had the assurance to declare at the Bar of the
Honorable House, That a Peace was actually concluded.

THIS being the present sad Condition of that important Trade, which will be
irretrievably lost, if some speedy and proper Remedies be not applied to regain
and settle it. It Is therefore humbly hoped our Honorable Representatives will
think it worthy their Regard: And the zealous desire I have to see it thrive
and flourish, prompts me to offer my private Thoughts concerning the most
suitable Methods for the Establishing it, to the Honor and Interest of the
Nation.

(...)
