Imprimatur,

Edmund Bohun.
November. 22. 1692.
SOME SHORT REMARKS Upon the Present State of Affairs; In a LETTER to a MEMBER
Of the HONORABLE House of Commons,

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley in Russel Street, Covent Garden, 1692.

Some short Remarks upon the present State of Affairs; In a Letter to a Member
of the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
YOu desire me to repeat to you the Substance of our last Discourse, relating
to the present State of the Nation; In which I should find some Difficulty to
comply with you, if the Reasons, you give, were not too strong to be contended
with. But you may be assured, that your Promise to conceal my Name, is not the
weakest Argument you have used, to make me publish my Thoughts. For, as Truth
has her Credentials writ in her Face, and needs not the Support either of
Persons or Parties, where she meets with sound Understandings: So I would not
willingly be obliged to answer every Fool in his Folly.

Our Nation is to be considered as a Man that is brought by Distempers into an
ill Habit of Body. And, to make a right Judgment of our Disease, we must
enquire into the Rise and Progress of it. To which end we must look back as far
as the Reign of King Charles the First.

The unhappy Occurrences of those Times put the Nation in a Ferment, that has
never since been thoroughly settled, and was the Seed from which our present
Misfortunes are grown. All England was divided into Parties, and the Youth of
the Nation, that was then springing up, took their first Tinctures from their
respective Factions; which bred a certain Hatred and Animosity, that grew up
with them, and became Natural. Insomuch that every Man was esteemed, not
according to his real Value, but according to the Opinion that was held of his
Party.

When this Tragedy of the State was wrought up to a Crisis, and the Scenes were
stained with Royal Blood; the young Princes were transplanted to a Soil wholly
improper for 'em. For they fell into the Hands of Ministers, that wanted
neither Wit nor Malice, to make use of such a Turn. Who imagined, being Masters
of our Source, easily to pollute our Streams. And indeed they did it
effectually. For when another Turn of Things happily brought in the King,
Experience tells us what Foreign Principles and Maxims he unhappily brought in
with him.

But being a Prince that valued his Ease and Pleasure above all Considerations
whatsoever, he never pushed his Designs farther, than to gratify his Senses,
and keep fair with all the World. Which made his Ministers study Cunning more
than Prudence; and all sorts of Juggling grew universally in Fashion. The Mask
was taken off. Honor and Trust were publicly bought and sold; and those who
had Employments, studied more to get Money by 'em, than how to execute 'em
well. All this made such a Confusion of Persons and Things, that the Disease of
the Body Politic dispersed it self though every Part; and the Noble Parts were
not the least affected. For the Luxury and Supiness of the Court (as is usual
in all such Cases) was attended with an Excess of Ill Management. And when the
Public Treasures were drained pretty near the Bottom, the most valuable
Interests, as well as Secrets, of the Nation were sold to France, to support a
lazy and ignoble Gallantry. And at the same Time the Youth of our Nobility and
Gentry were sent thither to be educated, and learn the Fashion in their
Principles as well as Dress. For the Ministers of France were in the Bottom of
all this, being as active and plotting, as we were idle and unthinking.

And here I cannot but take Notice of one of the blackest Contrivances, that
ever perhaps was formed. A Design was laid to bring in Popery among us; and in
order to this, 'twas thought necessary first to remove the Religion we had,
that we might afterward be more capable of receiving a new one. To promote
this there wanted neither Precept nor Example, Atheism, Irreligion, and Ill
Nature (the Fundamental Principles of all Villainy) were set up by some of the
keenest Wits of the Age (I do not say the soundest) as Principles of
Philosophy; and not ill seconded by the Practices of the Court. Don't think I
am canting (for you know me to be neither a Bigot, nor a Hypocrite) when I tell
you, that no State in the World ever flourished, where Religion of some sort or
other) was not seriously professed and publicly countenanced; nor indeed can
Natural Causes, any more than Providence, admit it to be otherwise.

But (to return to what I was saying) the Principles and Practices of the Court
grew at last so notorious, and the Nation was so tired with being often tricked
and deceived, that Men of Sense and Honesty began to have their Eyes open, and
to take such Measures as the Occasion made necessary. This revived and fomented
the Division between the Court and the Country; insomuch that a Man could not
be a Friend to the one, without declaring himself an Enemy to the other.

When this unhappy Prince concluded his Reign, the rash and unsteady Conduct of
his Successor was so far from settling the tottered State, that he quickly
drove Things to the last Extremities. And of what immediately ensued the
Impressions are still fresh upon all our Minds.

But now we have a new Scene of Things, and are arrived at another Crisis, that
must for ever ruin or confirm the Religion, Honor, Laws, and Liberties of
England; A Crisis, which if not prudently and nicely managed, is likely to
prove our last. For a small Portion of Experience, and a moderate Knowledge of
what has passed in the World (with but a competent Measure of Common Sense)
will make it clearly and distinctly evident to any Man, that if this Settlement
fails, or the French Power breaks in upon us, England (as a free Nation) is for
ever lost. Which is clearly demonstrated by reducing the whole Matter to these
three Points.

First, Either we must submit to the Power of France. Or, Secondly, We must
bring back the late King James, which will (in its Consequences) be much the
same Thing. Or, Thirdly, We must resolve vigorously to support the present
Government against all its Enemies, Domestic and Foreign.
Now as to the First of these; No Wise or Honest Man can ever so much as
entertain a Thought of submitting to a French Power. If we consider how
inhumanly that Prince tyrannizes over his own Native Subjects, and how
barbarously he tramples upon his New Conquests. And in all his Cruelties, and
Persecutions, has no regard either to Merit, Age, or Sex; We must be blind not
to read our own Doom, if ever we should fall under the Weight of his Power. And

Secondly, to think of bringing back the late King James, would be so few
Degrees from Driveling, (unless in such as are that way inclined from ill
Principles and Designs) that we could not take it amiss, if the Favorites that
came in with him, should beg us all for Fools, and so enjoy our Estates. If
ever we sink into such a stupidity, we need not be Conjurers to tell our own
Fortunes. Therefore

Thirdly, We must resolve vigorously to support the present Government against
all its Enemies Domestic and Foreign. We must indeed. And we shall certainly
do it, if the Cunning of our False Brethren does not impose upon the Ignorance
of our Weak ones. For, not to mention all the different Characters of Men, of
which we are at this Time unhappily composed, there are two sorts, which,
though they seem to sail with the same Wind, steer different Courses: And as
much as they agree in their Language and Style, yet have opposite Meanings. At
the same Time that the Enemies of our Government are studiously improving all
Occasions, to interrupt our wisest Debates, and to dash and perplex our
maturest Councils, by hollow Reasonings, pretended Difficulties, and frivolous
Enquiries; Our mistaken Friends (I speak as an Englishman) are unadvisedly led
into the same Errors, though with an honester Intention. Now as it is impossible
to know Men in this general Masquerade, it highly imports a Wise and Honest Man
to take his Measures rather from the Nature of Things, than the Countenances of
Men; And laying aside all manner of Prejudice or Partiality, diligently to
attend the Dictates of Right Reason in so important a Conjuncture.

This would lead Men into clear and untroubled Notions of Things, and secure
'em from being foolishly made the Instruments of their own Destruction. For our
Foreign (as well as our Domestic) Adversaries look upon our undiscreet
Proceedings, as the best Foundation of all their Hopes; and spare neither Cost,
nor Pains, to promote our Heats and Differences. They divert themselves with
our Folly, and are pleased with the Thoughts of our approaching Ruin. And
nothing but a faithful Enquiry into the Nature of Things, with a diligent
Attention to the Dictates of Right Reason (as I said before) nothing else can
save us. That indeed like an alterative Medicine will correct our ill Humors,
and restore us insensibly to a state of Health. 'Twill instruct us how to begin
all our Reasonings at the right end; and by equally weighing the Consequences
of Things, to give every Consideration it is true Weight and Force. As for
Instance,

To Reason profitably of the Affairs of England in so perplexed a Conjuncture
as this is, a Man must know and consider well the true Constitution of our
Government: He must purge off the corrupt Notions, he sucked in with his
Mother's Milk, and forget what he learned in the Nursery, or at School; not be
influenced in the least with a fondness of either Persons, or Parties. For a
Man to oppose the Court, and make an Interest against it, in the Reign of a
Just and Wise Prince (whose Interests are the same with our's) because his
Father did it at a time when our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, were visible
struck at; is just as if I must needs suffer a dangerous Operation, because my
Father had a Stone in his Bladder. The Interest of the Court and the Interest
of the Country are in Nature the same, and a difference between 'em is
downright Nonsense, unless either when the One, or the Other, designs an
Alteration in the Government; The first with a View of Oppression and Tyranny,
the latter of a Republic. As for the first of these; his present Majesty has
given us such constant and sensible Marks of his hearty Concern, and unwearied
Care for the Public Good, that 'twould be very disingenious and ungrateful to
suspect him; besides that there is a certain Air of Plainness, and Integrity in
all his Words and Actions; which are always a sure Mark of a Generous and
Honest Mind. Nor could his Interests lead him amiss, if his Inclinations did.
And as for the other Design, I mean of a Republic, I believe the Experiment
that was made in the Reign of King Charles the First (though attended with a
Series of strange Successes) had such dismal and terrible Consequences, that
all judicious and skilful Men must needs conclude such Designs to be as
unpracticable as they are unjust.

The Matter thus stated, why should a Division be kept on foot, by which both
Parties will certainly suffer? I do not love to judge rashly in any Case; but I
think we may safely conclude here, That whoever promotes or foments any such
Design (directly or indirectly) must needs have something out of order, either
in his Head, or in his Heart.

But (as you told me, when I had the Honor to discourse with you last) great
Complaints are made of the ill Management of the Government: Now (Sir) we must
remember, That in all Arts the Instruments are to be considered as well as the
Workmen. And I am afraid (with all the respect that is due to my Native
Country) that we are grown a little rusty with the Luxury and Idleness into
which the late Reigns have lulled us; and our Edges are blunted with an excess
of Pleasure and Debauchery, The Youth of our Nobility and Gentry want the
Advantages of Education (to make them useful to their King and Country) which
those of our Enemy's have, who are early instructed as well in all useful
Learning, as well as in the Art of War. And (as I remarked to you before) the
pernicious Councils, that took place in the Two last Reigns, have introduced
such a total Corruption of Persons and Things, as has thrown the Body Politic
into an ill Habit; and it is not in Nature to be expected, that a perfect Cure
can be wrought without a little Time and Patience. But a great many People
suspect an ill Management, only for want of Success; not considering from
whence Success comes, and that it is to be courted, not commanded. Whereas if
they were truly informed of the great and numerous Difficulties that His
Majesty meets with; and with what unwearied Vigor he renews his Application;
when (through the Failures of others) his Designs prove unsuccessful; they would
be more inclined to Admiration than Censure. If any one says, That the making
Use of good Instruments depends upon His Majesty; it may be answered, That no
Man ought to blame His Choice, without being acquainted with all the Reasons he
had for it. If Solomon himself could be supposed to come among us, in such a
confused and distracted a Conjuncture as this is, he would be at a loss (for
some time) what Measures to take. Upon the whole Matter, I am fully persuaded
(and indeed no Thinking Man can be of any other Opinion) That whatever ill
Management there has been, His Majesty has done all that was possible (on his
part) to prevent it. He is in the same Bottom with us, as Englishmen,
Protestants, and Honest Men; and it is a Madness to think that he will not take
all possible care of himself and the Nation. And one good Argument (among many
others) to convince us of His good Intentions toward us, is, His Asking Advice
of the Parliament (in His late Gracious Speech) with so much Heartiness and
Sincerity.

In Return to which, it would contribute very much to the Honor, and Credit of
Parliaments; and be of infinite Advantage to the Public, if you would enter
upon no unseasonable Debates, nor frivolous Inquiries; but observe in all your
Proceedings that Calmness and Solidity that becomes the Dignity of so great a
Council. It Is good in all Occasions to distinguish between what is Solid, and
what is Trivial; but in Affairs of Importance, it is of absolute Necessity: For
want of distinguishing these Two Things, your Time may be misspent, your best
Designs frustrated, and all your Labor lost.

In a word, the Fate of England (and of all Europe) is before you: You are
surrounded with active and subtle Enemies, that will omit no Stratagems, by
which it is possible to mislead you: You have an Opportunity to be the
Instruments of England's Glory and Happiness; which, if lost, can never be
recalled. But if you act Prudently and Sincerely (uninfluenc'd by all sorts of
Prejudice) you will lay the Foundation of your own Honor, and your Countrey's
Prosperity.

FINIS

