THE ARGUMENTS OF THE LORD KEEPER, THE TWO Lords Chief Justices, AND Mr. Baron
Powell, When They Gave JUDGMENT FOR THE Earl of BATH.

Die Martis 12 December. 1693. In the Middle Temple Hall, Com. Bathon. adv. Com.
Mountague, at al.
THIS Day being appointed by the Lord Keeper to hear the Opinions of the two
Chief Justices and Mr. Baron Powell, who assisted at the hearing of this Cause,
and to deliver his Lordship's own Judgment therein, Mr. Attorney General moved
on the Behalf of the Earl of Mountague, etc. for the Judgment of the Court; and
Mr. Baron Powell delivered his Opinion first.

Mr. Baron Powell. The Question in this Case is, Whether there be any Ground in
Equity, to set aside a Deed of Release, made in July, 1681. for the Settlement
of the late Duke of Albemarle's Estate, by which my Lord of Bath claims. The
Validity of this Deed has been tried at Law upon an Ejectment in the Court of
King's Bench, by Direction of this Court, where the Title has been found for the
Earl of Bath, by the Strength of this Deed; so that it must be agreed, my Lord
of Bath has a good Title at Law, because the Verdict has found it so, and all
Parties concerned have hitherto acquiesced under this Verdict.

This Case comes now back upon the Equity reserved, and it is only now to be
considered, what Matters of Equity have been offered to avoid this Title thus
found at Law. And those I think may be reduced to five Heads.

First; That this Deed was obtained by Surprise and Circumvention.

Secondly; That it was a concealed and a forgotten Deed.

Thirdly; That this is a Deed attendant upon a Will, and so revocable in its
own Nature, although it had no Power of Revocation in it.

Fourthly; That there is an implied Trust in this Deed, that the Duke might
have charged the Estate to the full Value, and consequently might well dispose
of it in Equity. And,

Fifthly; That the great Solemnity and Deliberation used about making the last
Will, and the publishing that Will, do amount to a Revocation in Equity,
notwithstanding that the Circumstances of the Power are not strictly pursued.

I am of Opinion in this Case, that this Deed having been affirmed by a Verdict
upon a Solemn Trial at the Bar at Law, none of these Matters are sufficient for
to ground a Decree in a Court of Equity, to set aside this Deed; and I shall
give you my Reasons for this Opinion in the same Order I mentioned those Heads
in, with particular Answers to the particular Objections under each Head.

1. It is said, this is a Deed that was obtained by Surprise and Circumvention.
Now I perceive this word Surprise is of a very large and general Extent. They
say, if the Deed be not read to or by the Party, that is a Surprise: Nay the
Mistake of a Counsel, that draws the Deed either in Misrecitals or other
things, that is a Surprise of the Counsel, and the Surprise of the Counsel must
be interpreted the Surprise of the Client. These things have been urged in this
Case, and I thought fit to mention them for the introducing my Reason against
this Head of Argument; and it is this:

That if these things be sufficient to let in a Court of Equity to set aside
Deeds found by Verdict to be good in Law, then no Man's Property can be safe: I
hardly know any Surprise that should be sufficient to set aside a Deed after a
Verdict, unless it be mixed with Fraud, and that expressly proved; and I know
not of any such proved in this Case.

It is true, Duke George by his Will, and the Settlement made upon his Son at
his Marriage, takes no notice of, or makes any Provision for the Earl of Bath;
but that, I take it, is not to be regarded as any way material at all, because
he takes no notice, in either of them, of any Body else but him that was his
Heir. But I must observe here by the way, that there was not only a very near
Relation between Duke George and the Earl of Bath, but a very intimate
Friendship cultivated by mutual Offices of Kindness between them to his Death.
And I must mention one Particular, because to me it seems a clear Answer to
this Objection, that is, His making no Provision for the Earl in the Will or
Settlement, might be the Occasion why Duke George did make such ^n earnest
Application to King Charles the Second, that upon Failure of his Issue Male,
his Majesty would please to bestow the Dukedom upon the Earl, and annex
Theobalds to it, which would then revert to the Crown. And that King did often
promise he would, and afterward did it solemnly under the Sign Manual.

But then it is said, that after this Duke Christopher made his Will, and
therein there is no notice taken of any such Disposition of his Estate to the
Earl of Bath; but that is not, I think, to be regarded neither, because that
was a Will only of his Personal Estate, and made when he was under Age, and
could not dispose of his Real Estate.

Then come we to the Year 1675. when the Will was made, to which this Deed has
some Relation, and by that Will Duke Christopher does settle a great Part of
his Estate, upon Failure of Issue of his own Body, upon my Lord of Bath. There
is no Pretense of any Surprise upon the Duke when he made this Will, and it is
plain then he had an Intention that my Lord of Bath should have a great Share
in his Estate if he died without Issue.

Now then it is to be considered what there is of Proof in this Case of any
thing that might be a Ground to conceive why he should alter this Intention
between the Years of 1675 and 1681, when this Deed was made. There is no Proof
of any Misunderstanding between the Duke and the Earl in that Interval; but on
the contrary, that there was a continual Friendship and Intercourse of Kindness
between them all the while, as does appear by a continual Succession of Letters
and other Correspondences passing between them in those Years, one of which I
cannot choose but take notice of, because of the Date of it, to wit, in June
1681. upon my Lord Lansdown's Intention to travel; wherein the Duke takes
notice of the Interest he had in my Lord of Bath's Family, and particularly in
his eldest Son, as the greatest next to that of the Earl himself: And I say, I
mention this Letter, because of the Date, that it is so near the very Date of
the Deed, that it is possible the Date was then made, because it was within a
Month after that Letter sealed and executed, therefore it might well be
referred to in it.

Next, this appears to be a Deed drawn by the Duke of Albemarle's own Counsel,
Sir Thomas Stringer; for it is proved the Paper-Draught is all of his Son's
Handwriting, except the first and last Sheet, and all of it interlined with
Sir Thomas his own Hand: Errington has proved the Abstract al of Sir Thomas his
Hand, with the very date in it, and swears that Sir Thomas examined it with
him. Now is it to be imagined that Sir Thomas Stringer should prepare such a
Settlement for the Duke to execute without any Order or Instructions from him
about it? No certainly that cannot be thought. But they say Sir Thomas Stringer
if he did draw it, might forget it or overlook it, and he now denies any
Knowledge of it. Truly, I cannot value much what Sir Thomas Stringer has sworn
in this Cause, he is not consistent with himself, and makes but a very odd
Figure in the Cause.


Mr. Stringer. My Lord, I beg your pardon for interrupting Mr. Baron Powell,
but I must vindicate my Father; he never swore a word in this Cause.


Lord Keeper. No he did not, he was dead before the Cause came into the Court.
That was a Mistake.


Mr. Baron Powell. I am sure there was Oath of what he had said about this Deed.


Mr. Stringer. That, my Lord, you may make what you please of, but he never
made any Oath in the Cause.


Mr. Baron Powell. But that which I mention him for, was, that there is Proof
apparent that he was advised with about this Deed, and he was the Duke's
constant Counsel. I do not think I confess that Sir William Jones did draw this
Deed; it is not insisted upon by the Counsel of my Lord of Bath that he did;
and any one that considers the Frame of it will think as I do. But I conceive
he was advised with upon the Proviso, and the Writing in the Margent against
the Proviso; I approve of this Proviso, I believe to be his Hand. Though
several Persons of good Credit that were well acquainted with his Hand, have
sworn they believe it not to be his Hand. But they might be mistaken, and to me
it appears by the Comparison of the Records, Deeds and Papers in open Court;
for it is plain, according to the various Nature of the several Things he writ,
or set his Hand to, he did write several Hands, and particularly wrote his Name
sometimes one way and sometimes another. And therefore upon Comparison of that
with other Papers, I do believe it to be his Hand.


The next Thing I would mention, is this; Here are six subscribing Witnesses to
the sealing and executing of this Deed at Albemarle-House, of which Sir William
Jones was one: And one Aleman, that is one of the Witnesses, swears, That when
the Duke delivered the Deed to the Earl of Bath, he wished he could have done
more for him. It was probable then the Duke believed he had done something for
him; and it is very probable too, he knew what he had done for him, when he
wished he was able to have done more. And Mr. Prideaux swears (though he does
not exactly fix the time) that the Duke told him himself he had settled his
Estate upon the Earl of Bath. Then, I say, it is hard to believe the Duke was
surprised in making this Deed, when his own constant Counsel drew it, so able a
Counsel perused and approved so main a part of it, and was present at the
Execution of it, and he should express his Wishes to be able to do more, can he
be supposed not to know what he did?

But now let us examine the Evidence, and Objections on the other side: They
say it does not appear that this Deed was ever read to the Duke, or by him. It
is indeed proved the last Will was read to him, by my Lord Chief Justice
Pollexfen, but not at the time of the Executing of it. But however, I think the
not reading of a Deed to, or by the Party that executes it, is a very slender
Objection to make out a Surprise, so as to set it aside. That would shake many
a Conveyance, I doubt it would shake many Deeds that were made and executed by
the Duke. For though he was so cautious as some of their Witnesses say, that he
would not execute any Deeds, but what his Counsel set their Hands to, yet I do
not find that any of them used to be read to him, or he himself read them at
the time he sealed them. Therefore it is a dangerous Doctrine to set aside a
Deed upon such an Account. Some People will not have Leisure to hear Deeds
read, or read them themselves.

Then they object the Mistakes and Mis-recitals of the Limitations of the Will
in the Deed, which refers to the Will, as particularly that of Norton Disney,
and some others of less moment: But God forbid that the Mistake of a Counsel in
a Recital in a Deed, should be of that great moment as to set aside the Deed
when executed by the Party.

But there is another Matter much insisted on by them as an Argument of
Surprise: that is, This Deed is pretended to be made in Confirmation of the
Will in 75, and yet it varieth from that Will in almost all the Limitations of
the Estates, except in some part of that to my Lord of Bath. I confess I have
looked over the Variations, and there are several, but I have this in general
to say to it, that I take it this Deed was made for the sake of the Earl of
Bath; and that it was for the Earl's better Security, that he bound himself up
by so strict a Proviso not to revoke. And if you look into the Deed, it will be
found to confirm the Will as to my Lord of Bath, which was the main Point of
both Deed and Will. For it sets the Estate given to him upon a firmer foot than
it was by the Will, which was revocable in its Nature: Therefore it must be
intended, as no doubt it was, for that very Purpose to secure it more to my
Lord of Bath, than it was by the Will.

But that which is said to be an Argument of the greatest weight and moment in
this Matter, that there must be Surprise in the Case, is this: It is hardly to
be believed, and almost impossible, that the Duke should send for Mr. Monk out
of Holland, by his Will desire the King to bestow upon him the Barony of
Potheridg, the ancient Seat of the Family, make a Disposition of his Estate by
a Will so solemnly prepared and deliberated upon, take care to have three parts
of it; one whereof was to be transmitted to the Duchess of Newcastle, another
part delivered by himself to Mr. Monk, and the third part taken with him to
Jamaica, and there pulled out and declared to be his Will, and yet intend no
real Disposition of his Estate by all this. These are things so dishonorable
to the Duke, that they are not easily to be believed of a Man of his Honor and
Quality.

I confess, this is an Objection of great weight, and carries much Presumption
with it, but it is Presumption only, which how far it shall conclude against a
Verdict, is left to Consideration. But besides, I would put the Case upon a
like bottom of Presumption the other way, and then see what we shall make of
it. Duke George prevails with King Charles II. to promise to make the Earl of
Bath, Duke of Albemarle upon his failure of Issue-Male; Duke Christopher, when
he comes of Age does make a Settlement of his Estate upon the Earl of Bath,
upon failure of Issue of his Body. The Earl of Bath is a Person that does heap
Obligations upon both Dukes and their Family; is Assistant to the Duke, both in
the Purchase and Sale of Albemarle-House, is continually the Chief Person
concerned in all his Affairs, nothing almost is done without him. There is no
proof of any Misunderstanding, or Ground for any, between them. Nay, it was the
Report in the Family, That if the Duke died without Issue, the Earl of Bath was
to have the Estate: He and Sir Walter Clarges are the Duke's nearest Relations;
whereas Mr. Monk, that I find, is not in the Case proved to be at all of Kin to
him, and so we must not take him to be related without proof; but only that the
Duke called him Cousin.

Now after all this, that the Duke should make this last Will, and give all
this Estate to a Stranger (for so as to any thing appears in proof) and give
nothing to the Earl of Bath, when by the former Settlement he had given him
such hopes of so great a Share; this, I think, is a very Unaccountable thing;
and, I confess, I know not how to extricate my self out of the Confusion it
causes in me: But I must set the one against the other as to that Objection,
and leave the Matter in the dark as to the Duke's Honor, as I found it;
though, I think, I may give a further Answer to this Objection under the Second
Head.

But I must speak something more under this, for I would omit nothing that I
conceive to be material in the Case. There is another thing objected that seems
dark in this Case, and that is, What was the meaning of some Parchments that
were engrossed by Thompson, the Summer before the Duke went to Jamaica? The
Jury have found that this Deed was executed in 81. And if then the other Side
would make use of this, as insinuating that they were the same Deeds, then that
is not to be admitted, as being expressly against the Verdict. But to me it
seems, That these Deeds in 87. were made upon some design to have them executed
then, perhaps to settle the Estate upon a firmer foot than it was thought
before. The Earl of Bath perhaps might be Jealous that the Duchess might
prevail upon the Duke to revoke the former Deed in due form; and therefore
these Deeds might be prepared absolutely without any power of Revocation, and
thought he might procure the Duke to seal them so before he went to Jamaica; I
say, that might be the Intention, though what was the Design, I cannot really
tell.

But admitting that such Writings were prepared with such a design to get the
Duke to execute them, I know not that all this put together, will be a
sufficient Ground in Equity to set aside the Deed of 81. For all Designs in
gaining of Deeds, will not avoid Deeds actually made: And that is plain, from
the Case of Bodmin and Roberts, that was one of the Precedents used in this
Case, which was in short thus:

Mr. Roberts, Son to the late Earl of Radnor, married the only Daughter and
Child of Bodmin, who was so passionately fond of his Daughter, that whenever
she was in his presence, he would break out into great Fits of Passion, and
weep for Joy to see her. Notwithstanding this great fondness of his Daughter,
one Mr. Win took an Opportunity when Mr. Bodmin was under an Arrest, and
officiously came to Bail him, and insinuates into him, that his Son-in-Law was
the occasion of his being Arrested; and thereupon wrought so far upon him as to
get him into a private place, where he was removed out of his Son and Daughters
Knowledge, and where he went by a strange Name: No one of his Friends had any
access to him but Win himself, and such as he would permit. Mr. Roberts made
frequent Application to be admitted to him, but was refused, which was all in
proof. While he was under this Concealment, Win tampers with one Barry that
had Mr. Bodmin's Will in his Custody, and would have had him suppressed that
Will, whereby he gave his Estate to his Daughter. It happens during his being
thus secured he falls sick, then there is a Will prepared for him to give this
Estate away to Win from his only Daughter; they get three Witnesses to the
Execution of it. This Will was never read over to him; this appears in the
proof, but they get him to execute it: And he dies. Hereupon Mr. Roberts
exhibits his Bill in this Court to set aside this Will. There was proof made of
all this Matter that I have opened, and this Point, of Surprise in obtaining
this Will, was insisted upon strongly. The Lord Chancellor at the Hearing of
the Cause, was assisted by the Chief Justice Bridgman, the Chief Baron Hales,
and Justice Rainsford. But notwithstanding all this proof, they could not
prevail to set aside this Will in this Court; and afterward when they came
into the House of Lords, they were of the same Opinion, and it ended at last in
Relief by the Legislative Power, an Act of Parliament.

This now I take to be much stronger for Relief, if any could be, than the Case
now in Question; and if then upon such apparent Surprise and Practice it could
not be set aside in Equity, sure this cannot, where there does appear no proof
at all of any such thing.

I come then to consider the Second Head of Argument against this Deed, that it
was a concealed and forgotten Deed. Now that it was concealed from the
Duchess, and those that were thought her Agents, I agree it so; and it is
plain, it was always intended it should be so. But that it was concealed from
the Duke, I think has no Ground at all. The thing they would infer it from, is
the Evidence of Aleman, whose Testimony was read once and again; and he says,
This Deed at the time of the Execution of it, was delivered to the Earl of
Bath, whence they infer he carried it away, and kept it concealed from the Duke
who forgot it: But upon reviewing Aleman's Deposition, it can be understood to
mean no other, but only delivered to that effect as a Deed to his Use; but not
that it was delivered to him for Custody, and carried away by him.

No truly, it seems plain to me from all the Proofs and Circumstances of the
Case, That this Deed did remain in the Custody of the Duke of Albemarle; For
that Sir Thomas Stringer, a little before the Duke went into Jamaica, does draw
an Abstract of it, in which the very date is mentioned; which could not be
drawn from the Paper-draught where the date is in Blank, but must be from the
Deed it self: And how should he have the Deed to do it by, unless it was in the
Duke's Custody?

Besides, there is a strong proof, That the Will of 75 was in the Earl's
Custody once; for the Duke sent to him into the Country for it, and the Earl
brought it up with him; for it is plain by the wording and framing of the last
Will in 87, my Lord Chief Justice Pollexfen had it in his Custody for comparing
the one with the other; they run so in the same manner, that it is impossible
but he that drew the last, must have the first by him at the same time.

How then came this Deed of 1681, and this Will of 1675, into the Custody of
the Earl of Bath, under the same Cover with the Seal of the Duke of Albemarle's
Coat of Arms on it? for so it was produced first by the Earl of Bath, after the
notice of the Duke's Death in Jamaica. This cannot be imagined how it could be
any otherwise, than as the Earl of Bath says in his Answer, that they were
delivered so to him by the Duke a little before his going beyond Sea; or else
that the Earl of Bath found them so sealed up and covered among the Duke's
Writings. And either way it is a mighty strong Proof, that the Deed was all
along till he went to Jamaica in his own Custody, and not in the Earl of Bath's.

But however, it is further objected, That it was a forgotten Deed. Methinks
what I last urged is a very good Proof it was not forgotten: but there is yet
further Proof of it. Not long before he went abroad, the Duke had some
Discourse with Mrs. Crofts, who (as she swears) was told by him, that she
should have a good Neighbor at New-hall if he should miscarry beyond Sea, to
wit, my Lord of Bath. And Lane, that is one of the Duke's Servants, does swear,
that the Duke told him, That after his Death the Earl of Bath would have
New-hall. Mr. Crosts swears, That upon his Application to know who he should
address to in case of his Grace's Death, the Duke told him, all he could do for
him, was to recommend him to the Earl of Bath, and Sir Walter Clarges, and
ordered him to leave the Keys of his Writings with the Earl of Bath; for he was
most concerned in them in case he should do otherwise than well.

It is proved that the usual Discourse of the Family was, that the Earl of Bath
would have the Estate after the Duke's Death, which must happen from some
Expressions of the Duke to that purpose. And Sir Walter Clarges does in his
Answer swear, That the Duke told him, he had provided for him as the Earl of
Bath knew, which could be only by this Deed. And Mr. Greenville swears in his
Answer much to the same purpose. And Mr. Courtney swears, That eight or nine
Years ago, my Lord of Bath came to him with a Draught of a Settlement to the
same effect to advise upon: And about three Months before the Duke went to
Jamaica, he came again with a Copy of this Settlement to advise, whether a Will
would revoke it; and that he gave his Opinion it would not, if the
Circumstances of the Power were not pursued.

But now here the Objection recurs again; Is it possible to be believed that
the Duke should deliberately make so solemn a Will, take six Months time in the
drawing and publishing of it, and then execute it in the Presence of three
Witnesses, if he had not forgot this Deed, but had known all along that there
was such an one? If he did know it, and had acquainted the Counsel that drew
his Will with it, certainly he would have advised him, that unless he did
revoke it, according to the Circumstances of the Power, all this Care and
Solemnity would signify nothing.

Truly on the other side it is to be considered, Whether the six Months was
taken up in Deliberation and solemn Preparation for making of that Will; or,
whether that was not an Evidence of a Difficulty to prevail upon the Duke to do
it at all: For I must take the liberty to say, there are Proofs in the Case of
Importunities used to bring him to it. Dr. Benwick did tell the Duke, unless he
did it, the Duchess would have a Return of her Distemper, and be very bad
again. It is proved, that when Money is to be paid for the Counsels Fees, upon
drawing it the Duke was uneasy, and said, the Duchess might pay it if she
would, for it was her Business. There appears great Difficulty afterward to
get him to execute it, that Sir Thomas Stringer importuned him much to it; upon
which he grew very much in favor with the Duchess, and there was Enquiry made
for a Baronet's Patent to be got for him: all to engage him the more to get
this Work done; and when it is done, how does he bring it about? The Duke was
that Day to go by appointment to Sir Robert Clayton's to meet with my Lord
Jefferies, and seal the Deeds of Purchase of Dalby and Broughton. Sir Thomas
takes this Will in three parts, and three Witnesses along with him to Sir
Robert's; and after my Lord Jefferies were gone, and the Duke in a fretting
discontented Humor, he gets him into a private Room in that House, and then
tells him he had brought his Will to him to seal; and the Duke, as Mr. Crofts
swears, was unwilling to do it then, and would have put him off, but he pressed
the Duke very hard to do it then, and told him he must do it, for he was to be
gone the Northern Circuit the next day, and could not be at the Execution of
it; upon which he did it, but not till after much urging and solicitation.

Now I would argue hence, Why should the Duke of Albemarle be uneasy and
disturbed at his being importuned to execute this Will, after so much Pains and
so much Time in the drawing and preparing it? I cannot imagine any reason why,
but that he had not forgotten this Deed, which he never intended to alter, and
yet must do something to satisfy some body's Importunity. He knew he should in
doing it, do a thing that would look very odly one day, and that made him so
uneasy, tho at last he did comply and did it.

But admit this Deed had been at that time forgotten by him, or concealed from
him, Would this in a Court of Equity be a sufficient Ground to set it aside? I
confess of a Purchaser where one that claims by such a Deed, will stand by, and
permit the Purchase to go on and conceal the Deed; as to that Purchase the Deed
will be a fraudulent Deed; but there is nothing of that in this Case, neither
such a Purchase, nor such a Concealment: And therefore it can signify nothing
here to set aside this Deed, tho concealed and forgotten.

But now I come to a third Head of Objections; That this Deed is a Deed
attendant upon the Will of 1675, and so revocable in its one nature, as a Will
would be, although it contained in it no Power of Revocation. This was very warmly
insisted upon by the Counsel of Mr. Monk.

I confess there is such a thing as a revocable Deed attendant upon a Will
which is revocable; that is, where a Man does suffer a common Recovery, and
makes a Deed subject to his last Will and Testament; such or such an Use may be
declared by Indenture under Hand and Seal as intended at that time of the
Recovery. But this Indenture after it has declared that Use being founded upon
an Assurance that was always subject to Uses declared in his last Will, that
Will being always changeable, the Deed may be always changeable: And so is the
Case in Dyer 314. 6. And the Reason is given in my Lord of Ormond's Case in
Hobart 349. by the Opinion of two Judges against one, because the Foundation,
which is his last Will, is always revocable. But such an Indenture to declare
Uses is revocable; but a Feofment, or a Lease, and Release to Uses referring to
a Will, or made to confirm a Will, that that should be revocable, there is no
Color nor any Authority of Law for it.

The fourth Head is, That there is an implied Trust, that the Duke might charge
this Estate to the full Value; therefore in Equity he might dispose of the
Land. This Objection does arise upon a variance supposed between the engrossed
Deed and the Paper-draught: For it should seem that one of the Sheets in the
Paper-draught is cut just where this Trust is declared, and so they would
presume it a general Trust, which would subject the whole Estate to the Duke's
disposal,

But as to this Matter, it is sworn by Thompson, who engrossed the Deed, that
he engrossed it by the Paper not cut, and did ingross it truly according to the
Draught, and he was believed by the Jury so to have done: Therefore, I suppose
it was cut since; and if it were, the Question is by whom it was cut? Truly, I
think it not worth the trouble of enquiring after that, but it is most probable
it was not cut by those to whose disadvantage it would turn to cut it.

But here does arise a considerable Objection. By the Will of 75, there are
20000 l. Legacies given, and here is a Trust that does subject this Estate to
the Legacies of that Will of 1675, is revoked by the Will of 1687. Shall then
the Earl of Bath hold this Estate free and discharged of any Legacies by the
last Will?

I must confess this was objected on one side, but not debated on the other
side; because they that were of Counsel for the Earl of Bath, thought it did
not concern this Question now in debate. That they said might be a Question
another Time between my Lord of Bath, and any Persons that may come here to
have any Legacies given them by the Will of 1687, if the Personal Estate will
not answer, I cannot say positively but they may be payable out of this Trust,
though I give no Opinion in the Matter, it not having been debated, and so I
have not considered it.

But sure the consequence of that, if it should be so, would not be what this
Head of Arguments I am upon would infer: That if the Duke might charge the
Estate with Legacies, therefore he might dispose of it, for he has bound up
himself by this Proviso not to dispose of it but under such and such Terms.

And that brings me to the last Head; Whether this Will of the Duke of
Albemarle, made in 1687, and so solemnly done, be a Revocation in Equity,
though it do not strictly pursue the Circumstances of the Power.

I know not any Rule more clear in our Law Books than this, that all the
Circumstances prescribed and required in a Power of Revocation must be observed
to make it a good and effectual Revocation. So is Scroops Case; so is the Case
of Kibbett and Lee. There is indeed a favorable Judgment to be given in
expounding Powers, but both those Cases still agree that all the Circumstances
must be strictly observed.

It may be said then, they must be observed in Law, but in a Court of Equity it
makes another Case. For when a Man has a Power over an Estate, those
Circumstances are only a Guard upon himself that he may not be surprised into a
sudden disposition of it: But when deliberately and solemnly he has done an
Act whereby he disposes of this Estate, but there wants some little Ceremony
or Circumstance, such as the not tendering 12 d. or the like, a Court of Equity
ought to supply such a Defect to support his solemn Intention to dispose of it.
For plain it is, he is not surprised into this Act, and so the Reason for those
Circumstances does fail, and they need not be strictly observed.

This way of Arguing may seem specious in a Court of Equity I confess, but
really I think I am able to give a very plain Answer to it, and that from the
Nature of Powers of Revocation. It is certain no Conveyance at the Common Law
could have a Power of Revocation annexed to it. As a Feoffment and Livery of
Seisin; and that because the Law would not admit such an Absurdity that a Man
should give an Estate absolutely to another, but yet reserve a Power to recall
it from him at his Pleasure. It is such a repugnancy as the Common Law will not
permit. But a Man might have done this at Common Law, he might have annexed a
Condition to his Feofment, that if he tendered 12 d. to the Feoffee or his
Heirs, he might enter upon the Estate: so that the Estate which was Divested
out of him by the Livery of Seisin, might have been revested by a performance
of the Condition and Reentry. So it stood at Common Law.

But after the 27th of H. 8. for transferring Uses into Possession, Uses became
more pliable than Conveyances at Common Law, wherein this Matter, and then
Powers of Revocation first came in use and fashion. Not but that it is as
repugnant to a Conveyance after the Statute, as it was before; for certainly it
is repugnant to give an Estate away, and yet have a general Power over that
Estate. But a Power of Revocation was let in as a Condition, and would work as
a Condition; but whereas the performance of a Condition at Common Law, would
not work a revesting of the Estate, without a Reentry; now the performance or
execution of the Power does transfer the Estate to the new Uses, or revest the
Estate in him that had the Power without any Reentry. But still there is now a
necessity of the Powers being performed, as there was of the Conditions being
performed at Common Law; for it is in the nature of a Condition and no more. So
is Inglefield's Case, 7 Co. 39.

There was a voluntary Conveyance made with a Power of Revocation; and he who
had the Power is attainted of Treason. Now all Conditions forfeited to the
Crown must be performed, or no Advantage can be taken. This Power was in this
Case agreed to be forfeited to the Crown; the great Difficulty was, Whether the
King could perform the Condition, or whether the Performance was not tied
strictly to the Person that had the Power vested in him? That was the great
Doubt in that Case, but there was no question but it was a Condition, and the
King should have it as a Condition forfeited.

And it is likewise agreed in Co. Lit. 237. That it is a Condition, and would
have been repugnant to be a general Power. So that it is not, as they say, a
Guard only upon a Man's Self to prevent Surprise, but a Condition. And as a Man
must perform a Condition at Common Law to entitle him to Reenter, so he must
execute his Power, to entitle him to a Revocation. And a Court of Equity can no
more let a Man in to defeat an Estate upon a Power of Revocation, without a due
execution of the Power, than the Common Law could let a Man in to defeat an
Estate upon a Condition, without performance of the Condition; or than a Court
of Equity can think to let a Man in to defeat a voluntary Conveyance, without a
Power of Revocation: for it is all but a Condition which must be performed, or
no Advantage taken of it; and a Court of Equity may do great things, but they
cannot alter things, or make them to operate contrary to their essential
Natures and Properties.

I confess, where there is an Impediment of executing a Power of Revocation, or
disability of doing it, a Court of Equity may perhaps interpose. And therefore
suppose the Earl of Bath had always had this Deed in his Custody from the time
of executing of it, and the Duke having a Mind to revoke it, had sent to the
Earl for it; that though seeing the Circumstances required he might truly
pursue them, but the Earl had refused to deliver it, and the Duke not knowing
what the Power was, had done such an Act with a mind to revoke; I agree it is
reasonable, that a Court of Equity should interpose to support it. But why is
that? because the Earl who was to have the benefit by this Deed, was the
Impediment why it was not strictly pursued.

And that is a Reason which would prevail at Common Law. I will put you a Case
to prove it, Dyer, 354. A makes a Feoffment to B, with a Power of Revocation;
if A at any time during his Life pay or cause to be tendered to B at the
Font-Stone in the Cathedral at Sarum 20 l. A tenders the 20 l. at the Place in
the absence of B, and without any notice to him to attend: this is held to be
no Revocation. But says the Book (as it should seem) if he had sent to B to be
there, or some for him to receive the Money at the tender, and B would neither
have come nor sent, it had been a good Revocation. So that where there is an
Impediment by the Default of the Party who is to have Advantage by the
nonperformance of the Power; and he that has the Power do an Act that
expresses his meaning to revoke, that shall be a good Revocation at Law, and
in Equity.

I agree likewise, that in case of Disability a Court of Equity may interpose;
And I agree therefore, that in case the Duke of Albemarle had taken this Deed
over with him to Jamaica, and there had had an Intention to revoke it, and had
gone as far as he could to do it, had made his Will, and had six Witnesses to
it, I believe it would be a good Revocation in Equity, though none of the
Witnesses were Peers, because of the disability he would be under to have any
such Witnesses.

And so that defective Executions of Powers of Revocations may be helped in
Courts of Equity, in the Cases of Purchasers and Creditors, I take it to be
true too. And it is said other particular Cases there may be, wherein a Court
of Equity can relieve, though the Revocation be not according to the Power
reserved. And as to that, I confess, several Precedents have been cited, and I
wonder, considering the Nature of them, that more have not been mentioned, but
I think there are not above four or five very much to the purpose, and those I
shall take notice of, and trouble you with no more.

The first is the Case of Thorn and Newman; and that Case is no more in short
than this. A Covenants with B to stand seized to Uses with a Power of
Revocation upon the tender of 12 d. in the Temple-Hall. A tenders the 12 d. to
B; who accepts it, but not in the Temple-Hall. The Question was, Whether this
was a good Revocation in Equity? Truly I believe it was a good Revocation in
Law.

For suppose a Man makes a Lease reserving a Rent payable at Michaelmass, in
the Middle- Temple-Hall, and there is a proviso of Reentry upon nonpayment
according to the Reservation. The Rent is paid by the Lessee at the Day, but
not at the Place; and the Lessor accepts the Rent, and afterward Reenters for
breach of the Condition. If he have once accepted the Rent, being privy to the
Deed, that makes it a good performance of the Condition in Law absolutely. So
is Co. Litt. 212.

And so it is in case of a Bond to pay Money at a Day and Place certain; the
Money is paid before the Day, and not at the Place, and the Obligee accepts the
Money. If he after bring an Action upon this Bond, the Defendant can plead
nothing but payment according to the Condition: and in Evidence he may give it
in Proof, that though it was not paid at the Place and Day, yet being received
by the Obligee before the Day at another Place, this is good Evidence at Law of
Payment according to the Condition. And that appeared in the Case of Band and
Richardson, Moor, 267. Aderson, 198. Cro, Eliz. 142. And this Case of Thorn
and Newman I take to be a good Performance at Law; where indeed the Condition
is to be performed to a Stranger that will alter the Case, but where it is to
one that is privy to the Deed, I take it it is a good performance at Law, and
consequently must be good in Equity.

Another Case cited was that of Smith and Ashton, and that was thus. One
Richard Ashton conveys his Estate in Uses, with a Power reserved in the
Conveyance by any Writing under his Hand and Seal, to make provision for
younger Children. Being sick, he prepares Instructions under his Hand, in order
for Counsel to draw it into Form; and it is drawn into Form and engrossed: But
before it is sealed, he dies; and this was held a good performance of this
Power in this Court. So here is a Defect in the Execution of a Power helped in
a Court of Equity.

As to this Case, I would observe, first, this is not a Case upon a Power of
Revocation, to divest an Estate, nor a Performance of a Condition. But further
here are Instructions prepared, and it went as far toward the Execution of the
Power as could be, till an Impediment came in the way by the Act of God in the
Death of the Party. Now I agree, where there is an Impediment by the Act of
God, or Fraud or Default of the Party, who claims by the Deed, Equity may
interpose. But that does no way come up to the Case in Question.

Then there is the Case of Dey and Thwaites, which was lately in this Court.
Thwaites makes a Settlement to the use of himself for Life, and afterward to
such Child and Children, and for such Estate and Estates as he should by any
Writing under his Hand and Seal, testified by two credible Witnesses, limit and
appoint. He afterward makes a Will, and has but two Witnesses to it, (so that
they did not cite the Case right, that said there were not two Witnesses); but
two Witnesses are not enough by the Statute to make it a good Will; and thereby
he gives a Rent of 100 l. a Year to such a Child, and dies.

Now one great Question was, Whether the Power being to limit Estate or
Estates, he might limit a Rent out of those Lands? It was held in Equity he
might; and truly I think that he might at Law. There is, I confess, an Opinion
against it in the Case of Brown and Tailor, where there were three Judges
against one. But really I think it is good at Law.

A second Question was, Whether this being void, as a Will by the Statute
should be, yet a good Declaration of the Trust, and an Execution of the Power?
And I think the Court of Equity did very well in decreeing it to be Good. For
tho it were not effectual in all Points (as it was intended) as a Will, yet it
was a Writing which had all the Circumstances required by the Power; and
therefore I see no reason to question whether it were Good.

The next Case is the Case of Ward and Booth; and that stands thus: Sir Thomas
Brereton made a Settlement, with a Power of Revocation, by a Writing under Hand
and Seal before two Witnesses; and he in a Passion one day tore off the Label
with the Seal, but afterward repented. Delivered it to the Trustees to be
preserved to the Uses: And enquiring whether what he had done amounted to a
Revocation? and being advised it did not, he was very well satisfied. This
Cause came to be heard before my Lord Nottingham, and adjudged no Revocation,
it appearing there was a continued Intention not to revoke. But I desire to
read part of the Ground that Decrce went upon, for that justifies what I said,
in case where there is a Disability or an Impediment by Fraud, this Court may
relieve though there be a formal Revocation.

There is but one Precedent more that I shall mention, and that I take to be
directly for the Earl of Bath. It is the Case of Arundell and Philpott. Mary
Philpott being a Widow, seized of Lands, made a Settlement upon the Defendant,
with a Power of Revocation upon the tender of a Guiney. She afterward makes
another Settlement upon the Plaintiff, but without any proof of the tender of
the Guiney. Upon a Bill suggesting her Intention to revoke, the Plaintiff could
not prevail in this Court to set aside the first Settlement, but was dismissed to
Law, and ordered to try the Title within a Twelvemonth, whether Revoked or not
Revoked. And there were afterward a Trial, and the Tender of the Guiney did
happen to be proved, and so the Power was well executed at Law. But this Court
would not interpose to set it aside as a Revocation in Equity upon the
Intention only, without a proof of the due Execution.

And upon the whole Matter I conclude, that in a Court of Equity there cannot
be a Revocation of a Deed, to which a Power to revoke is annexed, but what is
pursuant to that Power, unless there be either an Impediment from the Party
that claims by the Deed, or a real disability to execute according to the
Circumstances. And I think neither of these are in this Case, nor are any of
those Matters alleged of Surprise, Circumvention, Concealment, or the like,
any good grounds to set aside this Deed, if they were proved, which I think
there is no pretense of.

Lord Chief Justice TREBY. I Am of the same Opinion with my Brother Powell: I
shall state the Case as it stands upon this Deed and Will. The Will was made in
1675, the Deed in 1681; and shall take notice (as I find there was much use
made of it on one side) of what the Expressions are in the Will, and somewhat
of what Deficiencies there were of Expression in this Deed.

In 1675, the Duke of Albemarle made his Will; and by that Will he declares,
That in respect of my Lord of Bath's being one of his nearest Kindred, and out
of Gratitude due to him for many Acts of Friendship and good Offices done to
him and his Family, his Will was that he should inherit all the Parts of his
Real Estate not therein otherwise disposed of; and therein he desires the King
to grant to the Earl of Bath, and the Issue Male of his Body, the Title of Duke
of Albemarle; and that his eldest Son might bear the Title of Lord Monk: And
this was intended in Trust to pay all his Debts and certain Legacies in the
Will. He therein gives a Legacy of 1000 l. to Henry Monk, not the Father of the
Plaintiffs the Monks, who it does not appear was any ways related to him.

Six Years after, in 1681, this Duke Christopher makes a Deed; and in that Deed
recites this Will true as to the Date, but mistakes it in several Particulars.
This Deed settles the main part of the Estate after the Duke and Duchess their
death, without Issue by the Duke, upon my Lord of Bath, part of it immemiately
after his own death, without Issue, other parts upon Sir Walter Clarges and Mr.
Greenville: And it has been observed, that almost all the Limitations of the
Estates in the Deed differ from those in the Will, at least in express Terms,
if not in very Substance.

This Deed also sets forth the Grounds why the Duke made it; and it is to this
Effect. He does declare he was so unfortunate, that his next Heir at Law was
descended from a Regicide, and therefore I would observe it was not only to
confirm the Will, as they would have it, but for preventing so dishonorable a
Descent of the Estate which he owed to the Bounty of the Crown, and for
conveying and settling, and assuring the Lands to the Uses thereinafter
declared, and confirming and corroborating that Will which he did not intend to
revoke, and to prevent any Claim either by the Heir or any pretended
surreptitious Will, which might be obtained from him by Surprise: These are the
Considerations and Reasons expressed in the Deed, why he gives this Estate away
from his Heir at Law.

Both this Deed and Will agree in this for substance, that they limit the main
part of the Estate to the Earl of Bath, tho they differ in several of the
Limitations to diverse Persons: and as to some of the Limitations to the Earl of
Bath, they differ too; whether material or no, shall be considered by and by.

There is in this Deed a Proviso, which makes the great Question in this Case,
that the Duke should have Power to revoke any of the Uses in the Deed, and
limit new ones: but this Power is restrained by several Circumstances; it must
be by writing under his Hand and Seal in the presence of six Witnesses, three
whereof to be Peers of this Realm, and a tender of 6 d. to the Trustees named
in the Deed.

Afterward in the Year 1687, the Duke makes another Will, and thereby he
gives some Parcels of his Land to Mr. Bernard Greenville my Lord of Bath's
Brother, Sir Walter Clarges and others, and makes some larger Provision for the
Duchess for her Life than she had before; but the main bulk and residue of the
Estate, is by this Will given to Colonel Thomas Monk, Father of the Plaintiffs:
And he does likewise in that Will make a Petition to the King, that he will be
pleased to confer a Title of Honor upon him, and make him Baron Monk of
Potheridge, the Ancient Seat of the Family.

That Will of 75, and the Deed of 81. are subscribed by six Witnesses each,
this Will of 87 but by 3; and so the defect of this Will to make it a
Revocation is, that there are but three Witnesses, and none of them Peers, and
there was no tender of 6 d. to the Trustees.

The intent of the Earl's Bill is, to have an Establishment of this Deed
against this last Will; and the intent of the Duchess and Mr. Monk's Bills is
to set aside the Deed and establish this last Will, and that upon certain
Grounds of Equity, the Deed having obtained a Verdict for it at Law.

This is the general State of the Case, the particulars will be brought in best
under the several Heads that I shall mention: But first I shall take notice as
I go, what Progress this Cause has had since it was first in Agitation.

First, it was insisted, That this Deed was a false Deed, and that was thought
fit to be directed to a Trial at Law; and it was most proper it should be so;
for it concerned a great Inheritance and Freehold conveyed by Deed, and a
Devise, both Titles at Law, and that was fit to be decided in the proper
Judicature for such things, in a Court of Common Law by a Jury. Accordingly,
this Trial was directed in an Ejectment at the King's Bench Bar, and this Court
so far aided the Parties to come to the proper Question, as to order there
should no Encumbrances stand in the way, or be insisted upon, but any thing
that obstructed the Trial of the Right should be set aside: So that in short,
the Validity of this Deed was the thing directed to be tried; it was
accordingly tried, and thereupon a Verdict obtained that the Deed was a good
Deed, and the Earl of Bath's Title under it, good at Law; and Judgment was
afterward entered up, and that for the Defendant's part was not conclusive; if
there had been any Misdemeanour on the other side, or in the Jury, they might
have had redress by applying to this Court for a New Trial; nay, they may try
it again, when they please upon a new Ejectment: But they have acquiesced under
it to this day, that is to say, now for two Years together; so that we must
take it for granted (at least this Court is, I conceive, bound by it) that it
is a true Deed, and a good Conveyance of the Estate, as much Evidence there is
of it as is possible; so strong an Evidence, that we must take it to be a true
and a good Deed, and a Deed without Suspicion; Twelve Men, besides the
Witnesses to it, have Sworn the Validity of it (that being the sole Question
before them) and this must be remembered all along in the Consideration of this
Case.

Indeed the Counsel on the other Side did seem to speak a little slightly of
it, as upon a doubtful Evidence, and at last, that it is true by this Verdict
they must admit that this Deed was sealed by the Duke, though that was not a
little controverted before: But in truth, here is the Right tried, it was a
Deed that was a Conveyance of the Estate, and now we must take it for granted,
that the whole of the Deed was tried and confirmed by the Verdict; so that it
is a good Conveyance at Law, and passes all that the words can carry. And
therefore in our Consideration of this Case, we must lay aside all the Evidence
that was, or was properly to have been given at the Trial, as to the Truth and
Validity of the Deed: And I, for my part, can allow my self no Consideration of
this Deed in speaking to it, but such as are Considerations of Equity,
consistent with the Truth of the Deed.

And that is now the only thing that is to be applied unto, what there is in
Equity and Conscience, why this Deed should be set aside when it is allowed to
be good in Law; there is no doubt but there may be good Ground in some Cases in
Equity to set aside that which is good at Law. But the Question is, whether in
this Case there be any such or no.

But before I proceed to the Consideration of what has been insisted upon in
that kind, I desire to take notice of some things about the Will of 87. I am
very well satisfied that that Will is well proved: There is my Lord Chief
Justice Pollexfen has proved the Instructions given for the preparing it, and
the drawing of it; and there are three Witnesses that speak to the Publication:
and this is confirmed by the Testimony of Sir Robert Clayton, who transacted
the first Part of that Affair, to bring the Duke and my Lord Chief Justice
together: and I do equally reject all the Evidence on the one side and the
other, against the Truth of either the Deed or this Will.

Then this Will would have been a good Disposition of the Lands, if the Law did
not hinder, that is, if this Deed did not stand in the way, as a prior
Disposition, and found good in Law; so the Deed is good, if Equity do not
hinder it. Now the Grounds of Equity, which my Lord Mountague's Counsel insist
upon, are, I think, these: I have made indeed but four of them, but in
Substance I do not differ from my Brother Powell about them, for I comprehend
that the Deeds being Ancillary, as it was called, and attendant upon the Will
under the Head of a Revocation in Equity; I say, the Heads of Equity insisted
upon, to set aside this Deed are four.

First; Surprise and Circumvention in obtaining of it, and that relates to the
Creation of it.

Secondly; Concealment from the Duke, and this by my Lord of Bath, and so he
was not informed how his Power was circumstanced, and therefore not able to
execute his Power according to the Circumstances, which makes it become a
fraudulent Deed, and for that Cause the Plaintiffs shall have Relief against it.

Thirdly; Here is a Revocation in Equity, though it be not in all Points such
as would be sufficient in Law, yet here is so much done toward it, such a
Solemnity in the Action done, and such an Impediment of doing more, as will
amount to an equitable Revocation.

The fourth Head is that which was mentioned of the Trust in the Deed.

As to the first Point of Surprise, it was a Head much labored by the Counsel
on the Plaintiffs side, and yet I confess I am still at a loss, for the very
Notion of Surprise, for I take it to be either Falsehood or Forgery, (that is)
though I take it, they would not use the word, in this Case, Fraud; if that be
not the Meaning of it, to be something done suddenly and unawares, not with all
that Precaution and Deliberation as possibly a Deed may be done.

Here was a Case cited not long ago, in another great Case in this Court out of
the Civil Law, about Surprise, but that was under another Head; that is, a Man
was informed by his Kinsman, that his Son was dead, and so got him to settle
his Estate upon him: this is called, in the Civil Law, Surreptio; I know not
whether that Word will answer those Gentlemen's Notions about this Matter. Now
the Civilians define that thus, Surreptio est cum per falsam rei narrationem
aliquod extorquetur; when a Man will by false Suggestions prevail upon another
to do that which otherwise he would not have done.

And I make no doubt but Equity ought to set aside that, but then this is
Properly called Fraud, and that must be made out, it can never be intended. I
find not any such thing pretended to be made out, that my Lord of Bath did use
any false Suggestions to the Duke, or Informations at all, for what appears in
the Proof; I beg Pardon if I mistake or forget any of the Proof.

Then here is Matter of a Surprise objected, which must be something that will
not avoid this Deed at Law, but will avoid a Deed in Equity, which yet is not
direct Fraud or Falsehood in the Party, but is to be gathered out of the
particular Circumstances of the Case; but what in certain to make of it, I
confess I cannot tell.

I would repeat the Words that the Plaintiffs Counsel used; they say it is
absurdly drawn, it was unduly put upon the Duke, 'twas done without his
perusing it, or having it read to him; it was contrary to his common Intention,
before and after the Sealing of it. It must be admitted that there was
Deliberation, and Consideration, and Intention enough proved to make it a good
Deed at Law, otherwise there would not have been a Verdict for it: but it
should seem there was not enough of these in Equity, and the want of this is
what they call Surprise, and that must avoid this Deed in Equity.

But I confess I am not satisfied that there were any Surprise in this Case in
any thing; the Duke at the time of making this Deed was under no Force, no
Restraint, no false Information, as I observe, no nor any Solicitation from my
Lord of Bath at all; he was in his own House at his full Liberty, he was in
very good Company; for I take it for granted, (as I shall insist further by and
by) that Sir William Jones was by at the Execution of this Deed, and a Witness
to it; the Duke was under no Sickness, no Weakness: and I must take notice of
one Proof more which was mentioned, he had not been drinking, but was in very
sober Company. This appears to be the Condition in which the Duke was at the
Sealing of the Deed in question.

But let us consider what are the Particulars of Surprise, that they who oppose
this Deed insist upon; I think they are reducible to these three: There was a
want of collateral Circumstances that use to attend the Execution of Deeds,
made with good Deliberation, and without Surprise: Then there are some
Observations made upon the wording of this Deed, which argue Surprise; and then
they say it must be obtained surreptitiously, because it is contrary to his
constant Intention, and all the Course of his Actings, as well before as after
that time.

First, they say there is a want of Collateral Circumstances that are to attend
the Execution of Deeds made with good Deliberation, and without Surprise, and
that it appears in these Particulars.

First, it does not appear who drew this Deed: It is certain, they say, that it
could not be Sir William Jones, and I think so too: They observe, and with very
good Reason, that he saying, I approve of this Proviso, does prove that he did
only concern himself with the Proviso, and did apply himself singly to that,
and did not manage the Body of the Deed.

Then it does not appear that the Draught of this Deed was read, or the Deed
subsigned or countersigned by Counsel, as was the Duke's usual Method; nor was
there any Counterpart of the Deed: Whereas to the Will of 87, it was carefully
drawn and made, and three Parts of it prepared, and then there were very great
Persons concerned as Trustees in this Deed, and yet several of them knew
nothing of it.

To this I must acknowledge, that the Objection is for the most part true; but
how far it is an Objection, we shall consider farther by and by.

First for the want of Instructions about the drawing this Deed, this is now
above 10 Years before it comes in question; and such Instructions there might
have been, but in length of time lost or laid aside; and when once a Deed is
actually made, great Persons as well as lesser ones are careless of the
Preparations for such Deeds: the Deed binds the Estate; and if that be
carefully kept, there may easily be a Negligence as to the rest.

I did observe before, that though the particular Limitations in the first
Will, and this Deed, do differ, yet both Deed and Will do agree in Substance to
settle the Bulk of the Estate to my Lord of Bath: It is likewise observable,
that there is a strong Proof Sir Thomas Stringer drew this Deed, for his Hand
is interlined in every Sheet of the Draught; and as I do remember, his Son writ
it: Sir Thomas Stringer was at that time my Lord Duke's Counsel; and I confess
there have been reported several things about this Matter from his Mouth, which
because they are very various and inconsistent, I wish he had been alive, that
he might have set all right; but as the Matter now stands here, it has rendered
him very doubtful in the Case.

I confess I do believe Sir William Jones had too little Patience, (give me
leave to say so) and too much Skill to make such a Deed, I speak as to the Art
and Skill of framing it; therefore I conceive he did not, but Sir Thomas
Stringer did.

As to the not reading of the Deed to the Duke, the Defendants Counsel do
object, neither was the Will of 87 read to the Duke at the time of his sealing
and publishing it: So far is true, that after it was engrossed and brought to
Sir Robert Clayton's, it was not read to the Duke; but the Particulars of it he
had been acquainted with at the time of the drawing, and so it might be as to
the Deed too, for any thing appears to the contrary.

That there was no Counterpart, and that the Trustees were not acquainted with
it; the Answer is, That the Duke did intend it as a Secret, and therefore the
less notice was to be taken of it: and the Duke intending mainly by it an
Advantage to my Lord of Bath, it was thought sit to be concealed, for some
Reasons, from the Duchess.

But after all, I know no such Rule in Equity, I am sure none of the Precedents
that I have seen come near to it; that where there is a Deed, for the making of
which no Instructions are found, no Proof of its being read to the Party at the
Execution, no Counterpart, or the Trustees not acquainted with it, that these
are sufficient Grounds to set such a Deed aside in Equity: I do not think any
of the Precedents, or all of them together (and I am sure I have read them all)
will amount to prove any such thing.

The second Matter to make out the Surprise, is some Considerations taken out
of the Bowels of the Deed it self, several Improprieties of Expression, as (in
part of Dower) and (in full of Dower) which are not Phrases that look like the
Act of a Lawyer, one well skilled in the Propriety of the Law-Dialect: It does
likewise misrecite the Will of 75, that is particularly, as to the Lands given
to the Duchess, that they are given for Life, when it was only during her
Widowhood: the Lands are said to be given to Mr. Greenville as if he were
immediate Devisee; whereas it is a Devise to him in Remainder after a
Limitation to the Duke in Tail.

But certainly Improprieties of Expressions and Mis-recitals in Deeds, are too
slight Acts to avoid Deeds so made, so attested, so proved, as this Deed in
question has been: They are rather, and indeed Flaws and Objections that go to
the Manner and Form than the Substance, and show rather want of Art in the
Counsel that drew it, than of Honesty or Integrity in the Deed it self; besides
that, a Devise to one for her Widow-hood, is a Devise for Life in one Sense and
common Parlance, though it be defeizable; and a Devise to one in Remainder, is
a Devise to him though not an immediate one.

Another Observation out of the Deed it self is, that here are Estates limited
to the Duke's younger Sons out of Lands, which he had no power to create or
carve such Estates out of, they being settled before upon his Marriage on the
eldest Son; and that is true it is so, as to the Lands called Norton Disney:
But there are other Lands not comprised in the Settlement, and all the rest
that were new purchased, were in his Power to settle as he pleased.

But the great Objection out of the Deed is this, that this Deed does in
several places declare it self to be made to confirm and corroborate the Will
of 75. How comes it then to pass that it should differ from it in all the
Limitations except one? and that in the Draught is of my Lord of Bath's own
Writing; and that part of the Estate is by the Deed to come to the Lord of
Bath, upon failure of the Duke's Issue Male only; so that his Daughters are all
wholly debarred.

To this I say, what they object, (that there is rather a Contradiction than a
Confirmation of the Will, is true) I am not satisfied I assure you in that
which the Defendants say to it, that the Confirmation of the Will is mentioned
only, as to preventing the Descent. It is first mentioned there, but I think it
goes through and is repeated more than once: But that which I would observe is
this, that this Deed does confirm the Will in the main, and substantial part of
it, the settling the Bulk of the Estate upon my Lord of Bath.

Besides, the Expression of the Deed is not only for confirming the Will of 75,
but also for the settling the Lands to the Uses after declared; and if it does
not confirm every Limitation, yet it does agree in the substantial Settlement
of the Estate.

It was further said, that the only Limitation which agrees with the Will, is
that which in the Draught of my Lord of Bath's handwriting, where Lands are
limited to my Lord of Bath, after failure of Issue-Male, with Exclusion of the
Daughters, which the Plaintiffs say it cannot possibly be imagined the Duke
ever intended to do. But I must mention what Answer the Defendants give to it:
They say the Duke had then 15000 l. a Year, and he makes an Intercession to the
King to bestow the Honor of Albemarle upon the Earl of Bath, and that it might
not go alone he limits 3000l. a Year upon his failing of Issue-Male; so that
the Honor should come to the Earl, and there was enough left for Daughters.
Now if their Valuation of the Duke's Estate be right, (which truly I know not)
it is some answer, why some part should be given to the Earl only after the
failure of Issue-Male.

But then I would observe too, the Deed by this Obligation does confirm the
Will of 75, and that Will also affirm the Deed: If the Will of 75 were once
well, as I see no color to the contrary, then I am sure all their Objections
from the Duke's contrary Intentions are all answered, that he never intended to
give him his Estate; for if they admit that the Will was once the true Will of
the Duke of Albemarle, then there was once an apparent Intention in the Duke of
Albemarle to give the Earl of Bath the Bulk of his Estate if he died without
Issue.

Now as to the Variations in the Limitations of the Deed, from those in the
Will, I think truly it stands indifferent as to one side or other. For here was
the distance of six Years between them, and the Duke might alter his Mind; it
might be one way one time, and another time another: he might alter his Mind as
to his Daughters; he might after so many Years despair of Issue, and so not
mind the making any Provision for them: He might change his Mind as to his
other Kindred, and therefore might in these Particulars vary in the Deed from
the Will of 75.

But I would still have this observed, that in substance they do agree; he does
preserve the same Favor and good Intention for my Lord of Bath, to give him
his Estate as his nearest Kinsman. If then these Limitations in the Deed were
pursuant and agreeable to the Duke's then Mind, it is no matter if there be any
such Variations or Alterations from what was in the Will; and that it was
agreeable to his Mind then, I shall by and by take notice of some things that
occur in this Case, and which seem to satisfy me in it that this was his
Intent. For I did observe that one thing they insisted upon to show it was by
Surprise, was, that this was contrary to the Intentions of both the Duke of
Albemarle, and the constant Series of Purposes in the Family; and they
undertake to give Instances of it.

The Defendants Counsel say, that his Intention was to give his Estate to the
Earl of Bath, who was his near Kinsman, to whom he had very great Obligations;
that my Lord of Bath was concerned in that great Action of Restoring the Royal
Family, which was the Raising of his own; that he was a constant Friend of Duke
George and his, and his Sons chief Counselor and Adviser; and that the Family
were under great Obligations, is and must, be admitted both from what is in the
Deed expressed, and what is otherwise proved.

But the Plaintiffs say no, they had no such Intention neither one or other of
them, and particularly Duke Christopher had none neither before the making of
this Deed nor after. Duke George he makes his Will in June 1665, wherein he
gives all his real and personal Estate to his Son, and nothing at all to my
Lord of Bath. I did look into the Will, which is very short, and there is
nothing given to any Body but his Son* That is the whole of the Will. Then in
the Year 1669, is the Settlement made by Duke George upon his Son's Marriage;
and there is nothing settled upon my Lord of Bath, not so much as a remote
Remainder. In 73 Duke Christopher makes his Will, and therein gives great
Legacies to the Duchess, but none to the Earl of Bath.

These are Instances before this Will and Deed, but the Answers given them are
these; which make me not satisfied with the Plaintiffs Objection or Proofs of
his never Intending to give my Lord of Bath his Estate.

First, as I said, Duke George's Will is very short, and takes notice of no
Body but his Son; and as he gives nothing in it to my Lord of Bath, so neither
does he to any Body else; and that very Devise is void, because it was to the
Son and Heir to whom it would without that have descended: and it signifies
very little to their purpose, being in the same Year with King Charles's
Sign-Manual, at his Request, to promise the Earl the Dukedom upon failure of
Issue-Male.

As to the Marriage-Settlement in 1669, there is indeed nothing settled on the
Earl of Bath, so much as in remainder; but in such Settlements Men usually do
provide only for the Issue of that Marriage, and so leave the Disposition of
Remainders to Subsequent-Settlements.

As to the Will of Duke Christopher in 1673, at that time, they say he was but
a Minor of 20 Years of Age, and it was only to dispose of his Personal Estate;
for as to his Lands, if he had made any Devise of them, it had been void, and
the personal Estate was at that time about 60000l. But within a Year or two
after that, when he came of Age, is the Will of 75 made, and there is a mighty
liberal Gift, made to my Lord of Bath; and pursuant to his Father's Desire, and
King Charles's Privy Seal, does he make that Request for the Dukedom for my
Lord of Bath.

And it must be observed upon all these things, that as there is nothing given
to my Lord of Bath in Duke George's Will and Settlement, nor in Duke
Christopher's Will in 1673, so nor is there any Lands in either of them, nor in
the Will of 1675, or Deed of 1681, given to Thomas Monk, the Father of the now
Plaintiffs; so that that Objection is much stronger against them than against
my Lord of Bath.

Now I do not find any Proof of a Provocation or Cause given by my Lord of
Bath, to make the Duke totally change from this Intention, to give him the
greatest part of his Estate, and (...) put him quite out of his Favor, nor
does it appear he was so; here were several Letters read, there have been
Copies of them brought us, and I have looked upon them; against these Letters
it has been observed, that there is no notice taken in any of them of this
Deed, but there is some of the Will of 1687, while the Duke was in Jamaica,
about the Death of Colonel Monk.

I confess I cannot say there is any one Letter that speaks of this Deed, by
the Name of a Deed; but there is one or two that has an Aspect upon it, and
very near respect to it, and cannot refer to any thing else, particularly that
which was written relating to my Lord Lansdown, when he was going to travel,
and another about his Marriage, wherein he takes notice how much he was
concerned in him, even next to his Father himself, as he very well knew; and
that he wrote so much about him for Reasons best known to the Earl himself,
this seems to point at some Conveyance, and aims at this Deed to my thinking
directly.

They have made another Objection, That the Duke never intended to leave any
part of his Estate to Sir Thomas Clarges, because he was under the Duke's
Displeasure upon account of something he took ill from him; but that receives
an easy Answer, What is limited to him is but a Remainder, and that of no great
Estate neither. Besides that, the Evidence of the Duke's being displeased with
Sir Thomas, is but a hearing by a third Hand; but I find no Displeasure proved
at all that was conceived by the Duke against my Lord of Bath to the last.

Come we then to the time of making this Deed, and let us see whether the Duke
did really intend what the words of this Deed do import; and that I think is
made evident by Proofs that have not been answered or contradicted. The Deed
takes notice of the very great and many Acts of Friendship and Kindness
received by him and his Family from my Lord of Bath; and it is proved the Duke
declared it ought never to be forgotten, nor could he ever make him sufficient
Amends. It should seem he had procured his Father's Garter for him when he
might have had it himself; he thereupon tells Mr. Prideaux, that he was settling
or had settled his Estate upon my Lord of Bath, which must be much about the
same time that this Deed was made. One of the Witnesses to the Deed says, at
the sealing of it he wished he could have done more for him.

But to me one of the clearest Evidences of the Duke's Intention to do this for
my Lord of Bath, and that it was no Surprise upon him, is the Presence of Sir
William Jones at the Execution of this Deed; for I do take it upon the Proofs
it is most evident, that he was then present; and I will tell you what the
Evidence of it is: Mr. Vivian says, he was often used as Counsel for the Duke
of Albemarle, and principally relied upon; and this Vivian happens to be one of
the surviving Witnesses, and he positively says Sir William Jones was there and
a Witness to the Deed; so says Mr. Strode who knew him very well; and the third
says there was a great Lawyer there, tho he does not pretend to know him, it is
Clark: Mr. Hebblethwaite says he believes the Name endorsed is Sir William's
Handwriting; and no better Witness could there possibly be for that purpose
than he, nor could there be greater Evidence, than those multitudes of
Instruments that were produced in Court, whereby to my Apprehension it did
appear plainly that the Characters did very well agree.

Now if Sir William Jones was there at the sealing of this Deed, I think I need
say no more upon this Point: He was a Gentleman very well known to be both of
great Ability, and Integrity and Reputation; and he would never have given up
all his Honor and Reputation, and the Quiet of his own Conscience, to make one
in a Confederacy of circumventing this Noble Duke, or defrauding any one of his
Estate; and therefore believing him first to be present, which I really do, I
cannot but conclude that it was really, and bona fide, done without Fraud or
Surprise.

Besides this Evidence, there are several Discourses also that have been
proved, wherein the Duke has declared both his Intention, and that the thing
was done, which shows he was not surprised into it: I name Mr. Crofts in
particular, who must be admitted to be a good Witness, being one of the three
Witnesses to the Will of 1687, and he says the Duke of Albemarle told him the
Earl of Bath was to succeed to his Estate.

It is indeed objected upon this Head, What needed then all this Privacy be
used? Why should the Duke conceal it from the Duchess his Lady, to whom he
had been so kind in it? why from the Duke of Newcastle and the other Trustees,
Persons of Quality and Honor? They say it could not be for any Dissatisfaction
the Duke had with his Duchess, for they always agreed very well together, and
they have read the Testimony of my Lord Marquess of Carmarthen, who says that
he never observed a Couple to live better together, or any Woman to carry it
better toward a Husband than the Duchess; and they have produced you some
Letters from the Duke to her which show great Fondness and Affection to her.

Truly in the first place, I do not know why any Reason should be expected to
be given why he uses Privacy in any Action he does; sure he may, or he may not
at his Pleasure: There may be private Circumstances that may induce him (and
that with very good reason) to use more or less Privacy in the Affairs he
transacts. But besides this, they bring you in Proofs, that I cannot but
mention, that the Duchess had conceived a Displeasure, tho it be not known for
what Reason, against the Earl of Bath; that the Duke was uneasy under her
Importunities to do what he had no mind to, and that was the cause of his
drinking so hard to divert himself. The Duke was apprehensive she would pursue
her Displeasure against my Lord, and he should have but an unquiet Life if she
came to the knowledge of this Settlement, at least till she had prevailed with
him to alter it, which he resolved not to do.

Now it may be (I speak it with all due Respect to my Lord Carmarthen's
Evidence) that the public Carriage might be plausible, especially in the
presence of one of his Quality, and yet there might be some late Displeasure
which might break out amongst themselves whenever my Lord of Bath came in
Competition with those for whom my Lady Duchess had more Affection, and would
make use of her Interest in the Duke about it; and the Counsel for the
Plaintiffs could very hardly maintain but that the Duke had once an intention
that my Lord of Bath should have his Estate, till, say they, he came to have
the knowledge of one of his own Name, whom he designed to prefer and provide for.

If so, then I am sure, the first time that any such change of Mind does
appear, is by this Will of 1687, for before that they do not pretend to any
thing done for Colonel Monk; and that will serve to answer that Objection, that
this Deed of 1681, was against the Duke's constant Intent before and at that
time.

It is true, he does call Colonel Monk Cousin in his Will of 1687; whether he
was akin to him or no, does not appear in proof at all in the Case, but on the
contrary, it is in proof that my Lord of Bath is really near akin to him; and
it was as much his Intent when he made this Deed to keep up his Title and
Honor in my Lord of Bath's Family, as can be imagined or conceived.

As to the Will of 1687, that does declare his last Intention, and that they
say is most probable, that my Lord of Bath should not have the Estate, but
Colonel Monk should: for it was a Will made with a great Deliberation, being
five or six Months preparing, great Advice about the drawing of it taken,
particular Instructions by himself given, several Copies made and left with
several People. On the other side, they observe the distance of Time, six
Months between the Preparation and Execution, which is not an Argument that he
was very forward to do it, but rather an Argument that he was very unwilling to
do it; and the very time of executing it was when he was very uneasy about his
being forced to execute the Conveyances of Dalby and Bronghton to my Lord
Jefferies: His Mind was then disturbed; but if he had had a real Intention and
Purpose to revoke the Deed, he had an opportunity to get this Revocation done
in their Presence, and afterward he might easily have got a third Peer.

The great Objection is, What should the Duke take all this Pains for, and
this Care and Thought about the Preparations for this Will, so carefully
execute it, deliver the several Parts to several Persons, and all for nothing?
I do admit it is a great Objection, and I think there is but one Answer to it,
but that is a pretty plain and strong one, Why was all that Care and Thought
used about the Will of 1675, and the Deed of 1681? did he intend nothing by it
then? And if he did then intend something, what Provocation, what Demerit, what
was done or left undone by my Lord of Bath, to change the Duke's Mind, that
whereas before he gave him all his Estate, now he should give him never a
Farthing? Truly I think it was the Duke's intent to do this last Act only for
his own Ease. He knew the Duchess had a Displeasure to my Lord of Bath, and
therefore he himself designing to express his Kindness to my Lord of Bath,
would make such a Deed, and put it out of his own Power to alter it upon any
slight Attempts, or unless he should have reason to change his Mind toward him
upon extraordinary Occasions and Circumstances; so by not applying with these
extraordinary Terms in the Power, he could preserve his Purpose toward my Lord
of Bath notwithstanding any Attacks upon him, and yet by such a Will as this he
could pacify the Importunities of the Duchess, who not knowing of the Deed,
did acquiesce in a Settlement by Will, so things might pass easily, and he not
being disturbed by any Bickerings or Misunderstanding between the Duchess and
my Lord of Bath.

And truly it appears by what Dr. Berwick says, That the Duke was to buy his
Peace at home by such a compliance: For he was told, the Duchess would be very
bad as to her Distemper, if her desires were not answered; and in Jamaica there
is Proof of very great uneasiness the Duke was under, the Chamber was locked
up, and Persons that came to him were forced to come in at the Windows.

I have been long upon this Head of Surprise, because it was so much labored
by the Counsel for the Plaintiffs; but after all this, I think it is but a
short Point. Here is a Deed made in 81, fully proved, and found to be a good
and true Deed by a Verdict at Law, and as such, is a good and sufficient
Conveyance of the Land at Law; and there is made to my Lord of Bath, pursuant
(as to the Ground and Substance of it) to the Will in 75, though all the
particular Limitations do not agree: here is no Fraud, no Falsehood proved, no
Practice that appears at all upon the Duke to obtain it. But here is the want
of a Counterpart, and want of Notice to the Trustees, and there must be Matters
to make out a Surprise to set aside this Deed.

I confess, I am at a very great loss upon what Ground of reason that Rule is
founded, and am totally to seek for a Precedent to be guided by in the Case,
and therefore I cannot but be of Opinion that it cannot be set aside in a Court
of Equity upon that Point.

The next thing is that of Concealment; They say, that this Deed was secreted
and concealed by my Lord of Bath from the Duke of Albemarle, that he might not
know the particular Circumstances of his Power, so as to pursue them when he
had a purpose to execute it; and this they ground upon a Matter of Fact, which
they say is testified by one of the Witnesses to the Deed, that the Deed at the
time of the Execution was delivered to the Earl of Bath, and so they say it was
kept by him, and the particulars of the Power were forgot by the Duke, and so
he was not informed what he ought to do, nor enabled to make a perfect
Revocation. They say likewise, this Deed was concealed and not discovered upon
the Sale of part of the Estate conveyed in it to my Lord Jefferies, and Leases
and Annuities granted. But that which they insist upon (as I by my Notes take
it) is a passage in my Lord of Bath's Answer to their Bill, That about the Year
1686, my Lord Duke sent to the Earl for his Will in order to make a new
Settlement of his Estate, and this was just before he made the Will of 87.

Now truly I think it may have this short and plain Answer, The Duke if he had
a Mind to revoke this Settlement, had more need of the Deed than the Will, he
might revoke the Will without looking into it by making a subsequent Will; but
he could not revoke the Deed, because he was by the Proviso circumscribed to
the observance of such and such Circumstances; say they, those Circumstances
the Duke be apt enough to forget: and then when he knew the Duke's purpose to
alter the Settlement of his Estate, my Lord of Bath should have been so
ingenuous as to have sent the Deed, or have acquainted him with the purport of
it, and should have considered that the Duke did mostly need that to effect his
purpose, more than the Will to revoke, that he might observe the Statutes of
Frauds and Perjuries required by three Witnesses to make a good disposition of
Lands by a Will, and without much ado, that might be complied with: But yet all
the while this Power not being observed, all his Counsel by subtle Advice, told
him would signify nothing, therefore he would not discover that, and not doing
it, it must be a fraudulent concealment in him sufficient to set aside this
Deed.

They say it is no Objection, that this was not a fraudulent Conveyance in its
Creation for every Man; shall be relieved against that which being by Fraud
concealed from him, he could not make such reasonable Provision against, as if
he had known of it he might have done. Truly, I do think this is the best
Ground of Equity that has as yet been offered in this Case; and were it not
grounded upon Facts, which in truth upon the proofs are quite otherwise, I
should think it were a good Ground for Relief: for wheresoever a Man does
endeavor to inform himself of the Circumstances of his own Power and
Condition, in order to revoke such a Settlement, where he has a Power so to do,
and is hindered from coming at the knowledge of them, and especially by that
Person whose Interest it is to prevent a Revocation, he ought to be relieved in
such Case: For it is against good Conscience that any Man should profit by any
such sinister Practices. Therefore I say, the Objection were good, if the Fact
were true.

But alas, it is founded in this Case upon Presumption merely: It does not
appear that the Duke was desirous, or needed to be informed at all in the
Matter, or that he did really intend a Revocation. We do not hear any proof
that he did ask or speak to any Counsel about it. Nor is it true in Fact, that
the Duke should expect the Deed out of my Lord of Bath's hands, nor indeed
could he expect any such thing; for I take it, it stands plain in proof thus.

My Lord of Bath says in his Answer, That the Deed was delivered to, and kept
by the Duke: They say, that Answer of his, being a Defendant, is not to be
regarded; for it is replied to generally, and so the Facts not acknowledged any
further than they are proved. But to that, I say, the Plaintiff must prove that
this Deed was in my Lord of Bath's hands; they say Aleman proves it, who says
it was delivered into the Earl's hands. This was looked upon as so material a
Point in this Case, that the Deposition was called for to be reviewed; and upon
reading it again, it was plain it must be understood of the delivery of the
Deed only to execute it, and make it a good Deed, not a delivery into his
Custody.

Nay, there is farther strong Evidence, that it was in my Lord Duke's hands,
and not in my Lord of Bath's; for Sir Thomas Stringer does a little before the
Duke went beyond Sea, make an Abstract of it, and delivers it to his Man to
make a Copy of: And when after the Duke's Death both Deed and Will were
produced under one Cover, (but it is plain the Will was delivered to the Duke)
this answers it, and agrees to what my Lord of Bath says in his Answer, that
they were both delivered to him by the Duke a little before his going to
Jamaica, under that Cover, and sealed with the Duke's own Seal, and so they are
found.

And truly if it were but doubtful whether it were in the one hand or the
other, we must not determine that it was in my Lord of Bath's hands, or convict
him or any Man of Fraud where the Evidence is doubtful; it ought to be proved,
and plainly proved; for Fraud is a thing odious, and never to be intended or
presumed.

But the truth was, this Deed was concealed not from the Duke, but from the
Duchess, that she or her Counsel should not get at it to procure a Revocation.

As for the Case of Charles Clare that was mentioned, it does not in any sort
come up to this Case: he had lent Money upon a Statute, afterward Money is
lent upon a Mortgage of the Lands liable to that Statute: He ingrosseth the
Mortgage, and never discovers the Statute; the Lands were not worth more than
the Mortgage Money; and by reason of this Concealment it was adjudged Fraud in
him, and he should have no benefit of his Statute against the Mortgagee. Here
was a knowledge proved in the Case, which is not in my Lord of Bath's, that the
Duke would revoke; and yet I must needs say, and I appeal to those Gentlemen
that usually attend at this Bar, whether they did not think it a hard Case.

And as to the Case of Raw and Pott, besides, that it was a Case between a
Younger and an Elder Brother, and so might have a better Ground or Handle for
Equity, yet I think it was justly decreed, because the Party knew it and
concealed it on purpose, and encouraged the thing; for when he was asked why he
did not discover it? then he answered, If he had, then there would have been a
Fine levied and a Recovery suffered, and then he knew all would have been well
enough; but there is no such matter as knowledge or the like here.

The next Head of Objections is that of a Revocation in Equity; and for that
the first thing insisted upon is this: They would have the Deed of 81 to be
depending upon the Will of 75; it was ancillary, it leaned upon it; and
therefore this Will of 87 revoking the Will of 75, revokes likewise the Deed of
81: And for this they did cite two Cases out of Dyer; The first is, fol. 49. 6.
A Man makes a Feoffment to perform his last Will, and the Will is annexed to the
Charter of Feoffment, and Livery of Seisin is made; accordingly it was adjudged
that he might alter and revoke that Will, though it took effect by the Livery:
For that does not alter the Nature of a Will, which is always revocable by the
last Will; But does that revoke the Deed too? No certainly, the Deed stood
good, and there is nothing to the contrary appears in that Book.

The other Case is Dyer 314. 6. A Man by Deed indented declares, That whereas
he had suffered a Common Recovery to the intent to perform his Will touching
the Disposition of his Lands, he Wills so and so; and whether he could during
his Life alter the Uses in this Indenture, was the Question; and it is held he
might: For this Indenture is quasi a Will which is changeable; I will go
further than that, I say it was a Will, or it was nothing; for though it were
in form of an Indenture between several Parties, yet when he says he Wills so
and so, after he had recited a Power to declare by Will, this must be taken for
a Will, or it is no execution of the Power: for when a Man suffers a Recovery,
or makes a Conveyance to me of his last Will, he has two Interests in it; he
may dispose of it as Owner, or by way of Direction; If he will dispose of it by
way of Direction as this was, he must follow the Method prescribed, and that
must be by Will, and so this must be a Will, or no execution of his Power. But
what is that to this purpose, that a Will, which a Deed is made to Confirm
being revoked, that shall revoke the Deed too; sure that is no consequence, nor
has any Ground upon this Case.

But then, say they, here is a Revocation, and that a Revocation in Equity: for
though it be a good Deed in Law, yet there is such a contrary disposition by
this Will, as must revoke it, being revocable according to the Power. Indeed
here is not the Number of Witnesses required, nor the Quality, nor a tender of
the Money and Powers of Revocation: for it is natural Equity, that he who is
Owner of an Estate should dispose of it as he pleases. But there is another
Rule of Law that is as certain as any other, that all Circumstances must be
observed, or the Power not well executed; and that is Scroop's Case, and other
Cases that have been mentioned: And though the Law will go as far as it can to
expound the Circumstances as a Performance, yet a Performance is necessary.

The Foundation for this Revocation in Equity, which the Plaintiffs go upon, is
this, Where there is a deliberate Intent to make a new Settlement of the
Estate, and a Man goes as far as he can to make it, there Equity shall supply
any Defect.

First, I must deny that in this Case the Duke of Albemarle has done all that
he could do; for he thought six Witnesses necessary to the Will of 1675, and
six Witnesses to the Deed of 1681, and so provides in this Power for
Revocation, besides other Circumstances, and here are only three Witnesses to
this last Will.

Neither is this a proper Settlement of a Family; for it does not appear that
Mr. Monk, who is mainly taken care of in this last Will, was any kin to the
Family at all: Nay, it should seem the Duke was not spontaneous about it; for
he would have the Duchess pay the Counsels Fee as for her Business. When he
came to execute it, it was not a place that he came to for that purpose, but
upon quite another Affair: He would have put it off to another time, he would
have avoided it, it was done in a hurry, and before Witnesses prepared for that
very occasion, and brought from Newcastle-House; and therefore it is not so
much his Intent and firm last Purpose.

On the other hand they oppose this Argument thus, That the Duke did at the
same time write to my Lord of Bath, that his Purposes toward him were
unalterable; and what his meaning in that should be, unless his purpose not to
revoke this Deed and Settlement, truly I cannot tell, he left the Keys of all
his Evidences with him when he went away, Crofts was ordered to deliver them to
the Earl as chiefly concerned, if he should miscarry; he trusts him with the
chief Management of his Affairs, directs him to be advised with upon all
occasions, as he used to do himself before, and so is the same still toward
him in all respects as ever he was.

I do not find in any of the Plaintiffs Proofs, that there is any Cause shown
for altering this Mind of my Lord Duke's, if he had not himself declared it so,
to be unalterable. There was no Provocation on the one side, or increase of
Merit on the other side, why he should change from his Kindness so grounded
toward the nearest Relation of his Blood, to entertain a Stranger, to whom he
had never a thought of giving any thing before. It is hard to think that my
Lord of Bath, Sir Walter Clarges, Mr. Greenville, and even the Duchess her
self should continue the same, and the Duke should not; I find no Evidence of
it, nor can tell any Reason for it; and without Reason I cannot be induced to
give my Opinion against a Deed really, deliberately, intentionably made, upon
only the single Act of this Will, testifying so great and total a Change;
surely if any such thing had been meant, it was very strange he should take no
notice of this solemn Will and Deed made before, and ask Advice whether it were
not sit to revoke or look into it.

To my thinking the Duke has in effect declared that this Will in 1687, should
be taken for a Will as obtained by Surprise; for he binds himself by this
Proviso only to revoke in such and such away to prevent Surprise. We then find
there a Will that wants these Circumstances required in the Proviso, and then
we must take it to be what he intended to fence himself against; and nothing
does reconcile the Duke to himself in this matter, but that he was apprehensive
he should be drawn to do something that was against his Mind; aad therefore he
does fence himself with this Proviso against all such Attempts.

The Will and the Deed do both provide largely for the Duchess; but whether
the Will does it so liberally as the Deed does, I cannot tell: they did talk as
if there was 3 or 4000 l. Difference; I cannot tell what, as to the Value it
may be, but I am sure in this Will there is no Provision made for my Lord of
Bath at all, and there is none for Mr. Monk in the Deed, or any other thing
before this last Will.

I must crave leave to differ from the Counsel for the Plaintiff, in what they
take to be a Ground for a Revocation in Equity, that the Duke had forgotten
this Deed; I am not satisfied that upon that Ground only this Court should
relieve against it: And my Reason is this; Suppose his Intention to revoke do
appear, it ought to be in such a manner as the Law requires, and pursuing such
Circumstances as he has put upon himself, because here is a voluntary
Conveyance on both sides; and where there are two voluntary Conveyances, he
that has the Advantage at Law ought to keep it. And so the Resolution was in
Fry and Porter's Case; and I take it to be the standing Rule in Equity: For
what shall turn the Scale? shall the Defendant urge any thing of Merit? that
cannot be in this Case; but in the Eye of Law they are both equal under the
Consideration of the Court, and in pari gradu: And indeed if it should be
otherwise, what would become of Circumstances in Powers of Revocation? by which
Men shackle and circumscribe themselves with very good Reason at their
Creation, if the last Will alone shall set aside all.

It is objected, that it was always the Duke's solemn Intent to prevent the
dishonorable Descent of his Estate upon his right Heir at Law, who sprung from
a Regicide, and to prevent a Surprise by a sudden surreptitious Will, and both
these Ends are attained by the solemn deliberate Preparation for his Will, and
the Disposition of the Estate to Mr. Monk; and it is substantially, and
therefore equitably performed, though not strictly legally.

I think there was a further End in this Deed, and that was to settle his
Estate upon a Person of Honor nearly related to him in Blood: And this Court
cannot take it from him without reflecting on this Settlement, and upon him
that made it, and upon him for whom it was made. No, nor can it be done as I
take it, without performing the Circumstances required and prescribed for that
purpose in the Proviso, without which I think this Court ought not to
determine, that the Intent is performed, or that his Mind is changed. And if we
shall depart from these Limits, I cannot tell where we shall stop: I can set
this as a good Limit; here is a voluntary Conveyance on the one side, and a
voluntary Conveyance on theother side; the latter Conveyance must make it out,
that the Circumstances requisite are performed, and if not, I think the Law
must decide it; and there has been nothing made out, by which, as I conceive,
there can be any Advance given in a Court of Equity to determine it otherwise
than the Law will.

I shall speak but very little to the other Head. It is objected and asked,
whether there should be no Relief in any Case where there is a Defect in the
Execution of the Power; I think that would be very hard on the other side; and
it would be convenient Relief should be given in these Cases.

First, for a Purchaser; I speak not now of a Purchaser for a valuable
Consideration without notice, for that is helped already by the Statute; and so
where there is any Fraud, or the Party is guilty of any Deceit or Falsehood
whereby a Man is prevented from executing his Power, though he never so much
intended or desired it.

But there is no such thing here, and the Plaintiffs Counsel were wiser Men
than downright to call this Fraud only, they style it Surprised Circumvention.

I think also it may be fit for this Court to give Relief where there is a
foreign Consideration; as Consideration for Payment of Debts, or providing for
younger Children: As where a Man makes a Conveyance, or makes a Will, and
charge his Lands over, which he has such a Power, for Payment of his Debts,
and the Circumstances of the Power are not exactly observed, there shall be
Relief in Equity for the sake of the Matter: Payment of Debts is a most
conscientious thing, and fit for a Court of Conscince to take care of, and see
performed: And providing for Children is a thing of the same Nature; they are
looked upon as Creditors; and I think this is reasonable, and the Precedents
have all gone that way.

The Statute of 33 Hen.8. which gives a Man Power to devise Lands by Will in
Writing, recites it as reasonable, that a Man should dispose of his Estate to
pay his Debts, and provide for his Children, but goes no further. Those were
wise and prudent Considerations upon which the Law did enlarge a Man's Power of
disposing of his Estate; but there is nothing of either of these in this Case;
every one will say, he is not a Man of good Conscience that will not pay his
Debts, or provide for his Children: But will any Man say that my Lord Duke had
not been a Man of good Conscience if he had not given this Estate to Mr. Monk,
or to my Lord of Bath either? He might law^^lly and conscientiously give it to
the one or the other, but there is no Consideration of Equity appearing why he
should be obliged to it, or to take it from the one to give it to the other; he
might use his Liberty according circumstantiated his own Power.

Another Ground of Relief in Equity is Accident, or an Impossibility of
complying with the Circumstances when he has a plain Intention to do it: I
agree it is so, but then he must do all that he can: As the Case that was put
of a Man's being obliged to pay or tender Money at such a Place, and he falls
sick or lame, or Bed-ridden, that he cannot go thither, and it is tendered by
another by his Order, or at another Place; this being the Act of God, I think
it would be a good Performance of the Condition; and that I think is the best
Answer that can be given for the Decree in Popham's Case.

But now here, when the Duke was informed of his Power, or might have been, and
neglected all, and performed nothing; shall this Court supply these Neglects
and Want of Performance? sure they may as well supply all the rest; that there
should be no Hand, no Seal, and for ought I know no Will or Deed, but only a
Parole Declaration.

There is one thing that I should properly mention last under this Head; they
object it is not said, That it should be in the Presence of six Witnesses
altogether. Now it was in the Presence of three Witnesses here in England, and
three more in Jamaica: and so here are six Witnesses, though not all at once,
and there was no Peer to be had as a Witness in Jamaica: So there is an
Accident rendering it impossible to have any such, and therefore Equity will
relieve against such an Impossibility.

I do agree, if the Duke had gone about directly to make and publish his Will
in Jamaica, with an Intention declared to revoke this Deed, and had had six
Witnesses to this his Act and plain Intention, there being no Peer to be had
there, it should have been a good Revocation: as in the Case mentioned by the
Counsel of Hibbett and Lee in my Lord Hobart 312. Indeed if the Power were
limited to be executed in the Presence of three Subsidy-Men, it is said in the
Book, that they must be averred to be Subsidy-Men: But yet I take it now, that
old way of Subsidies is out of use; three substantial Men that would have been
Subsidy-Men, if that were the present way of taxing it, would be enough: For
none such would be had, nor could there be any Peer in this Case that is put.

But to consider the Case and Proofs, as to Jamaica, what it amounts to, I
would fain know how it appears that it was the same Will that he executed at
Sir Robert Clayton's; the Duke only said, Doctor, this is my Will; perhaps it
was the same, perhaps it was not: But how comes his writing his Hand and
Sealing in the Presence of three Witnesses, and declaring it after to be his
Will, (to make the most of it) in the Presence of three more to be an Execution
in the Presence of six Witnesses? But beyond all this, here is no Proof that he
did intend to publish this as his Will, it is only a private Saying of his on
the by, when he saw it among other Papers, which then he showed to Dr. Sloan:
He was not then solemnly making his Will, or executing his Power; he does not
so much as bid them take notice that he declared that to be his Will, or any
thing to make them remember it afterward. So that I take it, it signifies
nothing as to this Matter.

I would trouble your Lordship no longer, for I have been long enough already,
I am loath to meddle with the Cases and Precedents, because that may take up too
much of your time; but because the Precedents have been brought me, I must say
something to them, to show that I have read them, I will therefore open some of
them, such as I think come nearest the Case.

They say the Common Law goes as far in relieving, upon Cases of Powers of
Revocations, as appears by Hibbett's and Lee's Case, that I mentioned but now,
where a Will is declared to be Writing. So the Case of Thorn and Newman's
Payment in another Place than that required in the Proviso; in that Precedent
it is recited, that the Indorsement on the back was, that the Money was paid
according to the Proviso, and no notice taken of the Place, for upon the very
reading of the Indorsement the Plaintiff was forced to be nonsuit: And
afterward that Matter was disclosed in Equity, that it was in another Place
than the Place in the Proviso, but yet no Relief against his own Acceptance,
who was the Party privy.

The next Case is the Case of Guy and Dormer: a Man sells his Estate with a
Power to revoke by any Writing in express Words.

Now here they did not help the want of a Performance, but the Judgment was,
the Performance was real. Besides, I cannot allow that to be any Argument, that
if the Law has gone as far as it may, Equity should go further. To me the
Argument runs quite contrary, Equity shall carry it no further, for Equity
should follow the Law.

There were several Precedents cited by the Plaintiffs Counsel, but I confess
upon Consideration of them, very few do come up to the Case in question. I
shall take them as near as I can in order of time.

The first is that of Prince and Green, 40 Eliz. There was a Power to make
Leases intended to be reserved in a Conveyance by a Covenant to stand seized to
Uses, and a Lease is made accordingly, as a Provision for a younger Son. This
Power was not long after Mildmay's Case, and the Case in Rolls, Abd. 1 part,
lit, Charge 378. But because, says the Order, neither the Party nor his Counsel
did then know, but such Power was warranted by Law, though by late Judgments
they were found to be void, and so it was impossible to them to prevent it, the
Court did relieve in this Case to make good the Lease; and it is there said
that the elder Brother, who would avoid the Lease, was an unreasonable Man; and
this was a Provision for a younger Child: which is not our Case, either the
Counsels Mistake of the Law, nor a Provision for a younger Child.

The next is 44o Eliz. the Case of Ferrers and Tanner; A Man devises Annuities
out of Lands to his half-Sisters, and gives the Land to his half-Brother, who
makes over his Estate to prevent their being seized of the Rent in order to
distrein; and the Court after some time, and upon sight of a Precedent, did
relieve the Devisees.

Here I would observe how difficult it was even for this Court to do that: For
they say, the Heir that had the Land did promise the Devisor before his Death
to perform the Will, and that was a Deceit, otherwise the Devisor might before
his Death have done it by a Conveyance, or granted the Land with a Condition to
do such an Act, or permit such a Thing. And that he did consent afterward
before the Master of Chancery to do it, I will not say but that this Court
might have declared this Payment without these Circumstances, nor that these
might not make the Case somewhat better. Indeed in the short Print of the Case
in Moor 626. pl. 859. there is no Reason but the Resolution only.

The next Case is in the Year 1655, the Case of Hamilton and Maxwel in this
Court, which in short was upon very good reason, because it was a Provision for
a younger Daughter, and that is urged on all hands to be a good Ground of
Equity; and he declared that his elder Daughter was otherwise sufficiently
provided for.

Another Case is that of Bowman and Yates, and that is about a Covenant for
levying a Fine for raising a Rent out of Lands, which was indeed defective at
Law, but decreed in Equity to be paid and satisfied; but if it be looked into,
I think will not appear very pertinent to this Case, it being only to support
the Intention of an Agreement upon Marriage.

This was 12o Car. 2.

The next is the Case of Wallis and Grimes, 19 Car. 2. which was this; Sir
Thomas Grimes, the Grandfather, makes a Conveyance in Trust for Payment of
five hundred Pounds to younger Children; the Heir makes a Mortgage without
notice, and this Trust is endeavored to be set up against the Mortgagee, but
the Court would not permit it: But this comes not near our Case, for a
Mortgagee is in nature of a Purchaser.

Then 20 Car. 2. thence was Pit and Potham's Case in the House of Lords.

There this Court did relieve, because it was a plain Intent the Land should be
sold, and there was only a want of naming the Person that should sell, and the
Law would help that. He that has the Land shall do that Office, and that was
next door to a Provision for Children, it being for a

For the Case of Smith and Ashton, besides the Answer my Brother Powell gave to
it, has also this flat Answer to be given, that it was a Provision for
Children; that was the next Case in point of time.

Then comes the Case of Brisco and Peter's, 28o Car. 2. I have as carefully as I
can perused that Case, but cannot really observe how it is made use of in our
Case. And it is very much to be considered that it is no Rule between two
voluntary Conveyances, how far a voluntary Conveyance shall be fraudulent
against a Purchaser.

The next Case is that of Thwaytes and Dey, which has also had a full Answer
given to it already. It was doubted, whether it was a Seal to it; but the Court
seemed satisfied with that, and all the remaining Question was, Whether a Man
making a Conveyance, and reserving a Power to make any other Estate, could
charge that Land with a Rent for a younger Child; and the Court held he might,
and I think it a good Decree.

These are the Precedents that are brought on the Plaintiffs side; there are
but few brought on the Desendants part, but two that I think are very material:
the one is that of Ward and Booth, which has been opened and applied by my
Brother Powell; but I would observe from what he quoted out of the Decretal
Order in that Case, that it does very extraordinarily declare the Limits of
this Court's Proceedings, in such Cases as these. Here was not a formal
Revocation, but a clear and express Intention to revoke. That does not appear
in the present Case. There should be, I agree, Relief in such Circumstances if
there were Fraud in the Party; if there had been any Accident to render it
impossible, to execute the Power in all Formality. But here is neither Fraud
nor Accident, and therefore by the Reasons and Rules in that Case, there can be
no Relief in this Case.

The other is Arundel and Philpot's Case, and that is so very express an
Authority for this Court's leaving the Determination to Law, that nothing can
be more. They there say, where it is a voluntary Conveyance against a voluntary
Conveyance, you must try and decide the Matter at Law; and it did fall out in
that Case, that there was no need of a Court of Equity to interpose; for upon
the Trial it did fall out to be proved that there was a due and legal Execution
of the Power, that there was a Tender of the Guinea.

As to the Matter of the General Trust, I need say no more than this; whether
that would avail any thing upon a Controversy between the Legatees and my Lord
of Bath, I cannot tell; but I am sure it is not material at all as this Case
now stands.

Yet methinks as to a General Trust, that it cannot be; for that were to make
the Duke use all this Solemnity in making this Settlement to no purpose, and
would render this Power of Revocation very useless and idle. The use of this
Power was, because he had put the Estate out of him, both in Law and Equity,
and so there could be no General Trust or Means to bring it back again without
a due Execution of the Power.

There are two or three small Objections more that I shall but mention, and
conclude.

First, they say several Grants will be avoided if there be no Relief against
this Deed. That is, some Leases, some small Annuities to Servants, and a Grant
of 100 l. to the Duke's Natural-Son: This is all. Now whether it is not
reasonable to imagine, the Duke thought that the trusting the Earl with so
great a part of his Estate, he would have more Honor and Respect for him than
to dispute such trivial Matters; and for any Leases or Contracts, they come
within the Rule of Purchases, and so the Consideration would preserve them.

Then they say, Here is no Monument for the Duke, a Person of so great Quality;
but that may be made good out of the personal Estate. I am sure it is no
Objection in point of Law.

But the last Thing they urge is, If there be no Relief in this Case, you put
the greatest Indignity and Reproach upon the Duke that can be imagined. That he
should call Mr. Monk Cousin, send for him out of Holland to leave his Will with
him, in the Will give him so great a Share of his Estate, desire the King to
make him a Baron, and appoint his Son to be educated as one that was to make no
small Figure in the World; that he should send for my Lord Chief Justice
Pollexfen to draw this Will, make three parts of it; deliver one to the
Duchess of Newcastle, another to Colonel Monk, and carry a third with him into
Jamaica, and there take public notice of it; and after all this Expectation
raised in Mr. Monk of a Fortune, run himself into the Charges of an expensive,
but what he knew would be a fruitless Suit. This say they, is an unconceivable
Dishonor to the Duke to be represented as one that would prevaricate so with
the King and the World, and play with the Misfortunes of his Kinsman, and the
rather because the Duke was a plain sincere hearted Man, and in all this did
but pursue his real Intentions of Kindness to Mr. Monk and his Children.

Truly methinks they have just as much to say on the other side: What shall
those many Declarations of Kindness to the Earl before this Deed, in this Deed,
and after this Deed, by Letters and other things, signify his Care of my Lord
Lansdown, as one he was most concerned next to my Lord of Bath himself, his
Petitioning the King to confer on him the Title of Duke of Albemarle in case of
his failing of Issue-Male, and all this to signify nothing besides the known
Kindred, the apparent Obligations and Merit of my Lord of Bath: sure if all
this be considered, the Duke's Honor is as much concerned on this side as on
the other, to approve himself sincere in all these Solemn Transactions. Would
he own him as his nearest Kinsman, and the most deserving of his Blood, and all
the while have a secret purpose in the last Act of his Life to make a Will, by
which he would set aside all he had professed to do for him, and by leaving
this Deed and Will with him, leave only so much in his hands as should put him
into a chargeable Suit for nothing. Therefore upon the whole, I think there is
greater reason to conclude, that the Duke did not certainly mean to do this
last Act, as what he would have to stand against so much formerly done the
other way. But I rather think the Evidence is strong to persuade any one that
the making of this last Will, was to satisfy another purpose, and make his own
Condition easy at home.

But my Opinion, as to the Judicial part of this Case, which I thus happen to
be of, is the stronger in me, because of the Authority of two Cases, which I
take to be express in Point, and those are the Cases of Win and Roberts, and
Fry and Porter.

In the Case of Win and Roberts, there was Proof of a very great surprise
upon the Man, whereby he was induced to make a Will, and to disinherit his
Child, of whom he was before very fond, and who was married into a very
Honorable Family, and to break a Settlement solemnly made before; all this
Matter was Charged in the Bill and proved: But not withstanding this, the Court
declared they would give no Relief, but if they could expect any, they must go
to Law; and at last it was ended only by a Bill in Parliament. The Court said,
Try it at Law, a Will or no Will, and do not expect the Chancery should make
Men's Wills, or set them aside if legally made, especially then not upon bare
Conjectures and Suppositions concerning a Man's intentions to relieve against a
Solemn Act and Title found at Law.

In Fry and Porter's Case, one of the great Reasons why the Court denied Relief
there, was, that it was a Controversy between two voluntary Conveyances; and
there that Side that had the Advantage at Law, ought to keep it, and it was
without Precedent to relieve in any such Case.

So say I in this Case, we have no Precedent of Relief in any such as this now
before Us: We must not say this Court is unlimited, unbounded, by any Rules; it
is no doubt limited by Precedents and Practices of former times, and it is
dangerous to extend its Authority further; If therefore I err in my Opinion in
this Case, I err with these Precedents on my Side; and because I have never an
one to guide me the other way, the Desendants are in Possession of a Verdict,
Judgment and Title at Law, and I can see no ground of Equity to relieve the
Plaintiffs against them.

Then it being very late, the Court put off the delivering of the Lord Chief
Justice Holt's Opinion, and the Lord Keeper's Decree till another Day.


Die Veneris 23 December. 1693. In the Court of Chancery in Westminster Hall,
Com. Mountague and al. adv. Com. Bathon. and al. and e contra.
Lord-Chief-Justice HOLT. IN this Case, wherein the Earl of Mountague and the
Duchess of Albemarle and others are Plaintiffs, and my Lord of Bath and others
Defendants, I shall open the Case very shortly, as it stands upon the two
Wills, and upon the Deeds.

There was a Will made in the Year 1675, by Christopher Duke of Albemarle,
wherein there is a Disposition of several parts of his Estate upon his dying
without Issue, to several Persons; but the main Part and Bulk of it is given to
my Lord of Bath: And in that Will there is mention made of a particular Esteem
and Affection which the Duke bare to my Lord of Bath, that he was the nearest
of his Kinsmen by his Father's side; and that he also was indebted to him for
many great Acts of Friendship and Offices of Kindness performed to him and his
Father. Then there is in that Will also an express Desire that the Title of
Duke of Albemarle, by the King's Favor, might be conferred upon the Earl of
Bath; and that the eldest Son of the Earl of Bath, and so the eldest Son of the
Family successively, should be called Lord Monk; so that the Names of Albemarle
and Monk may with the King's Favor, remain with his Estate in the Posterity
and Family of my Lord of Bath, in memory of the late Duke his Father and
himself.

The Estate being so disposed of by the Will of 75, there are two Deeds made in
the Year 1681, a Lease and a Release. The Release does recite this Will, but in
the Recital of it there are some Differences from what is in the Will it self,
some Variations from it. In this Deed it is mentioned that the Intent and
Design of the Deed was to dispose of the Estate according as was in the Will:
And whereas it might be thought strange that the Duke by his last Will, which
by that Deed he does confirm and not intend to revoke, should give away his
Estate from the Heir at Law: Therefore for the satisfaction of the World, the
Duke does declare the Reason which has been frequently mentioned; and then the
Deed disposes of the Estate some to the Greenvills, some to the Clarges; but
the Main and Bulk of the Estate he settled upon my Lord of Bath. But in this
Deed there is a Power of Revocation to this effect, That it shall be lawful for
the Duke at any time to revoke this Deed upon the tender of a Shilling, by
writing under Hand and Seal in the presence of six Witnesses, whereof three to
be Peers of the Realm, and then to limit new Uses.

Then he makes his Will in the Year 1687, and therein he gives his Estate in a
different manner; that is, the bulk and the main of it is given, instead of my
Lord of Bath, to Mr. Monk, whom he supposes to be his Kinsman, and desires
that the Name and Title of Baron Monk may, by the King's Favor be bestowed
upon him, in case he himself died without Issue.

Now the Question is, whether or no this Will in 87 has revoked this Deed made
in 81 in Equity, for there are but three Witnesses to this Will, and not one of
them a Peer, so that in Law it is very plain it is no Revocation at all; it
cannot be a good Revocation there, because the Power is not pursued, the
Circumstances are not observed; here is neither the tender of a Shilling, nor
six Witnesses, whereof three Peers, nay not only so; but here are but three
Witnesses in all, and not one of them a Peer.

I am of the same Opinion with my Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and
my Brother Powell, that this is no Revocation in Equity, and that there ought
to be no relief had by the Devises of the Will of 87, against those that Claim
by the Deed of 1681.

These things are to be premised as granted, and not to be questioned.

First, That the Will of 75 was a good Will, there is no manner of dispate to
be made of that.

Secondly, This Deed of Release that was made in 1681, is a very good Deed, and
there is no manner of dispute to be made of that neither; for if there had not
been a Verdict in the Case, yet if they come to have the Opinion of a Court of
Equity, touching Relief in Equity against this Deed, it ought to be taken to be
a good Deed in Law, or they were not to come hither for Relief against it. And
as this Deed is to be admitted to be a good Deed, so in this Debate all those
Circumstances that appear in the Depositions are to be admitted to be true in
this Cause. I do not say that they are never hereafter to be controverted, but
now upon this Debate they are to be admitted true. As

First, That Sir William Jones his Hand is to the Perusal and Approbation of
the Proviso, and it is his VVriting.

Secondly, That he was a VVitness to the Execution of this Deed. And

Thirdly, That this is true which Errington swears about the Abstract of this
Deed made by Sir Thomas Stringer, which being main Circumstances about the
Deed, and Controverted, now must be taken for true in the Consideration of this
Cause. And then a third thing that is to be admitted without all Contradiction
too, is, that this Will of 87 is a good Will.

The Case standing thus, and all these things being taken for granted, the
Question I say will be, Whether those that Claim by this Will of 87, can have
any Relief against those that Claim by the Deed of 81? And I think there ought
to be no Relief, but those that Claim by the Deed of 81, have a good Title in
Equity as well as in Law.

I shall not mention any thing of the Evidence that has been given, or
insisted upon to support the Deed, nor now answer any of the Objections made
against the Truth of it; for I told you first, I take it for granted, that it
is a good Deed, and a true Deed without all dispute. But to the intent I may
comprehend all the Matters that I think are any way considerable, and fit to be
insisted upon, I shall speak to four general Heads.

First, I shall consider whether upon the Frame and Manner of this Deed of 81,
there be any ground of Relief for the Plaintiffs against it.

Secondly, Whether there appears upon the Proofs and Depositions in this
Cause, that there was any undue way or manner of Obtaining this Deed from the
Duke: Or any Way, or Contrivance, or Management for the Contriving it in being
afterward, which may produce a ground of Equity for the advantage of the
Plaintiffs.

Thirdly, I shall consider the Circumstances and Conditions of the Parties that
are in this Cause, those that Claim by the Deed of 81, and those that Claim by
the Will of 87, and whether upon that account there can be any Equity raised
in this Cause. And

Fourthly, I shall consider the Person of the Duke of Albemarle, and the
particular Circumstances he was under at the time of making this Will in 87;
and whether by reason of him from whom the Estate proceeds, or the
Circumstances he was under, there will appear any ground of Equity in this Case.

The first Consideration I say shall be, whether upon the Frame and Manner of
this Deed there be any ground of Equity for the Plaintiffs against it. There
were several things under this Head that were insisted upon by the Counsel for
the Plaintiff. As

First, That this Deed of 81 does partake of the Nature of a Will because it
recites a Will, and it is made to confirm a Will, and therefore shall be
Revocable in a Court of Equity as a Will shall be in a Court of Law.

Secondly, That it pretends to Recite the Will of 75, and there are several
Mistakes in the Recital, and very great Variations from it.

Thirdly, That there are several Dispositions different from those in the Will,
which it pretends to confirm.

Now for the first, To maintain that when a Deed recites a Will, and does say
it self is made to confirm that Will; therefore this Deed shall be Revocable in
its Nature in Equity, as a Will is at Law, I must needs say, is a Motion that I
never heard started before, I must confess I am apt to think

with the Proceedings and Practice in Courts of Equity, that may make it so
strange to me, it having been labored with no small apprehended Clearness at
the Bar. Therefore for that I must Appeal to you, who are constant Practicers
and Attendants here, Whether it be not a Notion altogether New. And to me as it
is a New Notion, so it is very fine, and seems impossible to be supported by
any Reason, but must produce very strange Absurdities. It is not to me to be
reconciled with any Reason of Law or Equity, as far as I understand any thing
of either.

For to say that a Deed is revocable, because it relates to a Will, is first to
contradict the Nature and Essence of a Deed. For a Deed takes effect
immediately upon the sealing and delivery, and is impossible to be altered from
what it is and has in it, or to be revoked by him that made it. But because it
relates to a Will, it shall be revocable as a Will is; That I say is a mere
sine-spun strange Notion, not at all agreeable to Reason.

Next such a Construction and Strain as this in Equity must overthrow the
Intention and Design of him that made the Deed. For when a Man has made a Will,
which is not consummate till his death, and after that makes a Deed, and limits
the Estate in such a manner as it was disposed of by the Will: What does this
Man mean, but that those Estates which were or arise by the Will upon his
decease, shall have immediate Effect during his Life? And whereas he thought
with himself it might not be so convenient to leave his Estate wholly to depend
upon a Will which might so easily be altered, it was his Mind and Intention
that it should be made more firm by a Deed which is more permanent.

Next it is a mighty Strain to make a Deed revocable as a Will; for then you
must first set up again that Will which was thereby revoked, for you cannot
imagine, but that when a Deed is made though to confirm a Will, the Estate
limited thereby does arise by the Deed, and the Will is revoked by the Deed. So
you set up a Will that is no Will in Law, and that shall control a subsequent
Deed which destroyed that very Will, which is strange, and contrary to all
Rules of Law and Reason.

There were some Cases quoted wherein a Deed shall control a Will, as Dyer 49.
It is said, If a Man makes a Feoffment to the use of his Will, which was next
at that time to the Charter of Feoffment, that that Will is revocable,
notwithstanding there is an express Application in the Deed to that Will it
self, and so the Uses arise by the Deed, not by the Will; and yet though this
Deed has relation to the Will, that Will may be revoked.

This indeed has the Terms put in this Case, but in Reason is no way
applicable to it. When a Man makes a Feoffment, and annexes his Will thereto,
there the Design is, that the Estate should arise, not immediately upon the
Feoffment, but attend upon the Will. But if a Man make a Deed of Feoffment, and
says it shall be to the use of such Persons, and for such Estates as in his
Will, or as he shall give according to the Will, there though the Will does
mention the Names, and limit the Estates, the Uses do not arise by the Will but
by the Deed: For though the Will be no part of the Deed, yet when the Deed does
refer to the Will, and the Will has limited the Estate, it is as much as if
all the Limitations had been comprised in the Deed.

And I take it that Deed is not revocable, because it has an immediate Effect,
and can be no otherwise revoked but according to a Power reserved in the Deed
it self. And that is Hussey's Case, Moor 756. A Man makes a Will, and he makes
a Feoffment to the Uses mentioned in the Will, tho the Will be revoked, as sure
it is, yet it is a sufficient declaration of the Uses.

It was further urged for the support of this Notion, what is said in Hobart in
the Earl of Ormond's Case. The Case is put a little short in the Book. A Man
suffers a common Recovery to the use of such Person and Persons, and for such
Estate and Estates as he should dispose of and to in his last Will. This was a
Case in Ireland, and before the Statute of Uses was made there; and so we must
look upon it in England as a Case before the 27 H. 8. and then there being a
Feoffment made, he remains Cestuy que use in Fee in the mean time, for he has
a Power by Will to dispose of the Use, according as is expressed in the Deed.
Then he makes a Deed in his Lifetime, and gives away the Inheritance of this
Use, and afterward makes his Will. Now here is a Deed that gives the
Inheritance of the Use away; and here is a Will that does control and alter
the Disposition of this Deed. This was the use that was made of this Case.

Now in answer to that, Suppose it were so, this Will is but an execution of
that Power which proceeds from the Deed; for when a Man makes a Feoffment for
the use of such Persons, and for such Estates as he shall limit by his Will. It
is not the Efficacy of the Will that disposes of the Estate, but it is by
virtue of the Deed; so that the Deed in his Lifetime was no execution of the
Power reserved in the first Deed, which was only to do it by a Will.

But I must say this further to that Case of the Earl of Ormond, That I do not
take that Opinion of the two Judges, Hobart and Dodderidge there delivered to
be Law; and there were other two Judges, Mountague and Hutton that were of
another Opinion, and others were of their Mind, and it did not come to a
judicial Resolution. And my Opinion is this, That if a Man made such a
Feoffment before or after the Statute of Uses, he has the Fee Simple of the
use vested in him in the mean Time, and therefore has a Power to dispose it.
And if he does by Deed in his Lifetime dispose of it, that is a good
Disposition, and the Will shall not control it, for he is as much Master of
the whole Estate, both before and since the Statute of Uses, as if he had made
a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself; And then an absolute disposition of
this by Deed does extinguish and destroy the Power. If he from whom the Estate
moved does reserve a Power in any particular manner to limit any Estate or
Estates by his Will, the whole Fee-simple is in him, and any Act he does do to
dispose of the Estate, will hinder him from executing of that Power.

And for this I shall quote you but one Case, and that is in Lea 39. Broad's
Case; a Fine is levied to the use of such Persons, and for such Estates as the
should limit and appoint by his last Will, and so the Case comes home to this
Case. He after this covenants to stand seized of these Lands to the use of his
second Son and his Heirs, and then makes his Will, and disposes of the Estate
therein according to the Power. The Question was, which of these Dispositions
should take place, the Deed or the Will? The Will was according to the Power
reserved upon the first Fine, and the Deed intervened before he came to execute
this Power; It was there held that having made a Disposition of the Estate by
Deed, though by a Covenant to stand seized, that should take effect, and the
Will, though made according to the Power, came too late to execute it. So that
I think none of these Cases that have been mentioned for this purpose are
applicable to the Case in Question, nor argue or prove any thing material for
that which the Plaintiffs Counsel intended them for.

Ay but say they, this Will of 1675, and Deed of 1681, make but one Conveyance,
and then the Will that is the Principal that shall govern all the rest. Now
this is a Notion fetched from the Courts of Law, but very improperly applied to
this Case as I think: For this Will being revoked by this Deed, is no
Conveyance at all. Where several Acts make but one Conveyance, every one has
its distinct operation to carry on the main Design. As a Lease and Release, the
Lease conveys the P^ss^s^ion for Years, the Release conveys the Inheritance to
the Po^^^ssion by way of Enlargement. So a Fine and Recovery, and Deed to
declare the Uses, make but one Conveyance, but each performs its particular
Part: The Fine conveys the Freehold to one Man, and upon the Recovery it is
conveyed to Another, and upon the Limitation of the Use it is conveyed to a
Third; all are preparatory Acts necessary to complete the Conveyance of the
Inheritance whither it was at first designed.

But how will they make a Will that has no subsistence to be one Conveyance,
with a Deed that before destroyed that Will? I cannot see how, nor is it
reconcilable with Law or Reason. So that for that Matter, I think they have no
ground to insist upon this Point, that this being a Deed relating to a Will,
may be revocable in Equity as a Will is at Law.

But to go on to the next.

This Deed does say, It was made and intended to confirm the Will, and yet
makes several Recitals and Limitations contrary to it.

Why, suppose it were that it did recite the Will truly, and says the Will
disposed of the Estate so and so; and then adds, that it was made to confirm
the Will, but yet disposes of the Estate quite otherwise than the Will does,
shall this avoid the Deed in Equity, or make it to have another consideration
than it else would have? The reciting part of a Deed is not at all a necessary
part, either in Law or Equity. It may be made use of to explain a doubt of the
Intention and Mea^ing of the Parties, but it has no Effect or Operation. But
when it comes to limit the Estate, there the Deed is to have its effect
according to what Limitations are therein set forth. And that is plain and
full, without any manner of Contradiction whatsoever.

Now because a Deed is repugnant in some part, that is material to what is
immaterial, Is that any ground in Equity to set aside this Deed? or make it
more liable to a Revocation than if they had been consistent? that seems
strange. Then here are Misrecitals and Mistakes, which I take to be Mistakes of
the Clerk; and shall these Misrecitalls of the Will in the Deed destroy the
Effect of the Deed, when the Meaning, and Intention of the Parties is most
manifest and clear how the Estate shall go, and there is no Reference in the
Limitations of the Deed to the Will, but only in the Recitals, and there there
are Mistakes. Now if the Limitations of the Will and Deed are not applied to
the Recitals in the Deed, then those Misrecitals cannot hurt the Limitations in
the Deed. If so be the Limitations in the Deed had been general to such Uses as
were before Recited to have been limited in the Will, then there had been some
ground to infer that these Mistakes should be a foundation for Equity, to
rectify those Mistakes. For that supposes the Recitals in the Deed concerning
the dispensation of the Estate by the Will are right, and would come too late
at the time of the Limitations to rectify them, and that were a Mistake, that
might be a good ground in Equity to relieve against the Mistake.

But when it comes only by way of Recital to be disposed by the Will one way,
and then does in express words limit it a contrary Way, the Intention is plain
that it should go according to the Limitations in the Deed; and there can be no
Foundations in Equity to set it aside. The Rule of Law is, Benignae sunt
Interpretationes Chartarum. And I suppose there ought to be a great deal more
indulgent interpretation of them in Equity, to maintain the Intention of
Parties. So that as to that first Point concerning the Frame and Manner of this
Deed, and the Contradictions to and Misrecitals of the Will in it, there is no
Foundation of Equity to relieve the Plaintiff against the Deed, unless the
Power of Revocation in the Deed were legally pursued.

The next thing is, Whether there be any thing proved in the manner of
obtaining it from the Duke, or managing and continuing of it after it was
obtained, be any Foundation for Equity to relieve against it? And for my part I
see none.

First, I do not see any manner of Evidence to prove any indirect Practice for
the obtaining of this Deed from Duke Christopher. The most that can be made of
it is but bare suspicion, and indeed that a very slender one too.

But say they, can you prove the Duke ever read it, or had it read to him? That
is a strange Objection, when it is proved to before Witnesses, and so many;
sure that is but a slender ground of Equity, the not reading of it? But nothing
of Surprise, or Ignorance in the Duke of what he did in it ought to be
supposed, because Sir William Jones, who is proved to be the Duke's Counsel,
was by, and a Witness to it. I told you at first Sir William Jones's Hand to be
to the draught and Deed must be admitted, because I take it for granted that
this is at Law a good Deed. And if I did not take it for granted that that was
Sir William Jones's Hand, and he was a Witness to the Deed, I should not take
it for a good Deed. But I meddle not with the point of Fact, but take the Fact
to be granted to bring the Judicial point in Question, so that it is his Hand,
and he is a Witness to this Deed.

Then Secondly, It must be imagined that when Duke Christopher made this Deed,
he did it with some Design and for some purpose or other, and if so, you cannot
imagine that the Duke was at all surprised therein, but that when it was
executed it was according to that design and purpose.

Next Sir Thomas Stringer, who was the Duke's Counsel to Peruse and amend the
Draught, as appears by his own Hand, sworn by his Son, and his Man. To imagine
then that a Man should be surprised into the making of a Deed, when his own
constant Counsel does Peruse and Amend the Draught, and the Counsel he used
particularly to advise with, is by at the Execution, and a Witness to it; is to
say, a Man was surprised when he had the Advice of Counsel about it, and they
were at his Elbow at the Executing of it.

Now I must confess I am to seek, and do not well know what is a Fraud in
Equity, that shall avoid a Deed, which is a good Deed at Law. The Case of
Bodmin, and Win, and Roberts, mentioned by my Lord Chief Justice, and my
Bother Powell, that spoke the last day this Cause came on, is I think a Case of
great Authority in a Court of Equity, because it had a great Transaction both
in this Court, and in the House of Lords, before it came to a Resolution and
Result. I shall put the Case in short as it was here in Court.

Mr. Roberts, Son to the late Earl of Radnor, married the Daughter of Mr.
Bodmin. Bodmin had made a Will, and given his Lands to the Children of his
Daughter in Tail, and after this he makes another Will, whereby he gave one
part of that Estate to Mr. Win, and another part to a remote Kinsman. It did
most plainly appear in the Depositions of this Case, that this Will was
obtained by great Fraud and Circumvention; that is, Win got into his
Acquaintance by pretenses of some little Offices of Friendship and Kindness, he
got him away from his Friends and Relations, and during his Sickness he did by
false Stories withdraw his Affection from his Daughter, kept him in secret
Places, that no Friend might come at him; and while he was so secreted and
wrought upon, was this last Will made, whereby he gave his Estate away from his
Child to a Stranger. All these pieces of Practice were Apparent before the
Court at the Hearing of this Cause, which was heard by my Lord Clarendon,
Assisted by

who all Unanimously Declared; that this was a Will obtained by Fraud and by
Practice, and that there was great Reason, if they could, to relieve against
it. But they searched Precedents, and could find none that would come up to the
Case. Thereupon for difficulty there was Advice taken about it in the House of
Lords; and there upon Consideration was an Order made by way of Advice to the
Lord Chancellor, that he should proceed to do Justice to either Party, though
there were no Precedent found to govern the Judgment. Afterward this Cause
came to be heard again, 12 June 1666, when my Lord Chancellor being assisted by
my Lord Chief Justice Bridgman, my Lord Chief Baron Hales, and Mr. Justice
Raynsford, did declare, That there could be no Relief, though it was said
before it was apparently a Will obtained by Fraud, and this to the Prejudice
of the Heir at Law, who had never Offended, or given him any Cause to
Disinherit her. So the Will was dismissed, but the Parties complaining in
Parliament, were Relieved by the Legislative Power by an Act of Parliament.

Now, besides that, there was Evidence of ill practice in that Case, but in
this I say, I find none; this is so great an Authority, and does show the
wariness of a Court of Equity, that I think none can be greater: Equity would
not relieve them, but they were put to seek their Relief by a Law made on
purpose.

But I will suppose now in this Case, that when my Lord of Bath did understand
the Kindness of Duke Christopher, and knew of the Will of 75. and knowing the
Incoastancy of the Duke's Temper, and other Circumstances in the Family, and
the Revocableness of a Will, should have applied himself to the Duke, and told
him, 'It is true, you have been so kind, as by your Will to bequeath me a great
part of your Estate, but you may be prevailed with on a sudden, or by some
Artifice or other, to alter this Will of yours; and you may be surpised into
the doing of it; pray will you make a more solemn Settlement to confirm this
Kindness by a Deed: And had prevailed to get him to do it. Suppose, I say, he
had done so, tho I find no Evidence in this Case of any such thing: suppose he
had been employed in the whole transaction of such a Deed, is this unlawful?
or, is it any harm? No, it is very innocent, he might lawfully do it; and if he
had opportunity, he might prudently do it. But, I say, I find not so much as
that in this Case, but this Deed was fairly obtained from the Duke; whether it
was by the advice, desire, or interposition of my Lord of Bath, does not
appear; or whether it were the Duke's own voluntary Act, though I think it is
not material, whether it was the one or the other.

But it has been said, That when Duke Christopher did design to alter his
Will, and for that purpose sent to my Lord of Bath, to bring the Will of 75.
which he had in his Custody, my Lord of Bath should have told him of this Deed
too: And therefore the concealing of the Deed of 81. from D. Christopher, is a
kind of fraud; and not making a discovery of it then, he shall not now take
advantage of this Slip, and have the Estate by this Deed; because if the Duke
had considered the Proviso in the Deed, he would have taken eftectual care to
have had a good Revocation in all the Circumstances: And, that he did not so
revoke it, must be imputed to the concealment of this Deed from the Duke, by
the E. of Bath.

So was the Case of Mr. Clare, at the Suit of the E. of Bedford, which was
opened the last Term. A Man that stands by and sees a Cheat, which might have
been prevented by his discovery, shall not take advantage of his own wrong and
profit by such concealment. But does it appear in this Case, that my Lord of
Bath knew to what purpose the Duke sent for his Will; or how or in what manner
he would alter the Settlement of his Estate? Why must he be bound to take more
notice of this Deed to the Duke than the Duke himself? It was the Duke's own
Act, and not my Lord of Bath's, and why should he give him notice of his own
Act?

The Rule of Law, when one is obliged to give notice to another, is this: When
the thing lies more in the Knowledge of the one than the other, and he cannot
come to the Knowledge but by his means: But when one Man has reason to know and
does as much as the other, he is not bound to give notice to that other.

Besides, it does not appear, as I remember, (for it is some time since this
Cause was heard) that my Lord of Bath did know to what purpose the Duke did
call for his Will, and that the Deed and Will were both in the custody of the
Duke; for though at the time of the execution of the Deed it was delivered to
my Lord of Bath, yet that was only for the due execution as a Deed; for my Lord
in his Answer says, He knows not where it was afterward, till delivered to
him by the Duke with the Will, under one Cover, some short time before he went
abroad. And so there is great Reason to induce the Belief, that it was in the
Duke's own custody.

Then as to the Objection of Secrecy, it is kept secret all-along, and no body
can give any account of this Deed. Take it for granted it was so; Shall a
Settlement in a Family (where the nature of the thing requires Secrecy) because
it is kept secret, be set aside in Equity? It ought to be kept secret, and that
is no Objection at all; Persons do not usually intend that all the World should
know how their Estates are settled.

But say you, At least here is a general Presumption, take all together, upon
the Circumstances of the whole Case, that there was some kind of management in
concealing of this Deed. Now, in a Court of Equity shall Presumption be
sufficient to found a Decree upon? If that shall avail in a Court of Equity, it
is an easy matter, according to the Judges Faith, to presume a Man out of his
Estate. There are Presumptions of several sorts, some are violent, and some
probable: A violent Presumption, That such a Man has done such a Fact, must be
when a Fact is done, and no other can be thought of to have done it: As, if a
Man be killed in a Room, and another Man comes out of the Room with a Sword
bloody in his Hand, and no body else was in the Room. Here is a plain Fact
done, and tho no body can swear they saw this Man do the Fact, that he killed
him, yet from this Evidence there is a very strong Proof.

But a probable Presumption alone is no Proof to rely upon; where indeed there
is some Proof of Witnesses positive, and the Presumption is probable that is
added thereto, it may be a good fortifying Evidence, but it signifies very
little of itself for a Foundation.

So that I think here is no Proof or Evidence, That my Lord of Bath did
surprise the Duke; or, that the Duke was surprised in this matter; or, that
there was any indirect means used to conceal it from the Duke. And so I have
done with the Second Head that I at first proposed. Therefore,

Thirdly, I come to consider the Persons that are concerned in this Cause, that
is, those that Claim by the Deed of 81. and those that Claim by the Will of 87.
Those that Claim by the Deed of 81. are Relations of Duke Christopher without
all question: My Lord of Bath, that is entitled to the greatest part of this
Estate, is a very near Relation, and a Person that had done many Kindnesses for
the Family, had been constantly assistant to the Duke in his business: And the
others are near Relations too.

Then for those that Claim by the Will of 87. Mr. Monk, that claims the main of
the Estate, is indeed in the Will called Cousin; but it is plain (if at all) he
is not so nearly related: So that when in respect of the Persons that claim by
contrary voluntary Settlements, there is even an equality of Relation, and no
difference of Consideration, (much more when there is an inequality) he that
has the best Title at Law, must carry the Estate: For what is it that makes
the Difference, but the difference of the Consideration? As in the Case of a
Deed in consideration of Blood, and an After-deed to a Purchaser, for a
valuable Consideration; the Last shall take place, as the Best Consideration.

But for revoking, or voluntary Settlement, in favor of a subsequent one,
where there is no difference between the Parties as to the Consideration, I
think has no ground in Reason. There is as much Equity for the one as the
other. It is perfectly at large, and I take it to be a constant Rule, that
where one Party has more Equity than the other, the Law must take place, and
that in this Case being manifestly for my Lord of Bath, by this Verdict Equity
ought not to take it from him.

This Principal was the Foundation of the Decree in that Case of Smith and
Ashton, that has been likewise mentioned and urged before: There was a Power
under Hand and Seal to be attested by three Witnesses, and to charge with
Portions for younger Children; so it is a limited Power: Then he makes a
Revocation for Advantage of younger Children, but not exactly pursuant to the
Circumstances of the Power. This was held good in Equity, and all the reason in
the world it should, because a Man is obliged to provide for his younger
Children; and it is against all Justice and Reason to make such a Settlement
upon the Eldest Son, as to send all the other Children a begging, being under
the same natural Obligation to provide for the one as the other. Therefore,
because of that Natural Obligation, Equity has been indulgent to support such
Provisions, because the first Settlement that disabled him from it, was
wrongful and injurious, and contrary to all Equity, and then in such Case
Equity is very indulgent.

But I would put this Case: A Man settles all his Estate upon his Younger Son
for Life, with a Power to revoke by Deed, sealed in the presence of three
Witnesses; without more ado he makes his Will, and disposes of his Estate to
his Eldest Son wholly, and that Will is attested as (put it) before the Statute
by two Witnesses, Is this a good Revocation in Equity? I say no: For the one is
as nearly Related to the Father as the other; the Considerations are equal, the
one is as much a Son as the other, and therefore there is no great difference
between them; and the Younger Son, who has the Estate by Law, shall enjoy it,
tho afterward it return back to him that was the Eldest.

The Fourth and Last Point is this, Whether in respect of Duke Christopher, and
those Circumstances that attended him, there be any Reason to relieve against
this Deed in Equity. And here,

First, It is said, If a Man makes a Feofment, with a Power of Revocation,
under such Circumstances, and does make a Revocation, where all the
Circumstances are not observed, he is such an Owner still of the Estate, as
that Equity shall support the disposition.

I say no: For that is to set up Equity in direct Opposition to the Law. For
when a Man has restrained himself by a particular Power, and has no Legal
Right to dispose of this Estate, but by exactly pursuing that Power, Equity
cannot enlarge that Right or Power.

Legally you agree he cannot; for if he could, then were there no Reason for
imploring the Aid of a Court of Equity: and there is the greatest Reason he
should be obliged by the Rule of Law in a Court of Equity, because it is a Law
that he has put upon himself: And that is the Equity of the Legal Obligation,
because it is supposed to be made by his own express or employed Consent, by his
Representative to all Laws. Here is a Man that has made a Deed, whereby he has
actually restrained himself from disposing of his Estate, but in such or such a
way. By the same Reason, that you in a Court of Equity will construe it a good
Execution of the Power, where the Circumstances are not strictly observed, you
may allow a Man to revoke a voluntary Settlement, when there is no Power
reserved to him in the Deed so to do: And that I take it, no one will be so
hardy as to affirm. A Man voluntarily makes a Settlement to the Use of himself
for Life, and after to other Uses, and reserves no Power of Revocation at all,
he cannot revoke this, no not in Equity: And the Reason is the same as to a
Power reserved where it is not pursued; for he has no other Right to do it but
by the Power, and it is as if he did it without a Power, unless he make a due
use of such Power as he had.

It will be manifestly inconvenient, if a Court of Equity have such a Latitude
in Powers of Revocation: For it is not sufficient to say it is unreasonable a
Man should be restrained, when a Man will fetter himself; nor do I see what
Reason there is to say it is imprudent. Indeed, to argue thus, is to make a Man
less Proprietary of his Estate, than the Law has made him, that he shall not
settle his Estate in such a manner as he pleases to order for himself; a Man
at this rate is never Master of his Estate; he makes the first Settlement as
Owner, and it is no matter, whether he has a Reason for making it or no, stet
pro Ratione Voluntas; but then, when he has so done, both Law and Reason bind
him to observe it, and there is no reason for a Court of Equity to avoid it.

I must confess Courts of Equity would have enough to do, if they were to
Examine into the Wisdom and Prudence of Men, in disposing of their Estates, and
if they were not discreetly, but foolishly done; therefore to set them aside,
there would need more Courts of Chancery than there are, to dispatch the
business of Equity in this Point; but be a Man wise or unwise, if he be legally
Compos Mentis, he is the Disposer of his own Property; and though he do not
dispose of it so discreetly, as a Judge or a great Lawyer would do, there is no
reason Equity should interpose to alter it.

Besides, there may be a very good Reason for a Man to put such a Restraint
upon himself, and for a Wise Man to do it too: For a Man may know the Frailty
of his own Temper, how apt he may be to be surprised, and prevailed upon to
make a precipitate or inconvenient Will, Settlement, or Disposition of his
Estate: Now to restrain this Infirmity which I have, and to prevent an
Inconveniency that may arise by my disposing of my Estate upon a Surprise, I
will restrain my self, and settle my Estate so and so, that if there be a
deliberate intention in me to alter it, I may solemnly execute such intention;
I will therefore have so many Witnesses, and those of good Quality, that if
they find me about any such Action, may advise me in it, and prevent any
apparent Surprise into the doing of any Action that may be foolish, rash, or
prejudicial: For that Reason I will bring my self under such and such
Restraints.

And when we see a thing done that may have a good Reason given for it, as
there may be for this circumscribed Power, to restrain from rash, sudden
Actions, it is to be presumed, that it was done upon good Reason; and therefore
the pretended unreasonableness of fettering the Owner of an Estate by himself
mentioned at the Bar, is no Argument against it: For it may be (and that is
rather to be presumed) upon very good Reason than upon no Reason at all.

Now I think it was never yet determined, or settled in a Court of Equity, that
a Revocation that did not pursue the Power, was good in Equity: It has been
settled and decreed not to be good, and that is the Case of Arundel and
Philpott, which came first into the King's Bench, and then into Chancery, and
afterward into the King's Bench again, and there it had its Period. A Woman
makes a Voluntary Settlement upon a Friend, with a Power to revoke upon the
tender of a Guinea; and upon some falling out or Quarrel that happened between
them, she makes another Settlement upon Arundell: at first in the King's Bench
they could not prove the Tender of a Guinea, and so the Revocation was not good
at Law; therefore they came into a Court of Equity to be relieved. It was held,
that no Relief should be had in the Case, although there was Proof of a
Provocation given, a Quarrelling and falling out, and so there might be some
Reason to revoke, but no Reason to revoke otherwise than according to the
Power: So the Bill was dismissed. Afterward, upon a Trial at Law that Matter was
substantially proved, That in the Heat of the Provocation the Guinea was
tendered, and consequently a good Revocation; and that I look upon as a full
authority that there can be no Revocation in Equity where it is not a good
Revocation at Law, unless there be a particular intention in the party to
revoke, which he could not effect pursuant to the power by fraud or accident.

The Case of Thorn and Newman I take to be good at Law, and therefore to be
sure good in Equity; there was to be a tender of 12 d. at a Day in the
Middle Temple Hall, the 12 d. was tendered at the Day but not the Place, and
accepted. That was before my Lord Chapter Justice Hales, and the party nonsuited
upon it. For upon a Condition to pay Money at such a day and place, the Money
be tendered to the Persons at the day, though not at the place, that tender to the
Person is good, being a Case of Money, but it is not so in a Collateral
Condition for doing of any other thing. And though it had not been in that Case
good at Law, it might be held to be good in Equity upon another account;
because, there where Children in the Case, and it was to make Provision for
them.

Now I do acknowledge that a power of Revocation not well executed at Law may
be in Equity in some other Cases: As where a Man having such a power has a real
intention to revoke, and his intention is known, but he is prevented by a
particular Accident, and surprised when his design was so to do, but he could
not perform that design, as by reason of Sickness, or that it was to be done in
a place whither he could not go. If any Accident obstruct that Intention, it
shall be looked upon as good, and shall prevail.

But now in this Case of the Duke of Albemarle, it does not appear that he had
any such intention of executing his Power. It is true, he made his Will, which
is a quite contrary disposition of his Estate. That is an Evidence of his
intention to make a new Will, but not to revoke this Deed; He was no way
hindered by any accident or irremovable Impediment from executing the Power
according to the Circumstances. He was in the place where best of all
throughout England he might have had three Peers to be Witnesses of it. The
Will was executed in London, at Sir Robert Clayton's House, and there were then
two Peers in the House; Therefore since he had an Opportunity to have done it
well, and would not do it, this can never be construed a good Revocation in a
Court of Equity. And I think truly that any such Construction would induce many
Absurdities. For,

First, It is to set up a power in a Court of Equity in direct opposition to
the Courts of Law, and so let a Man loose in Equity for no other reason, but
because he has restrained himself at Law, by a Law of his own making.

Secondly, It is as much as to say, That because a Man my dispose of his Estate
one way by Law, therefore in a Court of Equity he shall dispose of his Estate
any way. That is a very strange, but a true consequence of this Doctrine,
because a Man settles his Estate such a way with such a Power to alter it in
such circumstances, therefore he shall do it any way. At this rate, Tenant in
Tail may dispose of his Estate without a Fine in Equity, because he might have
done it at Law with a Fine, for the same Equity there is in both Cases. So a
Copyholder of Inheritance may in Equity dispose of his Estate without a
Surrender, because he might do it at Law by a Surrender.

Thirdly, It were to enable a Man to give away more then he has in him, for he
has no more in him than what is according to the Power he reserved to himself.
And,

Fourthly, it is to frustrate the intent and design of all Settlements
whatsoever; so that I think there is no reason at all for this Court to let a
man loose, that has thus restrained himself, unless there be some special
reason in the particular Case, for the sake of which a Man ought to have his
Case vary from the ordinary Rules.

Then let us consider next the Circumstances that the Duke was under at the
time of making this Will, you that are for the Plaintiff, say that he had
forgotten this Deed, and therefore it being an old and forgotten Deed, it shall
not have any regard in a Court of Equity, it not being taken any notice of by
the Party himself.

First, I pray consider whether the Evidence does not prove the quite contrary:
it was a Settlement made very solemnly; it is very well attested by six
Witnesses, Persons of Consideration, it was done with deliberation, and done
but in 81. the Will is in 87. It is not to be presumed that the Duke did or
could forget a Setlement so solemnly and deliberately executed. I say it is
hard to presume it, but rather the contrary, that he did not forget it.

Besides, though he had forgot it, Sir Thomas Stringer who was so instrumental
about this Will had not forgot it, for he made an Abstract of it about that
time with the very date in it. And I take it the memory of the Counsel in such
a Case, is the memory of the Client. Suppose a Man be to make a purchase and he
carries the Deeds of the Title to Counsel, and he espieth a Trust in the Deed,
and acquaints his Client, and yet he will purchase, shall Equity relieve? It
may be the Counsel overseeth this Trust, and the Purchaser is called to account
about it, says he, I had no notice, I knew nothing of any such Trust; I am a
Purchaser for a valuable Consideration, and it ought not to affect me. But then
they come and prove that the Deeds of the Title were carried to Counsel, they
saw this Trust or had an opportunity to see it. Then I take it, notice to the
Counsel is notice to the Client, and the Man that paid the money must lose the
Estate: So here Sir Thomas Stringer's memory is the Duke's memory.

But pray how comes it to pass that forgetting of a Deed is a ground to revoke
it in Equity? must the goodness and validity of a Deed depend upon the memory
of him that made it? Memory is slippery, but a Deed is permanent, and made to
abide for ever. Because Men are apt to forget what they have done, therefore
shall their Deeds have no more effect in a Court of Equity, than if they had
never been done at all? This I confess is very new and strange Doctrine to me,
when a thing once comes to be put into Writing, we say it is never forgotten;
Litera Scripta manet.

But then truly they say it is inconsistent with the Honor of the Duke of
Albemarle that he should make this stir and do about his Will, and pretend such
kindness to Mr. Monk, and desire a Title of Honor for him, and yet not intend
to revoke this Settlement that stood in the way. The others they say, how is it
consistent with the Duke's Honor to intend to revoke it, when there was such a
friendship between the Duke and the Earl, so many Services and Obligations
performed by the Earl, such a Trust and Confidence reposed in him even to the
last, as it is plain there was? How comes this to pass? but so it is, they are
Acts very much inconsistent I confess. But for persons Honors in judging of
Causes we have nothing at all to do with them.

For my part I see no reason in the World that the Duke had to alter his mind
as to my Lord of Bath, there is no appearance of any unkindness or displeasure
conceived by the Duke against the Earl, but an entire Trust and Confidence to
the very last, as is evident by the Order of the Keys of the Evidence-Room to
be delivered to him when he went away, and to consult with him upon all
occasions.

But withal I do not know what the meaning of this should be, if he really
intended any effect as to the Will of 87, which without all question is well
proved; and were it not for this Deed, would be a good disposition of the
Estate. Yet though it does contradict the Deed of 81, I cannot but take that to
be a very good Deed, and not to be set aside by this Will.

I have nothing further to consider in this Case, nor are we to make
Presumptions, and then to make Inferences from thence. We are to judge upon the
fact as it appears in the Depositions, which are plain and clear, and upon
these we are to determine our Opinions, and nothing else that is dark, and that
we cannot come at further than by conjecture.

There have been said in the Cause, which I omit on purpose, because I would
mention only those that are most material. Upon the whole matter I am of
Opinion there ought to be no Relief in this Case against my Lord of Bath, and
those that Claim by the Deed of 81.


LORD - KEEPER. I Shall first take Notice how these Causes stand in Court, and
who are the Parties in Judgment before the Court.

Here are Three Bills: One, in which the Duchess of Albemarle was Plaintiff
and since the Inter-Marriage, my Lord of Mountague is also Plaintiff against my
Lord of Bath and others Defendants, and this Bill sets out the law Duke of
Albemarle's Marriage-Settlement, and his Will of 87, with the Solemnity both of
preparing and executing it, and does complain that the Earl of Bath sets up
another Will, and a Deed in 75 and 81, whereby he seeks to frustrate the
Disposition of the Duke's Estate by the Will of 87. And the Bill does allege,
That if any such Deed was ever executed by the Duke (which they have reason to
doubt and do not admit) they believe the same was imposed upon the Duke by
surprise and not fairly obtained, and by fraud were concealed from the Duke,
and ought to be set aside in Equity, though the power of Revocation in the said
Deed were not strictly pursued, because his intention appears to revoke it, and
dispose of the Estate otherwise by making the Will in 87. And if it should not
be set aside, then the Duchess ought to have the Lands limited to her by that
Deed, and the Rentcharge of 2000 l. a year over and besides the Jointure
settled upon the Marriage, and confirmed by the Will of 75. And the Will of 87
ought to stand good, as to the Personal Estate and Legacies therein, and so
prays to be protected in the Enjoyment of the Personal Estate, and Specific
Legacies given to the Duchess discharged of the Duke's Debts.

There is another Bill brought by Christopher and Henry Monk, which complains
of my Lord of Bath, and the others setting up this Will of 75, and Deed of 81;
and I think in the same Words, or to be sure to the same effect with the other
Bill, and prays that both Will and Deed may be set aside, and the Plaintiffs
may enjoy the Benefit and Estate given them by the Will of 87.

Then there is a Third Bill of my Lord of Bath, Mr. Greenville, and Sir Walter
Clarges, in which they set out the Will of 75, and the Deed of 81, and the
continuance and constancy of the Duke's Friendship and Trust to the Time of his
Death, and complain that the Duchess and other Defendants set up the Will in
1687. and do pretend that amounts in Equity to a Revocation of the Deed of 81;
and his Bill prays that the Personal Estate may be applied to pay the Duke's
Debts in discharge of the Real Estate, which they pray may be confirmed to the
Plaintiffs in that Suit, and a discovery of the Writings about the Real Estate,
and that they may be brought into Court, and delivered up to the use of the
Plaintiffs.

These Causes were first heard before the Lords Commissioners, so long ago as
the 8th of July 1691. then was there a Decree made, That the Personal Estate
should be accounted for, and applied for the payment of the Debts; but before
the Court would deliver any final Judgment as to the Real Estate they ordered a
Trial at Law to be had in an Ejectment, wherein the Duchess and Mr.
Christopher Monk were to be Lessors of the Plaintiffs, and the Earl of Bath,
Mr. Greenvill, and Sir Walter Clarges to be Defendants, to try the Title to the
Real Estate: And the Plaintiffs were only to insist upon the Will of 87. and
the Deed of 81. so as that the Defendants Right upon the said Will and Deed
might be fairly tried. And all Exhibits were to be left with the Master three
weeks before tile Trial, for either side to inspect, take Abstracts and Copies
of as they should think fit.

According to this Order in the Michaelmas-Term, after there was a Trial at the
King's-Bench-Bar, and upon that Trial a Verdict past for the Defendants in the
Ejectment, the Earl of Bath, etc. upon the Will of 75. and Deed of 81. After
the Trial these Causes came to be heard again before the Lords Commissioners
about a year and a half since; at that time there was no complaint made of the
Verdict, nor any Motion for a new Trial. But after the Council had been heard
several days, the Court took time to consider of their Judgment; and before
Judgment one of these Causes abated by the Marriage of my Lord Mountague and
the Duchess, and by that and other Accidents the Cause has been delayed till
the late Hearing before the Court, assisted by my Lords the Judges, who have
delivered their Opinions. And now the Causes stand for the Opinion of the
Court, upon what appears in the Pleadings and Proofs, and what has been so
largely insisted upon on either side.

Upon which the Verdict being at Law for the Defendants, I must take it as my
Lords the Judges have already declared, not only that these Deeds of Lease and
Release, of the 15th and 16th of July 1681. were duly sealed and executed by
the late Duke of Albemarle, but also that they stand still in force, and
unrevoked at Law; for if they had not been so, the Verdict could not have been,
as it was, for the Defendant.

Therefore as that must be taken for granted, that these are good Deeds in Law,
the only Matter at present for the consideration of the Court, is, Whether upon
the debate of this Cause there be sufficient Ground in Equity for this Court to
interpose in the Case, so as to set aside these Deeds, as not good in Equity,
or revoked by the Will of 87. or no? And I shall, as to the Matter of the
Question, conclude my Opinion the same way with my Lords the Judges, that have
delivered theirs before.

And with respect to this Matter, I shall here consider who the Parties are in
Judgment before the Court, and what has been alleged as Reasons and Grounds
to induce the Court to set aside this Deed in Equity.

Here is no Purchaser in the case, no Creditor, no Child unprovided for, but
all the Parties claim by voluntary conveyances on the one side and the other,
so that at least they stand equal; or, if there be any circumstances as to the
Persons that have any weight, it is on the part of my Lord of Bath.

There have been several things insisted upon by the Council for the Duchess
and Mr. Monk, as grounds whereon they would found that Equity which should
impeach this Deed of 81. I would mention them as I apprehend they were offered,
and I will, as far as I can, avoid being tedious, or use unnecessary
Repetitions of what has been already said.

First, It has been offered, That this Deed was obtained by Fraud and Surprise.

Secondly, If it were Originally fairly obtained, yet it was unduely secreted
and concealed from the Duke, that lie could not come to know the true contents
of his Power; or, if it were not concealed, yet it was utterly forgotten by the
Duke, which was the reason and occasion why sufficient care was not taken to
execute the Power as it should have been.

Next, That though the power of Revocation was not literally executed, yet his
intention appearing clearly to dispose of the Estate otherwise, it ought to be
supported in Equity.

Then, That the Deed of 81. was but Ancillary (that was the Phrase) to the Will
of 75. being agreed to be revoked by the Will of 87. the Deed must fall with it.

Another thing was, That what the Duke had done amounted to a Revocation.

Then, That here was a General Trust, and the Duke remained Owner of the
Estate, and might charge it as high as he pleased to the utmost value, and so
being absolute Master of the Estate, his subsequent disposition of it by this
last Will ought to be made good in Equity.

There are many things accumulated together, and so make the better show; but
it is belt to consider them severally, if we would know the true weight of them.

It is true, it is charged in the Bill, That this Deed was obtained by Fraud
and Surprise, and that it was concealed from the Duke, or forgotten by him, and
he had an intention to revoke, and went as far as he could; so that they are
sufficiently let into this Matter by what is charged in the Bill. But whosoever
reads over the Depositions, will see that the End they aimed at was, to attack
the Deeds themselves as false Deeds, and not truly executed: But that being
tried at Law, and the Will and Deeds verified by a Verdict, the Counsel have
attempted to make use of the same Evidence, and read it all, or at least the
greatest part of it, as Evidence of Surprise and Circumvention.

But I think that ought to be well considered by the Court, for we are not to
found our Judgment upon that Evidence, which if it be to be regarded at all,
did amount to more than what was insisted upon, and which is positively
contradicted by the Verdict. As to Fraud and Circumvention, it must be granted
me, that they are things not to be presumed: It is all denied in the Answer,
and the Proof must be very clear, if it be to be regarded by the Court.

Now, for this word [ Surprize] it is a word of a general signification, so
general and so uncertain, that it is impossible to fix it: A Man is surprised
in every rash and indiscreet Action, or whatsoever is not done with so much
Judgment and Consideration as it ought to be. But I suppose the Gentlemen who
use that word in this Case, mean such Surprise as is attended and accompanied
with Fraud and Circumvention: Such a Surprise indeed may be a good ground to
set aside a Deed so obtained in Equity, and has been so in all times; but any
other Surprise never was, and I hope never will be, because it will introduce
such a wild Uncertainty in the Decrees and Judgments of the Court, as will be
of greater consequence than the Relief in any Case will answer for.

They say, This Surprise was made out two ways, by Matters that appear in the
Deeds themselves, and by Circumstances in Proof that arise out of the Deeds.

As to those Matters that appear in the Deeds themselves, they urge,

First, That it is expressed in the Deed of Release, that it is made in
corroboration of the Will, which is misrecited throughout.

Then, That it is imported to be for the confirmation of the Will, when in
effect it does fully revoke it, because there are no Limitations in the Deed,
but such as vary from those in the Will.

Then, That it is for securing the Legacies in the Will, and yet itself defeats
the Will.

That as to a great part of the Estate the Deed limits it to my Lord of Bath,
after failure of Issue-male, excluding the Daughters; whereas in the Will that
Limitation is after failure of Issue generally.

That the Provision in the Deed for the Third Son is ineffectual, because the
Duke had not power to settle it so.

That the Power of Revocation is unreasonably fettered, and the Covenant
whereby the Duke, who was then very young, is obliged not to revoke the Will,
is a derogatory and illegal Covenant.

And the unskilful Phrase and Language of the whole Conveyance must be a
Demonstration, that Sir William Jones was not employed in it as is pretended:
These are the Objections to the Deed it self.

Now as to the Misrecitals, as my Lord Chapter Justice has said, they will have no
insluence upon the Limitations, because the Recitals in a Deed are not made the
measure of the Limitations in it. Besides, as I apprehend, here are none of
these Misrecitals which are of that nature, as to draw on the Duke into a
Mistake in the favor of my Lord of Bath: For the Recital, that the Duchess
had a much greater Estate by the Will than she had before, as the Limitation of
Dalby and Broughton for Life, when it was but during Widowhood; this might lead
the Duke indeed into a Mistake in favor of the Duchess, (as it did) and might
have induced greater Limitations of the same kind, but never to the Advantage
of my Lord of Bath, who was to come in remainder; so that all the inference
that can be made from those Misrecitals, is only, That Sir Tho. Stringer who
(it is apparent in Proof) drew the Deed, was a careless Man.

Then they say the Variation of the Limitations from those in the Will shows,
That it was to revoke the Will, and not to confirm it. As to that,

First, Such Variation is a Proof, That the Duke between the Time of the Will,
and the Time of the Deed had altered his Mind as to those particulars, but to
carry it further I see no reason in the World.

Next it has been observed, That the Words of the Deed, which purport the end
of it to be for confirming of the Will, must plainly in reason infer to the
principal design of the Settlement, which was to dispose of his Estate to my
Lord of Bath, and the nearest of his Relations, and not to refer to every
particular Limitation in the Will; and that it does so confirm the Will as to
the main principal Limitation in the Will is plain: And it does appear by the
very phraseing of the Deed, that besides the confirming of the Will, he did
mainly design the settling of his Estate.

Then let us consider the differences in point of Limitation between the Deed
and the Will.

First, They say in the Deed, There is an Estate limited to the Duke for Life,
which is not in the Will; that is proper in a Deed, but would not have been
absurd in a Will which is not to take effect till after his death.

Then for that Variation in the Limitation to the Duchess, it is not material
in point of Value, but for duration of the Earl, and it was a reasonable thing
so to make it; for since he did intend to charge his real Estate with great
Legacies, it had been impossible to have sold any part of it that had been
under a Rentcharge of 6000 l. a Year, and therefore it limits Lands of that
Value.

As for the Limitation of Norton Disney, which indeed is to the advantage of my
Lord of Bath, and is the only variation from the Will which is so; for with
respect to the Essex and Nothern Estates my Lord has but a Remainder after
failure of Issue in General, but in this it is after failure of Issue Male. But
then it is to be considered that the Honor would fail upon the Duke's Death
without Issue Male, and he did intend and desire that the Honor of Duke of
Albemarle should come to my Lord of Bath. His Father had gone so far in it as
to procure a promise of it under the Sign Manual by K. Charles the 2d. And at
the same time he had an Estate of 15000 l. a Year, and then it became him well
that such a part of the Estate should go with the Honor.

As to that Objection, that thereby there was no provision made for Daughters,
it were indeed a very great one, if indeed there were no provision at all for
them. But it means no more than that if he left no Sons, there would be an
ample provision out of the rest of his Estate for Daughters: And so in effect
it is upon the Marriage-Settlement and the Will of 87. So that if it be an
Argument of Surprise as to the one, it is the same as to the other.

Then for that provision that is made out of Rotherhith and Norton Disney, for
the third Son; it must be admitted that as to my Lord Duke's mind in the matter
it would be ineffectual, but there can be nothing inferred from thence but that
there was a great neglect of looking into the Settlement: But that will be no
ground in Equity to relieve against this Deed; for if it should be so, how many
Settlements must we set aside upon Men's settling that over, which in part they
had no Power of making such disposition, because the persons concerned in
drawing the Settlement did not take sufficient care in every Particular to
pursue the Power he had who makes the Deed.

Besides there is the same mistake in the Will of 87, in relation to
Potheridge, where the Barony for Mr. Monk was to be fixed, it being by a
Settlement in King Charles the first's time so settled in Tail, that it could
not, or was not legally to be disposed of by Will.

Indeed it was said, that there were some Articles made with Pride about that
matter, to carry the Estate according as the Duke should direct: But those
Articles cannot answer the Objection, for they were made three Months after the
Will, and then they were made with a wrong Person, and so signify nothing.

It has been objected, That this Deed pretends to be for securing the Legacies
in the Will of 75, but defeats them. That is a Mistake in the Objection, for it
confirms the Will certainly as to the Legacies, and does create a Trust for
performing and paying them: indeed by a subsequent Act the Will of 87, there
may be an Alteration made, but that is no Argument against this Settlement
itself.

There was another Observation made, and that was, That the Power of Revocation
was unreasonable, especially backed with such an unreasonable Covenant not to
revoke. But as to that, it is to be considered what the Design of this
Settlement was, he had made his Will before, but he thought himself unsafe
under that Disposition; he was under apprehension of being applied unto and
importuned to dispose of his Estate otherwise than he had a mind it should go,
therefore he intended this Settlement as a Guard against any Surprise of that
kind; and that being his Intention, if it had been only a general power of
Revocation, it had been no more than what any Will or subsequent Act done by
him would have effected, but that had not answered his meaning.

And so as to the last Covenant in the Deed, which they call the Derogatory
Clause, whereby the Duke covenants not to revoke the Will otherwise than as
aforesaid. I take it, that does import no more, but that as to the preceding
part of the Deed he guards himself against Surprise as to the real Estate, so
he does here as to the personal Estate. And though it prove ineffectual at Law,
that is not material as to the Intention of the Duke.

The last Observation upon the Deed is, the penning it, which is an Objection
that is to go through the whole Deed: but this Objection goes further than the
point for which it is alleged, for if it prove any thing, it proves it to be a
false Deed. But for this I do not find it so much as suggested, that this Deed
was drawn by Sir William Jones; my Lord of Bath indeed says that it was left to
the Care and Conduct of Sir William Jones; but as to what appears, he was only
concerned in the Proviso; for it is very good reason to believe, when he says,
I approve of this Proviso, he did not refer his Opinion to any other part of
the Deed. And indeed any one that knew or remember him will think that he
concerned himself with no other part but what he set his hand to the
approbation of.

I have taken notice of these Observations as Arguments urged by the Counsel,
which taken altogether should induce their ground of Equity from a Surprise in
obtaining this Deed; but when they are severally considered they seem not to be
of such weight as is contended for.

But if the Obligations had been more in number, or of greater consequence, yet
let the Deed be never so ill drawn, and the Mistake and Mis-recitals never so
many, and the differences of Limitations in the Deed from those in the Will
never so many too, yet if this Deed were really executed by the Party, all this
will not be a sufficient ground in Equity to set aside this Deed. And the
Counsel for the Plaintiff; were well aware of this, and therefore they go to
other Circumstances out of the Deed to show this Surprise, and as far as I can
observe the Objections upon this point are these.

That there is no Proof of any previous Direction for drawing of this Deed,
there is no Proof of the Draught or Deed's being read to the Duke, no
Counterpart was executed: The Trustees were not acquainted with it, there was
an Estate limited to Sir Thomas Clarges, when there were great differences
between the Duke and him; it is not subscribed by the Duke's Counsel, as all
Deeds executed by him used to be; that it was engrossed according to the
Draught, and that in a very material place, for if it had been according to the
Draught, the Duke had been Master of the Estate by a general Trust; and if it
were not perused by Sir William Jones, or he was not a Witness to it, then so
far as Sir William Jones was surprised in the matter, the Duke was so too.

Now as to the want of Proof of any previous Directions for this Deed, that is
not strange after such a length of time Sir Thomas Stringer who drew it, dead,
four of the Witnesses to the Execution of it are dead too. But the presumption
is very strong, when the Draught is of Sir Thomas Stringer's Son's
Handwriting, and corrected, and interlined by his own hand in several places,
that he had Orders and Directions from the Duke to prepare such a Deed.

The Reading, or not Reading the Deed to the Duke, does not appear it might be
read to him before, and it was not necessary it should be read to him at the
time of the Executing; if it were, then the Will of 87, lies open to the same
Objection, for that was not read to the Duke when he sealed it.

As to that Objection that there was no Counterpart, nor the Trustees
acquainted with it, that can be nothing of an Objection, for the Deed remained
in the Duke's hands, till a little time before his going to Jamaica, as appears
by my Lord of Bath's Answer, which has not been falsified, as I know of, in
any point; nor was there any Occasion to give Notice to the Trustees, because
th^re was no manner of Estate, or Trust lodged in them. But my Lord of Bath was
the only Person that had any Trust in him by the Deed, therefore there was no
Reason that it should be known to any one but him. And the Nature of the thing,
and all the Proofs show, that it was intended to be concealed.

Then as to the Story of Sir Tho. Clarges, and the Differences between the Duke
and him, there is no Proof of it: It is at most but an Hearsay, testified by
one Witness.

That it was not Subscribed by the Duke's Counsel, as all his Deeds usually
were, it seems to me to be of no very great Weight, when the Draught appears
under Sir Thomas Stringer's Son's Hand interlined, and corrected by himself,
and Sir William Jones a Witness to the Execution, and present when it was
completed: Sure that can never signify any thing.

As to the other Observation that was made, that the Deed was not Ingrost
according to the Draught, and the Variation is in so Material a part, as to
make the Duke Master or not Master of the Estate; it should be considered,
First, That upon view of the Draught, it is plain, Words have been cut off; and
there is a positive Witness, who swears, That he twice Ingrost the Deed by the
Draught. It is possible, that a Man may twice leave out the same Words in
Engrossing a Deed by a Draught: But, that he should twice add the same Words
that were not in the Draught, is very strange, and not easily to be believed.

Then say they, This is not the Draught that was first perased, and approved of
by Sir William Jones. That is certainly such an Objection as never was made
before; and indeed it is likely there never was Occasion to make such an
Objection, till the last Hearing, for it may be it was not cut till then. But
pray let it be considered, for whose Interest it was to have this Draught cut,
or altered from the Ingrossment. It is impossible it should be cut off for the
Interest of my Lord of Bath, by the Objection that arises from it; for let any
Words in Nature have been there, they could not have been of such Disadvantage
as they would have it to be. However, be the alteration of the Draught what it
will, if it were not done by the Defendants, nor was for their Interest to be
done, nor done before the Execution of the Deed, it all signifies nothing.

But I think it is fit and proper here, to say something to that Notion, that
where the Counsel is surprised, that is a surprise upon the Client. I take that
to be a matter of a very great Consequence, and I fear it would shake most of
the Settlements of Estates in England, and for that I would mention the Case of
Sir James Herbert, and the late Lord of Pembroke. There was a Bill brought in
this Court, to set aside the Will of the Elder Brother, who was the late Earl
of Pembroke but two. Sir James was Heir at Law, and the other was but half
Brother.

That Earl had taken a Displeasure at his Brother, and sent Directions to Mr.
Swanton to draw a Will and Settlement of his Estate, and amongst other things,
orders to be sure that the Brother should have no power over the Estate, to
dispose of it; and because that in his Grandfather's Will there was such a
Settlement as he liked of, he sends him that, Swanton makes a Will, and limits
an Estate to Sir Philip Herbert the Brother for life, and the remainder to the
Heirs of his Body. This Will is brought by the Counsel to the Earl, and read,
and Executed, and held to be Good, yet this was a Notorious Surprise upon the
Counsel; for nothing is plainer, than that the Counsel had made a Mistake, or
knew not the Law. He did not, at best, consider, that upon such a Limitation,
the Law uses the whole Estate Tale in him, and he may dispose of it.

It is plain he had not pursued the Will of the Grandfather; but yet when this
Cause came to be heard before my Lord North, when the Will appeared to have
been truly executed, the Court declared it was a Misfortune, that they did not
go to a better Counsel. And it was sent to Law, to try whether it was the Will
of the Earl of Pembroke or no; and it being found to be the Earl's Will, the
Bill was dismissed with Costs.

Thus I have taken Notice of what has been offered to prove the Surprise. I
would shortly mention on the other side, what has been insisted upon, to show
that there was nothing like Surprise; but all was done upon a very good ground,
and pursuant to a settled full purpose, continued for so long a tract of time,
to the Duke's death.

First, Say they, It does appear there were a very near Relation between my
Lord Duke, and my Lord of Bath; and that Duke George owned, and owed his first
setting out in the world, to the Ancestors of my Lord of Bath: It does plainly
appear there was a most particular Friendship, and mutual Confidence between
them, in Matters of the Highest Nature, and Chiefest Concern: Nay, that this
proceeded so far on my Lord of Bath's side, in Duke George's time, that he
prevailed with King Charles the II. to promise under the Sign Manual, and
recommend it to his Successors, to Create my Lord of Bath Duke of Albemarle, if
here were a failure of Issue by the Duke.

Then that this Friendship did continue between Duke Christopher, and my Lord
of Bath, is plain beyond all Controversy; for it began upon a very good
Foundation: That is, Whereas the Garter should have been given to the Earl of
Bath, he prevailed to have it returned to the Young Duke, and it continued so
much all along, that there was nothing of Moment relating to the Duke's
Affairs, in which the Earl was not mainly concerned. And all this is proved by
a Series of Letters, continuing down from the Death of Duke George, to the
Death of Duke Christopher.

In 74 he sends him Word he had pursued his Advice, and his Advice should
always be very prevalent with him.

In 75 he tells him, he expected to see him with great Impatience, because he
was not able to go on in the Regulation of his Family, without his Assistance
and Advice; that he had finished his Will, and would make all more Perfect when
he came to him. It should seem his former Will was trusted in my Lord's Hands;
and when that was returned, or brought up, in a few Days after, this Will of 75
is made, and by that, all the Estate, or the main of it, is given to my Lord of
Bath; and it was the first Will I think that he made, after he came of Age, and
had any Power to dispose of his Estate in Land; and thereby, as I said, he
Devises the bulk of it to my Lord of Bath. He always desired, as the Will
declares, That in case he had no Issue, the Earl might succeed him in his
Honors and Estate, as well out of true Affection to him, as his nearest
Kinsman on his Father's side, as out of due Gratitude for the many Acts of
Kindness and Service done by the Earl, beyond all the rest of his Kindred and
Friends; upon which, he humbly desires his Majesty to confer the Dukedom upon
him, and that the Eldest Son of the Earl, and so successively the Eldest Son of
the Family, should be called Lord Monk, to preserve his Name and Honor in
Memory of his Father, and of himself. There cannot be Words that express more
Kindness and Respect, and intention of Advantage than are here used.

There was an Attempt, by Proofs in this Cause, to shake the Credit, even of
this very Will; but when the Counsel, on that side, came to speak to it, they
could produce no proofs that would at all come near it: It is plain then, that
at this time no Man could have more Kindness for another, than the Duke had for
the Earl.

In the Year 78, there appears the same sense in the Duke of the Earl's
Friendship, by his Letters, and the Obligations of Gratitude he had to him.
That he had no Friend in whom he could confide but himself, and desiring him to
come to assist him in the Management of his Affairs. That his Kindness and
Friendship was never to be forgotten, without the Highest Ingratitude.

All this is a sort of Evidence, against which there is no opposition to be
made: so it also continued to the Year 80. when he sent him word of a Servant's
death, and desired him to secure his Papers and Accounts.

Thus it stood to the time of making that Settlement; and while the Duke and he
were upon such Terms with one another, it was no strange thing that he should
make such a Deed as this, and the manner both of preparing and executing it,
seems far from having anything of surprise in it.

Then the next thing that has beeen urged, was, that this being a Settlement,
under a power of Revocation, which he intended to make use of, it was Secreted
and Concealed from him; so that he could not know what his Power was; and
several Cases were put, where a Man, in such Circumstances, knowingly suffers a
Purchaser to go on with his Bargain, he shall not have any Advantage by such a
Concealed Settlement. Those Cases were all admitted to be good, and
particularly, that mentioned by Mr. Baron Powell, and my Lord Chapter Just. Treby,
the Case of Mr. Clare. And I think truly I need go no further, than to say,
That there is no Resemblance between that Case and this. That is, where a
Purchaser is concerned, and the Person that conceals the Deed, suffers the
Purchaser to proceed without giving him any notice.

If indeed there had been a full and clear Proof, that the Duke had a real
intention to Revoke this Deed, if he could have known what he was to do in
order to it, and had been hindered by the Fraud an^ Contrivance of any Person
concerned in it, in point of Advantage; and if by such Concealment it was
impossible for him to know the true Circumstances of his Power, that would have
made a different Consideration in a Court of Equity; but there is no Proof that
these Deeds were ever in the hands of my Lord of Bath, till some little time
before the Duke went beyond Sea, when the Duke delivered them to him.

For as to Aleman's Deposition, that was but a delivery upon the Execution, and
not a delivery for Custody.

And my Lord of Bath in his Answer says, He had not them till then expressly;
so that, as far as that goes, it is all the Evidence you have, where the Deed
lay all the while. And his Answer is fortified in this, by what Mr. Courtney
says, that my Lord told him, when he came to him, that the Deed it self was in
the Hands of the Duke, and he had received the Draught from the Duke, to advise
upon. And it is further verified by two Material Facts, by the Abstract that
was taken about some two Years before, by Sir Thomas Stringer, and by what is
admitted on all hands, was by my Lord of Bath delivered up, when the Will of 87
was preparing; and that the Will of 75, and Deed, being produced together,
under the Duke's Seal, after his death, it is to be taken, that both together
were put under the Cover, and Sealed up by the Duke, and delivered to my Lord
of Bath, as he himself says in his Answer. There being then so much ground to
believe, that the Deed was in the Duke's own hands, what Obligation should
there be supposed to lie upon my Lord of Bath to make any mention of it to him?
It was always intended to be a private thing; that is plain. There is no Proof
what the purposes of the Duke were in making the Will, the Purport and Effect
of the thing speaks it self.

But my Lord of Bath says, That upon the selling of Dalby and Broughton to my
Lord Jefferies, he did give the Duchess a Caution not to be so earnest for
finishing the Bargain, for she might be a loser by it, which could mean
nothing, but that she had an Interest in it by this Deed.

As to the Objection, that my Lord of Bath stood by, and saw that Purchase
made, and gave no notice of this Deed to the Purchaser, I confess, had my Lord
of Bath set up this Deed against, and to overthrow that Purchase, that would
have brought it up to the Case of Wraw and Ford; but every body knows that a
bare voluntary Settlement is of no force against a Purchaser, without notice;
and as to the Leases, and Grants of Annuities, there is no Proof that ever my
Lord of Bath knew of them.

Then it was Objected, that though it go not so far as purposed Concealment, yet
the thing was out of mind, and the Duke continuing Owner of the Estate, and
acting as Owner, tho not with all the Circumstances required, those Acts done
by him as Owner, are to be Supported in a Court of Equity. This seems a hard
Demand for a Voluntary Devise, to crave Relief against a prior Settlement, with
a Power of Revocation, because he that made that Settlement had forgotten it.
There is no Precedent to warrant a Decree of that Nature, nor is there any
Pretense of Reason for it: For betwixt Two Persons, each of which claim by a
Voluntary Settlement, the matter stands upon an equal Poot, and there is no
possibility of an Equitable Consideration, to assist the one against the other.

And if there were any Ground for it, as a Notion, there were no Room for any
such Notion as to the Proof in this Case. For it is founded upon a Supposition
that the Duke of Albemarle had forgotten the Settlement; of which there is no
Proof, but only an Argumentative one, drawn from his disposing of his Estate
another way and manner. But that he had not forgotten it, besides the Answer of
Mr. Greenvil, and Sir Walter Clarges, there are other things to be ^id. And as
to their Answers, I take it, no Decree can be made against a Man's Answer, upon
the Proof of one Witness; Why then should a Decree be expected against a Man's
Answer, where there is no Proof to the contrary at all?

Sir Walter Clarges (upon some what that had been told him of the Duke's
intentions toward him by this last Will) as should seem took the liberty to
complain to the Duke, and seemed much discomposed; but the Duke bid him not be
concerned at what Stringer said, for he had otherwise better provided for him:
Now there is no other Provision, but what is by this Deed.

Mr. Greenvil addressed himself to the Duke, to thank him for what Kindness
(Sir Thomas Stringer acquainted him) he had shown him in his Will: but the Duke
replied, (with some Reflection upon Sir Thomas Stringer, who pretended to have
been very Instrumental in it) that he had never moved him in it; but that he
had taken Care of him, and his Brother would tell him wherein; and if he would,
he might tell his Brother he said so. And he swears he did go to his Brother,
my Lord of Bath, who told him The Duke had indeed Provided for him, and Settled
a part of his Estate upon him: But that if the Duke had not allowed him so to
do, by sending him to him, he would not have told him of it.

All this is a full Proof that the Duke had not forgotten this Deed at that
time; but it cannot be believed, that the Duke had ever forgotten this Deed,
without disbelieving several Acts that have been substantially proved to be
done by him, as when upon my Lord Lansdowns Marriage, his Letter does
particularly take notice of a great Interest he had in him, and seems expressly
to refer to this very Deed, as being so much concerned in his good or ill
Fortune, as my Lord of Bath himself very well knew; and congratulating the
Match with my Lord Treasurer's Daughter, he goes on to desire, That as he had
taken care to Marry him well, so he would have great Regard to his Education,
which he did mind him of, remembering still that he was most concerned in him,
of any one except himself, as he very well knew. This could refer to nothing
but some Settlement of his Estate, and none appears but this.

There seems to have been some Attempt to interrupt this Friendship, and
Amicable Correspondence between the Duke and the Earl; for by a Letter dated
(as I take it) 31 Jan. 81. The Duke says, his Kindness and Friendship shall
always be the same, and all the malicious endeavors of ill people shall not be
able to break the Link between them; so that it should seem there were
malicious Endeavors used, to sow differences between those Noble Persons, but
by whom, is not apparent in the Proof.

But still there is a continued Series of kind Letters between them, which
goes on even to the time of making the last Will in 87, as full of Gratitude
(all the Duke's Letters, great numbers of which were produced) as can be for
his continued Services and Kindness; nay, down to the time of his going to
Jamaica, and while he was there. Now it looks to me very strange, that the Duke
should all this while be receiving Obligations, and owning them from my Lord of
Bath, and yet must be supposed to have forgotten what he had done, in
acknowledgment and recompense of these Services.

Then there is besides all this, the Positive Testimony of Mr. Cro^^s, and his
Wife, both swearing particular Declarations from the Duke's own Mouth; which
can have Relation to nothing but this Deed.

There is indeed one thing that this urged as a strong Argument the Duke
intended to alter this Settlement; that is, his taking such formal steps in
preparing and drawing this last Will, his Advising with my Lord Chief Justice
Pollexfen, and so much Solemnity as was used in having the parts of it
engrossed, and delivered with such Ceremony to three several Hands. It is, they
say, hard to imagine he would do all this with a deliberate intent, that it
should all signify nothing as to his real Estate, and so quit the World with a
great deal of Pageantry and Ceremony to no purpose.

Now it must be owned, that it does seem a strange part in the Duke, and the
World must be surprised at it: For it is impossible to make the Duke's Actings
of a-peice, and reconcile such Contradictions. He cannot indeed be cleared from
Prevarication. He did certainly intend to deceive the Duchess, or my Lord of
Bath. It is most evident he did keep my Lord of Bath in hand, that he should
have his Estate; for besides the Testimony of Mr. Prideaux, and other
Witnesses, concerning the Duke's Declaration of his intending to settle, and
having settled his Estate upon him, we find by this Deed, his Estate is so
actually settled, and that Mind continued till 81; and it appears by Letters, as
well before, as since; that Duke Christopher entrusted him in all his Affairs
of Consequence, acted not in any thing, but with his assistance, continually
made use of his Friendship at Court, to the time of his Death: when he was
dissatisfied with any of his Servants, my Lord of Bath was the Man that must
settle the matter; when he was to Purchase, my Lord Bath must buy for him; when
he was to sell, my Lord of Bath was to transact the matter; when he wanted
Money, my Lord was to procure it for him; when he was in danger of losing
Money, my Lord is applied unto to prevent it. All this appears by the several
Letters that have been read and produced. When he was gone to Jamaica, and any
Request at Court, my Lord's Interest was that which he relied upon; my Lord of
Bath was the single Trustee to be applied to chiefly in what concerned the
Estate; the Keys of the Evidence-Room were to be deposited with him, as being
principally Concerned, if he should miscarry.

Now it must be confessed, a Man may do as much as all this comes to, and make
use of another Man's Friendship, and not design to give him his Estate, when he
had once firmly settled it so, and repeated his Assurance of Kindness, and
continued to make Profession of Kindness all along, to the time of his Death,
and went on to make use of his Service, because he thought he might freely
command the Service of one who expected to have such Advantages from him; yet
then I do not see but that it must be admitted, that he did deliberately design
to impose upon my Lord of Bath, or if he did not, he did intend to impose upon
my Lady Duchess. Now be it which it will, I do think he is not to be excused
in reference to the Point of Honor, as to the Request made to the King for the
Earl of Bath, and in pursuance of Duke George his desire, who engaged the late
King to promise under his Sign Manual, and he has made the same kind of
Request for Mr. Monk.

Now upon the whole Matter, whether this Will of 1687. was made to free him
from some Importunities in his Family, is a great Question. There are some
proofs in the Case, that greatly look that way: It is plain he did not execute
it for several Months after it was prepared and drawn, and when it was
published, it was obtained with great Importunity against his Inclinations at
that Time; and there does not appear any Intention, that it should revoke this
Settlement; but on the contrary it should seem he did not intend so, for there
are no VVitnesses called to the Will, but the same that came with Stringer
from Newcastle- House to that purpose; But whether he did intend it should take
Effect as to the Personal Estate only, or to delude my Lord of Bath, which way
his Honor is best saved, is not at all to our purpose to consider upon the
Case before us in Judgment. Though I must say, take it one Way or the other,
he seems to blame, and to have dealt in some sort double.

The next thing insisted upon is, That this Deed is revoked in Equity of this
Will; and though the Power be not pursued in all the Circumstances, yet his
Intention appearing to make this different disposition of his Estate, a Court
of Equity should supply that defect.

Now I take it for granted, that a Power of Revocation shall not be carried
further in a Court of Equity, than the Law will carry it. The Law has been
liberal in expounding Powers of Revocation favorably; and where the Law
expounds a thing according to an equitable Construction, there is no reason for
Equity to extend it further.

Where there appear to be other equitable Considerations, it may have another
Judgment, but if it stands without any mixture of other equitable
Considerations, I think it would be very hard to break through a Settlement,
especially so solemnly made, that he thought fit to restrain himself from
altering it, without the Assistance of so many Noble Persons, whenever he would
make use of the Power thereby reserved to him; I say it would be a very strange
thing for a Court of Equity, without the mixture of any other Considerations to
assist another voluntary Conveyance against this.

The Case of Arundell and Philpot is a full Authority in this Case, and it has
been so often repeated that I need not mention it any further.

As to what was insisted upon by some about the Revocation, being completed as
to the number of VVitnesses, by the publication in Jamaica, and the
impossibility of having any Peers there; I must confess had the Duke in Jamaica
had an express deliberate Intention and Purpose, to revoke and done any Acts to
testify it, and gone as far in pursuance of the Circumstances, as his Condition
in those parts would admit, that might have come in within that Foundation of
Equity (to wit) Accident.

But I think there is no ground of Proof of any such Intention or Action. For
the Proof amounts to no more than this. The Duke, to prevent any troublesome
Applications to him, shut up himself in his Room, and those that came to him
were to come in at the Window. And a strong Box in which his Papers were,
standing under the Window by frequent trading upon it, he had a Suspicion that
there had been some Attempts to force and open it; whereupon he calls for the
Box to open it, and out of it takes several Papers, which he read, or gave to
Dr. Sloan to read, several Letters as I remember, and afterward he took up a
sealed Packet, and said to the Doctor, This is my Will, and put it down again.
Is this any manner of proof in the World, that this Act was done animo
testandi? Much less is it any proof that there was any notice taken at this
time of this Settlement, or that he would avoid it.

I would say something to that other Point, that this being a Deed made to
confirm and corroborate the Will of 75, is but Ancillary to the Will, and
depends upon it, and is to stand or fall with it, and upon the Revocation of
that Will did fall with it.

This is an Objection wholly inconsistent with the other Arguments that are
used against this Deed, that it was by Surprise. For by those Arguments they
would destroy the Deed as inconsistent with the Will, but now the Argument is
turned the other way. But my Lord Chief Justice Holt has so fully and clearly
answered that matter, that I shall not need to trouble you with saying any more
in it. The Cases cited about it are in no sort applicable to this Case.

The last thing insisted upon, was, supposing the Deed to stand good, yet there
being a general Trust raised in it to pay the Legacies in the Will, my Lord of
Bath was no more than a Trustee, and the Duke continued Master of the Estate,
and he who had such a general Power to charge the Land, might do it to the full
Value, and then consequently might dispose of the Land too.

Now this Point of Trust is the proper Subject of a Court of Equity; but to
expound a Deed which is made on purpose to prevent a Descent upon the Heir, and
then to make a general resulting Trust to let the Heir in, is such a
Construction as will apparently contradict it self and the Deed.

But that will fall out to be a Point that comes to be considered hereafter,
how far this may be a Trust in my Lord of Bath to answer Legacies or Debts in
case the Personal Estate should fall short, it is not properly considerable now.

The only Point that was spoken to by the Counsel, and left for the Judgment of
the Court was this, whether in this Case here were sufficient Matter for a
Court of Equity to interpose so far as to set aside or impeach this Deed of 81.

Now as to that Matter, I think I have the Concurrence of my Lords the Judges
in it; and I am of Opinion, that there does not appear sufficient Ground upon
this Case for a Court of Equity to do any such thing. Therefore I declare my
Judgment;

That as far as my Lord Mountague, and my Lady Duchess and Mr. Monk their
Bills pray that the Court will interpose to set aside this Deed; so far their
Bills ought to dismissed.

As to any other Matters that arise in the Case, I suppose there will be time
taken to speak to them; but this is the only Matter in Judgment before us at
present.


FINIS.

