SOME REFLECTIONS ON A MODEL NOW IN Projection BY THE Presbyterian Dissenters.

WITH A CIRCULAR LETTER Intimating It.

LONDON: Printed for E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, MDCXCVIII.

The Circulary Letter.
Newbery, June 7. 98. For Mr. S. Minister of the Gospel in Oxford. Reverend Sir,
I Had a Letter last Week by the Direction of the Committee of Ministers and
Gentlemen, appointed at London for settling a Correspondence of the Protestant
Dissenting Ministers and Congregations throughout this Kingdom; for the
Advancement of the Interest of Religion, and Reformation of Manners; with the
Articles there agreed upon in order thereunto; and I desire you, Communicate
them speedily to the Brethren in these Parts: And if possible, a General
Meeting must be had this Summer in London.

Pursuant thereunto, it is desired that you would not fail to come your self,
and bring with you one Prudent Person of your Congregation, Chosen for that
End, according to the Method resolved on at London, to meet several of the
Brethren, and the Members of their respective Congregations here at Newbery,on
Wednesday the 22 Instant, to consider of the said Proposals; which shall be
laid before you, and the proper Method to Attain so desirable an End.

You are desired to be here on Tuesday in the Evening that we may enter on our
Work on Wednesday Morning, Resolving God willing, to spend some time in Prayer
before we begin. I am

SIR, Your Affectionate Brother and Servant in the Lord, W. T.

SIR,
ON the Receipt of yours, I labored to get the fullest Account of that
Project; which in a Circular Letter, directed to another of your Name, fell by
Chance into your Hands: But by all the Interest I can make with that sort of
Men, I find it impossible for me to penetrate into the Bottom of the
Contrivance; or inform my self from what Spring it had its Rise; and therefore
must be Content with the Light your Paper gives me of it; only I must confess,
that whatever may be hereafter Attempted, I am of Opinion, that at present it
is but in Proposition and Design.

But, though necessitated to this Brevity about your Enquiry, I will be more
large in showing the Illegality of their Model: And to this End, I will, as a
Foundation of what I have to say, set down the Project; and give my Reasons why
I judge it to be Illegal, and Unsafe for them to Ripen it into Act.

The Project, if I take you right, is as follows: 1. There are to be Lesser
Meetings of their Ministers; and one or two Lay Elders of every Congregation
within a certain District every Three Months: That is (as I understand it, and
I think with good Reason) there must be Classical Assemblies every three Months.

2. These Lesser Assemblies, or Classes, are to choose one Minister, and two
other Discreet Persons or Lay Elders of their Number, to manage a
Correspondence either with the Larger Meetings in the Country, or the General
Assembly in London.

3. That there be an Union of several Districts or Classes in one Larger
Meeting once every Six Months, where the Ministers and Lay Elders of the said
Classes shall meet, either in Person, or by their Representatives, called by
'em Delegates.

4. That this Assembly do Appoint One Person to manage the Correspondence, (i.
e.) as I conceive, a Praeses; who in Vacancy of this Provincial Council, is in
Conjunction with other Presidents; and the General Committee in London, to
maintain the Correspondence for the better Government of their Church.

5. The Larger or Provincial Assemblies shall send one Minister, and one
Lay-Elder as their Delegates, to a General Meeting to be held once a Year in
London, or oftener if Occasion (not the King) requires it.

6. That these Delegates bring with them Testimonials of their Delegations.

7. That the Ministers do carefully observe, and faithfully relate to the
Provincial, and National Assemblies the State of their Congregations
respectively.

8. That the whole be digested into a Method, and Recorded in a Register.

This is I think, a true and impartial Account of their New-Model, which is no
more nor less than a National Church-form, wanting nothing that is Essential
thereunto: For 1. The Design is the settlement of Matters Ecclesiastical,
according to their own Methods and Rules. 2. They have Ordained that there be
Ecclesiastical, Provincial, and National Assemblies, answerable to the
Diocesan, Provincial, and National Convocations. 3. Their Power is stretched
unto the utmost Parts of the Kingdom, taking in every one that will submit unto
them; which is the most our Church can do during the Suspension of Penal Laws.
4. They have appointed stated Assemblies, Provincial, and National, to be held
without the King's Writ of Summons, who are to agree on Rules for Church
Government without a Commission from the King, and send them forth though not
confirmed by the King's Letters Patents, which our Church cannot do, without
incurring Grievous Penalties; They assume to themselves an unlimited Power, and
want only the Formality of a Law to give to their General Meetings the Names of
Magna servorum Dei Frequentia, and Church-Gemote, as also that of Convocation,
or Synodical Convention.

The next thing of which I Will give you a View, is the Reasons proving the
Illegality of this National-Church-Form, and the Danger of putting it into Act,
or Execution.

First then, it is well known to the Learned in our Laws, That none of his
Majesty's Liege People of what denomination soever may Assemble to Entreat of
Matters Ecclesiastical for the Reformation of Manners, as in the Case before
us, unless called by the King's Writ; nor may they without the Royal Assent
entreat of, or make any Constitutions, Rules, or Cannons by what Name or Names
soever they are called; nor can they Promulge, or Execute them when made, until
confirmed by Letters Pattents under the Great-Seal without incurring the
Penalty of 25 H. 8. c. 19. whereby it is Enacted, That none shall promulge, or
execute any Cannons, Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial by whatsoever Name
or Names they may be called in time Coming which shall be assembled by
Authority of the King's Writ, unless the same Clergy may have the King's most
Royal Assent to make, promuige, and execute such Cannons Provincial, or
Synodal, upon pain of every one doing contrary to this Act, and being thereof
Canvict, to suffer Imprisonment, and make Fine at the King's Will.

The Crime is manifest, and so is the Penalty; so that in case the Dissenting
Ministers shall have their Assemblies, whether Classical, Provincial, or
National, and entreat of, make, promulge, or put in Execution any Cannons,
Constitutions, or Rules, by what Name or Names soever they are called: Or, if
there has been an Assembly, whether of Twenty Four of their Clergy alone, or
part Clergy, part Lay Elders, who have formed, promulged, and put in Execution
diverse Rules about Matters Ecclesiastical, in either of these Cases they fall
within the Words of this Act, and are liable to the Pains of Imprisonment, and
of making Fine at the King's Will.

Secondly, If these Men shall at any time presume to make, or put in Execution
any Cannons or Rules about Classical, Provincial, or National Assemblies, such
Rules are not only against the King's Prerogative, but Contrariant, and
Repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and the Pain no less than a
Praemunire.

In 25 H. 8. cap. 19. there is a Proviso against all such Constitutions,
Cannons, or Rules. It is in these words: Provided always, that no Cannons,
Constitutions, or Ordinances shall be made, or put in Execution within this
Realm, by Authority of the Convocations of the Clergy, which shall be
Contrariant, or Repugnant to the King's Prerogative Royal, or the Customs,
Laws, or Statutes of this Realm, etc.

Now if a Convocation called by the King's Writ, and enabled by the Royal
License to make Cannons, may not make, nor put in Execution such as are
Repugnant to the King's Prerogative, etc. much less may any Assembly of the
King's Liege People do so, who have neither the King's Writ, nor Royal License.
And it is Remarkable, that 'twas the Opinion of the Learned in the Law, That had
not the Assembly of 1640. been a Convocation, the Cannons then made, would have
been (according to the Vote of the ensuing Parliament) against the Fundamental
Laws of the Realm; and against the King's Prerogative; whereby they would have
justly incurred a Praemunire.

The Laws of this Land are so Tender in this Point, that about Church Matters
they will not admit of the least Usurpation, or Incroachment on the King's
Prerogative: For instance, If the King by his Letters Patents should appoint
one to be a Bishop, and limit the Dean and Chapter to Choose, and the
Archbishop to Consecrate him within Twenty Days, and they Act contrary to this
Limitation, they do thereby run into the Dangers, Pains and Penalties of the
Statute of Provisors, and Praemunire made in 25 E. 3. cap. 1. and 16 R. 2. cap.
5. Ay, and their Aiders, Counselors, and Abettors, incur the same Punishment
by 25 H. 8. cap. 20.

These Gentlemen then, should they promulge, or put in Execution any Rules
contrariant to the King's Prerogative; the Incroachment hereby made upon it, is
much greater than what is done in the Case aforesaid, and the Penalties not
less: And it is certain, that all Rules made for the Calling of Provincial or
National Assemblies; without the King's Writ, is to the Disberison of the
Crown. And they, their Aiders, Counselors, and Abettors, cannot escape a
Praemunire.

Besides, the appointing Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies about
Church Matters, is not only a Blow at the King's Prerogative, but at the
Customs, Laws, and Statutes of this Realm: For whatever is against the
Prerogative Royal, has been always deemed to be contrariant to the Common Law
of the Land, as what is contrary to Common Law is also against God's Law. Ley
d'Angleter est found'n sur le Ley de Dieu. And Ley de Exe, and Ley de Dieu sont
tout un. The Law of England is founded upon the Law of God. And, The Law of the
Land, and the Law of God are all one: And consequently, Encroachments on the
King's Prerogative, are not only to the prejudice and disherison of the King
and of his Crown, but to the disherison of all his Subjects, and to the
undoing, and destruction of the Common Law of this Realm; as may be seen in the
Preamble of the Statute of 27 E. 3. cap. 1. Furthermore,

Rules about Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies as to Matters
Ecclesiastical, are not only consequentially, but directly against the Laws of
the Land, as they are contrary to the Rubricks and Cannons; and those Statutes
which have confirmed and established them.

That Rules about Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies, are against
the Cannons of 1603. is too obvious and plain to be denied: And my Lord Chief
Justice Vaughan avers, That if Cannon Law be made part of the Law of this Land,
then is it as much the Law of the Land, and as well, and by the same Authority
as any other part of the Law of the Land. Edes and Walt. Bishop of Oxford's
Case. And whatever is the Law of the Kingdom, is as much the Law as any thing
else that is so; for what is Law does not, suscipere magis aut minus, Hill and
Good's.

And the Cannons of 1603. are Established by 25 H. 8. cap. 18. For the
Convocation in which they were made, was called by the King's Writ, and enabled
by the King's Commission to entreat, make, and promulge Cannons and
Constitutions which were confirmed by Letters Patents under the Great Seal.
Besides, Cannons for the setting up Assemblies, etc. are directly contrariant,
and repugnant unto the Act of Uniformity, by which the Government of our Church
is Established: So that should these Gentlemen make any such Cannons or Rules,
'twill be impossible for them to Escape a Praemunire. They must not think to
come off by telling us, They design not to intermeddle with the National
Church-Form; nor to set up an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but only a
Brotherly, and amicable Correspondence: That they use not the Terms Classical,
Provincial, or National: Nor do they impose any Cannons or Constitutions upon
their Brethren: They do but send them their Proposals or Methods for Regulating
their Correspondencies. To which it is answered:

1. That this is but Protestatio, facto contrario, it being evident they design
the Regulating such matters as are of Ecclesiastical Conusance, as the
advancing Religion, Unity, and Love, and the Reformation of Manners are.

2. The Project proposed is a National Church-form. For in it are Cannons
appointing stated Times for their several Assemblies, and ordaining, that they
shall be made up of Ministers and Lay Elders; and that they shall be of three
distinct sorts, as the Established Assemblies are; so that though they use not
the Terms Classical, Provincial, and National, yet they secure the Thing.

3. Though they do carefully lay aside the word Classical, lest by its use they
should frighten us, before they have maturated what is now in design; yet have
they selected other Terms, importing Jurisdiction in using the word Districts,
into which they have distributed their several Congregations. For Districtus
est Tractus, in quo Dominus Vasallos, and Tenentes suos distringere potest:
Justitiae exercendae in eo tractu facultas. Whence it is lib. 2. Teudor. Tit.
54. Qui allodium vendiderit districtum and Jurisdictionem Imperatoris vendere
non praesumat. Besides, the Clergy have adopted it, and Pope Boniface in his
Bull anno 1033. has Consecrated it, Maneantque sub Judicio, and Districtu
vestro. Agreeably hereunto the lesser, and larger Districts are to send unto
the General Assembly in London their Delegates, to whom they give in their
Testimonials, or Dedimus potestatem, or Commission. For Delegatus is dicitur,
which for the most part in the understanding of the Common Law, is as much as
Delegatio with the Civilians. For Delegatus is dicitur, cui Causa committitur
terminanda, vel exequenda vices delegantis repraesentans, and in Jurisdictione
nihil proprium habens: The reason is, because Delegatus Jurisdictionem non suo
Jure, sed alieno beneficio habet. They have also their Committees, that is,
Persons to whom the consideration, and ordering their Church Matters is
committed, which is usual in Convocations as well as Parliaments: And their
National Assembly they call General Committee, perhaps to tell us they will
imitate their Neighbors, and be as Parliamentary in their Proceedings as may
be; and to this end, Resolve their Assembly into a Committee of the whole
House: In a word, they have also a Register, that is, Books, or Rolls, wherein
are Recorded the Proceedings of their Spiritual Court.

4. Though they call not their Proposals by the Names of Constitutions, Cannons,
or Ordinances, yet are they of the same Nature; and being designed for the
regulating Matters of Ecclesiastical Conusance, they are within 25 H. 8. cap.
19. And it is well known, that when several Parish Ministers of the Puritan way,
had in the Reign of the Queen, their Assemblies at Wadsworth, London, Oxford,
Northamptonshire, and other Places, though with a Protestation, 'twas only in
Subordination, and not in Opposition to the Established Government; and though
they acted with much greater Caution than these Gentlemen, (if they go on with
their Project) do, yet could they not escape Imprisonment and Ruin: And it
must be confessed, that the Methods taken by the Popes to get their Decrees
received by the English Church, was by Clothing 'em under soft Names, and
modest Terms, such as Rogationes; which they entreated us for the promoting of
Holiness to submit unto.

Once more, the Statutes of Provisors are so strictly penned against Offenders,
that the laying aside the Common Terms in use amongst Ecclesiastics, and
taking up new ones, cannot Skreen them from the Pains and Dangers of a
Praemunire. For they do extend, not only to Usurpations and Encroachments made
on the Royal Power by Papists, but to all Persons whatsoever (as my Lord Cook
says) of what Quality or Sex soever; The words be, If any.

2. To all Courts of what Jurisdiction soever, or whether holden by Right, or
by Wrong; the word alibi, is of a large Extent, so large you see, as to take in
these Gentlemen's stated Assemblies for Reformation of Abuses, etc.

3. To all Things whatsoever, Where any thing; which words are as general as
can be, etc.

3. There are some Circumstances affecting the Convocation of 1640. which may
justly frighten these Gentlemen from having any hand in such a Project: For
it is certain that this Convocation was called by the King's Writ; That as soon
as they assembled, the Archbishop produced a Commission under the Great Seal,
by Authority whereof they might, according to 25 H. 8. cap. 19. propose,
entreat, consult, and agree on what Orders, Cannons, or Constitutions they
should judge meet, keeping within the Limitations of the said Statute: And when
they had Enacted their Cannons, and had the Royal Confirmation by Letters
Patents under the Great Seal, yet were they Voted by the House of Commons in
the following Parliament, to be against the Fundamental Laws of the Realm,
against the King's Prerogative, Property of the Subject, the Right of
Parliament, and to tend to Faction and Sedition.

The Reasons of this Vote were many, some of which were: 1. That upon the
Dissolution of the Parliament the Convocation was determined; and what Cannons
or Rules soever are made in an Assembly not Called by the King's Writ, are
against the Prerogative Royal, and such are the Classical, Provincial, and
National Meetings of these Dissenters.

2. The Cannons then enacted were against some Rubricks in the Service Book,
and contrary unto some of the XXXIX Articles, which is as true of those Rules
in the Dissenters Project: For contrary to the Established Government by
Bishops, Archbishops, etc. They have set up a National Church Government by
Ministers, and Lay Elders in their various Meetings, ut supra.

This brief Account may show them what appearance of Law this Convocation of
1640. and the Cannons then made, had: And yet for the Reasons aforesaid, the
Clergy who acted therein, did then, as was Voted by that Parliament (we may
call Whiggish) fall into the Pains and Dangers of a Praemunire, as is to this
Day the Opinion of our Learned and Reverend Judges, and other great Lawyers in
Westminster Hall.

How much rather then may they be supposed to incur the same Penalties, who
shall come to a General Meeting that is not called by the King's Writ, agree on
Rules about Church Matters without the Royal License; and though they have not
Letters Patents under the Great Seal for their Confirmation, promulge, and
execute them, some of which are against the Rubricks, Articles, and Cannons by
Law Established.

4. This Project, although in its appearance, and truest Complexion does most
resemble the late National Church-form amongst the French Hugonots, which was
granted them by sundry Edicts, yet they were never so bold as to ordain, and
appoint National Assemblies at any time, but when Lieensed by their Kings; and
more than seventy years bygone, 'twas ordained by Letters Patents, and
verified in the Court of Parliament, That in all Assemblies of the King's
Subjects of the Reformed Religion, one of his Majesty's Officers, being of the
same Religion, should assist in Person, and see that nothing should be
propounded and handled amongst them, but such Matters as were permitted by his
Edicts.

The French Kings were so very Jealous of their Clergy lest they should
incroach upon the Regalia, that they would never suffer them of the Romish
Faith to come together, but when called by Authority of the King; and when
assembled diverse Tituli or Capitula, containing Directions how to proceed, and
what to enter upon, were sent to 'em; whereupon the Clergy when assembled, did
in their Synodical Epistles, assure their Prince, that they acted Secundum
voluntatis vestrae consultationem, and Titulos quos dedistis.

This was not a Practice only in the Gallican, but long before in the Catholic
Church. For Dionysius Comes was sent by Constantine to the Council at Tire, Ut
Animadversor esset, and Custos Conservandae Aequabilitatis, and Ordinis.
Candidianus was sent by Theodosius upon the same Score to the Ephesine Synod.

If then neither Protestant, nor Papist, nor the Modern, nor Ancient Clergy
could hold a General Assembly, unless called by the King's Writ, nor enter upon
any Business concerning the State of the Church, without the King's License,
and certain Capitula, or an Animadversor of the Kings and Emperors Appointment,
How is it that these Dissenters, without either Summons or License, without an
Animadversor or Capitula, dare appoint Stated, Provincial, and National
Assemblies, and frame Rules and Cannons in prejudice to the King, and his
Crown, and contrariant, and repugnant to the Customs, Laws, and Statutes of
this Realm?

SIR, Illegality of this Project, and the Danger of putting what is yet but in
Design, into Act, or Execution, may satisfy you, that the Uttermost the
unquiet Party among the Dissenters can do, is to Alarm the True Sons of our
Holy Mother the Church of England, to take heed, That whilst Liberty is given
to the Conscientious amongst them, the Licentious be not suffered to Undermine
and Subvert the National Establishment, as this Project must needs do, if They
meet not with a timely Check, by putting the said Laws in Execution against
those Ill-designing, discontented Gentlemen, as soon as ever they shall be
guilty of the first Breach, which their bare Assembling in order to the
Ripening this Project will apparently be, and expose all concerned to the
Exemplary, and Merited Punishment inflicted on such Bold Undertakers, as can
Contemn the Laws, and Trample on Prerogative. Adieu.

SIR, I am Yours.


