SOME Modest Reflections UPON Mr. STEPHENS's late BOOK, ENTITLED, A Plain
Relation of the late Action at SEA, between the English, Dutch, and French
FLEETS, from June 22. to July 5. last. With Reflections thereupon, and upon the
Present State of the NATION, etc. WITH A VINDICATION OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND
FROM What He has therein Advanced against Her. By a Hearty Lover of King
William and Queen Mary.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall; And by most
Booksellers. 1691.

To the Reader.
HAving accidentally some time since met with a Book, Entitled, A plain
Relation of the late Action at Sea, etc. I read it with some greediness, being
tempted with a lawful curiosity to satisfy my self in matter of Fact,
relating to so great an Action. In the perusing of which Account, as I must
acknowledge, I found satisfaction in some things; so others seemed very
disagreeable both to those Notions which I had entertained, and indeed to
Experience and Common Reason, especially in what he writes relating to the
Church of England, whereof he seems to imply he is, and I profess my self to be
a Member. I acknowledge, as I proceeded, I could hardly, without some
Indignation, pass by many things which I there met with; and after I had gone
through the same, have ever since, in vain, expected an Answer, especially to
(...) part which contains, I hope, many groundless Reflections on the
Established Protestant Church of this Nation. On this, at last, I took Pen in
hand, and bestowed a few Hours in Examining and Confuting such things as I
thought deserved it; which having communicated to a Friend, at his desire I now
publish; though upon the Character he gives me of the Author, and my Observations
on his Writings, believing him to be really an honest Man, and one who means
well to the Public, and may, in some Instances, do it service, I have reviewed
what was written, and given several things a less severe turn than I at first
intended: Which is all I have to let you know before you come to the Book.

Some Modest REFLECTIONS, etc.
THE Reason why this so much talk'd-of Book ought to be Answered, is palpable
and obvious, because it is full of Reflections on the present State of Affairs,
or rather a kind of a Compendium of what is objected by mistaken Friends or
bitter Enemies. The reason why that Person, who has now undertaken to Answer
it, thought not fit to do it before, was, that he expected some better Hands
would attempt it, especially when it contained Reflections sharp enough on such
as were well able to hold the Cudgels against him that made 'em. But those from
whom it was expected neglecting to take him to task, lest what he advances
should have deeper or larger Influence, because unanswered, should be thought
unanswerable, these few Sheets are at last sent abroad into the World on
purpose to disabuse it, and place some things in a better Light, which he and
others have rendered more dark and obscure by pretending to explain 'em. Nor
can I expect but to be ranked by the Zealous Author, for this undertaking,
among those whom he styles a Faction; perhaps too he will say I Am of the
Court-party, and consequently that I am guided by Guilt or Interest in this
attempt. But the best is one who shoots his Bolt so nimbly as he, is in no
great probability of hitting what he aims at; and if he should bestow the
Character of a Favourer of Debauchery upon me, as he is very liberal that way, I
have yet the Comfort of very good Company, as he has ordered it, all the
Bishops in England being, if you will believe him, in little better
Circumstances. This all that read him or know him will grant. He tells the
Reader he is a Hearty Friend to King William and Queen Mary; but after all, he
is certainly Notion-struck, and believes he has an extraordinary Call to the
great Work of Reforming Kingdoms. A Privy-Counsellor at once to the Kings of
Earth and Heaven, and knows as well why Providence did not give us leave to
beat the French, as how to make King William the most Glorious Prince in
Christendom, if he would but follow his advice, that is, Gargil his Council,
Fleets and Armies; turn out every Man that would Swear, Drink and Whore;
Encounter the King of France with the remainder, and obtain a miraculous
Victory by the virtue of Venner's promise, that One should chase a Thousand:
And this indeed, if looked into, is the sum, drift and upshot of all his
Writings. He concludes his Epistle with a Politic Complement to his Reader; a
Cause placed there is in terrorem (I have seen something like it hang up in a
Corn-field) to scare any one from disliking or answering him.

Know therefore also, says he (with a huge deal of Grandeur and Authority) if
thou can be offended with him who wishes so well to his Country, and no Ill
to thy self, thou can be no good Man. Very well your Argument is. -- He that
can be offended with any one who wishes well to their Country, and to those who
are offended, can be no good Man. This is the sense of this Complaint, or it
has none at all: And if it is fair Arguing, you also ought to have a care how
you are offended with your Answer; who, protest as deeply as you can, that he
wishes well to his Country, and no Ill to you. Nay, as you do that, you may be
better and wiser, (a very Charitable wish,) for otherwise you have given away
that Character you have so deservedly proved of a good Man, according to your
own Arguing.

To leave the Preface, and fall upon the Book it self: In considering of which,
we'd willingly observe some Method, though it is very difficult to keep any, in
treating of what has none. However, the best way will be to throw the Contents
thereof into these following different heaps, in one or other of which 'twill
go hard but we shall meet with and clear all the seeming Arguments there laid
together.

The unfortunate business of the Fleet; the general Mismanagement of Affairs;
the Debauchery of the Nation, and those in public Employments; the Behavior
of Churchmen toward Dissenters, and others; his own Bill at the end.

For the first of these: The Affair of the Fleet. Here the Author of the
Reflections needed not to have hedged in his Bett so carefully, and to fright
any one from Answering what he writes on that Head, [Enter his Protestation]
(as he does Page 10.) That it requires a Person of rare Invention, of equal
Impudence, and void of all Sense of Honor and Love to his Country to compose a
Vindication of that Transaction -- and People of no less stupidity and easiness
to be imposed upon by such pretenses -- and lower -- such a Miscarriage as none
will offer to excuse, who are not either Partners in the Crime, or no good
Friends to the Cause. I say he is safe enough in that Lock, and needed not have
denounced so terribly against any one who should endeavor to force him out
on it. The matter of Fact, of the Baffle we received in the next Action, which,
among many other ill Consequences, did undoubtedly retard the Reduction of
Ireland, is too notoriously and sadly true, and cannot but force the Indignation
of any Englishman who reflects upon it, and few or none who deserve that
Character but will, I Am pretty confident, agree with him in his Censure upon
the same: That in point of Honor it ought to be enquired into strictly to the
bottom, and punished severely to the satisfaction of the World, and in point of
Justice no less. But then had this Reflecter been either very Just, or very
Honorable, would he not, before he had Tried and Condemned those persons
concerned in this unhappy business, (or Printed Letters to purpose 'em for
Execution?) Would he not, at least, have heard 'em speak one word for
themselves before the fatal stroke? or is it so very fair to Hang 'em first,
and Judge 'em afterward? He could not but know what they plead in their own
defense; and the weaker it is, the easier answered. For their not Fighting
sooner, but turning against the Wind, is pleaded by their few Friends, what is
as to the substance of it, in his own Printed Relations, Page 2d and 3d. In a
Council of Flag-affairs 'twas agreed not to fight them. And when at last
actually engaged, he cannot but have heard what has been farther said by some
who have born the largest, and I believe the justest of Censure for that
Action. -- That in the Engagement the Wind was beat down, as they phrase it,
and that 'twas therefore impossible for some of the Ships to come up and
relieve, or join the other. The wants of the Fleet, the thinness of the
Seamen, the disproportion in Numbers, the hazards of a close Engagement, and
danger of losing all, which every one knows are urged by those here concerned,
how weakly soever.

These things, and what was before mentioned, deserved some Consideration, and
a fair Answer from a person so impartial as the Reflecter would be thought to
be, and perhaps really is, though so very eager and zealous in the business he
undertakes, that he had not time to consider such small matters as these
mentioned. But it seems one Neck is not sufficient, a great many more must come
in for Compliance both by Sea and Land. Thus he asks the Question, Page 11.
Is It likely he would have behaved himself as he did, if he had not had some
encouragement at least by a willing and early Compliance. There he has indeed
put the matter beyond Controversy. He proves all those were guilty who
complied with those Councils which had such unhappy effects; and thus fairly
brings in the Fleet with others, both Dutch and English; for as he himself in
his Relation, 'twas agreed upon in a General Council of the Flag-Officers not
to fight, because of the disproportion of the Numbers. He next adds some
Observations, whether his own or any others, it is not much material,
complaining that the Fleet was full of Torrington's Creatures; and had he no
more to answer for but this, I cannot think 'twould much affect him: For shall
not an Admiral have power to advance or recommend such as he thinks have served
the King faithfully? Or is not he, if honest, a proper Judge?

But that which ought to have been considered here, is the Behavior of those
who indeed had been raised by him; and were there not of that Number, who
signalized themselves in the Action, as much as 'twas possible for Men to do,
and have been since deservedly preferred for the same to higher Stations, with
the applause of all Parties, a convincing Argument against one of these
mistakes, if not both? Nor is another Complaint he and his Observer makes less
remarkable, Page 14. That persons are preferred according to the time they had
served in the Fleet; a wonderful Accusation, and truly weighty Reflections as
on the Government! What gives Experience but Time; and what deserves Preferment
more than Experience? I confess I should have thought the contrary practice
would have deserved Censure, but this rather Commendation. Here he enquires
into the Effects of our Misfortune at Sea: He tells us very bad news, that we
have promoted nothing all this while, nor are in any better Condition than we
were in the Spring last was Twelvemonth. One would have thought the Reduction
of Ireland had been a good employment for one Summer, and all the glorious
Actions of His Majesty's Court (which I will call so, though my Antagonist call
me Flatterer for my pains) had deserved some small acknowledgment both to God
and Man. But he has a pleasant Answer for that in the following lines; We are
but where we were, if Ireland should be wholly reduced, because it might have
certainly been done at first with less difficulty than now the taking of
Limmerick, Tyrconnel then only wanting some body to quit it to. For Ireland's
not being reduced sooner, how often has he been told of it? The then Prince
brought with him only some Fourteen thousand; those who joined him after his
Landing, part for Fear, part for Interest, he could not depend upon; some who
had joined him with the first at his Landing, not having perhaps their Ambition
and Avarice satisfied, were again his Enemies: All things were unsettled and in
a hurry: There was great probability of accomplishing all without Bloodshed:
And after all, considering the nature of the Irish, is not a total new Conquest
better for England than such terms as they would have then stood upon, when their
Estates and Numbers were unbroken?

He goes on, Page 16. and tells us, Besides Time, we have lost Lives; a very
strange thing in War, especially in Sea-sights, where there are no Back-doors.
And Trade too; as strange as the other? But have the Dutch and French as free a
Trade as they used to have? or are the English only unfortunate? But worse yet,
we have lost Ships, Effects and all to our Enemies -- And would it not have
been strange indeed if we had done it to our Friends? And all this with Expense
too. Stranger still! but here he has the good luck to be an ill guesser, when
he prognosticates the difficulty of getting More supplies. The Parliament of
England act on more generous Principles; and so far was that, or any
Consideration of the like nature, from by assing that August Assembly, that a
Sum proportionable to the occasion was granted almost as soon as demanded. He
complains the Confederacy is in danger of being broken -- But all the World
must grant, had they done as much on that side as the King on his, things had
been in a far better posture than now we find 'em.

His next Complaint is just as reasonable as all that go before, of Many
unexpected accidents which May occur before next Summer. This, I think, is a
little too hard, that we Must answer what is not done, as well as what is; and
Make an Apology for a thousand ill things that never were nor will be.

He proceeds in the Mismanagement of public Affairs, to make a great, and
perhaps a too just Complaint of the Sale of Offices; which though it might be
so ordered as not to be any way prejudicial to the public, as at present it is
in France it self; yet as things are here, nothing can be more mischievous and
ruinous. What he seems to deserve a stricter reproof for in this case, is his
making such loud Complaints against the present Government and Ministers for
this fault, as if 'twas some strange and unheard of Mischief, never known in
the World till Charles the Second, by his Knavish Example (as he civilly styles
it) brought that and such manner of Vices in fashion in England: But was it
never so in any other place, or at any other time? Were Queen Elizabeth's
Golden days themselves proof against the power of Gold? Does he expect Causin's
Holy Court to be set up in England, where Money will do nothing? or, which is
homer; are all those of any other Party and Interest such sworn Foes to a
Feeling now and then, that they would reject a parcel of Guineys, if thrown at
their Feet? The sum is, that there never was, nor ever will be a Court in
England, nor any place else we may safely add, where Gold will not be
prevalent, and Men of no Merit often creep in where ten to one persons of real
worth and value may be rejected: And hence it follows, that whoever makes loud
Complaints in things of such a nature, if supposing 'em in some Instances true
enough, would yet be esteemed little less than ridiculous.

Upon this Head he falls foul on the ingenious and learned Gentleman, who is
the Author of the Observator, who has done the Government more service by his
handsome and valuable Writings, dressed in a Courtly and Manly style, and
obliging the World with frequent and acceptable rarities, than ever some
snarling Pens dipped in Vinegar are like to do, should they write as many Books
as he has Observators.

We have seen Remarks, says he, on the ill Consequenquences of buying and
selling Offices lately published in Print, and by a public Intelligencer, who
had either reason to believe that it is our own Case, or his Remarks were very
impertinent -- and if he did believe it, his expressing himself as far from
granting any such practices to be in us here in England, savored more of that
vulgar Wisdom lately in fashion, than of those Virtues I mentioned before --
Fidelity, Integrity, etc.

But yet more; he makes him little less than a party concerned, at least privy
to the business: I find it, says he, commonly believed by those, who in all
probability, little considering these things which I have now mentioned, must
therefore have some other Reasons from Matter of Fact for their belief.

All the Matter of fact is, we were at that time, (while the French were
hovering about us) in a great ferment, and, as was just, very angry with those
who brought 'em hither, if we could have found who those were. 'Twas so natural
a Reflection from the unhappy Circumstances of those affairs, to think on the
Officers employed in them, that one of a much less sagacity than this Author,
and as dull as he would have us believe the Observator himself, could not but light
upon it, and enquire into all the probable Reasons thereof; and why he might
not fall upon the same with the present Author, without knowing any more of
Matter of fact than he himself did, I cannot imagine. Nor when the Fret was a
little over, why some Expressions might not be softened, and he have liberty at
least to hope things were not so ill as he had doubted, especially after a
public enquiry had been made into those Matters by persons above exception;
namely, the Commons. -- So that upon the whole, the World is left to judge
whose Remarks are most impertinent. The Intelligencer upon Places, or he on the
Intelligencer.

But though he has no such particular knowledge in the matter, yet he has
shrewd Guesses that things go wrong from his own Observation. -- He
recommended a person to be made a Captain, who yet was not preferred -- and
this he thinks -- A sign of some sinister respects too prevalent amongst them.
But he answers this himself -- he did not do it in propria persona; nay, at
last, he did not do it all, but let it drop, for ought we can learn, by the
Story. -- and it is very hard that the Lords Commoners should prefer a Man upon
the Author's Recommendation, without ever knowing that he did recommend him; or
what is worse, for ought appears without his doing it.

The next Reason he gives why Many are preferred who want desert, and so are
like to injure the Nation rather than defend it, is favor and affection under
which he ranks Faction, which he complains has had no small share in
introducing ill Men into the Government, and keeping good out; Nay, not only
one, but two and three Factions, or at least one with three Heads, which is
full as terrible.

But those Names which he gives 'em, as well as the things meant by 'em, are so
invidious in themselves, and have been so mischievous to the Nation, that
surely he can do it very little service who endeavors to conjure 'em up again,
to disquiet both us and them, when they have been now so long asleep and
forgotten.

'Twou'd tempt a Man to run upon the other extreme, though less inoffensively
than be does; and to ask him whether he thinks not in his Judgment that the
Nation has been really more pestered with one Faction, than the three (or
tripple-headed one) he has there mentioned? If we must have Factions, let any
Man, that is of neither Party, impartially examine both, and see how much less
Atheism, Malice, Uncharitableness, Swearing, Debauchery, Covetousness there is
on one side than the other; and, I Am afraid, twoud be a hard matter to find one
to throw the first Stone. Let us borrow the Author's own words, and a very
little turn will make 'em bear hard where he never intended 'em. Is there not
really such a thing as a Party, or a Faction if you will, who agree to keep out
those who are not theirs, though never so Cordial Friends to King William, etc.
to Calumniate and abuse 'em, though never so pious and virtuous -- but be they
but zealous for their own Party, be they never so vicious, debauched or
profane, never so empty, shallow, blustering or inconsiderate, or meanly
qualified, they shall be embraced as honest Men, nay as good Protestants, so
they do but hate or rail at the Church of England.

And this indeed is the inseparable Mischief of all Faction, or separate
private Interests and Communities within Communities, distinct from, though not
formally against, the general Good of the Nation. I Would fain know who had
deserved best of Jerusalem, when besieged by the Romans -- He who should have
been of any particular Party, choose which he would, and rail at all the rest,
as Cause enough there was all round, there as well as here; or he that should
have endeavored a lasting peace among 'em, obliterating the very Memory of all
those odious distinctions which had such fatal effects.

In the same Nature, one would think a Man that loved his Country should, at
this time, endeavor to make them all Friends, not Enemies, to dress every
Party as fairly, not as frightfully as possible; and by uniting their
Affections, melt down the inveterate Enmity. Which if 'twere this Gentleman's
design, he has certainly taken a very unlucky way to accomplish it.

I am much of the same Mind with my Author concerning admitting Persons into
public Employments, which he treats of Page 23. but perhaps for different
Reasons from what he ever thought upon: One is, That the Number of those who
dissent from the public Establishment, supposing they were admitted into
Employment, is not so great, as if they designed any such thing to effect any
considerable Alterations.

Another Reason is, That Interest being the great quarrel, quiet but that and
all will be friends. But the mischief is, this Hypothesis of his, as well as
other fine ones, is impracticable, and does not any good at all, laying open to
the grand Objection of those Men whom he would ease by it.

He would have none admitted to public employ, but such as take the Sacrament,
though the limit's larger than before, in some solemn Assembly of Protestant
Dissenters, or others.

But here still lies the Objection, -- we are not fit for t -- Why should such
a holy thing be made a State-Engine? It Is against our Consciences, cry they, to
take it at all; and you throw us on a dreadful hazard, either to lose all our
employs, or to eat and drink our own Damnation, and I appeal to any Man whether
the business is not thus fairly stated; so that after all our whipping and
heaving, you see we are but just where we were, or but very little advanced.

Page 24. He seems to teach all the Princes in the World a new Scheme of
Politics, and would persuade 'em not to oblige Enemies, calling that Noble
part of Divine as well as Humane Prudence -- little Arts, and pieces of vulgar
Craft: and Page 25. pronounces very awfully -- I have always looked upon a
certain Condescension to, and compliance with some of that Party, to be one of
the first steps which have been made since the Revolution; and a Daubing into
which, we were betrayed by the pedantick Policy of some, etc. as inconsistent
with true Divinity, (you may see which way he squints) as with true Policy.

This is indeed a tender Subject; but we may venture to say on it -- That surely
he is one of the first good Men, who ever blamed a Prince for those truly Royal
Virtues of Clemency and Goodness. The truth is, all sides have played the fool
and been mad in their turns. Blood enough has been shed, Mischief enough
happened, and Quarrels long enough fomented -- All this the present Government
takes no notice of, but makes use of whoever are capable of serving it: this at
the bottom displeases some, who perhaps thought to have shared all between 'em.

Show us a Prince that ever came into a distracted Kingdom, without obliging
those who may else possibly not be very easy. And show me he that can, a
parallel of any Revolution in the World of this nature, made so suddenly, with
less confusion and blood attending it; not so much as one Insurrection or
Rebellion from the very beginning -- A sufficient proof that no little Arts or
vulgar Tricks, but true Politics and a right Spirit of Government have had the
Management of Affairs ever since. Which has considered the Nature of Mankind,
and acted accordingly; and the Event has abundantly made good the firmness and
validity of those Principles on which the Government has all along proceeded.

At the close of this Page he breaks out into a very pathetick Ejaculation: [
Poor Prince! (speaking of His Majesty) how did my Heart ache for him about this
time, though I knew not what was the matter?] A perfect Impulse! Poor Man, and
just in the same condition he has been ever since.

But he goes on: Princes are Men; ay, and so are Authors, and at least as
liable to mistakes as they.

He comes to yet worse news than all this, Page 27. How dangerous a condition
the King and Queen are in, of being delivered up an expiatory Sacrifice to
their Enemies, and these Nations, of being involved in Blood and Confusion. One
half of this, the truth is, would be enough to make any honest Man's heart ache
as well as the Author's; all the hopes is, it may not be true; and though he calls
what he has heap't together Demonstrations, there need more to persuade an
unprejudiced person to believe it.

He comes to enquire into the Means to prevent all these fatal mischiefs, and
throws 'em upon our Debauchery, as one great Cause of all. It Is confessed Sin
is the cause of all the miseries of Mankind, but it is an impossible thing so to
see every circumstance, as to affirm any thing of certainty in these matters.
How often is a good Cause and good Men unsuccessfull? Are the French the most
virtuous People in the World? or must not most of these matters necessarily be
left to a day of Judgment to declare the Equity of Providence, which seldom
seems so exact in these outward distributions, as this good Man supposes it?

He seems to desire that none but virtuous persons might have public
Employment. And it is no more than every good Man wishes practicable: -- But as
was said in another case; if we'll converse with no ill Men, we must go out of
the World; so if we'd make use of none else, we must even go the same way. God
himself makes use of ill Men, both for good and evil, to the rest of the World;
whereas he needs 'em not in either of those cases. Princes must do the same,
especially when newly settled, and perhaps, sometimes, all their Reigns after.
We know all David's Soldiers were not of the most extraordinary Character, who
though he himself were a Man after God*s own heart, many under him were far
otherwise. And though he says he who leads a Godly life shall be his Servant; yet
politic Reasons, the safety of his Country, and security of his Throne, made
him make use of a bloody Joab, because a brave General all his lifetime. And
did he not receive and kindly treat a treacherous Abner, while the true
undoubted Heir of his Sovereign was alive, and who left him merely out of
Revenge, and rage, being gently accused of incontinency by his timorous Master.

To come a little nearer: Were all those Saints with the then Prince, his
present Majesty? or had he done well to have made a Reform among 'em before he
Embarked, turning out whoever would Swear, or Drink, or Whore? Had he taken
this method, his Army, ten to one, had been less than Gideon's, and he must
have expected as great a Miracle to have made him Conqueror.

If Wars are necessary to purge the World, and throw off some ill humors,
contracted by long Peace and Luxury, as generally granted, ill Men may in this
case be more useful than good; at least I Am sure they are better spared, and
less mist afterward than the other.

It does not belong to him, he acknowledges, to inquire what has been done in
pursuance of the King's Letter to the Bishop of London, and the other Bishops,
for that belongs to them to do.

If no Man meddled with what did not belong to him, the State, as well as
Church, would be quieter than *it is. But to let that pass: I cou*d wish he had
spoken more upon this point, though less on some that go before and follow after.
Ought not a Writer, who studies the good and prosperity of the Government he
lives under, to acknowledge and commend whatever is handsomely done, rather
than make it his business to find fault with every thing? How fair an occasion
had he here for a just Panegyric? But I Am unwilling to suspect the true reason
why he would not inquire into what had been here done, was because he sound
something well done; but I cannot imagine how a Man that either comes near the
Church, or but the Highways, could be ignorant of the extraordinary methods
used in this matter. -- Of the remarkable care of my Lord of London in
Publishing the Letter it self with his own, and sending it to all the Ministers
in his Jurisdiction; to which, some time after, the Acts of Parliament were
also added. -- and what Obedience was given thereto, all the Pulpits in London
can witness: If the Ministers were not heeded, I hope neither They nor the
Government shall have that charg*d upon 'em, nor will the Author blame 'em, as
for want of other Apostolical Usages, mentioned a few Pages after, so for not
converting of Thousands, as they did by their Sermons, as miraculous in their
Effects as the Inspiration that Dictated 'em to the Speaker. And what if we
should say, so far were those in Office, either Sacred or Secular, from
neglecting their duty in this case, that some visibly over-did it, and strained
the Laws (as in stopping Gentlemen on the Sabbath Day) farther than ever it was
intended.

After this and all other means which can be used, it is not the work of a day
or year to heal those Wounds, and repair those Ruins which have been
industriously made in the Manners of the English for perhaps above this Age
last past. We have good Laws, we have an excellent Example one would think
enough to shame us into Virtue; but if in the mean time, some of the inferior
Officers will not do their Duty, I cannot imagine what the King can do more, unless
they would have him preach as well as fight, or Himself turn Informer or Constable;
and, with Harry the 8. run to the Cobler's Stall to hear him swear, or the
Miller's House to find him out in his cheating. This, I think, is sufficient to
wipe off all the Aspersions thrown, Page 39, 40. and other places, upon some of
the greatest and best in the Kingdom.

We would now follow him in the same method he leads, to the History of his
abortive Bill, and that unfortunate success it met with: but referring that to
the end of his Book, where we shall meet with the Bill it self, it may be here
necessary to enquire into the great and loud Complaints he makes against the
Established Protestant Church of the Nation.

Under this Head, it must be owned, that never was any particular Church since
our Savior's time, though we take in that of the Apostles themselves, without
what might be amended both in Discipline and Doctrine. And those who pretend to
Infallibility in either, or what is next kin to it, and perhaps the same in
other words, an extraordinary Purity and Gospel-perfection above their Sister
Churches; both these have been not rarely confuted by easy and vulgar
Experience. That the Church of England, as well as all other Christian
Churches, has a great number who pretend to be her Members, in the same
circumstances with those who said they were Jews and were not, but were of the
Synagogue of Satan, too sad experience daily tells us, and she her self had
rather bewail than deny.

But that the visible Church will always consist of Hypocrites and ill Men as
well as true Christians; that there will be tares as well as good seed in the
Field; till the Angels reap the Harvest of all Mankind, that great Shepherd
himself has foretold us, who cannot be deceived, because his knowledge is
infinite.

That the Discipline of our Church is not so exact as in the first Ages, and as
she her self desires, is by her acknowledged in her Rubric. That it has not
been taken care of since the Reformation, is partly to be imputed to the almost
continual hurry and struggle she has been in, from one side or the other,
partly to the Civil Government, a great many of our Lawmakers being so far
from giving her more power, that they think she has too much already.

Besides all this, 'twill be as readily granted, that we have Bigots amongst
us, as have ever had all the Churches in the World; That we have others under
the Mask of Religion who drive on a Secular Interest, as there have also been
the same in all Ages. That moreover, the Crowd of Debauchees and lewd persons,
will, for the most part, call themselves of the same side that is uppermost; and
that all these Cases are things so common and unavoidable, that they seem not
to weigh so heavy in the accusation of the National Church, as this good Man
believes.

After all she is able to make it appear, and I think I may modestly add, has
already done it unanswerably, That whatever accidental defects there may be in
her Model, She is yet in the Essentials of her Doctrine and Discipline, the
most conformed to the Primitive pattern of any in the World.

This in general: To be now more particular, and answer the severe heavy Charge
in the 31, and ensuing Pages laid against her.

In what has been related, he says we may see here; That which may correct and
humble us for our vain magnifying our Church above all others, and despising,
vilifying and disturbing our Brethren, who are, in many respects, better than
our selves.

Speaking the truth of our Church, and proving it, is not vainly magnifying it:
Despising and vilifying our Brethren had been more proper in Heylin*s time,
when he, and the rest of his temper, unchurch'd all the World beside
themselves: If he means our Dissenting Brethren at home, it seems no such
scandalous vilifying 'em as he insinuates, to think there are not so many Men
of Parts and Learning amongst 'em as may be found otherwhere -- For their being
in many respects better than we, Comparisons are odious; and notwithstanding
that, we may be also in many respects better than they, and I heartily wish in
both cases we may learn what is truly good and imitable of one another, and they
disturb us no more than we do them, since what is past he does not speak of,
and will only incline a Man to look back yet farther: What would be a kinder
Inquiry, is who freed 'em from these Disturbances, but a Parliament composed
almost entirely of Church-of-England-Men? And who would have yet done more, but
the Bishops of the same Church, both in Parliament and Convocation?

It Is too like the most uncharitable of those our forementioned Brethren, to
fix such a dreadful Censure on so great, and learned, and pious a Body of Men,
as he does in the following Lines, comparing the Church of England to that of
the Laodiceans, (as I remember some in the late times interpreted all that
Prophecy of the same Church,) and tells 'em plainly that they are wretched, and
poor, and miserable, and blind and naked. Too truly* indeed might the Character
of some of the other seven Churches agree with ours, that our Savior might
have some things against us, but I should have thought very few beside a
virulent Papist, or most rigid Sectary, would choose the very worst of the seven
to compare us to.

That there is scarce a notorious scandalous person in the Nation but of our
Communion, is too palbable a -- to be answered; that there are too many such,
has been already acknowledged and accounted for. That such persons, if of
Quality, are complimented and treated by the Bishops themselves, may be true,
and those good Men know nothing of their Debauchery -- but did they, something
is due to their Character; and they may as innocently, I hope, be Complimented
with those Titles which are their due, without any imputation of partiality or
flattery, as St. Paul styled a corrupt Roman Governor -- Most Noble Festus!

He next charges us in the same 32d Page with as great neglect in our Worship,
but is so fair to acknowledge it is common to all the Reformation, and that is
our not Celebrating the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist every day. Adding,
that he knows not any Church in the World, from the Passion of our Savior, to
the time of the Reformation, where this was not a part of their ordinary
public Worship of God, and their daily Sacrifice. But either his knowledge is
very suddenly improved, or he most egregiously contradicts himself, and his
Zeal makes him overrun his Memory; for the very same Page, but a few Lines
off, he owns both this and the Effects on it in the time of St. Ambrose and
Chrysostom. About some fair thousand Years before the Reformation, and when
indeed the Church first began to have need on it. In the Greek Church, says he,
where this neglect first began, as is noted by St. Ambrose, and much complained
of by Chrysostom, it was followed by dismal Contentions, etc. He adds, he is
well satisfied that our want of a daily Christian Sacrifice is one of the
principal Prejudices which hinders the Reconciliation of the Papists to our
Church. A new and an odd Argument. New, since 'twas never urged before by any
of the Communion for themselves; and very odd, when it is known we celebrate it,
every Sunday at least, by our Rubric, where there are enough to communicate
without making the Ordinance contemptible. Whereas at present the Catholics
seldom or never receive but at Easter, nor any other Christian Church, not so
much as those that are so much better than we, oftener than once a Month.

Nor yet where that is wanting, I hope, do we want a daily Christian Sacrifice,
unless Prayer and Praise deserve not to be called by that Name. And why the
second Service may not be used at other times as well as at the Sacrament, when
the Prayers don't immediately refer to, or necessarily imply the reception
thereof, I can see no reason, nor I believe he himself invent any, any more
than for his calling it a jejune and barren thing, or comparing it to what is
so.

He next complains, that our Offices and Collects are defective, but others
will complain they are redundant, and it is impossible to please both.

He finds as much fault with our Preaching as our Prayers; that it tends to
introduce superficial Formality and Pharisaical Morality -- neglecting to press
Humility, Contempt of the World, Heavenly-mindedness, Devotion to God, and
Universal Charity to all Men. Thus raking up all the weak baffled Objections of
our Enemies, which neither need nor deserve any farther Answer.

Page 35. We are further accused for want of care to make Proselytes, being
like Pharisees in every thing else. The Charity and Civility of the Man! I Would
defy a Quaker to outdoe him in Comparisons, with whom it seems he would join*
us, in Expeditions to Rome and Constantinople, to convert the Pope and Grand
Seignior.

But what need is there of going so far abroad, when even here in England, etc.
the Gospel it seems is not thoroughly planted. The old Complaint of Famine of
the word renewed, where, in truth, a Surfeit is more to be apprehended. But if
things be as he represents 'em, there is need enough of those Evangelists he
would have sent forth throughout the Kingdom.

What he adds of the small number of Churches, and the great multitude of
Ministers, many of 'em unprovided for, relates more to the State than Church,
in whose power it is both to Erect and Endow what is wanting, to reduce some
things to a little more Equality, and to take some care or other to obviate the
mischief which arises from the vast disproportion between the Clergy and
Benefices whereon to maintain 'em.

There follows a complicated Charge against the Ministers of London, Page 36.
That they neither invite others to God's public Worship, nor come themselves,
nor use it but Sundays, or Sundays, Wednesdays and Fridays, or not at such
Hours as some of their Charge can only have for that Service*They press not
their People to frequent the most solemn and peculiar part of our Christian
Worship; and then, to excuse their own neglect, falsely accuse their People, and
charge it upon them.

Whether this be a just Accusation, or an unjust, it falls very heavy on those
who give the scandal, or him that invents it; and he might well expect, as he
intimates, that 'twou'd offend some persons; though to hinder 'em from taking any
notice on it, he plainly tells 'em they cannot be so offended, unless void of
Piety and Consideration. But there is no reason Innocence should be hufft out of
its own defense, and it is an easy matter, in order to the same, to send him to
places where the attendance of public daily prayers, is as earnestly pressed as
possible, though is ineffectually as if not a word said on it. Where they are used
every day, Morning and Evening, as well as Sundays, Wednesdays and Fridays, at
such hours as are thought most convenient for an Auditory, (though what is so to
one person, is often the contrary to another,) when, I say, more can hardly be
said by Man, nor with more constancy and earnestness to press the people to
this most solemn part of Christian Worship; yet where there is seldom a
Congregation large enough to make the Responses, nor in such cases as these is
it said to excuse their own neglect, by falsely accusing their People, and
laying it upon them.

And, the truth is, though many more than do frequent such Prayers might be
there, if they pleased; yet for the much larger part of the common people, this
is so far from being their Duty, that they might perhaps rather sin in doing
it. God will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; and they ought not to neglect their
Families, or providing for their own House, though for the highest Acts of
Devotion. And after all, there are very many places in the City and Suburbs,
where God's Service is decently and constantly performed every day, and Morning
and Evening-Sacrifice presented to Heaven -- a custom* never practiced by those
better Men whom he so much admires. He persists to charge us with (as he calls
it before) greater abominations than these. A Pharisaical Exaction, Pharisaical
Persecution, and at the same time permitting notorious contempt of the Laws of
God in our own members, without check or control, or scarce serious
Resentment. He drives on yet more zealously, calls us Fanatics and Madmen,
and so much worse Fanatics than those we call so; that, he says, it is a truth
too notorious to be denied, that we have few Christian Assemblies, besides
those of the Dissenters, which can properly be called Holy. -- I wonder indeed,
and so would any one who reads his Book, that he does not forsake such a
Pharisaical, nay Diabolical Communion, and join himself to the Holy Ones he so
much admires; and were the Church of England such as he represents it, I think
it should be one of the last I would communicate with. We have had all, it is
too true, our Sins and Follies, and, I hope, are by this time of both sides
pretty well convinced and ashamed of 'em. There is not indeed that desire of
Unity which would be wished among Christians, of either side, but the
Inclination to mischief one another, which has stood still nowhere, nor ought
to be fixed on one Party, since it has gone all round, is sure pretty well
work't off; and only such things as these, which have a direct tendency to
revive the former Enmity, and keen Animosities, which every good Man wishes
Eternally buried.

But the Nobility and Gentry meet with no kinder entertainment from his warm
Zeal, than the Church and Clergy* Since even the Mob, he assures us, have more
steadiness, constancy and virtue, than a great part of them can pretend to.
Contrary to which one may safely aver, that take a proportion of both, though I
don't pretend to be so intimate with either of 'em, as I find he is; and I am
pretty confident 'twill be much harder to find a Man tolerable virtuous among
the scum of the People, whom he magnifies and admires, than among those he
vilifies and abuses. And if he were no more famed for steadiness and constancy,
than that Mob he commends, he would not have the Reputation the World now gives
him: Which is so great, that I can hardly think he really intends some things
which he speaks a little too warmly, without being examined by his calmer
Judgment. What account else shall we give of that passage, Page 42. where he
not only prefers the Mob before a great part of the Nobility and Gentry, but,
one would think, intended to set 'em upon them (as his Brother the Modest
Inquirer does upon the Clergy) by telling 'em, That wicked Men, be they
Gentlemen or Noblemen, or what they will; are ten thousand times worse than the
dirt of the Streets, and ought to be trod upon by the meanest of Humane race.

I thought there had been respect due to the public Character of a person, be
his inward Qualifications what they would; however the Mob is but an ill Judge,
and if it once calls a Man wicked, as they often do when a person don't please
'em, there are but a few steps more to their treading 'em under their feet.

For the King's Duty, which he as freely lays down as if he were another Moses
sent from Heaven for that very purpose, did not his own Inclinations and Virtue
sufficiently prompt him to the performance thereof, he has, I doubt not,
notwithstanding the squinting Censures scattered through the Book on their
Policy and Divinity; those about him who can represent all those things to his
Majesty as faithfully, and a little more mannerly than he does, and who would
both in public and private occasions humbly recommend to his practice those
Virtues for which he is already so eminent -- Fidelity to God, Courage, Vigor,
Faith, Resignation, and Righteousness: Nor can I see any reason why they should
not Preach on all these Subjects, at least as well as my Author.

Omitting all the Over-worn De Jure and De Facto business, it ought to be
remarkt to the Author's honor, that he certainly has no respect of persons;
for after he has done with the King, the Parliament next are to be taken to
task -- but they are even so bad, it is in vain to preach to 'em, there being no
hopes of their Amendment, and therefore he thinks it a good expedient to send
'em about their business, or, as he expresses, to dissolve 'em and call another
speedily, unless they will mend their manners.

It Is enough to say, on this Head, that we have had few Houses of Commons who
have made more good Laws, or more heartily espoused the Interest of the Nation
than this at present sitting, which deserves sure a more grateful treatment
than some Men's Civility thinks fit to give 'em.

He Is got to Sea again, Page 53. and tells us very ill news; That our Men of
War are generally filled with such Captains and Officers, as few Merchants
would entrust with a Ship of 200 Tun; and it is the common opinion of most
Seamen and Merchants, that there are but few amongst 'em that are any way
qualified for that service.

Yet the Blew Squadron, by their own Relation, or that part of it which could
get up, fought as bravely as could be expected from Men, and made the French
Fleet bend before 'em. The Author, as hot Men often do, usually over-shoots the
mark; had he only complained that some, nay that too many of of the Officers
might not be so fit for their Places, this had looked with a face of
probability; but when he adds -- that they are generally such, one may, I hope,
take the Liberty to believe, that either his Informations are faulty, or he has
drawn such Consequences from it as it will not well bear.

For those Lists mentioned of such as were able and ready to serve the
Government, yet refused; there are two Questions may be asked before any thing
can be pronounced on that Subject: The first, Whether there were Places enough
vacant for 'em, since ootherwise, by turning out others to make room for them,
both the Seamen and Captains might be too dangerously disobliged? The other,
Whether they were Qualified by Law; if not, (not to meddle with Right, which we
formerly discoursed of,) we have now no Dispensing Power, and they could not be
accepted by those in public Trusts without endangering themselves, whatever
service it might be to the Nation?

We are now come to the Postscript, wherein the Author promises an Appendix;
the design whereof should be to satisfy the Consciences of many mistaken
honest Men, in the matter of Allegiance to the present Government. A Province
which he seems well enough able to manage, and which has been long expected
from him; and had he made that the Book, and all this the Appendix, if not left
it out altogether, he might perhaps have done his Country more service than
this is ever like* to do. We come now to the Examination of that Bill, inserted
at the End of his Book, and which has made so much noise in the Body on it,
which matter I Have reserved entire to this place for the more distinct handling
of the same.

This Bill, or a Message from a Divine, by the desire of several Bishops, with
the advice of diverse of the Judges, drawn up by the Author, for the effectual
correcting of the most notorious Sins and Vices of the Age, he complains was
quash't and lost by the cowardice and worldly Wisdom of the Bishops, and the
worse Inclinations of some of the Temporal Lords, who were likely to make such
opposition against it; That the most prudential of the Bishops were against its
being read, lest it should be rejected: And by publishing this Story, he thinks
to make the Ears of all pious Men tingle, to raise up a better Spirit in the
Nation, and shame the Great Men of it into better Manners -- as are his own
words.

To set this matter in a better light* and answer those heavy Accusations which
he here lets fly, on some of the greatest Subjects in the Kingdom, Two things
will be necessary: First, to enquire into the Nature of his Bill proposed, what
Crimes therein to be punished, and what their punishments? To prove not only
the reason the Bishops had in not appearing For the Bill, but that 'twas not
only prudent, but lawful, and even their Duty, as circumstances then were, to
act in that manner.

The Bill it self, it must be owned, contains many excellent things,
particularly the repression of Blasphemy, Swearing, Perjury, Profanation of
the Lord's Day, Adultery, Fornication and Drunkenness. The Penalty's just, though
severe; the Methods of Prosecution very advisable and prudent; the Clause
added, to make wilful neglect of public Officers, punishable as Perjury,
extremely convenient for the Nation. -- And were this all contained in the said
Bill, the Complaint would be somewhat fairer against the rejecting it. But look
on-ward to Page 4. and let the wiser part of the World see whether 'twas fit to
be read with those Clauses therein afterward inserted.

And because (it goes on) Excess of Drinking exposes people to profane
Swearing, and such Excesses are usually promoted by drinking Healths: be it
enacted, that every person who shall begin or pledge any Health, shall forfeit
and pay, as is before enacted, for profane Swearing. --

Now what this Forfeiture is, the Paragraph before tells us -- Convicted
persons are to pay from 20 s. downward, and to be bound to their good
Behavior; and if not able to pay the Sums specified, to be set in the Stocks
for the first Offense, and publicly Whipped for every other Offense afterward.
See onwards, Page 6, and 7.

And be it further enacted, That no person, keeping a public House within the
Cities of London and Westminster, or Borough of Southwark, etc. shall keep any
Organ, or other Instrument or Instruments of Music for the Entertainment of
Guests, on pain of forfeiting the Sum of 20l. and on farther pain of being
disabled to sell Ale, Wine, etc. for the space of a Twelvemonth after such
Conviction.

One would think all this should be enough for Drinking the King's Health, or
keeping a pair of Bagpipes -- But alas, this is not half on it. Over and beside
all this, read what follows: And be it enacted, etc. That when any person
shall be convicted for any of these Offenses, the Judge or Justice, before whom
the Convictions are made, shall immediately thereupon signify the same to the
Bishop of the Diocese, to the end that he may thereupon proceed to
Excommunication of the Offenders, who shall not be Absolved but upon special
Order of the Bishop, and upon Certificate by the Parson or Vicar, etc. where
the Offenders shall inhabit; that the said Offenders shall* on some Lord's Day
in the Morning, immediately after the Creed, appointed for the
Communion-Service, in the Body or greatest Isle of the said Church, have
publickiy confessed his or her fault, and solemnly declare his or her unfeigned
sorrow and repentance for the same.

Such was the Bill, such the Act designed by this good Man, and such the Crimes
and Punishments therein contained; which whether or no 'twas suitable to the
Gravity and Wisdom, or Goodness and Charity of the Reverend Fathers to espouse,
I leave even the most rigid Enemy of their Order impartially to consider.

To begin, or pledge a Health, which all the World that can speak sense, now
acknowledge in it self absolutely innocent, and the ill consequences* thereof
far enough from being necessary thereto; this must be equaled in Punishment,
and therefore in Crime, with profane Cursing and Swearing; this must be
punished with Imprisonment, Stocks, and Whipping, the highest marks of public
Shame and Infamy; and not only so, but those who have endured all this from the
Secular Power, be turned over to the Ecclesiastical, and given over to Satan,
for only drinking or pledging one single Glass, and at the same time wishing
health to King William and Queen Mary, or the best and nearest Friends they
have in the World; and yet more, do public Penance in the open Church for the
same, without which no Absolution to be granted 'em.

In the same manner must those be dealt with who, in a public House, keep* any
Organ, or Instrument of Music. Woe be to any poor Alehouse-keeper that happens
to play upon the Fiddle or Bagpipe, nay even a Jews harp, must cost him 20 s.
and send him to the Devil into the bargain.

'Twou'd be worth the while to examine whether this good Man has not something
of Discord in his Nature, every thing in the World being out of tune in his
Ears, he is therefore such a bitter Enemy to whatever seems like Harmony.

Should we fairly represent the plain Consequences of such an Act, had it taken
place, 'twou'd be a hard matter for the Reader to be grave in perusing 'em.
When, for example, a couple of heinous Offenders against this new Law, after
the Stocks, and Whipping, and Paying, must come at last to the great Isle to
acknowledge their abominable Crimes before the Congregation.

Verily, Christian Friends, (says the first of 'em) I have most leudly and
scandalously pledged a Health to my Father and Mother, and I hope you will all
take warning by my Example.

And indeed, Beloved! (cries the second) I have yet greater wickedness, and
been* guilty of the heinous Sin of keeping in my House a Babylonish Bag-pipe, a
whole nest of filthy Whistles, called an Organ -- for which I deservedly stand
here at this present.

To be graver; I ask whether these things would not very well become a
Christian Congregation? and which would appear more decently there, the Penance
of these people, or the Reading this Act? which how proper it is to be read in
Churches, let any Man who will take the pains to read it any-where else
consider.

From what has been already said on the Bill it self, may be drawn sufficient
to vindicate those Reverend Persons, who were not forward to promote it against
all the World. What they might have done since is another Question, and foreign
enough from that which they are here accused of, viz. wanting courage or
honesty* to promote this very Bill.

But yet further: Supposing, for once, that the Bill had been on all accounts
unexceptionable, as to the draught of it, and the matter it contained, it is
easily proved that the Bishops not only lawfully* might, but in prudence and
duty ought to have acted as they did, supposing circumstances, as he himself
represents 'em.

The reason, he says, why they flag'd in their prosecution of that matter;
were, because the most prudential among 'em apprehended if the Bill had been
read, it would, by a contrary Faction, have been thrown out of the House, and
therefore advised the not reading it till a more favorable and convenient
time.

Now I Would fain know whether in this they did not act like wise and honest Men?
Ought not a positive Duty to be, in some cases, forborne or delayed, if any
notable inconvenience will, according to the most rational probability, ensue
thereon, nay hinder us from the same for the future? There are many Duties, as
every one knows, which bind semper, but not ad semper, which always oblige a
Man, but don't oblige him always to exercise 'em. Is not Prudence a Christian
Virtue? or how is the World like to be governed, if in the room thereof we set
up wild Enthusiasm? Reproof of 'em is an undoubted Duty: but will any be so
absurd to say I ought to reprove a Man which I am sure would stab me presently
if I should offer to do so? This for Illustration. But, to come nearer, Ought I
to rebuke an Elder publicly? Ought I to deal with a Prince as with another
Man? Are there not the Mollia tempora fundi, and agendi too, which every Wise
Man will observe, as the hinges on which almost all Actions run? On the whole,
we are not to cast Pearls, where they will be trampled under foot, nor to set
about the most laudable Enterprises where we have all Moral Certainty, it will
be quashed if we then do so, and as fair a probability of accomplishing it
according to our desires, if we take a more favorable opportunity for the
same. The application of all which, to the present purpose, is so plain, there
needs no more words about it.

THE END.

