SOME BREATHINGS OF LIFE, From a Naked Heart. Presented in Love to the Honest,
Upright, and Single-Hearted, That they, with me may wait to feel the imediate
Drawings, and Leadings of the Holy Spirit in all things; Or come to know that
State which the Apostle speaks of, to have the Anointing to teach them all
things, or of all things that comes from Christ, Gods Anointed; So that they
need not any man to Teach them, 1 John 2.27. With an Epistle for Peace and
Unity.

Thus has it been said by a Servant of the Lord. If Thy Presence go not with
us, carry us not from hence. And another blamed some for that They had need to
be Taught the first Principles of the Oracles of God. Not by Might, nor by
Power, but by my Spirit says the Lord of Hosts. Who art thou O Great Mountain,
before Zerubbabel Thou shall become a Plain, and he shall bring forth the Head
Stone thereof, with Shoutings, Crying Grace, Grace unto it.

Printed in the Year, 1663.

Some Breathings of Life, from a Naked Heart.
NOt to run with the Stream, nor Strive against the Flood which casts up its
Mire and Dirt (which is the same with that in France, Italy, Spain, etc.) for
it is the Nature of the Sea to cast up its Mire and Dirt; therefore to stand
still in the Arc, to abide still in the Secret of the Almighty, and so to keep
out of its reach, not to strive against it, least it cast upon thee its Mire
and Dirt; neither to run with the Stream, for it runs into the Sea that is
Bottomless. So strive not, stir not, nor provoke, but stand still, and the
Lord will dry it up. Which shall not hinder the Churches coming out of the
Wilderness, though the Dragon may cast out his Floods, but come over every
green thing, yea those Professors that have talked of Noah's Flood returning,
and abide not in the Ark, will run with it. And many Floods shall pass over
the Righteous Soul whom the Lord will Deliver, and will be as a Winter-storm;
So that its like the Floods may rise, and swell, and may prevail for a while,
but who are in the Arc will ride upon the Floods; So that there is no going
out, but to stand still, till it be abated. And there has been a time of
bringing all Home, of bringing them to their own, and there may be a time of
keeping at Home. And so every one to sit down under his own Vine, and quietly
to enjoy the Fruits of his Labors, for it has been the Lords Work to bring us
hither. And he that has labored, will now come to eat. So let Israel abide in
their Tents, and not in any thing outwardly to put forth, but as seeing the
thing inwardly in their own Life, and according to the moveings and leadings of
the Spirit of the Lord, for therein is safety, that their own life may be their
head in every thing.

And the Lord bid Noah go forth of the Arc before he went forth, after that
the Flood was abated. So that as he Commanded him in, so he Commanded him forth
again, and he was held in Subjection.

So that the man's part being kept down, any thing may be done at the
Commandment of the Lord where the Creature is held in Subjection.

If I find movings from the Spirit of the Lord, to put off any Garment, or the
whole, and see the end thereof, I may do it, otherwise it would be wisdom to
let it alone in its place.

And if it be to go to any man, or place, I may do it as I find drawings, and
there it would be safest to find leadings to it, and the hasty thing kept down,
and the Creature kept to the lowly, humble selfabasing Spirit.

And though I have an high esteem as to Meetings, yet I am not to do the thing
in my own will or time, nor any other, least it be said who required this at
your hands. So that there is no other course to come into, but that which the
Spirit of the Lord leads into daily; And not to uphold any thing because it
has been done, no farther then the Spirit of the Lord moves, or leads
thereunto at the present, Newly, for I am to serve God in Newness of Spirit;
and so is the Creature kept in a daily Subjection to the Spirit in every thing.

And so as sometimes I have said, Let Life lead in all things, and as that
leads, so to follow (or else to be still) if it be from House to House, so that
I am to Act from the Life. For the Worship of God is a weighty thing, therefore
am I to do it rightly, and truly, in the sincerity of my heart, and not
lightly, as a Costome, Tradition or formal thing, but in the strength of my
Life. And this is not to bring things out of course, or leave things at
uncertainties, to do it in the moveings and leadings of the Spirit of the Lord
daily and hourly in every thing, for who are from the feeling of that, and the
leading of that run at uncertainties.

Therefore if I go to a Meeting, I go in the moveings, or in the fear and dread
of the Lord upon my Spirit, in expectation of some thing that from the Lord
has been stirring thereunto (that both may be done in the Spirit wherein is
the unity,) or else it would not be right in him or them that has appointed
it; and it would turn to Isreal's reproach not to have the Lord going before us
in every Meeting, or thing done, to wait for his Motion or appearance, as
toward that Thing or Service, or else not to put forth in it. And as was said
by one, We are ready to hear all things that are Commanded thee of God, so say
I. And it has been upon my heart for the Preservation of the simple in this
day, and the avoiding Customariness, and Formality in any Service of God. Go
not forth but stand still, neither stir up the Souls Beloved until he please,
nor force the thing, but let it alone, until he gently leads; that People
might not loose their Expectation coming to find some appearance of the Lord,
and find carelesnesle in Meetings, Customarinesse, Formality, Deadness and
Drowsinesse, can they say this to be of the Lord, or according to the
appointment of his Spirit?

Some have been blamed for that they were grown so formal, as to know before
hand when to begin, and when to end their matter.

O that the dread of God may be upon all hearts in this day, that nothing may
be given forth or attempted, but what he appears in first (for Christ's Sheep
hear his voice, and they follow him.) And the hungry would be willing to wait
for his appearance, and many would be disappointed of their wicked intents and
purposes, as not knowing the time, which the Seed of God raised up by the power
of God fees all time in the Fathers hand or dispose; And so would Friends in
their Service be preserved, serving in the Spirit, and walking in the Spirit,
or else be still. Did Israel trust upon God, and rest wholly upon him, they
would find him their rest. And good it is to be found faithful in what they
are called of God; And so in their Callings to abide with God, and then is man
in his place, one day as well as another; for there has been a time of showing
these things unto many, and there may be a time of practizing the same, what
they have seen and that from the Lord concerning their coming out of
observation of days; and though they cannot act therein so inoffensively as
they would in respect of them without, yet to do it as inoffensively as they
can. Now who have believed do enter into rest; and he that is entered into his
rest he also has ceased from his own works, as God did from his: And such a
one his Servant shall rest as well as him, and his Cattle likewise, for a good
man is merciful to his Beast. And if any more publicly has a testimony to
bear against their day, and that from the Lord, let none be offended, but all
Israel keep in, keep cool and quiet; And that is the way to keep safe, and not
to strive to go forth that day more then another; If that there was formerly
Collection for the Saints on the first day of the week, must there needs be
meetings on that day, whether the Spirit of the Lord move or not? For as to
time I know it, from the Lord, that there is none more holy then other. For the
Seed of God being come up, sees over time, and beyond, and as it is kept in the
Dominion over things in time, and keeps open and single unto God, which is the
blessed Seed, or that in which the blessing is, and sees all time in the
Fathers hand. For feast-days, holy days, or Sabbath Days, what were they more
then Shadows of good things to come? but the Body is Christ, whose day is holy,
and his rest is Everlasting. For all Shaddows were to terminate in something,
be they what they would, Christ the end of all things in whom all Types,
Figures and Shadows end, the restorer of the Creation, the Rest that God has
prepared for his People, in whose Arm of Power the weary Soul finds rest. And
the resting in any outward Observation or Thing could not give rest to the
Soul; therefore was there a necessity of bringing in that which was more
perfect, the better hope by which we draw nigh unto God; And when that which is
perfect is come, then that which is imperfect comes to be done away.

So each thing was to be done as under the Covenant in which it was, and
according to its appointment; but the first gave place unto the second, and was
changed, then there must be also a change of the rest; For the Priesthood
being changed, there must be also a change of the things that were done under
it; A change of their offerings, which Christ the one Offering ends, and the
end of their Law by which they took their Tithes.

Christ within, the hope of Glory, the Mystery hid, but now revealed, praises
be to his Name who lives for ever, who is the Souls Bishop, who watches over,
and takes the Care of his Flock; for had his Compassions failed, we had not
been a People, whose Love has overcome my heart, therefore have I a Zeal for
him, and for his People. And it is his blessed appearance that is to be waited
for, that blesses you, the Glory of the Lord to fill his own Temple, which
appearance many have waited for. For of old they were to go up by appointment,
and do things in its Order. And we are now to receive an appointment before we
do, and to do things as under that Covenant in which we are, not according to
the Letter of a dispensation, as they that were ordered according to the Law of
the Carnal Commandment, which was to come to its end, but in newness of Spirit
to receive the Commandment new, and in all things to be ordered according to
the power of the endless Life.

For it is the New Testament to which we are come, where are new and fresh
discoveries, and leadings according to his will that we are Children of; He
made known his Will unto the Children of the first Covenant, which they were to
obey and do, and he makes knows his mind by putting his Law into our minds,
that we might serve and obey him likewise, not as they did in the oldnesse of
the Letter, but in newness of the Spirit. And this is that which we are to keep
on in the New and Living way, that leads unto the Living God, wherein is
found the Daily Bread; for that which I Received Yesterday, will not serve me
to day, nor that which I have to day will not serve me to morrow, but I must
have it fresh and new, and then it is good. So that this I find according to
the mind of the Spirit of God in me to be the time under which we are (as
New Covenant Children) to Act in newness, to walk in newness of life, mark
new, for the ^ords have an import in the very sound of the Covenants, the first
could not continue which was old and ready to vanish away, but the second is
new and everlasting, and abides for ever, and is a Covenant of life and peace
to all that stand in it, or live answerable to it.

So that this is according to what Moses Prophesied of Christ, that (...) was
to be heard in all things. And said the Minister of Christ, whatsever ye do in
word or deed do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, or in his power, that the
power may stir first, then in the name of Jesus which is the Savior, there is
safty. And so he may be called a spiritual man that does all in the spirit,
and with it and a good understanding, wherein the true worshippers worship the
Father in spirit and in truth.

And this will be a Dread among People, that they see we serve God indeed, with
Reverence and Godly Fear, not in our own Time nor Will, nor their Will, but
when he pleases or stirs, and not till then; And this is that which is
acceptable, not Customary, Formally, or by Tradition as others have done, which
the Lord has cast out before us.

And the Lord knows I am even sick with love, therefore bear with me, and
overcome with the goodness of the Lord which my soul has felt, and it is the
life of love that I breath after to see brought forth among us, and to know the
depth thereof; gifts may cease, and tongues may cease, but love abides which
is most excellent. And this when even tired and wearied in my mind, the Lord
fixed me upon his spirit of love which he has born up in me, which I prayed
the Lord and supplicated him for, as seeing a beauty in it, which the Lord will
bring his people to more and more love, general, universal, to live in it, and
bring them over all straitness and narrowness, Amen says my spirit. Which I
hope as the Lord has brought me to see it, so he will enable me to abide in it.

And as touching them who have declared among us, and do go forth, as they
stand in their places and are serviceable to the Lord in the moveing of his
spirit, to reprove sin and teach transgressors the way of God, and keep to
their first principles, walking in the light of the Lamb, it is lovely, but not
to meddle in what concerns them not, vaileing the man's part that the Lord
alone might have all the glory. For thus it was said by them who were in the
spirit of truth and of love, who is Paul, and who is Apollo, but servants by
whom ye have believed; for neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that
waters, but God that gives the increase; mark, not any thing but God: and
this farther ran through me from the spirit of the Lord, neither are they to be
as Lords over Gods heritage, but to be Examples to the flock. And the Apostle
who was not inferior to the chiefest Apostles, yet he said he was nothing; And
that the Lord might be all, and his truth all, they were content to abase
themselves, and such the Lord will (...). And that whereby I have been
preserved this day has been only in the name and power of the Lord, his arm
that has upheld me, but I see siftings, and winnowings must come, and good it
will be for many; And as the Lord has tried all other professions, so he will
try this, that they that are approved may be made manifest. And this I see,
Forms will be broken, the customary Observasion of days, and Friends preserved
as the spirit of the Lord is harkened unto and obeyed, and goes before in all
things. And that which I have come to see and feel into this day, and to have
my heart fixed, yea that I can say my heart is fixed, I can sing and rejoice,
has been through the travel of my soul, and prayers and supplications to the
Lord that hears in secret, who has had regard unto my low estate (whose mercy
indureth for ever) and to see his people in the spirit of love, and the
Imediate movings in it, and from it, indeed I should be Answered; And I hope
(it being from my very Soul that I have defired it) that I shall see it and be
satisfied. And I know he that dwells in the Love of God, dwells in a safe
place, for He that dwelle^^ in Love, dwells in God, where Storms, Tempests,
nor Pushings cannot come, nor hurt; The Creature may be hurt if he go forth, or
let his mind forth, but keeping within he is safe, the mind out of the
Creatures, or any visible thing up to the invisible God. And the Lord has
brought me to a State that I see over the Visibles, and where they are in their
place, and man standing in his place, and the Creatures used in their place in
Gods Covenant of Light are very good; So there is a necessity of perfecting
what is begun, or bringing forth that which many are yet out of, Even perfect
Love that thinks no evil, nor rejoices in Iniquity, wherein we may see one
another, and serve one another, and not be smiting without cause, not to have
the pure Life and Motions of the Spirit of Truth it self, judged by them that
are Professors thereof, because it came not forth according to their Mind,
Form, Time, or Way, even as others have done, ready to judge all out of their
own way; when as it is evident the Lords way is not as man's ways, and no man
is to have Dominion over another faith, but to be helpers of each others joy,
if they cannot help, then they are not to hinder; But the Lord will have all to
bow and be^^ (...) him, be they never so strong there is need of a continual
De^^^ance and eying him, even as the Servant of Christ of old De^^ld, without
him he could do nothing, but in him he could do all things; (...) have been
brought to see my own weakness, and my own ^^^gth, and in that could do
nothing, and when I have been weak^^ then have I been strongest, and the Lords
strength is precious, And as it has been so it is, Every man's way has been
right in his own (...), but the Lord pondereth the Steps; And in him was no
Form nor ^^linesse, nor nothing to be desired; Mark, here did not appear Form
nor Comeliness, but a man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Griefs; So who stands
in the Holy Mountain, will see and walk over all these Forms,
Outward-appearances, and Comeliness, and know the Kings Daughter that is all
glorious within.

And this would not leave any at a loss or uncertainty, to be guided and led by
the Spirit of God in all things, and if guided, then that to go before, or be
directed by it, for there is no other way whereby the Lord will carry on his
own work; Not by Might, nor by Power, but by my Spirit says the Lord; And the
Spirit is not to be tied or bound unto man's Convenience, or limited to the
narrow compass of his occasions to serve him when he has leasture, but the
Creature is to ^^ve way unto him; So that a man going without his guide may
ea^^^^ loose his way, and that imediately, to see or to hear it, otherwise he
goes but uncertainly. And where Friends have provided a (...), or others have
given up their House as to a Meeting Place, it may be made use of, when they
feel stirrings in the life, both in respect of time and place, as they see, or
are moved by the Eternal, in which they stand over all the Earth, and there
will be safety, whatsoever may come either to dye or to live, even in and
through the Eternal Spirit to offer up themselves.

And such that are Simple-hearted, and go in simplicity of their ^^arts to such
Meetings, directed or led into by the Spirit of the Lord, (...) his own
Seed-sake, them the Lord may preserve, but to do the (...) clearly in the Life,
and imediate movings of the Spirit toward (...) a thing is sure and safe, and
it would be disobedience if not answered, if required; for it is the Lord that
is to be hearked unto, and his (...) obeyed, and the Creature not to go forth
into any thing, any ^ther then that leads, but to be kept in subjection; for
if you (...) to feel the thing in your selves, and it be not hearked unto,
(...) shall go on any in a Formality or Customarinesse, out of the ime^^ate
Leadings and Guidance of the Spirit of the Lord, The thing will come over you,
and overtake you, and some will be burdened thereat, until they do declare
against it Publicly. And so walking in the unity of the Spirit, and keeping
down the man's part, then unity would be preserved and strengthened; for if the
Spirit be stopped, or quenched, then the unity is quenched, that is plain; And
this would put a stop quickly to all Customary and Formal proceedings, all to
do, and every one to do as they are moved of the Spirit by the Lord, which is
Holy, Just and True. And thus I have born forth my Testimony, as moved of the
Lord, and in Love to you all, wherein let me be Received.

William Salt.


And these two things feel me in (and therein abide with me.)

My heart fixed in the Spirit of Love, wherein I am to keep for ever, And drawn
and guided by that Spirit which way he pleases, and I passive therein, which
will never deceive any of you to abide in Love, and know the Imediate motions
of the good Spirit to guide you.

Thus it was well with Israel as they were kept by day and by night to the
Conduct of the Pillar of Fire and the Cloud, and had this in their sight
through all their Journeyings, to be kept in a continual Subjection and
Dependence upon God. And at the word of the Lord they traveled, and at the
word of the Lord they stood still, or abode in their Tents, whether two Days,
or a Month, or a Year, as the Cloud tarried or remained upon the Tabernacle,
the Children of Israel Remained still, and Journeyed not; So as this is to be
Read by each in Particular, so it is in the General; At the Commandment of the
Lord they rested in their Tents, and at the Commandment of the Lord they
Journeyed, and rose up, and sat down with Holy Breathings in their mouths.
Arise O Lord, and let thine Enemies be scattered, and return unto the many
Thousands of Israel. And the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord went before them
in their Journeyings, holding forth at that time what the Spiritual Israel were
to have, to go before them in ages to come, even him who was given for a Leader
and Commander to the People.

And what is it can help out of the Apostasy, heal any of their Backslidings,
or save any from the errors of their way, but the unerring Spirit of the Lord,
to know its Motions and Leadings.

And whereas it was said, by one speaking concerning the Raging of the Sea, and
casting up its Mire and Dirt, yet said he, We must (...) through it, yea but
the Lord must lead first, otherwise Creatures may quickly sink; and where the
Lord leads, there any are to follow, but for otherwise.

And another speaking to this effect, To heed the Power and Spirit of the Lord
which was before Storms and Tempests was; yea so to heed it, as to be guided by
it; So that this brings still unto the thing that has been spoken of, to feel
the Lord present, or to see the Living going before, if that move not then to
be still; So let all Flesh be silent before the Lord, and all fleshly
reasonings, for the Lord is risen of a Truth, whom we are to follow, and let
the sound thereof go forth to the utmost ends of the Earth.

This then in short, what the tendance of my words has been, not to appear in
any thing, but what the Spirit of the Lord moves unto directly, for had that
been still, I had been still in this matter; neither having regard to one time
or place more then another, but Spiritual, all in the Spirit to be performed,
or as that makes way, or bows the hearts of any, which is to be waited for: In
the man's day, things has been done in the man's time, and according to his
will, but in the day of the Lord, all is to be done in his time, and according
to his will, who has all times in his hand, which the Creature is to eye
diligently in this mighty day of the Lord, wherein man is wholly to be ceased
from for ever.

So to visit one another, any as they are moved, and speak one to mother, and
meet together as they are moved; for if two or three shall agree on Earth, as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in Heaven says Christ; For where two or three are gathered together
in my Name, there am I in the midst of them; And so daily to exhort one another
as they see cause, or are led thereunto by the Spirit of the Lord, where there
is any Buffettings, Temptations, or things of that kind. And where any more
generally shall assemble themselves together, and find leadings thereunto in
the Spirit of Love let them do it, even as that puts forth it self in the
thing, otherwise it were better to be still, and not to do it, because it has
been done, and others have exhorted thereunto, and so to be tied to the Letter
of a dispensation; for there is a time for all things, and to every thing there
is a Season says Solomon; there may be a time to go forth, and there may be a
time to keep still, a time to speak, and a time to be silent, or is the spirit
of the Lord to be limited about any of these things, as that he shall not have
the liberty left him, to require what, or when he pleases?

And may not some as contentedly be brought to sit in silence, or to be taught
as formerly to be Teachers of others, and may it not be (...) Convenient?

And did not the Prophet of the Lord Declare their strength was to (...) still?
and may there not be a time for sitting still now as well as then? and is not
the Creature Man and Woman to be held in subjection to the Creator? and did not
the Saints sit at his Feet, to hear the word at his Month, which is the thing
that is so desirable now, and the matter contended for to receive the Word at
his Mouth, which the Holy men of old well knew, and more desired it, then their
necessary food, yea it was sweeter to them then the Honey, or the Honey Comb.

But the Flood is come, and what shall I say, even to be still.

This then is my exhortation unto all, in the fear of God, and in Love, and as
moved thereunto by his blessed Spirit, every one as Members one of another, to
answer his place in the body ( The Wise man's eye is in his head, and sees what
he requires, and to answer his requirings, or what may be laid before one
another in meekness, and in Love, as they feel the thing in their own Life to
answer it) that there may be no drawings back, for such the Lords Soul has no
pleasure in.

And this which I have here in the beginning written, is what in time past has
risen in me from the moveings and openings of the spirit of the Lord, which I
now think meet to commacate. When I was in deep distress and sorrow of spirit
concerning the ark of our God and the cause of his truth, and something
concerning the condition of others, (when I set my face toward them) to both
which something was answered; Therefore let none proceed in a forward zeal or a
hasty rash Spirit to Judge, lest the Lord rebuke it, nor to be high-minded, but
fear.

Remember Vzza who put forth his hand, as he thought to stay the Ark, and yet
was smitten.

And with whom was he grieved, was it not with them whose Carcasses fell in the
Wilderness? who strived against his good Spirit, temped, and provoked him, and
so fell short of the promised Land? and that is not a Serving or worshipping
(for God is a Spirit and will be worshipped in Spirit and truth) to resist and
grieve his Spirit, or provoke it, or is not he to have the sole or absolute
Authority, and Preheminency over his own handy-worke; and is not every Creature
to bow unto him? if he say unto him go, is not he to do it; and if he say ^^th
the same come, is not he to obey, and so to be Subjected to his ^^^^enly will
in all things, whether it be to go, or come, or stand (...); therefore good it
will be for all the tenderhearted to eye the ^^^ings of the Lords good spirit
in all things, to look over all forms, or (...) appeareances, though sometimes
the spirit of the Lord (...) have appeared in them, yet he is not limited unto
that; therefore (...) is not to be sticked in, but to be pressing forward,
looking unto (...) that was in the beginning, Christ the Alpha and Omega, the
be^^^ing and the end, whose name is called the word of God, which (...) before
Shadows, Forms, or Visible things were; So that if the Creature be not by him
led into those, let him let them alone as things below the life, that there may
not be a striveing in any, or provoking, for that is not a serving, but the
Will subjected unto his pure, and holy, undefiled Spirit, whereby man may come
into life no live in God, and not to have a life in any outward Visible thing,
which may pass away, and perish with the useing; and so the outward thing is to
be used as if men used it not, and so will the heart be kept single and
dis-intangled to Follow the Lamb wheresoever he ^^^^deth, which all the Lambs
of Christ are needfully to mind, wherein stands their safty in this day.

My Dear Friends, something has been upon me to write unto you, which in the
Spirit of Love let me be felt and received.
FOllow Peace with all Men, and have peace one with another; This has been the
Language of the Spirit of Truth, in days past, and he that has an ear to
hear, let him hear what the Spirit ^ith unto the Churches; And this is the
Language of the same Spirit this day unto you his People, to follow peace with
all men, and Holiness, without which no man can see the Lord. Mark, without
Peace be followed with all men, no man can see God; Least there spring up any
Root of bitterness, and trouble you, and many thereby be defiled; and so they
were to follow peace, the Blessed Thing whereunto they were called, and God is
the Author of Peace, and not of Confusion, therefore the Lord keep us all out
of that that runs into Strife, for that goes into Confusion; I have found
something in several putting it self forth unto peace; and I say, Blessed are
the peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God: And doubtless
as we abide in the Power, we abide in the Peace, for it is the Gospel of Peace,
and if we abide in the Covenant, we abide in the Peace, for it is the Covenant of
Peace; and Christ says, In me ye (...) have Peace; but out of him in the
Worlds Spirit, is the Tribulation, and the Sorrow; and our fellowship is in the
Peace, and in the Power, the Gospel-Fellowship, where the Saints were Follows
together, and of the Household of Faith, all walking in the same Spirit; and
here was not any Mastering, or Lording it over one another in the
Gospel-fellowship; where they were as a Family; So did they Prophecy one by
one, and as the Lord did give forth his Gifts, so did they Minister every one
according to what they had received; and being come to the Living Thing in
themselves (the Principle of Life) in that they did go forth, and one had a
Doctrine, another a Psalm, another an Exhortation, another a Revelation, etc. 1
Cor. 14. And this was done with Acceptance, and mutual Consolation in the
Church, for the edifying of the whole, where every member was kept in its place
in the body, and all members one of another; and so in the Gospel of Christ,
which is the Power of God, as the Saints had, so they have their Fellowship
together, the Saints or Sanctified ones, Holy Men and Women, in the Power of
God; and this is according to the true Church Order, wherein all might speak
one by one, and having all Fellowship in the body, Living in the Power which
crusheth down the Enmity, wherein all comes to be Learned, Consolated, and
Edified; this is that Fellowship that stands over the World, in which the
Lambs, and Tenderhearted ones can skip and rejoice, wherein they feel strength
in the Power, which is the Gospel Fellowship, and keeps Lively.

And Youth being turned from the Darkness to the Light, and trained up in the
Living Way, and kept to the Life, Praises will be felt to arise in Families,
and Places, through which the Praise is given to the Lord, and then all Foolish
Laughter, Idle Talking, and Jesting will be avoided, as the Pure, Innocent Life
comes up, and the Power is harkened unto, wherein is the Fellowship, and in
this will you have Fellowship one with another, and every one be refreshed, and
praise the Lord.

So Young Men and Maids, Old Men and Children, all Praise the Name of the Lord,
for his Name alone is Excellent in all the Earth the Living it is that praises
him, and till this be come unto, all i^ not well; that whether we eat, or
drink, or whatsoever we do, al^ may be done to the Praise and Glory of his
Name; then all must (...) done from the Life, and in it, (and this one thing
here mentioned, I (...) not omit, for the Childrens sake, that all might become
the People of his Praise.)

And this further as to your selves, tending to the Peace and Furtherance
therein, I have to say; In the Worship, or Service unto God, mind not Jestures,
Postures, or Outward things, but the Spirit in which it is to be performed,
that all may be Spiritual, if it be in Humility, Contritenesse of Spirit, and
Brokennesse of heart, that sacrifice God will not despise; and he will keep the
Creature low, that he him self may be exalted; and the Saints exhorted to pass
the time of their Sojourning here in fear, and to work out their Salvation with
Fear and Trembling; and this is in my heart to mind you, that you following the
thing that makes for Peace, and whereby to edify one another, you will
flourish, and grow green, and the Renown will go forth as a wise and an
understanding People, that stand in the Council of God, and the God of Peace
will dwell among you, and bruise Satan under your feet; -- And so to live in
the True Unity of the Spirit, and not to quench it; nor grieve it; For if the
Spirit be quenched, then the Unity is quenched, for in that it stands, for the
bond of Peace is strengthend, the more the Spirit, and Power is united to,
wherein is the Fellowship, which I am not ashamed of, the Gospel of Christ,
which is the Power of God unto Salvation, out of which is not safety.

And this Fellowship, and Unity in the Spirit, and Power of the Lord is Strong
and Unalterable, and unless there be a going from the Power, and Spirit, it
cannot be broken, for as not any outward thing can or does make it, so neither
can it break it, which keeps down the man's part in all, or that that would
exalt self, that the Lord alone may be exalted; And it is a nearer Unity the
Lord is bringing his People into, then any outward thing can break it.

W. S.

Let this Pass through all Friends of God, Written by his Servant, Prisoner in
Rome.
DEar Sisters and Brethren, and Holy Building of God, we must be like Lambs
Suffering all things, that we may be like our Father the Shepherd; For God
Almighty suffers all things, and eases his burdened and grieved Spirit of
his Adversaries, when he will, I well know it; And therefore as Dear Children
take occasion to speak to each other in the pure bowels, and to cherish one
another, that you may be prepared and trimmed with the mighty strength, to bear
every Trial, and comfort your hearts in the Lord who will do great things,
which your patient hearts shall see in his time; Therefore wait, and pray, and
believe, and go to one another Houses, and visit one another, and especially
the Prisoners, and the Afflicted, and the Tribulated, that you may be
Consolation to them in the Name of the Lord; and kiss one another in the
Immortal, and so be joined as one in the Wedlock of the Lamb; For so am I
exceeding, dearly bound to you all, and in the simplicity dwell, which says
yea, and it is yea, and nay, and it is nay, and thee, and thou, for the Cross
is there.

And all must come to the first day, and second day, and third day, and to all
the six days, for the Kingdom of Heaven is in you; which stands not in words
but in Power, which is the seventh day of Rest, to which all must come; And so
in the truth, you stand in the Power of God, which brings forth all your words
in Subjection to the Power, and thus they are spoken in the Kingdom, in the
Pureness and Plain-heartednesse; And here they are not a tradition but the
fruits of the Power, and so are all the actions of the same nature by which God
is Gloryfied in you, and the whole world confounded before you. And as
concerning Tithes, all Friends must stand in the Power of God to Salvation,
which is the Cross of Christ, for Christ is the everlasting High Priest of
freedom, from the first Priesthood, and all the tithes and carnal Ordinances
which appertained thereunto, who by the Purchase of his Blood has he ransomed
you from them all; No man therefore ought, for the love of the things of the
world, by paying Tithes to deny the Blood of Christ, and the Lord which bought
them, least in so doing they draw fire on their own heads. And as touching the
observation of days, all must come into him which Created all days, and then
they are over them all, for God is the Lord of the whole Creation, and we know
that God cease not his labor every day, who dwells in his everlasting
Sabbath of rest, whose Soul is grieved with such as are in the observation of
days, which know not him that created them, for God feeds the Sheep, and the
Worms, and the Fishes, and the Fowls, and Children, and men, and all quick
things in the Womb, and makes the Vines, and the plants, and Corn, and
Flowers grow without respect of days, and makes the Rivers run, and the Seas
to Ebb and Flow, and the Rain falls, and the Sun shines, and the Winds blow,
and it Lightens, and Thunders, and Hailes, and the Sun, and the Moon, and the
Stars go their course without respect of days; And we know that all these are
the continual works of God, who also causes the Briars and Thorns to be
plucked up, and the unfruitful and dry Trees to be cut down, and makes them
rot as they stand in the ground, and kills the Creatures in the Sea, and in
the Earth by death, and slays men by Sword, Fire, Plagues, Famine, and by Death
without respect of days; and still God is in his Rest, and we in him do like
him, Labor all days without respect of days, which is the true Godliness to
be like God, and are in Gods Sanctified Sabbath Day of Everlasting Rest, and
the whole World sees us not but is Confounded.

And in Order to Prayer, many of the World take off their Hats, and pray
standing in the Synagogues with their heads covered, and rest in that Service;
But Christ kneeled down, and so did the Apostles, and Daniel, besides others of
the Holy men of God fell down with their faces to the ground, and prayed with
their Heads uncovered; and we read not that in a Custom they took off their
Hats or Caps; Stand you therefore in the Power of God to Salvation, which is
the Cross of Christ to all that stand in the Customs and Traditions; and ask
the World what is the difference between the fleshly Head of a Carnal Man, and
a Carnal Woman, and which of them two God does most respect? That one stands in
such an exercise with Hoods and fine Dressings, or Hat on, and the other with
Hat or Cap of; And the Answer of the Seed in them will confound them; and
hereby God Almighty is glorified in you; And therefore as you stand over the
Worlds Head, in like manner stand over all their Hats and Caps also; And if any
Friends are moved of the Lord God to Pray in the Congregation of God, falling
down with their faces to the ground, without taking off the Hat or the Shoes
let them so do in the Name, and Fear of the Lord; and if the World be
contentious, ask them, why take you off your Hats without precept, and not your
Shoes, seeing it was a precept which God Commanded Moses, saying, Take off thy
Shoes from off thy Feet, and the Seed will Answer you in secret, and so God is
Glorified, and the World Confounded.

J. P.

THe first time that any thing has been touched concerning the Ceremony of
taking off the Hat, was when J. P. was Prisoner in ROME, in the Solid and
weighty Seed of the Kingdom, not in a Light or Contentious Spirit, as may be
seen by the foregoing Paper of His; And though several has seen and felt the
thing as it was in themselves, yet it may be has not publicly declared it, or
it might not be laid upon them to Publish it; What, is it therefore to be
despised because it came from a Suffering Servant of the lord? Though in this
Case I desire to know no man after the flesh; For if I see and feel it be of
the Lord it is sufficient, for Christ is my Alpha and Omega, he who is the
Beginning and the End, the First and the Last; And who is it shall lay any
thing to the Charge of Gods Elect, It is God that Justifies, who shall
Condemn? For when I saw it, or it came to my hand to write it, I had this
Testimony for it in Spirit, That it was in the Dominion, and Authority of the
Lords own Spirit.

And this I have to say farther, if any thing be revealed to another, is not
the first to hold his Peace; For the Spirit of the Prophets is to be subject to
the Prophets, and God is not the Author of Contention and Strife but of Peace,
as in all the Churches of the Saints; And this is according to the True Church
Order, Subjection to the Spirit of the Lord in one another, and the Prophesying
one by one, that all may be Comforted, and all may be Edified; Therefore have
Salt in your selves, and Savor, and Love, whereby you may Edify one another,
for that which hurts, or destroys, is out of Gods Holy Mountain.

These Books may be Enquired for of Thomas Simmons.

OH Day of Trial, come thou art,
For to Discover every heart,
And manifest things as they be,
That all the Innocent may see,
The Man that does the Life possess,
From him that only it Profess;
Yea thou will show them who they are,
That Soared up above the Sphere,
In words, in Carriage, or in Action,
Which gave the Seed no Satisfaction;
And such before, that thou art over,
Their Nakedness thou will Discover;
Whereby some that deceived have been,
And caught by them as in a Gin,
Will be Ashamed, and sit down,
And wait within to feel their own
Eternal Gift, to guide again,
And Life to breath upon the slain;
And as these things they come to feel,
It will afresh revive their Zeal,
To stand against every thing,
That would to God dishonor bring;
And patiently the Cross to bear,
Whoever flee it, they will not dare,
Because they will see it would offend,
And bring them sorrow in the End;
The Living God who is so just,
That all that will him follow, must
Deny themselves in every thing,
And wait on him who is their King.
GEORGE FOX The Younger.

THE END

