Some THOUGHTS CONCERNING THE BETTER SECURITY OF OUR Trade and Navigation, And
Carrying on the WAR AGAINST FRANCE MORE EFFECTUALLY. Humbly Offered to
Consideration.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1695.

Some Thoughts concerning the better Security of our Trade and Navigation, and
carrying on the War against France more Effectually: Humbly Offered to
Consideration.
I Always thought it the Duty of every Man to contribute what in him lies to
the Happiness and Welfare of his Native Country, and therefore at a time when
the Nation is engaged in a Necessary and Expensive War, and struggles under
Difficulties to maintain it as it ought, many from time to time have divulged
their Notions and Apprehensions, some for raising of Money, some for the better
or more thrifty Management of sundry Particulars relating to the War; some one
thing, and some another, and whether they are in the right or wrong, I think
whilst they modestly give their Opinions, they do not deserve blame. But it
seems to me that none have yet thoroughly discovered the Malady under which we
labor, or proposed the full and proper Remedy. Perhaps in time it may, and in
order thereunto I have resolved to offer my Thoughts to the Public in the
following Discourse.

1. And First, I shall consider what, according to my Apprehension, is the true
Interest of England in general, and with respect to the present War with France
in particular. 2dly, What has been the Reason that hitherto we see no better
Effect of this War. 3dly, By what means it may be advantagiously continued, and
at length arrive to its desired Issue.
And as to the First, it is to be considered, that the strength of England, or
rather of Great Britain and Ireland, lies in the number and strength of their
Fleets at Sea, and those Fleets are always stronger or weaker in proportion to
those of our Neighbor Nations: Heretofore before Trade was driven to the East
and West Indies, the European Nations were not so Powerful and Numerous in
Ships of Force, nor was there need of it. When the Dutch fitted out but 40
Ships of War, and the French but 20, it sufficed then that England fitted out
60, or a few more; but since both the Dutch and French, as well as we, have
enlarged our Trades to the East and West Indies, more Seamen have been bred in
each Nation, and they thereby enabled to fit out greater Fleets in time of War
than formerly. The French King well considered that he could never expect any
considerable Success against England or Holland, unless he had a Fleet able to
deal with theirs; and therefore wisely for himself provided so considerable a
Navy, such as not many thought he would ever have been able to fit to Sea, viz.
100 Sail or near of Capital Ships; but still they proved too few against
England and Holland united, because they were able to send out a greater. And I
think I may confidently enough affirm, that at what time soever either of the
three Nations (for no other stand in Competition in these Seas) shall not be
able to set forth a Fleet of Ships capable to Engage the Fleets of the other
two Nations in Conjunction, that Nation must one time or other give up the
Sovereignty of the Seas, and be exposed to Invasion and Conquest, or at least
to great Disturbance and Anoyance in time of War. And because England alone (by
which I all along mean Great Britain and Ireland) is able to do this, whilst
it understands and pursues its true Interest; therefore in such case by
consequence neither Holland nor France can, but are subjected to the like
hazard and danger, when England is in Conjunction with either of those other
Nations, as it is now with Holland: And therefore it seems to me that France
might some time ago have been brought down, if proper Methods had been
prosecuted: Not that I would hereby go about to blame or censure the Conduct of
Affairs, but as all Humane Actions are subject to various Casualties and
Events, and many Difficulties occur in great Transactions, which are not easily
obviated; so it is no wonder if the same Fact has befallen this Kingdom. The
French, (...) (...) steps during this War; some by Land, but more by Sea; or
perhaps they might still have been in a better condition, and we in a worse:
And whoever shall consider well the late Revolution, the great Difficulties the
King has encountered, not only in forming and carrying on the Confederacy
abroad, but in managing the different Interests and Factions at home, may
rather think it strange to see things look with so good a face in the general
as they do. The King has done his part, all that was for him Personally to do,
to a Miracle, in carrying on the War with invincible Courage and Resolution,
and has never lost a Minutes time, or any Opportunity to Prosecute it with
Vigor, which I wish could be said of all his Subjects. But the discussing
things in order to a yet more successful Prosecution of the War, and not
Complaints, is the Province I am now engaged in, and in order to that, I may
say that. I am, and always was of Opinion, that the Parliament have been so far
from giving the King too much Money from time to time, that the first three
Years if they had given him half as much more, it would have saved the Nation a
great deal, in bringing the War sooner to a good end. And I think still that it
is better, and more for the Advantage of the Nation, to give 8 Millions a Year
than 5, provided it be well laid out, which is no difficult matter to see to. I
have often heard it said, that the Parliament have always given the King what
he asked, but the reason seems plain why the King or his Ministers ask no more,
and that is, because it comes with so much difficulty; whereas if the People
did well consider how much it is the Interest of England to bring down the
Exorbitant Power of France, they would give more freely and readily than the
King could ask. For what Security has any in England of enjoying their
Religion, their Laws, their Liberties, and Properties, whilst France has a
Fleet and Armies able to overcome us, if we were singly engaged against them,
at least they had at the beginning of this War? And how Fatal would it have
been to us, if England and France had joined together first to ruin Holland,
and then to set up an Arbitrary Power in England, as it was designed, had the
late Reign continued, and as yet the intention of some is, if they could break
the Consederacy, or take off the King, or raise a Civil War in England before
the Power of France is abated? It is true, the A Ship so called, burnt with the
rest at La Hogue.
Royal Sun of France is set, and since their Fleet has sailed by Moonlight, and
so has wandered and lost its way, and cannot yet recover it; but they hope to
see their Natural Sun rise again, and break forth, and bring a Glorious Day
along with it. Though perhaps Lewis XIV. may fall asleep in this Cloudy Night,
and (if it should happen at any time hereafter) may never wake to see it. It
lies upon us then, now to improve the Opportunity which Providence has put into
our hands. And that brings the Second thing I proposed into consideration; and
that is, Why the War goes on so heavily, and so many Difficulties attend the
Prosecution of it, and in raising Money; and that many People complain so
heavily of Losses, want of Trade, bad Money, rise of Guineys, etc. Some find
fault with the Bank, some with the Million Lottery and Annuities, and some with
borrowing Clauses: And they would be in the right, if they could propose any
other ways and means that are really better. It must be acknowledged, that by
them the Nation pays dear for Ready Money, but Ready Money must be had for the
Prosecution of the War, and bringing down the Power of France, which is the
first Interest England has at present, and such ways to that end must be taken
as can be found, till better offer.

Now, I do not find that the Cure of this Disease has been thoroughly
discovered; it has been indeed proposed how the value of Lands may be raised,
and the Interest of Money lowered, which is a way to prejudice those that have
Money at present, but does not at all enrich the Nation: For suppose 100 l. per
An. in Land be now worth 20 Years Purchase, which is 2000 l. and Interest of
Money is 5 per Cent. If Land come to 30 Years Purchase, then that Land will
sell for 3000 l. and if at the same time the Interest of Money be at 3 per
Cent. then the Gentleman who has Sold his Estate for 3000 l. makes 90 l. per
An. of his Money; whereas before if he Sold it for 2000 l at 5 per Cent.
Interest, he made 100 l. per An. which is loss to him. So that (...) I do not
see how this will help the Landed Rich or Poor only in comparison with our
Neighbors; for to that purpose Riches and Strength are all one, whilst Riches
will procure Strength. I am aware that some will say, that People are a great
part of the Strength of a Nation, which I own; and I include them in what I
call Riches, as will appear presently. And therefore it is not the raising the
Value of Lands, or lowering the Rate of Interest by Law or otherwise at once by
a kind of Hocus Pocus, or slight of hand, but the increasing the Wealth and
Stock of the Nation, which will necessarily draw along with it those good
Consequences; and that is done by these two ways, and no other: First, By
Importing more from abroad in Money or Money's worth than we send abroad.
Secondly, By a greater Production in value by the Land and the Manufacture of
the People in England, than the whole People consume in Clothing, Diet, and
all other Expenses. And it is so, and no otherwise in the Estate and Stock of
the whole Nation, as it is in the Estate and Stock of a Private Family; the
spending out of the Principal, or main Stock, lessens a man's Estate; and so
the spending or losing out of the Principal Stock of the Nation, lessens that,
and weakens the Nation, and that we have been doing all this War; and it is the
Remedy of that only which I conceive can Redress the Inconveniences complained
of, and that will help the Land and all things else; for unless you bring it to
pass, that the Land will produce more Corn, Hay, Grass, Butter, and Cheese, or
whatever it be, than it used to do; and that the said Product will Sell for the
same Price it did, or that the Country Gentleman can buy what he has occasion
for at lesser Prizes than now he does; nothing else will Advantage him. For if
you by a Law, or any other way at once (except it happens by the necessity of
Trade arising from the increase of the Stock of the Nation) lower Interest, and
raise the value of Lands, it is only an imaginary Advance, and will rob Peter
to pay Paul; that is, wrong those that have Money, to serve those whose Lands
are engaged, and at the same time, not better or increase the true or real
value of the Lands, nor increase the Stock of the Nation, which alone can
Remedy all the Evils complained of.

And having thus prepared my way, I come without scruple to declare, That it
has been the want of a proper Method in carrying on, and preserving the Foreign
Trade of the Nation, and the Losses sustained by that, which has been the true
Reason of the decay of Trade at home, the scarcity of good Money, and plenty
(...) rise of Guineys, and the great difficulty in raising Money for carrying
on the War. For if the Foreign Trade were promoted and secured as it might be,
we might easily find Money to carry on a lasting War with France, and perhaps
increase in Wealth at the same time. We have in that respect by our Situation a
great Advantage of all European Nations, with respect to the Fishery, etc. if
truly prosecuted; and by our Settlements in, and Trades to the West Indies,
have got very much the start of them, if we do not by our own Improvidence and
undue Management give away the Advantages we are possessed of; we have done a
great deal toward it in the East India Trade, which might easily be retrieved,
not only to the Nation's Honor and Advantage, but to the Adaantage and good
liking both of the Company and Interlopers, if they were in a Temper to hearken
to moderate Proposals; but it seems it is not yet the time, for I know that it
has been offered to Men considerably concerned in the Companies, to make such
Proposals as would be highly to their Advantage, and Satisfactory to the
Interlopers, and of such general Advantage, as that there is no doubt but the
Parliament would confirm: But they cared not so much as to hear or receive
them. What the Mystery is, I cannot tell, or rather I do not think fit to
publish. I hope it will not fall out so with what concerns the Nation in
general, whose Wealth and Strength, as I have said, is increased by the
increase of Foreign Trade, and the Advantages which that brings with it; and
this seems so evident, as I do not remember that I have heard any one
contradict or deny it: For it carries out all our own Product and Manufacture,
and makes England a Mart for Foreign Commodities, and imports them in greater
plenty and cheaper, and adds to the Number of our Shipping, and Navigation, and
Seamen, and brings in Foreigners into our Nation; (...) most of the Traders
have either lost their Estates, or drawn them out of Trade to lend the
Government and Employ at home, which serves a present Occasion, and would have
been a good Expedient for a War of a Year or two; but for a lasting War as this
is, the Government and the People will find it Fatal, if not timely remedied.

And in order to establish a means whereby the Foreign Trade may be increased
and secured, it must be considered, that the present War with France is not
like to a War with Holland or Spain, or other Nations; and therefore ought to
be managed after another manner: The Situation of Holland, with respect to
England, is such, that they cannot on a sudden send out any great number of
Ships of War to intercept Fleets of Merchants Ships going and coming with
Convoy, especially in the Entrance into the Channel, where our greatest Danger
is; neither can other Nations do it, not having Ports near to Friend, and
therefore in Wars with those Nations, the securest way of Trading is probably
to send out and return Trading Ships in Fleets with Convoys. But in the present
War, if other Measures be not taken, than hitherto have been, our Trade is like
to be wholly ruined, and when that is effected, the Fleet of Ships of War
cannot be long maintained. Our Island may be compared to a Garrison, which may
be distressed and starved, and by that means as well as by downright Force,
constrained to Surrender. It is to be seen therefore what the danger and
inconvenience is of carrying on our Trade with Fleets, and two or three
Convoys, as hitherto, and if it may not be made more large and secure by
another Method.

The greatest danger of losing our Ships is in and near the entrance into our
Channel, as has been too apparent, for that above three quarters of the Ships
lost since the beginning of this War, have been taken there; and the French
having so Commodious Ports, as Breast and St. Malo's, etc. to pop out and in at
any time with what number of Ships they please, it is rather to be wondered they
have not taken more of our Ships, than that they have taken so many. The
Inconvenience and danger attending our Trading in Fleets this War, I shall
represent in the following Particulars.

1. The Enemy knows the strength of our Convoys, and their times of setting out
and returning, and can more easily contrive to intercept them, as has been too
evident. 2. Many Goods laden for long Voyages are perishable, and decay whilst
the Ships wherein they are laden attend on the Convoys. 3. Greater Wages are
given to Seamen, and greater Charges in sitting out so many Ships together,
which causes excessive great Freights to be paid, to the extreme Prejudice of
Trade, for Workmen and Seamen on a Glut will have their own Price. 4. The time
taken up in attending on Convoys at home and abroad increases the Charge of the
Voyage to double what it otherwise would be. 5. Buying Goods all at a time here
makes them very dear, and coming together in a glut to the Markets abroad,
causes them to be sold cheap, whereby the Advantage that might be made by Trade
is lost. 6. Embargoes being continued most part of the Year, or Pressing of
Seamen, which is the same thing in effect, our Ships cannot then go out, and in
the mean time Foreign Ships come and carry away our Trade, and earn vast Sums
for Freight by their Ships and Seamen. 7. During the Embargoes, the fair
Merchants, who submit to the Orders of the Government, must lie still, whilst
many by Private ways and means get out Ships under various Pretenses, which can
never be prevented. 8. The Fleets to the West Indies that go out in the Winter
for the Crops, can never return with that Years Crop in time to serve His
Majesty's Royal Navy with the Seamen the following Summer. 9. Going out in
Winter, and at unseasonable times, the Ships and Cargoes are subject to great
hazards by Storms, etc. and the Ships themselves spoiled; and great Mortality
happens to Seamen by lying long abroad, as has been too fatally experienced.
For
(...) will Yearly add mightily to the Stock of the Nation, which consists in
People, Land, Houses, Money, Plate, Jewels, and all sorts of Merchandise. And
though to many this need not be explained, yet I do not think it improper for
the sake of others, to add the Explanation. For instance,

Suppose in England, Scotland, and Ireland (reckoning certain Numbers for
uncertain) there is in this Year 1695. in People 10 Millions. in Land the value
of 1 Year 10 Millions. in Houses 4 in Money 6 in Plate and Jewels 2 in Corn,
Woollen, and Home Goods 6 in Foreign Goods 2 30 Millions.

Now, if by any Accident you lose any People, or Land or Houses abate in their
Yearly Produce and Value (and not in an imaginary Value,) for the Nation was
not any thing the Richer for Guineys rising to 30 s. apiece, unless in Foreign
Nations they would have sold for 50 per Cent. more than they did before, and
brought so much overplus into England (which by the alteration of the Exchange
it did not do.) Or again, if there be less Money, Plate, Corn, etc. or Foreign
Goods, in the Year 1696. Then will the Nation be so much the poorer and weaker
next Year than it is this: And on the other hand, if any or all the things
abovementioned, wherein the Riches of the Nation consists, shall be increased,
so as that the whole amounts to more, then will the Nation be richer and
stronger. As if a man has one Year Ten Bags with each 50 l. in them, which is
together 500 l. it is not the taking out 10 l. apiece out of 5 Bags, and adding
it to the other 5 Bags to make them 60 l. each, that increases his store, but
an addition to the whole by any sort of Improvement.

It is to be considered further, that the Interest of Trade and Land are the
same, for the mutation frequently happens; the Moneyed Man to day is a Landed
Man to morrow; and the Landed Man to day becomes a Moneyed Man to morrow: Every
man according to his Sentiments of things turns and winds his Estate as he
(...) will be most Advantageous to him; and therefore if it could be supposed
that Land would come to 30 Years Purchase by any Stratagem, unless, as I have
said, the Land it self would produce more, some would Sell till money grew
scarce to Purchase, and Land plenty to Sell, and then the Scales would turn,
and it would fall again; and nothing but the increase of money in the Nation,
or of the Stock of the Nation in other things would or will lower the Interest
of money, and increase the Value of Lands: And when Money and Goods are more
plentiful, then there will be more buyers of Land, and so it will rise of
course and necessity, and consequently the Interest of money fall. And nothing
but a large Foreign Trade, especially when we are engaged in an Expensive War,
as at present, can add to the value of Land. And therefore the general state of
the Nation ought to be considered, and that will help all: For till money be
more plenty, and the Stock of the Nation increased, as it has been decreased,
you will find the Interest of money keep up in general; and it is not some few
little Devices that will effect it in the main. It is true, if I have 1000 l.
in my hands of another man's without Interest, I may lend it at 3 per Cent.
Interest, and get well by it. And the Bank, that has 8 per Cent. Interest from
the Nation, and has great Credit, may lend at 3 per Cent. And this is some
Advantage to some particular Persons, but not very considerable to the Nation
in general, it bearing no proportion to the Charges or Losses occasioned by the
War; but it must be a real plenty of Money which enforces a necessity of taking
a low Interest, because they cannot do better, which will Cure the Malady: And
this can be effected by no other means than increasing the Stock of the Nation,
and that by Foreign Trade, as has often been said. But the greatest difficulty
is, how to promote and carry on this so securely, that many may rather be
induced to continue Trade, it is Humbly Proposed,

That all Ships may be permitted to go and come when and as often as they
please, whereby the aforesaid Inconveniences in Trade will be removed, and a
far greater Trade driven, and thereby His Majesty's Customs will be much
augmented, many more Seamen bred, (for that Landmen would go out in
Summertime, and be made good Seamen against the following Year) and better
Provision made for Manning His Majesty's Fleet; and I doubt not but the
Security of the Ships so Trading might be provided for, and the before
mentioned dangers in great measure prevented by the following Method.

1. That a sufficient Number of Fourth Rate Frigates, with some Third Rate and
Fifth Rates, as occasion offers, may be appointed to Guard the Channel, and the
Entrance into it, and to Cruize off Cape Clear in Ireland: And this I conceive
may be done by 16 or 20 Frigates, two whereof Sailing continually between the
Downs and Plymouth and Falmouth, and so back again; taking under their Charge
all Merchants Ships that shall be ready to Sail with them: And 14 or more may
be constantly Cruzing from Plymouth to the Soundings and Cape Clear, 3 or 4, or
sometimes 5 in a Squadron, plying to and again in proper places by turns, that
when some must come in to recruit, the others may be in their stations, and
once a Month bringing the Ships from Kingsale that shall put in there. And by
this means the French Privateers will be frequently snapt up if they adventure
abroad, and they will soon find that it will hardly be worth their while to
come out.

2. That Ships of War may remain at the Islands in the West Indies for the
Security of the said Islands, and of Ships going to and coming from thence; and
as some Ships of War must be often coming home from thence, and others in their
room going thither, such may serve as Convoys going out, and coming home, to
such as shall desire to embrace that Opportunity. And it might not be difficult
to contrive how the Mortality of so many Seamen in the West Indies might be
prevented.

3. That some Ships of War might Cruise on the Coasts of Spain and Portugal,
and whilst we have a strong Fleet at Cadiz, or in the Streights, as we now
have, and ought always to have, and should have had sooner, it is very easy to
contrive the carrying on, and security of the Trades to Spain, Italy, and
Turkey.

(...) Trades to the Northward, it is best carried on with Convoys, because in
those Seas only small Privateers use, against whom the Convoys are a sufficient
Guard, and there we cannot be easily surprised by any great strength, as to the
Southward we may.

It is not to be expected that in this short Scheme all the Particulars should
be set forth that are necessary to the through Management of the Trade in this
manner; but if the general Notion find Entertainment, the Author is ready to
answer all Objections, and in all particular Instances that may occur, to
demonstrate that it will be Practicable, etc. with more Security to the Trader,
and less Charge to the Crown, than hitherto it has been. And then the want of
Money will be supplied, the Stock, and consequently the Strength and Riches of
the Nation increased, and without much difficulty the French Navigation may be
destroyed, on the strength whereof that Monarch has for some time past founded
his hopes of the Accomplishment of his Great Atchivements; and without which
(as the case now stands in Europe) he will always fail succeeding in great
Enterprises, unless England become again so blinded, or rather corrupted, as to
contribute to the Increase of his Naval Force and Power.

FINIS.

