SOME PROPOSALS Offered to Public Consideration, Before the Opening of
PARLIAMENT: MAY 19. 1685.
By an Affectionate Lover of his Prince and Country.
Ex Deo Rex, ex Rege Lex, ex utroque Salus.

AS without doubt Kings and Princes are then most like themselves when they
most resemble him whose Vicegerents they are; so nothing can possibly be more
worthy the Consideration, Care, and utmost Abilities of the Supreme Wisdom of
a Nation, than those Grand Concerns of True Religion and the Honor of God, the
Safety and Splendor of the Crown, together with the prosperity of the Subject.
In tendency to which good ends, these few particulars following with all
Humility are tendered to public view.

I. That an Humble Address be made to his Majesty for a gracious and general
Amnestia, to put us all into the condition of Good Subjects.

II. To promote the honor of God, in the advancement of a sound and Orthodox
Religion, of true Piety, Virtue and Loyalty, the proper effects thereof. In
settling Gods public Worship and Service, with Reverence and Respect toward
his Ministers, the Reverend Clergy: As also, That the Act for Building the
Churches in London may be continued, not only till all the Churches be built,
but also such others as shall be found necessary to supply the wants of the
large Out Parishes, that all people may conveniently attend the public worship
of the Supreme Lord.

III. To suppress Atheism, Profaneness and Debauchery, which abounds, and
grows upon us every day, and therefore calls aloud for a vigorous and severe
restraint. That therefore the good Laws in being for the suppression of
Drunkenness, Whoredom, and more especially profane Swearing and Cursing be
effectually revived, and put in execution; as also that there may be made
provision against Blasphemy, and scoffing at Religion and the sacred
Scriptures; for never yet was it known in the world, that any Nation (tho never
so barbarous) would endure their Gods to be reproached or despised.

IV. To suppress Erroneous, Hetrodox and wicked Opinions; all Faction, Schism
and Disloyalty, the great pest of the Nation, and the foundation of most of the
calamities which have fallen upon us these many years past. And to this end to
regulate Printing; To suppress all profane and seditious Books and Pamphlets
whatsoever, which corrupt and poison the minds of men; And further, to take an
effectual course to possess the people with sound, wholesome, Religious, humble,
and peaceable principles; especially by way of strict Catechizing of the Youth
of the Nation.

V. That his Majesty's occasions be freely and fully supplied, and the Kingdoms
Debts paid, as far as the present state and condition of the Nation will well
bear; that so our Gracious Sovereign may be like himself, most Honorable and
Illustrious, That the Head may stand firm in its right place, and out of the
reach of Envious and insolent attempts, and be enabled to support and defend it
self, without which the Body cannot subsist.

VI. In the next place, That the Members of the Body Politic may in their
several and respective places and stations be considered and provided for; It
being (as one has well observed) a true Maxim in the Academy of Honor, That
it is more glorious for a Prince to be King of an opulent and free people, than
of a slavish or Beggarly: In short, that the Crown may flourish and the People
be happy; whose mutual interest and welfare can never be separated.

VII. That for the further suppression of Vice, common Plays may be Regulated
and Reformed, That whatever is lascivious, wicked, or promoteth vice and sin,
may be expunged out of them; That the bold violations of the Divine Laws may
not be the subject of laughter and merriment; it being certainly the highest
degree of madness and folly for poor Mortals to laugh at that which causes the
Divine Majesty of Heaven to frown. Besides, wicked and filthy Plays imprint
strongly on the minds of men (especially young persons) more folly and sin,
than all the good Preaching in the world is able to correct in a long time. If
the Plays were therefore well Reformed, and made virtuous, they might possibly
sooner incline some persons to virtue and goodness, than good Sermons. And in
this respect our Nobility and Gentry are very much concerned, that the hopes
and supports of their Families (their greatest treasure) be not corrupted and
debauched, and thereby their Families emasculated, and subjected to Ruin. And
if this Reformation be not, I humbly conceive, That our Gentry may more safely
indulge their Children in hunting of whore-houses (a thing usual, as I have
heard, in Italy and Spain) where they possibly may learn but one vice, than in
giving them liberty to attend these Academies of not only one, but many vices.

VIII. That the Great Sufferings of poor Widows and Orphans, by the Chamber of
London, may be speedily Considered and Relieved: It being a most horrid piece
of Injustice and Oppression, which cries aloud to Heaven.

IX. To supply the defects in the Trade of the Nation; and that the people may
be honestly employed, and our Trade both at home and abroad improved and
flourish. To this end, to suppress Frauds and Cheats in Trading, and to revive
(if possible) the Credit of the Nation, the life of Trade. And to prevent those
frequent Frauds and Cheats that are among us, by breaking and turning Bankrupts
out of design, and then taking Sanctuary and Compounding their Debts. And
further, For the furtherance of Trade and Converse, as well as for the safety
of all Travelers, That the late expired Act for Repairing the Highways be
renewed for some time.

X. That the poor of the Nation may be honestly employed, And that lusty common
vagrants, with such as through Idleness become useless and burdensome to the
Commonwealth, be either forced to labor in some honest way, or else (as a
punishment of their Idleness) be Transported to our Foreign Plantations, to be
there employed, and made useful.

And when wholesome Laws (after mature deliberation) come to be Enacted, That
all possible care and diligence be used in the drawing up and penning the same.
That subtle and wicked Offenders may not be able to pick any holes in them to
creep out at, and thereby render them useless to us: And to prevent which
mischiefs I conceive it great wisdom to make much of our good Old Laws which
are Confirmed by Time and Experience, and found useful to this day and never
yet could be unravelled and made useless and insignificant by all the subtilty
of Hell. I am further induced to think also, that there may possibly be greater
need of some few good Laws to add vigor to the good Old Laws and Statutes in
being, than of multiplying our Statute Laws, which are already swelled to a
vast bulk, and without this caution may in time increase in infinitum, except
the end of the World put an end to them: And I humbly conceive that
multiplicity of Laws, may possibly in time prove a burden both to Magistrates
and Subjects; for certainly that Nation or People, which is well governed by
the fewest Laws, are the happiest: And to this purpose a late wise Statesman,
Cardinal de Richelieu, in the great Assembly of the Notables in France, in the
Reign of Lewis the Thirteenth, speaks thus: The sick sometimes dye by too many
Remedies as well as none at all: I am bound to tell you by the by, That to
establish this State in its first splendor, there is no need of many
Ordinances, but real Executions; by this means, this Assembly may close more
speedily, tho she may be perpetual for the fruit she shall produce. Few words
and many deeds will testify both the Good intentions and Judgments of them
whereof she is composed. And he concludes thus, You (says he) shall know by
the event, That his Majesty will surpass himself to procure the good of his
Kingdom. But how far this last Clause was made good to that Nation, I know not.
Nevertheless we in this Nation may assure our selves, That God has blessed us
with such a Just, Generous, and Gracious Prince, who will make it Good to us.
For whom (as in duty bound) Let us send up our Hearty and Affectionate Prayers
to Heaven, that the best of Blessings may be showred down upon him, his
Gracious Consort, and all the Royal Family; together with the High Court of
Parliament when Assembled: Unto which let all the People in this Kingdom, yea,
in the three Kingdoms, with loud Acclamation say, Amen, Amen.

LONDON, Printed by F. Leach, for Luke Meredith, at the Kings Head at the West
End of St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press, and will be speedily Published, a Book Entitled,
Sober and Serious Considerations, occasioned by the Death of his late Majesty,
King Charles the Second, of happy Memory; and the serious time of Lent
presently following. Together with a Brief Historical Account of the first
Rise, Progress, and Increase of Phanaticism in this Nation, with the dismal and
fatal consequents thereof: And now humbly tendered to public view, in tendency
to the promoting of the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom. By the same Author.
And Sold by Luke Meredith, at the Kings Head at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. Quarto. Price 6 d.


