Some Notable OBSERVATIONS UPON THE LATE SVMMONS By the Earl of Newcastle, of
the Town of MANCHESTER.

Written by a Worthy Member of the House of Commons, and appointed to be
printed.

Imprimatur

JOHN WHITE.



LONDON, Printed for EDWARD HVSBANDS, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Middle Temple, 1643. August 4.

The Earl of Newcastle Summons to MANCHESTER.
I Presume you are not Ignorant of the success it has pleased Almighty God to
give his Majesty's Army under my Command: and the great desire I have to avoid
the effusion of Christian blood, which makes me before I proceed any further
toward you, to make you offer of His Majesty's Grace and Mercy, if you will
submit your selves, lay down your arms so unjustly taken up in contempt of the
Laws of this Kingdom, and immediately return to your due Allegiance, His
Majesty is graciously pleased to authorize me to receive you into His Favor
vnd protection, which I am as willing to do, as to reduce you by force to your
Obedience if you shall refuse.

I cannot but wonder, whilst you fight against the KING and His Authority, you
should so boldly presume to proffer your selves for KING and Parliament, and
most ignominiously scandalize this Army with the title of Papists, when we
venture our Lives and fortunes for the preservation of the true Protestant
Religion, established in this Kingdom:

Be no longer deceived, for that blood that shall be shed in this Quarrel,
will assuredly fall on your own heads; I have no other end in this, but to let
you see your Errors if you please, (for my Condition is such, that I need not
court you) if not, let me receive your answer by this Messenger: And this, you
may expect to find little favor, if you force my Nature, but such as is due
to so high contemners of His Majesty's Grace and Favor now offered to you, By

W: Newcastle.
Bradford, 5. July
Some Observations upon the aforesaid SUMMONS.
THe lofty Summons of the Earl of Newcastle sent to Manchester, marches in the
steps of the summons sent by the great Assyrian Monarch to Jerusalem; Know ye
not what I and my father have done unto all the people of other Lands? and if
it conclude in the like end, it will make good that ancient truth, a high mind
goes before a fall. But withal he assumes, that his desire to save the
effusion of christian blood should be as notorious, as his Conquests; but what
other business more then the effusion of blood has that person that fights
against a just cause? and against men more righteous then he himself? against
men that desire only to keep their own; their own Religion, Liberties, and
possessions? and is it a sign of a sparing blood to put into his Army a
multitude of those men, who are the sons of that Scarlet whore, which is
drunk with the blood of the Saints? and who are Burgesses of that city,
wherein will be found the blood of all that are slain upon the earth? and yet
it seems to call the success of such a popish and scarlet Army a gift (of
favor) from Almighty God, but herein we may greatly mistake; such success is
indeed a chastisement upon those whom God does both covet and love: but to him
and his army, it may only be so much favor as to make them rods of anger,
whose end is commonly in the fire; It is the very doom of heaven, upon such a
Rod, The Lord of Hoasts shall send among his fatt ones leannes, and under his
glory shall he kindle a burning, like the burning of a fire.

But why does he look so far as heaven, to find out a God for his popish army?
for they have gods nearer at hand, even portable, manual, and eatable gods,
which they carry in their hands, or put into their pockets, or eat in their
mouths; witness that god of bread which the priests held up in their hands
before the people, and after eat with their mouths; and witness that golden
god found in the pocket of the Earl of Northampton; wherefore it had been more
suitable for the head of an idolatrous and popish army, to have imitated the
ancient Idolators the Lords of the Philistians, who when they had gotten (that
which the E: calls) success against Sampson, they gathered together to offer a
great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice, for they said, our god
has delivered Sampson our enemy into our hand, but withal let that be
remembered which follows: the house fell upon the Lords, and upon all the
people that were therein, this was the close of the success of Idolators.

And here he wanted memory or modesty to hold him from speaking of arms, taken
up in contempt of Laws, for had he but called to mind the list of his papists,
he must needs have remembered withal, and been ashamed by remembering it, that
his own army was condemned by his own words; having plainly taken up arms in
contempt of Laws: but no wonder if those that fight against the Parliament it
self, do fight against the Laws made by Parliament, the wonder lies here,
that they should be said to fight by the Kings authority that fight both
against the Parliament, and Laws made by Parliament; for if the Kings authority
be greatest in Parliament, then they fight against the Kings greatest
authority, that fight against the Parliament; as on the contrary, they fight
most for the King and his authority that fight for the Parliament wherein his
authority is most eminent.

And now he takes it unkindly that his army should be scandalized with this
truth, that it is a popish army; a truth which himself has taken so much
pains to make good with an apollogie, and it being believed from himself,
that he has a popish army, he could not well lay a greater, and more true
scandal on his army then here he has done; by his confuting a supposed one:
for he lays this ground, that papists cannot fight for the preservation of the
true Protestant Religion, which being easily believed, it will be as soon
believed (this belief being advanced by his own appologie) that Papists being
imbodyed into his army, and joining with him in the suport of one and the same
cause, this cause c^nnot be the preservation of the true Protestant Religion,
and indeed the very sound of the words, as well as the sense would carry an
absurdity in the face of it, that papists should fight for the Protestant
Religion: But from themselves also, as well as from this argument may we know
their own meaning, in their Massacres (rather then Wars) in Ireland they
professed to fight for the Catholic, (or Antichristian) cause. And in their
council here, for raising sums to maintain the late Wars against the Scots,
they professed that the War concerned them not only as Subjects, but as
Catholics; and now to make up a right popish War throughout all the three
Kingdoms, without question they fight (as the Earl himself confesses) not for
the Protestant Religion but for Popery; if they have not changed their opinions
in the War of the third Kingdom, which they professed in the War against two.

And if it be so that his popish army fights for popery against the Protestant
Religion, then let him, and his army take to themselves, the guilt of the blood
that is shed in so ungodly and unjust a quarrel; blood and Idols have been
ancient companions, and this Popish army carries the guilt of both in the
bowels of it. And it is to be believed that the great revenger will in his own
time execute judgment upon these gods, and their worshippers, and will avenge
the blood of his Servants which has been shed upon the earth.

And now he swells, because his arm (or army) of flesh is swollen into some
greatness, and in this carnal confidence he tells them that he needs not to
court them, but to take down this swelling, it may be read (if it be lawful in
a popish army to read Scripture) Woe to thee^ that go down to Aegipt (or Rome)
for help, and stay on horses, and trust in charriots, because they are many,
and in horsemen, because they are very strong: but they look not to the holy
one of Israel, neither seek the Lord. Now the Egiptians (or papists) are men
and not God, and their horses flesh, and not Spirit; when the Lord shall
stretch out his hand, both he that helps shall fall, and he that is the
helped, and they shall both fall together.

Lastly, the Summons concludes, that if they force his nature, no favor is to
be expected: not to say any thing of the nature of the soil it self, but this
certain, that if a piece of ground be forced, husbanded, and improved, by
Romish Principles, or persons, that ground will easily turn into a field of
blood, little favor is to be expected from that nature, which is animated and
actuated by the dragon, who was a murderer from the beginning; This appeared
evidently in the Powder Treason, wherein some fair natures were forced into the
bloudiest and foulest of Treasons; so a nature needs not to be forced to
cruelty by the constancy of Protestants, that is so near the leaven of Popery,
and Papists; but it were rather to be wished that his nature ^eing improved by
grace, would abhor the guilt of ^lood-shed, even the shedding of righteous men,
defen^ing themselves in a righteous cause, and so show fa^our to his own soul,
as well as to their lives; A victory being not a blessing, but a fearful
Judgment; when they that overcome by killing, are Murderers, and they that
dye, are Martyrs.

FINIS.

