Some Seasonable REMARKS Upon the Deplorable Fall OF THE EMPEROR JULIAN, With
an EPISTLE of his TO THE CITIZENS of BOSTRA.

Now made ENGLISH.

By PHILARETVS ANTHROPOPOLITA.

Caeterum intra Ecclesiam potestates necessariae non essent, nisi ut quod non
praevalent Sacerdotes efficere per Doctrinae Sermonem Potestas haec impetret
per Disciplinae terrorem. Major de Gestis Scotorum, Lib. III. Cap. XV. LONDON:
Printed for J. Gellibrand, MDCLXXXI.

Some Seasonable REMARKS Upon the deplorable Fall of the Emperor JULIAN.
HAd not our Holy Religion degenerated much from its Native goodness, and the
integrity in which our Savior Jesus and his blessed Followers left it, it
would have been indeed admirable that any once instructed in it, and much more
so excellent a person as Julian, should ever desert it. For men of wild and
extravagant tempers, and wholly unacquainted with solid Philosophy and good
reason, of which our present Age too much abounds, to be easily seduced by our
Modern Revivers of the Epicurean folly, is no more strange, than that all
Brutal Natures are prone to follow their untamed inclinations: but for a person
severely Virtuous, profoundly Speculative, admirably Learned and Eloquent, and
(which is yet more) firm and positive in the belief of a Deity, and future
life, to relinquish a Religion of so much genuine Piety, and simple innocence
as ours is, for the fond Superstitions of Heathens and gross Idolaters, would
be not only unaccountable, but above measure stupendous, did we not find the
lamentable causes of it in the debaucht Christianity of those times; I mean the
times of the two Emperors, Constantine, and Constantius; for then first our
Religion was converted into Faction, Policy, and vile Hypocrisy. Till then,
Christ's faithful Followers had learnt no other Lessons than those of Fasting,
Praying, Mortifying the Flesh, Patient and humble suffering, mutual love and
forbearance, and living in common; the greatest being not in Name, but reality
Servants to the meanest. But now having got Ambitious and Dissolute Princes of
their Party, instead of teaching them their Virtues, themselves learnt their
Vices. And now it was the voice was heard from Heaven, Poison is fallen into
the Church. But since I am fallen upon the mention of that hard and sour word
Church, I think it not amiss, nor impertinent to this place, to insert a brief
account of the ancient Discipline used among Christians, without which the
corruption and ambition of Constantines Clergy, the undoubted spawn of Popery,
can never well be discerned. Our blessed Savior Christ then having publicly
before Pontius Pilate declared his Kingdom was not of this world; and not only
so, but refused to arbitrate privately betwixt two Brothers, as being neither
Judge nor Divider among them; and having over and above this, strictly
prohibited any priority among his followers, and that not only by words, but by
wonderful Example, himself condescending to the most servile Office of washing
their feet; cannot be supposed in contradiction to all this, to have erected a
Spiritual Jurisdiction, or a Corporation of Priests, empowr'd Arbitrarily to
Enact Laws, and to force all Orders of men, if once Christians, to pay humble
and implicit Obedience to them; and this upon pain of forfeiting their whole
right to public Reputation and Humane Converse, nay Religion, and Eternal
Salvation it self.

Nor do we anywhere find in Scripture that he ever did de facto institute any
Form of Government, either by Bishops, Presbyters, or others: but of this see
the excellent Author of Irenicum, or Weaponsalve, at large. True indeed, he
once said, Dic Ecclesiae, Tell the Convention; but those are not words of
Institution, but suppose that Convention already in being, as well as the
Judgment and Council, mentioned in Matthew. 5. What then shall we say? Must he
not of necessity be supposed to have directed his Disciples to Associate, as
all other Sects of Jews did, according to the Form of Polity then in use? Yes
surely, if he was no Judge nor Divider, nor had any Earthly Kingdom. Is this my
single opinion, or does not the incomparable Grotius upon Acts 13. assert the
same in these full words: Totum regimen Ecclesiarum Christi conformatum est ad
Exemplar Synagogarum. The whole Government of Christ's Churches was shaped to
the Model of the Synagogues, or Mosaic Form of Polity. And certainly, had not
this been true, our Savior would never have predicted it as one of the
calamities his faithful followers should endure for his sake, to be Expelled
the Synagogues, but rather the contrary, to be forced to them.

What these Synagogues were, is superfluous to mention, since the Learned so
well know, that most of the Judicatures of those ancient Nations, which we have
any account of, were Consecrated Temples, intended for the management of Divine
and Humane Affairs jointly: Such were the Roman Curiae, the Athenian Areopagus,
the Delphick Temple, the Conventions of the Hebrews, and their Temple at
Jerusalem. But the Israelitick Conventions, called in Greek sometime
Synagogae, and sometime Ecclesiae, were made up of as many Freemen of their
respective Buroughs, (for so the world was anciently modeled) as at the voice
of a Crier, or the winding of a Horn, would assemble; the Town-Council called
the Presbytery or Senate, with their Chief, ever presiding. This prime man,
called in Greek Archon, Archisynagogus, or Episcopus, for so ( Judge. 9.28.)
Zebul Mayor of Shechem is styled by the Septuagint, was to superintend and
manage the Convention, and the Council called Presbyters in Greek, and in
Latin Seniores, being men of Age, Gravity, and Prudence, were to weigh and
examine matters brought before them, and to direct and advise the Commoners;
and in fine, the whole Body or (...) was to give Suffrage, and this in all
Causes whatsoever, whether Sacred or Civil, except some few, which being very
weighty, were reserved for the Cognizance of the Amphictyones of the Nation, I
mean the Seventy two wise Representatives of the Tribes, called the Synedrion,
or Grand Council, who sat in the Temple or Divine Oracle at Jerusalem; the
Priests then making no distinct State from the rest, but Voting in common with
others, whatever Figure any of them happened to make, either in the Synedrion,
or the lesser Conventions; their peculiar work being not Government, but
Sacrificing, etc. But that the Synagogues were really Civil Courts, is plain
from those many passages in the New Testament, that mention Trials in them for
Adultery and other Crimes, as also the Apostles being persecuted and whipped in
them; which certainly could not have been, if they had been mere Oratories like
our Churches. But the Jewish story of Susanna among our Apocryphal Books, puts
the controversy out of all question, which very well deserves the perusal; for
though it be not Divinely inspired, yet it gives us a distinct and clear
account of the manner of Trials in those ancient Conventions. Now that the
Jews, of which the Christians were a Sect, were so tenacious of their ancient
Rights and Form of Polity, that they kept up in all their Captivities and
Peregrinations, their Synagogues or Conventions, with the same zeal they
maintained their Religion and Rituals with, is so well known, that I need not
here tell it. But being now under the Jurisdiction of other Nations, and
deprived of their Jura Majestatis, and so of the cognizance of matters Capital
by their Laws, they could not punish in any case with Death, unless perchance
sometimes either by a particular License or Connivance from their Superiors:
To supply this necessary defect, they were forced to have recourse to Expulsion
or Banishment from their Community, with a Form of Imprecation, or Anathema,
whereby the Excommunicated was devoted to Divine Vengeance and the fury of the
Penal Demons; a Custom common to them with the Athenians and ancient Romans,
who were wont to back all such Laws as they would have to be Sacred and
Inviolable, with a dreadful Curse upon such as should presume to break them, or
should break them and yet escape public Justice. Sacratae Leges (says Festus)
sunt quibus sanctum est, qui quid adversus eas fecerit, sacer alicui Deorum
sit, cum familia pecuniaque. Laws made Sacred are such as have a Clause in
them, Ordering that whoever shall do any thing against them shall be Devoted to
some one of the Gods, with his Family and Goods. That what I have affirmed of
the Jews, is not by mere conjecture, I will produce one clear Testimony, which
our Learned Seldom quotes out of a Manuscript, in his first Book De Synedriis.
The Author is one Elias ben Moses, by Sect a Caree or Scripturist, who speaks
of Benjamin ben Moses thus; (...) that is, Rabbi Benjamin ben Moses said, That
such as had committed any foul Crime, or transgressed in any such case as might
not be punished as the Law required, in time of Captivity, was to repent and
make his Submission, with a promise of Amendment. But if he should refuse to
promise Obedience to the Divine Laws, we were to Anathematize and Excommuicate
him, as it is written, (Ezra 10.8.) His goods shall be Anathematized, and
himself Excommunicated from the Cahal, or Ecclesia. Which Text was not
understood by our Translators, nor by the Learned Grotius himself, who is in
the same error with them. And that this was put in practice by the Jews upon
the Primitive Christians, I authentically prove by the Authority of St. Justin
Martyr in his incomparable Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew. (...) (says he)
(...) (...). that is; And still you set at naught such as confide in him, and
in the Universal and Sovereign Creator that sent him, and do what you are able
to expose them; while you curse in your Synagogues those that trust in Christ.
For you have not license your selves (mark) to become our Murderers, because of
the present Powers: though as often as you could, you have not been sparing in
that too. This much I think is more than sufficient to evince the perfect
consent there was betwixt the Christians and other parties of Jews, in their
Civil, or (if you will) Ecclesiastic Polity.

But because I know it will still seem strange to most, whatever the Judaick
Polity was, that the Christian Ecclesiae should be accounted Popular, our
Episcopists holding them to have been a kind of little Monarchies, and the
Presbyterians Aristocracies, I Will subjoyn a word or two of undeniable proof.
Besides that, the Blessed Apostles, and the Holy Men of the Apostolic Age, St.
Clement, St. Polycarp, and St. Ignatius direct their Letters of Instructions,
for the most part, neither to one single person, nor yet to a stinted number of
people, but to whole Conventions: St. Paul in his first to the Corinthians,
chap. 5. expressly charges them all in full Synagogue, (...) (says he) to
deliver the incestuous person to Satan for his Correction, without once
mentioning the Clergyman, or his Keys. Nay, (which is yet more) when the whole
College of Apostles were congregated at Jerusalem, (Act. 15.) to consider the
debates at Antioch about the Mosaic Rituals, they presume not to write
infallible Letters by their own Authority, but regularly convene the People,
and then make their several Harangues to them. And ( v. 22.) the Apostles,
Presbyters, and the whole Ecclesia, or Convention, pass an order for the
drawing up of their sense into the form of an Epistle, which runs thus, ( v.
23.) The Apostles, Elders and Brethren, etc. And ( v. 25.) its Authentickness
is expressed thus, (...), We thought fit in full Convention, etc. And in fine,
( v. 28.) It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us. By this may be seen, that
in those times the Holy Ghost was not the Clergies peculiar, as it has been
thought since, especially by those of Simon's trade. I Will add the testimony of
Ignatius, in his undoubted Epistle to the Philadelphians, because he is
commonly thought a zealous Patron of the Clergy Interest. He there persuades
the Convention to elect a Deacon for their Legate, to make a Visit to the
Convention at Antioch, to which he had belonged, in these words, (...). It
becomes you as a Convention of God, to elect a Deacon to go as a Legate for
God. And then adds, (...). that is, It is no great matter, if you are but
willing to do so much for God, since your Neighboring Conventions have sent
some of them Bishops, others Presbyters and Deacons. But if none of this had
been said, it would be more than plain to every unbyassed Reader of this good
man's Epistles, that the Christian Polity was then rather faulty on the Popular
side than otherwise; since so many Conventions of Pious and Holy Men had so
great need to be instructed in their Duty of Subjection to their Bishops and
Presbyteries, which, it should seem, in those good times was almost wholly
neglected: it being, as the ancient Commentary upon the Epistle to the
Ephesians (believed to be St. Ambrose's) informs us, Omnibus inter initia
concessum and Evangelizare and Baptizare, and Scripturas in Ecclesia explanare.
Allowable for all Men at first to Preach, Baptize, and Expound the Scriptures
in the Convention. All which Tertullian, no mean Author in God's Church,
asserts (in Exhortat. ad Vxor.) to be lawful still, as to any thing of Divine
Right. Nonne and Laici Sacerdotes sumus? Scriptum est, Reges quoque nos and
Sacerdotes Deo and Patri suo fecit. Differentiam inter Ordinem and Plebem
constituit Ecclesiae Auctoritas, and honor per consessum sanctificatus. Ideo
ubi Ecclesiastici Ordinis non est consessus, and offers and tingis, and
Sacerdos es tibi solus. Sed ubi tres, Ecclesia est, licet Laica. That is, Are
not we that are Laymen Priests too? It is written, He has made us Kings and
Priests to God and his Father. The distinction betwixt the Bench of Presbyters
and the Commoners, was made only for deference and respect to those that
preside in the Convention. Wherefore where there is not a Convention-Bench thou
thy self give the Eucharist, Baptizest, and art thine own Priest. Yet where
there are three, there is a Convention, or Church, though but a Lay one.

It is most probable that the Disorders, that continually happened in these
Popular Churches, brought that Aristocracie, which St. Hierome in his Epistle
to Euagrius, and after him the pious and learned Mr. Calvin and the Modern
Presbyterians plead Prescription for, as being much more ancient than the
present Episcopacy. However, it could not keep long from devolving into the
absolute Power of Bishops, who in process of time were themselves also
swallowed up by Patriarchs, and all at last by one Demogorgon Pope. In manner
not unlike to this, the Roman Senate too (to compare great things with small)
by trampling upon the poor Plebeans, brought the Usurper Caesar, with a whole
train of Successors, upon their own heads. This second Alteration is noted, and
not without some severity, by the ancient Commentator upon the First Epistle to
Timothy, supposed to be the abovementioned St. Ambrose of Milan; Et Synagoga
(says he) and postea Ecclesia Seniores habuit, quorum sine consilio nihil
agebatur; quod qua negligentia absolverit, nescio; nisi forte Doctorum desidia,
aut magis superbia, dum soli volunt aliquid videri. That is, Both the Synagogue
first (mark the parity) and the Church after, had its Seniours, which by what
neglect it has come to be disused, I know not; unless perchance through the
sloth of Prelates, or (as I rather think) their Ambition to seem somebody
alone.

Much more I might say, if my purpose were to be large; but this much I could
not omit, to show by what steps the flock of Christ came at last to be a prey
to the Avarice and Ambition of Bishops, in the time of our unhappy Emperor
Julian; in so much that they were tamely led, or violently driven, like beasts
by Graziers, to fulfill the brutish Passions and Interests of those that managed
them.

To return to our first Discourse then, this discerning Prince soon saw their
Design was to erect in all parts of the Empire their own Mosaic or
Ecclesiastic Polity, by themselves Metamorphos'd from a Democracy into an
Absolute Tyranny: they having advanced so far already, as to procure of
Constantine the sole Jurisdiction over Christians, and leave to Assemble
themselves at Nice, to divide the Roman Provinces among themselves, and make a
new Body of Laws, called Ecclesiastical Canons, to the utter abolishing of the
Roman Laws and Government, and the great Oppression of those Gentiles whom God
had not yet enlightened with his Grace.

He saw moreover that let a Christian be never so deeply Criminal, no profane
hand must touch him; nor must he endure any other Punishment, than Confession
and Penance; and that when once Absolved, he was as innocent as the unborn
Child. Which practice of theirs in process of Time almost ruinated their
Empire; For not reflecting, that as Hebrews and a conquered People, they had
(as was above showed) been despoiled of their Jura Majestatis, and so of the
use of the Sword in cases of Blood, it never came into their minds to petition
Constantine for the Restitution of their ancient Rights; but contemplating the
perpetual practice of their Ancestors, since Christianity only, held on in
their now long-accustom'd track of Anathematizing, supposing it to have been of
the same Divine Right with their Religion; until at last, all men, good and
bad, promiscuously crowding into the Church, to be of the Religion in vogue,
they found their Government become impracticable, and thereupon were forced to
disgorge what they could not concoct, and to refund the cognizance of Capital
and other arduous matters to the old Pagan Civil Laws and Magistracy, which by
this means have been through God's Mercy continued down to our Times, where
they begin again to grow verdant and to threaten Retaliation to the usurping
Priesthood.

Add to this, that he could see no Person nor Rank exempted from the dire
Anathema Neither could he know, but that the Sovereign Prince himself might
upon a Pique, such as the disgrace of a potent Prelate, be on a sudden
Paganized, and next Assassinated even by them that had advanced him, since he
so lately saw Constans armed against his own Brother Constantius, by the Roman
Bishop and the great Athanasius, merely because the latter had been outed his
See, though as some say, for Treason, Sorcery, and Murder. And what indeed
might he not justly fear, when he saw with what bestial Rage the several
Factions the Bishops formed themselves among the people, by whom they were then
Elected, did massacre each other. If a man, as imagine it were at Alexandria,
had a Design to supplant a more potent and popular Competitor, no way so like
to ruin him, as by giving out, that he was not a right Christian, but a
corrupter of the true Faith, for that he used to read Origin and Plato,
unsanctified Authors; and then ten to one but he was knocked on the head, either
by the Rabble of the Town, or by sholes of Anthropomorphite Monks, who commonly
made what Bishops they pleased, and for a long time made a prey of the Egyptian
Kingdom, as well as of later years of our own; but now God has delivered us,
by the means of a great and generous Prince, from this fort of Egyptian
Vermin, who restored our Religion to its Primitive Candor and Ingenuity,
partly in his own Person, and partly by his Son and Daughter of Eternal Memory,
who obliged their Spiritual as well as Temporal Subjects to swear Fealty to
them, as their Ecclesiastic (since there must be that distinction) as well as
Civil Supremes.

But to return whence I diverted; I am persuaded nothing offended him so much,
as the vile Hypocrisy of the then Clergy, who besides their coining of
contrary Creeds, in the Reigns of Constantine and Constantius, and modelling
Religion by Court-Intrigues, seemed almost wholly to dispense with Morality,
placing Sanctimony not so much in a good Life, as in the strict Observance of
the Rituals and the Symbolical Representations of our Religion; such as
Baptism, the Eucharist, Chrism, but above all in submitting to the Formalities
of Confession and Penance, upon which the worst of offenses were too easily
remitted. What flesh could bear to hear the Murderers of ones Father, Uncle,
two Brothers, six Cousingermans, harangued to Heaven in Pulpits, as very holy
and good men, because (forsooth) absolved by their own Friends the Priests? And
I the rather suspect this to have been the principal Cause of his Tragical
Apostasy, because I do not find his Satyr any where so truculent, as upon this
occasion. In the end of his Caesar's we find his Uncle Constantine conducted by
the Goddess Effeminacy to her Sister Debauchery, where he finds his Son
Constantius making Proclamation as follows; (...). These words, though the
Learned Loyolite Petavius durst not translate to his Catholic Friends, I may
to pious Protestants without the least offense, since they derive not their
Religion from Constantine's Bishops, but from Christ immediately. Ho! whosoever
is either Sodomite, Murderer, Rogue or Villain, let him dread nothing but
repair hither, with this water I Will make him clean in a trice: And if he shall
happen (as humane Nature is frail) to repeat the same Crimes, if he will but
thump his breast, and box his noddle, I Will warrant him as innocent as the Child
unborn. This was the vengeance Julian took for the Barbarous Murders committed
upon almost his whole Family and Blood.

These particulars I thought fit to recount, omitting many others, such as the
discountenancing and persecuting men of honest and Primitive Principles, free
Learning and sound Philosophy, because above their Emulation; and paying devout
Visits to the Bones of dead Friars, calling them Holy Relics, and suchlike.
But that I may not be thought to obtrude my own Sentiments for Julian's, I will
adventure to Translate an Epistle of his to the Citizens of Bostra, who had
been in some disorders, by reason, as it should seem, of a Toleration allowed
by Julian to the yet unconverted Heathens of that Town.

JULIAN to the BOSTRENS.
I Thought verily the Galilaean Prelates would have accounted themselves better
obliged by me, than they were by my Predecessor. Since in his time many of
them Suffered Exile, Persecution and Imprisonment; nay whole Corporations of
them they term Heretics, were put to the Sword: Insomuch that at Samosata,
Cyzicum, Paphlagonia, Bithynia, Galatia and many other Countries, whole Towns
were laid level with the Earth. The clean contrary to which has been in my
time. For such as had been Exiled I called home, and to such as had been
Proscribed, I restored their own entire. But to that pitch of bestial Outrage
are they arrived, that since they may not still act the Tyrants, nor as men
above the control of Laws, perpetrate what they did formerly, not only upon
us, that reverence the Gods, but upon one another too; they leave no stone
unturned, and have the impudence to raise Tumults and Insurrections among the
people; practicing neither Piety to the Gods, nor Obedience to our Laws, though
so gentle and humane to them. Wherefore we will have none of them haled to our
Altars, but contrariwise do hereby straightly charge them, that if any of them
shall hereafter of his free mind desire to participate with us in our
Religious Rites, that he first offer Expiatory Sacrifice, and propitiate the
averting Deities. So far are we from being fond of their communion, that it
cannot so much as once enter into us, that any persons so impious as they, can
be at all qualified to participate of our holy Sacrifices, before he has
purged his Mind by supplicating the Gods, and his Body by the usual
Purgations. To me it is plain that the People, by the seduction of those they
call Clergy, do raise these stirs, and all because they are restrained their
former Excesses. For having once enjoyed a Tyranny of their own, they cannot be
contented with Impunity for their past Crimes, but still thirst for their
former Domination; and because they may not play the Judges, nor make peoples
Wills, and possess themselves of other men's Patrimonies, and so get all into
their own clutches, they leave no base nor unlawful design unattempted; but as
the Saying is, Pile fire upon fire; and are so daring as to add to their
former Villainies fresh ones, much greater than them, enraging the people, to
create Disorders. Wherefore I thought fit by this public Declaration to
forewarn all good people, that they tumultuate not with their Clergy, nor be
persuaded by them to take up stones, nor to oppose their Superiors. Let them
congregate with them as long as they shall think good, and say what Prayers
they shall appoint them, so it be for themselves only. But if they shall go
about to Preach them into Rebellion, let them give ear to them at their utmost
peril. I the rather give this warning unto the good Citizens of Bostra, because
Bishop Titus and his Clergy, to purge themselves, have impeached them; saying,
That they had indeed done their utmost to qualify them, but that they were
ungovernable. I have therefore specified in this my Declaration the words the
Bishop had the face to insert into his Defense; Though the Christians (says
he) were not inferior to the Greeks in number, yet I did my best to pacify
them. These are your Bishops very words of you. Mark, I pray you, how he
imputes your quietness to himself, not to you. You are, if he say true,
restrained, not by your own good Inclinations, but by his persuasions. Expel
him your City as your common Accuser. You Laymen live in peace one with
another, and let none of you act either Opposition to the Government, or
Injustice to your Neighbors. Neither do you, abused and mistaken people, offer
any wrong to those that lawfully and truly serve the Gods according to ancient
Custom; nor do you, the true Worshippers of the Gods, either molest the
Families or ravage the Goods of those that are misled through Simplicity and
Ignorance. Men ought to be brought over by Reason and Persuasion, and not by
ill Usage, Blows, or Stripes. I again and again strictly charge all such as are
Followers of true Piety, no wise to injure, affront or abuse the Galilaean
Laity. For such as act erroneously in greatest matters, are rather objects of
Commiseration than Hatred. Now as Piety is the best of Goods, so is Impiety the
worst of Ills. And such as relinquish the Immortal Gods for the Bones and
Relics of dead men, are sufficiently punished by the exchange they make. We
ever compassionate persons involved in Calamities, as we congratulate those
whom the Gods have delivered.

Dat. Antioch. Aug. 1.
The Epilogue.
ALL pious Christians will, I know, read the Impieties of this unfortunate
Apostate and Enemy of our true Faith, with just and due abhorrence; but they
will withal, I am persuaded, admire to find the Execrable Plots and Villainous
Intrigues of the Roman Ecclesiastics and their Dependents (not to charge one
Old Man with the common blame) so long since either truly exemplified or at
least sagaciously predicted, and that by a great Monarch of the greatest Empire
the Sun has yet seen: And not only these, but the intemperate and feeble
Passions also of the otherwise good men of our Times, who while they pretend to
instruct us, do themselves under the pretext either of Government on the one
hand, or of Conscience on the other, so shamefully violate that grand and once
indispensable Precept of Charity, delivered them and us by our Savior Christ.
As if the Contest were not so much who should be most like to him, or most
conformable to the Divine Precepts delivered by him, as who has most right to
abuse, Burlesque and expose the rest; and that person were most happy, who
could procure a Privilege or Patent from God or Man for so doing. Let such men
read the Epistle above, and blush at the equal candor and impartial Charity of
a Heathen, and for the future study to recover the Reputation of decayed
Christianity by better cultivating its Essentials, Piety, Loyalty, Charity,
Sobriety and mutual Forbearance. In fine, however Clergy differ in smaller
points, such as School Subtleties, Rituals, Jurisdiction over us, Humor or
Interest, let not the honest Laity intermeddle, much less espouse their
Quarrels, unless they shall desire them, as in times of Primitive and
Impolitick Christianity, to give their Suffrage among them.

Irenicum Page 398. Representing the Judgments of our first Reformers,
concerning Ecclesiastic Polity.
SOon after were called together by the Kings special order, the former select
Assembly at Windsor-Castle, where met (as far as I can guess by the several
Papers delivered in by every one of them singly, and subscribed with their own
hands, all which I have perused) these following persons, Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, Edward Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Rochester, Edmund Bishop
of London, Robert Bishop of Carlisle, Dr. George Day, Dr. Thomas Robertson, Dr.
J. Redmayne, Dr. Edward Leighton, Dr. Simon Matthew, Dr. William Tresham, Dr.
Richard Cozen, Dr. Edgeworth, Dr. Owen Oglethorp, Dr. Thyrliby. These all gave
in their several Resolutions in Papers, to the Questions propounded, with their
Names subscribed, (a far more prudent way than the confusion of verbal and
tedious Disputes) all whose judgments are accurately summed up, and set down by
the Archbishop of Canterbury himself. Their Resolutions contain distinct
Answers to several sorts of Questions propounded to them. The first set
contained several Questions about the Mass, about the Instituting, Receiving,
Nature, Celebration of it; and whether in the Mass it be convenient to use such
Speech as the people may understand; whether the whole were fit to be
Translated, or only some part of it; with several other Questions of the same
nature. The second set is more pertinent to our purpose, wherein are Seventeen
Questions proposed to be resolved; Ten of them belong to the number of
Sacraments, the other Seven concern Church Government. The Questions are these.

Q. 9. Whether the Apostles lacking a higher power, as in not having a
Christian King, among them, made Bishops by that necessity, or by Authority
given them of God?

10. Whether Bishops or Priests were first; and if the Priests were first, then
the Priest made the Bishop?

11. Whether a Bishop has Authority to make a Priest by the Scripture or no;
and whether any other but only a Bishop may make a Priest?

12. Whether in the New Testament be required any Consecration of any Bishop
and Priest, or only appointing to the Office be sufficient?

13. Whether (if it fortuned a Prince Christen learned, to Conquer certain
Dominions of Infidels, having none but the Temporal Learned men with him) it be
defended by Gods Laws, that he and they should Preach and Teach the Word of God
there or no, and also make and Constitute Priests or no?

14. Whether it be forfended by Gods Law, that if it so fortuned that all the
Bishops and Priests were dead, and that the word of God should be there
unpreached, the Sacrament of Baptism and others unministred, that the King of
that Region should make Bishops and Priests to supply the same or no?

16. Whether a Bishop or a Priest may Excommunicate, and for what Crimes, and
whether they only may Excommunicate by Gods Law?

These are the Questions, to which the Answers are severally returned in
distinct Papers, all of them bound together in a large Volume by Archbishop
Cranmer, and every one subscribed their Names, and some their Seals to the
Papers delivered in. It would be too tedious a work to set down their several
Opinions at large; only for the deserved reverence all bear to the name and
memory of that most worthy Prelate and glorious Martyr, Archbishop Cranmer; I
shall set down his Answer distinctly to every one of those Questions, and the
Answers of some others to the more material Questions to our purpose.

To the Ninth Qu. All Christian Princes have committed unto them immediately of
God, the whole cure of all their Subjects, as well concerning the
administration of Gods word for the cure of Souls, as concerning the
ministration of things Political, and civil governance.

And in both these Ministrations, they must have sundry Ministers under them to
supply that which is appointed to their several Offices.

The Civil Ministers under the Kings Majesty in this Realm of England, be those
whom it shall please his Highness for the time to put in Authority under him;
as for example, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord great Master, Lord
Privy Seal, Lord Admiral, Mayors, Sheriffs, etc.

The Ministers of Gods word under his Majesty, be the Bishops, Parsons, Vicars,
and such other Priests, as be appointed by his Highness to that Ministration;
as for example, the Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Duresme, the Bishop of
Winchester, the Parson of Wynwick, etc.

All the said Officers and Ministers, as well of the one sort as the other, be
appointed, assigned, and elected in every place by the Laws and Orders of Kings
and Princes.

In the admission of many of these Officers, be diverse comely Ceremonies and
Solemnities used, which be not of necessity, but only for a good Order and
seemly Fashion. For if such Offices and Ministrations were committed without
such Solemnity, they were nevertheless truly committed.

And there is no more promise of God, that Grace is given in the committing of
the Ecclesiastical Office, than it is in the committing of the Civil. In the
Apostles time, when there were no Christian Princes by whose Authority
Ministers of Gods Word might be appointed, nor Sins by the Sword corrected;
there was no remedy then for the correction of Vice, or appointing of
Ministers, but only the consent of Christian Multitude among themselves, by an
uniform Consent, to follow the Advice and Persuasion of such persons, whom God
had most endued with the Spirit of Wisdom and Counsel. And at that time,
forasmuch as Christian people (mark) had no Sword nor Governor among them,
they were constrained of necessity to take such Curates and Priests, as either
they knew themselves to be meet thereunto, or else as were commended unto them
by others that were so replete with the Spirit of God, with such knowledge in
the profession of Christ, such wisdom, such conversation and counsel, that they
ought even of very Conscience to give credit unto them, and to except such as
by them were presented. And so sometimes the Apostles, and others unto whom God
had given abundantly his Spirit, sent or appointed Ministers of Gods word;
sometime the people did choose such as they thought meet thereunto, and when
they were appointed or sent by the Apostles or others, the people of their own
voluntary will with thanks did accept them; not for the Supremacy, Imperie or
Dominion, that the Apostles had over them, to command as their Princes or
Masters, but as good people (honestly said) ready to obey the advice of good
Counselors, and to accept any thing that was necessary for their edification
and benefit.

To Qu. 10. The Bishops and Priests were at one time, and were not two things,
but both one Office in the beginning of Christ's Religion.

11. A Bishop may make a Priest by the Scriptures, and so may Princes and
Governors also, and that by the Authority of God committed them, and the
People also by their Election. For as we read that Bishops have done it, so
Christian Emperors and Princes have done it. And the People (mark this) before
Christian Princes were, commonly did elect their Bishops and Priests.

12. In the New Testament, he that is appointed to be a Bishop or a Priest,
needs no Consecration by the Scripture; for Election or appointing thereto is
sufficient.

13. It is not against Gods Law, but contrary they ought in deed so to do; and
there be Histories that witness, that some Christian Princes and other Laymen
unconsecrate have done the same.

14. It is not forbidden by Gods Law.

15. A Bishop or a Priest, by the Scripture, is neither commanded nor forbidden
to Excommunicate. But where the Laws of any Region give him Authority to
Excommunicate, there they ought to use the same, in such Crimes as the Laws
have such Authority in. And where the Laws of the Region forbid them, there
they have no Authority at all. And they that be no Priests may also
Excommunicate, if the Law allow thereunto.

Thus far that excellent person, in whose Judgment nothing is more clear, than
his ascribing the particular Form of Government in the Church to the
determination of the Supreme Magistrate. This Judgment of his is thus
subscribed by him with his own hand.

T. Cantuariens. This is mine Opinion and Sentence at this present, which I do
not temerariously define, but do remit the judgment thereof wholly to your
Majesty.

Which I have exactly transcribed out of the Original, and have observed
generally the Form of Writing at that time used. In the same M. S. it appears,
that the Bishop of St. Asaph, Thyrleby, Redman and Cox, were all of the same
Opinion with the Archbishop, that at first Bishops and Presbyters were the
same; and the two later expressly cite the Opinion of Jerome with approbation.
Thus we see by the Testimony chiefly of him, who was instrumental in our
Reformation, that he owned not Episcopacy as a distinct Order from Presbytery
of Divine Right; but only as a prudent Constitution of the Civil Magistrate,
for the better Governing the Church.

Thus far the worthy Author of Irenicum, to which I subscribe and conclude.

FINIS.

