SOME QUERIES Concerning the DISBANDING OF THE ARMY: Humbly offered to Public
Consideration.

Which may serve for an Answer to Mr. A, B, C, D, E, F, G's Argument.

Printed in the Year School.

IN putting any Nation in a Posture of Defense, Men must consider the Power of
its Neighbors, especially those who are most to be feared; and that, instead
of being Friends, they may become Enemies, notwithstanding Treaties to provide
for a Perpetual Peace; for so all Treaties of Peace are called, though of late
they have been found but of a very short Continuance; and that they will be our
Enemies when ever there is any Advantage to be got by it, is certain, according
to the Maxims of the World. This is the Foundation of the following Queries,
and is (I think) an undeniable Postulatum; some of them have not been urged so
expressly, and so home to the Point, as they might have been, (which would give
them a much plainer Force and Evidence) for fear of writing any thing which
might give Offense either one way or the other; but there is enough said to lead
the Understanding and Impartial Reader into what may be wanting.

QUERIES concerning the Disbanding of the Army, etc.
1. WHether it is not as much the Interest of a Powerful Neighbor (both for the
Preservation of that Monarchy in the formidable Greatness it is at present, and
for the Propagation of the pretended Catholic Faith,) to endeavor to subdue
England by the Re-establishment of the late King James, now in time of Peace,
as it was during the late War?

2. Whether HE be not more able to do at present in Peace, ^han he was during
the War; that he has no Diversion abroad for his Forces, and that consequently
he can bend them all upon us?

3. How long the Treaties of the Pyrenees, Aix la Chapelle and Nim guen, and
the 20 years Truce concluded at Ratisbone after the taking of Luxembourg, have
lasted? And whether it is not so much the Expresness of Articles and Conditions
that makes a Peace lasting and durable, as the putting our selves in such a
Posture of Defense, as to give no Advantage to those who would be willing to
break it?

4. Whether it is not fit to consider, in the present Juncture of our Affairs,
the Case between Spain and Portugal after the Pyrenean Treaty? And whether, if
we do not look to our selves, it may not become our own Case? For what has
been, may be again?

5. Whether HE being at Peace with the rest of Europe, and in a Condition to
bend all his Forces upon us both by Land and Sea, and his Fleet being in the
good Condition it is at present, we can put our selves effectually in a Posture
of Defense without Landforces?

6. Whether if HE Arms at once at Dunkirk, Breast, and the Hogue, (which Place,
as it is reported, Monsieur de Vauban has been to visit, in order to fortify it
and make it a Royal Harbor,) our Fleet can hinder his Forces from coming upon
us from every one or any one of these Places?

7. Whether we have not found HIM very secret and expedite in his Designs? And
whether HE has not his Seamen more at command than we have ours? And
consequently, whether HE may not put out all his Fleet, or a competent
Squadron, in less time than we can?

8. Whether we may not be invaded during the vacancy of a Parliament, (which of
course must be dissolved every three years, and this the last year of this
present Parliament,) when His Majesty can have no Funds ready for the Raising,
Clothing, etc. of an Army, nor even for the putting out of our Fleet soon
enough for our Defense? And whether the Prince of Conti's present Pretensions
upon Poland will not give our Neighbors a fair and plausible Pretext to embark
Landforces the very next Summer?

From the Premises, I ask Mr. A, B, C, D, E, F, G, 1. Whether the present
Government, our Religion, Laws, Liberties, etc. considering our present
Circumstances, be not in an evident Danger of being Invaded, or of an Attempt
toward it without Landforces for our Defense? And whether if HE, or the late
King, ever land in England with an Army, we shall not be Conquered, without one
to oppose them? And whether, under such Circumstances, we are not in a greater
Danger of losing our Liberty of Parliaments, and Rights, Privileges, etc. than
in having a sufficient Number of Landforces for our Defense? 2. Whether of two
Evils the least, and the least likely to happen, is not to be chosen, when we
must of necessity expose our selves to one or the other? And whether it is not
more certain, considering all things, that HE will Invade us, or attempt to
Invade us, if we have no Landforces for our Defense, than that the Landforces
we may provide for that purpose will Invade our Privileges and Liberties? 3.
Whether Salus Populi, or the public Safety of a People, be not the Fundamental
Law of ours, and of all Governments? And, if we are in danger of being invaded
by our Neighbors, and if invaded, of being conquered by them, unless we have
an Army as well as a Fleet for our Defense; whether it is then reasonable, just
or prudent to object, That it is inconsistent with the Nature and Laws of a free
Government to have an Army in time of Peace? 4. Whether, during this Peace, we
can compound with our Neighbors, that whenever they attempt to invade us, they
shall only bring their Arrier-ban along with them? If not, 5. Whether the
Militia, (which was at first a very useful Institution when there were hardly
any Standing Regular Troops in the World, and which may be still useful against
a sudden rising of Irregular Forces,) can ever be made Defensible against
Regular, Veteran, Well-disciplined Troops, if they land upon us? Or whether any
Person, that knows what Armies are or can do, be of this Opinion? 6. Whether if
the Militia can be made Serviceable, to this effect, it will not be an
incomparably greater Charge and Burden to the Nation, than a sufficient Number
of Landforces, which may be maintained for our Defense? 7. Whether the
proposing to make the Militia Serviceable, be not an acknowledging, that it is
at present Unserviceable for our Defense? And if so, then whether it is safe
(considering the present Juncture of Affairs) to disarm, at least till it be
made Serviceable? 8. Whether if the Militia can be made Serviceable for our
effectual Defense, if invaded, and if Men will go to the Charges mentioned to
make it so, this can be done without subjecting the Militia to Military
Discipline and Orders? And whether this can be done without intrusting the King
with more Military Power than our Author desires to see him have, or than he
could have with only a competent Number of Disciplined Regular Forces? 9.
Whether in all other respects 'twill not be worse for the Country to have the
Militia up in every County so often as must then be required, besides the
Regular Exercising of every private Company or Troop, (without which it cannot
be imagined to make it Serviceable, if with it,) than to have a sufficient
Number of Regular Old Troops under such Regulations as may be established in
Parliament? 10. Whether Landforces raised and maintained by Parliamentary
Funds, and increased, diminished, or continued every Session, according as a
present Conjuncture of Affairs in Christendom shall then (or from time to time
may) require, can be called A Standing Army, and inconsistent with the Nature
and Laws of A Free Government? 11. Whether the Horse, as may be thought
convenient for our Defense, (in the manner now specified) may not, whilst our
Neighbors are quiet, be employed for the Guard and Security of Highways, and
consequently for the Ease and Encouragement of our Inland Trade? 12. Whether
the Foot may not then be employed in the Fortifying of our Seacoasts, in the
repairing of Highways, and other public useful Works, with a small addition
then to their Pay; which Works cannot be done otherwise without a vast Expense;
and not in the laudable Occupations our Author is pleased to compliment the
Army with. 13. Whether the Parliament may not find Methods for the keeping of
Land Forces necessary for our Defense, so as to be no Burden to Inns, or any
other public Houses, unless upon Marches? 14. Whether, if we have a great
Fleet at Sea, (as we must of necessity without Land Forces) it can effectually
shelter us from an Invasion by our Neighbors from any of their Seaports
whatsoever, notwithstanding they should Arm at once at D -- k, in the Channel,
and Western Ocean. 15. Whether we can keep such a Fleet without Pressing
Seamen, and forcing them out of Merchant Ships to Man it? 16. Whether this can
be done without bringing a great prejudice to the Trade and Commerce of the
Nation, and consequently increasing the Trade and Wealth of our Neighbors? 17.
Whether this will not be a fair and just pretext for HIM to bring the main of
his Forces upon his Frontier Seacoasts toward England, and consequently of
projecting and effecting our Invasion with more Ease and Secrecy? And whether
we can have great Fleets at Sea without giving a Jealousy to those who will
only seek for an opportunity to break with us? 18. Whether the Admiralty may
not prove as bad in time of Peace as our Author supposes it (I hope
injuriously) to have been in time of War? Whether there may not happen
Treachery, besides many Accidents of Sea, Wind and Weather, (which it is
reasonable to expect and provide against) which may spoil all the Precautions
that can be taken in relation to our Sea Defense? And whether His Majesty did
not come clear from the Maese to Torbay, notwithstanding that my Lord
Dartmouth's Fleet was then in a Readiness, which is much a greater distance
than HE has to come upon us? 19. Whether these Dangers, to which we must expose
our selves without an Army, may not cause Fears and Jealousies among the
trading part of the Nation, and the People in general, who thereupon may be
apprehensive of an Invasion? Which consequently may tend to the crying down the
public Credit of the Government, and thus bring a general Loss and Detriment
upon all Trade and Trading.


In Relation to the Army I ask Mr. A, B, C, D, E, F, G.

1. Whether, as it is necessary, notwithstanding the Peace, (considering the
present Conjuncture of Affairs,) to provide for our Defense, we are not in a
better posture of Defense with an Army than we can be without one? and if so,
then consequently, whether a competent Army for our Defense will not be a means
to make the Peace more lasting and durable? And whether from thence we may not
expect a better support from Allies abroad, against the exorbitant Power of
HIM? 2. Whether the having no Army for our Defense may not expose His Majesty's
Person to the Attempts of Wicked Men, who have already taken hold of such a
Conjuncture to put such a horrible Design on Foot, when we had but few Land
Forces in England, and this without any regard to the greatness of our Fleet
then at home? 3. Whether the Army has not been very Instrumental in procuring
to us the present Peaceable Enjoyment of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, by
the Glorious Reduction of Ireland; and in the whole course of the War in
Flanders, where they have not only put a stop to the French King's Carier, but
taken one of the most impregnable Places of Europe; and where, in other Wars,
without us, his Progresses went on like a Flood and an Inundation? 4. Whether
this be the only Service of this kind performed by our Land Forces for the
security of the Protestant Religion, and of the Rights and Privileges of the
People of England? But may be our Author owes them no thanks for some of these
Services, and it is hard to know, whether for the Services of 1660. or those of
1688. 5. Whether the Army has not for the two years last past, not to mention
other times, served the King and Government (notwithstanding the great
Necessities to which all the Officers have been reduced among Strangers for
want of Pay) with an inviolable Fidelity and Constancy? Of which Fidelity and
Constancy, His Majesty has given a Royal and most solemn Testimony and
Acknowledgement in His most Gracious Speech at the opening of the last Sessions
of Parliament. 6. Whether our Author does believe in his Conscience, or any Man
in his Wits can believe, that this Army (if kept in Pay for our Defense) will
bring in the late King, as he extravagantly advances it in his Argument? 7.
Whether His Majesty in the whole Course of His Life has acted like a Man of
Arbitrary Principles? Whether on the contrary, He has not refused the
Sovereignty of a Powerful Republic, when (may be) he had a fair opportunity at
home, but certainly the offer of a Powerful Assistance from abroad, and that
even a whole Province had freely chose him for their Prince? 8. Whether such a
King can make any other use of such an Army as may be necessary for our
Defense, than for the Safety and Protection of His People? Or if he would,
Whether 'twould be safe, or even possible for him to attempt it, considering
the present Conjuncture of Affairs both at home and abroad? 9. Whether,
Considering the late King James, and the pretended Prince of Wales after him,
's Claim to the Crown of England, and their Support from Abroad upon a
favorable occasion, it be even feasible, for an Army raised for our Defense,
to offer any Violence to our Rights and Liberties under the present Government,
without bringing manifest Ruin upon it and themselves too? From whence I offer,
by way of Conclusion, to those who may be given to change amongst us, That no
Change can happen in England (arguing from Human Probabilities, according as
Affairs are at present in Europe, and likely to continue for many yeats) from
the present Government, but for Tyranny and Popery. 10. Whether the Land Forces
we have had Quartered in England during this War, have answered the Bugbear
Character given (...) a Standing Army by our Author? Whether on the contrary,
they have not behaved themselves with all Submission and Obedience to the Laws,
and Honor and Respect and Zeal for the Constitution of Parliaments? And
whether we had not in the year 1696. above 17000 Men Quartered in England
besides Officers, and at other times more or less? Whether the Troops Quartered
in England during the late War, have endeavored in the least to Bias or offer
any manner of Violence to the Freedom of Elections? And whether, considering
what has been said in the precedent Query, it be not more difficult for the
Army to offer such a Violence now, than during the late War? For France would
always profit of those Distractions which such Attempts would certainly cause
in England. 11. Whether, upon Cashiering of the Army (which has gained so much
Honor and Credit to the English Nation abroad, where they have passed for the
bravest and the finest Troops in the World) we can propose to our selves to
have such another at any time, if threatened with an Invasion, at a month or
two's warning at the most; or even, one then fit for our Service? 12. Whether
this will not be a Temptation to good and serviceable Officers and Soldiers
(unless their Zeal and Fidelity to the King and Government carries it against
their Interest) to go where they may find Rewards and Advancements suitable to
their Profession; and whether 'twill not make Officers in another War, careless
and backward in our Service to prolong a War? For the Experience of near forty
years last past tells us, That Treaties have not been of a long continuance.
13. Whether 'twill not be the Interest of our Neighbors to Invite, by good
Rewards and Encouragements, our best Cashiered Officers and Soldiers? and if it
is their Interest, Whether they will not do it? 14. Whether, considering this,
and the late King's present Forces They are his, if his upon any Occasion.
, and that our Neighbors Ships may assist him under our own Colors, we do not
run a Risque of being Invaded and Conquered, and Popery and Tyranny introduced
by our own selves, if we have not a competent Army for our Defense? Lastly, I
shall ask Mr. A, B, C, D, E, F, G, in the gross of his Book, Whether all the
Jacobites of the Land, or any others who may wish for, or imagine the
alteration of the present Government, be not of his Opinion in this Point? But
God forbid I should say, that all those who are of his Opinion are such
Persons; no doubt a great many good Men, and well-meaning Persons are of his
mind, and who, I hope, (when they are sensible of the fatal Consequences of it)
will be of another Sentiment; and if our Author himself be amongst these
well-meaning Men, I doubt not but he will forgive me freely, when nothing but
my Zeal, Sincerity, and Affection for our Safety, has put me upon this Work.
FINIS.

