SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE PAPER DELIVERED UNTO THE Sheriffs of LONDON, BY JAMES
HOLLOWAY At the time of his EXECUTION.
Entered according to ORDER.
IT cannot be otherwise than matter of astonishment to all Loyal and Ingenuous
Men, to behold the unquiet and restless Principles of too many amongst us, who
think it not enough to broach and spread about their Doctrines of disobedience,
but also to endeavor to debauch the Palates and Understanding of their Pupils,
so that the Poison they deliver may be esteemed as the wholsomest Food they
receive; of such Men, and such Principles, we have lately met remarkable
instances: A Horrid Conspiracy has been a foot, a Conspiracy to ruin the
Government we live under, to destroy the best of Kings, and the best of
Religions, and this apparently proved by such pregnant Testimonies, that
Infidelity it self might have been silenced. The Judgment of God has overtaken
many of the Conspirators, and justly have they suffered for the same; yet has
the Impudence of those men been so extravagant, that they have, and do
endeavor to Ridicule and Sham the same, and in plain words tell the World, Sir
S. Barnardi-stones Letters in his Trial.
The Plot is lost here except you find it in the Country amongst the Abhorrers
and Addressers. It will not therefore be amiss if we examine the Confession of
the last Sufferer, who, at the brink of death, when his Soul was ready to
launch forth into the Ocean of Eternity, and the prospect of Judgment and
Immortality was before him, freely and voluntarily asserted his knowledge of
those Crimes he came to suffer for: And though we needed nothing of this nature
to corroborate the other proofs thereof, yet as the same were the words of a
dying Man, they may prevail on the misled and ignorant, to take off that
prejudice they have too long lain under; and satisfy the whole world, that
those who pretend the greatest Innocence, and deceive mankind with their false
and specious pretenses of asserting the Liberties and Properties of the People,
are the very men, that in the same breath, at the same time intended the
greatest Invasions thereupon.

In order to which examination, I shall only take to pieces that Paper Mr.
Holloway delivered at the time of his Death to our present Sheriffs; wherein he
begins:

To stop the Mouths, etc. of all Pamphleteers and News-Scriblers, who have done
more prejudice to His Majesty and Kingdoms by their impudent endeavors to Sham
all Plots, and to fill the Country with false news than they will be ever able
to retrieve and to satisfy: all I leave behind me, I thought good to draw up a
short account of what I knew of the late Protestant-Plot, etc.

Herein the Reader may observe a plain Confession of the Plot in gross, the
Protestant-Plot as the Sufferer termed it, and his Reason for publishing what
he knew thereof, To stop the mouths of such virulent and impudent Scriblers who
endeavor to Sham the same, and put a false gloss upon such black and
Tremendous Actions; nor is he at all out in his opinion, that such as these do
a greater injury to the King and Kingdom than they are or can be in any
Capacity to retrieve; for if we consider how great a Providence was seen in the
discovery of the Nations worst and most implacable enemies in the midst of
their horrid and abominable Contrivances, all endeavors to stifle the same
must needs be Impious in the highest degree, for hereby the Government is
slaundered as unjust and cruel for shedding the blood of such who have lawfully
suffered in the same; Rebellion is covered with the name of Innocence; the
sentence of the Law duly executed is called Murder; Vice wears the mask of
Virtue: The Wolf is got into Sheeps clothing, and none can discern his Enemy
in the disguise of Friendship; though the Pit be dug to betray us, we are led on
in a pleasant and enticing Path, without fear or apprehension of our danger,
till the moment of our Ruin confronts our Presumption. But farther proceeds
the Sufferer, to the particulars of his concern in the said Plot, wherein he
ascribes his first knowledge thereof to his Public Spirit, which led him to
attend Affairs beyond that capacity wherein he had been bred, in the following
of Parliaments for the perfecting some designs on foot in order to the
improvement of the Linen Manufacture, etc. In which I would observe, That men,
when they leave the Calling that Providence has allotted them, and would soar
into a sphere above them, they very rarely miss the fate of Dedalus, their
Molten Wings deceive them, and their fall too late gives them notice of their
ruin. And here adds he in this Attendance upon that Parliament, The more I
knew, the more I was desirous to know, and did by some Scriblers and
News-mongers constantly know most of the public affairs that were acted, which
they undertook to represent according to their own humor; many Actions being
represented very Illegal, much against the Protestant interest in favor of
Papists, etc. Shamming the Popish Plot upon the Protestants, abusing the Rights
and Privileges of the Subjects, the truth of which I leave to the judgment of
all; but hearing many suchlike things, was easily prevailed with to be
concerned in the Plot, according as it was proposed to me, etc.

When the Devil has a work to do, he usually Employs such Agents as may best
deceive the Incautelous, and accordingly so disguises them, and puts such Words
into their Mouths, that you would take them rather for Angels of Light, than
Ministers of the Infernal Lord. The Lying Prophets came in the name of God with
as much Zeal in their mouths, and appearing Truth, as those by God himself
appointed; nor in like manner was the late faction any thing cautious of
cloaking their pretenses in the Livery of Heaven, Zeal was in their mouth, and
Treason in their hearts; Property and Liberty was their cry, Slavery and
Bondage their design; True Protestant Reformation their pretense, Heresy and
Schism, the Destruction and Ruin of the Established Religion and Government
their last aim; and in short, knowing they could never perpetrate their bloody
and worse than savage intetions, if the same were brought in naked, they
Clothed their Deformities in a Presbiterian Jump, and made Religion the Pander
to usher in the Cheat. But further he goes on, About July 1682. I met (says he)
a person who gave me an account touching the Election of Sheriffs of London,
etc. and the Illegallity thereof, as he represented the same; whereupon the
Protestant Gentry were resolved to remedy what was designed, by an Insurrection
in several parts of the Kingdom; and, if possible, to get the King off from his
Evil Counselors, etc. That it should begin at London, Bristol, Exeter,
Taunton, Chester, York, New Castle, and therefore desired we might consider how
it might be managed in Bristol, which they did, and concluded, that Bristol
with about Three hundred and fifty men might be easily surprised, etc.

In April, says he, I heard of another design against the King and Duke of
York, as they were to come from New Market, etc. When I heard it, I declared my
abhorrance of any such thing, I was confident none in our parts would be for it.

Here he confesses he did know of this design, and though he would be thought
ingenuous, in his abhorrence thereof, yet too much of the Phanatical Leven
possessed him, Why did he not reveal it? Can that man be said to abhor a Crime,
that when the same is discovered to him conceals it, and Clossets it in his
breast till the same is perpetrated on his Neighbor? much more in this case,
the Life of His Most Sacred Majesty and that of his Royal Brother were
designed, the very Arms bought and ready that were to effect the same; the men,
the manner, the place, and every circumstance agreed on the Hellish wickedness
in prospect of performance; the performance so execrable in it self, that words
are not significant enough to express the horror of it, nor Imagination
comprehensive to fathom its guilt; and yet to cover this, to lodge it quietly
in his breast, and yet own, or brag of his abhorrance of it, is Hypocrisy
against the Devil, and can admit of no excuse. But further he says.

The general Design for the Insurrection was carried on by others, who though
they made a great stir in the Nation, trying the Inclinations of people, and
had treated with the Scots and Irish as I heard, who were to be ready at the
same time, yet never came to any resolution as to any time or Method before all
was discovered, though they had been Eleven Months contriving it from the time I
first heard it. This I hope will be enough to satisfy all people there was a
PLOT.

Had we had no other Proof, surely this must, beyond all doubt, satisfy the
whole World of the truth of these Designs; yet can I not but observe how nearly
the same agrees with every part of that Evidence that has been before given in
at the Trials of such who have deservedly suffered Death for the same, the like
previous complaints you were by them acquainted with, the Magistracy illegally
chosen, Popish Councels and Ministers about the King, Arbitrary Government
coming upon us, Property and Liberty invaded, Shamming the Popish Plot, etc.
And therefore upon these grounds (say they) the Rebellion was intended, and the
Death of the King and His Royal Highness designed, and all this and you see is
but a counterpart of this Gentleman's last words; so that though all good Men
never doubted the veracity hereof before, yet now certainly the worst can never
have Impudence enough to go about to evade it. When the late Jesuits who were
executed in the Popish-Plot denied their concern therein, and in the words of
Dying Men asserted their Innocence, it was objected against them, that the
Religion they had Imbibed allowed them for the good of that Church (whereof
they were Members) to disown what the came to suffer for: I shall not dispute
the Validity or truth of the Charge, but sure I am, amongst Protestants, There
is no such tenent, to allow men in their last hours to speak what is false on
any pretense whatsoever, much less to give them liberty to charge themselves
and others with what they never did or were guilty of.

But to proceed, this Gentleman goes on, The Arguments (says he)
beforementioned, with many others to the same Effect, not only soon prevailed
with me, but made me indeed think it my duty to do what I could for my King and
Countries safety, being then fully persuaded, that not only Popery, but
Arbitrary Government was intended; not then considering, (as I have since
considered) how much Bloodshed it might have caused in the Nation; for then I
thought all would have been ended in a little time, supposing things to be as
to me was reported: But I now declare my Hearty Sorrow for my yielding thereto,
and acting therein; (this I can safely say, I was not for taking away the Kings
Life, but wholly for his Preservation) yet am satisfied that it might have
caused very much Bloodshed in the Nation, and am glad it did not take Effect.
And am satisfied it was a great Sin against God, etc.

What this Gentleman gives to palliate his offense, and make that a Duty as he
calls it, which was his Crime, is so far from giving any Color thereunto, that
let any sober man observe it, and he will conclude it rather a Sophestical
aggravation thereof. I thought it my duty, says he, to do what I could for my
King and Countries safety. A specious pretense, but pray mark him, an
Insurrection was to be made, the Peace we had so long enjoyed, and was then
likely to enjoy could they have been quiet, was intended to be disturbed. We
neither heard of Wars nor Rumors of Wars, but from themselves; the King was
to have been seized, his Friends taken from him under the Title of Evil
Counselors, and yet this Consistent with the King and Kingdoms safety, nay,
the Life of his Sacred Majesty was threatened, his Royal Brother to share the
like Fate, and this known (as above) to the Prisoner, and all the while he and
his Brother Phanaticks doing their Duty for their King and their Country. Oh!
but Popery and Arbitrary Government was intended. I know not in case of their
designs going forward, what security we should have had against Popery, though I
am apt to believe it had been the greatest help to the introduction of it,
under the Common disturbances that would have ensued, that they themselves
could have wished for; as for the Latter, I may be more certain, that nothing
could have possibly followed the same, if ever they had preprevailed, but the
most Tyrannical and slavish Government in the World; for that Kingdom whose
Foundation is in Blood, must have its Superstructure in Slaughter; and nothing
but Devastation and Ruin of the best, at the will and pleasure of the worst,
can ever be expected therein. An Instance whereof too many of us too fatally
remember in the late Usurpers days, our Channels were filled at the Expense of
our Decaest and most Loyal Veins; the Scaffolds, besides that of the best of
Kings, was almost every Month stained with some or other of our Nobles Blood;
our Estates at the Mercy of a Tyrant, who thought it crime enough for any man
to think him so; and as if he could have seen into their Breast, though their
Lips never uttered the same, that or their Lives were the Price of their
inexpressed Loyalty: and this is all good men might behold, as the end of the
said Designs of our late Plotters, had the same taken effect; and which is the
next words, our sufferer takes notice of, not considering then how much Blood,
etc. But this he confesses brought him to a sorrow for his Intentions, and he
owns it before all the world; That he then was glad it did not take Effect, and
owns it as a Sin against God Almighty, not only in destrusting his Providence,
but taking his Work out of his Hands; and certainly, if we consider that God
has placed our great Magistrate over us to be obeyed, and has left himself
only his Superior to call him to account for his actions in the Throne he has
Seated him; each irreverent word, or disobedient thought to this his Substitute
on Earth, is a Crime against Heaven, how much more then would it be, to strive
with these Saints, these Protestants, Reformers, and true Christians, though
indeed the worst of Rebels, to dethrone him. Could they plead in excuse, that
as he is the best of Kings, he was the worst of Tyrants; as he is the most
merciful amongst all the Princes in the World, he was the most Savage and
cruel; as he rules and governs in the highest and exactest Justice,
distributing to every man his right, the Sword was his only Arbiter; and the
Portion of every man's Inheritance, the right of his pleasure; yet these were
not enough to Justify a Rebellion, to such a Prince we are bound by all Laws
Humane and Divine to submit. But happy is it for us, we have as much reason to
obey him for his goodness, as we are bound to do the same in Duty; and may all
those that think otherwise, meet a reward for their Crimes, proportionable to
the same. But our Sufferer, after his Confession aforesaid, comes and tells
you, that he was not, nor would be compelled to say what he did, but that it
was his Resolution to declare all he knew concerning the Plot, and also to do
what in him lay to prevent all Plottings for the Future, and to put an end to
the Heats, etc. and afterward says, when I gave in my Confession, I stood not
upon terms of a Pardon, being confident if Truth will merit Mercy from the
King, I should have his Pardon, and that it was the only way to gain Mercy with
God. And afterward, I Repent not my Confession, and could I discover more, I
would do it willingly, though I find not Mercy with Man. So that upon the
whole, here is a Ingenious Confession of the said Phanatical Plot, and a proof
against all the Cavils of the worst of men, that the same was not a slight and
ill grounded design, but laid deep, and intended against the bottom of the
Government, against the life of the best of Kings and Brothers, and in short
against Monarch and Monarchy it self, whom God grant long Preservation unto.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for W. Davis in Amen-Corner, 1684.


