THE SECURITY OF English-Mens Lives, OR THE TRUST, POWER, and DUTY OF THE Grand
Iurys OF ENGLAND.

Explained according to the Fundamentals of the English Government, and the
Declarations of the same made in Parliament by many Statutes.

Published for the Prevention of Popish Designs against the Lives of many
Protestant Lords and Commoners, who stand firm to the Religion and ancient
Government of England.

LONDON, Printed for T. Mitchel. 1681.

THE Principal Ends of all Civil Government, and of Humane Society, were the
Security of Men's Lives, Liberties and Properties, mutual Assistance, and Help,
each unto other, and Provision for their common Benefit and Advantage; and
wherethe Fundamental Laws and Constitution of any Government have been wisely
adapted unto those Ends, such Countries ane Kingdoms have increased in Virtue,
Prowess, Wealth and Happiness, whilst others through the want of such
excellent Constitutions, or neglect of preserving them, have been a Prey to the
Pride, Lust and Cruelty of the most Potent, and the People have had no
Assurance of Estates, Liberties or Lives, but from their Grace and Pleasure:
They have been many times forced to welterin each others Blood in their Masters
quarrel for Dominion, and at best they (...) ^erved like Beasts of Burden, and
(...)ntinual, base subserviency to their (...)ers Vices, have lost all sense of
(...) Religion, Virtue and Manhood.

Our Ancestors have been famous in ^^eir Generations for Wisdom, Piety, (...)d
courage, in forming and preserving ^ Body of Laws to secure themselves and
their Posterities from Slavery and Oppression, and to maintain their Native
Freedoms; to be subject only to the Laws made by their own Consent in their
general Assemblies, and to be put in Execution chiefly by themselves, their
Officers and Assistants, to be guarded and defended from all Violence and
Force, by their own Arms, kept in their own hands, and used at their own charge
under their Princes Conduct; entrusting nevertheless an ample Power to their
Kings, and other Magistrates, that they may may do all the Good, and enjoy all
the Happiness that the largest Soul of man can honestly wish; and carefully
providing such means of correcting and punishing their Ministers and
Councillors, if they transgressed the Laws, that they might not dare to abuse
or oppress the People, or design against their Freedom or Welfare.

This Body of Laws our Ancestors always esteemed the best Inheritance they
could leave to their Posterities, well knowing that these were the sacred Fence
of their Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and an unquestionable Title whereby
they might call what they had their own, or say they were their own Men: The
inestimable value of this Inheritance moved our Progenitors with great
resolution bravely from Age to Age to defend it; and it now falls to our Lot to
preserve it against the Dark Contrivances of a Popish Faction, who would by
Frauds, Sham-Plots, and Infamous Perjuries, deprive us of our Birthrights, and
turn the points of our Swords (our Laws) into our own Bowels; they have
impudently scandalized our Parliaments, with Designs to overturn the Monarchy,
because they would have excluded a Popish Successor, and provided for the
Security of the Religion and Lives of all Protestants: They have caused Lords
and Commoners to be for a long time kept in Prisons, and suborned Witnesses to
swear matters of Treason against them; endeavoring thereby, not only to cut
off some who had eminently appeared in Parliament for our ancient Laws, but
through them to blast the Repute of Parliaments themselves, and to lessen the
Peoples Confidence in those great Bulwarks of their Religion and Government.

The present purpose is to show how well our Worthy Forefathers have provided
in our Law for the safety of our Lives, not only against all attempts of open
Violence, by the severe punishment of Robbers, Murderers, and the like, but
the secret poisonous Arrows that fly in the dark, to destroy the Innocent by
false Accusation and Perjuries. Our Lawmakers foresaw both their dangers from
the Malice, and Passion, that might cause some of private condition, to accuse
others falsely in the Courts of Justice, and the great hazards of Worthy and
Eminent Men's Lives, from the Malice, Emulation, and Ill Designs of corrupt
Ministers of State, or otherwise potent, who might commit the most odious of
Murders in the form and course of Justice; either by corrupting of Judges, as
dependant upon them for their Honor and great Revenue, or by Bribing and
Hiring men of depraved Principles, and desperate Fortunes, to swear falsely
against them; doubtless they had heard the Scriptures, and observed that the
great men of the Jews sought out many to swear Treason and Blasphemy against
Jesus Chr^^^: They had heard of Ahab's Courtiers and Judges, who, in the
Course, a^^ Form of Justice, by false Witnesses, (...)thered Naboth, because he
would nosubmit his Properly to an Arbi^rary Power. Neither were they ignora^^
of the Ancient Roman Histor^es (...) the pestilent, false Accusers that
aboun^ed in the Reign of some of those Emperors, under whom the greatest of
crimes was to be virtuous: Therefore, as became good Legislators, they made as
prudent Provision as perhaps any Country in the World enjoys, for equal and
impartial Administration of Justice in all the concerns of the Peoples Lives;
that every man, whether Lord or Commoner, might be in safety, whilst they lived
in due Obedience to the Laws.

For this purpose it is made a Fundamental in our Government, that (unless it
be by Parliament, See Ld Cooks Instit. 3d part, p. 40.
no man's Life shall be touched for any crime whatsoever, save by the Judgment
of at least 24 men; that is, 12 or more, See Mag. Chart. Cook 's 2 part of
Instit. p. 50, 51.
to find the Bill of Indictment, whether he be Peer of the Realm, or Commoner,
and 12 Peers, or above, if a Lord, if not 12 Commoners to give the Judgment
upon the general Issue of not guilty joined; of these 24 the first 12 are
called the Grand Inquest, or the Grand Jury, for the extent of their power, and
in regard that their number must be more than 12, sometimes 23, or 25, never
were less than 13, Twelve whereof at least must agree to every Indictment, or
else it is no legal Verdict; If 11 of 21, or of 13, should agree to find a Bill
of Indictment, it were no Verdict. The other Twelve, in Commoners Cases, are
called the Petit-Jury, and their number is ever Twelve; but the Jury for a Peer
of the Realm may be more in number, though of like Authority. The Office and
Power of these Juries is Judicial, they only are the Judges from whose Sentence
the Indicted are to expect Life or Death; upon their Integrity and
Understanding, the Lives of all that are brought into Judgment do ultimately
depend; from their Verdict there lies no Appeal, by finding Guilty or not
Guilty; they do complicately Resolve both Law, and Fact.

As it has been the Law, so it has allways been the Custom, and Practice of
these Juries, upon all general Issues, pleaded in Cases Civil as well as
Criminal, to judge both of the Law and Fact. See the Reports of the Lord Chief
Justice Vaughan, p. 150.151.
So it is said in the Report of the Lord Chief Justice Vaughan, in Bushel's
Case, that these Juries determine the Law in all matters where Issue is joined
and tried, in the Principal Case, whether the Issue be about a Trespass or a
Debt, or Disseizin in Assizes, or a Tort, or any such like, unless they should
please to give a special Verdict, with an implicit faith in the Judgment of
the Court, to which none can oblige them against their Wills.

These last 12 must be Men of equal condition with the Party Indicted, and are
called his Peers, therefore if it be a Peer of the Realm, they must be all
such, when Indicted at the Suit of the King; and in the case of Commoners,
every Man of the 12 must agree to the Verdict, freely, without compulsion,
fear, or menace, else it is no Verdict. Whether the case of a Peer be harder, I
will not determine. Our Ancestors were careful that all men of the like
condition, and quality, presumed to be sensible of each others infirmity,
should mutually be Judges each of others lives, and alternately taste of
Subjection and Rule; every man being equally liable to be Accused, or Indicted,
and perhaps to be suddenly judged by the Party, of whom he is at present Judge,
if he be found innocent. Whether it be Lord or Commoner that is Indicted, the
Law intends (as near as may be) that his equals that Judge him, should be his
Companions, known to him, and he to them, or at least his Neighbors or
Dwellers near about the place where the Crime is supposed to have been
committed, to whom something of the Fact must probably be known; and though the
Lords are not appointed to be of the Neighborhood to the Indicted Lord, yet
the Law supposes them to be Companions, and personally well known each unto
other, being presumed to be a small number (as they have anciently been) and to
have met yearly, or oftener in Parliament, as by Law they ought, besides their
other meetings, as the hereditary Councillers of the Kings of England. If time
has altered the case of the Lords, as to the number, indifferency, and
impartiality of the Peers, it has been, and may be worthy of the Parliaments
consideration, and the greater duty is incumbent upon Grand Juries to examine
with the utmost diligence the Evidence against Peers, before they find a Bill
of Indictment against any of them if in truth it may put their Lives in greater
danger.

It is not designed at this time to undertake a discourse of Petit-Juries, but
to consider the Nature and Power of Grand Inquests, and to show how much the
Reputation, the Fortunes, and the Lives of English Men depend upon the
Conscientious performance of their Duty.

It was absolutely necessary for the support of the Government, and the safety
of every Man's life and interest, that some should be trusted to inquire after
all such as by Treasons, Fellonies, or lesser Crimes, disturbed the peace, that
they might be prosecuted, and brought to condign punishment; and it was no less
needful for every man's quiet and safety, that the trust of such inquisitions
should be put into the hands of Persons of understanding, and integrity,
indifferent, and impartial, that might suffer no man to be falsely accused, or
defamed, nor the lives of any to be put in jeopardy, by the malicious
conspiracies of great or small, or the Perjuries of any profligate wretches:
For these necessary, honest ends was the institution of Grand Juries.

Our Ancestors thoughtit not best to trust this great concern of their Lives
and Interests in the Hands of any Officer of the King's, or in any Judges named
by him, nor in any certain number of men during life, lest they should be awed
or influenced by great men, corrupted by bribes, flatteries, or love of power,
or become negligent, or partial to Friends and Relations, or pursue their own
Quarrels or private Revenges, or connive at the Conspiracies of others, and
indict thereupon. But this trust of enquiring out, and Indicting all the
Criminals in a County, is placed in men of the same County, more at least than
Twelve of the most honest, and most sufficient for Knowledge, and Ability of
Mind and Estate, to be from time to time at the Sessions and Assizes, and all
other Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, named and returned by the chief Sworn
Officer of the County, the Sheriff, (who was also by express Law anciently
chosen annually by the people of every County and trusted with the Execution of
all Writ and Processes of the Law, and with the power of the County to suppress
all Violences, unlawful Routs, Riots, and Rebellions. Yet our Laws left not the
Election of these Grand Inquests absolutely to the Will of the Sheriffs, but
have described in general their Qualifications, who shall Enquire and Indict
either Lore or Commoner: They ought, by the old common Law, to be lawful Liedg^
people, of ripe Age, not over aged or in firm, and of good Fame amongst their
Neighbors, free from all reasonable suspicion of any design for himself or
others, upon the Estates or Lives of any suspected Criminals, or Quarrel, or
Controversy with any of them: They ought to be indifferent and impartial, even
before they are admitted to be sworn, and of sufficient Understanding and
Estate for so great a Trust. The ancient Law-Book, called, Briton, See Brit. p.
9, and 10.
of great Authority, says, The Sheriffs, Bailiffs ought to be sworn to return
such as know best how to enquire, and discover all breaches of the Peace; and
lest any should intrude themselves, or be obtruded by others, they ought to be
res turned by the Sheriff, without the Denomination of any, except the Sheriffs
Officers. And agreeable hereunto was the Statute of 11. See 11. Hen. 4.
H. 4 in thnse words. Item, Because of late Inquests were taken at Westminster
of persons named to the Justices, without due Return of the Sheriff, of which
persons some were outlawed, etc. and some fled to Sanctuary for Treason and
Felony, etc. by whom, as well many Offenders were indicted, as other lawful
Liege people of the King not guilty, by Conspiracy, Abetment, and false
Imagination of others, etc. against the course of the common Law, etc. It is
therefore granted, for the Ease and Quietness of the People, that the same
Indictment, with all its Dependances, be void, and holden for none for ever;
and that from henceforth, no Indictment be made by any such persons, but by
Inquest of the Kings Liege People, in the manner as was used, etc. returned by
the Sheriffs, etc. without any denomination to the Sheriffs, etc. according to
the Law of England, and if any Indictment be made hereafter, in any point to
the contrary, See Cook Instit. 3d part, fol. 33.
the same be also void, and holden for none for ever. See also the Statute of
Westminster 2d cap. 38. and Artic^^ super Cortas, chapter 9.

So careful have our Parliaments been that the Power of Grand Inquests might be
placed in the hands of good and worthy men; that if one man of a Grand Inquest,
though they be Twenty Three or more, should not be Liber and Legalis Homo, or
such as the Law requires, and duly returned without denomination to the
Sheriff; all the Indictments found by such a Grand Jury, and the proceedings
upon them, are void and null. So it was adjudged in Scarlet's case.

I know too well, that the Wisdom and Care of our Ancestors, in this
Institution of Grand Juries, has not been of late considered as it ought; nor
the Laws concerning them duly observed; nor have the Gentlemen and other men of
Estates, in the several Counties, discerned how insensibly their legal Power
and Jurisdiction in their Grand and Petit Juries is decayed, and much of the
means to preserve their own Lives and Interests, taken out of their hands. It Is
a wonder that they were not more awakened with the attempt of the late Ed. Chapter
Justice K. who would have usurped a Lordly, Dictatorian power over the Grand
Jury of Somersetshire, and commanded them to sind a Bill of Indictment for
murder, for which they saw no Evidence, and upon their refusal, he not only
threatened the Jury, but assumed to himself an Arbitrary Power to sine them.

Here was a bold Battery made upon the ancient Fence of our Reputations, and
Lives: If that Justice's Will had passed for Law, all the Gentlemen of the
Grand Juries must have been the basest Vassals to the Judges, and have been
penally obliged, Jurare in Verba Magistri, to have sworn to the Directions or
Dictates of the Judges: But thanks be to God, the late long Parliament (though
filled with Pensioners) could not bear such a bold Invasion of the English
Liberty; but upon the Complaint of one Sir Hugh Windham, Foreman of the said
Jury, and a Member of that Parliament, the Commons brought the then Chief
Justcie to their Bar, to acknowledge his fault, whereupon the Prosecution
ceased.

The Trust and Power of Grand Juries, is, and ought to be, accounted amongst
the greatest, and of most concern, next to the Legislative. The justice of the
whole Kingdom, in criminal Cases, almost wholly depending upon their Ability
and Integrity, in the due Execution of their Office; Besides, the Concernments
of all Commoners, the Honor, Reputation, Estates, and Lives of all the
Nobility of England, are so far submitted to their Censure, that they may bring
them into question for Treason, or Felony, at their Discretion; Their Verdict
must be entered upon Record, against the greatest Lords, and process must
legally go out against them thereupon, to imprison them if they can be taken,
or to outlaw them, as the Statutes direct; and if any Peer of the Realm, though
innocent, should justly fear a Conspiracy against his Life, and think fit to
withdraw, the direction of the Statutes, in proceeding to the Outlawry, being
rightly pursued, he could never reverse the Outlawry, as the Law now stands,
save by Pardon, or Act of Parliament. Hence it appears, that in case a Grand
Jury should be drawn to Indict a Noble Peer unjustly, either by means of their
own weakness, or partiality, or a blind submission to the Direction or Opinion
of Judges: One such failure of a Jury, may occasion the Ruin of any of the
best or greatest Families in England: I mention this extent of the Grand Juries
Power over all the Nobility, only to show their joint Interest and Concern with
the Commons of England in this ancient Institution.

The Grand Juries are trusted to be the principal means of preserving the Peace
of the whole Kingdom, by the terror of executing the penal Laws against
Offenders, by their Wisdom, Diligence, and Faithfulness in making due Inquiries
after all Breaches of the Peace, and bringing every one to answer for his
crime, at the peril of his Life, Limb, and Estate; that every man, who lives
within the Law, may sleep securely in his own House.

It Is committed to their Charge and Trust, to take care of bringing Capital
Offenders to pay their Lives to Justice, and lesser Criminals to other
punishments, according to their several demerits. The Courts, or Judges, or
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, and of Gaol Delivery, are to receive only
from the Grand Inquest, all Capital matters whatsoever, to be put in Issue,
tried and judged before them by the Petit Juries. The whole Stream of Justice,
in such cases, either runs freely, or is stopped and disturbed as the Grand
Inquests do their Duties, either faithfully and prudently, or neglect or omit
them.

And as one part of their Duty is to Indict Offenders, so another part is to
protect the Innocent, in their Reputations, Lives and Interests, from false
Accusers, and malicious Conspirators: They are to search out the Truth of such
Informations as come before them, and to reject the Indictment if it be not
sufficiently proved, and farther, if they have reasonable suspicion of Malice,
or wicked Designs against any man's Life or Estate by such as offer a Bill of
Indictment; the Laws of God and of the Kingdom, bind them to use all possible
means to discover the Villainy; and if it appear to them (whereof they are the
legal Judges) to be a Conspiracy, or malicious Combination against the Accused,
they are bound by the highest Obligations upon Men and Christians, not only to
reject such a Bill of Indictment, but to Indict forth with all the Conspirators
with their Abettors and Associates.

Doubtless there has been Pride and Covetousness, Malice and desire of Revenge
in all Ages, from whence have sprung false Accusations and Conspiracies; but no
Age before us ever hatched such Villainies, as our Popish Faction have contrived
against our Religion, Lives, and Liberties. No History assords an Example of
such Forgeries, Perjuries, Subornations, and Combinations of infamous Wretches,
as have been lately discovered amongst them, to defame Loyal, Innocent
Protestants, and to shed their guiltless Blood in the Form and Course of
Justice, and to make the Kings most faithful Subjects appear to be the vilest
Traitors unto him. In this our miserable State, Grand Juries are our only
Security, in as much as our Lives cannot be drawn into jeoperdy, by all the
malicious crasts of the Devil, unless such a number of our honest Country Men
shall be satisfied in the truth of the Accusations. For prevention of such
Plotters of wickedness as now abound, was that Statute made in the 42 of E.
3.3. See the Stat. 42 E. 3.3.
in these words: To eschew the mischiefs and damage done to diverse of the
Commons by False Accusers, which oftentimes have made the Accusations more for
Revenge and singular Benefit, than for the profit of the King, or of his
People; which accused persons, some have been taken, and sometimes caused to
come before the King's Council by Writ, and otherwise, upon grievous pain,
against the Law; It is assented and accorded for the good Government of the
Commons, That no man be put to answer without presentment before Justices, or
matter of Record, etc. according to the old Law of the Land, and if any thing
be done to the contrary, it shall be void in Law, etc. And (says the Statute
of the 25 of E. 3.4.) None shall be taken by Petition, or Suggestion made to
the King or to his Council, unless it be by Indictment, or Presentment of good
and lawful People, of the same Neighborhood where such deeds be done, etc.
That is to say, by a Grand Jury.

All our Lives are thus by Law trusted to the Care of our Grand Inquests, that
none may be put to answer for their lives, unless they Indict them. If a
causless Indictment of any man should carelessly pass from them, his guiltless
Blood, or what Prejudice soever the Accused should thereby suffer must rest
upon them, who by breach of their Trust were the occasions of it; their fault
cannot be excused by the prosecution of an Attorney, or Solicitor General, or
any other Accuser, if it were in their power to be more truly informed in the
Case. Whosoever prevents not an Evil when he may, consents to it.

Now to oblige these Juries to the more conscientious care, to Indict all that
shall appear to them Criminals, and to save every Innocent, if it may be, from
unjust Vexation, and danger, by Malice and Conspiracy, our Ancestors appointed
an Oath to be imposed upon them, which cannot be altered, except by Act of
Parliament: Therefore every Grand Jury Man is sworn, as the Foreman, in the
words following, viz.

You shall diligently enquire, and true Presentment make of all such Articles,
matters and things as shall be given you in charge. And of all other matters
and things as shall come to your own knowledge, touching this present service.
The King's Council, your Fellows, and your own, you shall keep secret: You
shall present no person for Hatred or Malice; neither shall you leave any one
unpresented for Favor, or Affection, for Love, or Gain, or any hopes thereof;
but in all things you shall present the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but
the Tru^^ to the best of your knowledge; so h^^ you God. The Tenor of the Oath
plain, saving in those words, All su^^ matters and things as shall be given
(...) in charge: But whenever a general Commission of Over and Terminer
issued, all Capital Offenses are always (...) principal matters given in
charge to (...) Grand Jury, which is enough for (...) present discourse o^
their duty: He^^ then it evidently appears, that eve^ Grand Jury is bound to
enquire d^^ gently after the Truth of every thi^^ for which they shall Indict
or Present any Man: They are not only bound (...) by the Eternal Law of loving
the Neighbor, to be as tender of the (...) and good Name of every man, as of
the own, and therefore to take heed to the Truth in Accusing or Indicting any
man but their express Oath binds them to (...) diligent in their Enquiries,
that is, (...) receive no suggestion of any Crime (...) Truth, without
examining all the C^^cumstances about it, that fall within the knowledge; they
ought to consider the first Informers, and enquire as far as they can into
their Aims and Pretenses in their prosecutions; if Revenge or Gain should
appear to be their ends, there ought to be the greater suspicion of the Truth
of their Accusations; the Law intending all Indictments to be for the benefit
of the King and of his People, as appears by the Stat. of 42 E. 3.3. Next, the
Jury are bound to enquire into the matters themselves, whereof any man is
accused, as to the time, place, and all other circumstances of the Fact
alleged. There have been false Informers that have suggested things
impossible; for instance, That Thirty Thousand Men in Arms were kept in
readiness for an Exploit, in a secret place, as if they could have been hid in
a Chamber, or a Cabinet. The Jury ought also to enquire after the Witnesses,
their condition and quality, their fame and reputation, their means of
subsistence, and the occasion whereby the Facts whereof they bear witness came
to their knowledge. Sometimes persons of debauche^ lives and low condition,
have depose^ Discourses, and Treasonable Council against Persons of Honor and
Virtue so unlikely to come to their Knowledge (if such things had been) that
their pretense of being privy to them, was strong Evidence that their whole
story was false and feigned. It is also agreeable unto our ancient Law and
Practice and of great Consequence in cases (...) Treason or Felony, that the
Jury enquire after the time, when first the matters deposed came to the
Witnesses knowledge, and whether they pursued the directions of the Law in the
immediat^ Discovery and pursuit of the Traitor o^ Felon, by Hue and Cry, or
otherwise, o^ how long they concealed the same; their Testimony being of little
or no value, i^ they have made themselves partake^ of the Crime by their
voluntary Concealment.

Neither may the Jury lawfully omi^ to enquire concerning the Parties Accused,
of their Quality, Reputation, and the manner of their Conversation, with many
other Circumstances; from whence they may be greatly helped to make right
Inferences of the Falsehood, or Truth of the Crimes whereof any man shall be
accused. The Jury ought to be ignorant of nothing whereof they can enquire, or
be informed, that may in their understandings enable them to make a true
Presentment or Indictment of the matters before them.

When a Grand Jury is sworn to enquire diligently after all Treasons, etc. it is
natural and necessary to their business, to think of whom they should enquire;
and it is plainly and easily resolved, that they ought to enquire of every man
that can or will inform them; and if any kind of Treason be suggested to them,
to have been done by any man, or number of men, their duty is the same in that
particular, as it was in the general; that is, to seek diligently to find the
truth. It Is certainly inconsistent with their Oaths, to shut their Ears against
any lawful man, that can tell them any thing relating unto a crime in question
before them. No man will believe, nor can they themselves think that they
desire to find an^ present the truth of a fact, if they sha^^ refuse to hear
any man, who shall pretend such knowledge of it, or such material
Circumstances, as may be useful to discover it; whether that which shall be
said by the pretenders, will answer the Juries expectations, must re^^ in their
Judgments, when they have hea^^ them. It seems therefore from the word of the
Oath, that there is no bound or limit set (save their own understanding or
Conscience) to restrain them to and number or sort of persons of whom they are
bound to enquire; they ought fir^^ and principally to enquire of one another
mutually, what knowledge each of the^ has of any matters in question before
them; the Law presumes that some at lea^^ of so many sufficient men of a County
must know or have heard of all notable things done there against the public
peace; for that end the Juries are by the Law to be of the Neighborhood to the
place where the crimes are committed. If the parties, and the facts whereof
they are accused be known to the Jury, or any of them, their own knowledge will
supply the room of many Witnesses. Next they ought to enquire of all such
Witnesses as the Prosecutors will produce against the Accused, they are bound
to examine all fully and prudently to the best of their skill; every Jury Man
ought to ask such questions (by the Foreman at least) as he thinks necessary
to resolve any doubt that may arise in him, either about the fact, or the
Witnesses, or otherwise; if the Jury be then doubtful, they ought to receive
all such further Testimony as shall be offered them, and to send for such as
any of them do think able to give Testimony in the case depending.

If it be asked how, or in what manner, the Juries shall enquire; the answer is
ready, according to the best of their understandings. They only, not the
Judges, are sworn to search diligently to find out all Treasons, etc. within
their charge, and they must and ought to use their own discretion in the way
and manner of their Enquiry: No directions can legally be imposed upon them by
any Court or Judges; An honest Jury will thankfully accept good Advice from
Judges, as they are Assistants; but they are bound by their Oaths to present
the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, to the best of their own
not the Judges, knowledge: Neither ca^ they, without breach of that Oath,
resign their Consciences, or blindly submit to the dictates of others; and
therefore ought to receive, or reject such Advices, as they judge them good or
bad.

If the Jury suspect a Combination o^ Witnesses against any man's Life, (which
perhaps the Judges do not discern) and think it needful to examine them
privately and separately, the discretion of the Juries in such a case, is their
only, best and lawful guide, though the example of all Ages and Countries, in
examining suspected Witnesses privately and separately, may be a good direction
to them.

Nothing can be more plain and express, than the words of the Oath are to this
purpose. The Jurors need not search the Law Books, nor tumble over heaps of old
Records for the explanation of them. Our greatest Lawyers may from hence learn
more certainly our ancient Law in this case, than from all the Books in their
Stueids. The Language wherein the Oath is penned, is known and understood by
every man, and the words in it have the same signification, as they have
wheresoever else they are used. The Judges (without assuming to themselves a
Legislative Power) cannot put a new sense upon them, other than according to
their genuine, common meaning. They cannot Magisterially impose their Opinions
upon the Jury, and make them forsake the direct words of their Oath, to pursue
their glosses. The Grand Inquest are bound to observe alike strictly every part
of their Oath; and to use all just and proper ways which may enable them fully
to perform it; otherwise it were to say, that after men had sworn to enquire
diligently after the Truth, according to the best of their Knowledge, they were
bound to forsake all the natural and proper means which their Understandings
suggest for the Discovery of it, if it be commanded by the Judges.

And therefore if they are jealous of a Combination of the Witnesses, or that
Corruption and Subornation has been made use of, they cannot be restrained
from asking all such Questions, as may conduce to the sifting out of the Truth,
nor from examining the Witnesses privately and separately; Fort. D. Land. Leg.
Ang. cap. 26.
lest (as Fortescue says) The saying of one should provoke or instruct others
to say the like.

Nor are the Jury tied up to enquire only of such Crimes as the Judges shall
think fit to give them directly in charge, much less of such Bills only as
shall be offered to them; but their Enquiry ought to extend to All other
Matters and Things which shall come to their Knowledge, touching the present
Service. If they have ground to suspect that any Accusation before them
proceeds from a Conspiracy, they are obliged by their Oaths to turn the Enquiry
that way, and if they find cause, not only to Reject the Bills offered upon
such Testimony, but to indict such Witnesses, and all the Abettors of their
Villainy.

They are carefully to examine what sort of men the Witnesses are; for it is a
Rule in all Laws, that Turpes a Tribunalibus arcentur, Vile Persons ought to be
rejected by Courts of Justice. Such Witnesses would destroy Justice instead of
promoting it. And the Grand Jury are to take care of admitting such: They may
and ought (if they have no certain knowledge of them) to ask the Witnesses
themselves of their Condition, and way of living, and all other Questions,
which may best inform them what sort of men they are. It Is true, it may be
lawful for the Witnesses, in many cases, to refuse to give answer to some
demands which the Jury may make; as where it would be to accuse themselves of
Crimes: but yet that very refusal, or avoiding to give direct Answers, may be
of great use to the Jury, whose only business is to find out the Truth; and who
will be in a good measure enabled to judge of the Credit of such Witnesses, as
dare not clear themselves of Crimes, which common Fame, or the knowledge of
some of the Grand Inquest has charged them with?

If the Witnesses which come before the Grand Jury upon an Indictment for
Treason, should discover upon their examination, that they Concealed it a long
ti^e without just Impediment; The presumption of Law will be strong against
them, that no sense of honesty (...) of their duty brought them at last to
reveal it.

It appears by Bracton, that ancient Writer of our Laws, Brac. L. 3. c. 3.
(...) morari d^bet, etc. n^^ d^bet ad aliqua neg^^ia, qua^^is urgentissima, so
convertere, qui^ vix permittitur ei quod retro aspiciat, etc. Si post
intervallum accusare velit, non erit de Jure a^diendus.
that in Cases of Treason the Juries were in his days advised (as now they
ought) to be so severe in their Enquiry within what time the Witnesses
discovered the Treason after it came to their knowledge: That if it were not
evident that they revealed it with as much expedition as was well possible for
them, they were not by Law no be heard as Witnesses; It was scarce permitted
them (says he) to look back in their going; such ought to be their speed to
make known the Treason. Or if in any case they be otherwise openly flagitious,
though they be not legally infamous, or if they are men of desperate Fortunes,
so that the temptation of want is manifestly strong upon them, and the
restraint of Conscience can be supposed to be little or none at all; what ever
they say is (at least) to be heard with extraordinary caution, if not totally
rejected. In Scotland such a degree of Poverty, S. G. Mack^zy, Crim. Law, lib.
26.3.
that a Witness cannot swear himself to be worth Ten Pounds, is sufficient to
lay him aside wholly in these high Concernments of Criminal Cases: And in some
other Kingdoms to be a loose liver is an Objection of the same force, against
any produced for Witnesses.

And for the better discovery of the Truth of any fact in question, the Credit
of the Witnesses, and the value of the Testimonies; it is the Duty of the Grand
Inquest to be well informed concerning the Parties indicted; of their usual
Residence, their Estates and manner of living, their Companions and Friends,
with whom they are accustomed to converse, such knowledge being necessary to
make a good judgment upon most accusations; but most of all in suspicions, or
Indictments of secret Treasons, or Treasonable Words, where the accusers can be
of no credit, if it be altogether incredible that such things as they testify
should come to their knowledge.

Sometimes the quality of the accused person may set him at such a distance
from the Witnesses, that he cannot be supposed to have conversed with them
familiarly, if his Wisdom and Conduct has been always such, that it is not
credible he would trust men so inconsiderable, or mere strangers to him, and
such as are wholly incapable to assist in the Design which they pretend to
discover.

Can the Grand Inquest believe such Testimony to be of any value? Or can they
avoid suspecting Malice, Combination, and Subornation in such a case? or can
they show themselves to be just, and conscientious in their Duty, if they do
not suspend their Verdict until further Enquiry, and write Ignoramus upon the
Bill?

It is undoubtedly Law which we find reported in Styles. Styles Repor. 11.
That Though there be Witnesses who prove the Bill, yet the Grand Inquest is
not bound to find it, if they see cause to the contrary.

Now to make their Enquiry more instrumental and advantageous to the Execution
of Justice, they are enjoined by their Oath to keep secret the King's Counsel,
their fellows, and their own. Perhaps it is not sufficiently understood or
considered, what duty is enjoined to every man of a Grand Inquest by this
clause of their Oath, being seldom (if ever) explained to them in the general
charge of the Judges at Sessions or Assizes: But it is necessary that they
should apprehend what Counsel of the King is trusted with them. Certainly there
is or ought to be much more of it communicated to them, than is commonly
thought, and in things of the greatest consequence. To them ought to be
committed in the several Counties where any Prosecutions are begun, the first
Informations and suspicions of all Treasons, Murders, Felonies, Conspiracies,
and other Crimes, which may subvert the Government, endanger, or hurt the King,
or destroy the Lives or Estates of the innocent People, or any way disquiet or
disturb the common Peace. Our Law intends the Councils of the King to be
continually upon the protection and security of the People, and prevention of
all their mischiefs and dangers by wicked, lawless, and injurious men And in
order thereunto to be advising how to right his wronged Subjects in general, if
the public safety be hazarded by Treasons of any kind; or their Relations
snatched from them by Murderers, or any way destroyed by malicious Conspirators
in form of Law; or their Estates taken away by Robbery and Thieves, or the
Peace broken. And for these ends to bring to exemplary Justice all offenders,
to deterr others from the like Wickedness. And until these Counsels of the King
come to the Grand Jury, he can bring no such Criminals to judgment, or to
answer to the Accusations and Suggestions against them. Hence it becomes
unavoidably necessary to reveal to the Grand Juries all that has been
discovered to the King or any of his Ministers. Judges, or Justices, concerning
any Treasons, or other Offenses, whereof any man is accused. And where
suspicion has caused any to be imprisoned, all the grounds of their suspicions
ought to be opened, concerning the Principals and the Accessories, as well
before as after the fact, all the circumstances and presumptions that may
induce a belief of their Guilt, and all notices whatsoever, which may enable
the Jury to make a more exact and effectual Enquiry, and to present the whole
Truth. They themselves will not only be offenders against God by reason of
their Oath, but subject to legal punishments, if they knowingly conceal any
Criminals, and leave them unpresented; and none can be innocent, who shall
conceal from them any thing that may help and assist them in their Duty.

The first notices of Crimes or suspicions of the Criminals by whomsoever
brought in, and the intentions of searching them out, and prosecuting them
legally, are called the King's Counsel, because the principal care of executing
Justice is entrusted to him, and they are to be prosecuted at his Suit, and in
his name; and such proceedings are called Pleas of the Crown. From hence may be
easily concluded, that the Kings Counsel, which, by the Oath of the Grand
Inquest is to be kept secret, includes all the persons offered to them to be
indicted, and all the matters brought in Evidence before them, all
circumstances whatsoever whereof they are informed, which may any way conduce
to the discovery of Offenses; all intimations given them of Abettors and
Encouragers of Treasons, Felonies, or Perjuries and Conspiracies, or of the
Receivers, Harbourers, Nourishers, and Concealers of such Criminals.

Likewise the Oath which enjoins the Counsel of their Fellows, and their own to
be kept, implies that they shall not reveal any of their personal knowledge
concerning Offenses or Offenders; nor their intentions to indict any man
thereupon; nor any of the Proposals and Advices amongst them of ways to enquire
into the truth of any matter before them, either about the Crimes themselves,
or the accusers and Witnesses, or the party accused, nor the debates thereupon
amongst themselves, nor the diversity of opinionins any case before them.

Certainly this Duty of secrecy concerning the Kings Counsel was imposed upon
the Grand Inquest with great reason, in order to the public good. It was
intended that they should have all the advantages which the several cases will
afford, to make effectual Enquiries after Criminals to offer them to Justice.
If packs of Thieves, private Murderers, secret Traitors, or Conspirators and
Suborners, can get Intelligence of all that is known of their Villainies, all
the parties concerned may consult together, how to hide their crimes, and
prevent such further Enquiries as can be made after them; they may form
Sham-Stories by agreement, that may have appearance of truth to mislead and
delude the Jury in their Examination, and avoid contradicting each other, they
may remove or conceal all such things as might occasion a fuller Discovery of
their Crimes, or become circumstantial Evidences against any of their
Associates, if one or more of them be known or taken, or is to be indicted.
There has been Confederates in high Crimes, who have secured themselves from
the Justice done upon some of their Companions, by their confident appearance
and denial of the Fact, having been emboldened therein from their knowledge of
all the grounds of suspicion, and all the Witnesses examined about them and the
matter of their Testimonies. It Is too well known what helps of discovering the
whole Popish Plot were lost through the want of keeping secret the Kings
Counsel therein, before the matter was brought either to the Parliament, or to
any Grand Inquest; and thereby they were disabled for the effectual Execution
of their Offices, and could never search into the Bowels of that dangerous
Treason in any County. But our Law having placed this great trust of Enquiry in
the prudence and faithfulness of the Grand Inquest, was careful that they might
not disable themselves for their own trust, by the indiscretion or worser fault
of any of their own number, in revealing the Kings Counsel or their own.

And as it was intended hereby to preserve unto them all reasonable helps for
their bringing to light the hidden mischiefs that might disturb the common
Peace, so it was necessary to prevent the Flight of Criminals; if the Evidence,
against one that is accused should be publicly known, whether it should be
sufficient for an Indictment of him, and how far it extends to others; his
Confederates and Accomplices might easily have notice of their danger, and take
opportunity to escape from Justice.

Yet the reason will be still more manifest for keeping secret the accusations
and the Evidence by the Grand Inquest, if it be well considered, how useful and
necessary it is for discovering truth in the Examinations of Witnesses in many,
if not in most cases that may come before them; when if by this Privacy
Witnesses may be examined in such manner and Order, as prudence and occasion
direct; and no one of them be suffered to know who has been examined before
him, nor what questions have been asked him, nor what answers he has given, it
may probably be found out whether a Witness has been biassed in his Testimony
by Malice or Revenge, or the fear or favor of men in Power, or the love or
hopes of Lucre and gain in present or future, or Promises of impunity for some
enormous Crime.

The simplicity of Truth in a Witness may appear by the natural plainness,
easiness, and directness of his Answers to whatsoever is propounded to him, by
the equality of his Temper, and suitableness of his Answers to questions of
several kinds, and perhaps to some that may be asked for Trial sake only of his
uprightness in other matters. And the Falsness, Malice or ill Design of
another, may be justly suspected from his studiousness and difficulty in
answering, his Artifice and cunning in what he relates, not agreeable to his
way of breeding and parts, his reserved, indirect, and evasive Replies to easy
Questions, his pretenses of doubtfulness and want of remembering things of such
short dates or such Notoriety, that it is not credible he could be ignorant or
forgetful of them. In this manner the Truth may be evidenced to the
satisfaction of the Jurors Consciences, by the very demeanor of the Witnesses
in their private Examinations, in as much as the greatest certainty does often
arise from the careful observation and comparing of such minute matters; of
which a distinct account is not possible to be giver to a Court: And for that
Reason (among others) the Juries are made the only absolute Judges of their
Evidence.

Yet further their private Examinations may discover truth out of some
disagreement of the Witnesses, when separately interrogated, and every of the
Grand Inquest ask them Questions for his own satisfaction about the matters
which have come to his particular knowledge, and this freely without Awe or
Control of Judges, or distrust of his own parts, or fear to be checked for
asking impertinent questions.

Conspiracies against the lives of the Innocent in a form of Justice, have been
frequently detected by such secret and separate Examination of Witnesses. The
Story of Susanna is famous; that two of their Elders and Judges of great Credit
and Authority, testified in the open Assembly a malicious invention against
her, with all the solemnity used in Capital Cases and Sentences of Death passed
upon her, and was ready to be executed, had not wise Daniel cried out in her
behalf: Are ye such Fools, O Israelites, that without Examination or Knowledge
of the Truth, Note that the Testimony given in the Assembly without separating
the Witnesses, and trying the Truth by circumstances, was esteemed
ye ^ave condemned a Daughter ^f Israel? Return (said he) again to judgment,
and put ^hese two one far from another, and I will examine them: And being
asked separately (though in public the testimony having been so given before)
concerning the place of the fact then in question, No Examination or knowledge
of the Truth.
they had not agreed upon that Circumstance as they had upon their Story; and
so their falsehood became manifest, one saying the Adultery was committed under
a Lentisk Tree, the other, it was under a Prime Tree: And upon that conviction
of the false Witnesses, the whole Assembly cried with a loud voice, and praised
God. These false Witnesses were put to death as their Law required.

We have also a late Instance of the usefulness of private and separate
Examinations, in the case of the Lord Howard, against whom the Attorney General
prosecuted an Accusation of Treason, the last Midsummer Term, before the Grand
Inquest for Middlesex. Mrs. Fitz-Harris, and Teresa Peacock her Maid, swore
words of Treason against him positively, and agreed in every point whilst they
were together: But by the prudence of the Inquest, being put asunder, and the
Mistress asked how her Maid came to be admitted to the knowledge of such
Matters; she had an Evasion ready, pretending her Maid to have craftily
harkened behind a Wainscot Door, and so heard the Treason. But the Maid not
suspecting what her Mistress had said, continued her first Story, that she
heard the Treason from the Lord Howard himself, and was as much trusted by him
as her Mistress: By this Circumstance the falsehood and Perjury (which Mrs.
Fitz-Harris has since acknowledged) was discovered, and the snare for the Life
of the injured Lord was broken, as is manifest by his liberty now obtained by
Law.

Witnesses may come prepared, and tell plausible Stories in open Court, if they
know from the Prosecutor to what they must answer; and have agreed and
acquainted each other with the tales they will tell, and have resolved to be
careful, that all their answers to cross Interrogatories, may be conformable to
their first stories: And if these relate only to words spoken at several times
in private to distinct Witnesses, in such a case, Evidence, if given in open
Court, may seem to be very strong against the person accused, though there be
nothing of truth in it. But if such Witnesses were privately and separately
examined by the Grand Inquest, as the Law requires, and were to answer only
such questions as they thought fit, and in such order as was best in their
judgments, and most natural to find out the Truth of the Accusation, so that
the Witnesses could not guess what they should be asked first, or last, nor one
conjecture what the other had said, (which they are certain of when they know
beforehand what the Prosecutor will ask in Court of every of them, and what
they have resolved to answer) if the Inquest should put them out of their Road,
and then compare all their several answers together, they might possibly
discern marks enough of falsehood, to show that their Testimonies ought not to
be depended upon, where life is in question.

By what is now said the reasonableness of this Institution of Secrecy may be
discerned in respect to the discovery of Truth, and the protection of the
Innocent from malicious Combinations and Perjuries. Yet the same Secrecy of the
Kings Council is no less necessary to reserve the guilty for punishment; when
the Evidence against any party accused is not manifest and full, it may be kept
without prejudice under Secrecy until further Enquiry; and if sufficient proof
can afterward be made of the Offense, an Indictment may be found by a Grand
Inquest, and the party brought to answer it: But when the Examinations are in
open Court, or the Kings Councils any other way divulged, and the Evidence is
weak and less than the Law requires, it is not probable that it will be more or
stronger, and should an Indictment be found, and the party tried by a Petit
Jury, whilst the Evidence is not full, they must and ought to acquit him, and
then the further prosecution for the same Offense is for ever barred, though
his guilt should afterward be manifest, and confessed by himself.

From hence may certainly be concluded that Secrecy in the Examinations and
Enquiries of Gr. Juries is in all respects for the Interest and advantage of
the King. If he be concerned to have secret Treasons, Felonies, and all other
enormities brought to light, and that none of the Offenders should escape
Justice; if the gain of their Forfeitures be thought his interest (which God
forbid) then the first notices of all dangerous crimes, and wicked
confederacies ought to be secretly and prudently pursued and searched into by
the Grand Inquest: The accusers and Witnesses ought not to publish in a Court
before a multitude what they pretend to know in such cases, until the
discretion of so many honest men of the neighborhood, has first determined
whether their testimony will amount to so good and full Evidence that it may be
made public with safety to the King and People in order to Justice. Else they
are obliged by Oath to lock up in their own breasts all the circumstances and
presumptions of crimes, until they, or such as shall succeed in the same trust,
shall have discovered (as they believe) Evidence enough to convict the accused,
and then, and not before, they are to accuse the party upon Record, by finding
the Bills, (as it is usually called.) But when Bills are offered without
fatisfactory Evidence, and they neither know nor can learn any more, they ought
for the King's sake, to indorse Ignoramus upon them, least his Honor and
Justice be stained by causing or permitting such prosecution of his People in
his own name, and at his suit, as shall appear upon their Trial and Acquittal
to have been frivolous, or else malicious designs upon their Lives and Fortunes.

If it should be said, that whatsoever reasons there are for this Oath of
Secrecy; yet it cannot deprive the King of the benefit of having the Evidence
made public, if he desires it, and that the Grand Jury do not break their
Oaths when the King or the Prosecutor for him will have it so: It Is not hard to
show that such Notions have no foundation in Law or Reason, and seem to come
from men who have not well studied the first principles of the English
Government or of true Religion.

Whosoever has learnt that the Kings of England were ordained for the good
Government of the Kingdom in the Execution of the Laws, must needs know, that
the King cannot lawfully seek any other benefit in judicial proceedings, than
that common Right and Justice be done to the People according to their Laws and
Customs. Their Safety and Prosperity are to be the objects of His continual
Care and Study, that being highest concern. The greatness and Honor of a
Prince consists in the Virtue, Multitude, Wealth and Prowess of his People; and
his greatest Glory is, by the excellence of his Government so to have
encouraged Virtue and Piety, that few or no Criminals are to be found in his
Dominions. Those who have made this their principal aim, have in some places so
well succeeded, as to introduce such a Discipline and rectitude of manners, as
rendered every man a Law unto himself. As it is reported in the History of Peru,
Gar. de la Veg. Hist. de los Incas.
that though the Laws were so severe as to make very small Crimes capital, yet
it often fell out, that not one man was put to Death in a year, within the
whole compass of that vast Empire.

The King's only benefits in finding out and punishing Offenders by Courts of
Justice are the preservation and Support of the Government, the protection of
the Innocent, revenging their wrongs, and preventing further mischiefs by the
terrors of exemplary punishments.

The King is the head of Justice in the esteem of our Laws, and the whole
Kingdom is to expect right to be done them in his several Courts instituted by
Law for that purpose. Therefore Writs issue out in his name in all cases where
relief is sought by the Subjects: and the wrongs done to the Lives or Limbs of
the People are said to be done against the Peace of the King, his Crown and
Dignity, reckoning it a dishonor to him and his Government, that Subjects
should not, whilst they live within the Law, enjoy Peace and Security. It ought
to be taken for a scandal upon the King, when he is represented in a Court of
Justice as if he were partially concerned, or rather inclined to desire, that a
party accused should be found guilty, than that he should be declared innocent,
if he be so in Truth. Doubtless the King ought to wish in all Enquiries made
after Treasons, Felonies, etc. that there were none to be found in his Kingdom;
and that whosoever is accused, might be able to answer so well and truly for
himself, as to show the Accusation to be erroneous or false, and to be
acquitted of it. Something of this appears in the common Custom of England,
that the Clerks of the Kings Courts of Justice, when any man has pleaded not
guilty to an Indictment, prays forthwith that God would send him a good
deliverance.

The Destruction of every Criminal ^s a loss to a Prince, and ought to be
grievous to him; in the common regard of humanity, and the more particular
Relation of his Office, and the name of Father. The Kings Interest and Honor
is more concerned in the Protection of the Innocent, than in the punishment of
the Guilty. This maxim can never run them into excesses; for it has ever been
looked upon as a mark of great Wisdom and Virtue in some Princes and States,
upon several occasions ^o destroy all Evidences against Delinquents; and
nothing is more usual than ^o compose the most dangerous distempers of Nations
by Acts of general Amnesty, which were utterly unjust, if it ^t were as great a
crime to suffer the Guilty to escape, as to destroy the Innocent. We do not
only find those Princes represented in History under odious Characters, who
have basely murdered the Innocent. but such as by their Spies and Informers
were too inquisitive after the guilty; whereas none was ever blamed for
Clemency, or for being too gentle Interpreters of the Laws. Tho. Trajan was an
excellent Prince, endowed with all hereical Virtues, yet the most eloquent
Writers, and his best friends found nothing more to be praised in his
Government, than that in his time, all men might think what they pleased,
Tacit. lib. 1. Hist.
and every man speak what he thought, and he had no better way of
distinguishing himself from his wicked Predecessors, than by hanging up the
Spies and Informers, whom they had employed for the discovery of crimes. But if
the punishment of Offenders were as universally necessary as the Protection of
the Innocent, he were as much to be abhorred as Nero; and that clemency which
is so highly praised, were to be looked upon as the worst of vices, and those
who have hitherto been taken for the best of Princes, were altogether as
detestable as the worst.

Moreover all humane Laws were ordained for the preservation of the Innocent,
and for their sakes only are punishments inflicted; that those of our own
Country do solely regard this, was well understood by Fortes^ue, who says,
Fort. de Laud. Leg. Ang. chapter 27.
Indeed I could ^ather wish Twenty Evildoers to escape death through ^itty,
than one man to be unjustly condemned. Such Blood has cried to Heaven for
Vengeance against Families and Kingdoms, and their utter destruction has
ensued. If a Criminal should be acquitted by too great lenity, caution, or
otherwise, he may be reserved for future Justice from Man or God, if he does
not repent; but it is impossible that satisfaction or reparation should be made
for innocent Bloodshed in the forms of Justice.

Without all question the Kings only just Interest in the Evidence given
against the party accused, and in the manner of taking it, is to have the truth
made manifest, that Justice may there upon be done impartially: And if
accusations may be first examined in secret more strictly and exactly, to
prevent Fraud and Perjury than is possible to be done in open Court, (as has
before appeared) then it is for the Kings benefit to have it so. And nothing
done in, or by a Court about the Trial of the accused, is for the King, (in the
sense of our Law) unless it some way conduce to justice in the case. The
Witnesses which the Prosecutor brings, are no further for the King, than they
tell the truth and the whole Truth impartially; and by whomsoever any others
may be called, upon the Enquiry, or the Trial to be examined, if they sincerely
deliver the truth of the matters in question, they are therein the Kings
Witnesses, though the accused be acquitted by reason of their Testimonies. If
such as are offered by the Attorney General to prove Treason against any man,
shall be found to swear falsely, maliciously, or for Reward or Promises, though
they depose positively facts of Treason against the accused, yet they are truly
and properly Witnesses against the King, by endeavoring to prevent Justice,
and destroy his Subjects: Their Malice and Villainy being confessed or proved,
the Kings Attorney ought (ex Officio) to prosecute them in the Kings name, and
at his suit, for their Offenses against him in such Depositions pretended to
have been for him: and the legal form of the Indictment ought to be for their
swearing falsely and maliciously against the Peace of the King, his Crown and
Dignity. The Prosecutors themselves, notwithstanding their big words, and
assuming to themselves, to be for the King, if their prosecution shall be
proved to be malicious, or by Conspiracy against the Life or Fortune of the
accused, they are therein against the King, and ought to be indicted at the
King's Suit, for such Prosecutions done against his Crown and Dignity. And if
an Attorney General should be found knowingly guilty of abetting such a
Conspiracy, his Office could not excuse or legally exempt him from suffering
the villainous judgment to the destruction of him and his Family. It Is esteemed
in the Law one of the most odious Offenses against the King, to attempt in his
name to destroy the Innocent, for whose Protection he himself was ordained. Qu.
Elizabeth had the true sense of our Law, Co. Inst. 3d part, p. 79.
when the Lord Burleigh, upon Sir Edward Coke her then Attorney's coming into
her presence, told her, this is he who prosecutes pro Domina Regina, for our
Lady the Queen; and she said, she would have the form of the Records altered;
for it should be Attornatus Generalis qui pro Domina veritate sequitur. The
Attorney General who prosecutes for our Lady the Truth. Whoever is trusted in
that employment dishonours his Master and Office, if he gives occasion to the
Subjects to believe that his Master seeks other profits or advantages by
Accusations, than the common Peace and Welfare: He ought not to excite a
jealousy in any of their minds, that confiscations of Estates are designed or
desired by any of the King's Ministers; whosoever makes such advantages to the
Crown their principal aim in accusing, are either Robbers and Murderers, (in
the Scripture sense) in seeking innocent Blood for gain, or in the mildest
Construction, (supposing the Accusation to be on good grounds) they show
themselves to be of corrupt minds, and a scandal to their Master and the
Government. Profit or loss of that kind ought to have no place in judicial
proceedings against suspected Criminals, but truth is only to be regarded; and
for this reason the judgments given in Court of humane Institution, are in
Scripture called, the Judgments of God, who is the God of truth.

Yet further, if any benefit to the King could be imagined by making the
Evidence to the Grand Jury public, it could not come in competition with the
Law expressed in their Oath; which by constant uninterrupted usage, for so many
Ages, has obtained the force of Law. Bracton and Britton in their several
Generations bear Witness, that it was then practiced; and greater proof of it
need not be sought, than the Disputes that appears by the Law Books to have
been amongst the ancient Lawyers, whether it was Treason or Felony for a Grand
Jury to discover, either who was indicted, or what Evidence was given them. The
Trust of the Grand Juries was thought so sacred in those Ages, and their
secrecy of so great concern to the Kingdom, that whosoever should break their
Oath therein, was by all thought worthy to die; only some would have had them
suffer as Traitors, others as Felons. Co. Instit. 3d part, p. 107. Rulls Indic.
771.
And at this day it is held to be a high Misprision punishable by Fine and
Impoverishment. The Law then having appointed the Evidence to be given to Grand
Juries in secret, the King cannot desire to have it made public. He can do no
wrong, says the old Maxim, that is, he can do nothing against the Law, nor is
any thing to be judged for his benefit that is not warranted by Law; His Will,
Commands, and desires are therein no otherwise to be known: He cannot change
the legal Method or manner of enquiring by Juries, nor vary in any particular
case from the customary and general forms of judicial proceedings; he can
neither abridge nor enlarge the power of Juries, no more than he can lessen the
legal Power of the Sheriffs or Judges, or by special Directions order the one
how they shall execute Writs, and the other how they shall give Judgments,
though these made by himself.

It Is criminal, no doubt, for any to say, that the King desires a Court of
Justice, or a Jury, to vary from the direction of the Law, and they ought not
to be believed therein: If Letters, Writs, or other Commands should come to the
Judges for that purpose, they are bound by their Oaths not to regard them, but
to hold them for null; the Statutes of 2 E. 3.8. and 20 E. 3.1. are express.
That if any Writs or Commandments come to the Justices in disturbance of the
Law, or the Execution of the same, or of right to the parties, they shall
proceed as if no such Letters, Writs, or Commands were come to them: And the
Substance of these and other Statutes is inserted into the Oath taken by every
Judge; and if they be under the most solemn and sacred Tie in the Execution of
Justice, to hold for nothing or none the Commands of the King under the great
Seal, surely the Word or Desire of an Attorney General, in the like case, ought
to be less than nothing.

Besides, they are strangely mistaken, who think the King can have an Interest
different from, or contrary unto that of the Kingdom, in the prosecution of
Accused Persons: His Concernments are involved in those of his People; and he
can have none distinct from them. He is the Head of the Body Politic, and the
Legal course of doing Justice, is like the orderly Circulation of the Blood in
the Natural Bodies, by which both Head and Body are equally preserved, and both
perish by the interruption of it.

The King is obliged to the utmost of his Power to maintain the Law, and
Justice in its due course, by his Coronation Oath, and the Trust thereby
reposed in him. In former Ages he was conjured not to take the Crown, unless he
resolved punctually to observe it. Brom. p. 1159 Mat. Paris, p. 153. Hoved. p.
374. Baker. p. 68.
Bromton and others speaking of the Coronation of Richard the First, deliver it
thus, That having first taken the Oath; Deinde indutus Mantello, ductus est ad
Altar, and conjuratus ab Archiepiscopo, and prohibitus ex part Dei, ne hunc
Honorem sibi assumat, nisi in mente habeat tenere Sacramenta and Vota quae
superius fecit. Et Ipse respondit, se per Dei auxilium omnia supradicta
observaturum bona fide. Deinde cepit Coronam de Altari, and tradidit eam
Archiepiscopo, qui posuit eam super caput Regis, and sic Coronatus Rex, ductus
est ad sedem suam. Afterward clothed with the Royal Robe, he is led to the
Altar, and conjured by the Archbishop, and forbid in the Name of God, not to
assume that Honor, unless he intended to keep the Oaths and Vows he had before
made; and he answered, by God's help he would saithfully observe all the
Premises: And then he took the Crown from off the Altar, and delivered it to
the Archbishop, who put it upon the King's head; and the King thus Crowned, is
led unto his Seat. The violation of which Trust cannot but be as well a wound
unto their Consciences as bring great prejudice upon their Persons and Affairs.

The Common Law that exacts this, does so far provide for Princes, That having
their minds free from cares of preserving themselves they may rest assured,
that no Acts, Words or Designs, that may bring them into danger, can be
concealed from the many hundreds of men, who by the Law are appointed in all
parts of the Kingdom, watchfully to take care of the King; and are so far
concerned in his safety, that they can hope no longer to enjoy their own Lives
and Fortunes in peace, than they can preserve him, and the good Order which
according to the Laws he is to uphold.

It is the Joint Interest of King and People that the Ancient Rules of doing
Justice be held sacred and inviolable; and they are equally concerned in
causing strict Inquiries to be made into all Evidences given against suspected,
or accused Persons, that the Truth may be discovered; and such as dare to
disturb the Public Peace by breaking the Laws, may be brought to punishment.
And the whole course of Judicial Proceedings in Criminal Causes, shows that the
People is therein equally concerned with the King, whose Name is used. This is
the ground of that distinction which Sir Ed. Coke makes between the Proceedings
in Pleas of the Crown, and Actions for wrongs done to the King himself. Co. 3d.
Inst. page 136.
In Pleas of the Crown, or other common offenses, nusances, etc. principally
concerning others, or the Public, there the King by Law must be apprised by
Indictment, Presentment, or other matter of Record; but the King may have an
Action for such wrong as is done to himself, and whereof none other can have an
Action but the King, without being apprised by Indictment, Presentment, or
other matter of Record, as a Quare impedit, Quare incumbravit, a Writ of
Attaint, of Debt, Detinue of Ward, Escheat, Scire fac. pur repealer patent,
etc. Unto which every man must answer: But no man can be brought to answer for
Public Crimes at the King's Suit otherwise than by Indictment of a Grand Jury.

The whole Course of doing Justice upon Crimina's, from the beginning of the
process, unto the Execution of the Sentence, is, and ever was esteemed to be
the Kingdoms concernment, as is evidenced by the frequent Complaints made in
Parliament, that Capital Offenders were pardoned to the Peoples damage and
wrong. In the 13 Rich. 2. it is said, that the King hearing the grievous
Complaints of his Commons in Parliament, of the outrageous mischiefs which
happened unto the Realm, for that Treasons, Murders, and Rapes of Women, be
commonly done, and committed, and the more because Charters of pardon had been
easily granted in such cases; And thereupon it was enacted, that no pardon for
such crimes should be granted, unless the same were particularly specified
therein, and that if a pardon were otherwise granted for the death of a man,
the Judges should notwithstanding enquire by a Grand Jury of the Neighborhood
concerning the death of every such person, and if he were found to have been
wilfully murdered, such Charter of Pardon to be disallowed; and provisions were
made by imposing grievous Fines upon every person, according to his Degree and
Quality, or Imprisonment, who should presume to sue to the King for any pardons
of the aforesaid crimes, and that such persons might be known to the whole
Kingdom, their names were to be upon several Records. The like had been done in
many Statutes made by several Parliaments, as in the 6 Ed. 1.9. the 2 Ed. 3.2.
the 10 Ed. 3.2. and the 14 Ed. 3.15. wherein it was acknowledged by the King in
Parliament, That the Oath of the Crown had not been kept, by reason of the
Grant of Pardons contrary to the aforesaid Statutes; and enacted that any such
Charter of Pardon, from thenceforth granted against the Oath of his Crown and
the said Statutes, the same should be holden for none. In the 27 Edw. 3.2. It
is further provided for preventing the Peoples damage by such pardons. That
from thenceforth in every Charter of Pardon of Felony, which shall be granted
at any man's suggestion, the said suggestion, and the name of him that makes
the suggestion, shall be comprised in the same Charter, and if after the same
suggestion be found untrue, the Charter shall be disallowed and holden for
none: And the Justices before whom such Charter shall be alleged, shall
enquire of the same suggestion, and that as well of Charters granted before
this time, as of Charters which shall be granted in time to come, and if they
find them untrue, then they shall disallow the Charter so alleged, and shall
moreover do as the Law demands.

Thus have Parliaments from time to time declared, that the Offenses against
^he Crown are against the public wel^are, and that Kings are obliged by their
Oath and Office to cause Justice to ^e done upon Traitors and Felons ^or the
Kingdoms sake; according to ^he ancient common Law, declared by Magna Charta in
these ^ords: Nulli negabimus, 9 Hen. 3.29.
nulli vendemus, nulli dif^remus Justitiam. We will sell to no ^an, we will not
deny or defer to any ^an either Justice or Right.

And as the public is concerned, that the due and legal Methods be observed in
the Prosecution of Offenders, so likewise does the security of every single man
in the Nation depend upon it: No man can assure himself he shall not be accused
of the highest crimes. Let a man's Innocence and prudence be what it will, yet
his most inoffensive Words and Actions are liable to be misconstrued, and he
may, by Subornation and Conspiracy, have things laid to his charge, of which he
is no ways guilty. Who can speak or carry himself with that circumspection, as
not to have his harmless Words or Actions wrested to another sense than he
intended? Who can be secure from having a Paper pur into his Pockets, or laid
in his house, of which he shall know nothing till his Accusation? History
affords many Examples of the detestable practices in this kind of wicked Court
Parasites, among which one may suffice for Instance, out of Polibius an
approved Author. Polib. lib. 5.
Hermes a powerful Favorite, under Antiochus the younger, but a man noted to
be a favourer of Liars, was made use of against the innocent and brave
Epigenes: He had long watched to kill him, for that he found him a man of great
Eloquence and Valor, having also favor and Authority with the King: He had
unjustly but unsuccessfully accused him of Treason by false glosses put upon
his faithful advice given to the King in open Council; ^his not prevailing, he
by artifice got him put out of his Command, and to retire from Court; which
done, he laid (...) Plot against him, with the help and Counsel of (one of his
Accomplices) Alex^s, and writing Letters as if they had been sent from Molon,
(who was then in open Rebellion against his Prince ^or fear, amongst other
Reasons, of the Cruelty and Treachery of Hermes) and corrupted one of Alexis's
Servants with ^reat Promises, who went to Epigenes, ^o thrust the Letters
secretly amongst ^is other Writings, which when he had ^one, Alexis came
suddenly to Epigenes, ^emanding of him, if he had received any Letter from
Molon: and when he said he had none, the other said, he was confident he should
find some; wherefore entering the House to search, he found the Letters, and
taking this occasion, slew him, [lest if the Fact had been duly examined, the
Conspiracy had been discovered.] These things happening thus, the King thought
that he was justly slain; in this manner the worthy Epigenes ended his days:
But this great man's designs did not rest here; for within a while heightened
with success, he so arrogantly abused His Masters Authority, as he grew
dangerous to the King himself, as well as to those about him; insomuch as
Antiochus was sorced for that he hated and feared Hermes, to take away his Life
by Stratagem, thereby to secure himself. By these, and a thousand other ways,
the most unblemisht Innocence may be brought into the greatest dangers. Since
then every man is thus easily subject to question, and what is one man's case
this day, may be another man's to morrow it is undoubtedly every man's concern,
to see (as far as in him lies) in every case, that the accused Person may have
the benefit of all such provisions, as the Law has made for the defense of
Innocence and Reputation.

Now to this end there is nothing so necessary as the secret and separate
examination of Witnesses, for though perhaps (as has been already observed) it
may be no very difficult thing for several persons, who are permitted to
discourse with each other freely, and to hear, or be told what each of their
fellows had been asked and answered, to agree in one story, especially if the
Jury may not ask what questions they shall think it for the satisfaction of
their own Consciences; but that they shall be so far under the correction and
censure of the ^udges, as to have the questions which they put, called by them
trifles, impertinent, and unfit for the Witnesses ^o speak to; yet if they be
examined a^art, with that due care of sifting out ^ll the Circumstances which
the Law requires, where every man of the Jury is at full liberty to enquire
into any thing for his clearer information, and that with what deliberation
they think fit, and all this be done with that secrecy which the law commands;
it will be almost impossible for a man to suffer under a false Accusation.

Nor has the Law been less careful for the Reputation of the Subjects of
England, than for their Lives and Estates, and this seems to be one reason why
in criminal Cases, a man shall not be brought to an open legal Trial by a Petit
Jury, till the Grand Jury have first found the Bill: The Law having entrusted
the Grand Inquest in a special manner with their good names; they are therefore
not only to enquire whether the fact that is laid, was done by the party
accused, but into the circumstances thereof too, whether it were done
traitorously, feloniously, or maliciously, etc. according to the manner
charged, which Circumstances are not barely matter of form, but do constitute
the very essence of the Crime; and lastly into the Credit of the Witnesses, and
that of the party accused, and unless they find both the Fact proved upon him,
and strong presumptions of such aggravating circumstances attending it, as the
Law requires in the specification of such Crime, and likewise are satisfied in
the credibility of the Witnesses; they ought not to expose the Subject to an
open Trial in the face of the County, to a certain loss of his Reputation, and
hazard of his Life and Estate. Moreover should this practice of public
Examination prevail, and the Jurors Oath of Secrecy continue, how partial and
unequal a thing would it be to declare that to all the World, which will blast
a man's good name, and religiously cenceal what they may know tending to his
Justification: To examine Witnesses (perhaps suborned) certainly prepared, and
have Evidence dressed up with all the advantages that Lawyers wits can give it,
of the foulest Crimes a man can be guilty of, and this given before some
thousands against him, and yet for the same Court to swear those, whom the Law
makes Judges in the case, not to reveal one word of those reasons, which have
satisfied their Consciences of his Innocence. What is this, but an Artifice of
slandring men (it may be) of the most unspotted cnnversation, and of abusing
Authority, not so much to find men guilty, as to make them infamous? After this
Ignominy is fixed, what Judgment can the Auditors (and from them the World)
make, but of high probability of guilt in the party accused, and Perjury in the
Jury.

This course, if it should be continued, must needs be of most dangerous
consequence to all sorts of men; it will both subject every one without relief
to be defamed, and fright the best and most conscientious men, from serving on
Grand Juries, which is a most necessary part of their duty. Now since there is
in our Government (as in every one that is well constituted there ought to be)
great liberty of Accusation, that no man may be encouraged to do ill through
hopes of impunity, if by this means a Method be opened, for the blasting the
most innocent man's honor, and deterring the most honest from being his Judges,
what remains, but that every man's Reputation, which is most dear unto such as
are good, is held precariously, and it will be in the power of great men to
pervert the Laws, and take away whose Life and Estate they please, or at least
to fasten imputations of the most detested crimes upon any, whom, for secret
reasons they have a mind to defame. The consequences of which scandal, as they
are very mischievous to every man, so in a Trading Country in a more especial
manner, to all who live by any vocation of that kind.

The greatest part of Trade is driven upon credit, most men of any considerable
Employment, dealing for much more than they are truly worth, and every man's
credit depends as well upon his behavior to the Government he lives under, as
upon his private honesty in his transactions between man and man; so that the
suspicion only of his being obnoxious to the Government is enough to set all
his Creditors upon his back, and put a Stop to all his Affairs, perhaps to his
utter ruin. What expedition and violence will they all use to recover their
debts, when he shall be publicly charged with such crimes as forfeit Life and
Estate? Though there should not be one word of the Accusation true, yet they
knowing the charge and the seeming proofs in the Court, and the consequences of
it, and not being acquainted with the truth, as it appears to the Jury, self
interest will make his Creditors to draw in their effects, which is no more
than a new contrivance, under color of Law, of undoing honest men.

If to prevent any of these mischiefs the Jury should discover their fellows
and their own Counsel, as the Court by public Examination does, it would not
only be a wilful breach of their Oath, but a betraying of the trust which the
Law has reposed in them, for the security of the Subject: For to subject the
reasons of their Verdicts upon Bills to the censure of the Judges, were to
divest themselves of the Power which the Law has given them, for most important
considerations, without account or control, and to interest those in it, whom
the Law has not in this case trusted, and so by degrees, the course of Justice
in one of the most material parts may be changed, and a fundamental security of
our Liberty and Property insensibly lost. On the other hand, if for fear of
being unworthily reproached as Ignoramus Jurymen, obstinate fellows, that
obstruct Justice, and disserve the King, the Grand Jury shall suffer the
Judges, or the Kings Counsel to prevail with them, to indorse Billa vera, when
their Consciences are not satified in the truth of the Accusation, they act
directly against their Oaths, oppress the innocent whom they ought to protect;
as far as in them lies, subject their Country, themselves, and posterity to
Arbitrary powers, pervert the administration of justice, and overthrow the
Government, which is instituted for the obtaining of it, and subsists by it.

This seems to be the greatest Treason, that can be committed against the whole
Kingdom, and threatens ruin unto every man in private in it. None can be safe
against authorized Malice, and notwithstanding the care of our Ancestors,
Rapine, Murder, and the worst of crimes, may be advanced by the formality of
Verdicts, if Grand Juries be overawed, or not suffered to enquire into the
Truth, to the satisfaction of their Consciences. Every man whilst he lives
innocently, does, under God, place his hopes of security in the Law, which can
give no protection, if its due course be so interrupted, that frauds cannot be
discovered, Witnesses may as well favor offenders, as give false testimony
against the guiltless, and if they, by hearing what each other says, are put
into a way of concealing their villainous designs, there can be no legal
Revenge of the crimes already committed. Others by their impunity will be
encouraged to do the like: And every quiet minded person will be equally
exposed unto private injuries, and such as may be done unto him, under the
color of Law. No man can promise unto himself any security for his Life or
goods, and they who do not suffer the u^most violences in their own persons,
may do it in their Children, Friends, and nearest Relations, if he be deprived
of the remedies that the Law ordains, and forced to depend upon the Will of a
Judge, who may be (and perhaps we may say) are too often corrupted, or swayed
by their own Passions, Interests, or the Impulse of such as are greater than
they. This mischief is aggravated by a commonly received Opinion, that
whosoever speaks against an accused person is the Kings Witness, and the worst
of men, in their worst designs do usually shelter themselves under that name,
whereas he only is the Kings Witness, who speaks the truth, whether it be for
or against him that is accused. As the Power of the King is the Power of the
Law, he can have no other intention than that of the Law, which is to have
Justice impartially administered; and as he is the Father of his People, he
cannot but incline ever to the gentlest side, unless it be possible for a
Father to delight in the destruction, or desire to enrich himself by the
confiscation of his Childrens Estates. If the most wicked Princes have had
different thoughts, they have been obliged to dissemble them. We know of none
worse than Nero, but he was so far from acknowledging, that he desired any man's
condemnation, that he looked upon the necessity of signing Warrants for the
execution of Malefactors, Sne. Vit. Ner. Vtinam nescirem letteras.
as a burden, and rather wished he had not learnt to write, than to be obliged
to do it. They who by spreading such barbarous errors, would create unto the
King, an interest different from that of his People which he is to preserve,
whilst they pretend to serve him in destroying of them, they deprive him of his
honor and dignity; Justice is done in all places, in the name of the chief
Magistrate, it being presumed, that he does embrace every one of his Subjects
with equal tenderness, until the guilty are by legal proofs discriminated from
the Innocent, and amongst us the Kings name may be used in civil cases, as well
as criminal: But it is as impossible for him rightly to desire I should be
condemned for killing a man whom I have not killed, or a Treason that I have
not committed, as that my Land should be unjustly taken from me by a judgment
in his Bench, or I should be condemned to pay a debt that I do not owe.

In both cases we sue unto him for Justice, and demand it as our right. We are
all concerned in it, publicly, and privately, and the King, as well as all the
Officers of Justice, are by their several Oaths, obliged in their respective
capacities to perform it. They are bound to give their assistance to find out
Offenders, and the Kings Attorney is by his Oath to prosecute them, if he be
required; and he is not only the Kings servant in such cases, but the Nations;
or rather, cannot otherwise serve the King, than by seeing Justice done in the
Nation. Whenever any man receives an injury in his Person, Wife, Children,
Friends, or goods, the King is injured, in as much as he is by his Office to
prevent such mischief, and ought to be concerned in the Welfare of every one of
his Subjects; but the parties to whom the injuries are done, are the immediate
sufferers, and the prosecution is principally made, that they may be repared or
revenged, and other innocent persons secured by the punishment of Offenders, in
which the King can be no otherwise concerned, than as he is to see his Office
faithfully performed, and his People protected. The Kings suit therefore is in
the behalf of his People, yet the Laws leave unto every man a Liberty, in case
of Treasons, Murders, Rapes, Robberies, etc. to sue in the Kings name, and
crave his aid, or by way of appeal in his own. The same Law looks upon Felons,
or Traitors as public Enemies, and by authorizing every one to pursue or
apprehend them, teaches us, that every man, in his place, ought to do it. The
same Act whereby one, or a few are injured, threatens all, and every man's
private interest so concurs with that of the public, that all depends upon the
exact preservation of the Method prescribed by the Law, for the impartial
inquisition after suspected Offenders, and most tender care of preserving such
as are innocent. As this cannot possibly be effected without secret and
separate examinations, the forbidding of them is no less, than to change the
Course, which is enjoined by Law, confirmed by custom, and grounded upon reason
and Justice. If on the other side any man believe, that such as in the Kings
name prosecute suspected Delinquents, ought only to try how they may bring them
to be condemned, he may be pleased to consider, that all such persons ought,
according unto Law, to produce no Witness whom they do not think to be true: No
Evidence which they do not believe good, nor can conceal any thing that may
justify the accused. No trick or artifice can be lawfully used to deceive a
Grand Jury, or induce them to find or reject a Bill, otherwise than as they are
led by their own Consciences. All Lawyers were anciently sworn to put no deceit
upon the Courts for their Clients sake, and there are Statutes still in force
to punish them, if they do it, but there is an eternal obligation upon such as
are of Counsel against persons accused of crimes, not to use such arts as may
bring the innocent to be condemned, and thereby pervert that which is not
called the judgment of man, but of God, because man renders it in the stead,
and by the Commandment of God, such practices exalt the Jurisdiction of
Tribunals, but infect and pollute them with that innocent Blood, which will be
their overthrow: And least of all, can it be called a service to the King,
since none could ever stand against the cry of it. This is necessarily employed
in the Attorney general his Oath, to serve the King in his Kingly Office,
wherein the Law presumes he can do no wrong: But the greatest of all wrongs,
and that which has been most destructive unto Thrones, is by Fraud to
circumvent and destroy the Innocent: This is to turn a legal King into a
Nimrod, a Hunter of Men: This is not to act the part of a Father or a Shepherd,
who is ready to lay down his Life for his Sheep, but such as the Psalmist
complains of, who eat up the People as if they eat Bread: Jezebel did perhaps
applaud her own Wit, and think she had done a great Service to the King, by
finding out men of Belial, Judges, and Witnesses to bring Naboth to be stoned;
but that unregarded Blood was a Canker, or the Plague of Leprosy in his Throne
and Family, which could not be cured but by its overthrow and extinction. But
if the Attorney General cannot serve the King by abusing Juries, and subverting
the Innocent, he can as little gain an advantage to himself by falsifying his
Oath, by the true meaning whereof he is to prosecute Justice impartially, and
the Eternal Divine Law would annul any Oath or Promise that he should have
taken to the contrary, even though his Office had obliged him unto it.

The like Obligation lies upon Jurors not to suffer themselves to be deluded,
or persuaded, that the Judges, Kings Council, or any others can dispense with
that Oath, or any part of it, which they have taken before God unto the whole
Nation; nor to think that they can swerve from the Rules set by the Law without
a damnable breach of it, The power of relating, or dissolving Conscientious
Obligations, acknowledged in the Pope, makes a great part of the Roman
Superstition; and that grand Impostor could never corrupt Kingdoms and Nations
to their destruction, and the Establishment of his Tyranny, until he had
brought them to believe he could dispense with Oaths, taken by Kings unto their
Subjects, and by Subjects to their Kings; nor impose so extravagant an Error
upon either, until he had persuaded them he was in the place of God. It is hard
to say how the Judges or Kings Council can have the same Power, unless it be
upon the same Title; but we may be sure they may as well dispense with the
whole Oath as any part of it, and can have no pretense unto either, unless they
have the Keys of Heaven and Hell in their keeping: It is in vain to say, the
King as any other man may remit the Oath taken unto and for himself; He is not
a party for himself, but in the behalf of his People, and cannot dispose of
their Concernments without their Consent, which is given only in Parliament.

The Kings Council ought to remember, they are in criminal Cases of Council
unto every man in the Kingdom; It is no ways referred unto the Direction of the
Judges, or unto them, whether that secrecy enjoined by Law, be profitable unto
the King or Kingdom; They must take the Law as it is, and render Obedience unto
it, until it be altered by the Power that made it. To this end the Judges by
Acts of Parliament, viz. 18 Ed. 3. cap. 8. and 20 Ed. 3. Cap. 1. are sworn to
serve the People, Ye shall serve our Lord the King and his People in the Office
of Justice, etc, Ye shall deny to no man common Right by the Kings Letters, nor
no other man's; nor for no other cause; and in default thereof in any point,
they are to forfeit their Bodies, Lands and Goods. This proves them to be the
Peoples Servants as well as the Kings.

Further by the express words of the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, they are
required to assist every man that suffers injury, and make diligent inquisition
after all manner of falsehoods, deceits, offenses, and wrongs done to any man,
and thereupon to do Justice according to the Law: so that in the whole
proceedings in order unto Trial, and in the Trials themselves, the Thing
principally intended, which several persons are severally in their capacities
obliged to pursue, is, the discovery of Truth: The witnesses are to depose the
Truth, the whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth: Thereupon the Council for
the King are to prosecute: The Grand Jury to present: and the Petit Jury to
try: These are several Offices, but all to the same End; It Is not the Prisoner,
but the Crime that is to be pursued; This primarily, the Offender but by
consequence; and therefore such Courses must be taken, as may discover that,
and not such as may ensnare him: When the Offense is found, the impartial
Letter of the Law gives the Doom; and the Judges have no share in it, but the
pronouncing of it: Till then the Judges are only to preside, and take Care,
that every man else, who is employed in this necessary Affair, do his duty
according to Law. So that upon result of the whole transaction impartial
Justice may be done, Either to the Acquittal, or condemnation of the Prisoner.

Hereby it is manifest why the Judges are obliged by Oath, To Serve the People
as well as the King: And by Commission, To Serve every One that Suffers
Injuries. As they are to See that Right be done to the King, and His Injured
Subjects in discovering of the Delinquent; So they are to be of Council with
the Prisoner, whom the Law supposes may be ignorant as well as innocent; and
therefore has provided, that the Court shall be of Council for him, and as well
inform him of what Legal advantages the Law allows him, as to resolve any point
of Law when he shall propose it to them; And it seems to be upon the
presumption of this steady impartiality in the Judges, (thus obliged by all
that is held Sacred before God and man to be unbyassed) that the Prisoner has
no Council; for if the Court faithfully perform their duty, the Accused can
have no wrong, or hardship, and therefore needs no Adviser.

Now suppose a man perfectly innocent, and in some measure knowing in the Law,
should be accused of Treason or Felony; If the Judges shall deny unto the Grand
Jury the Liberty of examining any witnesses, except in open Court, where
nothing shall be offered that may help to clear the Prisoner, but every Thing
aggravated, that gives color for the Accusation; such Persons only produced,
as the Kings Council, or the prosecutors shall think fit to call, of whose
Credit also the Jury must not inquire, but shall be controlled and browbeaten
in asking Questions, of such unknown witnesses, for their own Satisfaction, if
they have any Tendency to discover the Infamy of these witnesses, or the
Falsehood of their Testimony; How can Innocence secure any Man from being
arraigned?

And if the Oath of the Judges should be as much forgotten in the further
Proceedings upon the Tr^al, where in Cases of Treason the Prisoner shall have
all the Kings Council (commonly not the most unlearned) prepared with studied
speeches, and arguments, to make him black, and odious, and to Strein all his
words, and to allege them for Instances of his guilt: If then all his private
Papers, and Notes to help his memory in his Plea, and defense, shall be taken
from him by the Jailer, or the Court, and given to his Prosecutors; And all
Advice and Assistance from Councils or friends, and his nearest Relations shall
be denied him, and none suffered by word or writing to inform him of the
indifferency, or honesty, or the Partiality or malice of the Pannels returned
(whom the Law allows him to Challenge or refuse, either peremptorily, or for
good Reasons offered;) should he be thus deprived of all the good provisions of
the Law for his safety, To what Frauds, Perjuries, and Subornations is not he,
and every man Exposed, who may be accused? What Deceits may there not be put
upon Juries? and what Probability is there of finding security in Innocence?
What an admirable Execution would this be of their Commission, To make diligent
Inquisition after all manner of Falsehoods, Deceipts, wrongs and Frauds, and
thereupon to do Justice according to Law? When at the same Time; if so Managed,
a Method would be introduced of ruining and destroying any Man in the form of
Justice. Such practices would be the highest dishonor to the King imaginable,
whose name is used, and so far Misrepresent the Kingly Office, as to make that
appear, to have been Erected to vex and destroy the People, which was intended,
and ordained to help and preserve them.

The Law so far abhors such proceedings, that it intends, that every Man should
be strictly bound, to be Exactly just, in their several Employments, relating
to the Execution of Justice. The Sergeant, of the Kings Council (Sir George
Jeffrys, among the rest) who prosecute in the King's name, and are consulted in
the forming bills of Indictment, and advice about the witnesses and their
Testimonies against the Accused; These (if they would remember it) when they
are made Sergeants, take an Oath ( Cokes 2d Institutes Page 214.) as well and
truly to serve the People (whereof the party accused is one) as the King
himself and to minister the Kings matters duly and truly after the course of
the Law to their Cunning; Not to use their Cunning and Craft to hide the Truth
and destroy the accused if they can.

They are also obliged by the Statute of Westminster. 1. Cap. 29. To put no manner of
Deceit or Collusion upon the Kings Court, nor secretly to consent to any such
Tricks as may abuse or beguile the Court, or the party, be it in Causes Civil
or Criminal: And it is ordained that if any of them be convicted of such
practices, he shall be imprisoned for a year, and never be heard to plead again
in any Court; and if the Mischievous consequence of their Treacheries be great,
they are Subject to further and greater punishments. Our Ancient Law Book
called the Mirror of Justice, Cap. 2. Sect. 4. says, That every Sergeant
Pleader is chargeable by his Oath, not to maintain or defend any wrong or
Falsehood to his Knowledge, but shall leave his Client when he shall perceive
the wrong intended by him: Also that he shall not move or proffer any false
Testimony, nor consent to any Lies Deceits or Corruptions whatsoever in his
pleadings.

As a further Security unto the People against all Attempts upon their Laws,
Exemplary Justice has been done, in several Ages, upon such Judges, and
Justiciaries, as through Corruption, Submission unto unjust Commands, or any
other Sinister consideration, have dared to swerve from them: The punishments
of these wicked Men remain upon Record, as Monuments of their Infamy to be a
Terror unto all that shall succeed them. In the Reign of the Saxons the most
notable Example was given by King Alfred, who caused above forty Judges to be
hanged in a Short Space, for several wrongs done to the People, as is related
in the Mirror of Justice: Some of them suffered for imposing upon Juries, and
forcing them to give Verdicts according to their will; And one as it seems, had
taken the Considence to examine a Jury, that he might find which of them would
Submit to his will, and Setting aside him who would nor, condemned a Man upon
the Verdict of Eleven.

Since the Coming in of the Normans, our Parliaments have not been less severe
against such Judges, as have suffered the course of Justice to be perverted, or
the Rights and Liberties of the People to be invaded: In the time of Edward the
1st Anno 1289. The Parliament finding, That all the Judges (except Two) had
swerved from their duty, condemned them to several punishments according unto
their Crimes, As Banishment, Perpetual Imprisonment, Ex Chron. Anno 10 Ed. 1.
or the Loss of all their Estates, etc. Their Particular Offenses are specified
in a speech made by the Archbishop of Canterbury in Parliament. They had
broken Magna Charta; Incited the King against his People; Violated the Laws
under pretense of expounding them; And impudently presumed to prefer their own
Councils to the King, before the Advices of Parliament, as appears by the
speech, etc. Hereunto annexed.

The like was done in Ed. the 2d Time when Hugh De Spencer was charged for
having prevailed with the King to break his Oath to the People, in doing Things
against the Law by his own Authority.

In Edward the 3d. Time Judge Thorpe was hanged for having in the like manner
brought the King to break his Oath: Dan. History p. 260, 261.
And the happy Reign of that great King affords many Instances of the like
nature, amongst which the punishment of Sr. Henry Green and Sr. William
Skipwith, deserve to be observed and put into an Equal rank with those of his
brave and victorious Grandfather.

In Richard the Second's Time, See all the English Histories of Walsingham,
Fabian, Speed, etc. in the 11 and 21 years of Richard the 2d.
Eleven of the Judges, forgetting the dreadful Punishments of their
Predecessors, subscribed malicious Indictments against Law, and gave false
Interpretations of our Ancient Laws to the King, thereby to bring many of his
most Eminent, and worthiest Subjects, to suffer as Traitors at his Will:
Subjected the Authority, and very being of Parliaments to his absolute
pleasure, And made him believe, that all the Laws lay in his own breast:
Hereupon sentence of death passed upon them; and tho upon their repentance, and
confessing, they had been swayed by fear, and threatenings from the King, Two
only were Executed, all the others, were for ever banished, as unworthy to
enjoy the benefit of that Law, which they had so perfidiously, and basely
betrayed.

It were an Endless work to recite all the Examples of this kind that are found
in our Histories and Records; but that of Empson and Dudley must not be
omitted: They had craftily contrived to abolish Grand Juries and to draw the
Lives and Estates of the People into question, without Indictments by them; and
by surprise, and other wicked practices, they gained an Act of Parliament for
their countenance: Hereupon false Accusations followed without number;
Oppression and Injustice broke forth like a Flood, And to gain the Kings Favor,
they filled his Coffers: The Indictments against them mentioned in Anderson's
Reports, Pa. 156. 157. are worth reading; whereby they are charged with
Treason, for Subverting the Laws, and Customs of the Land, in their proceedings
without Grand Juries, and procuring the murmuring and hatred of the People
against the King, to the great danger of him, and the Kingdom. Nothing could
satisfy the Kingdom, tho the King was dead, whom they had flattered, and
served, but such Justice done upon them, and many of their Instruments, and
Officers, as may for ever make the Ears of Judges to tingle.

And it is not to be forgotten, that the Judges in Queen Eliz. time, in the
Case of R. Cavendish in Anderson's Reports P. 152, and 155. were (as they told
the Queen, and her Counselors) by the punishment of former Judges, especially
of Empson and Dudley, deterred from obeying her illegal Commands: The Queen had
sent several Letters under her Signet; Great Men pressed them to obey her
Patent under the Great Seal, and the Reasons of their disobedience being
required; They answered, That the Queen her self, and the Judges, also had
taken an Oath to keep the Laws; And if they should obey her Commands, the Laws
would not warrant them, and they should therein break their Oath, to the
Offense of God, and their Country, and the Commonwealth wherein they were
born; And, say they, if we had no fear of God, yet the Examples, and
punishments of others before us, who did offend the Laws, do remember, and
recall us from the like Offenses.

Whosoever being in the like places may design, or be put upon the like
practices, will do well to consider these Examples, and not to think, that he,
who obliquely Endeavors to render Grand Jurys useless, is less Criminal, than
he, that would absolutely abolish them: That which does not act according to
its Institution, is, as if it were not in being: And whoever does without
prejudice consider this matter, will see that it is not less pernicious to deny
Juries the use of those Methods of discovering Truth which the Law has
appointed, and so by degrees turn them into a mere matter of form, than openly,
and avowedly to destroy them. Surely such a gradual Method of destroying our
Native Right is the most dangerous in its consequence. The safety, which our
Forefathers for many hundreds of years, enjoyed under this part of the Law
especially, and have transmitted to us, is so apparent to the meanest Capacity,
that whoever shall go about to take it away, or give it up, is like to meet
with the fate of Ishmael, to have every man's hand against him, because his is
against every Man. Artifices of this Kind, will ruin us more silently, and so
with less opposition, and yet as certainly, as the other more moved oppression:
This only is the difference, that one way we should be slaves immediately, and
the other insensibly; But with this further disadvantage too, that our slavery
should be the more unavoydable, and the faster rivited upon us, because it
would be under color of Law, which Practice in Time would obtain.

Few men at first see the danger of little changes in Fundamentals, and those,
who design them, usually act with so much craft, as besides the giving specious
Reasons, they take great Care, that the true Reason shall not appear: Every
design therefore of changing the Constitution ought to be most warily observed,
and timely opposed; Nor is it only the Interest of the People, that such
Fundamentals should be duly guarded, for whose benefit they were at first so
carefully laid, and whom the Judges are sworn to serve; but of the King too,
for whose sake those pretend to act, who would subvert them.

Our Kings as well as Judges are sworn to maintain the Laws; They have
themselves in several Statutes required the Judges, at their peril, to
administer Equal Justice to every Man, notwithstanding any Letters, or
Commands, etc. even from themselves to the contrary; And when any failure has
been, the greatest, and most powerful of them have ever been the readiest to
give Redress. It appears by the preface to the Statutes of 20th Ed. 3. that the
Judicial proceedings had been perverted, That Letters writs and Commands had
been sent from the King, and great Men to the Justices, and that Persons
belonging to the Court of the King, the Queen, the Prince of Wales had
maintained, and abetted Quarrels, etc. Whereby the Laws had been violated, and
many wrongs done: But the King was so far from justifying his own Letters, or
those illegal practices: That the preamble of those Statutes says, they were
made for the relief of the People in their sufferings by them. That brave King
in the height of his glory, and vigor of his Age, chose rather to confess his
Error, than to continue in it, as is Evident by his own words. Edward by the
Grace of God, etc. Because by diverse Complaints made unto us, we have perceived
that the Law of the Land, which we by our Oath are bound to maintain, is the
less well kept, and Execution of the same disturbed many times by maintenances
and procurements; as well in the Court, as the Country, We greatly moved of
Conscience in this matter, and for this Cause, desiring as much for the
pleasure of God, and ease and quietness of our Subjects, as to save our
Conscience, and for to save and keep our said Oath, by the Assent, etc. Enact,
That Judges shall do Justice, notwithstanding Writs, Letters or Commands from
himself, etc. and that none of the King's House, or belonging to the King.
Queen, or Prince of wales do maintain Quarrels, etc.

King James in his Speech to the Judges in the Starchamber Anno. 1616. told
them; That He had after many years resolved to renew his Oath, made at his
Coronation, concerning Justice and the promise therein contained for
maintaining the Law of the Land. And in the next Page save one says, I was
sworn to maintain the Law of the Land, and therefore had been perjured, if I
had broken it; God is my Judge I never intended it. And His Majesty, that now
is, has made frequent Declarations, and Protestations of his being far from
all thoughts of designing an Arbitrary Government, and that the Nation might be
confident, He would rule by Law.

Now if after all this, any Officer of the Kings should pretend Instructions
from his Master, to demand so material an Alteration of proceedings, in the
highest Cases against Law, as are above mentioned, And the Court (who are
required to slight and reject the most solemn Commands under the Great Seal, if
contrary to Law) should upon a Verbal Intimation allow of such a Demand, and so
break in upon this Bulwark of out Liberties, which the Law has erected; Might
it not give too just an occasion to suspect, that all the legal securities of
our Lives, and Properties are unable to protect us? And may not such fears rob
the King of his greatest Treasure, and Strength, the Peoples hearts, when they
dare not rely upon Him in His Kingly Office, and trust, for safety and
Protection by the Laws? Our English History affords many Instances of those
that have pretended to serve our King in this manner, by undermining the
Peoples Right, and Liberties, whose practices have sometimes proved of fatal
consequence to the Kings themselves, but more frequently ended in their own
destruction.

But after all imagining it could be made out, that this Method of private
Examinations by a Grand Jury (which from what has been said before, has
appeared to be so Extremely necessary for the public good, and to every
private man's security) were inconvenient, or Mischievous, and therefore fit to
be changed; Yet being so Essential a part of the Common Law, it is no otherwise
alterable, than by Parliament. We find by Presidents, that the bare forms of
Indictments could not be reformed by the Judges: The words Depopulatores
agrorum, Insidiatores viarum, Viet Armis, Baculis, Cultellis, Arcubus and
sagittis, could not be left out, but by Advice of the Kingdom in Parliament. A
writ issued in the Time of K. Ed. 3. giving Power to hear and determine
Offenses, and all the Justices resolved ( Cok. 4. Inst. Page 164.) That they
could not lawfully act, having their Authority by Writ, where they ought to
have had it by Commission; Tho it was in the form and words, that the Legal
Commission ought to be. John Knivett Chief Justice by Advice of all the Judges
resolved that the said Writ was Contra Legem: And where diverse Indictments were
before them found against T. S. the same, and all, that was done by color of
that Writ, was Damned.

If in such seeming little Things as these, and many others, that may be
instanced, the Wisdom of the Nation has not thought fit to entrust the Judges,
but reserved the Consideration of them to the Legislative Power; It cannot be
imagined, that they should subject to the discretion, and pleasure of the
Judges, those important Points, in the Established course of the administering
Justice, whereupon depends the safety of all the Subjects Lives, and fortunes.
If Judges will take upon themselves to alter the constant practice, they must
either alter the Oath of the Grand Jury, or continue it; If they should alter
it, so as to make it sail with any such new Method, and thus in appearance
charitably provide, that the Grand Jury should not take a mock Oath, or
forswear themselves; they then make an Incroachment upon the Authority of
Parliaments, who only can make new, or change old Legal Oaths, and all the
proceedings thereupon would be void.

If they should continue constantly to impose the same Oath, as well when they
have notice from the King, that the Jury shall not be bound to keep his
Secrets, and their own, as when they have none; They must assume to make the
same form of Law to be of force, and no force; and the same words to bind the
Conscience, as they will have them; Whereby they would profane the Natural
Religion of an Oath, and bring a foul Scandal upon Christianity, by trifling
worse than Heathens in that sacred matter; And whilst the Judges find
themselves under the necessity of administering the Oath unto Grand Juries, and
not suffer them to observe it according unto their consciences, they would
confess, the illegality of their own Proceedings, and can never be able to
repair the Breaches, by pretending a tacit Implication, if the King will, but
must unavoidably fall under that approved Maxim of our Law, Maledicta est
Interpretatio quae corrumpit Textum; It is a Cursed Interpretation that
dissolves the Text.

There are Two Vulgar Errors concerning the duty of Grand Juries, which if not
removed will in Time destroy all the benefit we can expect from that
Constitution, by turning them into a mere matter of form, which were designed
for so great Ends. Many have of late, thought, and affirmed it for Law, that
the Grand Jury is neither to make so strict Inquiry into matters before them
Nor to look for so clear Evidence of the Crime, as the Petit Jury; but that of
their Presentiments, being to pass a second Examination, they ought to indict
upon a Superficial Inquiry, and bare Probabilities: Whereas should either of
these Opinions be admitted, the Prejudice to the subject would be equal to the
total laying aside Grand Juries; There being in Truth no difference, between
arraigning without any Presentment from them at all, and their Presenting upon
slight grounds.

For the first, that Grand Juries ought not to make so Strict Inquiry, it were
to be wished, that we might know how it comes to pass, that an Oath should be
obligatory unto a Petit Jury, and not unto the Grand: Or in what Points, they
may lawfully, and with good Conscience omit that Exactness, whether in Relation
to the Witnesses, and their credibility: Or the fact and all its circumstances:
Or the Testimony and its weight: Or lastly, in Reference to the Prisoner, and
Probability of his guilt: And withal upon what grounds of Law, or Reason their
Opinion is founded. On the contrary he that will consider either the Oath they
take, or the Commission, where their duty is described, will find in all
Points, that there lies an Equal obligation upon them, and the Petit Juries.

They swear diligently to inquire, and true Presentment make, etc. and to
Present the Truth, the whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth, etc. And in the
Commission of Oyer and Terminer their duty (with that of the Commissioners) is
thus described: Ad Inquirendum per Sacramentum Proborum and legalium hominum,
etc. per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit, de quibuscunque proditionibus,
etc. confoederationibus, Falsis allegantiis, nec non Accessoriis Eorundem, etc.
per quoscunque and qualitercunque habit. fact. perpetrat. sive Commiss. Et per
quos, Et per quem, cui, vel quibus quando, qualiter, vel quomodo, and de aliis
articulis and Circumstantiis praemis. and eorum aliquod, vel aliqua
qualitercunque concernen. To inquire by the Oath of honest and lawful Men, etc.
By whom the Truth of the matter may be best known, of all manner of Treasons
etc. Confederacies, false Testimonies, etc. As also the Accessories, etc. by
whomsoever, or howsoever, done, perpetrated, or committed, by whom, or to whom,
how, in what way, or in what manner. And of other Articles and Circumstances
premised, and of any other Thing or Things howsoever concerning the same: Now
for any Man, after this to maintain, that Grand Juries are not to inquire, or
not carefully, is as much as in plain terms to say they are bound to act
contrary to the Commission, and their Oath; And to affirm that they can
discharge their duty according to the obligations of Law and Conscience, which
they lie under, without a strict Inquiry into Particulars, is to affirm, that
the End can be obtained without the means necessary unto it.

The Truth is, that Grand Juries have both a larger field for their Inquiry,
and are in many respects better capacitated to make a strict one, than the
Petit Juries: These last are confined as to the Person and the Crime, specified
in the Indictment; But They are at large obliged to search into the whole
matter, that any ways concerns every case before them, and all the Offenses
contained in it, all the Criminal Circumstances whatsoever, and into every
Thing, howsoever concerning the same. They are bound to inquire whether their
Information of Suspected Treasons or Felonies, brought by Accusers, be made by
Conspiracy, or Subornation; Who are the Conspirators, or false Witnesses: By
whom abetted, or maintained; Against whom, and how many, the Conspiracy is
laid; When, and how, and in what course, it was to have been prosecuted.

But none of these most intricate matters (which need the most strict and
diligent Inquiries) can come under the Cognizance of the Petit Jury; They can
only examine so much, as relates to the Credit of those Witnesses brought to
prove the Charge against the Parties, Indicted; Wherein also they have neither
Power, nor convenient time to send for persons, or Papers, if they think them
needful, Nor to resolve any doubts of the Lawfulness, and Credibility of the
Testimonies.

Yet further, if the Crimes objected are manifest, it is then the Grand Juries
duty to inquire after all the Persons any ways concerned in them, and the
several Kinds of Offenses, whereof every one ought jointly, or separately to be
indicted as they shall discover them to have been Principals, or Accessories
Parties or privy thereunto, or to have comforted, or Knowingly relieved either
the Traitors or Felons, or concealed the offenses of others: But the
Inquisition into all these matters, which require all possible strictness in
searching, as being of the highest importance unto the public Justice, and
safety, is wholly out of the Power and Trust of the Petit Juries. The guilt, or
Innocence of the Parties put upon their Trials, and the Evidence thereof given
is the only Objects of their Inquiries. It is not their work, nor within their
trust to search into all the guilt, or Crimes of the Parties, whom they try;
They are bound to move within the Circle of the Indictment made by the Grand
Jury, who are to appoint, and specify the offenses, for which the Accused shall
be tried by the Petit Jury.

When a Prosecutor suggests that any Man is criminal, and ought to be indicted,
it belongs to the Grand Jury to hear all the proof he can offer, and to use all
other means they can, whereby they may come to understand the Truth of the
suggestion and every thing or circumstance, that may concern it; Then they are
carefully to examine the nature of the Facts, according unto the Rules of the
Com. Law, or the express words of the Statutes, whereby offenses are
distinguished, and punishments allotted unto each of them: It Is true, that upon
heating the Party, or his Witnesses, the Petit Jury may acquit or judge the
Facts in the Indictment to be less heinous, or malicious, then they were
presented by the Grand Jury, but cannot aggravate them; which being considered,
it will Easily appear by the intent and Nature of the Powers given unto Grand
Juries, that they are by their Oaths obliged, and their institution ordained to
keep all injustice from entering the first gates of our Courts of Judicature,
and to secure the innocent not only from punishment, but from all disgrace,
vexation, Expense or danger.

To understand our Law clearly herein, the Jurors must first know the lawful
grounds whereupon they may and ought to indict, and then what truly and justly
ought to be taken for the ground of an Indictment. The principal and most
certain is the Jurors personal knowledge, by their own Eyes or Ears, of the
Crimes whereof they indict: Or so many pregnant concurring Circumstances, as
fully convince them of the guilt of the Accused: When these are wanting the
Depositions of Witnesses and their Authority are their best guides in finding
Indictments. When such Testimonies make the charge manifest and clear to the
Jury, they are called Evidence, because they make the guilt of the Criminal
evident, and are like the Light that discovers what was not seen before: All
Witnesses for that reason are usually called the Evidence, taking their name
from what they ought to be: Yet Witnesses may swear directly and positively to
an Accusation, and be no Evidence of its truth to the Jury; sometimes such
Remarks may be made upon the Witnesses, as well in relation to their Reputation
and Lives, as to the Matter, Manner, and Circumstance of their Depositions,
that from thence the falsehood may appear, or be strongly suspected: It is
therefore necessary to know what they mean by a probable Cause or Evidence, who
say that our Law requires no more for an Indictment.

Probable, is a Logical Term, relating to such propositions, as have an
appearance, but no certainty of Truth, showing rather what is not, than what is
the matter of Syllogisms: These may be allowed in Rhetoric, which works upon
passions, and makes use of such Colors as are fit to move them, whether true or
false; but not in Logic, whose Object is Truth; as it principally intends to
obviate the Errors that may arise from the credit given unto appearances, by
distinguishing the uncertain from the certain, verisimile a vero, it cannot
admit of such Propositions, as may be false as well as true, it being as
impossible to draw a certain conclusion from uncertain premises, as to raise a
solid Building upon a tottering or sinking Foundation. This ought principally
to be considered in Courts of Justice, which are not erected to bring men into
condemnation, but to find who deserves to be condemned, and those Rules are to
be followed by them, which are least liable to deception. For this Reason the
Council of the Areopagites, and some others of the best Judicatures that have
been in the World, utterly rejected the use of Rhetoric, looking upon the Art
of persuading by uncertain probabilities, as little differing from that of
deceiving, and directly contrary to their ends, who by the knowledge of truth
desired to be led into the doing of Justice: But if the Art that made use of
their probabilities was banished from uncorrupted Tribunals, as a hindrance unto
the discovery of Truth, they that would ground Verdicts totally upon them,
declare an open neglect of it; and as it is said, that uno absurdo dato mill
sequuntur, if Juries were to be guided by probabilities, the next question
would be concerning the more or less probable, or what degree of probability is
required to persuade them to find a Bill: This being impossible to fix, the
whole Proceedings would be brought to depend upon the Fancies of Men, and as
nothing is so slight but it may move them, there is no security that innocent
Persons may not be brought every day into danger and trouble. By this means
certain mischiefs will be done, whilst it is by their own confession uncertain,
whether they are any ways deserved by such as suffer them, to the utter
overthrow of all Justice.

If the word Probable be taken in a common, rather than a nice Logical sense,
it signifies no more than likely, or rather likely than unlikely: When a matter
is found to be so, the Wager is not even, there is odds upon one side, and this
may be a very good ground, for betting in a Tennis Court, or at a Horse race,
but he that would make the Administration of Justice to depend upon such
Points, seems to put a very small value upon the Fortunes, liberties and
reputation of men, and to forget that those who set in Courts of Justice have
no other business there than to preserve them.

This continues in force, tho in a Dialogue between a Barrister, and a Grand
Jury man, published under the Title of the Grand Jury Man's Oath and Office, it
be said p. 8. and 9. That their work is no more than to present Offenses fit
for a Trial, and for that Reason, give in only a Verisimilar or probable
charge; and others have affirmed, that a far less Evidence will warrant a Grand
Juries Indictment, than a petit Juries Verdict. For Nothing can be more
opposite to the Justice of our Laws, than such Opinions: All Laws in doubtful
Cases direct a suspension of Judgment, or a sentence in favor of the Accused,
person: But if this were hearkened unto, Grand Juries should upon their Oaths
affirm, they judge him Criminal, when the Evidence is upon such uncertain
grounds that they cannot but doubt, whether he is so or not.

It cannot be hereupon said, that no Evidence is so clear and full, but it may
be false, and give the Jury occasion of doubts, so as all Criminals must
escape, if no Indictment ought to be found unless the proofs are absolutely
certain, for it is confessed, that such Cases are not capable of an infallible,
Mathematical demonstration; but a Jury, that Examines all the Witnesses, that
are likely to give any Light concerning the business in question, and all
Circumstances relating to the fact before them, with the Lives and Credit of
those that testify it, and of the Person accused, may and do often find that
which in their Consciences, does fully persuade them, that the accused Person
is guilty; This is as much as the Law, or their Oath does require, and such as
find bills, after having made such a Scrutiny, are blamless before God, and
Man, if through the fragility inseparable from humane nature, they should be
led into Error? For they do not swear, that the bill is true, but that they in
their Consciences believe that it is so; And if they write Ignoramus upon the
Bill, it is not thereby declared to be false, nor the Person accused acquitted,
but the matter is suspended, until it can be more clearly proved, as in
doubtful Cases, it always ought to be.

Our Ancestors took great Care that suspicious, and probable Causes should not
bring any Man's Life, and Estate into danger; For that reason, it was ordained
by the Stat. 37. Ed. 3. Cap. 18. That such as made suggestions to the King;
should find surety to pursue and incur the same pain, that the other should
have had if he were attainted, in case their suggestion be found evil and that
then process of the Law should be made against the Accused.

This manner of Proceeding, has its root on eternal, and universal Reason: The
Law given by God unto his People, Deuteronomy. 19. allotted the same Punishment unto a
false witness, as a Person convicted. The best disciplined Nations of the
world, learnt this from the Hebrews, and made it their Rule, in the
administration of Justice. The Grecians generally observed it, and the Romans,
according to their Lex Talionis, did not only punish death with death, but the
intention of committing Murder by false Accusations, with the same severity,
as if it had been effected by any other means. This Law was inviolably observed
as long as any thing of regularity or equity remained amongst them; and when
through the wickedness of some of the Emperors, or their favorites, it came
to be overthrown, all Justice perished with it. A Crew of false Informers brake
out to the destruction of the best men, and never ceased until they had ruined
all the most eminent and ancient Families: Circumvented the Persons, that by
their Reputation, Wealth, Birth or Virtue deserved to be distinguished from the
common sort of People, and brought desolation, upon that victorious City. Tac.
Ann. 3.
Tacitus complains of this, as the cause of all the mischiefs suffered in his
Time, and Country.

By their means the most Savage Cruelties, were committed under the name of
Law, which thereby became a greater Plague, than formerly crimes had been: No
remedy could be found, when those Delatores, whom he calls, genus hominum
Publico exitio repertum, Tac. Ann. 4.
and poenis quidem nunquam satis coercitum, were invited by impunity, or
reward, and the Miserable People groaned under this calamity, until those
instruments of iniquity, were by better Princes, put to the most cruel, though
well deserved deaths.

The like has been seen in many Places, and the domestic quiet, which is now
enjoyed in the Principal parts of Europe, proceeds chiefly from this, that
every man knows the same Punishment, is appointed for a false Accusation, and a
proved crime.

It is hardly seven years since Monsieur Courboyer, a man of quality in
Brittany, suborned two of the King of France his Guards, to swear Treasonable
Designs against La Motte, a Norman Gentleman; The matter being brought to
Monsieur Colebert, he caused the Accused Person and the witnesses to be
secured, until the fraud was discovered by one of them, whereupon he was
pardoned? La Motte released: Courboyer beheaded, and the other false Witness
hanged by the Sentence of the Parliament of Paris. Though this Law seems to be
grounded upon such foundation, as forbids us to question the equity of it, our
Ancestors (for Reasons best known unto themselves) thought fit to moderate its
Severity, by the Statute of 38. Ed. 3. Cap. 9. yet then it was enacted, and the
Law continues in force unto this day; That whosoever made complaints to the
King, and could not prove them against the defendant, by the process of Law
limited in former Statutes, which is first by a Grand Jury, he should be
imprisoned until he had made gree to the Party of his damages, and of the
slander he suffered by such occasion, and after shall make fine and ransom to
the King, which is for the Common damage, that the King and his People suffer
by such a false accusation and defamation of any Subject: And in the 42. Ed. 3.
Cap 3. To eschew the Mischiefs and damage done by false Accusers It Is enacted,
that no man be put to answer such suggestions without presentment before the
Justices, i. e. by the Grand Jury: It cannot surely be imagined, that the
suggestions made to the King and his Council, had no probability in them, Or
that there was no color, cause, or Reason for the King to put the party to
answer the Accusation, but the grievance and complaint was, that the People
suffered certain damage, and vexation upon untrue, and at best, uncertain
accusations, and that therein the Law was perverted by the King and his
Councils taking upon them, to judge of the certainty, or Truth of them, which
of right belonged to the Grand Jury only, upon whose Judgment and Integrity our
Law does wholly rely, for the indemnity of the Innocent, and the punishment of
all such as do unjustly molest them.

Our Laws have not thought fit so absolutely to depend upon the Oaths of
Witnesses, as to allow, that upon Two, or Ten men's swearing positively Treason
or Felony against any Man, before the Justices of peace, or all the Judges, or
before the King and his Council, that the party accused, be he either Peer of
the Realm or Commoner, should without further Inquiry be thereupon arrained,
and put upon his Trial for his Life: Yet none can doubt but there is something
of probability in such depositions nevertheless the Law Refers those matters
unto Grand Juries, and no man can be brought to Trial, until upon such strict
Inquiries, (as is before said) the Indictment be found. The Law is so strict in
these Inquiries, that tho the Crime be never so notorious, may if Treason
should be confessed in Writing under hand and seal, before Justices of Peace,
Secretaries of State, or the King and Council, yet before the party can be
arrained for it, the Grand Jury must inquire, and be satisfied, whether such a
Confession be clear and certain: Whether there was no collusion therein: Or the
party induced to such confession by promise of pardon: Or that some pretended
partakers in the Crime may be defamed, or destroyed thereby; They must inquire,
whether the Confession was not extorted by fear, threatenings, or force, and
whether the party was truly Compos mentis, of sound mind, and Reason at that
Time.

The Stat. 5. Eliz. Cap. 1. declares the ancient Common Law concerning the
Trust and duty of Juries, and Enacts that none should be indicted for
assisting, aiding, comforting, or abelting Criminals in the Treasons therein
made and declared unless he, or they be thereof lawfully accused by such good
and sufficient Testimony or proof, as by the Jury, by whom he shall be
indicted, shall be thought good, lawful, and sufficient to prove him, or them
guilty of the Said Offenses. Herein is declared, the only True Reason of
Indictments, i. e. the Grand Juries Judgment that they have such Testimonies as
they esteem sufficient to prove the party indicted guilty of the Crimes whereof
he is accused, and whatsoever the Indictment does contain, they are to present
no more, or other Crimes, than are proved to their satisfaction, as upon Oath
they declare it is, when they present it. This exactness is not only required
in the Substance of Crimes, but in the Circumstances, and any doubtfulness, or
uncertainty in them makes the Indictment, and all proceedings upon it by the
Petit Jury, to be insufficient, and void, and holden for none, as appears by
the following Cases.

In Youngs Case in the Lord Cooks Reports Lib. 4. Fol. 40. An Indictment for
Murder was declared void for its incertainty, because the Jury had not laid
certainty, in what part of the body the mortal wound was given, saying only,
that 'twas about his breast, the words were Vnam Plagam mortalem circiter
pectus. In like manner in Vaux Case Cooks Rep. Lib. 4. Fol. 44. he being
indicted for poisoning Ridley, the Jury had not plainly and expressly averred
that Ridley drank the Poison, tho other words employed it, and thereupon the
Indictment was judged insufficient for (says the book) the matter of an
Indictment ought to be full, express, and certain, and shall not be maintained
by argument or implication, for that the Indictment is found by the Oath of the
Neighborhood. In the 2d part of Rolls Reports p. 263. Smith and Malls Case the
Indictment was quashed for incertainty, because the Jury had averred that Smith
was either a servant or Deputy, Smith Existens servus sive Deputatus, are the
words: It was doubtless probably enough proven to the Jury, that he was Either
a Deputy, or servant, but because the Indictment did not absolutely and
certainly aver his condition Either of servant, or Deputy, it was declared
void: If there be any defect of certainty in the Grand Juries Verdict, no proof
or Evidence to the Petit Jury can supply it, so it was judged in Wrote and Wigs
Case Coke 4. Rep. Fol. 45, 46, 47. It was laid, that Wrote was killed at
Shipperton, but did not aver that Shipperton was within the Verge, tho in truth
it was, and no Averment or Oath to the Petit Jury, could supply that small
faileur of certainty to support the Indictment; and the reason is rendered in
these words, viz. The Indictment being Veredictum id est dictum Veritatis a
Verdict, That is, a saying of Truth and matter of Record, ought to contain the
whole Truth which is requisite by the Law, for when it does not appear, it is
the same, as if it were not, and every material part of the Indictment ought to
be found upon the Oath if the Indicters and cannot be supplied by the Averment
of the Party. The Grand Juries Verdict is the foundation of all judicial
proceeding against Capital Offenders (at the King suit) if that fail in any
point of certainty, both convictions, and acquittals thereupon, are utterly
void, and the proceedings against both may begin again, as if they had never
been tried, as it appears in the Case last cited, Fol. 47.

Now as the Law requires from the Grand Jury Particular, certain and precise
affirmations of Truth, so it expects that they should look for the like, and
accept of no other from such as bring accusations to them. For no man can
certainly affirm that which is uncertainly delivered unto him, or which he does
not firmly believe. The witnesses that they receive for good, are to depose
only absolute certaintys about the Facts committed, That is, what they have
seen, or heard from the accused parties themselves, not what others have told
them; They are not to be suffered to make probable arguments, and infer from
thence the guilt of the accused; Their depositions ought to be positive, plain,
direct and full: The Crime is to be sworn without any doubtfulness, or
obscurity; Not in words qualified, and limited to belief, conceptions, or
apprehensions. This absolute certainty required in the deposition of the
Witnesses, is one principal ground of the Juries most rational assurance of the
Truth of their Verdict: The credit also of the Witnesses ought to be free from
all blemish, that good, and Conscientious men may rationally rely upon them, in
matters of so great moment, as the blood of a man. It must also be certainly
evident, that all the matters which they depose, are consistent with each other
and accompanied with such circumstances, as in their Judgment render it
credible: All just Indictments, must be built upon these moral assurances,
which the wisdom of all Nations has devised as the best, and only way of
deciding Controversies; Neither can a Grand Jury man, who swears to present
nothing but the Truth, be satisfied with less.

It Is scarce credible that any learned in our Laws, should tell a Grand Jury
that a far less Evidence will warrant their Indictment (being but an
Accusation) than the Petit Jury ought to have, for their Verdict. Both of them
do in like manner, plainly, and positively affirm upon their Oaths, the Truth
of the Accusation; Their Verdicts are indeed one, and the same in substance,
and sense, tho not in words. There is no real difference, between affirming in
Writing, that an Indictment of Treason is true, as is the practice of Grand
Juries, and saying that the party tried thereupon is guilty of the Treason,
whereof he is indicted, as is the course of Petit Juries: They are both upon
their Oaths; They are equally obligatory into both; The one therefore must
expect the same proof for their satisfaction, as the other, and as clear
Evidence must be required for an Indictment, as for a Verdict; It is
unreasonable to think that a slighter proof, should satisfy the Consciences of
the greater Jury, than is requisite to convince the less; And uncharitable to
imagine, that those should not be as sensible as the others of the Sacred
security they have given by Oath, to do nothing in their Offices, but according
to truth.

If there ought to be any difference in the Proceedings of the Grand and Petit
Juries, the greater exactness and diligence seems to be required in the Grand:
For as the same work of finding out the truth in order to the doing of Justice
is allotted unto both, the greatest part of the burden, ought to lie upon
them, that have the best opportunities of performing it. The invalidity
weakness, or defects of the Proofs may be Equally Evident to either of them:
But if there be deceit in stifling true Testimonies, or malice in suborning
wicked Persons, to bring in such as are false, the Grand Jury may most easily,
nay probably, can only discover it. They are not straightened in time; They may
freely examine in private, without interruption from the Council, or Court,
such Witnesses, as are presented unto them, or they shall think fit to call;
they may jointly or severally enquire of their Friends or Acquaintance, after
the Lives and Reputations of the Witnesses, or the accused Persons, and all
circumstances relating unto the matter in question, and consult together under
the Seal of Secrecy: On the other side the Petty Jury being charged with the
Prisoner, acts in open Court, under the Awe of the Judges: is Subject to be
disturbed, or interrupted by Council: Deprived of all opportunity of Consulting
one another, until the Evidence be summed up, and not suffered to eat or drink,
until they bring in a Verdict; so is it almost impossible for them thus limited
to discover such evil practices, as may be used for, or against the Prisoner,
by Subornation or Perjury to pervert Justice; if therefore the Grand Jury be
not permitted to perform this part of their duty, it is hard to imagine how it
should be done at all: And it is much more inconceivable how they can satisfy
their Consciences, if they so neglect, as to find a Bill upon an imperfect
Evidence, in the absence of the Prisoner in Expectation that it will be
supplied at the Bar: It concerns them therefore to remember, that if they
proceed upon such uncertainties, they will certainly give incurable Wounds into
their Neighbors Reputations, in order unto the destruction of their Persons.

Whatever ground this Doctrine of Indicting upon slight proofs may have got in
our days, it is (as we have seen) both against Law and Reason, and contrary to
the practice of former times. My Lord Coke in his Comment on Westminster. 2d. tells
us, That in those days (and as yet it ought to be) Indictments taken in the
Absence of the Party were formed upon plain and direct Proofs, and not upon
Probabilities and Inferences, Herein we see, that the practice of our
Forefathers, and the opinion of this great and judicious Lawyer, were directly
against this new Doctrine, and some that have carefully looked backward,
observed, that there are very few Examples of men acquitted by Petit Juries,
because Grand Juries of old were so wary in canvasing every thing narrowly, and
so sensible of their Duty, in proceeding according unto truth upon Satisfactory
Evidence, that few or none were brought unto Trial till their Guilt seemed
evident.

It is therefore a great mistake, to think that the second Juries were
instituted for the hearing of fuller proofs; That was not their work, but to
give an opportunity to the accused persons to answer for themselves, and make
their defense, which cannot be thought to strengthen the Evidence, unless they
be supposed to play booty against their own Lives. By way of answer the
Prisoner may avoid the charge: He is permitted to take Exceptions; he may demur
or plead to the Indictments in points of Law: Herein the Judges ought to assist
him, and appoint Counsel if he desire it: He may show that the Indictors, i. e.
the Grand Jury, or some of them, are not lawful men, or not lawfully returned
by the Sheriffs; embracery or practice may be proved in the packing of the
Jury: A Conspiracy, or Subornation may be discovered; Falsehood may be found out
in the Witnesses, by questions about some circumstances that none could have
asked, or imagined, except the Party accused: And besides doing right to the
Indicted, in these and many other things, it is the Peoples due to have all the
Evidence first taken in private, to be afterward made public at the Trial,
that the Kingdom may be satisfied in the equal administration of Justice, and
that the Judgments against Criminals may be of greater Terror, and more useful
to preserve the common peace.

If any object that this Doctrine would introduce double Trials for every
offense, and all the delays that accompany them, it may be answered. That Nulla
unquam de morte hominis cunctatio Longa est, Ju. Sat. No delay is to be
esteemed Long, when the life of a man is in question. The punishment of an
offender, that is a little deferred, may be compensated by its severity, but
blood rashly spilt, cannot be gathered up, and a Land polluted by it, is hardly
cleansed. Wise, and good men, in matters of this nature, have ever proceeded
with extreme caution, whilst the swift of foot are in the Scripture
represented under an ill Character, and have been often found in their haste to
draw more guilt upon themselves, than what they pretended to chastize in
others. To avoid this mischief, in many well polished Kingdoms, several Courts
of Justice are instituted, who take cognizance of the same facts, but so
subordinate unto one another, that in matters of life, limb, liberty, or other
important cases, there is a right of appeal from the inferior, before which it
is first brought, to the Superior where this is wanting, means have been found
to give opportunity unto the Judges to reflect upon their own sentences, that
if any thing had been done rashly, or through mistake, it might be corrected,
man, even in his best estate, seeming to have need of some such helps. Tiberius
Caesar was never accused of too much lenity, but when he heard that Lutorius
'Priscus, had been accused of Treason before the Senate, condemned, and
immediately put to death, Tam praecipites deprecatus est poenas, He desired
that such sudden punishment might for the future be forborne, and a Law was
thereupon made, That no Decree of the Senate should in less than ten days be
transmitted to the Treasury, before which time it could not be executed, Tac.
An. 3. Matters of this nature concerning every man in England, it is not to be
doubted but our Ancestors considered them, and our constitutions, neither
admitting of subordinate Judicatures from whence appeals may be made, nor
giving opportunities unto Juries to reexamine their Verdicts, after they were
given, they could not find a way more suitable unto the rules of Wisdom,
Justice, and Mercy, than to appoint two Juries with equal care, according unto
different methods, the one in private, and at leisure, the other publicly in
the presence of the party, and more speedy to pass upon every man, so as none
can be condemned, unless he be thought guilty by them both, and it cannot be
imagined, that so little time, as is usually spent in Trials at the Bar, before
a Petit Jury, should be allowed unto one that pleads for his life, or unto them
who are to be satisfied in their consciences, unless it were presumed, that the
Grand Jury, had so well examined, prepared, and disgested the matter, that the
other may proceed more succinctly, without danger of error.

Therefore let the Grand Juries faithfully perfom they high Trust, and neither
be cheated nor frighted from their Duty: Let them pursue the good old way,
since no Innovation can be brought in, that will not turn to the prejudice of
the accused Pesons, and themselves: Let them not be deluded with frivolous
Arguments, so as to invalidate a considerable part of our Law, and render
themselves insignificant ciphers, in Expectation that Petit Juries will repair
the faults they commit, since that would be no less than to slight one of the
best fences that the Law provides for our Lives and Liberties, and very much to
weaken the other.

When a Grand Jury finds a Bill against any person, they do all that in them
lies to take away his Life, if the crime be capital, and it is ridiculous for
them to pretend they rely upon the virtue of the Petit Jury, if they show none
in themselves. They cannot reasonably hope the other should be more tender of
the Prisoners concernments, more exact in doing Justice, or more careful in
examining the Credit of the Witnesses, when they have not only neglected their
duty of searching into it, but added strength unto their Testimony by finding a
Bill upon it.

They cannot possibly be exempted from the blame of consenting (at the least)
unto the mischiefs that may ensue, unless they use all the honest care that the
Law allows to prevent them; nor consequently avoid the stain of the blood that
may be shed by their omission, since it could not have been, if they had well
performed their part before they found the Indictment, whereby the Party is
exposed to so many disadvantages, that it is hard for the clearest Innocence to
defend itself against them.

But when the one and the other Jury act as they ought, with courage,
diligence, and indifference, we shall have just reason, with the wise Lord
Chancellor Fortescue, to celebrate that Law that instituted them. To
congratulate with our Country men the happiness we enjoy, whilst our Lives
lie not at the mercy of unknown Witnesses, hired, Fort. de laud. Leg. Ang. cap.
26.
poor, uncertain, whose conversation or malice we are strangers to, but
Neighbors of Substance, of honest report, brought into Court by an honorable
sworn Officer; men who know the (...)

POstquam Rex per spatium trium Annorum and amplius in partibus transmarinis
remansisset, Ex Chronico ab Anno 1272. 1 Ed. 1. ad An. 1317.10. Ed. 2. Mss.
and de partibus Vasconiae and Franciae in Angliam rediisset, valde anxiatus
and conturbatus fuit per quotidianum clamorem tam Clericorum quam Laicorum
petentium ab eo congruum remedium apponi versus Justiciarios, An. Dom. 2289.
Annoque Regni Regis Ed. 1.18.
and alios Ministros suos, de multimodis oppressionibus and gravaminibus contra
bonas leges and consuetudines regni illis factis; Certe scimus quam plurimos
eorum qui judiciis sub Ed. 1. praefuere viros quidem maximos and aevo in illo
Juris-consultos celeberrimos repetundarum and quod lites suas fecerant aliosque
praeter Ministros, forenses aliquot merito damnatos multos exitia and carcere
punitos. Ex Seldein ad Fletam dissertatio. p. 548.
super quo Dominus Edvardus Rex, per regale scriptum Vicecomitibus Angliae
praecipit quod in omnibus Comitatibus, Civitatibus, and Villis mercatoriis,
public proclamari facerent quod omnes qui sese sentient gravari venirent apud
Westminster. ad proximum Parliamentum, and ibi querimonias suas monstrarent, ubi tam
majores quam minores opportunum remedium and celerem justitiam recuperent,
sicut Rex vinculo juramenti die Coronationis suae astrictus fuit: Ac jam adest
magnus dies and judiciarius Justiciorum and aliorum Ministrorum Concilii Regis,
quem nulla tergiversatione, nullo munere, nulla art vel ingenio placitandi
valent eludi. Coadunatis itaque Clero and Populo and in magno Palatio
Westmonasterii consessis, Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis (vir magnae pietatis and
columna quasi sanctae Ecclesiae and Regni) surrexit in medio, and ab alto
ducens suspiria, Noverit universitas vestra (ait) quod convocati sumus de
magnis and arduis negotiis regni (heu nimis perturbati and his diebus enormiter
mutilati) unanimimiter, fideliter, and efficaciter fimul cum Domino Rege ad
tractandum and ordinandum, audivistis etiam universi querimonias gravissimas
super intolerabilibus injuriis and oppressionibus and quotidianis
desolationibus, Vide Fleta Cap. 17. p. 18, 19. Authoritas and Officium
ordinarii Concilii Regis.
tam sanctae Eccles. quam Reg. factis per hoc iniquum Concilium Domini Regis
contra magnas Chartas tot, toties and multoties emptas and redemptas, concessas
and confirmatas per tot and ta lia. Juramenta Domini Regis nunc, and Dominorum
Henrici and Johannis, ac per terribiles fulminationes Excommunicationis
sententiae in transgressores communium libertatum Angliae, quae in chartis
praedictis continentur corroboratas, and cum spes praeconcepta de libertatibus
illis observandis fideliter ab omnibus putaretur stabilis and indubitata, Rex
conciliis malorum Ministrorum praeventus and seductus easdem infringendo
contravenire non formidavit, credens deceptive pro munere absolvi a
transgressione quod esset manifestum regni exterminium.

Aliud etiam nos omnes angit intrinsecus quod Justiciarii subtiliter ex malitia
sua ac per diversa argumenta avaritiae, and intolerabilis superbiae Regem
contra fideles suos multipliciter provocaverunt and incitaverunt, sanoque and
salubri consilio Ligeorum Angliae contrarium reddideruut, consilia sua vana
impudenter praeponere and affirmare non erubuerunt seu formidaverunt, ac si
plus babiles essent ad consulendam and conservandam Rempublicam quam tota
Universitas Regni in unum collecta. Ita de illis possit vere dici, viri qui
turbaverunt terram and concusserunt Regnum sub fuco gravitatis totum populum
graviter oppresserunt, praetextuque solummodo exponendi vereres Leges, novas
(non dicam Leges) sed malas consuetudines introduxerunt and vomuerunt, ita quod
per ignorantiam nonnullorum ac per partialitatem aliorum qui vel per munera vel
timorem aliquorum potentum innodati fuerunt, nulla fuit stabilitas Legum nec
alicui de populo Justitiam dignabantur exhibere, opera eorum sunt opera
nequitiae, and opus iniquitatis in manibus, pedes eorum ad malum current and
festinant, ac viam recti nescierunt. Quid dicam? non est judicium in gressibus
suis.(...) agros and violenter tulerunt and rapuerunt domos and oppresserunt
virum and domum ejus imo virum and Haereditatem suam, vae Judices qui sicut
Lupi vespere non relinquebant ossa in mane; Justus Judex adducit Consiliarios
in stultum finem and Judices in stuporem, mox alta voce justum Judicium terrae
recipietis.

His auditis omnium aures tinniebant totaque Communitas ingemuerunt, Vide Mat.
West. Anno 1289. p. 376. li. 13.
dicentes heu nobis, heu, ubi est Angliae toties empta, toties concessa, toties
scripta, toties jurata Libertas?

Alii de Criminalibus sese a visibus populi subtrahentes in locis secretis cum
amicis tacit latitaverunt, Anno vero 1290. ( 18. Ed. 1.) deprehensis omnibus
Angliae Justiciariis de repetundis (praeter Jo. Metingham, and Eliam de
Bleckingham quos honor is ergo nominatos volui) judicio Parliamenti vindicatum
est in alios, atque alios carcere, exilio, fortunarumque omnium dispendio, in
singulos mulcta gravissima and amissione officii. Spelmans Glossary, p. 1. co.
1.416.
alios protulerunt in medium unde merito fere omnes ab officiis depositi and
amoti, unus a terra exulatus alii perpetuis prisonis incarcerati, alii que
gravibus pecuniarum solutionibus just adjudicati fuerunt.

AFter that the King for the space of three Years and more, had remained beyond
Sea, and returned out of Gascoign and France into England, he was much vexed
and disturbed by the continual clamor both of the Clergy and Laity, desiring
to be relieved against the Justices, and other His Majesizes Ministers, of
several oppressions and injuries done unto them, contrary to the good Laws and
customs of the Realm; whereupon King Edward, by his Royal Letters to the
several Sheriffs of England, commanded that in all Counties, Cities, and Market
Towns, a Proclamation should be made, that all who found themselves agrieved
should repair to Westminster at the next Parliament, and there show their
grievances, where as well the great as the less should receive fit remedies and
speedy Justice, according as the King was obliged by the Bond of his Coronation
Oath: And now that great day was come, that day of judging, even the Justices
and the other Ministers of the Kings Council, which by no Collusion or Reward,
no Argument or Art of Pleading they could elude or avoid: The Clergy therefore
and the People being gathered together and seated in the great Palace of
Westminster, the Archbishop of Canterbury (a man of eminent Piety, and as it
were a Pillar of the holy Church and the Kingdom) rising from his Seat, and
fetching a profound sigh, spoke in this manner: Let this Assembly know that we
are called together concerning the great and weighty Affairs of the Kingdom
(too much alas of late disturbed, and still out of Order) unanimously,
faithfully and effectually with our Lord the King to treat and ordain: Ye have
all heard the grievous complaints of the most intolerable injuries and
oppressions of the daily desolations committed both on Church and State, by
this corrupt Council of our Lord the King, contrary to our great Charters, so
many and so often, purchased and redeemed, granted and confirmed to us by the
several Oaths of our Lord the King that now is, and of our Lords King Henry and
John, and corroborated by the dreadful thundrings of the sentence of
Ecommunication against the Invaders of our common Liberties of England in our
said Charters contained; and when we had conceived firm and undoubted hopes,
that these our Liberties would have been faithfully preserved by all men, the
King circumvented and seduced by the councils of evil Ministers has not been
afraid to violate it by infringing them, falsely believing that he could for
Rewards be absolved from that offense, which would be the manifest destruction
of the Kingdom.

There is another thing also that grieves our Spirits that the Justices
subtly and maliciously, by diverse Arguments of covetousness and intolerable
Pride, have the King against his faithful Subjects sundry ways incited and
provoked, counselling him contrary to the good and wholesome Advice of all the
Liegemen of England, and have not blushed nor been afraid, impudently to assert
and prefer their own foolish Councils, as if they were more fit to consult and
preserve the Commonweal, than all the Estates of the Kingdom together
assembled, so that it may be truly said of them, they are the men that troubled
the Land, and disturbed the Nation under a false color of gravity, have the
whole People grievously oppressed, and under pretense of expounding the ancient
Laws, have introduced new (I will not say Laws, but) evil Customs, so that
through the Ignorance of some, and partiality of others, who for reward or fear
of great Men have been engaged, there was no certainty of Law, and they scorned
to administer justice to the people, their deeds are deeds of wickedness, and
the work of Iniquity is in their hand, their feet make have to evil, and the
way of truth have they not known; what shall I say? there is no Judgment in
their paths.(...) build their Houses in injustice, and their Tabernacles in
Unrighteousness: We be to them that covet large possessions, that break open
Houses and destroy the Man and his Inheritance; Woe be to such Judges who are
like Wolves in the Evening, and leave not a bone till the morning. The
Righteous Judge will bring such Counselors to a foolish end, and such Judges
to confusion: ye shall all presently with a loud cry, receive the just sentence
of the Land.

At the hearing of these things all Ears tingled, and the whole Community
lifted up their Voice, and mourned, saying, Alas, alas for us! what is become
of that English Liberty which we have so often purchased, which by so many
Concessions so many Statutes, so many Oaths has been confirmed to us.

Hereupon several of the Criminals withdrew into secret places, being concealed
by their friends; some of them were brought forth into the midst of the People,
and deservedly turned out of their Offices; one was banished the Land, and
others were grievously Fined, or Condemned to perpetual Imprisonment.

This is confirmed by Spelman An. 1290. All the Justices of England, says he,
were An. 18. Ed. 1. apprehended for Corruption, except John Mettingham, and
Elias Bleckingham, whom I name for their honor, and by Judgment of Parliament
condemned, some to Imprisonment, others Banishment, or Confiscation of their
Estates, and none escaped without grievous Fines, and the loss of their Offices.

FINIS.

