SOME REMARKS ON A REPORT Containing an ESSAY For the Amendment of the Silver
Coins, Made to the Right Honorable The LORDS COMMISSIONERS OF His Majesty's
Treasury, BY Mr. William Lowndes, Secretary to the said Lords Commissioners.

LONDON, Printed for W. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1695.

SOME REMARKS, etc.
THat the Clipping and Counterfeiting the Silver Coin of the Nation is a great
and growing evil, there is no doubt; and seeing the Lords of the Treasury have
been pleased to take into Consideration the Remedy thereof; and in order to it
have commanded Mr. Lowndes to make a Report of such Matters as concerned the
same; which being published, with an Invitation (at the latter end) to others
to communicate their thoughts, I doubt not but what I shall offer will be well
received both by their Lordships and the Author of the Report, although I happen
in some things to differ in my Sentiments from the said Author, whose Report I
am now about to consider; and shall treat it not with heat, as Persons commonly
do who differ in Opinion, but with that respect which I really think it
deserves. The Author must be acknowledged to be a Person of great Ingenuity and
Industry, and in this elaborate Treatise of Coins now published, has given
sufficient evidence of both, and done great Service; but as the Subject it self
is (as the Author says) very difficult and curious, it gives room and scope for
a further discussion; and in the doing thereof I shall give an account in what
I agree with the Author, and wherein I disagree, give my Reasons for such
disagreement, and shall proceed as the matters lie in the Report.

I am of the Authors Opinion as to the signification of the word Sterling, and
I make no doubt but the Historical Account which he gives of the proportions of
fine Gold and fine Silver, with the respective Allays observed from time to
time, fol. 19, to 27.
is exactly true, and of great use to be known.

I am also of Opinion with the Author, 29.
that the present Standard of fineness ought to be continued, yet think that
the Reasons he gives against the debasing of Money, are of equal force against
altering the denomination or extrinsick value of Money, as he calls it, which I
shall discuss more at large by and by, and in the mean time I must own, that
the great Pains the Author has taken in examining and setting down the several
Alterations made in Money from time to time, fol. 34, to 56.
with respect to the Weight and Number of Pieces in a Pound Troy of Gold and
Silver, and the difference in the Allays, deserves great Commendation, and has
laid a very good Foundation for the exact discussing of this Matter. The
Observation the Author makes from the said Deduction of the Alterations made in
the Coins, is, That such Alterations have been practiced as any Exigence or
Occasion has required, and that no Inconvenience, Disgrace or Mischief has
ensued by the doing thereof, but that all Projects for debasing Money are
dangerous, dishonorable, and needless: And so comes to establish an
Hypothesis, That making the pieces less, or ordaining the respective pieces (of
the present weight) to be current at a higher rate, may equally raise the value
of the Silver in our Coins: To which Hypothesis I exactly agree, but the chief
thing will want to be proved, viz. That either the one or the other will raise
the Value of the Silver in our Coins, upon which the stress of the Question
depends; and I am of Opinion neither will, for Reasons which will afterward
appear. Indeed taking it for granted, that either would raise the Value of the
Silver in the Coins, 61.
the manner the Author proposes might do, though it seems to me that the
lessening the pieces one fifth part would be more natural and easy in
accounts, and better corespond with the present kinds of Money commonly used:
But because I cannot grant it, I come to examine the Author's Reasons for such
an Alteration of the Denomination of our Coin: And the first is, 68.
Because the Price of Silver is risen, and that whenever the extrinsick value
of Silver in the Coin has been or shall be less than the price of Silver in
Bullion, the Coin has been and will be melted down. So that the Author
conceives, that giving a higher Denomination to a Crown Piece will prevent its
being melted down: Wherein I must crave leave to differ from him in Opinion,
and shall endeavor to evince that the Value of pure Silver in the Coin is, and
always was, and ever will be, the same with the value of pure Silver in
Bullion, or very near. There often happens some small difference, by the charge
of Coining on one hand, or by a present occasion for exportation of Bullion on
the other hand, which causes the Value of the one and the other to vary a small
matter, but never considerable; for it is impossible that the same quantity of
Silver uncoined can be less worth than the same quantity of Silver coined, by
more than the charge of Coinage and the interest of the Money whilst it is
coining, and the trouble of carrying and fetching; neither can the same
Quantity of Silver coined at any time, be less worth then the same Quantity of
Silver uncoined, by more then the charge of melting down, and a small matter
for the Hazard, which will always be thought small, because it can be done
privately, without a possibility of being discovered. But the Author will say,
how comes it to pass that Bullion now is worth 6 s. 5 d. an Ounce, and an Ounce
of Silver in coin goes but for 5 s. 2 d. or thereabouts? if that were so, I
confess my Proposition would not hold; but the case is thus: It is true, our
great Losses at Sea and Interruption of Trade this War, and the payment of our
Army abroad, our Exportation has not been sufficient to supply, and nothing can
make that good but Money or Bullion, this brought a necessity of our Exporting
Bullion; which by the great occasion there was for it, advanced the price a
small matter, but not considerable, whilst there was any Silver Coin passed,
that had in a Crown the value or weight of about an ounce of Silver, as it
ought to have; but when all this sort of Money was gone or withheld, and the
remaining English Coin was clipped, or counterfeited to that degree that the
People could not distinguish the bad from the good, and began to think they
might come to a loss by it in time, they undervalued it, or rather the said
Money in it self became less worth, and the people chose rather to receive
Gold, and so by degrees as the Silver Coin was diminished and debased in it
self, so it fell in the Estimation of the People, and in proportion Gold
advanced, and also Bullion, (that is, not in it self, but in proportion to the
bad money) not that Bullion became worth 6 s. 5 d. an Ounce, or Gold 30 s. a
Guinea, in good Money, that is, in weighty standard Money, but in clipped and
counterfeit Money, whereof 6 s. 5 d. was not of the true, nor esteemed value of
5 s. 2 d. and as we our selves grew sensible of the want of value in the Money
that passed, so did Foreigners likewise, and the Foreign Exchanges soon
altered accordingly, so that it cannot properly be said that Bullion is
advanced much, or that Gold is advanced much, or that Commodities are advanced
much, but that the Money that is exchanged for them is of much less value then
it was, and the new coining of our Money will not, as I apprehend, alter the
value of Bullion, Gold, etc. but will bring Silver in coin to its due value.
The Author before he concludes his first Reason, mentions a Suggestion that has
been made by some Men, That raising the Value of our Coin, or continuing it on
the present foot, will be the same thing. As to that I confess I am of the same
Opinion, but do not think that those Gentlemen mean thereby as the Author
supposes, That Silver in Bullion will always during this War be dearer than
Silver in Coin, because of the Necessity to Export it for the Foreign Expense
of the War, and to answer the balance of Trade, occasioned by the Interruption
of our Navigation. But I take it that these Gentlemen mean, (at least I do)
that the raising the Value of the Coin in Denomination, will not Answer any of
the Purposes the Author intends, and will only injure some Men to advantage
some others, whilst in the mean time no Benefit will accrue to the Kingdom in
general, or to the Crown in particular, which I shall consider by and by, and
also examine the Reasons the Author offers in answer to the said Suggestion, 72
to 82.
after I have gone through his general Reasons for raising the Value of the
Coin in Denomination: Of which the second is, That it will encourage the
bringing of Bullion to the Mint to be Coined: 82.
Wherein I must also crave leave to differ, for a Crown new Coined, though called
six Shillings and three Pence, will have no more Silver, or intrinsic Value in
it than an old Crown not diminished, and will exchange for no more of any other
Commodity, nor for more Bullion than now it will. If the Money be all New
Coined, and a Crown goes for 5 s. as now, then will Bullion presently fall to
about 5 s. 2 d. an Ounce, as formerly, and the Exchange for Holland rise to its
former height, or near it; and if you call the Crown so New Coined 6 s. 3 d.
Bullion will remain about the Price it does, and the Exchange for Holland also:
And if you give the New Coined Crown the Denomination of Ten Shillings, Bullion
will also immediately be worth about Ten Shillings an Ounce, so that none will
have any more advantage by having their Silver coined on that score than they
have now; or if that were likely to increase the coining of Bullion, why should
not the Crown Piece rather be called Ten Shillings then six Shillings three
Pence? It can only be said, the Loss of those that are to receive Money due
will be the greater. But the same Argument holds against raising it to Six
Shillings three Pence, for wrong ought not to be done in any Proportion.

The Author's third Reason for raising the Value of the Silver in the Coin
(which is in Truth only raising the Denomination of it) is To increase the
Species in tale; 83.
but I think it will not do that neither, unless it could be said, that coining
ten thousand Half-crowns did increase the Species in tale more then coining
five thousand Crowns, which I suppose will not be thought; and it seems the
same thing to increase the Coin in Denomination only, let it be in what
proportion it will, and no otherwise then if the KING should appoint a
Half-yard to be called a Yard, would increase the quantity of Cloth in the
Nation that is to be measured thereby; for indeed Money is only a Measure for
all Commodities, and the Standard thereof is settled, by which People have
governed themselves in their Contracts, and the altering the Measure in any
kind, whether it be Money, length, or weight, is (as has been said) a Wrong to
those that are to receive, a present though unjust Advantage to those that are to
pay, and no Benefit to the whole. But this I shall have occasion to speak more
to.

The fourth Reason says, 84.
That the old unclipt Moneys ought to be raised in proportion. Now if it were
fit to make such an Alteration in the Denomination of the New Coins, it may be
considered, Whether it would not be more reasonable that the KING should have
the Advantage by all the Old Moneys, rather then a few particular Persons, who
have picked out the weighty Moneys and laid by, in hopes of such an Advantage.
As for instance, a Banker who may have usually twenty Thousand Pounds, or more,
in Cash, and has in a little space it may be received and paid two Hundred
Thousand Pounds; suppose he has culled out and laid by but ten Thousand Pounds
weighty Money, upon the proposed Alteration he gets two Thousand Pounds, and so
will every one get in proportion who has weighty Money, which he receives for
others Accounts, and not for his own: And it is an Infallible Rule, that
Wherever some get without a real Increase of the Stock, others must lose, as in
this Case, and the Cases of Stock-jobbing, Wagering, Lotteries, etc.

85.
The Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Reasons, argues the Convenience of raising the
value of a Crown to 6 s. 3 d. and of old unclipt Money to the same value, which
being grounded on the Supposition that the proposed Alteration will yield
Advantage, and answer the Ends designed, but containing no further Argument to
prove it, I pass over, and shall only add, that if it were granted, please to
consider, Whether giving the New Crown the Denomination of Ten Shillings, (as
before hinted) would not better answer all the ends of Accounts, Computations,
etc.

The Eighth Reason is taken from the Difficulty of amending the Clipped Money, 86.
without raising the value of the Silver, because of the great deficiency of
the Silver clipped away, which upon recoining must necessarily be born one way or
other. Now as to the Loss by the Clipped Money, I take it that it is already
lost, and born by the Nation in general, for that which is Clipped off, is spent
and gone, and every Crown of the remainder is not worth above three Shillings
and six Pence, or thereabouts, neither will it purchase more of other
Commodities, that is, exchange for more: And therefore those who receive Rent
and Moneys upon former Contracts, etc. do for the present bear a part of the
Loss, in as much as he that receives 100 l. per An. Rent, cannot as abovesaid
purchase more Commodities or Necessaries for the said 100 l. than he might have
done before (and might do now) for 70 l. if the Silver Coin were unclipt and
good, so that he loses 30 l. per Ann. out of his 100 l. but it is not
reasonable he should always do so. Now if the Money be New coined, and the
Crown called 6 s. 3 d. I take it clearly that every Man loses one fifth part of
all his Rents reserved on Leases and other Contracts, which does not seem
reasonable and just. Then the Question will be, Who shall bear the said Loss?
and my Answer to that must be, that as I have said the whole (or near it) being
lost to the Nation already, I think the said loss ought to be distributed to
every one in proportion; that is, that there should be an equal Tax laid to
make good the whole; which I believe considering the Vexation and Loss which
People meet withal daily in the Money that passes, would be very cheerfully
born by all, over and above the other necessary Taxes, which as yet the Nation
is able to bear, and I conceive it might not be very difficult to propose, and
I shall humbly make bold to offer my Thoughts, if such a Resolution comes to be
taken. If it could be shown, that by raising the Denomination of the Coin any
real gain would accrue to the Realm, whereby to help to defray the Loss, I
think it were a good Expedient; but that being otherwise, in my humble Opinion
I should think it hard, that the whole, or any part of it should be born so
unequally as I apprehend it will be by the proposed means of raising the Coin.

The Ninth Reason only intimates the Expediency of keeping the Coin to the old
Standard in fineness, and weight, or bigness; which depending on the former
Supposition, I pass; only, the Author suggesting that the said raised Values
may be lowered again hereafter, gives me Occasion to say that I apprehend there
will be the same Injustice (to the Tenants and others that are to pay Money
upon Contracts, etc.) in lowering the Coins at any time, as would be now to the
Landlords and those that are to receive Money in raising them. As to the Gold,
the Author is of Opinion not to alter the Coins of that; and that the Remedy to
fix these Gold Coins upon a right Foot will be the re-establishment of the
Silver Coins, wherein I concur with him.

Before I leave the Author's Second Head, I must according to my Promise
consider his Answer to an Objection he starts, as made by some, That raising
the Value of our Coin, or continuing it on the present foot, will be the same
thing; and then he takes their meaning to be, that Silver in Bullion will
always during this War be dearer than silver in Coin, because of the necessity
to export it for the foreign expense of the War, and to answer the balance of
Trade. And though I suppose that is not their meaning (as I have before said) yet
it will be fit to consider what the Author says in answer, which is, First,
that this Necessity may be diminished, but it cannot in any sense be augmented
by raising the value of our Coin. To which I reply, if it be a doubtful thing,
I think there will not be found reason sufficient to introduce so great a
Mischief, where the matter is doubtful whether it will succeed or no. The
Author, Secondly, On a supposition that Bullion in this case may advance
further, says, That howover Offenders then will not have the same encouragement
to melt down our Coin, because their profit on every raised Crown must be less
by fourteen pence half penny than it is at present upon a Crown running in
payment for five shillings only. It is true, if unclipt Crown-pieces went
current in payment as formerly, and Bullion sold for 6 s. 5 d. there would be
great gain in melting them down, but as I have said, as soon as ever Bullion
rose in price any thing considerably, it was occasioned by the undervalue of
the clipped Coin, and forthwith some of the unclipt Coin was melted down, which
yielded some profit, but not near the proportion of fourteen pence half penny
in a Crown. Indeed those who have kept unclipt or milled Money till this time,
may make an advantage, but it is no otherwise then they might do if they had
kept any other Commodity, which sells for more than it did, by reason that the
Money commuted for the same is of less value; that is to say, the measure is
altered, which shows by the way that common consent grounded upon reason and
necessity in Trade and Dealing is of more force than Laws and Statutes, either
with respect to the value of Silver, or interest of Money, but that by the by.
And to return; you may now have the same quantity of Bullion for a five
shilling piece unclipt, as you shall have hereafter for the same quantity of
Silver in Coin, though you call it 6 s. 3 d. or 10 s. or by any other
denomination; and an Ounce of Bullion is not now worth 6 s. 5 d. good weighty
standard Money, but it is worth so much of the clipped bad Money which now goes
about; which bad Money, as I have said, is really fallen in its value, and not
Money of full weight or Bullion risen, and those that shall melt down Money
now, cannot I think properly be said to get fourteen pence halfpenny an Ounce
by it, because the good unclipt Money does only retain its former value, and
the clipped and bad Money is less worth than it was by at least 30 per Cent. and
the case being so, it cannot be supposed that any will pay good Money, for the
difference is not only by melting the Money into Bullion, but by other
Commutations, or Exchanges; you shall buy as much Cloth, Wool, or any thing
else now for 5 s. of silver, Coin that is weighty, as you may for 6 s. 3 d. and
more of the money that now goes current, and if there is little profit made now
by melting down Money, the difference can be but little when the Crown piece
shall have a higher denomination. The Author's third Answer is, 72.
That it is hoped the Exchange to Holland may by the success of some good
designs now on foot be kept at a stand, at least from falling much lower. To
which I say, if Guineas continue current at 30 s. a piece, the Exchange will
continue about the rate it does, except the common and ordinary variation,
which many sudden Drafts or Remittances occasion; and if Guineas fall, the
Exchange will rise in proportion, and if the Silver Coin is redressed, Guineas
will fall, and there are no other designs whatsoever can effect any
considerable alteration, for English standard Silver and standard Gold will
always be of the same value in Holland, as the same standard Silver and Gold in
England, within 2, 3, 4, to 6 per Cent. or thereabouts, and that difference
happens according to present occasions, and the charge of sending it from one
place to another, and the Exchange to Holland and other places will always
govern accordingly. The Author says in the fourth place, 73.
That there is a difference between exporting Bullion or Coin for the service
of the Government, or by Public Authority, and such an exportation as proceeds
from the exorbitant profit of the Melters. But let the occasion be what it
will, either for the service of the Government, that is, for paying our Forces
abroad, etc. or for the paying what we owe by the overbalance of Trade, if we
owe abroad more then our Exports in Commodities can supply, Money or Bullion
must go, and go it will till People are grown poorer, and then they will abate
in their expense of Foreign Goods, and so the tide will turn again; but we
ought to husband our Trade so, as not to suffer that Poverty to come upon us,
which will have a bad effect to weaken our Hands, and expose us to a more
Powerful Enemy; before the English Coin was so clipped and counterfeited as
really to debase it in the Esteem and Value of the People, and consequently of
Foreigners, there was little profit made by melting down our heavy Money, as
has been said, (but in this case it is necessary to repeat some things) and
Bullion advanced but little: But when the Money declined in its value in the
common opinion, then Bullion advanced, and consequently Gold, and so likewise
have all other Commodities, or rather they kept their old value, and you must
give more clipped shillings and half Crowns to make up the value of a Pound
sterling then you did before; and since that People have culled our their heavy
moneys, and cannot so truly be said to have gained by melting them down, (that
is, those who receive and pay money only for their own accounts) as to have
held their own, whilst they and others have lost by the clipped and bad money:
For suppose a man has now reserved an hundred weighty Crowns, he melts these
down into Bullion, which sells for 6. s. 5 d. an Ounce, this he receives in
clipped and bad money, and with this he can buy no more Necessaries then he could
before with his hundred Crowns; where then is the Gain? It is true you will
say, if he owed money before on any Contract, or for Rent, he profits in the
payment, which is what I have said before, that those who were to receive
moneys have sustained some present real loss, which in case moneys should be
raised in their denomination they will continue to bear, which seems not equal;
74.
this the Author takes notice of in his fifth and last Answer, wherein what he
says concerning the balance of Trade, and the cause of the Exportation of
Silver arising thence, is very true in the main, though by the way it is not that
which occasions the great fall in the Exchange between Holland and here, but
the reason of that is the badness of our silver Coin. Now as to the loss which
will happen in all Rents and Revenues, public and private, etc. The Author
says the value of silver is risen, and so persons may purchase as much with a
new Crown called 6 s. 3 d. as they can with 6 s. 3 d. of the clipped money that
passes now: I agree they may do so, but it is not that silver is risen so much,
but because our Coin is fallen in value, or debased, therefore silver seems to
be risen, when in truth it is not, (I mean in any great degree) and the loss
is, that so much cannot be purchased now for 6 s. 3 d. as might have been
before the debasing the money. The Price of silver is what it is worth in good
weighty standard money, not what is it worth in bad, for silver is now worth in
Holland not above 5 s. 3 d. an Ounce, and therefore as is beforesaid, the
balance of Trade is not the cause of the great fall of the Exchange for
Holland, but the debasing of our Coin, and if (as I have often said) some loss
has already happened to particular Persons, I think it is fit a stop should be
put to it, and this cannot truly be done, but by new coining the Money
according to its old denomination and standard. And here it may be fit to say
something particularly concerning the King's Revenue; as the Money commonly
current is debased, and thereupon the Exchange for Holland proportionably
fallen, the Crown loses about one fifth part of all the moneys paid abroad to
the Army, and also of all moneys expended here, except Wages to Seamen and
Sallaries, etc. in the civil list, for that all the Commodities both from
abroad, and those produced at home, cost at least one fifth part more than they
did, and consequently five Millions now will go no further than four did
before, and the case will be the same if the Crown be new coined, and called,
or raised to 6 s. 3 d. then, whereas about five Millions a year has been
thought necessary for the carrying on the War, there must in such case be given
six, and the Land which was before charged 4 s. in the pound, must be in
proportion charged 5 s. in the pound now, but then consider the condition of
the Landlord, in case of raising the Crown to 6 s. 3 d. he pays 5 s. out of 20
s. for 4 s. that he paid before, and for 20 s. he received, or was to receive
before, he receives now but 16 s. that is, although what he receives be called 20
s. yet it serves him but to the same purpose that 16 s. did before.

Having now done with these Reasons, 90.
I pass to the Author's Corrollary, wherein he Notes, That the balance of
Trade is the Original Cause of the scarcity of silver in England, and the loss
by the foreign Exchange: The first is most certainly true, and as the Author
says, whoever can propose a means to convert it to our advantage, ought well to
be heard: Indeed Necessity will enforce it er'e long. But the reason of the
fall of the Exchange to Holland, etc. (where we give the certain Sum, and they
in exchange the uncertain) or its rise to other places, where we give the
uncertain Sum and they the certain, is not the scarcity of silver here, for
that would rather have just the contrary effect, but the reason is the badness
of our present current Coin, as has been before intimated, which I own cannot
be now remedied any other way but by new coining it.

The Author's Second General Head concerns the present state and condition of
the Gold and Silver Coins, on which the Author discourses very ingeniously and
rationally, and I believe hits as near the truth of the Matter as any one can,
in facts that can only be estimated and guessed at.

The Author under his third Head, gives reasons for the new coining all the
Money, and the necessity of it, wherein I perfectly agree with him, without
entering into a consideration of all the Reasons particularly, only I shall add
two which I think weighty, the first is, the Present and Continued Loss (till
it is effected) to those who receive Rents and Money upon former Contracts; the
other is, the loss to the Crown in the Money given for Aids, which can in no
sort be compensated by the gain upon the Money the Crown shall at such time
happen to have in Cash.

118. 152.
The Author in his fourth and fifth general Heads, proposes the means and
methods for reestablishment of the Silver Coins, and supplying the Commerce,
and paying Taxes in the mean time, which I think in the general are admirably
well contrived, and no doubt but the matter is practicable, as he proposes it;
and if any difficulty should arise, it may easily be obviated, and therefore I
will not enter into an Examination of the particulars, but must acknowledge the
Author has taken great Pains, and shown great Judgment and Ingenuity in fixing
the Method to render it practicable; and I am sorry I am forced to disagree
with him about altering the denomination of the Money when recoined. I must
also declare my thoughts, that it is not to the Advantage of the Kingdom to
restrain the exportation of Bullion, or indeed of Money it self, to any certain
Quantity, but to let it be entirely free: Nor would I oblige Vintners,
Ale-house-keepers, etc. to bring in their Plate to be coined, the more Plate
and Jewels in the Nation, the better and the greater is its Stock and Riches,
and when those who have Plate or Jewels have occasion, or are necessitated,
they will part with them without being compelled, and till then there is no
need of it. Many reasons might be given for these Positions, but I do not think
it material now.

Before I conclude, I must take Notice of one or two things more: The Author
thinks justly, that the debasing of the Coin, that is, the adding a greater
Allay to the Silver, is dangerous and dishonorable, and the reason thereof
must be, because there is a less Quantity of Silver ordained to pass for the
same value which before a greater Quantity did, which being unjust to those who
had Money owing, was a breach of the Public Faith, and therefore
dishonorable, and by consequence dangerous.

Further the Author owns, as the truth is, that only the security of the Trade,
and an overballance by that, can increase the stock of Silver and Bullion in
the Nation, wherefore it necessarily follows that whilst there is occasion to
pay more abroad then we receive from thence, Money and Bullion will be sent
out: So that if the Money should be new coined, and Trade not secured, it would
all presently go out of the Nation, and calling a Crown by any other name,
whether it be 6 s. 3 d. 10 s. or 20 s. it would not at all contribute to the
keeping either Coin or Bullion in the Kingdom, because the Exchange would
presently alter in proportion. I shall not add any further, but humbly submit
what I have offered to Consideration.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
There is Newly Published, SOme Thoughts concerning the Better Security of our
Trade and Navigation, and carrying on the War against France more effectually:
Humbly offered to Consideration.


