Chartham News: OR A BRIEF RELATION OF SOME STRANGE BONES THERE LATELY DUG
UP, IN SOME GROUNDS OF Mr. JOHN SOMNER'S, OF CANTERBURY:

WRITTEN By his Brother, Mr. WILLIAM SOMNER, late Auditor of Christ Church
Canterbury, and Register of the Archbishops Court, there; before his Death.

LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, MDCLXIX.

TO THE READER.
Kind Reader,
THE Author of this short Discourse, even whilst he was upon it, and had
scarce read it over himself, was seized upon, first by sickness, then death,
the common Fate of all men. If therefore there be any thing amiss, or imperfect
in it; it would be great unkindness, to impute it to him, who by such
unavoidable necessity, was prevented the benefit of a review; and no less
unkindness perchance, though more tolerable, to blame him, who, as out of a due
respect to the Author; so, out of a desire to gratify them, (not a few
probably) who may desire to satisfy their Curiosities, or improve their
Knowledge, in such things; has published it. Farewell.

I. S.

News from Chartham, in KENT.
ALthough it may, and perhaps must be granted, that Miracles (strictly
understood) are long since ceased: yet in the latitude of the notion,
comprehending all things uncouth and strange, (miranda, as well as miracula;
wonders, as well as miracles) they are not so: but do, more, or less,
somewhere, or other, daily exert, and show themselves. Dies Diem docet. New
days, make new discoveries; especially to such, as are in any measure, curious,
(shall I say) or ingenious, and inquisitive; as few enough amongst us here in
England are, unless acted and animated by some profit, or advantage to
themselves by the discovery; how considerable and remarkable soever it may be
otherwise. It Is true, New lights, are now adays much cried up: but as in
matters (mostly) of Religion; so (if you mark it) by whom? But such, as not so
much for conscience, as for lucre-sake, broach and obtrude them upon a
credulous giddy sort of people, whose applause they first catch, and then,
their purses. But leaving these spiritual Mountebanks, and their counterfeit
ware, new lights only in pretense; I shall here acquaint you with a piece of
new light indeed, but of another kind, presented and held forth upon no
account, or aim at all of profit, or advantage to the publisher; but (if he
mistakes not) of good use and profit (in point of knowledge) unto others,
(learned Antiquaries, and Naturalists, as I suppose) of more skill, insight and
judgment, (if they please to employ them on this occasion) in things so rare
and extraordinary, then he can, does, or would be thought to pretend unto.
Well, to the matter of fact then.

Mr. John Somner, in the month of September, 1668. sinking a Well at a new
House of his, in Chartham, a Village about three miles from Canterbury, toward
Ashford, on a shelving ground, or bankside, within twelve rods of the River,
running from thence to Canterbury, and so, to Sandwich Haven; and digging, for
that purpose, about seventeen foot deep, through gravelly and chalky ground,
and two foot into the Springs; there, met with, took, and turned up a parcel of
strange and monstrous Bones, some whole, some broken, together with four Teeth,
perfect and sound, but in a manner petrified, and turned into Stone; weighing,
(each Tooth) something above half a pound, and almost as big (some of them) as
a man's fist. Cheek-Teeth, or Grinders, as to the form, they are all, not much
unlike, but for the bigness, the Grinders of a man. And whereas I said, almost
as big, some of them, as a man's fist: it brings to my remembrance, what I have
read in Ludovicus Vives, of such a Tooth, but a little bigger; (dens molaris
pugno major; he says: that is, a Cheek-Tooth, bigger than a fist) which was
showed to him for one of St. Christophers Teeth, and was kept in a Church, that
bare his name: which whether he believed, or not, I know not: but contradict
it, he does not, I am sure; neither he, nor his learned companion, whom he does
name there. Just such another Tooth of the bigness, he says, of an ordinary
fist, was seen by Acosta, (a very creditable Author) in the Indies, dug out
of the ground, in one of their houses there, with many other bones; which put
together, represented a man, of a formidable, or as he speaks, deformed
bigness: or, greatness: as he judged of it. And so must we have judged of these
Teeth, and of the body, to which they belonged; had not other Bones been found
with them, which could not be man's Bones. Some that have seen them, by the
Teeth, and some other circumstances, are of opinion, that they are the Bones of
an Hippopotamus, or Equus Fluvialis; that is, a Riverhorse; for a Seahorse, as
commonly understood, and exhibited, is a fictitious thing. Yet Pliny makes
Hippopotamum, (mari, terrae, amni communem) to belong to Sea, Land and Rivers.
But what are the differences and properties of each kind, I leave to others to
inquire. The Earth or Mould about them, and in which they all lay, being like a
Sea-earth, or Fulling-earth, not a stone in it, unless you dig three foot
deeper, and then it rises a perfect gravel.

So have you the story, an account, if you please, of what was found, where,
when, and upon what occasion. For more public satisfaction, and to facilitate
the discovery; at least, to help such, as are minded to employ their skill in
guessing and judging of the Creature, whose remains these are, what it was for
kind; we have by, and with the help of an able Limner, adventured on a Scheme,
or Figure, of several of the Teeth and Bones, with their respective dimensions,
of breadth, length, and thickness.

No man, we conceive, not willing to be censured of rashness, will be very
forward to divine, much less to define or determine, what the Creature was; and
doubtless dubious enough it is, whether of the twain, the Sea, or the Land may
more rightly lay claim unto it. But leaving all others to the freedom of their
own judgments and conjectures; if he may have the same liberty from them for
his, who as he knows the place, with the Country about it, has taken a large
time of consideration of all particulars and circumstances fit to be duly and
deliberately weighed and observed in the case; he would adventure to conjecture
it to be some Marine, or Sea-bred Creature, to which the Land can of right lay
no claim. But admitting that (supposing it, I mean, a Sea-bred Creature) how
then (will some say) should it possibly come there? Piscis in arido? and at
such a depth under ground too? I answer, first, with as little wonder, as a
Land creature should, which who with reason can imagine to have ever had at
first so deep a burial? Next I say, the Mould, Soil or Earth, wherein it lay,
was altogether miry, like to that coenum (oase, some call it) on many parts of
the Sea coast, both in England and abroad. But how possibly (will it be said) a
Sea creature, when found at so remote a distance from the Sea? For solution (if
it may be) of this, and the like incidental doubts, and removing all rubs out
of the way of this conjecture; our future discourse and further progress in
this argument, shall branch it self out into these four following Queries.

1. Whether the situation and condition, face and figure of the place may
possibly admit of the Seas once insinuating it self thither?

2. Whether (that possibility being granted, or evinced) the Sea did ever
actually insinuate it self so far as to this place, and when?

3. How in probability, and when this Valley, or Level being once Sea land,
should come to be so quite deserted and forsaken of the Sea, as it is at this
day; the Sea not approaching by so many, a dozen miles, or more.

4. By what means, the Sea once having its play there, this Creature comes to
lodge, and be found so deep in the ground, and under such a shelving bank.

1. As for the first (the places capacity and aptitude for the Seas influx, or
insinuation) such as know the situation, withal cannot but know, and must agree
it to be so. As for strangers, and such as are unacquainted with the place, for
perfecting their information in what either the common Maps, or a particular
Scheme and draught of the Level, herewith intended, may chance to be defective
in; they may please to know, that the place (the locus loci) we are upon, is a
part of that wide, fair and fruitful Level, or Valley, extending it self not
less than twenty Miles in length, between a continued series and range of
Hills, Downs, or high grounds, lying at a pretty equal distance each from other
all the way; beginning at the East-Kentish shore, and stretching it self,
Westward, by Sandwich, Fordwich, Canterbury, Chartham, Chilham, Godmersham, Wy,
Ashford, sometime in a direct, sometime in a winding course, as far at length,
as to that famous spacious Level of Romney-marsh, and is washed and watered all
along, at least from about Ashford, by a sweet and pleasant River running
through the midst of it, as far as to Sandwich, and there by the Creek, or
Haven, emptying it self into the Sea: nothing at all of obstruction, by the
interposition of Hills, or high grounds, hindering, or controlling the Seas free
play and passage for so many miles together. The place then, with the parts,
the tract above and below it, from the condition, or constitution of it, is
plainly not unapt or incapable of the Seas insinuation and influence.

If any shall object, Canterburies being in the way, as an obstruction, or bar;
they are easily enough answered. For although that City seems, and indeed is,
at this day, for the most part somewhat elevated above the pitch of the rest of
the Valley or Level we are upon; yet not so much, as to desend it self many
times from floods, and overflowings in the lower, and most depressed parts of
it, even by the Springs it stands upon, to her great damage and annoyance:
toward the helping whereof, by the care and providence of former ages, it is
very certain, and by digging Wells, Vaults, Cellars and the like, daily
experimented, that the most part of the City, not excepting the very heart and
center of it, is made and raised ground; the tokens of foundations upon
foundations, to a very considerable depth, daily appearing, and the ground (as
at Amsterdam, Venice and elsewhere) for supporting superstructures, in several
places often stuck and stuffed with Piles of wood, or long Poles and Stakes,
forced into the ground, as Wells and Cellar-diggers have informed me. Nay, and
as if where about now the Bull-stake marketplace is kept, the River had
sometime had its course or current, Pits and otherlike Tanners Utensils, have,
not many years since, been met withal in digging for Cellars thereabouts. To
this let me add, that my very next neighbor in Castle-street, within these
thirty years sinking a Cellar, did at a good depth (five or six foot deep)
light upon, and was put to some stop and stand, in his work, by a strong and
well couched arched piece of Roman Tile or Brick, which he was fain to take, or
break asunder, and remove, before he could proceed. Hereof I was an eye
witness, and (for curiosity sake) took one of the Bricks or Tiles to my self,
which with some other like Roman remains (some found in that, which is my own
Garden) I keep by me to this day. However then, Canterbury may now seem to
stand in the Aestuaries way; yet time was, when in probability it did not; when
I mean the place, the soil which now the City occupies, as the rest of the
whole valley both above and below it, was of too low a pitch, to be an obstacle
to it.

2. As to the second enquiry, (whether probably the Sea did ever actually
insinuate it self so far as to this place, and when) the answer is nothing so
easy: Record of it, we have none. The best and eldest account we have now of
the Condition, Site and Constitution of these our Eastern Parts and Tract, we
owe to Julius Caesar, and the Romans after him: from whom (alas) we have not
the least spark of light to such a discovery: rather indeed the contrary; both
the Seacoast, and Inland parts, by his, and their relation; bearing in a
manner one and the same face and figure then, as now. However, that the Level
we are upon, was sometime an Aestuary, or Arm of the Sea; several Criteria, or
tokens, are not wanting. For example; besides what may be argued and inferred
from this parcel of strange Teeth, and Bones now under consideration; much (as
I conceive) there is of probability for it, resulting from our Rivers name of
Stoure, more anciently, not seldom both called and written Aesture, Esture,
etc. which I doubt not to proceed and come from the Latin Aestuarium, and in
process of time to have been corrupted and contracted into Sture and Stoure;
giving name in part to Stourmouth, a place (a Parish) about six miles Eastward
from Canterbury; so called from the Rivers disimboying there into the Sea, or
Salt Water, flowing up thither: as also giving name to that Manor of the
Archbishops; at this day, and for some ages past called Westgate-Court, at
Canterbury; but more anciently, as in the Conquerors time (witness
Domesday-book) called, the Manor of Esture and Esturesaete, from its situation
by the Sture or Stoure. From which occasion doubtless, the late Lord Finches
Seat in -- about five or six miles nearer to the Spring head, at this day
vulgarly miscalled, East-Steward; is of old sometime called Esture, sometime
Aet-sture. From Saxon Monuments and Records I could easily trace the name up to
a very high date, by many examples.

But to leave that, and proceed to other Criteria; as by the Teeth and Bones
now under consideration, we have an instance on that side of the Valley for the
probability of the Seas quondam occupation of it; so I shall give you here
another no less remarkable from the other, or opposite side of it. By credible
relation and assurance then you may know, that at a place called Westbere, an
obscure Village, about three miles from Canterbury, Eastward, lying under the
brow of the Hill stretching out by Upstreete, as far as to the West end of
Sarr-wall, by which you make your entrance into Thanet; upon the like occasion
to that here at Chartham, (the digging, or sinking of a Well) at a very great
depth, store of Oyster and otherlike shells, together with an Iron Anchor, f^rm
and unimpaired, were found and turned up in our time. The like I have been told
of an Anchor in our days dug up at Broomedowne, on the same side of the
Level somewhat above Canterbury, Westward. And although I can at present
instance only in these few on either side the Valley; yet happily upon enquiry
other might be found for confirming our conjecture. And I shall desire and
hope, that every ingenuous person will so fat oblige and encourage me, as upon
this overture to help me in this research and scrutiny, by imparting to me,
what either of his own knowledge, or credible relation from others, may conduce
toward so noble a discovery.

3. Mean time let us entertain our selves with our third Query, and see if
happily somewhat may not thence result adminicular and suppletory to what may
be defective and wanting in the former. Our third Query now is, how in
probability, and when this Valley or Level, being once Sea-land, should come to
be so quite deserted, and forsaken of the Sea, as it is at this day, the Sea
not approaching it by so many, a dozen miles, or more? In answer whereof, I
must needs say and grant, that in case this Level were once Sea, an Aestuary I
mean, or Arm of it; so very long it was ago, as we may not reasonably think,
that Canterbury (whether as a City, or never so mean a Pagus, or Village) was
then in rerum natura, or a place inhabited; which happily it may have been, if
not as long as Julius Caesar's days, yet undoubtedly, not longafter. For an
account we have of it (as of some other places in Kent) in the Romans time,
both from Ptolemy the Geographer, Antoninus Itinerary and elsewhere. Now (as
was hinted erewhile) elder Records either of Kent, or of Britain that we may
confide in, as Authentic; we have none that I know of, before the Romans time:
no written credible evidences to help us in this scrutiny. We must therefore
either sit us down, and rest contented to throw off all further inquiry, or
else cast about for information as we can. Such as are for this latter, will
tell you, that the world (all know) is very aged, many thousand years old, and
that many and manifold are the alterations, changes and mutations, which time
has made in several parts and quarters of the world, to the notice and
discovery whereof, no written Record, or unwritten Tradition at this day, can
reach or direct us; Tradition it self (longer lived many times than any written
evidence) failing us for age. Of such a nature they conceive may this of the
Aestuary be, so very ancient, as time has quite worn out the memory of it;
withdrawn all light from us, that might conduct us in the scrutiny, and left us
as men in the dark, without either vola, or vestigium, to stumble out our way,
and rome and ramble at uncertainties. Such a one happily shall he be thought,
that adventuring to conjecture at the reason and occasion of the Seas recess
here, with an absolute valediction to the place of its wonted resort, shall
pitch upon the Seas breaking, bursting and cleaving asunder that Isthmus, or
neck of Land, between Gaul and Britain, rendering the latter of the same
Continent with the former, such things (it is certain) have happened elsewhere.
Thus (says Seneca) has the Sea rent Spain, from the Continent of Africa. Thus
(as he adds) by Deucalions flood, was Sicily cut from Italy. More instances of
this kind may be found in Mr. Cambdens Cantium, and elsewhere. And although
there be no certain evidence of such an accident here from ancient either
Historians, or Geographers; yet is the thing so strongly and rationally argued,
by him especially, as by Verstegan also, Twine and others before him; and the
conjecture backed with such plenty of pregnant and probable Criteria, by the
former; that what others may think I know not; but were I of the Jury, I should
more than incline to concur with them, who would find for the Isthmus.
Especially, when to the plenty of Arguments mustered up by Mr. Cambden, I shall
have contributed this one, by him and the rest omitted, which is, that by a
received constant Tradition, Romney-Marsh, that large and spacious Level,
containing (says Mr. Cambden) fourteen miles in length, and eight in breadth;
was sometime Sea-land, lying wholly under Saltwater, and is therefore of some
not improperly called, the Seas gift; which having, when time was, forsaken it,
and withdrawn his wonted influence from it; the place thereupon became and
continues firm Land. And if I may guess at the time and occasion of both that,
and our Canterbury Levels recovery and riddance from the Sea, I shall (for my
part, with submission to better judgments) be apt to pitch upon that of the
Seas breaking through, and in time working and washing away that Isthmus,
between Us and France. And then whereas beforetime Romney Level (which had and
has its Stoures too, or Aestuaria as well as ours) and this other, not
improbably (no high Lands, as we see, interposing for impeding their
conjunotion) were but one and the same Level, and lay under the Seas and
Salt-waters tyranny; now both the one and the other (the Sea having so much
more play and elbow-room, than formerly by cleaving asunder the Isthmus) were
rescued from it, and of an Aestuary, became such a rich and noble Valley, or
Level, as is second to none (I take it) in England.

I am resolved to keep home and conceive my self no further concerned than in
our own Level. But if from hence any other shall take an hint to consider of
the Nether-lands, or Low Countries, and enquire whether those in whole, or in
part, may not have arisen out of, and been gained from the Sea, by the very
same occasion, which is here conjecturally assigned for our Kentish Low-lands;
I shall not at all wonder at it, thinking it (for my part) a task not unworthy
a learned, judicious, sober undertaker: and were I as much concerned, and as
well instructed there as here, I should not know how to purge my self of
negligence, if I did not undertake it with the first.

4. To come, at length, to the fourth and last of our Queries, by what means
the Sea once having its play there, (at Chartham) this Creature comes to lie
and be found so deep in the ground, and under such a shelving bank? My answer
is, that supposing this with the rest of the Level or Valley once occupied by
the Sea, or Salt Water, that being a Creature which by fluxes and refluxes
always is in motion, and thereby in time beating upon and working itself into
the bank, or rising ground there, might at length so far undermine, eat into,
and loosen it, as to fetch down so much mould, or earth upon, or over the
place, as might lodge the Creature at so great a depth. Or else perhaps, the
continual agitation of the Water might in time force, drive up, and cast over
it, that great quantity of Ouse, Earth and other matter under which it lay. By
the way, it is observed that the nature of the Soil here and there, is such, so
loose, supple, rotten, and sandy, that merely of it self, it is apt to sink and
fall in; as was lately experimented by a Saw-pit, dug hard by, which after a
little time by the Earths giving way on each side of it, fell in, and filled up
it self.

Thus have you (gentle Readers) our Chartham News, or discoveries with the
circumstances, and the use my little skill will serve me to make of them, in
point either of History or Geography. Arcana they are, but whether tanti;
whether I mean, grateful, or useful to the Public, is left to the judicious
Antiquaries, Naturalist, etc. who are desired to take the matter, where the
Historian has left it. It has been the Finders care, and good will, as to
preserve, so to expose and communicate what he has found: and if at length, to
this of the parts, and by them, a full discovery of the whole, by the skill and
dexterity of the learned in the School, and secrets of Nature, may be added,
for the benefit of the Commonwealth of learning; both the Finder, and Relator
will think their time and pains very well both bestowed, and recompensed.

FINIS.
The exact Figure (part of what the Author intended, if he had lived) of two of
the Teeth, is here set down at the end.






