Something concerning Agbarus, Prince of the Edesseans; With his Epistle to
Christ; and Christ's Epistle in Answer thereto. Also Paul's Epistle to the
Laodiceans, with the manner of his Death, and his Exhortation to his
Persecutors.
A Catalogue of those Scriptures mentioned, but not inserted in the Bible. As
also how several Scriptures are corrupted by the Translators: With the
Difference betwixt the Old and New Translations.
AFter that Jesus Christ was made manifest unto all men through the working of
Miracles, he drew unto him an innumerable sort of Strangers, far distant from
Judea, (afflicted with sundry Diseases, and every sort of Maladies, hoping to
recover their health;) of which number King Agbarus Governor of the famous
Nations, inhabiting beyond the River Euphrates, grievously diseased in body,
incurable by man's cunning, hearing the renowned Fame of Jesus, the wonderful
works which he wrought, agreeable unto the same, published of all men, wrote
unto him by letters, requiring deliverance from his Disease; Jesus (though not
presently) yielded unto his desire, vouchsafed to answer him by an Epistle,
that shortly he would send one of his Disciples, which should cure his Disease
promising withal, that he should not only cure his Disease, but as many as
belonged unto him; which promise he not long after performed; for after his
Resurrection Thomas; one of the twelve Apostles, sent his Brother Thaddaus,
accounted among the seventy Disciples of Christ by Divine Inspiration, into the
City Edessa, to be a Preacher of the Doctrine of Christ, by whom all things
which concerned the promise of Christ were performed.

The Reader has an approved Testimony of these things in writing, taken out of
the recorded Monuments of the Princely City Edessa; for there are found
inrowled in their public Registry things of Antiquity, and which were done
about Agbarus's time, yea and preserved unto this day; there is no reason to
the contrary but that we may have the Epistles themselves, copyed out of their
Registry, and translated by us out of the Syrian Tongue in this manner.

The Epistle of Agbarus unto our Savior.
AGbarus Governor of Edessa unto Jesus the good Savior, showing himself in
Jerusalem, sends greeting; I have heard of thee, and of thy Cures which thou
have done without Medicines and Herbs; for (as the report goes) thou make
the Blind to see; the Lame to go; the Lepers thou clensest; foul Spirits, and
Devils, thou castest out; and long diseased thou restorest to health; and
raisest the Dead to Life. When that I heard these things of thee, imagined with
my self, one of these two things, either that thou art God come from Heaven,
and do these things, or the Son of God that brings these things to pass.
Wherefore, by these my Letters, I beseech thee to take the pains to come unto
me, and that thou will cure this my grievous Malady, wherewith I am sore vexed.
I have heard moreover that the Jews murmur against thee, and go about to
mischief thee; I have here a little City, and an honest, which will suffice us
both.

These things he wrote after this manner, being a little lightened from above; I
think it also not amiss to hear the Letters of Jesus sent back to Agharus by
the same Bearer.

The Epistle of Christ unto Agbarus.
AGbarus, blessed art thou, because thou have believed in me, when thou saw
me not; for it is written of me, That they which see me shall not believe in
me, that they which see me not, may believe and be saved. Concerning that thou
wrotest unto me, that I should come unto thee; I let thee understand, that all
things touching my Message are here to be fulfilled; and after the fullness
thereof, I am to return again unto him that sent me. But after my Ascension I
will send one of my Disciples unto thee, which shall cure thy Malady, and
restore life to thee, and them that be with thee.

Unto these Epistles, there were also these things added in the Syrian Tongue.
When Jesus was taken up, Judas (which also is called Thomas) sent unto him
Thaddaus the Apostle, one of the seventy, who when he came, remained with one
Tobias, the son of Tobias: When that the fame was spread of him, and that he
was made manifest by the Miracles which he wrought, it was signified unto
Agbarus, and said, The Apostle of Jesus is come, of whom he wrote unto thee.
Thaddaus by that time began, through the Power of God, to cure every sort and
sickness, that all men greatly marvelled. Agbarus hearing of the weighty and
wonderful Works which he wrought, that he cured in the Name and Power of Jesus,
forthwith suspected the same to be he of whom Jesus had written; saying, After
mine Ascension I will send one of my Disciples unto thee, which shall cure thy
Malady. And when he had called to him Tobias, where Thaddaus lodged, he said
unto him, I here say that a certain mighty Man come from Jerusalem is lodged
with thee, and cures many in the Name of Jesus; who made answer and said, yea,
there came a certain Stranger and lodged at my house, which has done wonderful
things; to whom the King said, Bring him unto me: Tobias returning unto
Thaddaus, said unto him, Agbarus the Governor sent for me, and commanded, that
I should bring thee unto him, that thou may cure his Disease; Thaddaus
answered, I go, for it is for his sake that I am sent thus mightily to work:
Tobias bestirring betimes the next day, took with him Thaddaus and came to
Agbarus; as he came, even at his entrance, there appeared unto Agbarus in the
presence of his chief men, a great and strange show, in the countenance of
Thaddaus the Apostle, at which sight Agbarus did reverence unto Thaddaus, so
that all they that were presence marvelled, none of them saw the sight save
Agbarus alone, which questioned with Thaddaus, and said, Art thou of a truth a
Disciple of Jesus the Son of God, who made me this promise, I will send unto
thee one of my Disciples which shall cure thy Disease, and show life unto thee
and all thine? To whom Thaddaus made answer, Because thou have greatly believed
in the Lord Jesus which sent me, therefore am I sent unto thee, but in case
thou believe in him as yet, thy hearty desires according unto thy says thou
shall obtain; to whom Agbarus said, I have continued so believing in him, that
I could have found in my heart mightily to destroy the Jews which crucified
him, were not the Roman Empire a let unto my purpose: Thaddaus said again, our
Lord and God Jesus Christ fulfilled the will of his Father, which being
finished, he is ascended unto him; Agbarus answered, and I have believed in
him, and in his Father; to whom Thaddaus replied, therefore in the Name of the
self same Lord Jesus I lay my hand upon thee, which, when he had done, he was
forthwith cured of his Malady, and delivered of the pain that pressed him sore;
Agbarus marvelled at this, that (...), it was reported to him of Jesus, so in
truth by his Disciple and Apostle Thaddaus, without Apothecary stuff, and
virtue of Herbs he wa^ ^^ted: And not only he, but also Abdus, the son of
Abdus, greived with the Gout, and falling at the feet of Thaddaus recovered his
former health: by the laying on of his hands he cured also many other of his
fellow Citizens, working miraculously, and miraculous things, and preaching the
Word of God; to whom Agbarus said again, Thou Thaddaus through the Power of God
do these things, and we have thee in admiration: I pray thee moreover, that
thou expound unto me the coming of Jesus, how he was made man, his might, and
by what power he brought such things as we have heard to pass, to whom Thaddaus
said, At this season I will be silent, though I am sent to preach this Word;
but to morrow call together all thy people, and fellow Citizens, then will I
show unto them the Word of God, and sow the Word of Life, and teach the manner
of his coming, how he was made man, of his Message, and to what end he came,
being sent from the Father, moreover of his Miracles and Mysteries uttered in
this World, and Power in bringing things to pass; and besides this, his new
Preaching, and how base slander and humble he seemed in outward appearance, how
he humbled himself, and died, which great things he suffered of the Jews; how
he was Crucified, and descended into Hell, and rent the hedge and middle wall,
never severed before, and raised the dead, that of long time had slept; how
that he descended alone, but ascended unto the Father accompanied with many;
how that he sits in Glory at the Right Hand of God the Father in Heaven; and
last of all how he shall come again with Glory and Power to judge both the quick
and dead. When the morning was come, Agbarus commanded his Citizens to be
gathered together to hear Thaddaus, which being ended, he charged Gold, coined
and uncoyned, should be given him; but he received it not, saying, Insomuch
that we having forsaken our own, how can we receive other men's.

These things were done the three and fortieth year, which being translated
word for word out of the Syrian Tongue, we thought not amiss to declare in this
manner.

Jerome, with other grave Writers, affirms such circumstances to have been:
Eusebius, whose credit herein is not small, reports the same to have been
taken out of their Records in the City of Edessa, registered there in the Syrian
Tongue, and by him translated out of the Syrian into the Greek Tongue.

The Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans.
1. PAul an Apostle, not of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ.

2. To the Brethren which are at Laodicea, Grace and Peace be with you from God
the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

3. I thank my God in all my Prayers, that you remain steadfast in him, and in
all his works; waiting upon his promises to the day of Judgment.

4 And be not seduced by some unprofitable talkers, who go about to cause you
to fall from the Gospel which was preached unto you by me.

5. Oh that they that were instructed by me, might serve to the profit of the
Gospel of Truth, and become diligent in good works of Eternal Life.

6. And henceforth are my bonds manifest which I suffer for Christ's sake.

7. Whereof I rejoice in heart, and account it Eternal Salvation.

8. That such is done through your Prayers, by the working of the holy Spirit,
whether by life or death.

9. For I have a will and a joy to dye in Christ; who will through the same
mercy give you to have the same love, and to be of one mind.

10. Therefore beloved Brethren, as you have heard in my presence, that keep
and finish in the fear of God, so shall you have Eternal Life; for God will
work it and perfect it in you without delay.

11. My beloved, rejoice in the Lord, and take heed of them that are desirous
after filthy lucre.

12 Let your Prayers be manifest unto God, and remain firm in the knowledge of
Christ.

13. And do that which is meet, convenient, just, and reasonable, and what you
have heard and received, that keep in your hearts; so shall you have Praise.

14. The Grace of God and our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirits, Amen.

Cause this Epistle to be read unto the Colossians, and read you that which is
written unto the Colossians; Read Col. 4.16.

This Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans was found in the oldest Bible that was
printed at Worms.

IN a Translation of the New Testament into both Latin and English, each
correspondent one to another, after the vulgar Text, commonly called St Jeroms,
faithfully translated by John Hollybush, 1538. and Printed in Southwark by
James Nicholson, and set forth by the Kings License, I find in the sixth
Chapter of Luke it is thus in the Margent, after the fifth and sixth verses,
after these words, The Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath, viz. in one of
the Greek Copies this follows, Jesus seeing a certain man working on the
Sabbath day, said unto him, O man, if thou did know indeed what thou do,
thou art happy; but if thou know not, thou art accursed, and a Transgressor
of the Law.

Concerning the Death of Paul.
PAul being delivered by Nero, bound unto Longinus and Magistus the chief
Officers, and Acestus the Centurion, that they should lead him without the
City, and cause him to be beheaded; and Paul being full of the holy Ghost,
spoke the words of Eternal Life, that both Nero, and all should believe in
Jesus Christ, who was King of Heaven and Earth, who would destroy the glory of
the World with fire; when they had led him away, Longinus, Magistus, and
Acestus began to say unto him, Tell us, O Paul, where is that King, and where
will he appear unto you, and how will you know him? and what will he give unto
you, or what good will he bestow upon you, that you Christians so mightily love
him; that by no means, you will consent unto our Religion, that you may live
and enjoy the good of this life; but rather then all the pleasures of delight,
to be led to die for him with diverse torments? for this seems to us to be a
great error, to hate this joyful life, and to embrace with all your desire
punishment and death. Paul therefore says, O ye wise men, and flourishing in
knowledge, depart out of the darkness and error, wherein the nobillity of your
understanding is clouded with darkness lest you should see the Truth which
lies hid in you; return the eyes of your minds to the Eternal and True Light,
that ye may be able first to know your selves, and so come to the knowledge of
that King with gladness, and to be saved from that fire which is to come upon
the World, and to remain unhurt; for we do not war, as you think, for some
earthly King, but the living God, the Kingdom without end; who by reason of the
iniquities that is done in this World he will come a Judge, and will judge it by
Fire; happy will that man be who will believe in him, he shall have Eternal
Life, and shall live World without end; and most unhappy is he who despising
the riches of his bounties, and long-suffering, will not return unto him, for
he shall perish Eternally.

A Catalogue of those Scriptures which are mentioned, but not inserted in the
Bible.
THe Prophecy of Enoch, mentioned Jude 14. The Book of Jehu, mentioned 2 Chronicles.
20.34. The Book of the Battles of the Lord, mentioned Numbers 21.14. The Book
of Nathan the Prophet, The Book of Iddo The Prophecy of Abijab, mentioned 2 Chronicles. 9.29. The Book of Shemaiah the Prophet, mentioned 2 Chronicles. 12.15. The
Book of Jashar, mentioned 2 Samuel 1.18. The Book of Gad, 1 Chronicles. 29.29. One
Epistle to the Corrinthians, mentioned 1 Cor. 5.9. The first Epistle to the
Ephesians, mentioned, Ephesians. 3.3. The Epistle to the Laodiceans, mentioned,
Colos. 4.16. The Books of Henoch, mentioned in the Epistle of Thadeus Origin
and Tertullian. The Books of Solomon's three thousand Proverbs, and one thousand
Songs, with his Books of the nature of Trees, Plants, Beasts and Fishes,
mentioned, 1 Kings 4.32, 33. The Epistle fathered upon Barnabas. The Revelation
of Peter, the Doctrine called the Apostles, mentioned in Eusebius, Lib. 3.
Chap. 22.

Several Scriptures Corrupted by the Translators.
Jude 14. BEhold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, in the Greek
it is in ten thousands, (...).

Heb. 1.3. Express image of his Person, Greek Substance or Subsistence, (...).

Heb. 2.16. He took not on him the nature of Angels, in the Greek, (...), which
is by true interpretation, he does not take hold of Angels: As for the word,
Nature, which is in our English Copies, there is nothing for it in the ^reek.

Mat. 3.11. in Beza his Latin Testament, and our English Copies, it is rendered,
I indeed baptize you with Water, and from the word, with water, is the act of
Sprinkling pleaded for, in the Greek it is, I Dip, Plunge or Baptize you in
water, in it, (...).

Col. 1.23. In the Latin and English Copies it is thus, which was preached to
every creature which is under Heaven, in the Greek it is, in every creature,
(...).

Luke 16.15. In the Latin and English Copies, it is that which is highly
esteemed among men, in the Greek it is, in men, (...).

1 Cor. 15.31. In our English Copies it is, I protest by your rejoicing, etc.
Now I protest is added, for there is nothing for it in the Greek, (...).

1 Cor. 2.6. We speak Wisdom among them that are perfect; in the Greek it is,
in them that are perfect, (...).

2 Cor. 5.19. Not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto
us the Word of Reconciliation: In the Latin and Greek Copies it is thus
rendered, And has put in us the Word of Reconciliation. Posuitque in nobis
sermonem illum reconciliationis, (...).

Romans 8.29. In the English and Latin Copies it is, that he might be the first
born among many Brethren; it is, in many Brethren, (...).

Mat. 28.19. In the English and Latin Copies it is, Baptizing them in the Name;
in the Greek it is, into the Name, (...).

Mat. 6.7. In the English Copies it is, For they think they shall be heard for
their much speaking; in the Greek it is, in their much speaking, (...).

1 Timothy 3.16, In our English and Latin Copies it is, Great is the mystery of
Godliness, God was made manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles; in the Greek it is, preached in the
Gentiles, (...).

Romans 11.2. In the Latin and English Copies it is, Wot you not what the
Scripture says of Elias; but in the Greek it is, i^ Elias, (...).

Heb. 1.1. God, etc. Spoke to the Fathers by the Prophets; in the Greek it is,
God spoke to the Fathers in the Prophets, (...).

Has in the last days spoken unto us, by his Son; In the Greek it is, Has
spoken unto us in his Son, (...).

Romans 15.6. That you may with one mind, and one mouth glorify God; In the
Greek it is, in one mouth, (...).

Romans 1.19. In the Greek, Latin, and English Copies it is (speaking of the
Gentiles) That which is to be known of God, is manifest in them, or made known
in them, though some dare say and do say, among them,

Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? This
is the English Translation in the Hebrew it is, Shall there he evil in a City,
and shall not the Lord do somewhat?

Heb. 5. ver. last, Strong meat belongs to them that are full of age; in the
Greek it is, Strong meat belongs to them that are Perfect, (...).

John 8.6. In our English Copies it is, Jesus stooped down, and with his Finger
wrote on the Ground, as though he heard them not, as for the words (as though
he heard them not) they are added by the Translators, for there is nothing in
the Greek for them, (...).

John 1.14. The Word became flesh, and dwelt amongst us, in the Greek it is, in
us, (...). By true interpretation it is, the Word became flesh and pitched his
Tent in us.

Heb. 10.20. In the English copies it is, by a new and living way; in the Greek
it is, of late slain, and living Way, (...), properly signifies recens
mactatus, lately, or of late slain, says Leigh and Pasor.

The Difference betwixt the Old Translation and New.
Old Translation, IF any one want Light, let him look upon the Law and the
Testimony whether they speak after this meaning; if he do not this, he stumbles
and suffers hunger, and if he suffers hunger, he is not patient, but
blasphemeth his King and his God; then looks he upward and downward to the
Earth, and behold there is trouble and darkness, vexation is round about him,
and the cloud of error, and out of such adversity shall he not escape, even
like as in time past it has been seen well. This is the old Translation, Isa.
8.

New Translation thus; To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no life in them: And they shall
pass through it hardly bestead, and hungry, and it shall come to pass, that
when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their King and
their God, and look upward, and they shall look unto the Earth, and behold
trouble and darkness, and dimness of anguish, and they shall be driven to
darkness, Isa. 8.20, 21, 22.

Old Translation. Prove. 23. When thou sit at the Table with a Lord, order
thy self mannerly with the things set before thee; Measure thine appetite, and
if thou will rule thy own self, be not over greedy of his meat, for meat
beguiles and deceives.

New Translation thus: When thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider
diligently what is before thee, and put a knife to thy throat if thou be a man
given to Appetite: Be not desirous of his dainties, for they are deceitful
meat, Prove. 23.1, 2, 3.

Old Translation, Amos 3. Cry they out Alarm with the Trumpet in the City, and
the people not afraid? comes there any Plague in a City without it be the
Lord's doing?

New Translation thus: Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not
be afraid? shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Hosea
5.6.

Heb. 1.3. In the New Translation it is said, who being the brightness of his
Glory, and the express Image of his Person.

But in the Old Translation it reads thus; being the brightness of his Glory,
and the very Image of his Substance.

2 Cor. 2.17. In the English it is, we do not corrupt the Word, but in the
Latin it is, we do not sell the Word for money.

Old Translation Epistle Jude latter end it is, unto him that is able to keep
you free from sin and to present you faultless.

In the New Translation it is, unto him that is able to keep you from falling,
etc.

Old Translation, 2 Timothy 3. at the end of the Chapter, it is, all Scripture
given by Inspiration of God, is profitable to Teach, to Improve etc.

In the New Translation it is, all Scripture, is given by Inspiration of God,
and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, etc.

Old Translation, Mac. 3. about the beginning of the Chapter, it is said, and
as concerning the Prophets that deceive my people, thus says the Lord against
them, when they have any thing to bite upon, then they preach, that all shall
be well, but if a man put not something into their mouths they preach of War
against him

New Translation, Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my
people err, that bite with their Teeth, and cry Peace, and he that puts not
into their mouths they even prepare War against him.

THE END.

