A SERMON Preached at LAMBETH-CHAPPEL on the 25th of November, Upon the
Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Dr JOHN DOLBEN Lord Bishop of
ROCHESTER.

By ROBERT SOUTH D. D.

Public Orator to the University of Oxford, and Chaplain to the Lord High
Chancellor of ENGLAND.

SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for William Not, at the Queens Arms in the
middle of the Old Pell-mell near St. James's. 1666.

To the Right Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN, Lord Bishop of ROCHESTER, Dean of
the Cathedral Church of WESTMINSTER, And Clerk of the Closet to His Majesty.
My LORD,
THough the interposal of my Lord of Canterburies Command for the Publication
of this mean Discourse, may seem so far to determine, as even to take away, my
Choice; yet I must own it to the World, that it is solely and entirely my own
Inclination, seconded by my Obligations to your Lordship, that makes this, that
was so lately an humble Attendant upon your Lordships Consecration, now
ambitious to Consecrate it self with your Lordships Name. It was my Honor to
have lived in the same College with your Lordship, and now to belong to the
same Cathedral; where at present you credit the Church as much by your
Government, as you did the School formerly by your Wit. Your Lordship even then
grew up into a constant Superiority above others; and all your After-greatness,
seems but a Paraphrase upon those Promising beginnings: for what soever you
are, or shall be, has been but an easy Prognostic from what you were. It is
your Lordships Unhappiness to be cast upon an Age in which the Church is in its
Wane, and if you do not those glorious things that our English Prelates did two
or three hundred Years since; it is not because your Lordship is at all less
than they, but because the Times are worse. Witness those magnificent Buildings
in Christ Church in Oxford, begun and carried on by your Lordship; when by your
Place you governed, and by your Wisdom increased the Treasure of that College:
and, which must eternally set your Fame above the reach of Envy and Detraction,
these great Structures you attempted at a time when you returned Poor and bare,
to a College as bare, after a long Persecution, and before you had laid so
much as one Stone in the Repairs of your own Fortunes: By which incomparably
high and generous undertaking, you have shown the World how fit a Person you
were to build upon Wolseys foundation: A Prelate, whose Noble design you
Imitate, and whose mind you Equal. Briefly, That Christ-Church stands so high
above-ground, and that the Church of Westminster lies not flat upon it, is your
Lordships Commendation. And therefore your Lordship is not behind hand with the
Church, paying it as much Credit and Support; as you receive from it; for you
owe your Promotion to your Merit, and, I am sure, your Merit to your Self. All
men Court you, not so much because a great Person, as a Public good. For, as a
Friend, there is none so hearty, so Nobly warm and active to make good all the
Offices of that endearing Relation: As a Patron, none more able to oblige and
reward your Dependants; and, which is the Crowning Ornament of Power, none more
willing. And lastly, as a Diocesan, you are like even to outdo your self in
all other Capacities; and, in a word, to exemplify and realize every Word of
the following Discourse; which is here most humbly and gratefully presented to
your Lordship, by

Your Lordships most obliged Servant, ROBERT SOUTH From St. James's, Dec. 3.
1666.

A SERMON Preached at LAMBETH-CHAPPEL on the 25th of November, Upon the
Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Dr JOHN DOLBEN Lord Bishop of
ROCHESTER.
2 Titus, last Verse. These things Speak and Exhort, and Rebuke with all
Authority; let no man Despise thee.
IT may possibly be expected, that the very taking of my Text out of this
Epistle to Titus may engage me in a Discourse about the Nature, Original, and
Divine Right of Episcopacy; and if it should, it were no more, then what some
of the greatest, and the learned persons in the world (when men served Truth
instead of Design) had done before: For, I must profess that I cannot look upon
Titus as so far Vnbishopt yet, but that he still exhibits to us all the
Essentials of that Jurisdiction that to this day is claimed for Episcopal. We
are told in the fifth Verse of the first Chapter, That he was left in Crete to
set things in order, and to ordain Elders in every City; which Text one would
think were sufficiently clear and full, and too big with Evidence to be
perverted; but when we have seen Rebellion commented out of the thirteenth of
the Romans; and since there are few things but admit of Gloss and probability,
and consequently may be expounded as well as disputed on both sides; it is no
such wonder, that some would bear the world in hand, that the Apostles design
and meaning is for Presbytery, though his words are all the time for
Episcopacy; No wonder, I say, to us at least, who have conversed with too many
strange unparalled Actions, Occurrences and Events, now to wonder at any
thing; Wonder is from Surprise; and Surprise ceases upon Experience.

I am not so much a Friend to the stale Starched Formality of Preambles, as to
detain so great an Audience with any praevious discourse extrinsick to the
Subject matter and design of the Text; and therefore I shall fall directly upon
the Words, which run in the form of an Exhortation, though in appearance a very
strange one; for the matter of an Exhortation should be something naturally in
the Power of him to whom the Exhortation is directed. For no man exhorts
another to be strong, beautiful, witty, or the like; these are the felicities
of some Conditions, the objects of more Wishes, but the effects of no man's
Choice. Nor seems there any greater reason for the Apostles exhorting Titus,
That no man should despise him; for how could another man's Action be his Duty?
Was it in his power that men should not be wicked and injurious? and if such
persons would despise him, could any thing pass an obligation upon him not to
be despised? No, this cannot be the meaning; and therefore it is clear, that
the Exhortation lies not against the Action it self, which is only in the
Despisers power; but against the just occasion of it, which is in the will and
power of him that is Despised; it was not in Titus's power that men should not
despise him, but it was in his power to bereave them of all just cause of doing
so; it was not in his power not to be Derided, but 'twas in his power not to be
Ridiculous.

In all this Epistle it is evident that St. Paul looks upon Titus as advanced
to the dignity of a prime Ruler of the Church, and entrusted with a large
Diocese, containing many particular Cities under the immediate Government of
their respective Elders; and those deriving Authority from his Ordination, as
was specified in the fifth Verse of the first Chapter. And now looking upon
Titus under this Qualification, he addresses a long Advice and Instruction to
him, for the discharge of so important a Function, all along the first and
second Chapter: but sums up all in this last Verse, which is the subject of
the ensuing Discourse, and contains in it these two things.

1. An account of the Duties of his Place or Office.

2. Of the means to facilitate and make effectual their Execution.

The Duties of his place were two. 1. To Teach. 2. To Rule. Both comprised in
these words; These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all Authority.

And then, the means, the only means to make him Successful, Bright and
Victorious in the performance of these great works, was to be above Contempt,
to shine like the Baptist, with a clear, and a triumphant Light. In a word it
is every Bishops duty to Teach, and to Govern; and his way to do it, is not to
be despised.

We will discourse of each respectively in their Order.

1. And first, for the first branch of the great work incumbent upon a Church
Ruler, which is to Teach. A work that none is too great or too high for: it is
a work of Charity, and Charity is the work of Heaven, which is always laying it
self out upon the Needy, and the Impotent; nay, and it is a work of the highest
and the noblest Charity; for he that teaches another, gives an Alms to his
soul, he clothes the nakedness of his Understanding, and relieves the wants of
his impoverished Reason: he indeed that governs well, leads the Blind; but he
that teaches him, gives him Eyes; and it is a glorious thing to have been the
Recoverer and Repairer of a decayed Intellect, and a Sub-worker to Grace, in
freeing it from some of the inconveniences of Original sin. It is a
Benefaction that gives a man a kind of Prerogative: for even in the common
Dialect of the world, every Teacher is called a Master: it is the property of
Instruction to descend, and upon that very account it supposes him, that
instructs, the Superior, or at least makes him so.

To say a man is advanced too high to condescend to teach the Ignorant, is as
much as to say, that the Sun is in too high a place to shine upon what is below
him. The Sun is said to rule the day, and the Moon to rule the night: but do
they not Rule them only by enlighting them? Doctrine is that, that must
prepare men for Discipline; and men never go on so cheerfully, as when they see
where they go.

Nor is the dullness of the Scholar to extinguish, but rather to inflame the
charity of the Teacher: for since it is not in men as in vessels, that the
smallest capacity is the soonest filled; where the labor is doubled, the value
of the work is enhaunced; for it is a sowing where a man never expects to reap
any thing but the Comfort and Conscience of having done virtuously. And yet we
know moreover, that God sometimes converts even the dull and the slow, turning
very Stones into Sons of Abraham; where, besides that the difficulty of the
Conquest advances the Trophee of the Conqueror; it often falls out, that the
backward Learner makes amends another way, recompencing Sure for Sudden, and
expiating his want of Docility with a deeper and a more rooted Sincerity. Which
alone were argument sufficient to enforce the Apostles injunction of being
instant in season and out of season; even upon the highest and most exalted
Ruler in the Church. He that sits in Moses chair, sits there to Instruct as
well as to Rule: and a Generals office engages him to Lead as well as to
Command his Army. In the first of Ecclesiastes, Solomon represents himself both
as Preacher and King of Israel: and every soul that a Bishop gains, is a new
accession to the extent of his Power; he preaches his Jurisdiction wider, and
enlarges his spiritual Diocese, as he enlarges men's apprehensions.

The Preaching part indeed of a Romish Bishop, is easy enough, whose Grand
business is only to teach men to be Ignorant, to instruct them how to know
Nothing, or, which is all one, to know upon Trust, to believe implicitly, and
in a word, to see with other men's eyes, till they come to be lost in their own
souls. But our Religion is a Religion that dares to be understood; that offers
it self to the search of the Inquisitive, to the inspection of the severest and
the most awakened Reason: for being secure of her substantial Truth and Purity,
she knows that for her to be seen and look into, is to be embraced and admired:
as there needs no greater argument for men to love the light then to see it: It
needs no Legends, no Service in an unknown tongue, no inquisition against
Scripture, no purging out of the heart and sense of Authors, no altering or
bribing the voice of Antiquity to speak for it; it needs none of all these
laborious Artifices of ignorance; none of all these cloaks and coverings. The
Romish faith indeed must be covered, or it cannot be kept warm; and their
Clergy deal with their Religion as with a great Crime; if it is Discovered they
are undone. But there is no Bishop of the Church of England, but accounts it
his Interest, as well as his Duty to comply with this Precept of the Apostle
Paul to Titus, These things teach and exhort.

Now this Teaching may be effected two ways; 1. Immediately by himself. 2.
Mediately by others.


And first immediately by himself. Where God gives a Talent, the Episcopal Robe
can be no Napkin to hide it in. Change of Condition changes not the abilities
of Nature, but makes them more illustrious in their exercise; and the Episcopal
dignity added to a good Preaching faculty, is like the erecting of a stately
Fountain upon a Spring, which still, for all that, remains as much a Spring as
it was before, and flows as plentifully, only it flows with the circumstance
of greater State and Magnificence, Height of place is intended only to stamp
the endowments of a private condition with Luster and Authority: And thanks be
to God, neither the Churches professed enemies, nor her pretended friends have
any cause to asperse her in this respect, as having over her such Bishops, as
are able to silence the Factious, no less by their Preaching, then by their
Authority.

But then on the other hand, let me add also, that this is not so absolutely
necessary, as to be of the vital Constitution of this Function. He may teach
his Diocese who ceases to be able to preach to it: for he may do it by
appointing Teachers, and by a vigilant exacting from them the care and the
instruction of their respective Flocks. He is the Spiritual father of his
Diocese; and a Father may see his Children taught, though he himself does not
turn Schoolmaster. It is not the gift of every Person, nor of every Age, to
harangue the multitude, to Voice it high and loud, and Dominari in Concionibus.
And since Experience fits for government, and Age usually brings experience,
perhaps the most Governing years are the least Preaching years. In the

2. Second place therefore, there is a teaching Mediately, by the Subordinate
ministration of others; in which, since the Action of the Instrumental agent is
upon all grounds of Reason to be ascribed to the Principal, He that ordains and
furnishes all his Churches with able Preachers, is an Universal Teacher, he
instructs, where he cannot be Present, he speaks in every mouth of his Diocese,
and every Congregation of it every Sunday feels his Influence, though it hears
not his Voice. That Master deprives not his Family of their food, who orders a
faithful Steward to dispense it. Teaching is not a Flow of Words, nor the
Draining of an Hourglass, but an effectual procuring, that a man comes to know
something that he knew not before, or to know it better. And therefore
Eloquence and Ability of speech is to a Church Governor, as Tully said it was
to a Philosopher, Si afferatur non repudianda, si absit non magnopere
desideranda: and to find fault with such an one for not being a Popular
Speaker, is to blame a Painter for not being a good Musician.

To Teach indeed, must be confessed his Duty; but then there is a Teaching by
Example, by Authority, by restraining Seducers, and so removing the Hindrances
of knowledge. And a Bishop does his Church, his Prince and Country more
Service by ruling other men's Tongues, then he can by employing his own. And
thus much for the first Branch of the great Work belonging to a Pastor of the
Church, which was to Teach and to Exhort.

2. The second is to Rule, Expressed in these words; Rebuke with all Authority.
By which I doubt not, but the Apostle principally intends Church Censures, and
so the Words are a Metonymy of the Part for the whole, giving an instance in
Ecclesiastical Censures, instead of all other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. A
Jurisdiction, which in the Essentials of it is as old as Christianity, and even
in those Circumstantial additions of secular Encouragement, with which the
Piety and Wisdom of Christian Princes always thought necessary to support it,
against the Encroachments of the injurious World, much Older, and more
Venerable, then any Constitution that has divested the Church of it.

But to speak directly to the Thing before us; We see here the great Apostle
employing the utmost of his Authority in commanding Titus to use his: and what
he said to Him, he says to every Christian Bishop after him, Rebuke with all
Authority. This Authority, is a Spiritual Sword put into the hands of every
Church Ruler, and God put not this Sword into his hands, with an intent that he
should keep it there for no other purpose, but only for Fashion-sake, as men
use to wear one by their sides. Government is an Art above the Attainment of an
ordinary Genius, and requires a wider, a larger; and a more Comprehending Soul
than God has put into every Body. The Spirit that animates and acts the
Universe, is a Spirit of Government; and that Ruler that is possessed of it, is
the Substitute and Vicegerent of Providence, whether in Church or State. Every
Bishop is Gods Curate. Now the Nature of Government Contains in it these three
parts.

1. An Exaction of Duty from the Persons placed under it. 2. A Protection of
them in the performance of their Duty. 3. Coercion and Animadversion upon such
as neglect it.
All which are in their Proportion, ingredients of that Government that we call
Ecclesiastical.

1. And first it implies Exaction of Duty from the Persons placed under it: for
it is both to be confessed and lamented, that men are not so ready to Offer it,
where it is not exacted: Otherwise, what means the Service of the Church so
imperfectly, and by halves read over, and that by many who profess a Conformity
to the Rules of the Church? What makes them mince and mangle that in their
Practice, which they could swallow whole in their Subscriptions? Why are the
Public Prayers curtailed and left out, Prayers composed with Sobriety, and
enjoined with Authority, only to make the more Room for a long, crude,
impertinent, upstart Harangue before the Sermon?

Such persons seem to Conform (a Word whose signification they never make good)
only that they may despise the Churches Injunctions, under the Churches Wing,
and Contemn Authority within the Protection of the Laws. Duty is but another
English Word for Debt, and God knows, that it is well if men pay their Debts
when they are called upon. But if Governors do not remind men of, and call them
to Obedience, they will find that it will never come as a Free-will-offering,
no, not from many who even serve at the Altar.

2. Government imports a Protection, and Encouragement of the Persons under it,
in the Discharge of their Duty. It is not for a Magistrate to frown upon, and
brow-beat those who are hearty and exact in the management of their Ministry;
and with a Grave insignificant Nodd, to call a well Regulated, and Resolved
Zeal, Want of Prudence and Moderation. Such Discouraging of men in the ways of
an Active Conformity to the Churches Rules, is that, that will crack the Sinews
of Government, for it weakens the Hands, and Damps the Spirits of the Obedient.
And if only Scorn and Rebuke shall attend men for asserting the Churches
Dignity, and taxing the murder of Kings, and the like: Many will choose rather
to neglect their Duty safely and creditably, then to get a Broken Pate in the
Churches Service, only to be rewarded with that, that shall Break their Hearts
too.

3. The third thing employed in Government, is Coercion and Animadversion upon
such as neglect their Duty. Without which Coercive Power, all government is but
Toothless and Precarious, and does not so much command, as beg obedience.
Nothing, I confess is more becoming a Christian, of what Degree soever, then
Meekness, Candor and Condescension; but they are Virtues that have their proper
Sphere and Season to act and show themselves in, and consequently not to
interfere with others, Different indeed in their Nature, but altogether as
Necessary in their Use. And when an insolent despiser of Discipline, nurtured
into Impudence and Contempt of all Order, by a long Risk of License and
Rebellion, shall appear before a Church governor, Severity and Resolution are
that Governors Virtues, and Justice it self is his Mercy; for by making such
an one an example, (as much as in him lies) he will either Cure him, or at
least Preserve others.

Were indeed the Consciences of men, as they should be, the Censures of the
Church, might be a sufficient Coercion upon them; but being, as most of them
now a days are, Hell and Damnation-proof, her bare Anathema's fall but like so
many Bruta fulmina upon the Obstinate and Schismatical: who are like to think
themselves shrewdly hurt, by being cut off from that Body, which they choose
not to be of; and so being punished into a Quiet enjoyment of their beloved
Separation. Some will by no means allow the Church any further power then only
to Exhort and to Advise, and this but with a Proviso too, that it extends not
to such as think themselves too Wise, and too Great to be Advised: according to
the Hypothesis of which persons, the Authority of the Church, and the obliging
force of all Church Sanctions, can bespeak men only thus; These and these
things it is your Duty to do, and if you will not do them, you may as well let
them alone. A strict and efficacious Constitution indeed, which invests the
Church with no power at all, but where men will be so Civil as to obey it, and
so at the same Time pay it a Duty, and do it a Courtesy too.

But when in the Judgment of some men, the Spiritual Function as Such, must
render a Churchman, though otherwise never so Discreet and qualified; yet
merely because he is a Churchman, unfit to be entrusted by his Prince with a
share of that Power and Jurisdiction, which in many Circumstances his Prince
has judged but too necessary, to secure the Affairs and Dignity of the Church;
and which, every thriving Grasier can think himself but ill dealt with, if
within his own Country he is not mounted to: It is a sign, that such
discontented Persons intend not that Religion shall advise them upon any other
Terms, then that they may Ride and Govern their Religion.

But surely all our Kings, and our Parliaments, understood well enough what
they did, when they thought fit to prop and fortify the Spiritual Order with
some Power that was Temporal; and such is the present state of the World, in
the judgment of any observing Eye; that, if the Bishop has no other defensives
but Excommunication, no other power but that of the Keys, he may, for any
notable effect that he is like to do upon the factious and contumacious,
surrender up his Pastoral Staff, shut up the Church, and put those Keys under
the Door.

And thus I have endeavored to show the Three things included in the general
Nature of Government; but, to prescribe the manner of it in Particular, is
neither in my Power nor Inclination; only, I suppose, the Common Theory and
Speculation of things, is free and open to any one whom God has sent into the
world with an ability to contemplate, and by continuing him in the World, gives
him also opportunity. In all that has been said, I do not in the least pretend
to Advise, or Chalk out Rules to my Superiors; for some men cannot be Fools
with so good acceptance as others. But whosoever is called to speak upon a
certain occasion, may, I conceive, without offense take any Text suitable to
that occasion; and having taken it, may, or at least ought to speak sutably to
that Text.

I proceed now to the second thing proposed from the Words, which is the Means
assigned for the Discharge of the Duties mentioned, and exhibited under this
one short Prescription, Let no man despise thee: In the handling of which I
shall show,

1. The ill effects and destructive Influence that Contempt has upon Government.

2. The groundless Causes upon which Church-Rulers are frequently despised.

3. And lastly, the just Causes that would render them, or indeed any other
Rulers worthy to be despised. All which being clearly made out, and impartially
laid before our eyes, it will be easy and obvious for every one, by avoiding
the Evil so marked out, to answer and come up to the Apostles Exhortation.*

And first we will discourse of Contempt, and the malign hostile Influence it
has upon Government. As for the thing it self, every man's Experience will
inform him, that there is no Action in the Behavior of one man toward
another, of which humane Nature is more Impatient than of Contempt; It being a
thing made up of these two Ingredients, an undervaluing of a Man upon a belief
of his utter Uselesnesse and Inability, and a Spightful endeavor to engage the
rest of the World in the same Belief, and slight Esteem of him. So that the
immediate Design of Contempt, is the shame of the Person contemned; and Shame
is a Banishment of him from the good Opinion of the World, which every man most
earnestly Desires, both upon a Principle of Nature and of Interest. For it is
Natural to all men to affect a good Name; and he that despises a man, Libels
him in his Thoughts, Reviles and Traduces him in his Judgment. And there is
also Interest in the Case: For a Desire to be well thought of, directly
Resolves it self into that owned and mighty Principle of self-Preservation: For
as much as Thoughts are the first wheels and motives of Action; and there is no
long passage from one to the other. He that Thinks a man to the ground, will
quickly endeavor to Lay him there: for while he Despises him, he Arraigns and
Condemns him in his Heart; and all the after Bitterness and Cruelties of his
Practices, are but the Executioners of the Sentence passed before upon him by
his Judgment. Contempt, like the Planet Saturn, has first an ill Aspect, and
then a destroying Influence.

By all which I suppose, it is sufficiently proved, how Noxious it must needs
be to every Governor: for, can a man respect the Person whom he Despises? and
can there be Obedience where there is not so much as Respect? will the Knee
bend, while the Heart Insults? and the Actions Submit, while the Aprehensions
Rebel? And therefore the most experienced Disturbers and Underminers of
Government, have always laid their first Train in Contempt, endeavoring to
blow it up in the Judgment and Esteem of the Subject. And was not this method
observed in the late most flourishing and succesful Rebellion? for how
studiously did they lay about them, both from the Pulpit and the Press, to cast
a slurr upon the Kings Person, and to bring his governing Abilities under a
Disrepute? and then, after they had sufficiently Blasted him in his Personal
Capacity, they found it easy Work to dash and overthrow him in his Political.

Reputation is Power: and consequently to Despise is to Weaken. For where there
is Contempt, there can be no Awe; and where there is no Awe, there will be no
Subjection; and if there is no Subjection, it is impossible without the help of
the ^ormer Distinction of a Politic Capacity, to imagine how a Prince can be a
Governor. He that makes his Prince despised and undervalued, blows a Trumpet
against him in men's Breasts, beats him out of his Subjects hearts, and fights
him out of their Affections; and after this, he may easily strip him of his
other Garrisons, having already dispossessed him of his strongest, by dismantling
him of his Honor, and seizing his Reputation.

Nor is, what has been said of Princes, less true of all other Governors, form
Highest to Lowest, from him that Heads an Army, to him that is but Master of a
Family, or of one single Servant; the formal Reason of a thing equally
extending it self to every particular of the same kind. It is a Proposition of
Eternal Verity, that None can Govern while he is Despised. We may as well
imagine that there may be a King without Majesty, a Supreme without
Sovereignty. It is a Paradox, and a Direct contradiction in Practice: for,
where Contempt takes place, the very Causes and Capacities of Government cease.

Men are so far form being Governed by a despised Person, that they will not
so much as be taught by Him. Truth it self shall lose its Credit, if Delivered
by a Person that has none. As on the Contrary, be but a Person in Vogue and
Credit with the Multitude, he shall be able to commend and set off whatsoever
he says, to authorize any Nonsense, and to make Popular rambling incoherent
Stuff, seasoned with Twang and Tautology, pass for high Rhetoric and moving
Preaching; such indeed, as a Zealous Tradesman would even Live and Dye under.
And now I suppose it is no ill Topic of Argumentation, to show the Prevalence
of Contempt, by the contrary Influences of Respect; which, thus (as it were)
Dubbs, every little, pettit Admired person, Lord and Commander of all his
Admirers. And certain it is, that the Ecclesiastical, as well as the Civil
Governor, has cause to pursue the same Methods of Securing and Confirming
himself; the grounds and means of Government being founded upon the same bottom
of Nature in both, though the Circumstances, and Relative Considerations of the
Persons may differ. And I have nothing to say more upon this Head, but that, if
Churchmen are called upon to Discharge the parts of Governors, they may with
the highest Reason expect those Supports and Helps that are indispensably
Requisite thereunto: and that those men are but Trapann'd, who are called to
Govern, being invested with Authority, but bereaved of Power; which according
to a true and plain Estimate of things, is nothing else but to mock and betray
them into a Splendid and Magisterial way of being Ridiculous. And thus much for
the ill Effects and destructive Influence that Contempt has upon Government: I
pass now to the

2d. Thing, which is to show the Groundless Causes, upon which Church-Rulers
are frequently Despised.

Concerning which, I shall premise this; That nothing can be a reasonable
Ground of Despising a man, but some Fault or other chargeable upon him; and
nothing can be a Fault that is not Naturally in a man's power to prevent;
Otherwise, it is a man's Unhappiness, his Mischance or Calamity, but not his
Fault. Nothing can justly be Despised, that cannot justly be Blamed; and it is
a most certain Rule in Reason and moral Philosophy, That where there is no
Choice, there can be no Blame.

This premised, we may take notice of two usual grounds of the Contempt men
cast upon the Clergy, and yet for which no man ought to think himself at all
the more worthy to be Contemned.

1. The first is their very Profession it self; Concerning which, it is a sad,
but an experimented Truth, that the Names derived from it, in the refined
Language of the present Age, are made but the Appellatives of Scorn. This is
not charged Universally upon all, but experience will Affirm, or rather
proclaim it of much the greater part of the World; and men must persuade us
that we have lost our Hearing, and our common Sense, before we can believe the
Contrary. But surely the Bottom and Foundation of this Behavior toward
Persons set apart for the Service of God, that this very Relation should
entitle them to such a peculiar Scorn, can be nothing else but Atheism; the
growing* rampant Sin of the Times.

For call a man Oppressor, griping, Covetous, or overreaching person, and the
Word indeed being ill befriended by Custom, perhaps sounds not well; but
generally, in the apprehension of the Hearer, it signifies no more, then, that
such an one is a Wise, and a Thriving, or in the common Phrase, a Notable man;
which will certainly procure him a Respect: And say of another, that he is an
Epicure, a Loose or a Vicious man; and it leaves in men no other Opinion of
him, then that he is a Merry, a Pleasant, and a Gentile Person: and that, he
that taxes him, is but a Pedant, an Unexperienced, and a Morose fellow; one
that does not know men, nor understand what it is to Eat and Drink well* But
call a man Priest or Parson, and you set him, in some men's Esteem, ten degrees
below his own Servant.

But let us not be Discouraged, or Displeased, either with our Selves, or our
Profession upon this account. Let the Vertuoso's Mock, Insult, and Despise on:
yet after all, they shall never be able to Droll away the Nature of things; to
trample a Pearl into a Pebble, nor to make Sacred things Contemptible, any
more, then themselves, by such speeches Honorable.

2. Another groundless Cause of some men's despising the Governors of our
Church, is their loss of that former Grandeur, and Privilege that they
enjoyed. But it is no real Disgrace to the Church merely to lose her
Privileges, but to forfeit them by her Fault, or Misdemeanor, of which she is
not Conscious. Whatsoever she enjoyed in this kind, she readily acknowledges to
have streamed from the Royal Munificence, and the favors of the Civil Power
shining upon the Spiritual; which Favors the same Power may retract and gather
back into it self when it pleases. And we Envy not the Greatness and Luster of
the Romish Clergy, neither their Scarlet Gowns, nor their Scarlet Sins. If our
Church cannot be Great, which is better, she can be Humble, and content to be
Reformed into as low a Condition, as men for their own private Advantage would
have her; who wisely tell her, that it is best and safest for her to be without
any Power, or Temporal advantage; like the good Physician, who out of
tenderness to his Patient, lest he should hurt himself by Drinking, was so kind
as to rob him of his silver Cup. The Church of England Glories in nothing more,
then that she is the truest Friend to Kings, and to Kingly Government of any
other Church in the World, that they were the same Hands and Principles that
took the Crown from the Kings Head, and the Mitre from the Bishops. It is
indeed the Happiness of some Professions and Callings, that they can equally
square themselves to, and thrive under all Revolutions of Government; but the
Clergy of England neither know nor affect that Happiness; and are willing to be
Despised for not doing so. And so far is our Church from encroaching upon the
Civil Power; as some who are Backfriends to both, would maliciously Insinuate,
that were it stripped of the very Remainder of its Privileges, and made as like
the Primitive Church for its Bareness, as it is already for its Purity; it
could Cheerfully, and, what is more, Loyally, want all such Privileges; and in
the want of them pray heartily, that the Civil Power may flourish as much, and
stand as secure from the Assaults of Fanatic, Antimonarchicall Principles,
grown to such a dreadful height, during the Churches late Confusions, as it
stood while the Church enjoyed those Privileges. And thus much for the two
groundless Causes upon which Church Rulers are frequently Despised. I descend
now to the

3d and Last thing, which is to show those just Causes, that would render them,
or indeed any other Rulers worthy to be Despised. Many might be Assigned, but I
shall pitch only upon Four; in Discoursing of which, rather the Time, then the
Subject will force me to be very Brief.

1. And the first is Ignorance. We know how great an Absurdity our Savior
accounted it, for the Blind to lead the Blind, and to put him that cannot so
much as See, to discharge the Office of a Watch. Nothing more exposes to
Contempt then Ignorance. When Sampsons eyes were out, of a public Magistrate,
he was made a public Sport. And when Eli was blind, we know how well he
Governed his Sons, and how well they Governed the Church under him. But now the
Blindness of the Understanding is Greater and more Scandalous; especially, in
such a seeing Age as Ours; in which the very Knowledge of former times, passes
but for Ignorance in a better Dress: an Age that flies at all Learning, and
enquires into every thing, but especially, into Faults and Defects. Ignorance
indeed, so far as it may be Resolved into Natural inability, is, as to men, at
least, Inculpable, and consequently, not the Object of Scorn, but Pity: but in
a Governor, it cannot be without the Conjunction of the highest Impudence; For
who bid such an one Aspire to Teach, and to Govern? A blind man sitting in the
Chimney-corner is pardonable enough, but sitting at the Helm he is
Intolerable. If men will be Ignorant and Illiterate let them be so in Private
and to themselves, and not set their Defects in an high Place* to make them
Visible and Conspicuous* If Owls will not be hooted at, let them keep close
within the Tree, and not Perch upon the upper Bows.

2. A Second thing that makes a Governor justly despised, is Viciousnes and ill
Morals. Virtue is that, that must Tipp the Preachers Tongue, and the Rulers
Scepter with Authority. And therefore with what a Controlling, Overpowering
force did our Savior Tax the Sins of the Jews, when he ushered in his Rebukes
of them, with that high assertion of himself, Who is there amongst you that
convinces me of Sin? Otherwise, we may easily guess with what impatience the
world would have heard an incestuous Herod discoursing of Chastity, a Judas
condemning Covetousness, or a Pharisee Preaching against Hypocrisy; Every word
must have recoyled upon the Speaker. Guilt is that, that quells the Courage of
the Bold, ties the Tongue of the Eloquent, and makes Greatness it self sneak
and lurk, and behave it self poorly. For, let a Vicious Person be in never so
high Command, yet still he will be looked upon but as one great Vice, empowred
to Correct and Chastise others. A Corrupt Governor is nothing else but a
reigning Sin. And a Sin in Office may Command any thing but Respect. No Man can
be Credited by his Place or Power; who by his Virtue does not first Credit that.

3. A Third thing that makes a Governor justly despised, is fearfulness of, and
Mean Compliances with, Bold Popular Offenders. Some indeed account it the very
Spirit of Policy and Prudence, where Men refuse to come up to a Law, to make
the Law come down to them. And for their so doing, have this infallible
Recompense, that they are not at all the more Loved, but much the less Feared;
and, which is a sure Consequent of it, accordingly Respected. But believe it,
it is a Resolute tenacious Adherence to well Chosen Principles, than adds Glory
to Greatness, and makes the face of a Governor shine in the Eyes of those that
see and examine his Actions. Disobedience, if complied with, is infinitely
encroaching, and having gained one degree of Liberty upon Indulgence, will
demand another upon Claim. Every Vice Interprets a Connivence an Approbation.

Which being so, is it not an Enormous indecency, as well as a gross impiety,
that any one who owns the Name of a Divine, hearing a great Sinner brave it
against Heaven, talk Atheistically, and scoff* Profanely at that Religion, by
which he owns an Expectation to be saved, if he cares to be saved at all,
should instead of Vindicating the Truth to the Blasphemers Teeth, think it
Discretion and Moderation (forsooth) with a Complying Silence, and perhaps a
Smile to boot, tacitly to approve, and strike in with the Scoffer, and so go
Sharer both in the Mirth and Guilt of his profane Jests?

But let such an one be assured, that even that Blasphemer himself, would
inwardly Reverence him, if Rebuked by him; as on the Contrary, he in his Heart
really Despises him for his Cowardly base Silence. If any one should reply
here, that the Times and Manners of men will not bear such a Practice, I
confess, that it is an Answer from the mouth of a Professed Time-server, very
Rational: But, as for that man that is not so, Let him satisfy himself of the
Reason, Justice and Duty of an Action, and leave the Event of it to God, who
will never fail those, who do not think themselves too wise to Trust Him. For
let the worst come to the worst, a man in so doing would be ruined more
Honorably, then otherwise preferred.

4. And lastly. A fourth thing that makes a Governor justly Despised, is a
proness to Despise others. There is a kind of Respect due to the Meanest
Person, even from the Greatest; for it is the mere favor of Providence, that
he who is Actually the Greatest, was not the Meanest. A man cannot cast his
Respects so low, but they will Rebound and Return upon him. What Heaven bestows
upon the Earth in kind* Influences, and benign Aspects, is paid it back again
in Sacrifice, Incense and Adoration. And surely, a great Person gets more by
Obliging his Inferior, then by Disdaining him; as a man has a greater advantage
by Sowing and Dressing his Ground, then he can have by trampling upon it. It is
not to Insult and Domineer, to look Disdainfully, and Revile Imperiously, that
procures an Esteem from any one: it will indeed make men keep their Distance
sufficiently; but it will be Distance without Reverence.

And thus I have shown four several Causes, that may justly render any Ruler
Despised; and by the same Work, I hope, have made it Evident, how little Cause
men have to Despise the Rulers of our Church.

God is the Fountain of Honor, and the Conduit by which he Conveys it to the
Sons of men are Virtuous and Generous Practices. But as for Us, who have more
Immediately and Nearly Devoted, both our Persons and Concerns to his Service;
it were infinitely vain to expect it upon any other Terms. Some indeed may
(...) from full Revenues, stately Palaces, Court Interests, and great
Dependances. But that which makes the Clergy glorious, to be Knowing in their
Profession, Unspotted in their Lives, Active and Laborious in their Charges,
Bold and Resolute in opposing Seducers, and daring to look Vice in the face,
though never so Potent and Illustrious. And lastly, to be Gentle, Courteous,
and Compassionate to all.

These are our Robes, and our Maces, our Escutenions and highest Titles of
Honor, for by all these things God is honored, who has Declared this the
Eternal Rule and Standard of all Honor deriveable upon men, That those who
Honor Him, shall be Honored by Him.

To which God, fearful in Praises, and working Wonders, be rendered and ascribed
as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion, both now and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Page 7. Line 11, for Preaching read Teaching.


