THE Political Mischiefs OF POPERY: OR, Arguments Demonstrating, I. That the
Romish Religion Ruins all those Countries where it is Established. II. That it
occasions the loss of above 200 Millions of Livres or 16 Millions Sterling, per
An. to France in particular. III. That if Popery were Abolished in France, that
Kingdom would become incomparably more Rich and Populous; and the King's
Revenues would Advance above 100 Millions of Livres, or 8 Millions Sterling per
Annum. IV. That it is impossible that France should ever be Re-established,
whilst Popery is their National Religion.


By a Person of Quality, a Native of France; Author of The Desolation of France
demonstrated.

LONDON: Sold by J. Harris, at the Harrow in Little Britain. School.

TO The Honorable THE House of Commons.
THIS Treatise which I take the Liberty to Dedicate to your Honors, with all
imaginable Respect, was published sometime ago in French, and by several
Persons of Great Judgment, thought not Unworthy to be presented to your view in
English, because of the Importance of the Matter, and the Profit which they
thought might from thence redound to Church and State.

The design of it is, to prove by Political Arguments, (a Method New and
Extraordinary) that the Romish Religion is the Falsest of any that has
hitherto appeared in the World, because it is the destruction and plague of all
Countries where it is Established, and Ruins Nations more* than any other False
Religion that we have yet heard of.

This I demonstrate by the Instance of France, and make it evident, that Popery
occasions the loss of above 200 Millions of Livres per Annum to that Kingdom;
whence it follows, that even as to Temporals, the Kingdom of England reaps
unspeakable Advantages by the Reformation, which has delivered her from that
Cruel and Unsupportable Yoke.

I have so much the greater Reason to hope that this Book will not be
unacceptable to your Honors, because it tends more and more to confirm the
Protestant Religion in this Kingdom, for the defense of which, against the
Tyranny of Popery, you have on all occasions testified an ardent Zeal.

The tender Care and great Charity which you have manifested toward the poor
Refugees, who suffer for the said Religion; but above all, the Courage and Zeal
you have discovered in this last War, by sparing nothing that was necessary for
the preservation of the Protestant Interest, have made it gloriously appear to
all the Nations of the Earth, that you value neither your Treasures nor your
Blood, when there is a necessity of spending them in defense of your Religion;
And in effect, there was no less at Stake, than the loosing or preserving it,
for your selves and your Posterity; nay, I may say for the whole Protestant
World, and together with that you must have lost your precious Liberties, and
all that is dear to you as Men and Christians; That it would please God that by
your Genenerous Example and Sage Resolves, you may transmit to all succeeding
Parliaments, that same Prudence, Magnanimity and Zeal, for the Mainte^ance of
the Protestant Religion and your Public Liberties, against all Attempts of
Popery, is and shall be the constant Prayer of him, who is with all possible
Submission and profound Respect,

Your Honors Most humble and most Obedient Servant, De Souligne Grandson to M.
Du Plessis Mornay.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
ABout a Year ago, I published a Treatise, for the Service of this Nation, upon
the present State of France, Entitled, The Desolation of France Demonstrated:
And there, in short, I made it evident, That Popery was the principal Cause of
all the Misery and Ruin that has befallen that Kingdom. The Book was pleasing
to this Nation in general; but some were apt to think I had aggravated Matters,
and that the Condition of France was not so bad as I had represented it.
Amongst others, a certain Gentleman of great Parts, was pleased to write a
Manuscript upon that Subject, full of Wit, and diametrically opposite to what I
had advanced, but did not think fit to publish it. The Events that happened
since, have confirmed, in part, what I then said; whereupon that Ingenious
Person has acknowledged, in a curious piece lately published, That I had
Reason on my side, for what I had writ in general, as to the Condition of
France. But diverse other Persons of Worth, having wished that I would justify
the Proposition which I had advanced, in the same Book, viz. That Popery
occasions the loss of 200 Millions per An. to France; which to them seemed a
Paradox, I thought my self obliged to sa^isfie their desire.

To this end I published what I had writ upon that Subject sometime ago in
French, that by the Judgment which others gave upon it, I might be the better
enabled to conjecture what was proper to be Added or Corrected in the English
Edition, which I n^w present to the Public, with several Additions; and had
done it sooner, but for some Reasons not fit to be here related. But I supposed
besides, that People will have more Inclination to Read such Pieces now the War
is over, during which they loved to hear of nothing but bloody Battles, and
Princes Dethroned, according to the humor of the Romans in Horace his time, as
he expresses it in the following Lines, -- Pugnas and exactos Tyrannos
Densum humeris bibit aure vulgus.
I doubt not but some people will say, That I write with too much heat against
Popery: To which I reply,

1. That those Persons don't know Popery well enough, nor have they ever
examined it thoroughly. They are misled by some common Prejudices, and judge of
that Religion not according to its essential Principles, and constant Practice,
but only by the external Behavior of some that profess it, as Laics who are
s^metimes as well Polished, Civilized, Learned and Honest in outward
appearance, as Protestants, and here those People stop without consulting the
Scripture, or considering that the Doctrine, Morals and Tyranny of the Romish
Clergy, are more becoming Devils than Men. I confess, that they are Men and
Women, as well as others, and that there are People morally Honest among them,
as there are among Pagans, Jews and Mahumetans; and even among the Romish
Clergy, there are sone who are honester as to the matter of Society, than their
Religi^n obliges them to be. But those Gentlemen I speak of, think there is no
hurt in their Idolatry, nor don't consider the Mischiefs their Religion does to
ail Mankind in general, because they think it never did them any; so that
according to this Maxim of theirs, all Religions should be alike, for there are
Rational and Moral People of all Persuasions.

2. I may Reply, That there was never any Protestant that had more Reason than
my self, to write sharply against Popery, there having been no Man hitherto,
who has studied that Point so thoroughly as I have done, in Regard of the
infinite Mischiefs, which it occasions to States; as will appear by the
following Treatise.

3. No Man can exceed bounds in expressing his Abhorrence of Popery, provided
he forbear reflecting upon innocent Persons, as I have carefully done, for
certainly the Malignity of the Romish Religion and Clergy, goes beyond all
Expression or Idea; and if I have Reason on my side, as it appears I have, all
honest Papists will think themselves obliged to me* for disabusing them, and if
they can convict me of a Mistake, I am wi^ling to bear the reproach of it.

The Wits of this Age will perhaps find fault with my Style and manner of
Expression, and complain that it is dull and not genteel, for most People now a
days look for a fine Style in Books. But besides, that my Matter will not admit
of a fl^urishing Style nor sallies of Fancy, I freely own, that I am none of
those who are fond, of the Title of a fine Wit, an Orator or Polite Writer: I
am concent if I can discover, in my rude Method, such things as are of the
highest Importance, and Use to Men and Christians, which no body else has
taken notice of. And I hope that those who love Solid and Important
Discoveries, and the Order and Good of the Commonwealth, will do me Justice.
Those that have finer Pens t^an I, may perhaps Handle this Subject better after
me, Correct my Faults, Supply my Defects, and Add to my Discoveries, it being a
Maxim as true ^s common, Facile est inventis addere.

For my own part, I must confess that I expect more from Works of this nature,
toward the Destruction of Popery, than from all the Books of Controversies
that shall be writ henceforward. Great Men never Read them, and for the most
part, they govern themselves merely by sensible Reasons and Visible Interest.
Those that I propose here are Uncontrovertible, beyond all Exception, and
Intelligible to People of the meanest Capacities, if they have but patience to
hear them; so that all that remains to be Controverted, is the degree of the
Mischief occasioned by Popery, and whether it be so great, as Ihave represented
it or not.

I have chosen to insist on the Instance of France, to prove the infinite
Malignity of the Romish Religion, rather than on that of any other Popish
State, because that Country is best known to me, and that last year I undertook
to make it appear that the Ruin of France proceeded mostly from Popery; so that
^is Treatise is an Appendix of that.

I am forced contrary to my inclination, to represent the Mischiefs of the
Government of France, but what I say is the Truth, and with no design to offend
any Man, my intention being only to display the desperate Malignity of Popery.
I own that those who Govern in France, are endowed with many great and rare
Qualities, but Popery striveth continually either to Stiste them, or to Employ
t^em to base and pernicions Ends. There is nothing more certain than that all
would do well there, were it not for the Popish Clergy, and especially the
Jesuits, wh^ carry the chief Sway in that Nation.

I propose ^o other end to my self in this, but to serve the Church of God, and
my present Country the Kingdom of England, in which I have hitherto found some
Bread, and where I hope I shall not be suffered to starve in time to come:
Whereas on the contrary, I have been robbed of all in France, for serving Go^
according to my own Conscience; and it is probable that if I and others ^ad
slaid there till now, we should not only have been d^riev'd of our Lives, but
had the same endeavors used to ruin our Souls, that have been made use of to
ruin those of others.

And moreover, it may be easily evinced, that all I say might be of infinite
advantage to France, if she knew how to make use of it, seeing she might
thereby become ab^ndantly mo^ Rich, Po^ent and Happy, than ever she was; So
that in t^ respect I discover a thousand times more Love for France, than those
do who Govern her, or than ind^d she discovers for her self.

THE Translator's Letter TO THE Bookseller.
SIR,
THE following Book being now Translated, must take its Fa^e in the World. The
Worthy Author has performed his part to Admiration, and as it became a
Grandson of the Great du Plesfis Mornay, though under a much greater
Disadvantage than he: The Grandfather when he wrote his Books, which have
eternized his Fame, was one of the chief of the Protestants of France, (then a
flourishing and formidable ^ody,) and abounded in all things necessary for his
Undertaking; but the Grandson, on the contrary, has had much ado to escape
with his Life, and is cast upon our Island as part of the valuable Wreck of
that once renowned Protestant Church: Yet in that forlorn Condition, with
little encouragement from Men, and as little help of Books, he has given us
many proofs of his Zeal and Abilities to serve the Protestant Interest. His
Book Entitled, The Desolation of France demonstrated, etc. met with deserv^d
Applaufe; and if the dignity of the Subject, depth of Thought, and strength of
Argument, have any influence upon Mankind, there is no Reason to think that this
he now offers to the Public, can meet with less.

As for the Translation, which is my own part, you know I have performed it
du^ing a hurry of other business; so that if it be passable English it is as
much as you can expect.

The Author will bear me witness, that I have kept to his Sense, and indeed, as
there is something uncommon in his Thought, there is the same in his manner of
Expression, which is more adap^ed to inform the Judgment, than to please the
Fancy, and therefore to have attempted to set off or rather to disguise by
flourishes of Style, what the Author designed should be intelligible to every
one, would have been an injury to the pattern he has set me.

I have nothing to add, but that as in the last Century God raised up many
great Men ^o discover the False Doctrines of the R^mish Church, which made such
People as had any due regard to their Salvation, to come out of her. Who knows
^ut that he same Providence, by raising up others to dis^over the P^li ical
Mischiefs of that Religion to Kingdoms and States, may thereby stir up the
Kings and Princes of the Earth to hate the Whore, and burn her flesh with fire.
That this may be one of the effects of this Book (the best, if not the only
Trea^ise that ever was writ upon the Subject) and that it man Answer your
Expect^tion, and Procure the Author that Re^pect and Esteem, which he deserves
from all good Men, is the unfeigned wish and hearty desire of

Your humble Servant, G. Ridpath.

ERRATA.
Page 2. line. 27. less read more. p. 56. l. 34. r. Flesh-meat. p. 59. l. 27.
r. bought in Lent. p. 60. l. 7. VIOLENC r. Violence. p. 113. l. 5. r. But when
shall they be able to do it? p. 119. l. 6. as r. an.

Political Arguments, proving that the Popish Religion ruins all those States
where it is the Public Religion.
TO justify my Proposition, I will make it appear in Eighteen Articles, that
the Popish Religion occasions the Loss of above 200 Millions of Livers per
annum to France.

The I. Article which concerns this affair, is the Cheats of the Clergy, by
which they pillaged the People to the Value of 40 or 50 Millions per Annum,
Thirty years ago, when the Kingdom was in a good condition. Part of the Methods
they took to do this were as follows.

The Chief are their Masses, which they say for the Living, and the Dead, viz.
to deliver the Souls of the Deceased, not from Hell, but from a place (unknown
to Scripture, nay to God himself) which they call Purgatory; and to expiate the
Sins of the Living, who either pay for those Masses, or assist at saying them.
This is the Clergies Greatest Traffic, and that which contributes most of any
thing to retain all Popish States and Kingdoms under the Pope's Tyrannical
Yoke, by the multitudes of Priests and Monks that it entertains, who are as so
many Armies to support that Usurper, and who render him Master of all those
Kingdoms. There are Churches where above 50 or 100 such Masses are said every
day upon a great number of Altars, as they call them, which raises Subfistance
for a great number of Priests and Monks, and did formerly maintain a greater
number.

It is here proper to be observed, that to the end they may entertain the
greater number of 'em, at the same time they recommend the Mass as the
principal part of Divine Worship and Religion, and oblige the people to
frequent it every day; the Priests are strictly forbid to say above two per
diem, except in some priviledg'd places, as in Picardy, and the Country of
Arras, because the Parishes there are poor and small. Which makes it plain that
they have no essential Reason why a Priest may not say diverse Maises in one
day, but that the Court of Rome was resolved to maintain as many of her
Pensioners or Lifeguard men, at the Charge of others, as she could. The
Parliament of Paris has regulated their pay at 12 d. per Mass, and in diverse
Provinces they have not above 5 d. or 6 d. apiece, which is as good, at least,
as the pay of Horse and Foot, though they be more useful, and their Calling less
dangerous.

Abundance of Masses are said for the Cure of Diseases, both in Men and Women,
Children, Beasts and Birds; as Hogs, Dogs, Geese, etc. as also for a happy
Journey, safe return of a Ship, a happy Marriage; as also for mere trifles; as
for the finding again of a lost Ring, Fork, Spoon, etc. Nay even for success in
an Assassination or Plot against a Prince, or a Robbery, etc. That is to say,
they do really sacrifice (as they themselves pretend) the Body of Jesus Christ
in all those cases, and many others of the same nature. Being herein more blind
than the very Pagans, who thought it enough to offer some Cakes, or to
sacrifice some low-priz'd Animal to their Gods and Goddesses, when they prayed
them to succeed their designs, according to that of the Poet:

-- O pulchra Laverna
Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus objice Nubem,
-- and tibi far litabo.
Which may be Englished ad sensum thus.

O fair Laverna, prithee never fail
Ore all my Villainies to spread a Vail,
And thou shall have thy fill of Cakes and Ale.
I am also well assured, that in order to bring Money into the Priests Pocket,
they have in some places introduced a Custom of playing at Dice and Cards for
Masses, as well as for Prayers, and he that loses pays the Priest, who does
really next morning, as he pretends, sacrifi^e Jesus Christ, (but in an
unbloody Sacrifice however) for the Expiation of the Winners Sins and Crimes,
how heinous soever they may be. I own that I never saw them play for Masses,
but have diverse times seen them play for Prayers, and know no reason why they
may not as well play for the other: In the time of Pope Leo the Xth. the
Preachers of Indulgence played for the pardon of the Sins of Towns and Cities in
Germany. They get also Money by those Masses another way, which is, that those
who assist at them do many times put Money into the Box, which falls all to the
share of the Priests.

Sometimes it happens that a dying person orders 100, 1000, 6000 nay 10000
Masses to be said for the repose of his soul after his death for which his
Heirs pay through the Nose. There are very few Roman Catholics who are not
guilty of this Weakness at their death, but if some of those who understand
better, despise those fooleries upon their Deathbed, their Friends who are not
so well informed, are sure to order Masses for them, and pay the Priests for
their pains; nay, the very poorest of them always take care to have some Masses
said.

Besides this, there is every year an Anniversary, as they call it, for most
people which have left any Estate behind them, or whose Friends are well to
pass, that is to say a Mass Sung for the Soul of the deceased, by a great
number of Priests, sometimes 50 or 100 together; who must all of them be
splendidly treated afterward, where they usually fuddle themselves, and each
of them must have a piece of Money besides.

It is then upon the account of the great Profit which the Mass brings to the
Clergy, that they have made it one of the most essential parts of their Worship.

The Invention of their Fraternities or Brotherhoods, is another grand Method,
by which they pillage the people, who being as Ignorant as Pagans, the Monks
take advantage of it, and persuade them that whoever enters into the Order,
shall have a share in the Merits of the same, nor do they admit them without a
considerable Present at first, which they oblige them to repeat from time to
time. Sometimes there are people of Quality of both Sexes, nay, even Generals
of Armies, that have been much esteemed in the World, who do so far forget
themselves, and become so weak, as to desire to die in the Habit of these
rascally Monks, who impose upon them so far as to make them to believe that
they cannot fail of being saved and of going directly to Paradise, without
touching at Purgatory, provided they die in the habit of their Order; and that
the habit of their St. Francis, is as much worth as the Baptism of Jesus
Christ. Many considerable Persons in the Courts of Justice, and abundance of
others are guilty of this Weakness as well as silly Women; Whence it comes to
pass that they serve the Order, into which they have entered, with all their
might; and it may be justly said that they divide the Kingdom into diverse
Factions, who are in a continual C^nspiracy against God, and the King, and
their Neighbors; for as those different Orders subsist and enrich themselves
merely by the Idolatry, Superstition and Ignorance of the People, they foment
it as much as they can, and engage in the Interests and Designs of the Court of
Rome, to favor the same against the King and the State, and every one of those
Orders hate and despise one another, both out of a principle of Envy, and
because they know one another at bottom; and then their Devotionists, who are
joined to their Fraternities espouse all their Passions, Quarrels and Interests.

Those Monks do likewise persuade abundance of Silly Women of Quality and
others, to enter their very Sucking Infants into their Fraternities, persuading
them that there is no better method to make them to Live; insomuch that
sometimes we shall see those poor little Creatures muffled up in a Monks Hood
and Cassock, by which the Order lose nothing.

Another method made use of by the Ecclesiastics, to catch the Wealth and
Substance of the People is their Indulgences, which they obtain of the Pope
from time to time, for some Churches or Monasteries, which whosoever Visits,
during such a number of days, which serve as a Fair, or so many Market Days to
the place, shall infallibly receive a Pardon of all their Sins, provided they
give bountifully also to the said Church or Monastery; for that is always to be
understood, and there are very few but what give more or less in such cases.

Another of their Baits to fish for the Peoples Money, is the Holy Relics as
they call them, in their Churches, Monasteries, and Convents. And when the
Peoples Devotion grows cold for the Old Relics, they never fail of bringing
New Shrines or Boxes full of New and Fresh. And ordinarily they say they come
from Holy Rome. It is well enough known, that oftentimes those Relics are
pieces of Past-board fashioned like Bones, sometimes they are the real Bones of
an Humane Creature, and sometimes of Beasts, as it has been often proved; the
Priests and Monks making it the Matter of their Diversion to insult over the
foolish Credulity of the People in this Impudent manner, and yet at the same
time make them pay for Seeing and Touching those Relics.

There are also Miracles to be performed from time to time, when the Priests
and Monks please, by the Statues, Images, or Bones of some dead Man or Woman,
under the Name of Relics or Shrines of some Saints, as they call the Bones
and Boxes in which they keep them. Those Miracles are of great Advantage to the
Clergy, for by this means they bring abundance of Offerings to their Churches
and Chapels.

There are moreov^r Legacies, Dirges and Donatives, whether they be Voluntary
by Persons whom they have Seduced, or Suborned, or altogether false, which the
Priests or Monks forge, in order to dispoil Families, whereof the World has had
Millions of Examples, and some such happen every day.

Auricular Confession is also one of their most Gainful Inventions, by which
they Shear their Flock four times a Year. There are few People who don't at
such times give them a Piece of Money, especially those who are guilty of Great
Crimes, and thereupon the^ receive Absolution, provided that together with this
they do some little troublesome thing, which the Priests impose upon them under
the Notion of Penance, the better to color that Infamous Traffic, and to make
the People believe that it is not for the Money they Absolve them, for that
would appear odious even to the most dissolute Wretch in the World. I take no
notice here of the great Advantage the Pope and his Clergy make of this
Confession, to dive into the Secrets of Princes and Grandees, and of all People
in General, that so they may make their own use of it, and take their Measures
thereupon to pry into the greatest Secrets of Men and Women, which gives the
Ecclesiastics an opportunity to Debauch all the Sex, or to squeeze Money out
of them; for by this means they lead Captive silly Women, laden with Sins, and
carried away with diverse Lusts, according to the Words of the Text.

There Is another thing very Gainful to the Romish Clergy, and that is Burials,
not only in that they sell the Ground at dear rate in their Churches and
Convents, and that they make a great deal of Profit as I have said already by
Masses for the Dead, but they get also a great deal of Money for the singing of
a multitude of the Priestly-herd at ordinary Interments, where there is
commonly a great number, who have each of them a piece of Money and a good
Treat, at which they use to fuddle themselves, as well as at the Aniversaries
abovementioned.

I don't here condemn a reasonable Allowance for one or two Ministers or
Priests who go before the Corpse, and cannot subsist without those little
Profits, or who are there to comfort the Friends of the deceased, or to
instruct the Company, by putting them in mind of their Latter End; or to Preach
the Funeral Sermons of Persons of great Merit; but I condemn only the great
Excess of that pretended Church, in employing such a great number of Priests at
Funerals without necessity, who sing in the Streets like so many Priests of
Bacchus, things which neither the People, nor the greatest part of themselves
understand, and which occasions a great Charge to the Friends of the deceased,
who frequently have not one bit of Bread left after they have paid for the
Funeral, and the Masses, that are to be said afterward for the deceased. In my
time it was a Complaint at Paris, that the meanest person, such as a Footman,
could not be Buried for less than four Pistoles. Perhaps the Court has
moderated the Charge, since they have erected so many Offices of Buriers of the
dead, and Criers of Burials, and that there is a Tax as I am informed of eight
Crowns laid on every Burial for the King; for it would be very hard that the
Priests and the King should squeeze so great a sum from the Poor People all at
once upon this Account.

The Gain which the Priests have by Marriages and Baptisms, is also very
Excessive. Let them in Gods Name have some Profit thence as the Ministers have
in England, who cannot subsist without it, but this matter ought to be
moderated, and there should be a distinction made betwixt Poor and Rich. At
present I confess, that those profits of the Popish Priests in France are much
di^inished, because as times are now, there are but few Marriages or Baptisms
in that Kingdom.

These are the most General and Common Methods that the Idolatrous Clergy of
France make use of to cheat the poor Ignorant people of their Money and
Substance.

I take no notice here, of what they gain by their Schools and Boarders,
because it may be said in some sense, that what they gain that way is honestly
got: Yet herein also they occasion a loss to the State to which they are
commonly E^emies. And hereby they do likewise take the Bread out of the Mouths
of abundance of Schoolmasters, who are Honester Men than themselves, have
nothing else to Live on, have Families to Maintain, and pay Taxes to the King
proportionably to their Income. Whereas those Ecclesiastics have enough to
Live on without teaching School, being for the most part too Rich already, and
on the other hand, they pay almost nothing to the King, ruin the Kingdom, and
have no Families to Maintain. Nay that which is worse, they acknowledge a
Foreign Authority, viz. that of the Pope, to be Superior to His Majesty's
Authority, and they are accustomed to inspire their Scholars with those injust
and pernicious Sentiments, as also a False and Bastard Devotion, which enclines
them to shake off all Subjection to their Parents, to make themselves Jesuits,
or Priests of the Oratory, and to give their Estates to the Order into which
they enter themselves, or at least to make their Relations pay them a good
Pension, of which the Convent reaps the Profit. They do likewise corrupt those
Children in another manner, at least the Jesuits labor under the Scandal of
it, and indeed there is no wickedness of which they are not capable.

The other Monks who neither keep Schools nor Boarders, do nevertheless seduce
abundance of Young People, under pre^ence of Confessing them, and by Virtue of
the Credit which they have to creep into Houses, they ensnare and seduce also
the Parents to become Monks and Nuns, and to give them their Estates,
especially in the time of Widowhood, nay sometimes they persuade them to be
Unmarried on that account, and so create Divisions betwixt Man and Wife, and
their Children. They do likewise Debauch their Wives and Daughters, know all
the Secrets of Old and Young, and make their own Advantage of the Weakness of
every one.

In many places the Nuns do likewise take young Boarders, who oftentimes learn
somewhat else than Virtue among them, and by degrees they persuade them also to
turn Nuns, especially if there be any profit to be had by it to the Convent,
for the Relations of the Girls give them either a considerable sum of Money for
ever, or a good Annual Pension, which is so much loss to the Capital Stock of
the Kingdom, seeing it falls into Mainmort or becomes Dead.

There are also many of those Convents, both of Monks and Nuns, who for Money
take in the young Bastards of Persons of Quality, that would not have the thing
known, and many times they make away with 'em*there have been found in Ponds,
Cisterns and Houses of Office, several Corpse and Bones of those poor Infants.

They plunder the people also by their Tapers, Wax-candles and Torches, which
they use in Grand Processions; for they oblige the people to furnish those
things, and all that is not spent belongs, as they allege, to the Church, that
is to say, to the Priests or Monks. It is well enough known, that on certain
days, which they look upon as great Festivals, they oblige every Corporation or
Company, in great Towns, to furnish huge Torches, each of which does sometimes
represent an History of the Old and New Testament, or fabulous Legend; or
sometimes they will have the Images of 5 or 6 Persons, or as many Beasts, in
Wax at large, so weighty that they must have 10 or 12 Men to carry one of these
Torches. Twenty such they carry in Procession, which costs more sometimes than
10 or 20000 Livres; and the profit of this is to be reaped by their Clergy, at
the Expense of the poor Idolatrous People. This is chiefly to be seen on that
^day, which they call the Feast of God, for the Popes, good Men, have thought
fit that God should have a Festival, as well as Dominic, Loyola, and Xavier,
etc.

And if the Inquisition were established in France, as many people imagine it
may be done in this Reign, which however, I believe not, it would still pillage
the Nation more, as it has done Spain and Portugal.

There Is yet another secret way, that the Monks are charged with using, to levy
a great Sum of Money upon the People and their own Devotionists, all at once,
which is thus, When their Convent and its Dependencies, or their Church, is old
and does not please them, they set it on fire themselves, and then make heavy
Lamentations for that sad Accident which it has pleased God to permit, and
then they go a begging for Money to Re-build what is burnt. If it require 30000
Livres, more or less, to Re-build it as it was, they will raise at least 100000
upon the people, leaving always the work unfinished, and give out, that the
Sums raised were but very small, and not enough to carry on the Work; for none
but themselves know perfectly what is given, or what the building has cost,
because they take care that no body shall be acquainted with their Affairs, and
so this furnishes them with a pretense to beg constantly, and to procure
Legacies from some silly people when a dying, on pretense of finishing that
Work.

There are many Orders who sell little Relics, that they say have been
Consecrated by the Pope, and Beads that have touched some Miraculous Images.
The Carmelites have what they call the Apparel of the Virgin, etc.

The Holy Days are moreover very gainful to the Ecclesiastics of all sorts,
because the people go to Church on those Days, with more Devotion than on
Sundays, cause abundance of Masses to be said, and besides paying for them,
give Money also to the Box. Those Festival Days are like so many Fairs* wherein
the Clergy make Money of their Merchandise; They are likewise very advantageous
to the Pope, not only in that they contribute to the Enriching of his
Ecclesiastical Troops, which he entertains, as I have already said, at the
Expense of those whom he has brought under his Yoke, and of whom, he assures
himself more and more by that Method, both by weakening them, and keeping in
their Kingdoms Armies and Garrisons, of Priests and Monks, who have Sworn to
him, as being in their Opinion, Superior to the King* and having a Right to
claim Obedience from him in every thing; so that they are constantly ready,
either to revolt or to kill Kings, when the Pope desires it, or when Princes
would have them contribute to the Charge of the State. But those Festivals we
now Treat of, are above all advantageous to the Popes in this, that they raise
him above all humane Authority* nay, above that of God himself; for it is they
who have Institured or Authorized all those pretended Holy Days, by which they
give Laws to the Consciences of Men, and oblige them to Adore and Invoke whom
they please, and for the most part Villains, that is to say, the Popes
themselves and the Ministers of their Tyranny; and by this means the Popes
don't content themselves to be Adored while they live, but they hope to be
Invoked and Adored after their death. They have also this Satisfaction thereby,
that they see the Holy Days of their own Appointment, more devoutly observed
than those of God's Appointment, which is the Sabbath. Thence also they reap
another grand Advantage, viz. the Money which they squeeze from the people for
Canonizing such and such Saints.

I must not forget here, the profit which they make by Means of their Father
Titrier, or Title maker, as they call him, especially in the Religious
Communities, for whom he forges Titles, that they may bereave the Laics of
their Estates.

The Popes having erected Marriage into a Sacrament, is also a gainful
Contrivance for the Clergy; besides by this means they render themselves Judges
of the Birth and Legitimacy of the Children of Princes and Great Men, which
keep them in a dependence upon the Popes; for under pretext that Marriage is a
Sacrament according to them, and that the Pope is the Sovereign Judge of
Sacraments, he can Bastardize or Legitimate whom he pleases.

They often attempt to draw within their own Cognizance, all Testaments,
Treaties, Acts and Contracts 'twixt Man and Man, under the pretext that the
Oaths, by which they are confirmed, are Matters whereof the Violation concerns
the Conscience. In this manner they would render themselves absolute Masters of
all the Estates, as well as of the Quiet and Honor of Mankind.

The Exemption which the Ecclesiastics plead from the Ordinary Courts of
Justice, occasions a great disorder in Society, of which the Popish Clergy make
their Advantage.

They get Money also by granting dispensations, for eating Meat in Lent, and at
other times.

They also squeeze Money from sick Persons, or their Friends, for carrying
their pretended Sacrament and Holy Oils to them.

Their Mischievous Clergy have a great number of other Methods, to plunder the
people of their Substance, and they invent new ones from time to time, or
extend and enlarge the old ones.

I confess, that all the Riches of which the Clergy do thus cunningly bereave
the people, is not absolutely lost to the Kingdom, because they either spend it
themselves, and so it circulates again among the people, or else they hoard it
up, by which they do great prejudice to the State; but however, soon or late
the Money comes out of their hands, at least after their death, and has its
ordinary Co^se among the People: But it is certain that this Money would have
been much more profitable to the State, had it been in the hands of those
addicted to Trade, Husbandry or Handicrafts, and who have Children to breed up.
All Men agree, that Money robbed or taken upon the Highway by Villains, and
spent lavishly, as it always happens in that case, or that Money got at Game by
professed Cheats, would do much more good to the State, if it were in the hands
of industrious Citizens, and those that are useful to the Commonwealth, than in
the hands of such Profligates. And hence it comes to pass that in all
Countries, where there is good Discipline, these disorders are punished, though
the Money that they rob and cheat people of, does not go out of the Kingdom. It
signifies nothing to tell me, that the Money which the Priests catch by these
Methods, is given them freely; for grant it be so, the State being so much
dammag'd by it, ought not to suffer it. The Master of a Family, who wants
management, does often times waste his Estate to little purpose, though he does
it willingly, yet he is nothing the less injurious to his Family and Creditors,
and therefore the Magistrates in some well-governed Countries* appoint a
Guardian over such, and that many times too at the request of their Children.
But moreover, it is not true that the ignorant Papists give their Estates
willingly to the Priests, for they are the poor people whom they have made
drunk with the Wine of their Fornications, according to the Scripture Phrase,
that is to say, with their Idolatries and Superstitions, threatening them with
Hell and Purgatory, if they don't give them, and promising them Heaven if they
give. Therefore those who believe their Follies, are under a Moral Necessity of
giving them.

It may be truly said, they rob the people of all they get in that manner,
seeing the more they give that way, the less they have to maintain their
Families, carry on their Trade and to breed up and give portions to their
Children.

If they employed that which they rob the people of in Trade, Handicrafts,
Manufactures, Husbandry or Fishing, it would still remain a great piece of
Injustice and Disorder, (...) the State would not suffer so much by it. (...)
they employed it in Buildings, profitable to the Society, or purchasing Jewels,
or lasting Mo^oles, the State would not lose so much by it, but many times they
spend it in excess of Eating and Drinking, and other lewd Debauches; or
otherwise hoard it up in their Coffers, or turn Usurers.

If those Ecclesiastics had not enough to subsist on, without all those
cheating Tricks above* mentioned, it were much better for the people, how
useless soever they may be, to make a public Fund, for their maintenance, than
to suffer them to follow the Trade of Cheating; as all Men agree, it were
better for them to provide thus for other Robbers and Cheats, if it were found
to be an effectual Method to divert them from that wicked way of Living. But it
has always been thought, that it would be ineffectual as to Highway-men by
Profession, and we may say the same, as to the Popish Clergy, who for the most
part have enough to subsist on without cheats; yet they find what they catch
that way, sweeter than all the rest, and look upon it as the Fruit of their
Cunning and Parts. The shortest way then, would be to suppress six parts in
seven of all those Ecclesiastics, which would be a good thing, even for
themselves, because by that sort of Robbery, they not only destroy their own
Souls, but also those of the people, whom they have bewitched and besotted,
ruining besides a vast number of Families; and thus by their pernicious
Example, instruct and bring up all the World to Imposture, Cheating and
Hyp^crisie, and make people to conceive Monstrous Opinions of the Deity, by
transforming the same either into a Brutish Idol that has no understanding, or
into a Demon as wicked as possible.

So that all being considered, I do verily believe, that without reckoning the
Scandal occasioned by these disorders, there was no less than one third of loss
to the Kingdom, by those 40 or 50 Millions which all those Cheats brought to
the Popish Clergy of France before this War.

If it be said, that there are many other useless lewd Fellows, that plunder
the State as well as the Clergy, that does not one whit excuse them, nor those
who suffer such disorders, and might easily prevent them. But on the contrary,
the more there are of others, the ^ewer there ought to be suffered of these who
are doubly hurtful, as being contrary to the Salvation of the peoples Souls,
and the Welfare of the Government.

The II. Article relates to the excessive multitude of Ecclesiastics in
France, which are six to one in England, their respective proportions and
extents being considered, (and yet it is known there are more in England than
in any other Protestant Country) whence it appears, that there are
proportionably so many more people in France that don't work, being idle
Fellows for the most part, altogether useless, nay, do a great deal of
mischief. They are computed at 300000 altogether Males and Females, whereof I
am sure 40000 Males would be sufficient for the Service of their pretended
Church, such as it is; so that there remain 260000 useless Ecclesiastics.

Then it is to be observed, that 300000 Adult Persons, such as they, are worth
double the number of others taken out of the common Mass of People, especially
if we consider that the greatest part of those Ecclesiastics are Males. Lets
reckon the Work then to which those 260000 useless persons ought to apply
themselves, if the World were not turned upside down, only at 3 d. per Day one
with another* without Victuals; and let us suppose also, that they work 300
days in a year, the unprofitable Holy Days being abolished, that amounts to
above 11 Millions 500000 Livres per Annum pure loss. I am willing to abate a
Million and a half for the Lace, Points, etc. made by some Nuns, and for what
some poor Priests and Monks work in their Gardens, yet there remains still
above 10 Millions of pure lo^s, without taking notice of the Contagion of their
bad example of Idleness, which corrupts the people, and besides it is certain
that they spend their time in doing mischief.

I take no notice neither of their Maintenance, which is ill bestowed, and
another Robbery that they commit on the Nation, seeing it ought to be employed
in maintaining others, who are more useful, and have so much the less, as those
Ecclesiastics have too much, who are as Drones that eat up the Honey of the
industrious Be. This Article amounts to as much as the other; for these
people, as I have said, own, that by their Professions, they are not to Work
nor to Marry, and so devour the rest of the laborious people that have
Families. This, I say, is a Robbery upon the Commonwealth, according to that
Axiom, Non Nobis nati sumus sed Patriae and Liberis. We are not born for our
selves, but for our Country and Children.

Some ignorant people will perhaps say, that they pray to God for others: I
Answer, That others either do pray, or ought to pray for them; So that, as to
that matter, they are even with them. But I can tell them besides, that God
does not regard the Prayers of the Wicked, and their Clergy are every whit as
Idolatrous and incomparably more Vicious than the People, and that which is
worse, do make them Idolaters and Seduce them a thousand ways.

God also hates the Worship and Prayers of Idolaters and Hipocrites, especialy
Seducers, and chiefly when they call themselves Christians, because then they
make Jesus Christ the Author of their Idolatry and strange Worship, which is
the greatest of all Impieties.

Article III. Mendicant-Fr^ars in particular, are a very great charge to the
Kingdom, all of them being absolutely needless, whereas amongst the Secular
Clergy the Bishops with a few Canons, Curats, and Priests, are necessary and
fit enough for the ordinary Service of their Church, such as it is; and those
Begging Friars are so much more intolerable than the Endowed Monasteries, as
by their voluntary Begging and Laziness, they are very chargeable to the
People, who maintain them richly one way or other. For ordinarily they Eat the
best, and Drink abundance of Wine, whilst many Honest people who are useful
Subjects in the Kingdom, have much ado to get Bread by their Labor. Those
wretched Monks are also highly injurious to the real Poor, who are robbed of so
much Alms as those Idle Bellies receive. They are moreover greater Hypocrites,
and more Ignorant than the rest of the Clergy, and abundance of handsome Young
Women choose them for their Confessors, because of their seeming Devotion and
Mortification, under which pretext the^ commit a deal of Uncleanness. It Is
supposed that there are above 60000 of those Monks in the Kingdom; let us
reckon then that they cost the Kingdom but 6 d. a piece per day one with
another, that will exceed six Millions of Livres per annum. This is the least
they spend, for most part of them live in Good Cities or Towns, where they fare
deliciously, but take care as much as they can to conceal their good Cheer,
because that would prevent the Peoples giving them so much. I have several
times seen diverse Spits full of choice P^llets, Venison and Wild-fowl roasting
for them in by Houses, (at a little distance from their Convents) where the
People followed that way of living, and they wo^ld tell me that those things
were sent out of Charity to the Good Fathers.

Article IV. All those several sorts of Ecclesiastics live Unmarried, whereas
Protestant Churchmen Marry for the most part, and contribute to the Peopling of
the Kingdom. The Popish Ecclesiastics in France are comp^ted as I said, at
300000, who being all of 'em Unmarried they render 300000 other Adult Persons
which Nature had designed 'em for Wives or Husbands useless for Propagation. If
the rest of the Nation, should do thus, it would be entirely extinguished in 50
or 60 years. It is observed from the Registers of Births an^ (...) (...)
Kingdoms, that there is near the matter equal proportion betwixt the Birth and
Death of both Sexes; which is a proof that they are born one for another. Now
if according to the observation of (...), 600000 persons, double in (...) years
time, and produce 1200000, these 1200000 in 800 years time ought to be Nine
Millio^s according to the ordinary progress of Generation. But because the
number of Ecclesiastics was not ne^r so great at that time as at present, for
^e nearer we approach to the dregs of Time, the more that Vermin multiplies;
especially since the Reformation, by which the Empire of Antichrist was shaken,
and he endeavors to support it by an extraordinary multitude of Guards and
Pensioners, who are in the same Interest with himself; and moreover because
France was nothing near so well Peopled in those days, as it has been since,
we shall content our selves with a fourth part of those Nine Millions which we
supposed might have been born in 800 years time, if the Popish Clergy had
Married. Let Us see then to how much that loss might have amounted per annum,
according to the valuation which we might have made of the People of France 30
years ago.

I have made it plain elsewhere, that without People a Country is worth
nothing, and that about 30 years ago, the people of France might have been
valued at 1500 Livres a piece one with another, so that the loss of Two
Millions and 250000 souls, which is the fourth part of the Nine Millions
abovementioned, that might have been born in 800 years time of the Romish
Clergy, had they been Married, amounts to 3350 Millions, which being divided by
800, is above Four Millions loss each year, and this is so much the more
palpable, that those Two Millions and a Half of people, being added to those
that were already in the Kingdom, would have increased in Value, and have
augmented the Value of the Kingdom, and of all the People; for the better
Peopled a Country is, the more Valuable it is, as is also every individual in
the Kingdom, so that this occasions an annual loss of Four Millions at least,
one year with another.

Article V. The Popish Clergy possesses one half of the Estates Real and
Personal in the Kingdom of France, which half about 30 years ago, we have
computed elsewhere at 200 Millions per annum; then it is to be noted that those
Estates are in Mainmort, that is to say, lie dead, because they can neither
engage nor alie^ate 'em, nor employ them in Trade, so that they are less
advantageous to the Country than if they were in the hands of Men fit for
Commerce, Handicrafts* Husbandry or Manufactures, or that those Estates passed
by Inheritance from Father to Son, so that by necessary consequence, their
being in the hands of the Clergy, is very much against the Good of the Kingdom.
Hence also it follows, that the Ecclesiastics may well increase their own
Riches at the Expense of the People, whose Estates they are able to acquire,
whereas the People can never make any advantage of them. They are moreover as
so many Usurers, and make profit from the Industry and Labor of the People, by
lending them Money at a great Interest, which is very pernicious to a State.
They are in this respect abundantly worse than the Jews, who ordinarily are
very Covetous, spend little, and are great Usurers, nor are there any
Land-Estates to be purchased from them, because they ordinarily have none. Yet
they are abundantly more profitable to a State than the Popish Clergy, because
diverse of 'em Traffic by Sea, employ Vessels, Mariners and other People of
business, and do moreover maintain and breed up Families.

For our better understanding how prejudicial it is to a State to have a great
part of their Fund or Stock in Mainmort, we must consider, that if all the
Riches of a State were so, it could not subsist, as the World is managed at
present. Trade, Arts, Ma^factures, Sciences and Industry, etc. must necessarily
f^ll, all hope of advancing ones self, or of acquiring Estates by Labor and
Industry, or of distinguishing our selves from others would evanish, all people
would by this means be alike Wealthy, there would be neither Poor nor Rich,
Knowing nor Ignorant; there could be no subordination in any thing, and all
should be in confusion. Such a Nation would be incapable of making War, or
defending it self: for a Neighboring Nation whose Funds should not be in
Mainmort, must immediately become Master of that Nation that were so, for by
dividing their Funds amongst their Soldiers, they would encourage all their
Soldiers to take Arms against the other Nation, and to dispoil them of all. For
suppose those two Nations are equal in number of Men, and extent of Dominions,
That Nation whose Wealth is not in Mainmort, and has more poor people than
Rich, according to the usual course of the World, might make an Effort twenty
times greater than the other, seeing their stock is ordinarily of 20 times more
value than their Revenue at the 20th Penny. So that one very inconsiderable
Nation might by this Method, easily Conquer the whole World, if the Wealth of
all other Nations besides it self were in Mainmort, for as soon as ever they
should have subdued another, they would dispose of their Stock in favor of
their Soldiers, and of all others that should follow their Party.

If that should take place, there would be no such thing as getting of Riches,
nor would there be any need of Money, but people would only Barter one
Commodity against another with their Neighbors for a few days, and in very
small quantities, for the use only of a few persons. Credit must either be
totally abolished, or extend only to a small part of each ones Revenue, and
only for a few Days or Weeks, and there would likewise be a necessity of
assurance, that he who borrowed was not already indebted to another in some
part of his Revenue. Who then would take upon him the trouble of administering
Justice, if there were no Estate to be acquired by his Labor? Or who is it
would be Physician or Divine, or serve the Public in any Station for nothing?

Suppose that in such a Country I have an Estate in Land, which I cannot
Engage, and I have a desire to take up my abode in a Neighboring Nation, where
their Estates are not so disposed in Mainmort, and that I have occasion for
Two, Ten, or 20000 l. in Money, for something that may be Advantageous to the
State, or my own Family, as carrying on a Trade, opening Shop, etc. Who will
lend me that Money, if I cannot Mortgage my Estate? Or suppose I have Money to
Lend, to whom shall I Lend it? Where are my Sureties, seeing no person can
alienate his Estate? Whereas when a Man may Mortgage his Estate for ready
Money, all those Funds enter into Commerce, every Industrious and Diligent
Person imploys himself in hopes that sometime or other he may get some share of
it, and thus all is in Motion, and Circulates as it ought to do in a Body
Politic, without which it should not be able to make use of its Members, but
labor under a Civil or Political Palsy. The Soldier hopes to purchase some
Estate one time or other; Men of Ingenuity and Parts, if Poor, entertain the
like hopes, and therefore set themselves to Business; ^ good Mechanic or
Mariner does the like, and so the rest, for which there would be no room, if
Estates were inalienable; for in this case Prodigality, Liberality,
Covetousness, Industry or Idleness, could neither profit or hurt us; if there
were no Riches, and by Consequence no Honors to be acquired amongst men.

Hence then it is clear, that the Kingdom of France is deprived of the use of
one half of its Members, because one half of its Substance is in Mainmort, for
the more of a Countries Wealth that there is so, the less they have of
Activity, Motion, Commerce or Credit one among another, or with Strangers.
Hence it comes to pass, that Popish Countries, who have a great part of their
Wealth in Mainmort, cannot drive any considerable Trade, even though their
mischievous Religion should not have unpeopled them, as it in^allibly does,
unless they have abundance more of ready circulating Money than other Nations,
which have more Credit and Hopes for Trade, because they have more Funds proper
to be engaged in the same. Though there be some Popish Countries in Italy, that
have still a considerable Trade, as Genoa, Venice and Leghorn: This is
occasioned partly because the Clerg^ is not so Numerous and Rich there, and
partly that private persons are forbid the putting out of Money to Use, and
that for the most part in times of Peace, Interest of Money does not exceed 3
per Cent in those places, which obliges the people to be frugal, and to improve
their Money in a way of Trade, without which Popery would reduce them low
enough in a little time. And yet notwithstanding ^his, if all Protestant
Nations would fix the Interest of Money among themselves at the same rate, they
should quickly Engross all the Commerce into their hands, and in a little time
those Popish people would come to nothing, for naturally Popery is good for
nothing else but to ruin Kingdoms, and to render the Pope and the
Ecclesiastics Masters of all.

The Banks and Lombards in those Towns of Italy are also very useful to them,
but after all, these are but two or three Cities in that Country, which is no
great matter, and which with all those helps would be much less considerable,
if it were not that they have extended their Dominion in a manner over all the
rest of Italy, of whose Land Estates they possess a great part by the purchases
they have made, whereas on the other hand Fr^nce and England are generally
fitter for Trade, and without doubt the Italians would be four times more
proper for it than they are, and their Country abundantly better peopled, were
it not for their Religion, and Italy by remaining Papist, would be much more
unpeopled than it is, were it not the Seat of the Papacy, but it is in some
manner compensated for its losses by the Popish Religion, with the Booty which
the Court of Rome draws thither from all other Nations, as those who live in
the Neighborhood of Algier are advantaged by the Robberies of that Nest of
Pirates.

It must be considered that in a great State or Country, let it be what it
will, and let them drive what Trade they please, except it be in the Provinces
of Holland and Zealand, the Real Estates are abundantly more valuable for the
Capital Fund than Personal Estates, though the latter do very near afford as much
Revenue. But if all those Real Estates were in Mainmort, and could not be
alienated, the Personal Estate would be abundantly more valuable, because any
Man who is possessed of such. might therewith purchase an Estate in a
Neighboring Country which should not be in Mainmort, and whereof he might
dispose at pleasure.

It is also certain, that how much Land. Estate soever any person may have, if
his Estate were in Mainmort, he could not be said to be worth so much as the
real value of his Land, because a Man cannot be accounted rich, but in
proportion to that Estate which he has power to dispose of. It Is true, that in
a plentiful year, he should be able to maintain abundance of people, but then
all of them would run the risk of being starved in a year of dearth and
scarcity, because not being able to alienate his Estate, he should not have
credit to buy Provisions; and besides, those people that serve him must needs
be slaves, for none else would serve him, but in hopes to gain something; and
what is it they could gain, when there is no Stock to be acquired, nor no
Money, and if there were, it would be of no use to them.

Some may perhaps imagine, that if there were great Public Storehouses of
Metals. Clothes, Linen, Hides, and such things which might be alienated, and
purchased by Industry, either in whole or in part, that they might serve
instead of real Estates, as to that matter. But it is easily perceived, that
this could satisfy none at best, but the poorer sort, who live from Hand to
Mouth, and not aspiring persons, or those of a refined Spirit. Moreover, except
it were Steel and Iron, which are indispensably necessary for the use of Life,
Gold, Silver and other Metals, would be of little worth; for there being no
Commerce, Money would be out of use, for that very reason: And as for those
other Commodities abovementioned, viz. Linen, Hides, Cloth, etc. they are so
very apt to spoil, that they could not be kept any long time; and besides with
what should they be exchanged, there being little or no Money, because it would
not be necessary, there being no Trade nor Estate to be alienated.

Further, if all those Real Estates were in Mainmort, and unalienable, there
would be no room for Industry, and by Consequence not the 10th part of the
Personal Estates, that there are at present. For, as I have already said, Money
would be useless, Navigation, Ships, Merchandise, and all Movables,
superfluous; all Arts would decay; no Man would work but for his own use, and
that of his Family and pressing occasions; Persons of Dignity and Honor, if
there were any such, could not make any Figure or Pomp, to distinguish them
from others; and in a word, the whole face of the Universe would be changed, or
rather turned upside down.

Of all Riches, those which are most generally desired, and without which there
could be no other, are Real Estates, to wit, Lands and Houses, because they are
most profitable, durable and visible, and cannot be stolen; and besides, they
occasion their Possessors to be most taken notice of in the World. These are
things which cannot be wanted, whereas we may well enough be without most of
the other things, and it is the natural and general desire of all Mankind* to
attain to such Estates, which cause the subsistence of Society, Arts, Sciences,
and Commerce. If it be objected that in our time, there are abundance that love
Money better, and prefer it to real Estates: I Answer, That it is because they
know that therewith they can purchase Houses and Lands, when they have a mind
to them. But if they had never so much Money in a Country, where such Estates
could not be alienated, they would find themselves very uneasy, and be perfect
Beggars, for where there is no Commerce, they would not know what to do with
their Money, nor would they any way be taken Notice of.

According to the present Posture of Affairs, a Man may Buy or Farm an House
and Land for his Money, without being obliged to any Body, because such things
are always to be had, either for a longer or shorter time, and that there is a
flourishing Trade amongst Men, for which there could be no place, if all those
Estates were in Mainmort.

At present we may reckon Kingdoms and States, as to the Capital Stock, and as
to the Revenue of this Stock, we may reckon all the real and personal Estates
of a People, and of every particular Person apart; We can now fix the Value of
an entire Nation, at a certain rate, but all these would be worth nothing, if
Real Estates were in Mainmort* because there could be neither Industry,
Commerce, Revenue, nor Money, etc.

As for Example, I have valued elsewhere, the Revenues of all the Estates, Real
and Personal, of France, and the Fruits of the Peoples Industry altogether at
1000 Millions of Livres per Annum; and the whole Stock therein, comprehending
the people at 20000 Millions, at 20 years purchase; And likewise in England, I
have valued the same Stock and product at 550 Millions of Livres per Annum, and
the whole Stock therein, comprehending the people at 11000 Millions, at 20
years purchase. But if all those Estates were in Mainmort, they would not be
worth the 10th, nay, the 20th part so much, nor indeed worth any thing, but the
present enjoyment of the people, who would be very few in number, as I have
already said, and like so many Savages, having neither Commerce, Arts,
Manufactures, Sciences nor Money, as has been often said; for no Man would work
but for himself and his Family, and that too but from hand to mouth. These and
many more are the Inconveniences, that would follow upon having all Estates in
Mainmort.

Lands and Houses are in a State, when they can pass from one hand to another,
like Bills of Assurance or good Security, which are worth as much or more than
Gold and Silver, when those things can pass by way of Commerce, there is less
need of Gold and Silver, and other personal Effects; and if this were not so,
there would be an immediate Obstruction of Commerce, and the State must fall
into a Consumption. Herein it is that the want of Public Registers in England,
is very prejudicial to the Trade of the Nation, because for want of this, those
who would Traffic with diverse persons that have Estates, which might be
purchased, dare not venture upon it, for fear that those Estates are already
engaged to others, which for a time, has the same effect to those particular
persons, as if their Estates were in Mainmort; so that the Public and the
Proprietors lose abundantly by this means, besides the numerous Suits, which
are thereby occasioned; so that it is neither easy to sell them, nor to borrow
Money upon them. And hence it is observed, that in the Town of Taunton, where
there are Public Registers for Lands and Houses thereon depending, and for
such Estates as are Morgag'd or not Morgag'd, that that Town is in a
flourishing Condition, for that very Reason.

But though the want of Public Registers be a very great disorder in England,
yet it comes far short of that which is occasioned by Estates being in Mainmort
in Popish Countries. For in the first place, this may be remedied when the
Nation pleases, whereas in Popish Countries the Pope and the Clergy, who
tyrannize there, and make their own advantage of those disorders, would rather
over-turn a Country, than suf^er any Reformation, as to that Head, unless
Princes of great Power and Authority, such as the present King of France,
undertakes it. In the next place, those dubious Funds in England, are not
perhaps the 20th part of those in the Kingdom, neither are they constantly left
out of Commerce, as are those of the Popish Ecclesiastics. And last of all,
it is well known, that this is no effect of the Protestant Religion, as the
disorder whereof we now speak, is certainly an effect of the Romish Religion in
France.

But some perhaps may say, that Entails are allowed in all Countries, which
hinders those that enjoy such Estates from alienating them; so that they cannot
enter into Commerce, so long as the Entail lasts, and that by the same reason
the Popish Clergy, may also enjoy Estates that are inalienable without any
great inconvenience.

I Answer, That those Entails don't take place, but where Men cannot do better,
that it is an inconvenience and not an indifferent thing; but besides it is not
usual for the Entail to be perpetual, only for a little time, for as soon as the
Children, in whose favor it is made, become Masters of the Estate, it returns
again into the Public Commerce, and may be Morgag'd and Alienated, and pass
from one hand to another, either in whole or in part. 2. There is not perhaps
the 200th part of any Country so entailed all at once, and there is no reason to
doubt, but in a well-governed State, where the Governors have sufficient
Authority, they would find a Remedy for those Entails, if there were too many
of them, and that they would find out some other Method for ensuring the Estate
to Infants or Heirs, without having the Estate cut off from the public
Commerce. 3. But besides that this is not so common; it must be agreed, that
there is much more reason to have regard to poor innocent Children, whom a
Father that is an ill Husband, might ruin, and who may one time or other be
very useful to the Public, who are moreover recommendable for the sake of
their Grandfathers, Grandmothers, or other Ancestors, whose Memory is dear to
the Public. I say there is more regard to be had to those Infants, to whom that
Estate ought Naturally and Lawfully to be transmitted by Hereditary Right, than
to Ecclesiastics who have no Natural nor Acquired Right to those Estates; and
who are besides unprofitable, for the most part, to a State, scandalous
Persons* and i^ whose hands, and those of their Successors, the half or more
of the Wealth of a Nation, is always to remain cut off from Public Commerce.

But perhaps some Opinionative Persons may say, that to carry on the Trade of a
Nation, it is enough that the half of the Wealth of a Country is not in
Mainmort, which is just as much as if he should say, that it is as good to have
half the Body Paralitick, and deprived of the use of half of its Members, as
not to be so at all, because they still live in that condition. But who is it
that does not perceive that it is a distempered and a languishing condition,
and that in such a case, a Man cannot do half the business that he might do, if
he were in perfect health.

It cannot be reasonably denied, that the more vigorous a Body is, the better
it does work; so that the more Credit there is in a Nation, the more all its
effects are in Motion; the more Arts, Industry, Agriculture and Commerce
flourish there, and the Country becomes Populous in proportion. What a mighty
disorder then does it occasion that all those Monks and Priests (who are the
Subjects of a Foreign Prince, seeing they have taken the Oaths to him, and who
is moreover of necessity the Hereditary Enemy of the State) should be thus with
all their Wealth, sequestered from the State, in respect of all those things,
wherein they might be useful to it, viz. in regard of Imposts, and the Charges
of the State, and Trade; as also in regard of Propagation, and Obedience to
their Sovereign, as other Subjects; that they, I say, should be no otherwise
united to a State, but so as to ruin it, and enrich themselves by its Spoils.

Let us suppose the Estates that are in Mainmort among the Ecclesiastics,
possessed by Merchants or Tradesmen, the Commerce would have been much greater
in FRANCE, and by Consequence the Kingdom should have been more rich and potent.

Let us suppose, that they had been in the hands of the Generals of Armies,
Colonels, and other Military Officers, who like the Turkish Timariots should
entertain upon those Estates so many thousands of Married Men as might
Cultivate them. What an incredible ease would that give to the poor people, who
should thereby be relieved from the Burden of Maintaining so many Troops; what
increases of People, and what Riches would not that produce? Or let us suppose,
that those Estates were in possession of people of Quality, or others who
either had served, or might serve the King in his Camp, though not in the manner
of Timariots, they would spend those Estates in the service of the King, by
doing him Honor at Court, or Generously in fine Buildings, Sculptures,
Paintings, Gravings, or other Magnificent Curiosities and Ornaments, which
would Embellish and Set off the Provinces and Towns, make Arts to flourish,
employ a vast number of people, and cause Money to circulate incessantly from
one hand to another. Or suppose they were possessed by Laics of all ranks
indifferently, as the other half of the Estates of the Kingdom are at present,
and that as to other things the Government should remain on the same footing as
it is at present, (which however is not much to be desired:) The King in that
case should mightily increase his Revenue; the Officers of Justice, of the
Police or Discipline of Cities, and those of the Treasury, as also those of the
Imposts, and all their Train, would get twice as much Riches as they do, except
their number should be Augmented in proportion: In which case the King would be
enriched by the sale of great number of Places. It Is true, the people should
always continue miserable if they were as much Taxed in proportion, but the
King's Revenues would be doubled.

Nay the very name of Mainmort imports, that those Estates in such hands are
unprofitable to the Society.

I have enlarged a little upon this Article, beyond what I intended, because it
is of the highest concern in Politics, and that I have met with several Men of
Parts, who did not ^ightly apprehend the Mischief of having so much wealth in
Mainmort.

Article VI. relates to the great Quantity of Plate which they have in their
Churches and Convents, and in those places they call their Treasuries, as St.
Denis near Paris, Notre Dame de Liesse, and des Ardillieres, and other places
of that nature. This one Superstitious and Foolish Custom, must needs have
robbed the Public Commerce of diverse Millions, at such time as the Clergy had
amassed a great quanti^y of it as before this War, which was the true cause
that a great part of it was melted down by the King's Order. Suppose that in
the whole it had not exceeded 20 Millions, that would have at least amounted to
several Millions amongst the people per Annum. However I will not take upon me
to determine how far this loss extended, because I don't know what quantity of
Plate they had, for the Popish Clergy never tell the truth in these cases, and
very seldom in any others.

Article VII. Relates to the constant practice of their Clergy in hoarding up
Money, which is of more importance than the preceding Article, for seeing many
of them possesses great Revenues, and are neither allowed to Trade nor to
Marry, and by consequence have no lawful Offspring, they do ordinarily betake
themselves to the amassing of vast sums of Money, under the pretext of
providing for their Nephews and Neeces as the Popes do, and they don't provide
for them neither, for the most part, till after their death, which is doubly
prejudicial to Commerce. It has moreover been the constant Observation of such
persons that they are very Covetous and don't love to give Alms to the Poor,
although they be thereunto obliged by the intention of their Founders; so that
taking of their Avarice for granted, which is in^eparably annexed and natural
to that sort of people, together with their sordid Principles of Parsimony, at
least in all their Communities, where they spend little in comparison of their
vast Incomes, though at the same time they eat and drink a great deal; These
things, I say, being taken for granted, as they are certainly true, there is
ground to believe, that all their Clergy together, Secular and Regular of both
Sexes, might have constantly, before this War, at least 50 Millions of useless
Money to the Public, in their Coffers, or the hands of the Public Notaries.
Whence it is easy ^o perceive, that the Public lost considerably by this
Money, which in Commerce, would have brought abundance of profit to the
Kingdom, helped to pay Taxes, employed abundance of people, and contributed to
Propagation.

This Article must certainly amount to sev^ral Millions; I will not determine
how many, but without doubt this, and the preceding Article, are to be reckoned
at 8 or 10 Millions loss per Annum at least.

Article VIII. relates to the Ridiculous Festivals that they observe; wherein
the poor Idolatrous People lose their time, besides the Debaucheries which this
abuse occasions indispensibly in Popish Countries, which together cannot be
reckoned at less than ^50 Millions of Livr^s loss per An. For supposing that
the Industry of the Nation might have been formerly valued at above 600
Millions per Annum, as I have made it appear elsewhere, if it were not for the
abuses of Popery, whereof this is one of the most prejudicial: Supposing, I
say, there are above 50 working days lost in a Year, by Festivals in general,
without reckoning Sundays and some remarkable Festivals, that would be the 6th
part of the peoples Industry lost, which amounts to 100 Millions per Annum. We
must also take notice, that besides those general Festivals and Holy days,
there are many particular Festivals, viz. those of every Parish, who have their
particular Saint, whose Image they adore according to the Doctrine of their
Councils, the Festivals of Saints for every Profession, Trade and Distemper,
when they practice the like, the Festivals of Beasts or Saints that are Patrons
of Beasts; so that there is much above the 6th part of the peoples time lost. I
confess that the time of those Holy Days, is not absolutely lost, for then they
mind Housekeeping, dress Victuals, and take care of their Cattle on Sunday,
etc. and some other profitable things are done, as Traveling by Land and Sea,
and Mariners are employed on those days as well as others; which to observe by
the by, is still a great advantage, that Protestants and Trading Nations have
above others, who have not so much Trade by Sea. But then if we consider that
those Holy days debauch the People, teach them bad Habits of Idleness,
Drunkenness and Immodesty, which hinders them from working on other days, ruins
their Families* occasions abundance of Disorders, Quarrels, Diseases, Fires,
and the Death of many People; one may easily perceive, that the Damage
occasioned by these Festivals, amounts to above 100 Millions per An. and in
effect, as Men do generally ^e those days, they look more like as if they were
consecrated to the Devil than to God. Master^ suffer very much by this
Libertinism of their Servants and Apprentices; and the poor Wives at home are
grieved, to consider that their Husbands are at the Public Houses, where they
spend all that they had gained in several days, and will come home drunk, and
perhaps beat them into the bargain.

If it be pretended, that Men work the better, and are the more vigorous the
days after the Festival, because they have had some rest; that may be true, as
to some of the honest people, but as for the greatest part, it has a contrary
effect; their Idlenefs and Debauchery makes them lose those days and many
others, and if all of them don't debauch themselves on those days, they spend
them at least in Races and unprofitable Walks, which fatigues them more than
their ordinary Work, and to those who are of a regular* Temper, those Holydays
are perfectly irksom. God who is wiser than Man, has appointed but one day in
seven as a day of Rest; not that I would reproach those Christian Nations, who
have but a small number of Holy Days, that I think tolerable, provided there
be no excess in their number, as there is an horrible excess in the Popish
Church. I am really of opinion, that the disorders abovementioned, which are
the result of, or inseparably annexed to those Festivals, do almost as much
mischief as the Holy Days themselves, and experience shows us daily, that
there is more Insolence and Disorder committed on one Holy Day than on three
others, and that by an ill habit they contract on those days; they do likewise
break out in profanity on the Lords day; and most Masters of Shops in Towns,
complain that they cannot find Journey-men to work the day after Holy Days,
nay, nor on Mondays, because of the Sunday preceding, the Rabble usually
disordering themselves so much on those Holy Days, that they cannot work the
day after. I take no notice here of the Disorders and Debaucheries that are
committed at their Midnight-Masses.

To this I may join their loss of time in their Scandalous Pilgrimages, it
being known that sometimes they go as far as Rome, and Loretto, and St. James
de Compostella in Spain, etc. and now and then as far as Jerusalem. Besides,
they lose abundance of time in Shrieving or Confessing themselves, and at their
Anniversary Days, Ash Wednesday, etc. and by carrying their pretended Sacrament
or God about every day, by 4 persons at a time, besides the Priest who holds it
in his hands; and this is perhaps in 50 places at once in some great Cities.
They lose also abundance of time in their daily Masses, which are said without
any shadow of necessity, but merely to subsist the Popes Troops in the Country
at the charge of the people. They have moreover their private Masses for the
cure of their Cattle, at which every one who is interested is obliged to
assist. They lose abundance of time at all those Follies, of which I might make
an Article apart, as also their Ambarvalia and Rogation Weeks (which they have
borrowed from the Pagans, as they have done most of the rest of their Religion)
by which they think to procure Rain, or divert boisterous Seasons, when they
threaten their Corn. And this loss of time is so much the more ruinous to
France, that there are abundance of more people in it unfit for work
proportionably, than in England, viz. Lawyers and other Civil Officers,
Clergymen, and c.

Article XI. relates to the Sum* which the Pope draws from France every year,
under different denominations as Annates, Bulls, Dispensations, Indulgences,
Relics, Provisions, Agnus Dei, and Consecrated Grains, all sorts of
Expedition, Consecrations of Prelates, Dedications of Churches, Jubiles now and
then, both at France and at Rome, etc. which is so much the more ridiculous for
France to endure, that the Nation since many Ages, has not had greater Enemies
than the Popes, and yet the Money drained out of the Kingdom by this means,
amounts to diverse Millions Annually. Mr. de Sully Surintendant of the
Finances, under Henry the IV. having well examined the matter, found that in
that time the Pope got every year one with another, above 4 Millions of Livres
from France; and since that time it has doubled at least; suppose it were but 6
Millions of Livres per Annum, it is 120 Millions in 20 years time.

Article X. is concerning the great Sums which the Cardinals Protectors of
France, and diverse other Romish Prelates, who are Pensioners of France, besides
the Knights of Maltha, etc. draw yearly out of the Kingdom by Benefices which
they possess in it. This amounts also to several Millions yearly.

Article XI. relates to the Tapers, Waxcandles, and Oil that is spent in their
foolish Superstitions, as burning them before Images, Statues, Hosties, and at
Funerals, etc. which did formerly cost the Kingdom of France, perhaps 8 or 10
Millions per Annum, the greatest part of the Wax being imported from other
Countries, and for that which is the product of France, it must be also
reckoned, because it is as unprofitably spent, as if they should take the Wine
and Brandy, which is their prod^ct too, and that they sell to Strangers, and
pour it out upon the Ground. I don't reckon here the Incense which they burn to
little purpose, because that is no great matter, and is grateful to the smell;
neither do I take notice of the Ornaments and Raiment of their Statues, Images,
and other Idols, because they last long, nor of their Mysterious Vestments,
adorned with fine Lace, of Linen, Silver or Gold, or Gold-Fringes or
Imbroidery, with which their Priests are decked, when they perform what they
call Divine Service. Nor do I take notice of the great Quantity of Wine, which
is spent in their multitude of Masses daily, because it nourishes those that
drink it; nor yet of their Wafers or Consecrated Hosties, that they keep, though
it be so much flower lost: So that I content my self here, only to reckon the
loss of their Tapers and Oil, which I do verily believe, including their loss
of time, in making or lighting their Candles, and cleaning and lighting their
Lamps amounted to 8 or 10 Millions per Annum.

The Expense of the Wax is more perceptible to abundance of people than that of
their Oil, and especially to Protestants who don't go often into the Popish
Churches, because they have seen 1000 times in the Streets and at the Gates of
the Churches, prodigious Quantities of great long Tapers, Flambeaus and
Torches, burning all at once, whereas they don't so much see the Consumption of
the Oil. But on the contrary, the Papists will Judge that the Expense of the
Oil is much greater, because they see in many Churches, 10, 15, or 20 Lamps
burning all at once, night and day, and in truth I am of opinion, that the
expense of the Oil is the greater. To convince any Man that it was great, let us
suppose there were only 200000 Lamps burning continually in the Churches,
Monasteries, Convents and Chapels of the Kingdom, before their pretended
Sacrament, their Images and Statues in the middle of the Churches to enlighten
the Night, whether they be fed with Oil of Oli^e, Oil of Rape or other Fat; yet
it is known that for the most part they spend the best Oil, which in many places
is brought a great way by Land, is very dear; and oftentimes the principal
Trade of the Grocers, and Wax-Chandlers in Cities, is to furnish Oil and Wax
for the Churches, Funerals and Processions.

I am of the mind, that the least we can reckon for every Lamp in 24 hours is 2
d. which at the rate of 200000 Lamps, amounts to 20000 Livres per day, which is
almost 7 Millions per Annum for Oil alone. There are many Lamps which spend
above 6 d. per day in Oil where it is dear, or the Lamps great, and have a
large wick and cast a great light. It is to be considered, that there are 27000
Parishes in the Kingdom, besides what is in the new Conquests; and that there
are few Churches, nay, even in the Country, but what have two Lamps; and that
in Cities there are Churches that have 10, 15, 20 or above, continually
burning, besides what are in Monasteries, Convents and Chapels both in Town
and Country. There are many places in France, as well as in Spain, Portugal,
Italy and other Countries where those that light the Lamps in the Churches
maintain their Families perfectly, by robbing the Lamps of their Oil, and
giving out that it is drunk by Night-Owls.

As to the Wax, after having considered it well, I believe that formerly it
amounted to no less ^han 3 Millions of Livres per Annum; which would in whole
amount to 10 Millions; but this I submit to the Judgment of such who are more
thoroughly acquainted with those things than I; but if it should not amount to
above 5 Millions, it is still a considerable loss to the Kingdom.

Article XII. concerns their Lent, Ember-weeks, and other Fast-days, as they
call them, viz. the Friday and Saturday of every Week, with the Orders of Monks
and Nuns, who are never allowed to eat Flesh, Eggs nor Butter. All those things
occasion abundance of Mischiefs, which I shall here present to view, that we
may be better able to Judge of the great prejudice done to the State by this
one Head, which is of the greatest consequence.

1. By this means, great Sums of Money are exported out of the Kingdom for dry
and fresh Cod* Stock Fish, White and Red-hering. Salmon, Pilchards, Sardines,
etc. It Is certain* that formerly there were several Millions, above 6 at least,
went out of the Kingdom every year for Fish. It it be said, that the French for
a considerable time, have Fished Cod enough in New-^ound-Land. It is however
certain, that it is not many years since they bought that sor^ of Fish from
Foreigners, and as for the other sorts of Salt-fish, they buy them almost
wholly still from Foreigners and Protestants.

2. These Superstitions prevent the breeding of many Cattle of all sorts, and
likewise of Fowl in the Kingdom, as there would be otherwise, because for
almost one half of the year they dare not eat any Flesh, which by necessary
consequence diminishes the Revenues of Land.

3. For this very reason of the want of Flesh* it is impossible that a Country
can maintain and breed up so many people, because next to Bread, there is
nothing does so much Nourish a Man as Flesh, nor any thing that renders him so
proper for Labor and Generation. They must not pretend to tell me, that that
Land which is fi^ for Feeding Cattle, is fit for other things, and that what
they lose on the on^ hand, they gain it on the other, for it is very well known,
that there are many Grounds proper for Cattle, Pasturage, and Hay, that are fit
for nothing else; and on the other hand, suppose that those Grounds were
equally fit for Corn, Wine or Wood, as for breeding of Cattle, it is known that
the profit of Cattle is the greatest. I have known several Quarters of France
that abounded with Meadows along the Rivers, where a Load of Hay weighing
2000l. weight, and drawn by six great Oxen, and sometimes two or three Horses
joined to them besides, was not worth above three Livres, and sometimes not
above two and an half, which would not have been so, but for their Lent and
other Fast-days*

4. It is known that the profit of Cattle comes with less Expense and Labor,
for the Cattle go of themselves to the places where one would have them, and so
save Carriage.

5. It is also known that Cattle when they feed, are at Work for their Owner,
without any need of his being present with them, so that he may apply himself
to some other thing.

6. A little Meat with B^ead, nourishes better than three times as much B^ead
alone.

7. Cattle give rise to abundance of important Manufactures, that employ and
afford Subsistence to great numbers of people, such as Wools, Hides, Horns,
Suet, Butter, Cheese, etc.

8. This want of Cattle makes Meat dear to those employed in Manufactures, and
other Handicrafts, as also to Merchants whom i^ costs a great deal dearer to
Victual their Ships.

9 It likewise occasions the dearness of Candle, Butter, Cheese, Hides, and
Wool, etc. in a Country, which is an hindrance to Mechanics, Trade, and
Propagation, and makes other Provisions dearer in general than in those
Countries where that Superstition is unknown. It particularly occasions the
dearness of Bread, because the people for want of Flesh-meat are obliged to eat
abundance of Bread. This want of Cattle occasions also the laying out of great
sums in Foreign Rice, Hide^, Suet, Butter, Cheese, and Fat or Grease for
Coaches, and other Carriages.

10. Those Extravagant Superstitions are the cause of Maladies and Distempers,
Languishings, and of the death of an infinite number of poor people, and of
Infirm, Aged, and Scrupulous persons* to whom Meat would be more proper than
any thing else, and yet they cannot have that Relief, because ^hey either
cannot or will not give it them, or that they dare not eat it, because of the
Scruples that the Idolatrous Priests have formed in their Minds, so that they
suffer extremely during that time, and abundance more people die in that season
than in others. This Superstitious Lent falls likewise precisely out at a time
when the Husbandman, and other Country people labor very hard, about digging
their Vines, Dunging their Ground, Sowing their March Corn, and Manuring their
Gardens; so that the Peasants are in much the worse condition to work, that
they are ill fed, not being allowed to eat Flesh-meat, and their Garden Stuff
being many times spoiled by the hard Frosts in the Winter.

11. Besides this the Lent falls just at the end of Winter, when the Poor,
Sickly and Ancient people have suffered more than they do ordinarily at other
Seasons, and instead of recovering strength as they would, or might do, were
they allowed to eat such good Meat as the Season affords, as fresh Eggs, Lamb,
Veal, Kids, Pigs, etc. instead of that, the Lent compleats their ruin and kills
them.

12. Lent, and their other pretended Fastdays, and their Monks and Nuns that
never eat Flesh, destroy all the Fish in the Rivers, without a possibility of
being stocked again, nay they hinder those of the very Ponds from coming to
maturity or a competent growth.

13. It occasions abundance of people to lose their time by Fishing i^ those
Rivers, without almost catching any thing, because they will have Fish, and can
have no other but such.

14. Lent occasions the loss of the Advantage and Income of Eggs* which are
good a^ that time, and they don't know what use to put them too, and after Lent
they are either too Old or of no Value.

15. It Is a shame to humane nature, to see those Excesses which the poor
Idolatrous Papists are guilty of, during the time of the Carnaval, when they
conceive they have a privilege to dishonor, violate, and degrade their
nature, by all sorts of Infamy, Excess and Disorders, and by their Masquerades
and changing the habit of their Sex, to make themselves amends for being
condemned by their Priests to eat no Flesh during Lent, and when that is over,
they believe themselves authorized again to commit the like Riots at Easter,
which is so much the more dangerous to the health of many people, that they ^ed
slenderly before, in hopes of being sooner delivered from the Fire of Purgatory
after their Death.

16. Lent and other Fast-days which the Priests command them to observe on pain
of Eternal Damnation, makes them disrelish and loath all Sea and Shellfish,
and are the cause that there are fewer Mariners and Fishers than otherwise
there would be, because people do without Comparison eat abundance less of
Seafish than otherwise they would do, and by this means the Kingdom loses a
great advantage, and an inestimable Revenue, which Nature presents to them
without Trouble and Charge.

17. The Country people throughout the whole Kingdom lose abundance in the time
of Lent, of what they might reap from their Calves, Lambs, Kids, Pigs, and
other young Animals that are bred during that time, and have for the most part
need of the Milk of their Dams; for either the Peasants must dispense with the
want of that Milk which does highly incommode them, or else they must throw
part of those Creatures to the Dogs. They lose also by their Poultry, which
they can neither Eat nor Sell, and yet must keep them, though many times they
have not Corn to feed 'em.

18. The Country People do many times lose part of their great and small Cattle
by the Lent, for if the Winter be long, and the Spring backward, and they have
not gathered together abundance of Forage the year foregoing, their Cattle die
of Hunger, which would not be if they were either allowed to Sell them to the
Butcher, or to Eat them themselves.

19. The Peasant not daring to eat neither Flesh nor Eggs, because they are
forbid to eat them under the Notion of a great Sin, and having no Fish to eat,
because it is scarce and dear, nor Roots, nor Herbs, because the Winter has
destroyed them, they are obliged to maintain themselves by the Milk of their
Cows, which occasions their Calves being starved, and is partly the cause why
the Cattle are so Poor in France, and this occasions an incredible prejudice to
the Kingdom.

20. There Is more counterfeit Devotion at that time than at others, which
exhausts the Purses, and wastes the time of those poor Ignorant people. I say
nothing of those Monstrous Opinions unworthy of God and Man, which these base
and foolish Superstitions do nourish and maintain, as if it were more pleasing
to God, to see people eat Fish or Pulse than to eat Flesh, and at one time
rather than another, I say I wont speak of those things here, for that belongs
more to Divines than to me; For all these Reasons abovementioned and others, I
make no scruple to say, that the keeping of Lent does above 50 Millions of
Livres prejudice to the Kingdom of France per Annum.

And being upon this Subject, it may not perhaps be unseasonable to confute the
Errors of those who fancy that Lent, and other Fastdays are advantageous to a
Nation, because say they, it saves abundance of Cattle, puts people upon
Fishing, and consequently to the getting of more profit by Sea, than they would
otherwise do, and by that same means also more Seamen are bred. I confess that
Lent and Feast-days are useful to some Nations, not by observing them
themselves, but by selling Fish to those who do so, as the English, Scotch,
Dutch, etc. who furnish the French and others.

In England the Nation was quickly sensible, that the keeping of Lent was a
mistake in Politics, for after Lent had been observed there, a while, since
the Reformation, on pretense of ^ome such Political Reasons, as the
encouragement of Fishing, etc. they soon left it off, because they ^ound it did
more hurt than good. They saw it did not increase the number of Seamen, but
rather diminished them, and that there was not more Fish taken and spent, but
rather less, by reason that people being under that Servit^de, were disgusted
with it, and did eat it against their will upon the very Fish days, and could
not at all endure it at other times; whereas they eat it at all times
indifferently now, and there is constantly good store of all sorts to be found
at the Fishmongers, as well Sea as Fresh-water-fish, and all sorts of
Shellfish; so that now those who love Fish better than Meat, may please
themselves, which they could not do, if they were tyrannically commanded to do
it. Besides, Fishermen could not then make their constant Trade of Fishing but
only in Lent, and about Fridays, and Saturdays, whereas they both can and do
fish actually every day. It Is true, France does not afford such plenty of Fish*
meat as England, but this must also be granted, that the people in France who
have Means, do not feed so much upon Meat, even on Flesh-days, as they call
them, as the English comm^nly do; and be^ides most part of the French have not
wherewith to do it. But I say further, that France is in greater want of Fish
than of Flesh, and that there would have been Flesh enough in the Nation, if
Lent, the four Ember-weeks, and other Fast-days, and the Orders of Monks and
Nuns had not been set up by Superstition, for this occasioned a neglect in
breeding of Cattle; and even at present, though most of the Kingdom lies
desolate, there would be Cattle enough, if Lent were abolished and Lands not
abandoned; and though France is at less expense now, as to the buying of Foreign
Fish, than it was before the War, yet it still expends very great Sums that
way, though the poorest sort of people in the remotest Provinces from the Sea,
seldom taste Fish of any sort, and even very rarely of Flesh-meat.

But lest any Body should imagine that I contradict my self, in saying that the
people of England don't eat less Fish since the Observation of Lent, but rather
more, and that I pretend nevertheless, that the notice of such a Superstition
does prejudice to the Revenues of Land in France, and hinders the Breeding and
Consumption of Cattle; I shall answer that specious objection; I call it
specious, because it seems that if so be the abolishing of Lent, and other
Fish-days in England produce that effect, that more Fish is eaten in it since,
it would seem to follow, that less Flesh-meat should be consumed, and so
consequently if Lent, and other pretended Fast-days were abolished in France,
more Fish would be eaten, and less Flesh destroyed. I answer, that there is no
real contradiction in what I have asserted, but only a seeming one, and that
also to those who do not weigh things rightly; my reason is this, that in
England the people have always and at all seasons, plenty both of Meat and
Fish; no place in the Kingdom being very remote from Sea, and there being many
Rivers full of Fresh Water Fish, and the Tide coming up a great way in many of
those Rivers, the Seafish is conveyed into the Country at a very small charge.
They have also plenty of good Cattle, so that they may at all times eat that
they like best, or find cheapest, without that aversion which the Tyranny of
Imposition occasions, when they are commanded upon Eternal Damnation to eat, or
not to eat such and such things, at such and such times, whereas France is
generally much more remote from the Sea, and Fish there very scarce or dear.
Now in those places at a great distance from the Sea, if it were not for the
Superstition of Lent and other Fast-days, as they call them, in those places
they would eat much more Meat than they do, and more also than is eaten on the
Seacoasts, where Fish is more plentiful and cheaper, and consequently they
should breed more Cattle. More Fish would also be eaten in the Sea* Ports and
other places near the Sea, than is eaten at present, if it were not for the
tyrannous Impositions upon their Consciences, which forbids them to eat Meat at
such times, and creates, in most part of them, a kind of abhorrency of Fish,
which they are forced to eat; and hence it comes to pass that less Fish is
taken in the Seaports, than there would be were it not for this Superstition;
and less Cattle is also bred in the Country than would be, were it not for the
same Abuse, which forbids the eating of Meat above five Months in the Year, and
so puts all things out of order; for by this Means, those that live near the
Sea are disgusted at Fish, which Nature and Providence affords them very cheap,
nay, almost for nothing; which would be a great Treasure to them, if it were
not for the tyranny imposed upon them, and those who live in remote places of
the Country, and have an opportunity to breed abundance of Cattle and eat Meat
very cheap, are forced to abstain from it, and lose that great advantage, though
they cannot have Fish but at a very dear rate.

It deserves likewise our Observation, that France has lost considerably in
respect of the profits they made of their Cattle, by the expulsion of the
Protestants, because they bought those young Cattle, Poultry, etc. in the Towns
and Countries where they lived, which otherwise had been lost or very
chargeable to the Owners.

Article XIII. relates to the Injustice, Violence and Spiritual Tyranny of the
Popish Clergy, which causes an unestimable damage to the Kingdom of France.
This Spirit of Injustice and Inhumanity, which is essential to Popery, was the
cause of the last War, which they kindled secretly, and of the last
Persecution, and of all the Massacres and Civil Wars, that have been in France.
That same Spirit of VIOLENC sets them, whenever they meet with Princes
obnoxious to them, to persecute all those with the utmost fury, that differ
from them in their Opinions, though they have no other Foundation sor them, but
their own Ambition, Pride and Covetousness, that Spirit, I say, of Injustice
has been one of the great causes of the Ruin of France; I leave it to the
World to Judge whether they did not take advantage of the Ambition of that
Potent Prince, who was perhaps possessed with the design of an U^iversal
Monarchy, to make him believe that it was convenient for him, in order to
a^tain his end, to destroy the Reformation in England, Holland, France and all
other parts, and under that pretense to bring King James, who was known to be a
Bigoted Prince, into the same design, and to oblige him to do all what we know
he did. It Is by such Methods as these, that the Court of Rome Ruins all the
Princes and States of Christendom; when she is in any way afraid that they
will grow too Potent, then to be sure she inspires them by her Emissaries and
Confessors, with such designs, as will lay them desolate, and unpeople their
Country, when at the same time they have no mistrust of any such things I shall
not offer to compute the damage done by this Article, at any certain Sum^ of
Money, for every one may easily perceive, that this is a Fountain of
innumerable Mischiefs.

Article XIV. shows plainly how ruinous the Popish ^lergy is to the State of
France, in this that the^ contribute little to the great Charge of ^e ^tion,
though they enjoy the half of all Estates Real and Personal of the Kingdom, and
^ught consequently to pay as much proportio^ably to the King, as those do who
possess the other half of the Kingdom. For the Clergy, even at present
scarcely, pay 10 Millions o^ ^vres toward the 200 Millions, which the King
has exacted every year from the Nation, one way or other, since the War; that
is to say, that the Clergy and Religious Orders, as they call them, of France,
who make up per^aps 300000 Souls, enjoy as much Reven^ as 8 or 9 Millions of
other People, that may ^ill be reckoned to be in the Kingdom o^ ^rance, or as
much as was enjoyed by 13 or (...) Millio^s, that might have been in it 30
ye^rs ago, and that* though every one of the Clergy and ^uch like Religious
Persons, have one with another, as much to spend now, in relation to the
Reven^e of the Real and Personal Esta^es, as 40 or 50 other persons of the
promiscuous multitude, taken one with another, that yet for all that the Clergy
and those Religious Orders taken in bulk, don't bear above the 20th part of the
Charges of the Government. To this may be added, that before the War, when the
King did raise by the ordinary Impositions, 132 Millions yearly, besides the
Casualties, as they term them, that did amount some years to 50, 60, and 70
Millions, the Clergy did not pay above 5 or 6 Millions yearly; for the
Poll-tax, by which they were obliged to pay 4 Millions per Annum during 5
years, was establi^hed since.

But that we may the better comprehend how much the Clergy is eased above all
other Subjects o^ the Kingdom, it must be known that the Officers of
Judicature, and other Civil Officers in the Nation, as those of the Finances,
Civil Government and others, who all purchased their Of^ices at a very dear
rate, the Farmers of the Imposts with all their dependants, and the Clergy
themselves did cost the people altogether, above 200 Millions of Livres yearly,
about 20 or 30 years ago, besides the other vexations and losses of time, which
they suffered by continual Wranglings at Law, Oppressions and Depredations of
their Goods by the said Officers, or by the Superstition of the Clergy; of all
which Vexations, Losses of Time, and other Calamities, as the Marches,
Counter-marches and Quartering of Soldiers, if they had been free, they might
have probably saved or earned 100 Millions per Annum more, but those I don't
reckon, because they turned to no bodies Account. Now the Clergy is not only
^ree from all those Mischiefs and losses of Money and Time, to which the other
Subjects are obnoxious, but they likewise get Money from the people and plunder
them ^y their false Devotions, and a thousand new ways suggested by their
Covetousness, abusing the peoples Credulity, endeavoring continually to
involve them in greater Ignorance, that they might domineer over them more
easily, and so dispoil them. It Is very well known, that the Officers of
Judicature indulge the Clergy much more than they do the other Subjects, and
that the Farmers of the Impositions have little or nothing to do with them. The
Clergy are moreover respected and feared by the Lawyers, and maintani some
Judges, Advocates and Attorneys, who are their Pensioners. There is not one
Community of Religious Persons, but what have Pensioners in all the Notable
Tribunals* where their business lies, who order it so that they gain almost all
their Suits at Law, how unjust soever they be against the Laity, who have
neither so much Money nor so great Protection as they. Then by the help of a
Father Titler, which they have in every Community, they forge false Titles
every day; and this they account a pious Fraud, as well as the false Donatives
and Legacies, which they often pretend to have been bestowed upon them. In this
manner they bereave the poor Laity of their Estates by the Favor and
Protection they find one from another; for they stand by one another as Thieves
do, and are all of them supported by the Pope, who has a secret Influence upon
their Affairs: And many times they are also supported by Courtiers. Then as to
the Farmers general and particular of Impositions, and their Servants, the
Romish Clergy is not exposed to their Robberies, because they are not obnoxious
to the Public Taxes; but on the contrary that sort of Men are obnoxious to the
Clergy, for they flatter them with the hopes of a pardon for all their
Extortions and Robberies, if they will but employ 'em to say Masses, make them
Presents, or enter into their Fraternities and pay them for it. Nor do they
suffer by the Cheating Tricks of other Ecclesiastics as the rest of the
Subjects do, for one Raven never picks out the Eyes of another.

The Estates, Farms and Tenants of the Clergy, are moreover in a better
condition than those of others, because their Landlords are better able to
support them; so that their Houses and Lands are always in better order, and
stocked with the best Cattle of the Land.

The Clergy moreover are not liable to be forced to buy new Offices, nor to
lose the old ones, as other Subjects are, or to buy Letters of Nobility; nor
are they crushed with ordinary or extraordinary Taxes, nor with forced Loans to
the King, nor with Quartering of Soldiers, whereby so many thousands of other
People have been every day plagued; nor are they obliged to go to War, nor to
the Arrier-Ban; By which means it comes to pass that the Clergy, who are for
the most part burthensom and unprofitable to the Nation, nay, even to their own
pretended Church, are free from all the Calamities under which the useful
Subjects groan. I grant the Curates and Country Priests are so laden with Taxes
that they can hardly subsist, yet they fare a great deal better than the
greatest part of the Laity who formerly had Estates, which now they have lost
by the Taxes* and are charged with Debts and Children besides. Whereas though the
Priests be never so poor, yet still they have some Bread left them without any
toil for it, for they neither Labor nor Preach, nor are bound to do any Work
but what the dullest Peasant might do, if he could but read and had memory
enough to learn by long practice, how to handle the Musket; for the Mass-Trade
can be learnt as easily. They enjoy a ChurchLiving gratis, which they neither
merit for their Capacity nor Services, neither had they it left them by
Inheritance from their Ancestors, nor can they be seized upon for Debts. I
grant it is but reason they should live by their Trade, since they do that which
the people would have them to do, but as for the great numbers of rich
Monastries, Convents, and ^. which contribute little or nothing to the
Government; is it not ridiculous they should enjoy the half of all the Estates
in that Kingdom, and not pay the 20th part toward the support of the
Government of what the rest of the Nation pays? for, as I have said before,
those wealthy Clergymen pay almost nothing of what the Clergy pays in general,
all the burden falls upon the little Curates and Priests, who are left without
Protection. What (...) then is it that the diligent and laborious for^ of
people in a Nation should perish, and be destroyed like Victims, merely to
fatten the lazy and idle sort of people, and that so many Millions of useful
Subjects should be sacrificed to such sluggish Belly-Gods. We can never enough
bewail such Blindness as this, nor express all the Mischiefs which such
Injustice brings along with it.

This very thing alone is capable of ruining the Kingdom by degrees: If it be
objected that the Ecclesiastics, who possess one half of it, are not ruined; I
Answer, they are properly no more a part of the Kingdom, than a Cancer is which
devours the Body that it seizes on, or tha^ a Palsy which renders diverse of
the Members of the Body useless, can be a part of the same; and this is so much
the truer that the Clergy, as I have already said, acknowledge the Authority
of, and have sworn Obedience to another Sovereign Prince, who must of necessity
be a natural Enemy to France, because of the Usurpations that he has made, and
designs to make o^ that Kingdom, in which he cannot maintain his old, nor make
new Usurpations, without e^feebling the Kingdom from time to time
proportionably, as he sees its power, and the Authority of the Kings Increase,
and to this end he serves himself of his Ecclesiastics, who, under a Cloak of
Religion, have attained a mighty Credit, and are maintained on the Fat of the
Land, at the Expense of others, and that which is a wonderful thing, have their
Generals in great number, and Garrisons in all Ci^ies, consisting of diverse
Regiments of di^erent Liveries, that is to say, the different Orders of
Ecclesiastics, who under Spiritual Pretenses, enjoy the Temporal Estates of
the Kingdom, keep Princes and Subjects under the Popes Yoke, and so Constitute
one formidable Empire within another, Imperium in Imperio.

It is certain, though it cannot be denied that the Taxes in France are excessive,
that if the Clergy had contributed proportionably to their Revenues, with the
rest of the People, the Kingdom had been worth one half more than it is, except
the King had augmented the Taxes in proportion, and in that case he would have
almost doubled his Revenues. If the Clergy had paid the share they ought to
have paid of the Impositions, the Kingdom would have been much less harras'd
and ruined than it is; so that this Article reaches a great way throughout the
Kingdom.

That we may the better understand it, suppose that any Man has two Slaves or
two Carriage-Horses of equal strength in his possession, capable of working or
carrying considerable burdens, it is certain if he work them equally and load
neither of them above their ability, that both of them may hold out a long
time; but if he overcharge the one excessively, to ease the other, that which
is overloaded cannot hold out, but must languish by degrees and become unable
either for Work or Carriage, except it be little or nothing, and does quickly
die. Suppose then that it does not hold out above half the time that it might
have done, had it been treated as the other, or that it does not work half so
much as it might have done otherwise, there is one half lost, or if it hold not
out, or work not above a 4th part, that is three fourths loss. Thus it is with
the people of France, they are much less profitable to the King and State, than
they would be if the Clergy bore one h^lf of the charge of the Kingdom, as they
ought to do. I believe this Article may amount to forty or fifty Millions per
Annum; for besides the Taxes from whence they are exempted, they are not
subject, as I have already said, to any of the Vexations which are committed in
the Levying 'em, nor to quartering of Soldiers, nor are they pillaged by Civil
Officers and Farmers general and their Underlings, but on the contrary they
pillage them.

Article XV* relates to their Practice and Morals, I mean those of the Clergy;
this occasions an infinite number of Crimes which are committed without
Scruple; nay, they think they merit Heaven by the Commission of them, for they
Act them by a Principle of Conscience.

The Mischiefs which they have committed on the Account of their pretended
Religion are to be ascribed to their Morals: They have Consecrated and
Canonized Perfidiousness, Cruelty, Murder, the Ravishing of Matrons and
Virgins, and the Stealing of Children and Estates. It is not easy to compute
this loss in Money, but all people of Sense must needs perceive that this does
ruin or very much incommode Trade, Arts, Manufactures, Navigation, and all sort
of Handy-labour, for the Persecutors as well as the Persecuted suffer
incredibly thereby; without mentioning the value of the Men and Women, whom
they Massacre and Kill in a hundr'd manners, either all at once or gradually.
This does moreover occasion a general and incredible Corruption in the whole
Nation, for people perceiving that the Crimes committed on the account of
Religion, which of all things in the World ought to be the most Sacred, are not
punished, but applauded and rewarded by the Clergy, or at their Suggestion, by
those who govern them, they readily conclude, that if it be lawful to Commit
such things for the good of the Church, it is more lawful to Commit them for
other ends.

By this means the people become desperately wicked at the heart, and if they
were not afraid of Secular Justice, would become a mere Society of Thieves and
Robbers. That we may the better understand this, let us suppose that the Civil
Magistrate should approve Crimes in the same manner, promise Heaven to the
Criminals, and reward them also in this life, as the Clergy have compensated
those who were the most Zealous in committing all sorts of Cruelties and
Indignities against the Protestants; I say, if the Civil Government should thus
countenance the Destruction of Honest and Substantial Men, all humane Society
must be forthwith dissolved and unable to subsist. Or otherwise, let us suppose
that a multitude of Villains should prevail over Mankind, and commit all
imaginable crimes out of a principle of Conscience, in order to oblige Men to
say that they believe an Onion, a Tree, a Stone or an Horse are adorable, and
deserve the Worship, which the Papists call Dulia and Latria, as well as God,
and force them in effect to Invoke and Adore those Creatures; and that this
numerous multitude of Villains should call themselves Infallible at the same
time, and by all sorts of Cruelty and Torture, force people to acknowledge them
as such, and that none durst oppose them on pain of losing their Liberty,
Estate, Honor and Life, what unspeakable disorders would this occasion in a
State? For honest Men who would not be guilty of such unbecoming and unmanly
practices should be outragiously persecuted, put to death by their Orders, and
the multitude would think themselves obliged to take party with those Villains,
to avoid their own Ruin, and for fear of becoming suspected to those Wretches,
become as wicked themselves.

But the Divine Providence has not permitted humane Justice to be depraved to
that height; as is the Religion of the Church of Rome, which is abundantly more
wicked than the most wicked of Men; and herein it is directly opposite to other
Religions, which though they be wicked in themselves, do nevertheless teach
better Morals than those of the people that profess them; whereas on the
contrary, the Laics of ^he Church of Rome are more honest and less Villainous
than their Religion.

I think it proper also to observe in this place, that setting aside the
Interest of that which they call their Religion and their Church, which relates
wholly and finally to the Profit or Ambition of the Ecclesiastics; the Clergy
of the Church of Rome considered, as to their Civil Life, are not much wickeder
than their Laymen, as I have already said, which proves that the Devil Reigns
principally in that Church, in regard of the Legislative Authority of Popery,
as it relates to the Affairs and Interest of their Religion and Church, that is
to say of the Pope and his Guard of Pensioners or Catchpoles. This excepted, I
have known many honest enough Men of their Clergy, nay, even of the Jesuits,
whose conduct as to Civil Life, was near the matter as good externally as those
of their honest Laics. And there are diverse Persons who assure me, that how
abominable soever the Court of Rome may be in general, as their Principles and
Maxims have been for several Ages, yet there are Prelates, nay, even Cardinals
among them, who have very good Moral Qualities, and are persons of Merit.

Article XVI. relates to that Spirit of Despotical Government, with which the
Church of Rome inspires Princes in regard of their Subjects. This is it that
has produced the Severity of the Government of France, which has so much
contributed to the Desolation of that fine Kingdom. The Jesuits especially do
infuse it in Princes, who are ruled by them not only in matters of Religion,
but likewise in Affairs of Political Government, by advising them to make use
of the most Absolute Authority, because that how much the more the Princes whom
they govern, are Authorized and Feared of their Subjects, so much the more are
the Jesuits their Tutors Authorized and Dreaded also. France smarts at present
under the Effects of this; and England has but lately escaped the like danger.
That Spirit of Tyranny which makes up a great part of the Essence of Popery, is
yet more peculiar to the Society of the Jesuits, than to any other in Popery,
and it is known that the Principles of their Order, as they call it, do give
their General an Absolute and Unlimited Power, to Command and to do what he
lists, wherein they are to render him a Blindfold Obedience. It Is also known
that they look on the Popes pretended Monarchy, over the Universal Church and
World, to be the most perfect Pattern of Government, in assuming to himself the
Authority to destroy all Nations and Persons in Soul and Body, that oppose his
temporal Interest.

The Church of Rome reaps great advantage from this Despotical Power of the
Princes of her Communion, for those Princes being governed by their Confessors,
who are governed by Rome, the more Authority those Princes have the more the
Pope has over all the Kingdom, and then this great Authority of the Princes is
employed to oppress those they call Heretics, both within and without their
Dominions, and to purchase more Slaves to the Pope; or otherwise, they engage
them in War for humbling some Popish State, that the Court of Rome would have
brought low, and many times with a design to ruin that very Prince, whom they
so engage in War. For it is highly the Interest of the Court of Rome, that
their Neighboring Nations be kept poor, because that Spirit of Bondage,
Slavery and Ignorance, which is so useful and agreeable to the Religion which
they impose, is not consistent with the Liberty of a rich people, and the Popes
are constantly afraid that if the Dominions of those States and Princes that
are subject to him, be very populous and rich, they will at sometime or other
shake off their Yoke.

This is it they had in view by inspiring the French King with a design to ruin
his Protestant Subjects, so manifestly contrary to the true Interests of France
and the Kings Honor. That same was the reason of their engaging him in a War
against so many Potentates all at once, to the end they might weaken him, and
prevent his setting his thoughts upon Enterprises a thousand times more great,
glorious, and profitable, such as that of delivering his own Kingdom from the
Slavery of the Pope, and so many foolish Superstitions of Popery, of which the
honest Papists themselves are ashamed, and also that they might prevent his
pushing on his Conquests on the side of Italy, where he might have made War
with much more success and advantage, than against so many powerful States, and
strong Towns as he had to rencounter elsewhere.

Article XVII. relates to the Incontinence and Whordom of the Romish Clergy,
which is a large Field, and much might be said upon it, but many Authors have
enlarged on this Head already. It Is known to every Body by Experience, that the
Celibacy of that wretched Clergy is the source of an Universal and Loathsome
Impurity among them, and that the least Crimes committed by those of that
Order, are Fornications and Adulteries. It Is well enough known that their
Divines teach, that Sins against Nature of every sort, don't render an
Ecclesiastic Irregular, but Marriage does, and that their Casuists do
continually cram their Books with Extenuations of those Crimes, and add more
and more Fuel to the impure Flames, by their obscene Questions, and the
Niceties and Subtleties they have found out to advance and increase those
impure pleasures.

It is also known that the Pope Authorizes Public Stews, and Protects them in
order to draw a considerable Revenue from them; but it is not so universally
known, that to advance the Reputation of that Crime, which indeed is not
accounted any by the Court of Rome, the Popes will not suffer any Women to
prostitute themselves, unless they be Christians, and therefore by order of his
Holiness, Jewish, Pagan and Mohammedan Women, who have a mind to set up that
Trade at Rome, must first be Baptized. This makes it the more relishing to
Antichrist to think that Jesus Christ is thereby the more offended. But seeing
the Church o^ Rome is already branded in the Holy Scriptures, with the Name of
Sodom and the Mother of Harlots and of the Abominations of the Earth; both upon
the account of her Corru^tion, and because of her Idolatries, Here^ies and
Blasphemies, we have no reason to doubt that she is so, and therefore I shall
not insist upon this as a Vice which is so much favored and nourished by that
Church, but only in relation to the infinite number of Mischiefs which it
occasions in humane Society.

It many times happens that the Popish Princes are no better in this respect
than the Clergy that has corrupted them, or don't teach 'em their duty in this
matter; so that being wholly given up to Unchastity themselves, the Subordinate
Magistrates and Officers are corrupted by their Example, and consequently take
no care to suppress that Vice, which ruins and lays wast Nations, and fills
them with all sorts of Crimes, for experience teaches us that this one Crime
draws all others after it; and Mankind perceiving that Princes and Magistrates
neglect to punish this Vice (which they ought to do with all manner of rigor,
for the good of Society, though there were neither an Heaven nor an Hell) come
insensibly to be of opinion that it is only a Peccadillo.

But if they considered the Consequences of it only with reference to the good
of Society, and to the innumerable Mischiefs which it occasions, they ought to
look upon it as a very great Crime, and by consequence that it must provoke God
highly, who is the preserver of Society, though it were not so expressly forbid in
his Word, which excludes such persons from the Kingdom of Heaven.

For it occasions an infinite number of Murders of Men and Children,
Miscarriages and Poisonings; it destroys a great number by nasty distempers, as
well among Adult persons as among Infants, of which a great number die or are
lame during their lives, by the infection of their Fathers, Mothers or Nurses,
or else live in misery and are incapable of serving the Public; it shortens
the Lives of one and the other, enfeebles the Wit, destroys Courage, makes People
renounce Honor and Probity, and renders those who are addicted thereunto
incapable of undertaking or performing any thing glorious or profitable for the
Public Welfare: It ruins Families; and Fathers and Mothers who are addicted
to this Crime, neglect the Education of their Children, who for the most part
too, are born feeble and infirm, and generally become prof^igate like their
Parents; It generally debauches all sorts of people from their Work and
Employments; is always accompanied with Idleness, Laziness, great loss of Time,
Luxury, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Perjury, False Evidence, Pilfering, Robbery,
Tricking, Cheating, Cozening, Breaking, Blasphemy, Impiety and Irreligion; and
by consequence occasions the abandoning of True Religion and the embracing of a
False One. And to support themselves in this Vice, Men become Coiners and
Clippers, Highway-men, Pirates, Forgers and Knights of the Post. This practice
brings many to the Gallows, occasions some to make away themselves, their
Conscience and the bad Condition of their Affairs, throwing them into despair;
Children, that they may have wherewith to maintain themselves in this Vice, rob
their Parents, as do Servants and Apprentices their Masters. It wholly corrupts
the Minds of those that belong to the Courts of Justice, Whordom bereaves them
of all Probity, makes them Unjust and Trickish, or at least occasions them to
suck the Blood of their Clients by prolonging their Suits. This Vice occasions
the Superior Officers of an Army to rob their Subalterns and Soldiers, and
many times the Government. It has the like influence upon those that are
employed in any other Public Post; so that those who are addicted to this Vice
do always abundance of Mischief, and but little good.

It hinders Marriage, because for want of Discipline, Men can with impunity
find debauched Women and Girls in great numbers for their purpose, whom they
quit at pleasure and take others, without any Trouble, Servitude or Dependence,
and this begets in them a general Contempt of the Sex; so that they think them
all alike and worth nothing, judging none of them worthy to be their Wives but
only their Concubines. On the other hand those loose Women are afraid of being
subject to or depending on an Husband, because either he would be jealous if
they kept Company with others, or should not be able to satisfy their brutish
Appetites; So that this Vice is altogether destructive to Mankind, it ruins
those that are addicted unto it, and prevents the Birth of others in their
stead.

This Vice does moreover make Men and Women Liars and Dissemblers, Children
Disobedient to their Fathers and Mothers, and without any Natural Affection to
them, because having naught else in their eye, but their impure pleasures, they
conceive no other ways of their Parents, and think that they brought them into
the World, just as a brutish Animal does its Young, in a manner (...) their
will, having no other design bu^ ^o assuage their brutish Lusts, and beget
them, as it were, only by accident, and that they are no otherwise obliged to
them ^or their being then so.

This Vice does likewise render Men Cruel and Unnatural to on^ another, as also
to Beasts, which they look upon (...) as a little matter formed by chance. I^ a
^rd, I don't believe there is any Vice which corrupts the Heart to the same
d^gree that this does, both in regard of their Duty toward God (...) ^wards
Men, yea, and toward themselves, (...) they accustom themselves by the
^requent ^deas of Vice and by a Judicial Blindn^ss, which always attends it, to
regard every thing in a Carnal and Corrupt manner.

It is true, that those desires are many times violent in Youth, both because
of the boiling of the Blood at that Age, and because their Experience and
Reason are but feeble. But it must also be owned, that it is not so much the
temper of the Body and the Heat of Youth, which occasions that disorder, as bad
Example, ill Education, and the filthy Discourse of Mankind, who are for the
most part infected with this Vice; so that we see in some Nations even the
Public Stages, and all the Public Shows poisoned and pestered with all sorts
of Obscenity, without any censure by the Magistrates.

The very Pagans were sensible of the danger of bad Example to Children, when
they said, Maxima debetur puero Reverentia: i. e. We ought to have a very great
respect for young ones, and neither do nor say unhandsom things before them;
and the Public Stage amongst them was not poisoned with Impurity as it is now a
days. But in this Age few Fathers or Mothers or Magistrates take care of that,
they act and speak themselves before their young ones and all people, all that
their wicked Habits suggest to them. Servants are also drowned in those Vices,
and remain Ignorant, and without Instruction, either from the Church or
Magistrate; so that they act and speak a thousand profane things with one
another, b^re Children, which makes a deep Impression upon the Mind of young
ones, which is so much the more dangerous, that na^urally all Mankind is too
much addicted to this Vice; so that now a days we many times see young Girls of
8 or 10 years of Age, and sometimes those of Quality too, that know a thousand
filthy things, and by that time they arrive to the Age of 14 or 15, they
renounce all Subjection to their Fathers and Mothers, and Prostitute and Marry
themselves to Serving-men or Idle Fellows, who at last despise and abuse them;
the Consequence of which is many times Despair, and this occasions their making
away with themselves, after one sort or other, and thus their Families are
every way dishonored.

This Vice does also beget a general Contempt among Men for one another,
because it renders Marriage Vile and Dishonorable in their Eyes, though it be
the source of Mankind, Hallowed and Instituted by God himself, and therefore
ought to be accounted Sacred by all Men, for that very reason. It does as much
as can be to frustrate the End which God proposed by the Formation and
distinction of two Sexes, viz. the Propagation and Multiplication of Mankind by
means of Marriage, and therefore he did not give two Wives to Adam nor two
Husbands to Eve.

Those who are addicted to this Vice have no regard for one another, but only
with respect to their impure Inclinations, and if they don't think them as bad
as themselves, they do all they can to make them so, and to corrupt them by all
Methods, either directly by themselves or indirectly by others; hence it comes
to pass, that we see every day so many handsome Women of good natural parts, and
many times of good Families, thus seduced and drawn away, which is a horrid
Mischief, for which those who have any remainder of Conscience left, cannot but
grieve. In the esteem of those Debauchees, I say, (who as soon as they immerse
'emselves in those Villainies, lose all Sense of Religion, and of the Excellency
of Man and the Nobility of his Extraction) Mankind is valued but little above
Dogs and Swine, which they see Engender much in the same manner as they do
themselves, that is to say indifferently, with all of their Species that they
meet, according to their brutal Appetites, without reason or consideration,
without any regard to God, the Good of Society, or the Honor and Dignity of
Man; so that they corrupt themselves in what they know naturally, as Bruit
Beasts, as the Holy Scriptures express it.

Hence it is, that in Society there is so little Charity, Friendship and
Respect for one another, a debauched Man looks upon all Women to be tained with
this Vice. Women commonly show less disrespect for debauched Men, than Men show
for Lewd Women; yet at the same time, they would have more esteem for those
that they believe to be free from that Vice, which renders those that are
tainted with it Contemptible, even to persons that are most Vicious themselves,
though they make use of them for asswaging their brutish Lust; and hence it comes
that they do readily call all Women Whores and Bitches, and Children Sons of
Whores or Young Dogs, which occasions many Quarrels, Lawsuits, and Insolences,
yea, sometimes Murders.

It is not to be expressed what prejudice this Vice does to Commerce, in those
Countries which lie Commodiously for Traffic by Sea, and therefore are obliged
to take more care therein than others, because Plenty produces, nourishes and
entertains this Vice; if the Magistrates be not persons of Honor, love the
Public Welfare, and keep good Discipline; and the Consequences of it are more
mischievous in such Countries than elsewhere; from this it was that Plato said,
Mare improbitatis Magister, the Sea teaches Wickedness; and hence also it was
that the Poets feigned that Venus was bred of the Froth of the Sea; and that a
Latin Poet expressed it thus, Hispanae Navis Magister, dedecorum pretiosus
Empt^r, implying, that Masters of Ships spare no cost to debauch Women. There
is nothing more contrary to the growth of a State, either in number of Men or
Riches, than to suffer Whordom to go unpunished.

It troubles me to think that amongst so many able Men who have treated of
Commerce, and of what is contrary to it, none of them have observed that this
Vice is one of the chief Obstacles to the Prosperity of a Nation. I know a
State, to which I wish well from the bottom of my heart, to which it occasions
the loss of diverse Millions per Annum, which I could ea^ily demonstrate, and
am very certain that if they would give necessary Orders in good earnest, for
preventing it, which would not be so difficult to do neither, as is generally
believed, at least for the greatest part, there would be abundance of more
people than there are, and Trade, Arts, Manufacture and Agriculture would
thrive there a great deal better than they do; Men, Women and Children would be
abundantly more healthsul, and fewer of them would in comparison die of
Consumptions.

This Vice must be abundantly greater in Popish than Protestant Countries,
because the Popish Clergy favor it by their Principles, Auricular Confession,
their own Example, and that of the Court of Rom^, as also by the easiness of
Absolution in Confessing themselves to a Priest, who is himself immersed in
such Impurities, or by giving him Money, a good Dinner, or hireing him to say
Masses, etc. The Unchastity of all their Clergy, Male and Female, caused by
their Celibacy and Execrable Morals, as well as by the Example of the chiefest
Prelates at Rome, is a very great prejudice to Popish Kingdoms, which it fills
with Adulteries, Fornication, Incests and Crimes yet more Execrable, yea with
Millions of open and hidden Crimes, as Abortions, Murders and such like, for
the Clergy who are guilty of those Vices, make no scruple so they can but
conceal them, to murder both the Mothers and Children.

As to Protestant States, it is well enough known, that they are infected with
this Vice by the Neighborhood of the Popish ones, and it is confidently
asserted, and not without ground, that in the two last Reigns, all those sorts
of Disorders were favored in England, for the better and more easy
Establishment of Popery.

Article XVIII. relates to the Drunkenness of the Popish Clergy, which as well
as their Incontinence is chargeable upon the Morals of their Church; for the
greatest part of the Clergymen except some Bishops and Curates in the biggest
Towns, and some particular Men in Monastries, are Drunkards, and by their
Example the Common People do mostly become so.

This Vice does likewise occasion abundance of Mischief, though much less than
the other, as I could here demonstrate, contrary to the opinion of some Men, if
it were proper. The truth of this appears by this one thing, viz. that the
Popish Clergy are unchaste by Principle, and in a manner of necessity, because
Marriage is forbid to them, that so they may have less dependence upon the
State, and may be more profitable, and apply themselves with the greater
Application to the Interests of the Pope, which they call the Church. And
besides, this Libertinage which pleases them infinitely, makes them love the
Pope and his Religion, which grants them so great Privileges, whereof others
are deprived, viz. that they may enjoy Women without any trouble, as it is said
to be practiced by the Republic of Venice, who to assure themselves of the
Fidelity of their Clergy, grant them a greater Liberty in this matter, than is
allowed in other parts of Italy.

Now one may easily Judge what disorders this Example of the Libertinage of the
Clergy must necessarily produce in Society, and what Ravage they make of the
Women's Chastity, by their Auricular Confession and Absolution, and what
influence those things have upon the Women and Maids, who are by this means
delivered into their hands as a prey. Another Reason which proves that
Fornication is incomparably more mischievous in a Country, than Drunkenness; is
this, that it is a Crime common to both Sexes; So that it is hard to say, which
of the two is most addicted to it, whereas Drunkenness is more particularly the
Vice of Men. Another reason is this, that Whordom being contrary to
Propagation, as I have said already, and corrupting all the Sources of
Generation in a particular manner, and ruining the Bodies of Men, Women and
Children, as much and more than Drunkenness ruins those of Men, It is certain
that it is abundantly more pernicious than the other. I could bring 30 more
reasons to prove this, if the place were proper.

This last Article concerning their Drunkenness, makes it evident that this
Crime does great prejudi^e to a Country, if it were no more but by the loss of
the Wine, Brandy, Cider, etc. which they consume without necessity. But
besides, this Vice ruins abundance of Families, shortens the Days of abundance
of Men as well as the other, though in lesser number, occasions the loss of a
great deal of time, with many Quarrels and Murders, and makes people brutish
and dull as well as Fornication.

But we will lay aside those two last Articles, if the Reader pleases, and
count them as nothing (though the prejudice they do, goes farther than can be
imagined) for it is clear enough that the others which I have proposed already,
occasion above two hundred Millions loss per Annum, throughout the Kingdom of
France, and they can be ascribed to nothing else but Popery, whereas they may
perhaps cavil at the two last, and say that the Protestants are incontinent and
likewise drunken as well as the Papists.

If it be well adverted to, it will be found that four of the 18 Articles, that
I have proposed, do alone amount to above 200 Millions of Livres per Annum,
viz. those of their Holydays, the Estates of the Church that are in Mainmort,
Lent and other Fast-days, and the few Taxes that the French Clergy pays in
comparison of the rest of the people.

Popery occasions the same Mischiefs proportionably in all other Popish
Countries, and in some more, as Spain and Portugal, which it has greatly
dispeopled, by the Incontinence, and Celibacy of their Clergy, and the
Consequences of these Disorders, by the great number of their Ecclesiastics,
the Spirit of Persecution and the Perfidiousness of Popery, in the Expulsion of
the Moors and Jews, and by their Inquisition, etc.

But as Italy is nearest to the Court of Rome, she has thereby contracted
greater Vices also than other Nations. All Sins against Nature are in Vogue
there, and Poisoning, Cozenage, Imposture, and a certain Effeminacy and
Cowardliness which the Priests and Monks have introduced there, with all Vices
imaginable; Whence it comes to pass that there is not the least spark of the
Courage, Greatness of Soul, and Generosity of the Ancient Romans, to be seen,
and that there is no Country more easy to be conquered by a powerful Neighbor
than that.

France is also owing to Popery and the Court of Rome, for their having
infected her in some measure, with the Habits of diverse of those unnatural
Crimes, which are so common in Italy, that the Spaniards say of the Italians
that are infected therewith, In Italia todos; and of those Crimes the Religious
Convents and Monastries, the Monks, Jesuits and their Scholars, with some
great Men in France, are accused.

It is also well enough known, that the Art of poisoning was brought into
France, from Italy by the Ecclesiastics.

The Maltotes, or the great Impositions, is another Calamity introduced upon
France by its Communion with the Court of Rome. The Popes that are the greatest
Tyrants of the World, furnished Examples of it upon their own Subjects in
Italy, and the Romish Religion and the Confessors of Princes, and of their
Ministers have furnished them with Lessons of the same.

Equivocations, Perfidiousness in all Treaties, Ambig^ous Expressions in all
Transactions and Public Acts, have been Consecrated by the Example of Popish
Councils, especially that of Trent, which formed a great number of Decrees,
capable of diverse contrary Senses, which have occasioned Divisions among
diverse Sects of their Monks, and many of their Divines; whereof that
Infallible Tribunal, as they call it, of the Pope and his Cardinals, would
never determine the Sense, for fear of disobliging some one of the Parties,
though they do it every day in the most Insolent and Impudent manner, in regard
to the Word of God, to which they attribute the most absurd and extravagant
Sense imaginable, with a surprising Impiety.

All Europe in general is obliged to the Court of Rome, for the false and
cursed Politics that Reigns almost in all its Courts, and has banished
thence, Probi^y, Sincerity, upright Intentions, Fidelity, Justice, Truth,
Generosity; so that they are n^w filled with Cozenage, Deceit and E^eminacy.

The Court of Rome is moreover become a grand Pattern and Teacher of Irreligion
and Prophanity, now for several Ages.

It is from the Popes that Roman Catholic Princes have learned to profane the
Christian Religion, and to corrupt People daily, by offers of temporal Rewards,
to abjure the Religion of Jesus Christ to follow theirs, of which we see sad
Examples every day, as to the Church of Rome, and even of some Sovereign
Princes.

We have reason to say when we consider all those things well, that the Papacy
or the Pope, deserves abundantly better the Title of Infidel, or Hereditary
Enemy of Christendom than the Turk, though ^e assumes to himself the Name of the
Common Father of Christendom.

If any Opiniater will still take upon him to deny that Popery does not
occasion the loss of 200 Millions per Annum, through the Kingdom of France, I
am satisfied that he wont be accounted any great Master of Reason, by such
Judicious Persons as have read my Arguments. But I say however, that though it
should not amount to above one half or one third of that Sum, it would be an
Argument cogent enough for the abolishing it, and sufficient proof* of the
Falsehood of that Pretended Religion.

Amongst those direful Effects which Popery occasions perpetually and
necessarily in the Dominions that are thereunto Subject, I have not taken any
notice of those which may be called Passing and Accidental, though they have
also a determinate Cause, and proceed from the same Original, viz. the first
Principles of Popery, which we may call the Soul of it, and constitute the
essential Form of the Church of Rome, viz. Ambition, Pride and Avarice; which
have made, and do make from time to time, an horrible Ravage in Christian
Countries, nay, through the whole World. I am certain, that if we should reckon
up those accidental Mischiefs, which Popery occasions from time to time in
France, the Sum would be much ^bove 200 Millions per Annum. How many Unjust
Wars has it kindled in France, both Intestine and Foreign? History tells us,
that the Ambition of the Popes was the cause of the Mahometans subduing part of
Europe, and that the Empire of the East, of Christian became Mohammedan; The
Ambition of the Popes has also torn in pieces the Empire of the West, and
spoiled its Emperors of part of their Dominions, even of Rome it self, and
made them their Vassals and Slaves in a manner, so as to tread upon them in
person sometimes with Impunity; so that by the Ambition of the Roman Clergy and
their Popes, the Empire is no other than a mere Shadow of what it formerly was.

It is very well known that by the perfidiousness of the Pope, the Turks
rendered themselves Masters of Hungary, the Court of Rome having obliged the
unhappy King Uladislaus to violate his Faith and break the Treaty he had made
with them, which Violation was followed by a Total Defeat of that King, at the
Battle of Varn^ and the loss of the Kingdom, which the Infidels seized upon, as
may be seen by the following Distich, wherein that ^nfortunate King is made to
complain that the Pope and his Clergy had ruined him by their perfidious
Counsel*

Me nisi Pontifices jussissent rumpere faedus,
Non ferret Scythicum Pannonis or a jugum.
May be thus Englished,

By Popes command had I my League never broke,
Pannonia never had felt the Scythian Yoke.
For above 1000 years the Popes and their Clergy, have been constantly aspiring
to the Universal Monarchy, and have made it their constant business to sow
Divisions betwixt Christian Princes and their Subjects, and to kindle War
amongst those Princes, to weaken them by one another, that so they might bring
them all under their Yoke.

By this method they make themselves Arbitrators and Masters of their
differences, and always cast the Balance on the side of their own Interest,
without any regard to Honor or Justice, and that not by Armies or open Force,
but by the Intrigues of Confessors, Monks and Prostitutes, or as the Scripture
represents it by their Cups, Draughts and Witchcrasts, as becomes the great
Prostitute that has made the Kings and the Princes of the Earth drunk with the
Wine of her Fornication.

They still foment now as formerly, and without ceasing, Divisions and Factions
in all the Countries of Europe, yea, even amongst Protestants, by their secret
Emissaries whom they employ in great numbers in order to bring them gradually
under their Yoke, one way or other, by a Million of Crimes. A famous Spanish
Politician Las Empres^ Politicas de Savedra.
who knew their Game well enough, said that there is not so much as a Sword
drawn, no^ a Pike carried in Christendom, that has not been sharpened in the
Forge of Rome. No se Saca espada, non se arbola pica, cuyo el hierro no
estuviere aguzado en la fraga de Roma. They had the greatest share in the War
newly concluded, and made their profit on it, though the simple Vulgar are apt to
think they have no hand in it.

No Body is Ignorant of the cunning Invention, made use of by the Popes
formerly, to bring part of Asia under their Yoke, without putting themselves to
any charge, and at the same time to increase their own Authority and Conquests
in Europe, at the expense of the Christian Princes, whom they dispoil'd. Their
way was to persuade those poor innocent Princes to go in Person to Asia, with
great Fleets and Navies, to chase the Mahometans from that Country, for which
end the Popes called it the Holy Land; as if that Land had been holier than
another, after having put the Lord Jesus Christ to death. And while those
Princes were in that Country, with numerous Armies of their Subjects, by which
they dispeopled their own Dominions, the Popes endeavored to make themselves
Masters of the same, or at least sucked their Subjects to the bone, and drained
out all the Riches of their Countries by means of their Clergy. France and
England suffered very much by this means, and we have no reason to doubt but
they would have been much more rich and populous, had it not been for that.

All the World knows that the Romish Clergy or Church, has destroyed or caused
to be destroyed by their Orders, more people under pretense of Religion, than
all the Heathen Emperors, and more than all the Nations of the habitable
World, have done upon that account since the Creation of the World. France and
England can testify this from sad Experience.

It Is well enough known, that their Councils, that is to say the Luminaries of
Popery, the most enlightened, and sincere part of the Church of Rome (a mark of
the Absolute Reprobation of that Church, for several Ages.) It Is well enough
known, I say, that those Councils have established it as a Maxim or Rule for
several Ages past, that they are not obliged to keep Faith with Heretics, and
that Princes are obliged on pain of eternal Damnation and the loss of their
Dominions to destroy them. Whence it comes to pass, that not only all the
Murders, Robberies, Perjuries, Rapes, and all Crimes in general are permitted,
but commanded against all those Christians who oppose themselves never so
little, to the Interests, Tyranny, or Ambition of the Pope and Clergy; which
Sentence does a fortiori, include also Jews, Pagans and Mahometans, when the
Church of Rome shall think meet, seeing it is clear that they ought not to have
any more favor showed them than those they call Heretics. From those
Principles have proceeded so many Massacres, Persecutions, Violations of Faith,
Religious Wars, Croisades and Leagues to extirpate those who were called
Heretics. Hence also proceeded many Assassinations of Princes, and Attempts
upon their Lives, which France has often had experience of; hence came the
Civil Wars in England and Ireland, the burning of Towns, and Conspiracies
against the State. One of the Kings of France was formerly whipped at Rome, in
the Person of his Ambassador, by the Popes Order, which is the highest Ignominy
that can be done to a Nation or Prince. And if we have not fresh and daily
Instances from their Church, of such decrees as those of the Councils of
Constance and Lat^ran, or such remarkable demonstrations of their Pride and
Cruelty; it is not because they have changed their Principles, but because there
is no opportunity offers to do it with safety, and for the advantage of the
Pope. It is not want of good will; The Habit remains still, though the Acts are
not continually exerted. A Shoemaker, says Horace, though he lays aside all the
Tools of his Art, and shuts up his Shop, is a Shoemaker still.

-- Alfenus vafer, omni
Abjecto instrumento Artis, clausaque tabern^
Suitor erat, etc.
We see what that Church has occasioned to be done lately, and does yet at
present in France against the Protestants, and what they would have done in
England; and for their Inquisition, it continues still the same.

It may be clearly seen, by all those proofs which we have produced of the
Natural and Necessary Opposition there is betwixt the Church and Religion of
Rome, and the Happiness and Prosperity of Princes, States and People, that the
said Church and its Religion is false to the highest degree, there never having
been any Religion in the World so contrary to the good of Mankind. It has no
remainders of old Christianity, but just so much as is necessary to constitute
the Form of Antichristianism, by way of Excellence, that is to say the most
perfect Enmity against Jesus Christ, by ascribing to him all sorts of Idolatry
and Impiety, making him the Author of their Tyranny and Cruelty, and feigning
an adherence to him, like Judas, in order to betray him, and to dishonor him
the more, as an Adulterous Woman dishonours her Husband, while at the same time
they persecute his Followers with the height of Rage, and fill the Universe
with Blood and Confusion, and trample under foot, ruin and devour Princes and
their Subjects, and all in the name of Jesus Christ.

The True Religion being come from God, who is the Creator and Preserver of Men
and Society, cannot tend to the Ruin and Destruction of States, except we
establish with the Manichees two eternal Principles, one good and the other
evil, which is so gross that it deserves no Con^utation.

If the Romish Religion be good, with all those Mischiefs and Disorders which
we have seen, it produces naturally and necessarily in all Countries where it
obtains, God who is all Just, all Holy and Holiness it self, the Preserver of
Nations, and Mankind, and the Author of the Old and New Testament, can neither
be Just, Holy, Good, Wise, True, nor the Author and Preserver of Humane
Society, and the Old and New Testament cannot have proceeded from any other but
the wicked Spirit. Absit Blasphemia.

God must likewise, if the Religion of the Church of Rome be True, be contrary
to the Propagation of Mankind, which it appears to be one of the favorite
Designs of Providence. He must also, according to them, approve of Deceit and
Imposture, and Cozenage in the Ministers of his Religion, and in his Worship,
he must likewise love Injustice, Impiety, Perfidiousness, Tyranny, Laziness,
Idleness, Cruelty, Incontinence, Robbery, Profanity, Perjury, Hypocrisy, Murder
and Calumny, which are so essential to the Popish Religion and the Roman Clergy.

I leave it to Divines to treat of the Idolatry, Heresy, Superstitions, etc.
of this pretended Church, which agree so well, and are so very becoming to all
the rest which we have seen, and which cannot indeed be otherwise, and are the
natural Effects of the Ambition of those Mischievous Creatures, as well as the
rest; for as Saint Chrysostom says well* (...) i. e. that Ambition or a desire
of Dominion, is the Mother of Heresies; and therefore St. Paul reckons Heresy
amongst the Works of the Flesh. For the Popes not being able to establish their
Authority in the World, but by introducing those Practices into the Church, and
the Disorders, of which we have spoke before, that ruin all the Popish
Nations, have been obliged entirely to corrupt the Morals and Doctrine thereof*
and to suppress the Light of the Gospel* which would have discovered their
Exorbitanci^s and Iniquity to Mankind, and have inclined them to oppose their
Ambition. For this reason they favored all manner of Ignorance and Vice, that
they might the better extinguish amongst Men, all Fear and Knowledge of God,
and all Generosity. And seeing Men could not live without Religion good or bad,
they afterward hurried them headlong into all sorts of Idolatry and Impiety.

If they had not entirely corrupted and falsified the Christian Religion, and
People had known the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament, they would never
have submitted to Practices and Customs so contrary to the Public Good;
Princes and their Ministers would never have suffered a Religion to be
Established among them, which is so much contrary to their Rights, Arts,
Husbandry, Manufacture, Commerce, Propagation, good Morals, and the ^ublick
Peace of Nations.

Let us but read and consider the Old an^ New Testament, or only the Ten
Commandments of Gods Law, we shall find nothing commanded therein, but what is
Excellent and Worthy of God, and wonderfully suited not only to the Temporal
good and advantage of every Man in particular, but also to that of People and
Countries, and the whole World in general; So that if the great Wits of this
Age, who pretend to be Men of Parts, though they be indeed mere Fools, would
consider this sedately, they would be obliged to own, whether they would or
not, by comparing this with the Conduct of all the Politicians in the World,
and their Pretended Skill in the Government of their People, that there are no
other Rules of True Policy, for regulating of Morals and making every
particular Man as profitable as can be to Society, but those that the Law of
God and the Gospel furnish us with, and that every thing which does not agree
with that, and is not conformable thereunto, is nothing else but Error and
Destruction. I don't mean only the Political Laws of Moses, as they are called
to distinguish them from the Moral Law, under which the Commonwealth of Israel
became so flourishing, and was Peopled in such a manner, as seems Incredible to
those that read their History; but I mean also and chiefly the Moral Law, which
certainly contributed still more than the Political Laws of that People, though
but very ill observed, to make them so rich and powerful. I join also thereunto
at present, the Gospel which not only regulates our Actions, but also our
Thoughts and Words, and has given us a Model of Incomparable Charity, and
furnished us with new and powerful Motives to this Virtue, by revealing to us
clearly the saving Grace of God, that we may live all in general, Princes and
People, and every one in particular, Soberly, Justly and Religiously, which
comprehends all our Duty to God, our Neighbors and our selves, wherein if we
did acquit our selves, Men would not only be happy in the Life to come, but
also in this, and Nations would become incomparably more powerful, populous and
rich than they are; For Godliness has the promises of this Life, and that
which is to come: Which of it self might be enough to convince our Deists (many
of whom value themselves highly on the account of their sense and ability, and
think they are able to Govern Kingdoms) of the Divine Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, if there were no other proofs of it.

In that Divine Book alone are the true Rules of Policy to be found.

All the World agrees in this without thinking on it, when they say that
Honesty is the best Policy, that is to say, to observe the Law of God, and
cause it to be observed by others, which is no less essentially Necessary for
the good of the State than for Salvation. But ^he Church of Rome has
confounded all those Notions, as I have already said, and having governed the
World for a long time, has introduced a cursed sort of Politics into the
same, quite contrary to that which the Law of God prescribes, but suited indeed
to her ow^ Doctrine and Morals, by which after she has blinded the Eyes of
Princes and People, she leads them whither she pleases.

It is certain, that if Princes and Magistrates applied themselves, as they
ought, if it were no more but for their own Temporal Interest, and the good of
the State, to make the Laws of God to be observed* by punishing Delinquents
severely, and if the Church concurring with the Magistrates, did her best by
Doctrine, Example and Discipline, and if every particular Person would also do
their Du^y, they would see their Dominions, Provinces, Cities and Families
flourish otherwise than ever they did hitherto. If it were thus, no Body would
do to another what they would not have done to themselves: Every one would have
his own; Industry and Diligence would be much more in Vogue than it is;
Injustice which Reigns so much at present in Courts of Judicature and
elsewhere; Rapine, Robbery, Idleness; Imposture, Cozenage, and Deceit in
Matters of Religion, which have rendered the Popish Clergy so powerful by the
Ruin of the People; Bankrupts, Coiners, Murders, Knights of the Post, Lying,
Unfaithfulness, all of them so contrary to the Repose and Prosperity of
Countries, would be banished in a great measure; Cruelty and Perfidiousness so
essential to the Church of Rome, Incontinence which at this day makes such a
Ravage amongst Men, and is looked on as a mere trifle without Punishment or
Public Censure, tho* I make bold to say, it is the root of all other Crimes*
and occasions more Disorders at present than Murder and Robbery both, because
those are in some measure punished; Drunkenness, Unfaithfulness in Treaties,
and public and private Contracts; the Spirit of Tyranny in Princes toward
their Subjects, the Rebellion of Subjects against their Princes, the
Disobedience of Children to their Parents, etc. all of them so contrary to
Commerce, Propagation, and the Repose of People, should be exterminated for the
most part.

In a word, Vice being either banished or repressed by the method of this true
Policy, Virtue would take place, by which Nations should prosper at another
rate than they do, and Princes would be incomparably more Potent. In this case
also Men would be abundance more long-lived, healthful, and vigorous, Marriages
would become more numerous; by which together with the mildness of the
Government, the Industry and Diligence of all sorts of People, Countries would
become infinitely more populous.

Once more still, I will adventure to say that it is in the Holy Scriptures
alone, that those wise Politics are to be found, which are capable of
enriching a Nation and making it potent; So that the false Politicians of the
World have sought for it in vain elsewhere for so many Ages, and all of them
complain that they could never hitherto find it.

This does not hinder, but the Wisdom of God out of his profound and just
Judgment, suffers Tyrants sometimes to prosper in their wicked Designs, by
contrary Maxims, as may be seen by the example of the Popes, who making use of
the Credit that they had acquird in the Quality of Bishops of Rome, to domineer
over Sovereigns and their People, under pretense of Religion, have subjected
both the one and the other, by Millions of Crimes of all sorts. This is so far
from destroying what I have said, that it confirms the same, for if they*have
raised themselves by those wicked methods, they have done incredible Mischiefs
to Mankind; which is just the same as in every Country and City, there are
Villains who succeed in Robberies and Injustice, though they be looked upon
with horror, as the plagues of Society, who violate the Laws of God and the
State, and deserve to be totally rooted ^ut*

This is it which has obliged the Popes, in order to cover their Injustice, as
I have already said, to corrupt and change the Law of God, and to conceal the
Scriptures from the People, and after having established Morals contrary
thereunto, to over-turn the Doctrine of the Faith, that so there might be a
proportion betwixt the Maxims of their Government and their Opinions, and that
their Tyranny might not be discovered by the inequality betwixt them. This is
it that brought forth the Fine Doctrine of Transubstantiation, of the Sacrifice
of the Mass, the In^allibility of the Church, and many others.

For if they had not over-turn'd the Rights of God and Man in their Doctrine
and Worship, as well as in the Government and Discipline of the Church; and if
they had not extinguished all the Light of Revelation, as well as that of
Reason, the Light that should have remained in the Doctrine, would have
discovered their Tyranny and Injustice, and the intention they had to make
themselves Masters of the World, and bring the same under their subjection. So
likewise if their Ecclesiastical Government, their Maxims and Practice had been
conformable to the Scriptures and good Sense, and had contained nothing
contrary to good Order, and the Prosperity of People and Nations, and that
together with this, the Doctrine and Worship of their Church had been
extravagant and senseless, as they are at present, Men would have still
preserved one of their Eyes, and not have been altogether so blind, but must
have perceived the falsehood and injustice of the one or the other, that is to
say either of the Doctrine which the Popes had imposed upon them, or of their
Conduct in the Government of their Church, and so would either have demanded a
Reformation, or shook off their Yoke; so that it is visible that it was
absolutely necessary for the Interest of the Church of Rome, that their Morals
and also the External Government of their Church, and in one word, their whole
Tyrannical Economy and their Doctrines, should answer one another.

It is nothing but Ambition at the bottom which has occasioned all these
Disorders, and that also by degrees, for no one Man could form the project
thereof all at once, but during the many Ages that this Mystery of Iniquity has
been at work, the Court of Rome has improved all Occasions, and the
Circumstances of Time, Place and Persons.

All this is apparently come to pass very naturally, and by the little that we
know of the Corruption of Men's Hearts, we may perceive that those who are very
Ambitious are able to commit insensibly and by degrees, proportionably to the
Opposition they meet with, whether it be by the Established Laws or by Men,
millions of Crimes, and trample under Foot all Laws Humane and Divine.

We have all of us those Seeds of Injustice and Pride, and if God did not
restrain us by his Providence, but presented such opportunities unto us as he
has done to the Popes, to become Masters of the World, we should by degrees
become as wicked as they. Nemo repent fit turpissimus, No Man arrives to the
height of Wickedness but by degrees; and in this case Ambitious Persons would
reason with themselves, much after the same manner as he did formerly, who
said, Si violandum est jus, regnandi causa violandum est; If it be lawful to
break through Law in any case, it is lawful to do it for a Crown and a Scepter.

The Heart of Man is universally and at all times the same.

Let us suppose, that some Ambitious Prelate had Authority enough among the
Pro^estants to Form such Designs, as were those of the Bishops of Rome, to
raise themselves in the first place above other Bishops and Priests, and
afterward over Princes and People, they would go near to make use of the same
methods as the Popes and their Clergy did; and as they should receive
opposition from time to time from those that would endeavor to restrain and
tie them up to the Laws of God and Men if they and their Successors should
overcome those Oppositions, they would by degrees suppress the Holy Scripture,
over^throw all Morality, and introduce an Universal dissoluteness of Manners;
so that the Protestant or Christian Religion, without changing its Name, for
that to be sure they would not do, should become in the first place like that
of the Church of Rome, in Government and Discipline, and next in Doctrine and
Worship, that is to say, a perfect Brigandage or Robbery, and that Protes^ant
Pope should become a Tyrant over Protestant Princes and People, by calling
himself their Common Father, and should likewise become Master of the States,
Honor and Repose of their Subjects, without any hopes of Reformation, but by a
Miracle wrought by the Almighty.

They would also Establish an Inquisition, and infinitely multiply the number
of their Ecclesiastics, that is to say their Guard-men, and would neither
spare Perfidiousness nor Cruelty to accomplish their Designs, and to maintain
and augment their Authority. They would pretend to Infallibility as well as the
Pope, and claim as much Right as he to change the Law of God, and to make that
sin, which is no sin, and sin to be accounted Duty. They would pretend to all
power in Heaven and Earth, and would labor incessantly to divide Protestant
Princes amongst themselves, and with their Subjects, weaken them by all means,
that they might keep a curb in their Jaws, and hold them in dependence upon
themselves. They would raise wars for them without number, massacre those that
should oppose their Impieties and Ambition from time to time; nor would they be
wanting if they found it necessary to have Orders of Clergymen, resembling the
Monks and Jesuits, or worse than those if they could, under other Names, and
would likewise Assemble Councils, wherein they would Establish and Make
Decrees, like those of Constance, Lateran and Trent: Et totus Orbis
Protestantium miraretur se esse Antichristianum; so that the whole Protestant
World should wonder at its being become Antichristian.

So that while the Pope and the Romish Clergy, are possessed of a power of
Dominion and Rule, and that they will always be, unless God stir up some great
and poten^ Prince to bring that rascally Crew to themselves, as I hope he will;
but until that time they must always of necessity be cruel and perfidious by
their Principles and Maxims, and pretend to Infallibility in their Doctrine,
Worship and Moral^, because they have neither Titles nor Foundation for their
Usurpations, which are palpable and gross; for if they had, they could no more
be charged with Usurpations and Injustice, and if they were not Usurpers, they
would not maintain their own Rights nor Gods, as they impiously pretend, by
committing so many Crimes, and pretending to Infallibility, with so much
Impudence as they do, when they find no other way to color their Impieties*
There Is none but unjust and barbarous Usurpers, who can make use of those
pretenses as they do.

The most clear sighted Protestants ordinarily look upon the Church of Rome, in
regard of its Doctrine, as a Medly of Idolatries, Heresies, Superstitions*
Errors and Blasphemous Doctrines; and in regard of their Morals, as a
Composition of Perfidiousness and Infideliy, Cruelty, Impurity and Pride; and
they Judge that all those together constitute, and make up the es^ential Form
of that Church, and they are not deceived. But at the bottom it is Ambition
alone, as I have said, which has produced and maintains all those things, and
is the Soul of their Church. One proof of this is, that there is no Men who do
less believe their Doct^ines than the Men of Parts amongst themselves, who
govern all, but chiefly the Court of Rome. In their Civil Conversation among
other Men, they don't appear much worse than they, as has been said already;
and there is no room to doubt, but if the Pope and his Clergy could be assured
by the Orthodox Church, that in case they would embrace the pure Christian
Religion of the Protestants, they should have the same Dominion and Power over
the Kings, Princes and People of the Earth, and the same Revenues, Dignities
and Means to advance all those who adhere to them; there is no doubt, I say, but
they would prefer it, how wicked so ever they may be, because it is more
conformable to Scripture, Reason and the Natural Light of Conscience, which often
pinches them, notwithstanding their profound and inveterate Habits of Error and
Crimes.

I confess that it were impossible for their Tyranny and Authority to subsist
with that Religion, which is pure Christianity, and the only Religion becoming
the Excellence of Man, and therefore they were obliged to root it out of the
Church of Rome, that so they might reign in it. But they have at least so much
Equity, that Men of Sense among them who would persuade others to embrace their
Communion, don't demand that they should believe their Doctrines, which they
have no esteem of themselves, but only that they should go to their Church, and
for other things, permit them to believe as they please.

It must then be purely and simply Ambition, and a desire of Dominion, which
has ruined the Church of Rome or the Clergy, and which continues to ruin them
still; take but that Vice away from them* their Tyranny will cease, Christian
Morality would reassume its place, they would neither be Idolatrous,
Superstitious nor Heritical, Cruel nor Perfidious. Transubstantiation, and the
Infallibility of their Church, and all other monstrous Opinions would fall,
their Discipline, Observations, Customs and Usages so pernicious to the Wel^are
of People and Countries, should be abolished, and we should see Industry, Arts,
Manufactures, Commerce, Agriculture, Sciences flourish every where, and their
Clergy themselves would become Christians upon the matter, and honest Men.

Though there never was any Religion in the World more contrary to the Gospel
and Reason, than that of the Pope, in regard of Doctrine and Worship; yet I
will adventure to say, that it is still more detestable, in regard of the
Tyranny which is exercised therein by the Pope and his Clergy.

For the better understanding of this, I maintain that if it were possible
there were but two Religions in the World, one whose Doctrine, was well Founded
on Scripture and Reason, but the Morals Impious, and the Maxims of
Ecclesiastical Government Tyrannical, and tending to the Oppression and Ruin of
Princes and their Dominions. And that on the contrary, the Doctrines of the
other were Abominable, contrary to Scripture and good Sense, but its Moral
Practice Good, and its Ecclesiastical Government tending to the advantage of
Sovereigns and their People, to make Countries Flourishing, Rich and Populous,
and maintaining Peace and Tranquillity in them. There Is no Man of Sense, but
would confess the second Religion would deserve the Protection of the State
better than the first* So that if the Protestants should become Idolaters and
Heretics, and teach Transubstantiation, Purgatory, the Invocation of Saints,
Adoration of the half of one of the two Sacraments, and that of Statues and
Images, or such like Doctrines; their Morals and Maxims of Ecclesiastical
Government, remaining the same as they are at present, that is to say, allowing
to God, Princes and People all their Rights, as to what relates to Morals and
the Government of Church and State, their Religion should better deserve the
Protection of the State, than that of a Church, which should detest
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. and at the same time by their Maxims,
Observations and Tyranny fill the World with Desolation and Vice, and ruin
Princes and People, as the Roman Religion does.

So that it appears hence, that the Church and Religion of Rome, are yet more
abominable by their Tyranny and Morals, than by their Idolatries and Errors.
The Pope and his Clergy are more Antichristian by the Tyranny that they
Exercise over the Souls and Bodies, the Estates, Honor, Life and Repose of
Princes and People, than in regard of their Speculative Impieties and Worship.
But I confess, that the one cannot be without the other. Where there is such an
horrible Tyranny, Religion cannot long remain pure in Doctrine, and where the
Opinions are so monstrous, their Morality and Church Government must needs
become detestable and tend to the ruin of States.

I confess that in relation to God, it is equally impossible, according to
Scripture, for private Idolaters, and those that practice a Morality
destructive to Society, to be saved; So that in that respect the matter is
equal, but it is not so with reference to the State.

Experience teaches us that there are Idolaters who are Morally Honest, as to
Dealings betwixt Man and Man, and good Countrymen, who deserve the Protection
of Magistrates, and that there are ill Men amongst the Orthodox, who deserve to
be cut off, or chastised severely, as Murderers, Fornicators, Robbers, etc.

As to Sovereigns and all Magistrates, the good of the State is always
preferred to that of the Church, as Nature in order preceeds Grace, and the
Light of Reason that of Faith. For the Church cannot subsist without the State,
but the State can subsist well enough without the Church; hence it follows that
Disturbers of the Public Peace, and those that plunder and ruin People,
deserve better to be cut off or banished out of a Country than Idolaters or
Heretics, that don't trouble the State. And that the Church of Rome who is
guilty of both, that is to say, ruins States and is Idolatrous, deserves more
to be destroyed upon the former account than the latter.

History informs us, that the Spirit of Domineering and Tyranny began first in
the Church of Rome, after which Vice and Ignorance, and next Idolatries and
Herefies infected her in Crowds, and destroyed all her Doctrine and Worship.
For the Popes did first attack the Temporal Rights of Sovereigns and People,
before they made any attempt upon the Public Worship.

Had they been chastis'd for their Ambition, and kept und^ as they ought, the
Christian Religion had not been destroyed utterly among 'em, and People and
Princes would have preserved their Rights. It is the Natural Order of the
Ambition of the Popes and their Clergy* that in order to promote their Designs
upon the Temporal Rights of Sovereigns and People, they make use of what they
call Spiritual Methods, to attain their end. Whence it follows, that Sovereigns
ought to abhor them more for their Ambition and Tyranny, than for their
Doctrine, though the one cannot subsist without the other, and they ought not to
delay one moment the exterminating of such a Religion out of their Dominions,
when it is so clearly demonstrated to 'em, as I have done that it lays them
desolate in such a terrible and amazing manner.

After so great a number of Political Reasons* which so manifestly prove the
falsehood of the Romish Religion, the Papists, who hence^orth continue
obstinate, must find out other Metho^s to palliate it, and not apply themselves
to refu^e all our Arguments from Scripture, Reason and Sense against their
Opinions and pretended Mysteries, but to prove, if they can, that all the
re^sons I have bro^ght against them are false, and that the XVIII Articles, by
which I ^ave made it appear* that they lay Countries desolate, are
supposititious or of ^o (...). But though they should be able to do it: They will
not find it easy to (...) themselves from the Argumen^s (...) said dow^* which
are so (...) and obviou^ to Sense.

It will ^e to no purpose for them to allege the I^fallibility of their
Church, as they have successfully done to maintain Transubstantiation, for here
their Sophisms c^nnot so much as impose upon a Servant-Maid, who of her self
may Judge of my Arguments, which relate to matters of Fact that they themselves
touch and manage, are visible, and plain, and proportioned to the Capacities of
the most Ignorant, and which may all be examined to the bottom in a very little
time.

There Is no need of understanding Hebrew, Greek or Latin for this, nor
Divinity and Philosophy, nor so much as to read the Old and New Testament, or
those they call the Fathers: The discussion of this Point is not ^edious, and
it will be to no purpose for the Papists to allege Prescription in this, no
more than it would be for a Troop of Highwaymen, Pickpockets or False Coiners,
who had been acc^stomed to the cutting of Purses without being taken Notice of,
or had for a long time cheated and ruined a senseless People, who did not
observe that their Money was Cou^terfeited. The Mischiefs are too great and
mani^est* not to have a remedy attempted as soon as possible, when ever* they
are discovered, otherwise Princes and People, who are so much concerned
therein, must have lost their Senses.

It appears plain by what I have said, that so many Persons, who for diverse
Ages, have passed ^or great Ministers of State and Politicians, in Popis^
States and Kingdoms, were in reality nothing; but on the contrary mean spirited
Men, that either did not perceive those Disorders of opery, which are obvious
to every Man's view, nay, as I may say, leap on his Face, or suffered a Religion
so ridiculous and ruinous to Sovereigns and their People, and so contrary to
good Manners, to take place, and be the Religion of the State.

This Treatise which proves so evidently, and in a Method suited to the
Capacity of the most Ignorant and Unlearned Persons, the Falsehood and
Transcendent Malignity of the Church of Rome and her Religion, and which I
defy all or any of them ever to answer, will hence-forward take off the Mask
from all the Hypocritical Clergy of that Church, who though they believe
nothing of their Religion themselves, yet they pretend to be sincerely of her
Communion, under a Counterfeit Allegation, that the Holy Scripture is Obscure,
and that the said Church is Infallible* whereas they are in good earnest
retained in her* Communion merely by their Love of Ease, and the World, and a
Spirit of Profanity, that they may enjoy the Sensual Plea^ures, and Carnal
Delights, which are the Lot or Inheritance of the Romish Clergy.

So that henceforward the Popish Clergy cannot but be understood, even in Popish
Countries themselves, to be the greatest Enemies of the State and of Mankind.

And henceforward we shall have reason also to look upon all the other Papists,
who can read or have heard those Reasons Dis^ours'd of* as Impious Profane
People without Religion, and that Love nothing but the World; if they still
continue in the unhappy Communion of that great Harlot, seeing her Shame and
Uncleanness cannot in any wise be concealed.

We shall moreover have more Reason now than ever to look upon all Protestants,
Great or Small, Princes or Subjects, that renounce the Reformation or rather
Christianity, to embrace Popery, as declared Enemies of the State, seeing
Popery is so evidently proved to be the Bane of all Countries, where it is the
obtaining Religion: Nor can we in particular, entertain any more favorable
Opinion of those English ^rotestants who continue Jacobites, though they do not
change their Religion.

This should also make such Protestants blush who entertain, or rather would
bring others to entertain a good Opinion of the Church of Rome, as if it were
still a True Church, and comparable in any degree to the Church of England, or
other Reformed Churches; whereas there is no more comparison to be made between
them, than between Christ and Belial, the Temple of God and that of Idols.

I hope also by this way of writing, to deliver the World from abundance of
Disputes and Vain Questions, about the Popes Supremacy, whether he be the
Center of Unity, the Source and Fountain of Ecclesiastical Ministry, that is,
of the Mission of all Bishops and Ministers, to which Pretensions, he has no
more Right than the Muphti; as also about the Insallibility of the Pope and his
Church, Transubstantiation, Invocation and Adoration of Saints and Angels, and
a thousand Inanimate Creatures; in which Vain and Foolish Disputes, the
Protestants lost abundance of Time, in endeavoring to convince the Popish
Clergy, of the Folly and Falsehood of those Opinions, which they themselves know
to be False, as well as we, and without Foundation, and laugh at us in their
sleeve, that we should think them so simple, as to believe those nonsensical
and ridiculous Opinions.

If they believed their own Doctrines and pretended Mysteries, they would not
prosa^e them as they do, forcing People by a thousand torments to go to their
Mass, and to swallow down their pretended God of Bread, which the Protestants
profess publicly to abominate, as they do their other Mysteries.

By this means I hope I have also delivered our Divines from a sort of
Necessity they lay under, by reason of their Controversies with the Papists, to
read again and again those Books called the Fathers, Ecclesiastical History,
the History of Councils, the School-Divines,Canonists and Decretals of the
Popes, etc. which are all of 'em Vain Studies, for the most part; yet they were
obliged to spend a great deal of time in following them* which might have been
better improved in applying themselves only to Meditating and searching out the
Meaning of the Holy Scriptures, which ha^ been much better understood since the
Reformation than in all the Ages preceding, and is the only Study in which a
Man's whole Life can be profitably spent.

Hence we may also perceive of how little consequence it is to us, in regard of
our Controversies with the Church of Rome* to know which of the two Histories
of the Council of Trent is the Truest and most Faithful, viz. that of the
Incomparable Fra. Paolo, or that of the Profane Candinal Pallavicini, called of
a long time his New Gospel, which does not deserve to be read, seeing we have a
thousand other stronger Proofs of the Impiety of the Court of Rome, and their
pretended Religion, than that History of Father Paolo, though excellent in it
self, as to the Matter of Fact.

We may very well say, that the Council of Constance and Lateran, did Evidence
and Establish as great Impieties as the Council of Trent diverse Ages before
it. That which was most fatal to Christianity in that Impious last Council,
was, that all the Idolatries and Heresies of the Church of Rome, as also her
Tyranny, were therein Consecrated and Established in Form of Laws, with
Anathemas; so that if there were any remainder of Christianity in that
pretended Church before the Council of Trent, which is indeed very much to be
doubted, it was absolutely destroyed thereby; especially if we consider, that
by Virtue of the Decisions of that pretended Council, where the Protestants
could not assist, because it was not free, and all was done therein by Bribes,
Violence and Treachery, against the Protestations of almost all the Princes of
Europe even Papists, who had demanded a Free Council: By Virtue I say, of the
Decisions of that Profane and Impious Assembly, the Pope and his Clergy did
afterward put in practice all the Cruelties and Barbarities imaginable, in
order to quench the Light of the Gospel in the Blood of the Reformers, and did
also highly raise the fury of their Inquisition, which Tribunal alone proves
the absolute Reprobation of the Romish Church, better than any thing that was
done in the Council of Trent.

The Church of Rome has retained nothing of Christianity but the Name, and some
small Appearances of it, in order to enrich her self by them, just as the
Rouers of Algiers, who put out a Christian Flag when they design to enslave and
swallow up the Christians; for at the bottom there is nothing in the Church of
Rome but Idolatry, Perfidiousness, Cruelty and Tyranny.

It would seem reasonable also, that after so many and so evident prooss, that
the Pope is the greatest Enemy of all the Christian States, and of Christianity
it self, that Protestant Travelers should be more scrupulous to kiss the Popes
Foot, when they are at Rome; For it is not as a Temporal Prince that the Pope
imposes upon them such as Ignominious and Abject Submission, but as the
Antichrist or Vicar of Christ, for the word (...) signifies that, as (...)
fignifies a Viceroy, and (...) a Proconsul. The Pope, I say, and all his Court
take it to be a Religious Worship, and an acknowledgment of his Almighty Power,
both in Heaven and Earth, as being the Vicar of Christ, or the Antichrist not
as Enemy of Christ, which the word fignifies also by the special Providence of
God, though he be such a one (...) I know Travelers commonly have but a mean
Idea of Religion* and do this merely out of a base Covetousness to get the
Popes Golden Medal, and fancy that it is only a civil aspect which they pay to
him as to a Temporal Prince, and not a Religious one. But its a horrid mistake:
For the Pope pretends it is due to him, by Virtue of a Prophecy in the Old
Testament, by which it is said of the Messiah, That all Nations shall bow down
and submit to him, and lick the dust of his Feet. Otherwise the Pope has no
ground to pretend to that excessive and shameful Submission, above so many
Princes in the World, who have a greater Temporal Power and Revenue, are of a
far nobler Pedigree, and are infinitely better in all respects than he is; So
that all those Travelers who are guilty of that, commit besides the sin
against God, a horrid baseness against 'emselves and Christianity, and in
truth, I should think that those who will be so base hereafter, as to stoop to
that Villainy for the Golden Medal, would make no great scruple to prostitute
themselves also for Money to the other Roman Prelates at Rome and Muliebria
pati.

There is nothing in my Opinion more capable of inspiring one with low and
abased Thoughts of Mankind, than to see Kings and Princes, and their Counsels,
who ought to be the most clear-sighted and prudent of all Men, as to what
concerns the Welfare of their Dominions and People, to suffer themselves to be
led by the Nose, by the most Vile and Abject Rascals in the World, who have
imposed such a Foolish and Shameful Religion upon them, under pretext of which
they pillage, ruin, and lay waste their Countries, without their perceiving
it, or at least endeavoring to deliver themselves from that Yoke of Slavery.

The Church of Rome is not contented thus to treat those that she has already
brought under, but would also swallow up all others, and yet if you will believe
her, she is, as I have said, Infallible, and there is no Salvation to be hoped
for, but in her Communion, and by submitting to her Yoke; which is all one as
if the most dissolute Prostitute in a City, should allege that all the honest
Women are debauched, and cannot learn how to behave themselves except they come
to her School: Or just as if a multitude of Profligate, Impious Debauchees,
Thiefs, False Coiners and Murderers, pretended to impose a new Religion upon
Men, to Administer Justice to all the World, under pretense that some of their
Ancestors, from whom they claim a Direct and Legal Succession, were honest Men,
and acted in those Stations a thousand years ago. For it is just the same: the
Popes pretend to be Successors to the Bishops of Rome; who were, as they
pretend, the Successors of Saint Peter* but what consequence can they draw from
it, if it were true; seeing they are now all Idolaters, Heretics and the
greatest Tyra^s in the World, and have been such for several Ages* Is it not
certain that Judas, tho he was an Apostle himself, forfeited his Right to his
Office, by betraying his Master? how much more have the Popes and the Popish
Church forfeited it, who outdo him as much as the Prototype use^ to outdo
it is Type.

Let Us suppose that the Mohammedan (...) who are a kind of Christians, as well
as the Popes, since they acknowledge Christ for a great Prophet, did pretend
that they are the Successors of those Bishops of Asia to whom St. John in his
Revelation, directs some Admonitions, who had at least as much Right to pretend
to be the Successors of the Apostles, as the now Bishops of Rome. Let us
suppose, I say, that those muphtis did pretend now, not only to have their
Mission from Christ, but to be the Center of Unity amongst Christians, and
under that pretense oblige us to (...) Mahometans, would the Popish Church
think their Arguments good; and yet they have as much Right to such Pretensions
as the Pope and his Clergy, who are more Antichristian than they.

The Pope then and his Clergy being without Controversy, as I have
demonstrated, the greatest Enemies to Jesus Christ, and to the Christian
Church; is it not a horrid piece of Impudence* and Folly, to pretend that they
are or may still be the Fountain of the Ecclesiastical Mission and Ministry? It
is against God's Holiness* Truth and Wisdom to think so* and Blasphemy to speak
so? For did ever any wise Prince trust his Authority, his Person and Family to
Rebels and his greatest Enemies, does not he on the contrary, deprive them of
all their Offices, and of all his Favors* for otherwise he should countenance
their Rebellion and Crimes; but when they have submitted and sworn Fidelity
afresh, then if he thinks fit to pardon them, and give them their Offices
again, there must be new Patents and a new Commission* on else he would be
guilty of Folly against his own Crown and Dignity; just the same as if our
Lawful Sovereign King William, did trust his Authority, Person, and People to
the Irish, who are in the late Kings Service in France, and his own greatest
Enemies, and that they should exercise that Authority without renouncing
Popery, Idolatry, and the late King. This might justly be called a trusting the
Sheep to the Wolves. Unless Peter after the abjuring of his Master, had
repeated of that great sin, and been also restored by his Master to the
Apostleship, by a thrice repeated Commission to feed his Sheep, as he had three
times abjured him; Unless, I say* Christ had so sealed his Pardon and renewed
his Commission, he had forfeited his Apostleship: How much more then has the
Popish Church forfeited all her pretended Privileges, by the multitude of her
Idolatries, Heresies, Execrable Morals, and by her Tyranny over Princes and
Nations?

It Is a Folly in Protestants to dispute seriously with the Roman Clergy, and
quote Scripture, or bring Reason against them; for they know very well that the
Scripture is against them, otherwise they would not prohibit the Reading of it,
nor speak with that disrespect of the same, as they do* it is just the same as
if you would endeavor to dispute Highway-men or Prostitutes out of their way
of Living, which they have chosen before all others, with a Resolution never to
abandon the same.

It Is a Maxim in Logic, that one ought not to dispute with those who deny
Principles, nor with those who impudently Controvert certain Truths. And can
any Society be more guilty of this, than the Church of Rome, who orders those
of her Communion to violate all the Commandments of God, all the Maxims of
Christianity, and all the Laws of Nature and Society, to Convert Men, as she
calls it, to her Religion? Can there be any thing more effronted and impudent
than that pretended Church, when in her Debates with us, she asserts also, as I
have said already, her own Infallibility, in Pillaging, Ruining and laying
Desolate those Nations that submit to her Yoke* and likewise by denying that
there was any Persecution in France, or that their pretended Sacrament is Real
Bread, etc.

To what purpose is it to Dispute of Religion with such a Church, which for
several Ages has impudently Anathematized those who Communicate in both kinds,
though she owned at the same time, that Jesus Christ commanded we should do so,
when he instituted that Sacrament, and that the Apostles and Primitive Church
did the like.

It exceedingly delights the Popish Clergy, so find the Protestants seriously
Disputing against their Ridiculous Doctrines, for they value themselves upon it
as having Wit enough to make all their Extravagancies seem Problematical at
least. For it requires as much ingenuity to put a fair color on their Follies,
as if a Man should undertake to prove that the Devil loves Truth, Justice and
Holiness, or that that which is called Truth and Holiness, is False and Sinful.
What delight would not the Devil take to hear Men Disputing, whether he is to
be Worshipped and Religiously Served as well as God. This comparison is not too
harsh, for in many places of the Scripture, the Adoration of Creatures, both
Animated and Inanimated, such as the Papists are guilty of, is called The
Adoration of Devils; to drink the Cup of Idols, is called a drinking the Cup of
Devils; to Sacrifice to Idols (as the Papists do when they Invoke and Adore so
many Creatures in Heaven or Earth, and when they offer the Sacrifice of their
Mass to pretended Saints, who are dead, and mere Idols) that is called in
Scripture, a Sacrisice to Devils, the Adoration of Images of Gold and Silver,
is joined with the Adoration of Devils. And several Doctrines which seem to be
none of the most Impious of the Romish Church, are called the Doctrines of
Devils, such as is their prohibiting their Ecclesiastics to Marry, and eating
such and such sorts of Meat, etc.

I mention all this by the by, without quoting the places of Scripture,
because* I am no Divine, but those who read the Scriptures know what I say is
true. They know also that the Romish Church is called in Scripture by the Names
of Sodom, Egypt and Babylon, as if the Spirit of God had fought for the
harshest Terms, to denote to us in some degree, the infinite Malignity of the
Romish Church, which is beyond all Expression and Idea. Their Clergy, I say,
take a great delight to see our Divines busied in confuting their Opinions, as
those who undertake the Apology of Folly, do when they see others seriously
confuting their foolish Arguments.

If it were not for the Riches of Popery, and the Princes and the numbers of
People, who follow that Beast and false Prophet, according to the Prophecies of
the New Testament, it would appear to the Judgment of the Papists themselves,
the most Execrable Religion that ever was, and I hope there will come a time,
when all the World will be amazed, to understand by History that there has
ever been in the World such a Portentous and Monstrous Religion as that is*

I promised at the beginning of this Work, to demonstrate the great Advantages
which the King and Kingdom of France might reap by abolishing Popery; in order
to show by that single example, what Advantage other Popish Nations might reap
by the same, and the great ones that England and other Protestant Countries
enjoy by the Reformation: I shall therefore now say, that should it please God
to put it into the heart of the K. of France, who Reigns at present, and who of
a long time seems to a great many people, to be destined to do great things, to
deliver his Kingdom from the Tyranny of the Pope, he would reap abundance of
more true glory from it before God and Man, than he would have done, had he
been able to conquer the whole World. That would be an Action truly Heroic,
infinitely greater than* any thing he has done hitherto, and would be a
clearer demonstration to the World, that he ^ath a Great and Noble Soul. This
return to God, to Himself and to his People, would compensate for all the past
Miscarriages of his Reign, and preserve those great Titles, which have either
been given him by others, or assumed by himself, as also the Glory of all the
great things that he may have done. Then indeed he would deserve the Title of
Most Christian King, which can never be properly given to a Popish Prince,
because Popery and Christianity are Antipodes to one another, at least as much
as darkness is to lig^t.

It is well known that ever since he ascended the Throne, the honester sort of
Papists in that Kingdom, have entertained hopes that this great and glorious
Prince would deliver it from the Popes disgraceful Yoke* by creating a
Patriarch. But the Court of Rome by the pernicious Counsels of her Clergy, who
have sold themselves to Iniquity, diverted him from that design, by inspiring
him with false Ideas of the Glory and Grandeur he would acquire by extirpating
the Protestant Religion, which they call Heresy, out of his Kingdom, that is
to say* to persecute such True Christians as were in the same, with all manner
of Fury, in order to subject them to the Pope, instead of making War upon that
Grand Enemy of Jesus Christ, the greatest that ever he had or can have.

It must be confessed that the design of establishing a Patriarch in France,
was very considerable, seeing by that means they had designed to deliver the
Kingdom from a Foreign Yoke, as ruinous as possible, but it must be
acknowledged on the other hand, that it would be abundantly and more assuredly
Glorious and Advantageous to Reform the National* Religion entirely from so
many frightful Errors in Doctrine, and so great a number of Customs and
Superstitions, that are pernicious to the State, and were introduced into the
same under the favor of that profound darkness, which the Tyranny of the Pope
has spread therein, and which in their turn maintain and support that Tyranny*

For if we consider things duly, that horrid Darkness and Ignorance could not
have been dissipated by the mere Creation of a Patriarch, for notwithstanding
that, most of those ruinous Disorders, represented in the forementioned 18
Articles, would still have continued, because they are the natural Dependances
and Necessary Consequences of the other Principles of the Romish Religion,
which would have remained entire notwithstanding the Creation of a Patriarch,
the Abolition of the Papal Authority only being excepted.

Besides such an Inconsiderable Change as this, the rest of the Popish Religion
being continued, would neither have been Advantageous for the Salvation of Men,
Glorious to the King, nor Profitable to the State. For Idolatry and the other
Heresies remaining, there would have always been an Impossibility of being
saved in that Religion, and the greatest part of the Oppression attending it,
being also continued, the people would have had but little relief by it, nor
would the King of France have reaped the fourth part of the Advantage, which he
might expect from a thorough Reformation.

Neither is it to be thought that so small a change, could be solid and
durable; for at the bottom, it is certain that it is the Popes who have made the
Religion of the Church of Rome to be what it is, either by corrupting the
Doctrine of the Apostles* or Adopting the Idolatry and Worship of the Pagans,
or by Forging now and then new Articles of Faith, for their own private
Interest, and that of their Clergy: And it is certain that their Religion is
founded on no other Authority but that of the Pope, and therefore Cardinal
Pallavicini had reason to say in his History of the Council of Trent, called by
some, his New Gospel* Tutti gli Articoli della Religione unitamente considerati
non hanno altra certezza prossima ed immediata che l'Autorita del summo
Pontefice; i. e. that all the Articles of their Religion, considered together,
have no other certain and immediate foundation, but the Authority of the Pope.
So that if we reason consequentially from this Principle, the Popish Religion
cannot be preserved but by the preservation of the Papal Authority, from which
it derives all the Authority, that gives it any value in the eyes of the World.

It is also probable, that if a greater Reformation were not made immediately
upon the Creation of a Patriarch, the Popes Authority would be again
Re-established; ^or he should without doubt have always a great Party in the
Kingdom, under the ^avour of that horrid Darkness which must have continued
therein, if it had been no other but for the Jesuits and Monks, who would be
constantly Jealous that the Patriarch would pair their Nails. One Party of the
Nation would always have entertained a Correspondence with the Popes Friends,
being united by their Communion in the same Religion, excepting the Opinion of
the Authority of the Pope, tho'some would have made semblance of rejecting that
too, for fear of their King, yet they would effectually endeavor the
Re-establishment of the Papal Authority. And so much the more, that the Court
of Rome would have been prodigal of their Treasures, and have spared nothing on
this occasion to maintain their Tyranny: And moreover, i^ the King who had
created a Patriarch, should come to have died before the Reformation should
have been completed, and a Prince of less Authority had Succeeded, there would
have been an end of the Patriarchat.

This erecting of a Patriarch would not have pleased the Popish Princes
neither; so that they would have joined with the Pope and the Party that
adhered to him in France, and would either have stirred up Civil Wars there, or
have made War upon it themselves.

Nor could this imperfect Change have satisfied the Protestant Princes, who
would always have looked upon France as Idolatrous and Heretical, and ready to
return again to wallow in that mire, whence she had made some Effort to get
out, and begun to lift up her head; so that they would never put any confidence
in her. It should happen to France in this case, as it always happens to
Neutral Princes in the quarrels of Neighboring Potentates, their Neutrality
does not reconcile them with their Enemies, nor yet procure them any Friends.
Neutralitas ne^ Amicos pari^ neque Inimicos tollit, says Tacitus: In such
cases we must be either the one or the other, and avoid that which is called
Consilia Media. Such a faint Reformation would have served for naught, but to
awake all the Malice of the Pope, and the Mischievous Ecclesiastics of the
Kingdom, who would have reaped the same Advantage from this, that a strong Man
does from the Impotent Menaces of his Enemy, which serve only to put him on his
Guard and set him at Work, to prevent the threatened Mischief, according to the
Italian Proverb, Le Minaccie sono l'Armi del Minaccia^o. Threats sound an
allarum to the threatened Man, to take Arms, either to de^end himself or offend
his Enemy, as occasion requires.

Whereas if the King of France did not do things by halves, but should,
together with his Subjects, renounce all at once the false Doctrines, Worship,
Superstition and Abuses of the Church of Rome, and Free his Kingdom from that
Tyranny, by Establishing the light of the Gospel, to enlighten his People,
amongst whom it is hid under a Candlestick, he might assure himself that such
an Evangelical Reformation would be followed by unexpressible Advantages to
himself and his People, both in regard of Temporal and Eternal Life.

Some may perhaps object that such a comple^t and sudden Reformation, must
needs shake the Kingdom of France, and that there is no passing so suddenly from
one Extreme to another without danger, that is to say, from the thick darkness
of Popery, to the bright shining light of Christianity, and therefore it mu^t
be done gradually, as our Savior did when he restored sight to the Blind, they
did not at first see all Objects dis^inctly; but Men walking like Trees, and
that God does not make us pass from the dark night to the bright day, but by
the dawning of the Morning, and therefore according to that Wisdom, it were
proper first to Establish a Patriarchat in France, before they endeavor a
Gospel-Reformation.

To this I answer, That as to the Authority of the Pope, which the Creation of
a Patriarch would have over-turn'd, all the Parliaments of France, and amongst
others that of Paris, all Persons of Learning, Sense and Honesty, even amongst
the Clergy themselves, do not acknowledge that Authority in their heart; nay,
they despise all other Doctrines contrary to those of the Protestants, as being
evidently false or unprofitable. The Kings Authority and the Respect or Fear
that they have for him, are the only Ties which retain them, lest he should
destroy or ruin them, if they did ^urn Protestants. They have had many Doctors
of a long time, who have opened their Eyes in regard of the Popes Authority,
and diverse other such Doctrines, as the Chancellor Gerson, and the Drs.
Richer, de Launoy, the Author of the Book called, Les Moyens Seurs and
Honnetes, Sure and Honest Methods, Elias Du Pin, and many other, without
mentioning the Books of Protestants; and besides, the Jansenists, the New
Philosophy and the present Quietists, do something of that Nature; And there is
ground of hope that all the Nation will be moved at the infinite number of
Mischiess, which Popery occasions in the State when they are set before their
Eyes.

We must also consider, that the Rigor and Length of the last Persecution of
France, nay which continues still, and has been one of the longest and most
cruel that ever the Christians endured since the Establishment of Christianity;
that grand Rigor, I say, and the continuance of the Persecution, have given
occasion to all Persons of the Romish Communion, who had not absolutely
divested themselves of all Conscience and Humanity, and become perfect Bruits,
to inquire into those Opinions, ^or which the Protestants have suffered, and
suffer still so many evils, and have found them Reasonable and Christian,
contrary to what the Monks represented them to be, and diverse of the honestest
of their Clergymen who were formerly very Ignorant, have instructed themselves
in them. All of them have been terrified to find so much Courage, Firmness,
Humility and surprising Patience amongst an infinite number of Persons of all
Sexes, Ages and Conditions, which made them to think, that in all this, there
was something Divine, (...); they are also surpised to find, by the Zeal which
those poor People, discover at present when persecuted in diverse places with
the utmost rage, that they are less Papists than ever, which occasions many
thoughts of heart amongst those who have any Judgment.

Besides the bad success of that Persecution which has been accompanied with
this long and bloody War, a violent Famine, and the dethroning of the late King
James, with whom it was concerted, and which, in fine, has issued in the ruin
of the Kingdom of France, has made it evident that it was not a Wok which God
approved, and that he did without all doubt avenge himself on the Nation for
their perfidiousness and cruelty committed against his People, at the
Instigation of the Court of Rome and the Clergy of France; and those who are
not judicially blinded, or have any Sense of God upon them, understand and
perceive clearly that God concerned himself in the Cause of the Protestants,
and the Evils they Suffered. Which ought to be another strong Argument, to
incline the Papists to embrace the Protestant Religion. So that there is no
cause to doubt but the People of France, have a mighty disposition to shake off
the Popes Yoke, and to embrace the Doctrine of the Gospel* if the King of
France would declare himself for it, above half the business would be done.

Never Prince had nor can have so fair an occasion to acquire Immortal Glory,
and to render his People happy, as the King of France has at present in putting
that great Work in Execution, for besides all the Dispositions thereunto
abovementioned, he has the most Authority in his Dominions of any Prince in
the World, and has the finest and most numerous Army that ever was seen in
France, and if he should s^and in need of any assistance to carry on a Work so
Glorious, so Magnificent and Advantageous to Mankind, there is no doubt but the
Incomparable William, and other Protestant Powers, would lend him their helpi^g
hand.

It seems that the present State of the Kingdom of France, does moreover
indispensibly require this general Reformation, and the abolition of the
Papacy, to the end the King may appropriate to himself all or at least the
greatest part of the Riches of the Church, which belong to no Body, and whereof
he might dispose for the ^afety of the State, without any Injustice, by which
means he would be enabled to pay his Debts to every one, and to prevent a Civil
War, which seems to threaten France unavoidably, if there come a K* of lesser
Authority than Lewis the XIV. by reason of the desperate Condition into which
People of all ranks are upon the brink of being reduced, because of the ill
condition of their Affairs.

All his Troops seem to require it also, to prevent their being cashiered, for
they must either perish in Foreign Countries, or starve, or be hanged at home;
the great numbers of brave Officers and Noblemen, ruined by the Kings Service
do also require it; and it is a thousand times more just that they should be
compensated by the Riches of the Church which belong to no Body but the King
and State, than that they should be enjoyed by such an Herd of Scandalous and
Unprofitable Ecclesiastics. The great numbers of others who have been forced
by several ways to lend Money to the King, or to buy Places, or Letters of
Nobility, and must unavoidably be cashiered and ruined, or who have lost all
they had by the Taxes, do also require such a general Reformation, that the
King may be enabled ^o pay or give them some Compensation, and to furnish them
Bread, of which they have none left. And besides those abovementioned* all
ranks of People through the Kingdom in general require it, that they may be
delivered from those prodigious Losses, that they suffer continually by Popery,
which amount, as has been said, to above 200 Millions per Annum, that so they
may be Re-established and Repeopled a little; for which end the Monks, Nuns and
other Ecclesiastics might be very useful, if their Monasteries were dissolved.

The general Desolation of the Cities and Countries do also demand it, that so
that King may be in a condition to moderate the Impositions and Taxes, with
which they are overwhelmed at present, and will continue so to be. Without this
all Arts, Manufactures and Husbandry, will infallibly decay more and more, and
the Art Military will come to nothing in France, where it has flourished so
much in this Reign.

The Interest of the Church of France, as they call it, and all the honest
Ecclesiastics among them, seem also to require it; because if after the
present King and Dauphin, there should happen to come a weak Prince, the
Kingdom also being so much weakened as it is at present, and as it will continue
to be still, may be for ever ruined unless this general Reformation be set
about speedily: If, I say, a weak Prince should happen to come to the Crown at
such a time, the Popes will treat France in a more Tyrannical and Cruel manner
than ever, because of the fears they have labored under, that France would
shake off their Yoke, and of the attempts which they will pretend have been
made upon their Authority in this Reign, which they will never pardon. Then the
Pope will Establish the Inquisition in France, deprive the Gallican Church of
that she calls her Liberties, rob the King of his Regale, oblige him to restore
the Seculariz'd Estates to the Church, and certainly despoil the Bishops of
their Lawful Jurisdiction over the Regular Clergy. Then they must believe the
Infallibility of the Pope, or at least pretend to do so, both in Matters of
Fact and Right, his Almighty Power in Heaven and Earth, his Superiority over
Councils, his Absolute Power over the Temporal Rights of Kings, and their
Lives, as well as in the matters of their Salvation, and the like over their
Subjects: The Pope, the Monks and the Jesuits will render themselves Masters
of all under a weak Prince, and the Kingdom will be more exposed to the Cheats,
Impostures and Scandalous Vices of the Clergy than ever.

The King of France should hereby gain the Affection of all Protestant Princes
and States entirely, which would be much more useful to him than that of the
Popish Princes, because they are honester in their Treaties, and at present
much more powerful especially by Sea, and more able to hurt or help him. And
moreover, France cannot subsist without Commerce with them, and the King knows
very well that they have no thoughts of regaining any thing from France, as the
Popish Princes have, because she has never taken any thing from them; nor have
they any thoughts of making Conquests upon him, as being more Sage and
Judicious than that comes to: Neither has he any reason to fear that the Court
of Rome will employ them to do Mischief to France, as they have employed, and
may still employ Popish Princes to do.

But if France neglect such a fair opportunity as this is, to shake off the
Yoke of Popery, (when there is such an Indispensible Necessity ^o do it for the
fafety of the Kingdom, which must otherwise perish) after having seen so
evidently, that Popery is the ruin of States, and by consequence a false
Religion, all the World will have reason to believe, that His Majesty does not
only hate the Protestant Religion, but the very Persons of all Protestants,
especially if he does not Re-establish his Subjects of the Reformed Religion in
the free Exercise of the same, and in a full and entire Liberty in all
Respects, as his other Subjects, and with all possible Assurance for time to
come, seeing no Man can reproach them with Disloyalty toward the King, nor on
the account of their Doctrine, which the most Learned of the Papists themselves
acknowledge to be very Sound, and Conformable to the Scripture, and make their
boasts that they believe the same things as they do, having nothing else to
reproach them with, but only that they don't believe enough, because they don't
believe Transubstantiation, nor fifty other Fooleries of the like Nature; nor
adore the half of one of the two Sacraments, which has not so much as the
Honor to be Bread, but is only an Elil Elilim, a Nothing, an Idol, which
according to St. Paul is a mere Nothing; of this number of Learned Men is the
Bp. of Meaux, as appears by his Exposition of the Catholic Doctrine. Without
^his Reformation, France will become as desolate in 30 years time, as Spain and
Portugal is at present, though there should be a continued Peace all that
while. For the Women and Girls who are at present three thirds of the People of
France, will for the most part be dead without Children, because there are not
Men enough at present to Marry them; so that this want of People will be much
more apparent then, than now.

It may very well be said that the Kingdom of France has for 30 or 40 years
had a great Ascendant over all the other Nations of Europe, by means of the
Kings Vigor and Absolute Power. But the Kingdom will lose that Ascendant, come
to nothing, and be despicable to all the World, and especially to the Court of
Rome, without hopes of being ever able to recover it self, if such a
Reformation be not made; And I dare venture to say, that without this the
Kingdom is in danger to be torn into pieces by Civil Wars ere it be long, or
involved in short in another new War, on the account of Religion, by the
Jesuits at the secret Suggestion of the Pope, who are still afraid of that
Kings great Authority, tho his Kingdom is ruined.

There Is no other Method left, as I have intimated already, to put the King in
a condition to pay his numerous Debts, but this Evangelical Reformation; and
because diverse Persons of great Merit have desired of me to give some Account
of the Ways and Means they take, to find Money to borrow, and Places to sell in
a Kingdom so much ruined as France; I could not refuse to obey them in
imparting what is publicly known of that Matter in France, therefore I shall
here make a little digression.

We must observe then that the Court entertains a great number of People in
Provinces and Towns, who make it their business to discover those who have yet
any Money left 'em. Whereupon the Intendant, Governor or other Chief Men of
the Place, have orders either to call for such Persons, or to go to their
Houses, and tell them that the King has a mind to sell such and such new
Places, or Augmentations of Salleries to all Civil Officers who are already in
Place, or Letters of Nobility to Commoners, or some other Privileges, or to
create Rents upon the Townhouse of Paris, or to alienate the Revenues of the
PostOffice, or some part of his Demain, etc. Then they are acquainted Civilly
that they will oblige the Court to lay out their Money on such things, and do a
piece of good Service to the State, that their Principal and Interest will both
be sure, and their gain considerable. If they answer that they have no Money,
after being desired thus to lay it out, then they find it to be, as Tacitus
says, Preceserant, sed quibus resisti non poterat. They were Prayers indeed,
but such as they could not resist.

Those Officers inform themselves more partic^larly of the Sta^e of their
Affairs, from Scriveners and Notaries, who are obliged to tell all they know of
it; After this they proceed to threaten the Persons, that so they may squeeze
Money out of them. But there are few who let it come to this extremity, because
they see so many Examples before them of People ruined by such Refusals, for
either they are taxed extraordinarily as rich Persons, or are accused that
either they themselves or their Friends, whose Estates they Inherit, robbed the
Public when they were in Office, and thereupon despoil them of their Estates.
Otherwise all the Actions of their whole Life are Canvass'd, or if that fail,
the Conversations of their Children and other Relations, are enquired into, on
purpose to vex them, and their Tenants are overwhelmed with*Impositions, or
Quartering of Soldiers.

There are a hundred other such Methods; and their Children and Relations are
never advanced neither in the Church, in the Army, nor otherwise. And they are
besi^es accounted at Court Enemies to the Government, sometimes imprisoned, and
if they have any Suit at Law, the adverse Party is sure to find favor, etc.
It Is true, there are some who are known to be extremely Rich, or in great
business, that prevent ^he Court on purpose ^o gain Favor, and lend their
Money upon the Townhouse of Paris, nor do they know how to dispose of their
Money otherwise, Trade being quite ruined, Houses and Land being of no value,
and all people almost being broke; so that there is no safety in lending it to
private Hands; besides they are afraid of the Species being cried down, the
same having been augmented one 6th part during the War. Th^n the Interest is
upon the foot of twelve, fourteen, eighteen or twenty years purchase more or
less, and most of those Persons live at Paris on those Revenues: Here I shall
take notice by the way, that above two thirds of all the Kingdoms Money, Plate
and Jewels are at Paris; and that there was plenty of Money in France 15 years
ago, as it is necessary for Trade, in a Country where the half of all Estates
are in Mainmort.

We must suppose that Court was persuaded that the last War was just and
necessary, and that the Kingdom was in great danger, had it not been for the
help of such Methods, and they reasoned as that Man, who said formerly;
Praestat aliquam habere Rempublicam quam nullam, that is, it is better to have
some Republic than none: And we must think also, that they thought the Kingdom
was able soon or late to pay and reimburse all those Loans, both Principal and
Interest, and that the Money was useless during the War, in the hands of
private Men who had it, or might even be prejudicial to the Kingdom, if the
Owners had applied themselves to Usury, as it is in such Circumstances in some
Countries. So that it is no wonder, that the Court having such an Authority,
made use o^ such Ways and Means.

How then can all those Public Debts, old and new, be paid without abolishing
Popery? How can those who have bought their Places, of whom three fourths at
least must be Cashiered, be otherwise reimbursed? and this last alone may
amount perhaps to a thousand Millions, besides what is due to those who have
purchased Augmentations of Salleries, and Titles of Nobility, which together
with other Privileges sold also, must be abolished; or how can the Interests
of all those Debts be paid, seeing the Kingdom is every day more and more
dispeopled? for there is at least three Women for one Man, and by consequence
there are but few Marriages, and more People die than are born. What hopes then
can that Ki^gdom entertain from Trade and Husbandry, when they have no Men to
manage them?

And besides, the continuance of the Persecution will more and more alienate
the Hearts of all True Protestant Strangers, who either will not Travel, or at
least not stay any long time in France, where so much Perfidiousness and
Cruelty abounds, against their Brethren, and where they cannot promise safety
to themselves, for either ^hey are in hazard of being knocked on the head, by
the Furious and Idolatrous People, if they don't kneel before their breaden God
in the Streets, or are always at the Mercy of their Landlords, Masters of
Exercises, or Idolatrous and Bigoted Physicians, etc. for it is now the mode
in France to be mad Bigots, and if they fall sick there, they will be
persecuted to the death, in order to make them abjure their Religion. Nor can
they have leave to eat Meat for six Months almost in the Year, without buying
Permission of the Priests, for they are now more ridiculous in France, in those
matters than at Rome it self: Because the Pope is well satisfied to draw
Strangers thither, and to have their Money, and that France should lose so much
by it. So that the great pro^it which the Kingdom of France did ordinarily reap
from Protestant Strangers, must reasonably be supposed to diminish considerably.

There will happen also another Inconvenience by the abating of the Value of
Money, which must yet of necessity be done, and will occasion abundance of
disorder in the Kingdom. I confess that the abolishing of Popery, which we have
demonstrated to be so necessary, cannot prevent that diminution of the Value of
the Coin which is so just, but it would occasion that that loss and all the
rest would be nothing so sensibly felt by the Kingdom, because the Affairs of
the King and the Subject both would be abundantly bettered by it.

I think it necessary to observe here, that the Rents of the Townhouse of
Paris, beforementioned, consist in Taxes laid upon all sorts of things, that
are exported or imported into that City, for the use of Man and Beast, as
Provisions, Cattle, Corn, Wine, Clothes, Firing, Hay, Straw, etc. Nor is there
any thing but what is liable to this Impost, whether it be the product of the
Kingdom or of Foreign Countries, and it is the same as to all manner of Goods
Exported from Paris, as Manufactures, all sorts of things ^ la mode for
Dresses, either of Men or Women, and whether it be to the Provinces of France,
or to Foreign Countries; so that there is nothing but what pays, the very Herbs
and Flowers not being excepted. About 20 years ago the King had at least 20
Millions of Livres, or above a Million and a half Sterling yearly by this
Impost, but it is without all doubt much diminished at present. The Salt alone
which is sold at 14 and 15 d. per Pound, did formerly yield 1800000 Livres per
Annum, which was appropriated for the Use of the Kings Table, and those of the
Officers of his Household, though Paris be nothing near so Big, Rich and well
Peopled as London; and by consequence spends much less.

Then besides the Tax on all things Imported into that City, for the use of Man
and Beast, which pay by the Gross, either at the Ga^s, the entrance of the
Suburbs, or to the Pataches on the River, (which are Boats with Officers of the
Custom-house, and Guards to levy the said Tax on all things Imported or
Exported by Water) there is moreover a Tax laid upon every thing that is
retail'd within the City and Surburbs; and because that this Revenue must
necessarily fall in proportion to the Decrease and Poverty of the People, the
Court who are unwilling that it should do so, augment the Tax on every thing,
to make up what they lose by this fall of the Revenue, which occasions
abundance less to be consumed, and this Branch of the Revenue to fall more and
more, and People to suffer Extremly by it. Those Taxes are so many that there
are several Books writ for ascertaining them. It is the same in several of the
biggest Towns of the Kingdom and it is at present the best part of the Kings
Revenues, because the great Cities are not so Depopulated as the Country. But
let us return to our Subject:

I shall suppose here the Popish Religion to be Good as to its Doctrine and
Wo^ship, and the Protestant Religion False; yet the King of France, by
embracing the latter, should be ^ssoon saved if he paid his Debts, relieved his
People from their Pressures, and his Kingdom from a Foreign Yoke which ruins
it* if he labored incess^ntly to Re-establish and Re-people his Kingdom, doing
Justice to all, rewarding such as have been undone by his Service in one manner
or other, making reparation to his Reformed Subjects for the damage he has
done them, making Ver^ue and Learning to Flourish, and Ba^ishing Vice,
Ignorance and Imposture; all which he may do by abolishing Popery, and which
cannot be done without it. I say, that he would as soon be saved in a Religion
that is fal^e, as to Doctrine and Worship by doing those things, as he could be
in the Popish Religion, supposing it to be Orthodox in Worship and Doctrine,
and that he did not perform his Du^y in all those respects, as it is certain he
cannot do whilst his Kingdom continues Popish.

Vengeance in (...) cases displeases God* but that which the French K. should
hereby take of the Court of R^me might well be called an Holy Vengeance; seeing
the Popes have ruined France by their Religion, secret Intrigues, and by the
Spirit of Pecsecution, with which they have inspired her Princes, etc. The King
on the other hand, would Re-establish Fr^nce by the Ruin of the Popes; which
were no more but thebruising of the Scorpion upon the wound that it makes.

By this means the King of France would ob^ain a mighty Ascendant over the
House of Austria, by the Augmentation of his Power and Riches, and the Favor
which he should find among Protestants; and the Pope would not be any thing
formidable to the French King.

It Is time now to draw to a conclusion, and therefore I shall only say, that it
is clear as the Sun shine, that the Court of Fr^nce by saving that damage
which Popery occasions to the Ki^gdom, might easily upon the 200 Millions which
the Kingdom would at least gain by it, increase its Revenue 100 Millions,
without reckoning the Revenues of the Church, the Plate in their Churches and
Treasuries, and their Gro^ing-timber, which the King might dispose of as he
should think fit, and at the same time the blessing of God would attend the
King and the Nation, whereas they have great reason to dread the contrary, if
they don't follow this Me^hod. But whereas, it continues too evident that the
Romish Clergy influences the King to persecute and murder still his Protestant
Subjects with all manner of Outrage, it it a certain proof that the Pope is
a^raid of his Power still, and does not think him reduced low enough, and
therefore if he can, he will certainly prompt him to undertake new Enterpri^es
against some Nation and perhaps a Protestant State, and the truth is while the
French Court continues to treat their own Reformed Subjects at that rate,
there is very good reason for Protestants to be Jealous of them.

By this Persecution we may perceive that the Morals of the Church of Rome are
far worse ^han those of the civilized Pagans, as appears by that Saying of
Tacitus, Apud optimum quemque ^am miserum est occidere quam perire: That is to
say, all honest Men account it as u^grateful to nature to kill others as to be
killed themselves; but on the contrary, that which is called the Church of
Rome, accounts it a thing meri^orious to be drunk with the Blood of the Saints,
and esteems it more advantageous to those that shed it, or occasion it to be
shed than the Blood of the Cross; so that I cannot forbear to say, that it
would seem that Persecuting Clergy are certain of their own Reprobation, for if
they were in any doubt concerning it, or had the least hope of Salvation, or
that their Church were not wholly abandoned by God, they would not so defile
and pollute it, by such a desperate Conduct, and by the Commission of so many
Cruelties, Perjuries, Profanities and Sacriledges to advance its Interest.

FINIS.
Consult the Errata.

