TWELVE SERMONS UPON Several Subjects AND Occasions.

By ROBERT SOVTH, D.D.

The Third Volume.

Never before Printed.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Churchyard, School.

To the Most Reverend Father in GOD NARCISSUS Lord Archbishop of DVBLIN, His
Grace.
My Lord,
THE Particular Acquaintance and Friendship which your Grace was pleased to
Honor me with, while you lived at Oxford, have emboldened me (...) address my
self to your Lordship at this great distance of Place, and greater of
Condition, in hopes that by your Grace's Advancement to so high a Station in
the Church, That, which before was only Friendship, may now Improve into
Patronage and Protection. And yet, as Ambitious as I am of so ennobling a
Patronage, and as singular a Value as I have for your Grace's Favor, I must
needs own, that the Design of my present Application to your Grace, is not so
much to Crave a Favor, as to pay a Debt: and, in answer to the many
obligations I lie under, to Congratulate your Grace that height of Dignity and
Greatness, to which Providence has so happily raised you, and your own Worth so
justly entitled you, and so, without your seeking (and much less sneaking) for
it, made you, to your great Honor, to be sought for by it: There being (as
from my heart I believe) few Examples in the World, of so much Merit, and so
much Modesty in Conjunction.

It is indeed no small Infelicity to the Church of England, to have parted with
so Extraordinary a Member; but none at all I conceive to your Grace, that you
are placed, where you are; Especially, if your Grace shall Consider, the
present estate of our Church here, as through the Arts of her Enemies she
stands divided against Her self: and that only by Two, or Three Odd New Terms
of Distinction maliciously invented, and Studiously made use of for that base
Purpose; such a Sovereign, or at least such a peculiar, method have some found
out for preserving our Church, if the best way to preserve a Body, be by
Cutting it a sunder. For those of the Ancienter Members of Her Communion who
have all along owned and contended for a strict Conformity to Her Rules and
Sanctions, as the surest Course to establish Her, have been of late
represented, or rather Reprobated under the Inodiateing Character of High
Churchmen, and thereby stand marked out for all the discouragement that Spite,
and Power together can pas^ upon them; while those of the Contrary Way and
Principle are Distinguished, or rather Sanctified, by the fashionable Endearing
Name of Low Churchmen; not from their affecting (we may be sure) a Lower
Condition in the Church than others; (since none lie so low but they can look
as high) but from the Low Condition, which the Authors of this Distinction
would fain bring the Church it self into: A Work, in which they have made no
small Progress already. And thus by these Vngenerous, as well as Unconscionable
Practices, a Fatal Rent and Division is made amongst us: and, being so, I
think, those of the Concision who made it, would do well to Consider, whether
that, which our Savior assures us, will destroy a Kingdom, be the likeliest
way to settle and support a Church. But I question not, but these Dividers will
very shortly receive Thanks from the Papists for the Good Services they have
done them; and in the mean time they may be sure of their Scoffs.

Never certainly were the Fundamental Articles of our Faith so boldly impugned,
nor the Honor of our Church so foully blemished, as they have been of late
Years; while the Socinians have had their full Uncontrolled Fling at Both; and
the Tritheists, have injured and exposed them more by pretending to defend them
against the Socinians, than the Socinians themselves did, or could do, by
opposing them. For surely it would be thought a very odd way of ridding a Man
of the Plague by running Him through with a Sword; or of Curing Him of a
Lethargy by casting Him into a Calenture; a Disease of a Contrary Nature
indeed, but no less Fatal to the Patient; who equally dies whether his Sickness
or his Physic, the malignity of his Distemper, or the method of his Cure
dispatches him. And in like manner must it fare with a Church, which feeling it
self struck with the Poison of Socinianism, flies to Tritheism for an Antidote.

But at length happily steps in the Royal Authority to the Church's Relief,
with several Healing Injunctions, in its Hand, for the Composing and Ending the
Disputes about the Trinity then on foot; and those indeed so wisely framed, so
seasonably timed, and (by the King at least) so graciously intended, that they
must in all Likelihood (without any Other Irenicon) have restored Peace to the
Church, had it not been for the Importunity and Partiality of some, who having
by the Awe of these Injunctions endeavored to silence the opposite Party
(which by their Arguments they could not do,) and withal looking upon
themselves as Privileged Persons, and so above those Ordinances, which others
were to be subject to, Resolved not to be silent themselves; but renewing the
Contest, partly by throwing Muggleton, and Rigaltius, with some Other foul
stuff in their Adversaries faces; and partly by a shameless Reprinting (without
the least Reinforcing) the same exploded Tritheistick Notions again and again,
they quite broke through the Royal Prohibitions, and soon after began to take
as great a Liberty in venting their Innovations and Invectives, as ever they
had done before; so that He, who shall Impartially Consider the Course taken by
these Men with reference to those engaged on the other side of this Controversy
about the Trinity, will find that their whole Proceeding in it resembles
nothing so much, as a Thief's binding the hands of an honest Man with a Cord,
much fitter for his own Neck.

But, blessed be God, matters stand not so with you in Ireland; the Climate
there being not more Impatient of Poisonous Animals, than the Church of
Poisonous Opinions; An Universal Concurrent Orthodoxy shining all over it, from
the superior Clergy who preside, to the Inferior placed under them: so that
we never hear from thence of any Presbyter, and much less of any Dean, who
dares Innovate upon the Faith Received: and least of all (should such a Wretch
chance to start up amongst you) can I hear of any Bishop likely to debase his
Style and Character so low as either to Defend the Man, or Color over his
Opinions. Nor lastly do we find, that, in the Judgment of the Clergy there, a
Man'^ having wrote against one sort of Heresy or Heterodoxy, ought to Justify
or Excuse Him in Writing for Another; and much less for a Worse.

The Truth is, such Things as these make the Case with us here in England Come
too near that of Poland about an Hundred and Twenty or Thirty Years ago; See a
Learned Tract in 8^o. Entitled, The Growth of Error, etc. Sect. 8. Printed in
the Year, 1697.
Where the Doctrine of Three distinct infinite Spirits began, and led the
Dance; and was quickly followed (as the Design was laid) by Socinianism.
Whereupon, their old Popery got a firmer establishment, and more rigorous
Imposition than before: (the Government preferring a less Pure, and Perfect
Christianity before the most refined Turcism.) This was the method taken there,
and I wish it may not have the like Issue here.

But on the Contrary amongst You, when a Certain Mohammedan Christian (No new
thing of late), Notorious for his Blasphemous Denial of the Mysteries of our
Religion, and his Insufferable Virulence against the whole Christian
Priesthood, thought to have found shelter amongst you, the Parliament to their
Immortal Honor, Presently sent him Packing, and without the help of a Faggot
soon made the Kingdom too Hot for him. A sufficient Argument Doubtless, how far
we are from needing those savage Executions, used by the Papists to Rid the
Church of Heretics and Blasphemers, where Authority Animated with due Zeal
will attempt that worthy Work, by other more Humane, but not less effectual
means. Nothing Certainly but Power, as the World now goes, can keep the Church
in Peace.

And now, My Lord, may that God by whom Princes and Prelate's Govern, and
Churches stand, long preserve Your Grace, and that Excellent Church, which you
are so eminent a Pillar of, and Ornament to; and which by Her Incomparable
Courage and Faithfulness lately shown in preserving that Great Depositum, the
Holy Religion Committed to her Trust, has gotten her self a Name, which will
never die; and such a solid well-founded Reputation, as no Bending this way or
that way, no Trimming or Tricking it, ever could or can give so Ample and so
Considerable a Body. For it is Lead only that Bends to almost every Thing,
which the Nobler Metals cannot do, and the Nobler sort of minds will not.

But I fear, I trespass too far upon Your Grace's Time and Business; And
therefore humbly imploring Your Grace's blessing, I lay these Poor Papers at
Your feet; infinitely Unworthy, I Confess, of the Acceptance of so great a
Person, and the Perusal of so Judicious an Eye, but yet, at present, the best
pledges I can give Your Grace of those sincere Respects, and Services, which
Your Grace ought always to Claim, and shall never fail to Receive, from,

My Lord, Your Grace's ever Faithful and most Obedient Servant, Robert South.
Westminster April 30. School.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SERMONS.
SERMON I.
JOB XXII.2. former part. Can a Man be profitable to God? p. 3
SERMON II
Luke XI.35. Take heed therefore that the Light which is in Thee be not
Darkness. p. 35
SERMON III
Matthew. V.44. former part. But I say unto you, Love your Enemies. p. III
SERMON IV.
Matthew. VII.26, 27. And every one that hears these sayings of Mine, and does
them not, shall be likened unto a foolish Man, who built his House upon the
Sand. And the Rain descended, and the Floods came and the Winds blew, and beat
upon that House and it fell, and great was the fall of it. p. 165
SERMON V.
1 Cor. VIII.12. But when ye Sin so against the Brethren, and Wound their Weak
Conscience, ye Sin against Christ. p. 211
SERMON VI.
1 Cor. II.7. former part. But we speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery. p. 259
SERMON VII.
Revel. XXII.16. latter part. I am the Root and the Offspring of David, and
the Bright and Morning Star. p. 315
SERMON VIII.
John I.11. He came to His Own, and His Own received Him not. p. 361
SERMON IX.
Isaiah LIII.8. latter part. -- For the Transgression of my People was He
stricken. p. 415
SERMON X.
Acts II.24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the Pains of Death: because
it was not possible that He should be holden of it. p. 463
SERMON XI.
1 Cor. XII.4. Now there are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit. p. 503
SERMON XII.
Psalm CXLIV.10. former part. It is He that gives Salvation unto Kings. p. 553
Some of the Chief Errors of the Press are thus to be Corrected.
PAge 27. l. 23. r. Eleemosynary, p. 25. l. 23. r. suitable, p. 36. l. 22. for
do r. de, p. 46. l. 14. for Of r. and, p. 61. l. 4. r. Unconceivably, p. 79. l.
15. r. Ethiopian, p. 87. l. 1. r. skillfullest, p. 89. l. 19. for Himself r.
Him, p. 92. l. 19. r. Instances, p. 122. l. 25. for was r. were, p. 138. l. 2.
r. artificially, p. 139. l. 25. for ever r. even, p. 150. l. 24. dele the first
[And] p. 153. l. 9. r. Head, p. 155. l. 12. for Who r. whom, p. 247. l. 16. for
last r. late, p. 264. l. 23. r. Influence, p. 283. l. 5. r. Egyptians, p. 315.
l. 10. r. Epiphany, p. 351. l. 9. r. Appearance, p. 451. l. 16. for [word] r.
Work, p. 456. l. last r. Renounce, p. 542. l. 1. for Rule r. of Rule, p. 578.
l. 9. dele from, p. 596. l. 13. r. Concerning.

Books lately Printed for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
TWenty four Sermons upon several Occasions; being the First and Second Volume.
By Robert South, D. D. The Second Edition. Sermons and Discourses upon several
Occasions. By Dr. Stradling, Dean of Chichester. With an Account of the Author
by James Harrington, Esquire. Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions. By Dr.
Meggot, Dean of Winchester. The Certainty and Necessity of Religion in General:
or, the first Grounds and Principles of Human Duty Established. In eight
Sermons, Preached at St. Martins in the Fields; at the Lecture for the Year
1697, founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire. By Francis Gastrell, B. D.
and Student of Christ-Church, Oxon. Some Considerations concerning the Trinity,
and the ways of managing that Controversy. The Second Edition: Together with a
Defense of them against the Objections of the Dean of St. Paul's. A Discourse of
Religious Assemblies; wherein the Nature and Necessity of Divine Worship is
Asserted and Explained, against Negligence and Profaneness: For the use of the
Members of the Church of England. By Geo. Burghope, Rector of Little Gaddesden
in Hertfordshire. A Conference between an Orthodox Christian, and a Socinian,
in four Dialogues: Wherein the late distinction of a Real, and a Nominal
Trinitarian is considered. By H. De Luzancy, B. D. Vic. of Dovercourt and
Harwich.
THE Doctrine of Merit STATED, AND THE Impossibility of MAN'S Meriting of GOD,
Asserted in a DISCOURSE UPON The 22. of Job, and the 2d Verse.

PREACHED At Westminster-Abbey, On December. 5th 1697.

JOB XXII.2. Can a man be Profitable to God?


IT is a matter of no small moment certainly for a Man to be rightly informed,
upon what Terms, and ^onditions, he is to transact with God, and God with him,
in the Great Business of his Salvation. For by Knowing upon what Terms he must
obtain Eternal Happiness hereafter, he will know also, upon what Grounds he is
to hope for, and expect it here; and so be able to govern both his Actions and
Expectations according to the Nature of the Thing he is in Pursuit of: Least,
otherwise, he should chance to fail of the Prize he runs for, by mistaking the
Way he should run in.

St. Paul, as plainly as words can express a Thing, tells us, That Eternal Life
is the Gift of God; and Consequently to be expected by us only as such: nay, He
asserts it to be a Gift in the very same verse in which He affirms Death to be
as due to a Sinner, as Wages are to a Work man, Romans 6.23. Than which Words
nothing certainly can be more full and Conclusive, That Salvation proceeds
wholly upon Free-gift, though Damnation upon strict Desert.

Nevertheless, such is the Extreme folly, or rather Sottishness of Man^ Corrupt
Nature, That this does by (...) means Satisfy Him. For though indeed he would
fain be Happy, yet fain would He also Thank none for it but Himself. And,
though He finds, that, not only His Duty, but His Necessity brings him every
day upon His knees to Almighty God, for the very Bread he eats, yet when he
comes to deal with Him about Spirituals (things of infinitely greater Value) he
appears, and acts, not as a Suppliant, but as a Merchant; not as One, who comes
to be Relieved, but to Traffic. For something he would receive of God, and
something he would Give Him; and nothing will content this Insolent, yet
Impotent Creature, unless he may seem to Buy the very Thing he Begs. Such being
the Pride and Baseness of some Spirits, that where they Receive a Benefit too
big for them to requite, they will even Deny the Kindness, and disown the
Obligation.

Now this great self-delusion, so prevalent upon most minds, is the Thing here
encountered in the Text. The words of which (by an usual way of speech) under
an Interrogation couching a Positive Assertion, are a Declaration of the
Impossibility of man's being Profitable to God, or (which is all one) of his
meriting of God; according to the true, proper, and strict sense of Merit. No^
does this Interrogative way of Expression import only a bare Negation of the
Thing, as, in it self, Impossible, but also a manifest, Undeniable Evidence of
the said Impossibility; As if it had been said, That nothing can be more
plainly Impossible, than for a man to be Profitable to God; for God to receive
any Advantage by man's Righteousness; or to gain any Thing by his making his
Ways perfect: and Consequently, That nothing can be more absurd, and contrary
to all Sense and Reason, ^^an for a man to entertain, and cherish so irrational
a Conceit, or to affirm so gross a Paradox.

And that no other Thing is here meant by a man's being profitable to God, but
his meriti^^ of God, will appear from a true State and Account of the Nature of
Merit; Which we may not improperly define, A Right to receive some good upon
the score of some good done, together with an Equi^olence or Parity of Worth
between the Good to be Received and the Good Done. So that although according
to the Common Divis^^n of Justice into Commutative and Distributive, that,
which is called Commutative, be employed only about the strict Value of Things,
according to an Arithmetical Proportion, (as the Schools speak) which admits of
no Degrees; and the other species of Justice, called Distributive, (as
consisting in the Distribution of Rewards and Punishments) admits of some
Latitude and degrees in the Dispensation of it; yet, in Truth, even this
Distribution it self must so far follow the Rules of Commutation, That the Good
to be dispensed by way of Reward, ought in Justice to be Equivalent to the
Work, or Action, which it is designed as a Compensation of; So as by no means
to sink below it, or fall short of the full Value of it. From all which (upon a
just Estimate of the matter) it follows, That, in true Philosophy, Merit is
nothing else, but an Instance, or Exemplification of that Noted saying, or
Maxim, That one Benefaction, or good Turn requires another; and imports neither
more nor less, than a man's claim, or Title to Receive as much Good from
another, as he had done for him.

Thus much therefore being premised, as an Explication of the Drift, or Design
of the Words (the Words themselves being too plain and Easy to need any further
exposition) we shall observe, and draw from them these Four Particulars.

First, Something supposed, or employed in them, viz. That Men are naturally
very Prone to entertain an Opinion, or Persuasion, That they are able to merit
of God, or be Profitable to Him. Secondly, Something expressed; namely That
such an Opinion or Persuasion is utterly false and absurd; and that it i^
impossible for man to merit of God, or to be Profitable to Him. Thirdly,
Something Inferred from both the former, to wit, That the forementioned
Opinion, or Persuasion is the very source or foundation of Two of the greatest
Corruptions, that have infested the Christian Church and Religion. And
Fourthly, and Lastly, Something objected against the Particulars discoursed of,
which I shall endeavor ^o answer* and remove; and so Conclude this Discourse.
Of Each of which in their order: And

First, For the first of them. The Thing supposed or Employed in the Words,
namely, That Men are naturally very Prone to entertain an Opinion or
Persuasion, That they are able to merit of God, or be Profitable to Him.

The Truth of which will appear from these two Considerations.

First, That it is Natural for them to place too High a Value both upon
themselves, and their own Performances. And that this is so, is evident from
that Universal Experience, which proves it no less Natural to them, to bear a
more than ordinary Love to themselves; and all Love (we know) is founded in,
and results from, a Proportionable Esteem of the Object Loved: So that, look in
what Degree any Man loves himself, in the same Degree it will follow, that he
must Esteem himself too. Upon which account it is, that every Man will be sure
to set his own Price upon what he is, and what he does, whether the World will
come up to it or no; as it seldom does.

That speech of St. Peter to our Savior is very remarkable, in Mat. xix.27.
Master (says he) we have forsook all, and followed Thee, what shall we have
therefore? In which words, he seems to be upon Equal Terms with his Lord; and
to expect no more of him (as he thought) but strictly a Pennyworth for his
Penny; and all this from a Conceit that he had done an A^ so exceedingly
Meritorious, that it must even Nonplus his Master's Bou^^y, to quit scores
with him by a just Requital. Nay, so far had the same proud Ferment got into
the Minds of all the Disciples, that neither could their own low condition, nor
the constant S^rmons of that Great Example of Self-denial and Humility, whom
they daily conversed with; nor lastly, the Correctives of a Peculiar Grace
totally clear, and cure them of it. And therefore, no Wonder, if a Principle so
deeply rooted in Nature works with the whole Power of Nature; and considering
also ^he Corruption of Nature, as little wonder is it, if it runs out with an
Extravagance equal to its Power, making the Minds of Men even Drunk with a
false intoxicating conceit of their own Worth, and Abilities. From whence it
is, That, as Man is, of all Creatures in the World, both the most Desirous, and
the most Unable to advance himself, So, through Pride and Indigence, (Qualities
which usually concur in Beggars) none is so unwillingly to own the Benefactions
he lives by, and has no claim to, as this weak and worthless Self-Admirer, who
has nothing to be admired in him, but that he can, upon such Terms, admire
Himself. For Naked came I into the World, and Naked shall I go out again, ought
to be the Motto of eve^^ Man when born, the History of his Life, and his
Epitaph when Dead: His Emptiness and Self-consciousness together, cannot but
make him feel in himself (which is the surest way of knowing) that He has
indeed Nothing, and yet he bears himself (...) if he could command all things;
at the same time low in condition, and yet lofty in opinion; boasting and yet
depending; nay boasting against Him, whom he depends upon. Which certainly is
the foulest Solecism in Behavior, and two of the worst Qualities, that can be,
in Conjunction. But,

Secondly, A Second Consideration, from whence we infer this Proneness in Men
to think themselves able to Merit of God, or to be Profitable to Him, is their
Natural ^ptness to form, and measure their apprehensions of the Supreme Lord of
all Things, by what they apprehend, and observe of the Princes and Potentates
of this World, with reference to such as are under their Dominion. And this is,
certainly, a very prevailing fallacy, and steals (...) ^asily upon Men's Minds,
as being ^ounded in the unhappy Predominance of Sense over Reason; which, in
the present Condition of Man's Nature, does but too frequently, and fatally
take Place. For Men naturally have but faint Notions of Things Spiritual, and
such as incurr not into their Senses; but their Eyes, their Ears, and their
Hands are too often made by them the Rule of their Faith, but almost always the
Reason of their Practice. And therefore no marvel if they blunder in their
Notions about God; a Being, so Vastly above the Apprehensions of Sense; while
they conceive no otherwise of Him at best, but as of some great King, or
Prince, ruling with a Wordly Majesty, and Grandeur over such Puny mortals as
themselves: Whereupon, as they frame to themselves no other Idea of Him, but
such as they borrow from the Royal Estate of an Earthly Sovereign, so they
conceive also of their own Relation to Him, and Dependence upon him, just as
they do of that which passes between such a Sovereign and His Subjects; and
consequently, since they find, that there is (...) Prince upon Earth so
Absolute, but that he stands in as much need of His subjects for many Things,
as they do, or can stand in need of Him for His Government and Protection; (by
reason whereof there must needs follow a reciprocal Exchange of Offices, and a
mutual supply of Wants between them, rendering both Parties Equally Necessary to
One Another.) I say from these misapplyed Premises, the Low, Gross,
Undistinguishing Reason of the Generality of Mankind, presently infers, That
the Creature also may, on some Accounts be as Beneficial to His Creator, as
such a Subject is to his Prince; and that there may be the like Circulation of
good Turns between them; they being (as they think) within their compass, as
really ^seful to God, as God for His Part is Beneficial to them; which is the
True Notion of Merit, or of being Profitable to God. A conceit, that sticks so
close to Humane Nature, that neither Philosophy, nor Religion can wholly remove
it; And yet if we consider the limited Right, which (...) Greatest Prince upon
Earth has over his meanest slave, and that Absolute, Boundless, Paramount
Right, which God has over the very same Things, and Persons, which such Princes
avow a Claim to, and by virtue of which Transcendent Right somet hing is God's
which can never be Theirs; And even what is Theirs is still by a much Higher
title His, I say, if we consider this, the Absurdity and Inconsequence of all
such Discourses about the Relation between God and Man, as are taken from what
we see, and observe between Man and Man, as Governing and governed, is hereby
more than sufficiently proved: and yet as Absurd, as Fallacious, and
Inconsequent as this way of Discoursing is, it is one of the Chief Foundations
of the Doctrine of Merit, and consequently of the Religion of too great a Part
of the World: A Religion tending only to defraud men of their true Savior, by
persuading them that they may be their Own. And thus much for the first
Particular, the Thing supposed in the Words, to wit, That Men are Naturally
very prone to persuade themselv^^, that they are able to Merit of God, or be
Profitable to Him.

I proceed now to the

Second Particular, In which we have something expressed, namely, That such a
Persuasion is utterly false and Absurd, and that it is Impossible for Men to
Merit of God, or be Profitable to Him. And this I shall Evince by showing the
several Ingredients of Merit, and the Conditions necessary to render an Action
Meritorious. Such as are these four that follow; as

First, That an Action be not due; that is to say, it must not be such as a Man
stands obliged to the doing of; but such as he is free either to do, or not to
do, without being chargeable with the Guilt of any sinful Omission, in case he
does it not. It being no ill Account given of Merit by Spanhemius (the Elder,
Dub. Evang. Part 3^ page 782.
) That it is Opus bonum Indebitum faciens praemium debitum ex Indebito. For
otherwise, if that which is Due, may also Merit, then, by paying what I owe, I
may make my Creditors my Debtors; and every Payment would not only clear; but
also transfer the Debt.

Besides, that in all the Benefactions passing from Almighty God upon such as
serve him the best they can, there could be no such thing as Liberality; which
can never take place but where something is given, which the Receiver cannot
Challenge: Nay, very hardly could there be any such Thing as Gift. For if there
be first a Claim, then, in strictness of speech, it is not so properly Gift, as
Payment. Yea, so vast would be the Comprehension of Justice, that it would
scarce leave any Object for Favor. But God's Grace and Bounty, being so
prevented by Merit, would be Spectators rather than Actors in the whole work of
Man's Salvation. Nor would our Obedience to God's Positive Precepts only, but
also to His Negative sometimes strike in for their share of Merit, and Claim to
a Reward. And any one, who could plead such a Negative Righteousness, might
come and demand a Recompense of God for not Drinking, or Whoreing, Swearing or
Blaspheming; just as the Pharisee did, for not Being as the very Dregs of
Sinners; and so vouch himself meritorious (forsooth) for being a Degree or Two
short of Scandalous. Moreover, amongst Men, it would pass for an obligation
between Neighbors, that one of them did not rob or murder the other; and a
sufficient Plea for Preferment before Kings and Governors, not to have
deserved the Gibbet and the Halter: which is a poor Plea indeed, when to have
deserved them proves oftentimes a better. In short, upon these Terms, He, who
is not the very worst of Villains, must commence presently a Person of a
peculiar Worth; and bare Indemnity will be too low a Privilege for the Merit of
Not being a Clamorous, Overgrown Malefactor.

But now, that All that any Man alive is Capable of Doing, is but an
Indispensable Homage to God, and not a free Oblation; and that also such an
Homage, as makes his Obligation to what he does much earlier than his Doing of
it, will appear both from the Law of Nature, and that of God's Positive
Command: Of each of which a word or two, and

First, For the Law of Nature. There is Nothing that Nature proclaims with a
louder, and more intelligible Voice, Than, that He, who gives a Being, and
afterward preserves and supports it, has an Indefeasible claim to whatsoever
the said Being so Given, and Supported by Him, either is, or has, or can
Possibly do. But this is a point, which I must be more particular upon, and
thereby lay a foundation for what I shall argue, a Fortiore, concerning God
Himself, from what is to be observed amongst Men. Now the Right, which One Man
has to the Actions of Another, is generally derived from One, or Both of these
two Great Originals, Production, or Possession. The first of which gives a
Parent right over the Actions of his Child; and the other gives a Master a
Title to whatsoever can be done by his Servant. Which two are certainly the
Principal, and most Undoubted Rights, that take place in the World. And both of
them are Eminently and transcendently in God, as He stands related to Men: and

First, For Production. By the purest and most Entire Communication of Being,
God did not only Produce, but Create Man. He gave him an Existence out of
Nothing, and while he was yet but a mere Idea or Possibility in the Mind of his
Eternal Maker. That one Expression of the Psalmist, It is He who has made us,
and not we our selves, being both a full account, and an irrefragable
Demonstration of His Absolute Sovereignty over our Persons, and His
incontestable Claim to all Our Services. Nor is this the Utmost measure of our
obligation to Him, but as He first drew us out of Nothing and Nonexistence, so
He ever since keeps us from Relapsing into it; His Power brought us forth; and
His Providence maintains us. And thus has this poor Impotent Creature been
perpetually hanging upon the Bounty of his great Creator, and by a daily
Preservation of his Precarious Being^ stands obliged to Him under the growing
renewed Title of a Continual^ Creation. But this is not all. There is ye^*

Secondly, Another Title; whereby One Person obtains a Right to all that
another Can do; and that is Possession. A Title, every whit as Transcendently
in God as the former; as being founded in, and Resulting from His forementioned
Prerogative of a Creator. Nothing being more Unquestionable, Than that the
Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: as the Psalmist declares, Psalm
24.1. v. He is the Sole Proprietor, and Grand Landlord of the Universe. And
moreover, as all Things were made by Him, so they were made for Him also; He
made all Things for Himself, says the wisest of Men, Prove. 16.4. He is the
Original Efficient by which, and the Great and Last End for which they are: For
by Him they Begun, and in Him they Terminate. After which two Essential
Relations born by God to Man on the one side, and obliging Man to God on the
other, can there be any Thing that is Good, either in the Being or Actions of
the latter, which can be called perfectly his own? any Thing which is not
entirely due to God, and that by a Complication of the most binding and
Indispensable Titles? And if so, How and where can there be any Room for such a
Thing, as Merit?

The Civil Law tells us, that Servants have not properly a Ius, a Right or
Title, to any Thing, by Virtue whereof they can implead, or bring an Action
against their Lord, upon any account whatsoever; every such Servant, as the Law
here speaks of, being not only his Masters Vassal, but also part of his
Possessions. And this Right our Savior Himself owns, and sets forth to Us by
an Elegant Parable, couching under it as strong an argument, Luke 17.7, 8, 9.
Which of You (says He) having a Servant plowing, or feeding Cattle, will say
unto him by and by, when he is come from the Field, Go, and sit down to meat?
And will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup; and gird thy
self and serve me, till I have eaten and drank; and afterward thou shall Eat
and Drink. Does he thank that Servant, because he did the Things that were
Commanded him? I trow not. Where we see, upon what Terms of Right, even the
most diligent, and faithful Servant stands with his Master; who after he had
been Toyling all Day in his Masters Business, dressing and manuring his
Grounds, and Watering them with the drops of his brow, comes home at length
hungry, and tired, (where if he could find no reward for his hard service, yet,
one would think, that he might at least expect a Discharge from any further
Work, and receive the Present Refreshments of his Natural food,) yet even then
his Master renews his Employment, delays his Repast, and Commands him to serve,
and attend him at his Table, and with weary Limbs, and an empty Stomach, to
expect a dismission at his pleasure; and, all this, without so much as any
Thanks for his Pains. In which, neither is the Master Unjust, nor the Servant
injured. For he did no more than what his Condition obliged him to; he did but
his Duty; and Duty certainly neither is, nor can be Meritorious. Thus, I say,
stands the Case amongst Men, according to the Difference of their respective
Conditions in this World. And if so, must not the same Obligation, as it passes
between God and Man, rise as much higher, as the Condition of a Creature founds
an Obligation incomparably Greater, than that of a bare Servant possibly can?
And therefore, since man stands bound to God under Both these Titles, to wit,
of Production, and Possession, How can there be a greater Paradox, than for
such a Contemptible, forlorn piece of Living dirt, to claim any Thing upon the
stock of Merit from Him, Who is both his Master and his Maker too? No, the very
best of Men, upon the very best of their Services, have no other Plea before
God but Prayer; they may indeed beg an Alms, but must not think to ^^and upon
their Te^ms. But,

Secondly, Not only the Law of Nature, and the Reason of the Thing it self, (as
we have sufficiently shown) Excludes a Man from all Plea of Merit, but also
that further Obligation lying upon him, and all his services from the positive
Law, and Command of God, equally cuts him off from the same. The known Voice of
that Law being, Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou
serve. Matthew. 4.10. And th^n for the measure and extent of that service, It is
to be, with all the Heart, and all the Strength, and all the Soul. Mark 12.30.
Which one Comprehensive Injunction grasping in it all that humane nature is
able to do, and by Consequence bringing all that can be done by Man within the
compass and Verge of Duty^ has left no Vacancy or Possibility for Merit to take
place; till it be proved, That a Man may actually do more, than with all his
Heart, and all his Strength, and all his Soul, he is able to do; than which, it
is impossible, even for Com^on sense, to conceive any Thing more senseless and
contradictious. And so I proceed to the

II. Condition required to render an Action meritorious; and that is, That it
should really add to, and better the State of the Person of whom it is to
Merit. The reason of which is, because all merit (as we have shown before)
consists properly in a Right to receive some Benefit, on the account of some
Benefit first done: The Natural order of Things requiring, that where a
Considerable Advantage has been received, something of the like Nature should
be returned. For that otherwise, if one Part of the World should be always upon
the Receiving hand, and never upon the Restoring, that Part would be a kind of
monstrous Dead Weight upon the other, and all that was good and useful to
Mankind would by an Enormous Disparity lean wholly on one side.

But to bring the foremen^ioned Condition of Merit home to our present Purpose,
and thereby to show how far God is capable of Receiving from man, a^^ man of
giving to God, it may not be amiss briefly to represent to our selves, What God
is, and what man is, and by Consequence how the Case of Giving and Receiving
must stand on God's Part, and how on Man's* And here in the

1 st. Place. God offers Himself to our Consideration as a Being infinitely
Perfect, infinitely Happy, and Self-sufficient; depending upon no supply, or
Revenue from abroad; but (as I may so express it) retreating wholly into
Himself, and there living for ever upon the Inexhaustible stock of His Own
Essential fullness; And, as a Fountain owes not its Streams to any Poor,
Adventitious Infusions from without, but to the Internal, Unfailing Plenties of
its own Springs; So this Mighty, All-comprehending Being which we call God;
needs no other Happiness, but to Contemplate upon that which he actually is,
and ever was, and shall be possessed of. From all which it follows, That the
Divine Nature, and Beatitude, can no more admit of any Addition to it, than we
can add Degrees to Infinity, new measures to Immensity, and further
Improvements to a Boundless, Absolute, Vnimproveable Perfection: For such a
Being is the Great God, Who is one of the Parties whom we are now discoursing
of. Nevertheless, to carry the Case a little further; supposing for the
Present, That the Divine Nature and Felicity were capable of some further
Addition and Increase, Let us in the

2. Place, cast our Eye upon the other Party concerned, and consider, whether
Man be a Being fit, and able to make this Addition: Man, I say, that poor,
slight, Inconsiderable Nothing; or at best a Pitiful Something, beholden to
every one of the Elements, as well as Compounded of them, and living as an
Eleemosinary upon a Perpetual contribution from all, and every Part of the
Creation; This Creature clothing him, another feeding him, a third curing him
when sick, and a fourth comforting and Refreshing him when well. In a word, he
subsists by the joint Alms of Heaven and Earth; and stands at the Mercy of
every Thing in Nature, which is able either to help, or hurt him.

And is this now the Person who is to oblige hi^ Maker? to indent and drive
barga^^s with the Almighty? Those, I am sure, who, in their several Ages, have
been reputed most Eminent for their knowledge of God and of themselves too,
used to speak at much another Rate concerning Both. My Goodness (says David)
extends not to Thee^ Ps. 16.2. And again, If Thou be righteou^ (says Elihu to
Job) what give thou Him? or what does He receive at thy hands? Job 35.7. So
that St. Paul might well make that Challenge without expecting ever to see it
answered in Romans 11.35. Who has first given to Him and it shall be recompensed
to him again? For let Man but first prove the Debt, and the Almighty will be
sure to pay it. But most fully of all does our Savior Himself determine this
point in that Remarkable conclusion of the forecited Parable, in Luke 17.10.
where He instructs His Disciples, After they had done all that was Commanded
them, to acknowledge themselves Unprofitable Servants. That is to say, such as
God, upon no account whatsoever, was, or could be at all the better for. And a
clearer Text certainly, and more direct, and home against all Pretense of Merit
neither Law, nor Gospel can afford.

Nevertheless, it must be confessed, That some have found out such an
Exposition of it, as (if admitted) renders it ^f no force at all against this
Doctrine of Merit. For first, they absolutely Cashier and Literal, Express
sense of the Words, and in the room of it Introduce a Figure called by the
Greeks, (...), which to diminish, or degrade a thing, expresses it in Terms
representing it much less than indeed it is; as when we say, a thing is smaller
than an Atome, less than Nothing, and the like; Such words are not to be
understood Literally, but import only, that the thing spoken of is very
Inconsiderable. Accordingly, when Christ bids His Disciples after their best
and most exact Performances acknowledge themselves Unprofitable Servants; we
are not (say these Expositors) to conclude from hence, That really they were
so, but that Christ only read the^ (...) Lecture of Humility, and
Self-abasement toward God, in speaking but meanly and lowly of their own
Piety, how differently soever it might deser^e to be Valued, according to the
str^^^ Estimate of the Thing it self. So that by all this (it seems) our
Savior was only teaching those about Him, how to pa^^ Complements upon
Almighty God, Their Professing of themselves Unprofitable Servants, amounting
to no more than if they had told Him, they were His Humble Servants. The
meaning of which words (if they have any meaning at all) the Fashionable Custom
of Gentile Lying will much better account for, than the Language of Scripture (
the word of Truth) is able to do. But in the mean time, what an insufferable
perversion of the Written Word is it, to affix such a sense to any Text of it,
as this forced Exposition here does? which manifestly turns a most Devout
Confession to Almighty God into a piece of Courtship; a Principal Truth into a
mere Trope or Figure; and, in a word, one of the highest Duties of a Christian
into a false, fulsome, and (at best) an Empty Expression. And so I pass to the

III. Condition required to render an Action meritorious; and that is, That
there be an Equal Proportion of Value between the Action, and the Reward. This
being evident from the foundation already laid by us; to wit, That the Nature
of Merit consists properly in Exchange; and that, we know, must proceed
according to a Parity of Worth on both sides; Commutation being most properly
between things Equivalent. But now the Prize we run for, in all our Religious
performances, is no less a thing than Life Eternal, and a Beatifick Enjoyment
of God Himself for ever; And can any Man, not quite abandoned by his Reason,
imagine a few, weak, broken Actions, a competent Price for Heaven and
Immortality? And fit to be laid in the balance with an Exceeding and Eternal
Weight of Glory? Is there any thing in Dust and Ashes, that can deserve to
dwell with God, and to converse with Angels? O^ can we, who live by sense, and
act by sense, do any thing worthy of those joy which not only exceed our
senses, but also transcend our Intellectuals? Can w^ do beyond what we can
Think? And Deserve beyond what we can do? For let us rate our best, and most
Exact services according to the strict Rules of Morality, and what Man is able
to carry so steady an hand in any Religious performance, as to observe all
those Conditions, that are absolutely necessary to answer the full Measures of
the Law? No, this is such a pitch of Acting as the present strengths of Nature
must not pretend to. And if not, how can an Action, short of complete Morality,
set up for Meritorious?

The Papists; we know, in their disputes upon this subject, distinguish of
merit into that which is de Condigno, which merits a Reward upon Terms of
Justice, and by Reason of the inherent Worth and Value of the Work done; and
that on the other side to be de Congruo, which, though it cannot claim a Reward
upon those Terms, and and from the Precise Worth, and Value of the Work it
self, yet is such, that God would not act sutably, and congruously, to the
Equity and Goodness of his Nature, if He should not reward it. These two sorts
of Merit, I say, they hold, but are not yet agreed, which of the two they
should state the Merit of their good works upon. For some boldly assert, that
they merit the former way, to wit, by their own inherent worth and value; And
some, that they merit only the latter way, that is, by being such, as the
Equity and Goodness of God cannot but Reward; And lastly, Others, (as
particularly Bellarmine) hold that they merit both ways: to wit, partly by
Condignity, and partly by Congruity.

In Answer to which without disputing any thing against their Merit of
Condignity (since it more than sufficiently confutes it self) I utterly deny
the whole foundation of their Merit de Congruo, as to any Obligation on God's
Part, to reward our Religious Services upon the score of Equity; since upon
that account God can be under no Obligation to do any thing: For as much as
ther^ is no such thing, as Equity in God, distinct from his Justice and Mercy;
and the Exercise of his mercy must on all hands needs be granted to be free;
how much soever that of his Justice may, by some, be thought otherwise.

Amongst Men, I confess, there is such an Obligation, as that of Equity; and
the reason is, because Men stand obliged by a Superior Law to exercise mercy,
as well as Justice; which God does not: and therefore though there may be such
a thing as a Meritum de Congruo between man and man, yet between God and man,
(since God is under no Obligation to show mercy, where His own Word has not
first obliged Him) no such Merit can take place.

But besides, This is not the point, Whether or no it be Congruous to the
Goodness of God, for Him to reward such or such Actions? For there may be many
Thousands of Things and Actions very Congruous for God to do, which yet, by his
Nature, He is not obliged to do, nor ever will do. So that the bare Congruity
of any Thing, or Action to the Divine Nature lays no obligation upon God to do
it at all. But the point lies here; to wit, whether it be so Congruous to God
to reward the Obedience, and good Actions of men, that it is incongruous to his
Nature not to do it: and this I utterly deny. For if it were Incongruous to his
Nature not to reward them, it would be necessary for him to reward them; and
then indeed Merit must upon Equal necessity take Place. But if God be not bound
to reward every Act, which it may be suitable or Congruous for him to reward
(as we have shown that he is not) then Meritum de Congruo, is but Merit
equivocally so called; and the forementioned Division of Merit is not a
Division of a Genus into Two several Species, but only a Distribution of an
Equivocal Term into its several Significations; and Consequently to give the
Name of Merit with respect to God, to that which is so only de Congruo, is a
mere Trif^ing about Words, without any regard had to the sense of them. Nor let
any one here Object the frequent use of the Terms mereri and me^^ritum by the
Fathers and other Ancient Church-Writers; for they use them not in a Sense
importing Claim upon the score of strict Justice, but only as they signify the
Actual obtainment of any thing from God, upon the Stock of Free-Promise, by
Coming up to the Conditions of it: which by no means reaches that sense of the
word which we have been hitherto disputing against. In short therefore the
Question stands thus: Does this Meritum do Congruo, from the Nature of the
Thing it self, oblige God to reward it, or does it not? If it does, then I am
sure that Merit of Condignity does the same, and can do no more; and so the
Distinction between them is but Verbal, and superfluous. But if, on the other
hand, it does not oblige God, then, I affirm, that it is not so much as Merit;
for where there is no Obligation on one side, there can be no Merit on the
other. To which we may add this further consideration, that the asserting of
such a Merit of Congruity, is altogether as Arrogant, as to assert that of
Condignity; forasmuch as it equally binds God, and brings him under as great a
necessity of Rewarding, as the other can; and that not by Reason of his own
Free-Word, and Promise obliging him to it, (of which more anon) but because of
a certain Worth, and Value inherent in the Work it self; which makes it
incongruous, and consequently Impossible, for God not to reward it; Since it
must needs be impossible for him to do any thing Incongruous to himself, or to
any of his Attributes.

From all which it follows, That the Third Condition required to make an Action
meritorious, is here failing also. Which is, That the Excellency of the Work be
commensurate to the Value of the Reward. And so I am come at length to the

Fourth and Last Condition, or Ingredient of merit. And that is, That he who
does a Work, whereby he would merit of another, do it solely by his own
strength, and not by the strength or Power of him, from whom he is to merit.
The Reason of which is, Because otherwise the Work would not be entirely a man's
own* And where there is no Property, there can be no Exchange; All Exchange
being the Alienation of one Property or Title for another. And I have all along
shown, that the Nature of Merit is founded in Commutation.

But now, how great an Hand, or rather What a Total Influence God has in all
our Actions, that known Maxim jointly received both by Heathens and Christians,
sufficiently demonstrates: namely, That in him we live, and move, and have our
Being. And so intimately and inseparably does this Influence join it self with
all the motions of the Creature, that it puzzles the Deepest and most Acute
Philosophers to distinguish between the Actions of second Causes, and the
Concurrence of the first, so as to rescue them from a downright Identity.
Accordingly in Philip. 2.13. the Apostle tells us, That it is God who works
in us not only to do, but also to will according to his good Pleasure. And if
in every good Inclination, as well as Action, God be the Worker, we must needs
be the Recipient Subjects of what is wrought: and to be Recipient certainly is
not meritorious.

In all the Actions of Men, though we naturally fix our Eye only upon some
Visible Agent; yet still there is a secret Invisible Spring which is the first
mover of, and conveys an Activity to every Power and Faculty both of Soul and
Body, though it be discerned by neither. Upon which account it is, that St.
Austin says, That in all that God does for us, He only Crowns His own Works in
us; the same Hand still enabling us to do, which shall hereafter reward us for
what we have done. And if, according to these Terms, and those Words also of
the Spouse to the same purpose, Cantic. 1.4. Draw me, and I will follow Thee;
our Coming to God be from nothing else, but from His Drawing us to Himself, how
can we merit of Him by our following Him, or Coming to Him? For can any one
oblige^ me by a Present bought with my own Money? or by giving me that which I
first gave Him? And yet the Case here is much the same. For as apt as we are to
flatter our selves, and to Think, and speak big upon this subject, yet in Truth
by all that we do or can do, we do but return God something of His own. Much
like the Rivers, which come rolling with a mighty noise, and po^^^ themselves
into the Sea, and yet as High as they swell, and as loud as they Roar, they
only restore the Sea her own Waters; That which flows into her in one Place,
having been first Drawn from her in another. In a Word, can the Earth repay the
Heavens for their Influences, and the Clouds for that Verdure, and Fertility
which they bestow upon it? or can Dirt, and Dunghils requite the Sun and the
Light for shining upon them? No certainly; and yet what poor shadows, and faint
Representations are these of that Infinitely Greater Inability, even of the
Noblest of God's Creatures to present Him with any Thing, which they were not
first Beholden to Him for. It is Clear therefore, That since Man, in all his
Duties and Services, never had any Thing of his own to set up with, but has
Trafficked all along upon a Borrowed stock, the fourth and last Condition
required to make his Performances meritorious utterly fails him.

And thus I have distinctly gone over the several Conditions of Merit. As
First, That the Meritorious Act be not Due. Secondly, That it really add to,
and better the Condition of Him from whom it merits. Thirdly, That there be a
Parity of Value between the Work and the Reward. And Fourthly and Lastly, That
it be done by the sole strength of him who merits, and not by the Help and
Strength of Him, from Whom he merits. These four, I say, are the Essential
Ingredients, and Indispensable Conditions of Merit. And yet, not one of them
all agrees to the very best of Man's Actions, with reference to Almighty God.
Nevertheless, in despite of all these Deplorable Impotences we see what a
Towering Principle of Pride works in the hearts of Men, and how mightily it
makes them affect to be their own Saviors, and even while they live upon God,
to Depend upon themselves* To be Poor and Proud being the truest Character of
Man ever since the Pride of our first Parents threw us into this forlorn
Condition. And thus I have finished the second and main Particular proposed
from the word^, and Expressed in them; Namely, That it is Impossible for men by
their best services to merit of God^ or be Profitable to Him. I proceed now to
the

Third Particular, which exhibits to us something by Way of Inference from the
Two former; to wit, That this Persuasion of Man's being able to merit of God,
is the source, and foundation of Two of the Greatest Corruptions of Religion;
that have infested the Christian Church; and those are Pelagianism and Popery.
And,

First, For Pelagianism. It chiefly springs from, and is resolvable into this
one Point, namely; That a Man contributes something of his own, which he had
not from God, toward his own Salvation: and that not a bare something only,
but such a something also, as is the Principal and most Effectual Cause of his
Salvation. For as much as that which he receives from God, (according to
Pelagius) is only a Power to Will and to Do; Which a man may very well have,
and carry to Hell with him, as those who go to Hell, no doubt, do. But that
which obtains Heaven, and actually saves a Man, is the Right use of that Power,
and the free Determination of His Will; which (as the same Pelagius teaches) a
Man has Wholly from himself, and accordingly may wholly thank Himself for. So
that in answer to that Question of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. Quis te discrevit?
Who made Thee to differ from Another? and that as to the grand Discrimination
of Saint and Reprobate? The Pelagian must reply, if he will speak pertinently
and consistently with himself; Why; I made my self to differ, by using the
Powers, which God gave me, as I should do; which my Neighbor did not; and for
that Reason I go to Heaven, and he to Hell; and as he can blame none but
himself for the One, ^o I am beholden to None but my self for the Other. This,
I say, is the main of the Pelagian Divinity, though much more compendiously
delivered in that known but lewd Aphorism of theirs. A Deo habemus quod sumus
Homines, a nobis autem ipsis quod sumus Iusti. To which we may add another of
their Principl^^, to wit, That if a man does all that Naturally he can do
(still understanding hereby the Present State of Nature) God is bound in
Justice to supply, whatsoever more shall be Necessary to his Salvation. Which
Premises if they do not directly, and unavoidably infer in Man a Power of
meriting of God, the World is yet to seek, what the Nature and Notion of Merit
is. Accordingly, both Gelasius, and St. Austin, in setting down the Points
wherein the Catholic Church differed from the Pelagians, assign this for one
of the chief, That the Pelagians held Gratiam Dei secundum Hominum merita
conferri. And, the Truth is, upon their Principles a man may even merit the
Incarnation of Christ: For if there be no saving Grace without it, and a Man
may do that which shall oblige God in Justice to vouchsafe him such Grace, (as
with no small self-contradiction these Men use to speak) then let them Qualify
and Soften the matter with what Words they Please, I affirm, that upon these
Terms, a Man really merits his Salvation, and by Consequence all that is, or
can be necessary thereunto.

In the mean time, throughout all this Pelagian Scheme, we have not so much as
one Word of Man's Natural Impotency to Spiritual Things, (though inculcated, and
wrote in both Testaments with a Sunbeam) nor consequently of the Necessity of
some Powerful, Divine Energy to Bend, Incline, and effectually Draw Man's Will,
to such Objects, as it Naturally resists, and is averse to: Not a Word, I say,
of this, or any Thing like it; (for those Men used to explode, and deny it all;
as their Modern Offspring amongst us also do:) And yet this passed for sound,
and good Divinity in the Church in St. Austin's time; and within less th^^ an
hundred years since, in our Church too: till Pelagianism, and Soc^nianism,
Deism, Tritheism, Atheism, and a Spirit of Innovation, the Root of all, and
Worse than all, broke in upon us, and by false Schemes of Models countenanced
and encouraged, have given quite a new face to Things: though a new face is
certainly the worst and most unbecoming that can be set upon an old Religion.
But

Secondly, To proceed to another sort of men famous for corrupting Christianity
more ways than one; to wit, those of the Church of Rome. We shall find, that
this Doctrine of Man's being able to merit of God is one of the Chief
Foundations of Popery also. Even the Great Diana, which some of the most
Experienced Craftsmen in the World do with so much Zeal Sacrifice to, and make
shrines for; and, by so doing, Get their living, and that a very plentyful, and
Splendid One too; As knowing full well, that without it the Grandeur of their
Church (which is all their Religion) would quickly fall to the Ground. For if
there be no merit of good Works, then no Supererogation, and if no
Supererogation no Indulgences, and if no Indulgences then it is to be feared,
that the Silversmiths Trade will run low, and the Credit of the Pontifical Bank
begin to fail. So that the very marrow, the life, and Spirit of Popery lies in
a stiff adherence to this Doctrine: The Grand Question still insisted upon by
these Merchants being Quid dabitis, and the great Commodity set to sale by them
being merit. For can any one think that the Pope, and his Cardinals, and the
rest of their Ecclesiastical Grandees, care a Rush whether the Will of Man be
free, or No, (as the Jesuits state the Freedom of it on the one side, and
Dominicans and Jansenists on the other) or that they at all concern themselves
about Justification and Free Grace, but only as the Artificial stating of such
Points may sometimes serve them in their Spiritual Traffic, and now, and then
help them to Turn the Penny. No; they Value not their Schools any further, than
they furnish their Markets; nor regard any Gospel but that of Cardinal
Palavi^cini; which professedly owns it for the main design of Christianity, to
make Men as Rich, as Great, and as Happy as they can be in this World. And the
Grand Instrument to compass all this by is the Doctrine of Merit. For how else
could it be, That so many in that Communion should be able to satisfy
themselves in doing so much less, than they know they are required to do, for
the saving of their Souls, but that they are taught to believe, that there are
some again in the World who do a great deal more than they are bound to do, and
so may very well keep their Neighbors lamp from going out, by having oil
enough both to supply their own, and a comfortable Overplus besides, to lend,
or (which is much better) to Sell, in such a Case. In a Word, take away the
Foundation, and the House must fall; and, in like manner, beat down Merit, and
down goes Popery too. And so at length (that I may not trespass upon your
Patience too much) I descend to the

Fourth and Last Particular, proposed at ^^^st from the Words. Which was to
remove an Objection, naturally apt to issue ^^om the Foregoing Particulars. The
Objection is obvious, and the Answer to it needs not be long. It proceeds thus.

If the Doctrine hitherto advanced be True, can there be a Greater
discouragement to Men in their Christian course, than to consider, that all
their Obedience, all their Duties and Choicest performances are Nothing Worth,
in the sight of God? and that they themselves, after they have done their Best,
their Utmost, and their very All in His service, are still, for all that,
Useless and Unprofitable, and such as can Plead no Recompense at all at His
hands? This You will say is very hard; but to it I Answer.

First, That it neither ought, nor uses to be any Discouragement to a Beggar
(^s we all are in respect of Almighty God) to continue asking an Alms, and
doing all that he can to obtain it, though he knows he can do Nothing to Claim
it But

Secondly, I deny, That our Disavo^^ing this Doctrine of Merit, cuts us (...)
from all Plea to a Recompense for our Ch^^stian Obedience at the hands of God.
It cuts us off indeed from all Plea to it upon the score of Condignity and
strict Justice: But then should we not on the other side consider, whether
God's Justice be the only Thing that can oblige Him in Hi^ transactings with
Men? For does not H^^ Veracity, and His Promise oblige Him a^ much as His
Justice can? And has H^ not positively promised to reward our sincere
Obedience? Which Promise though His mere Grace and Goodness induced Him to
make, yet His Essential Truth. s^and^ obliged (...) see performed. For though
some have ventured so far as to declare God under no obligation to Inflict the
Eternal Torments of Hell (how peremptorily soever threatened by Him) upon Men
dying in their sins; Yet I suppose, none will be so hardy, or rather shameless,
as to affirm it free for God, to perform, or not perform His promise; The
Obligation of which being so Abso^ute, and Unalterable, I do here further
affirm, that upon the Truest, and most ^^sured Principles of Practical Reason
there is as strong, and as enforcing a Motive from the Immutable Truth of God's
promise to raise Men to the Highest, and most Heroic Acts of a Christian Life,
as if every such single Act could by its own Intrinsic Worth Merit a Glorious
Eternity. For to speak the Real Truth, and Nature of things, that which excites
endeavor, and sets Obedience on Work is not properly a Belief, or persuasion
of the Merit of our Works, but the Assurance of our Reward. And can we have a
greater assurance of this, than that Truth it self, which cannot break its
Word, has promised it? For the most High, and Holy One (as we have shown, and
may with Reverence speak,) has pawned His Word, His Name, and His Honor to
reward the steadfast, finally Persevering Obedience of Every one within the
Covenant of Grace, notwithstand its Legal Imperfection.

And therefore, though we have al^ the Reason in the World to blush at th^^^
Worthless Emptiness of our Best Duties, and to be ashamed of the poorness, and
shortness of our most Complete Actions, and, in a Word, to think as meanly of
them and of our selves for them, as God Himself does, Yet still let us build
both our Practice; and our Comfort upon this One Conclusion, as upon a Rock;
That,^ though after we have done All, We are still Unprofitable Servants, yet
because We have done All, God has engaged Himself to be a Gracious Master.

To whom therefore be rendered, and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might,
Majesty, and Dominion* both Now, and for Evermore. Amen. A SERMON Preached at
CHRIST-CHURCH in OXFORD Before the University, October. 29. 1693.

LUKE XI.35. Take heed therefore, that the Light which is in Thee be not
Darkness.


AS Light is certainly one of the most glorious, and useful Creatures that ever
issued from the Wisdom, and Power of the Great Creator of the World; so were
the Eye of the Soul as little weakened by the Fall, as the Eye of the Body, no
doubt the Light within us would appear as much more Glorious than the Light
without us, as the Spiritual, Intellectual Part of the Creation exceeds the
Glories of the Sensible, and Corporeal. As to the Nature of which Light, to
give some Account of it, before I proceed further, and that without entering
into those Various Notions of it, which some have amused the World with; It is,
in, short, That which Philosophers in their discourses about the Mind of Man,
and the first Origins of Knowledge, do so much magnify by the Name of Recta
Ratio; that great source and Principle, (as they would have it) both of their
Philosophy, and Religion.

For the better explication of which I must, according to a Common but
necessary distinction, (and elsewhere made use of by me) observe that this
Rec^^ Ratio may be taken in a double sense.

First, For those Maxims, or General Truths; which, being collected by the
observations of Reason, and formed thereby into certain P^^^ositions, are the
Grounds and Principles, by which Men govern both their Discourse, and Practice,
according to the Nature of the objects that come before them: or,

Secondly* It may be taken for tha^ Faculty, or Power of the Soul, by which it
forms these Maxims, or Propositions, and afterward discourses upon them. And
so no doubt it is to be taken here.

For Propositions themselves, as to the Truth of them, are neither Capable of
Increase or Decrease, Improvement or Diminution; but the Powers and Faculties
of the Soul are Capable of Both; that (...) of becoming stronger or weaker,
ac^ording as Men shall Use, or Abuse, Cultivate, or Neglect them. Upon which
Account this Recta Ratio can be nothing ^lse, but that Intellectual Power or
Fa^ulty of the Soul, which every one is ^^^urally endowed with.

To which Faculty, as there belong Two Grand, and Principal Offices; to (...)
One to Inform, or Direct, and the ^ther to Command or Oblige, so the (...)
Faculty sustains a different (...), ^r Denomination according to each of them.
For as it serves to Inform the Soul, ^^y, discovering Things to it, so it is
called the Light of Nature; but as it obliges the Soul to do this, or forbear
that (which it does, as it is actuated, or informed with those forementioned
general Truths or Maxims,) so it is called the Law of Nature: which two
offices, though belonging to one and the same Faculty, are very different. For
the former of them, to wit, i^^ Enlightening or Informing Quality, extends much
further than it^^ obliging^ Virtue does; even to all Things Knowable by the
mind of Man^ but the latter only to such Things, (...) are matter of Practice,
and so fall under a Moral Consideration. Besides, that this obliging Quality,
must needs also pre^suppose the Enlightening Quality as Essenti^ally going
before it. For as no Law (...) bind, till it be Notified or Promulged so
neither can this faculty of the So^^ oblige a Man, till it has first Informed
(...)* By which we see, that the Light of Nature, according ^o the Essential
Order (...) Things, precedes the Law of Nature, an^ Consequently in strictness
of Speech ought to be distinguished from it; how much soever some have thought
fit (...) Confound them. And I doubt not, (...) it is This, which the Text here
Principally intends by the Light within us.

Nevertheless, since the word Conscience takes in both, and signifies as well a
Light to Inform, as it imports and carrie^ with (...) also a Law to oblige us,
I shall Indifferently express this Light by the Name of Conscience (as a Term
equivalent to it) in all the following Particu^^^s; but still this shall be,
with respect (...) its Informing, rather than to its obliging office. For as
much as it is the former of these only which is the proper effect (...) light,
and not the latter. For though ^^nscience be both a Light, and (as it ^^mmands
under God) a Law too; yet (...) it is a Light, it is not formally a Law. ^^or
if it were, then whatsover it dis^^vered to us, it would also oblige us (...).
But this is not so; since it both may, ^^d does discover to us the indifferent
^^ture o^ many Things, and Actions ^^thout obliging us either to the Pr^ctice
or Forbearance of them; which one ^onsideration alone is sufficient to set the
difference between the enlightening, and the obliging office of Conscience,
clear beyond all Objection.

And thus much I thought fit to premise, concerning the Nature of the Light
here spoken of by our Savior, and Intended for the subject of the present
discourse. Which Light as it is certainly the great and Sovereign Gift of God
to Mankind for the Guidance and Government of their Actions, in all that
concern^ them, with reference to this Life, (...) a better; so it is also as
certain, that it is Capable of being turned into Darkness* and thereby made
wholly useless for so Nobl(...) Purpose.

For so much the Words of the T^^ Import; nor do they Import only* bare
possibility, that it may be so, but a^ so a very high Probability, that,
wit^^^^ an extraordinary Prevention, it will b^ so. For as much as all Warning,
in the very Reason of the Thing, and according to the Natur^l force of such
expressions, implies in it these two Things First, Some very Considerable Evil,
or mischief Warned against; and Secondly* An Equal danger of falling into i^
without which all Warning would be not only superfluous, but Ridiculous.

Now both these, in the Present Case, are very great; as will appear by a
distin^t consideration of each of them. And*

First, For the Evil which we are warned or cautioned against; to wit, the
Turning of this light within us into Darkness. (...) Evil so unconceivable
great, and comprehensive, that, to give an Account of the Utmost extent of it,
would pose our Thoughts, as well as Nonplus our Expressions. But yet to help
our Apprehensions of it the best we (...), let ^s but consider with our selves
those Intolerable Evils which Bodily Blindness, Deafness, Stupefaction, and an
utter Deprivat^on of all sense must unavoidably subject the outward Man to. For
what is one, in such a Condition, able to do? And what is He not liable to
suffer? and yet Doing and Suffering, upon the matter, Comprehend all that
concerns a Man in this World. If such an ones Enemy seeks his Life (as, He may
be sure, that some or other will, and Possibly such an One as he takes for his
Truest Friend) in this forlorn Case, he can neither see nor hear, nor perceive
his Approach, till He finds Himself actually in his Murdering Hands. He can
neither encounter, nor e^cape Him, neither in his own ^^fence give, nor ward
off a Blow: (...) whatsoever blinds a Man, ipso facto disarms Him; so that
being thus (...) rest both of his Sight and of all his Sense^ besides, what
such an one can be fit for, unless it be to set up for Prophecy, or believe
T^^^substantiation, I cannot Imagine*

Th^^, I say, are some of those F^^tal mischiefs, which corporal Blindne^^ and
Insensibility expose the Body to* and are not those of a Spiritual Blindne^^*
Unexpressibly greater? For must (...) Man, Laboring under this, be utterly
(...) at a loss, how to distinguish betwe^^^ the two grand Governing concerns
(...) ^^fe, Good and Evil? and may not th^^ Ignorance of these cost us as dear
as the Knowledge of them did our first Parents^ Life and Death, Vice and Virtue
com^ alike to such an one; As all things are o^ the same Color to Him who
cannot se^ His whole Soul is nothing but Night, and Confusion, Darkness, and
Indistinction* He can neither see the way to Happines^* and how then should He
choose it? No^ yet to destruction, and how then should He avoid it? For where
there is no sense of things, there can be no distinction, and ^here there is no
distinction there can be no Choice.

A Man destitute of this directing and distinguishing Light within Him, is and
must be at the Mercy of every thing (...) Nature, that would impose or serve
(...) Turn upon Him. So that whatsoever the Devil will have Him do, that (...)
must do. Whithersoever any Ex^^^tant desire or design hurries Him, thither He
must go. Whatsoever any base Interest shall prescribe, that he must set his
hand to, whether His Heart goes along with it, or no. If he be a Statesman He
must be as willing to sell, as the Enemy of his Country can be to bay. If a
Churchman, he must be ready to surrender, and give up the Church, and make a
Sacrifice of the Altar it self though He lives by it; and (in a Word) take that
for a full discharge from all his Subscriptions, and obligations to it, to do
as He is bid. Which being the Case of such as steer by a false Light, certainly
no slave in the Galleys is or can be in such a Wretched Condition of slavery as
a Man thus abandoned by Conscience, and bereft of all Inward Principles, that
should either Guide or Control Him in the Course of his Conversation. So that
we see here the Transcendent Greatness of the Evil which (...) stand cautioned
against. But then,

Secondly, If it were an Evil that seldom happened, that very hardly and ra^^ly
befell a Man, this might in a (...) measure supersede the strictness of t^^^
Caution, But, on the contrary, we sha^^ find, that as great as the Evil is,
which we are to fence against (and that is (...) great as the Capacities of an
Immortal Soul) the Greatness of the danger is still Commensurate. For it is a
Case that usually happens, It is a mischief as frequent in the Event, as it is,
or can be Fatal in the Effect. It is, as in a Common Plague, in which, the
Infection^^ as hard to be escaped, as the distemp^^ to be Cured: For that which
brings this Darkness upon the Soul is Sin. And as the state of Nature now is,
the Soul is not so Close United to the Body, as Sin is to the Soul; indeed so
close is the Union between them, that one would even think, the Soul it self
(as much a Spirit as it is) were the matter, and Sin the form in our present
Constitution. In a word, there is a set Combination of all without a Man, and
all within Him, of all above ground, and all under it, (if Hell be so) first to
put out his Eyes, and then to draw or drive Him headlong into Perdition. From
all which, I suppose, we must needs see Reason more than sufficient for this
Admonition of our Savior, Take heed, that the Light, which is in Thee be not
Darkness. An Admonition founded upon no less a Concern, than all that a Man can
save, and all that He can lose to Eternity. And thus having shown both the
Vastness of the Evil it self, and the extreme danger we are in of it; Since no
Man can be at all the Wiser, or the Safer barely for knowing his danger without
a Vigorous application to prevent it; and since the surest and most Rational
preventive of it, is to know by what Arts, and methods, our Enemy will
encounter us and by which He is most likely to prevail over us, we will enquire
into, and Consider those Ways, and Means by which He commonly attempts, and too
frequently effects this so dismal a Change upon us, as to strip us even of the
poor Remains of our fallen Nature, by turning the last surviving spark of it,
this Light within us, into Darkness.

For this must be acknowledged, that no Man Living, in respect of Conscience,
is Born-Blind, but makes himself so. None can strike out the Eye of hi^
Conscience but himself: For nothing can put it out, but that which sins it out.
And upon this Account, it must be confessed, That a Man may Love his Sin so
Enormously much, as by a very ill application of the Apostle's Expression, even
to pluck out his own Eyes and give them to it; as indeed every obstinate Sinner
in the World does.

Our Present business therefore shall be (and that as a Completion of what I
discoursed formerly upon Conscience in this Place) to show How and by what
Courses, This Divine Light, this Candle of the Lord, comes first to burn faint
and dim, and so by a gradual decay fainter and fainter, till at Length by a
total Extinction it quite sinks to nothing, and so dies away. And this I shall
do. First, in General, and Secondly, in Particular.

And first in General, I shall lay down these Two Observations.

First, That whatsoever defiles the Conscience, in the same Degree also darkens
it.

As to the Philosophy of which, How and by what way this is done, it is hard to
conceive, and much harder to explain. Our great unacquaintance with the Nature
of Spiritual, Immaterial Beings leaving us wholly in the Dark as to any
Explicit knowledge, either How they work, or how they are worked upon. So that
in discoursing of these things we are forced to take up with Analogy, and
Allusion, instead of Evidence and Demonstration. Nevertheless the Thing it self
is Certain, be the manner of effecting it never so unaccountable.

Yet thus much we find, that there is something in Sin Analogous to Blackness,
as Innocence is frequently in Scripture, Expressed, and set forth to us by
White^ness. All Guilt blackens, (or does some^thing Equivalent to the
blackening of) the Soul; as where Pitch cleaves to anything, it is sure to
leave upon it both its foulness, and its Blackness together: and then we know,
that Blackness and darkness are inseparable.

Some of the Ablest of the Peripatetick School (not without Countenance from
Aristotle Himself, in the fifth Chapter of his Third Book, (...)) hold, that
besides the Native, inherent light of the Intellect (which is essential to it,
as it is a Faculty made to apprehend, and take in its object after a Spiritual
way) there is also another light, in the Nature of a Medium, beaming in upon it
by a Continual Efflux and Emanation from the great Fountain of Light, and
irradiating this intellectual Faculty, together with the Species or
Representations of Things imprinted thereupon. According to which Doctrine it
seems with great Reason to follow, That whatsoever interposes between the Mind
and those Irradiations from God (as all Sin more or less certainly does) must
needs hinder the Entrance and Admission of them into the Mind: and then
Darkness must by necessary Consequence ensue, as being nothing else but the
Absence, or Privation of Light.

For the further Illustration of which Notion, we may observe, that the
Understanding, the Mind, or Conscience of Man (which we shall here take for the
same Thing) seem to bear much the same Respect to God, which Glass or Crystal
does to the Light or Sun: which appears indeed to the Eye, a Bright, and a
shining Thing; Nevertheless this shining is not so much from any essential
light or brightness existing in the Glass it self (supposing that there be any
such in it) as it is from the Porousness of its Body, rendering it Diaphanous,
and thereby fit to receive and transmit those Rays of Light, which falling upon
it, and passing through it, represent it to common view as a Luminous Body. But
now let any Thing of dirt or foulness sully this Glass* and so much of the
shine or brightness of it is presently gone, because so much of the Light is
thereby hindered from entering into it, and making its way through it. But if,
besides all this, you should also draw some black Color, or deep die upon it,
either by paint or otherwise; Why, then no brightness could be seen in it at
all, but the Light being hereby utterly shut out, the Glass or Crystal would
shine or glister no more than a piece of Wood, or a Clod of Earth.

In like manner every Act of Sin, every degree of guilt, does in its proportion
cast a kind of Soil or Foulness upon the intellectual part of the Soul, and
thereby intercepts those Blessed Irradiations, which the Divine Nature is
continually darting in upon it. Nor is this all, but there are also some
certain sorts, and degrees of guilt, so very black and foul, that they fall
like an Huge Thick Blot upon this Faculty; and so sinking into it, and settling
within it, utterly exclude all those Illuminations, which would otherwise flow
into it, and rest upon it from the great Father of Lights; and this not from
any failure, or Defect in the Illumination it self, but from the Indisposition
of the object, which being thus blackened, can neither let in, nor transmit the
Beams, that are cast upon it.

I will not affirm this to be a perfect exemplification of the Case before us,
but I am sure it is a lively Illustration of it, and may be of no small use to
such as shall thoroughly consider it. But however (as I showed before,) the
Thing it self is certain and unquestionable, Guilt and Darkness being always so
United, that you shall never find Darkness mentioned in Scripture in a Moral
sense, but you shall also find it derived from Sin, as its direct Cause, and
Joined with it as its Constant Companion: For, by a mutual Production, Sin both
causes Darkness and is caused by it. Let this therefore be our first General
observation; That whatsoever pollutes or fouls the Conscience, in the same
degree also darkens it.

Secondly, Our other General observation shall be this; That whatsoever puts a
Biass upon the Judging faculty of Conscience weakens, and, by consequence,
darkens the Light of it. A clear and a right Judging Conscience must be always
Impartial; and that it may be so, it must be perfectly Indifferent: That is to
say, it must be free and disencumbred from every thing, which may in the least
sway, or incline it one way, rather than another, beyond what the sole, and
mere Evidence of Things would naturally lead it to. In a word, it must judge
all by Evidence, and nothing by Inclination.

And this our Blessed Savior with admirable Emphasis and Significance of
Expression calls the singleness of the Eye, in the Verse immediately before the
Text. If thy Eye (says He) be single, Thy whole Body shall be full of Light.
That is, nothing Extraneous must cleave ^o, or join with the Eye in the Act of
^eeing, but it must be left solely, and entirely to it self, and its bare
object, as Naked as Truth, as Pure, simple, and ^nmixed as sincerity. Otherwise
the ^hole Operation of it unavoidably pas^s into Cheat, Fallacy, and Delusion.
As, to make the Case yet more particu^ar; if you put a Muffler before the Eye,
it cannot see; if any Mote or Dust falls into it, it can hardly see; and if
^here be any soreness or pain in it, it ^nuns the Light and will not see. And
^ll this by a very easy, but yet certain, and true Analogy, is applicable to
the Eye of the Soul, the Conscience; and the Instance is verifiable upon it, in
every one of the Alleged Particulars.

In short, whatsoever bends, or puts a Biass upon the Judging Faculty of
Conscience, represents Things to it by a false Light; and whatsoever does so,
causes in it a false and erroneous Judgment of Things. And all Error or
Falsehood is, in the very Nature of it, a Real Intellectual Darkness; and
Consequently must diffuse a Darkness upon the mind, so far as it is affected
and possessed with it. And thus much for our Second General Observation.

^^om whence we shall now pass (...) Particulars. In the assigning and stating
^^ which, as I showed before, that Sin in General was the General Cause of this
Darkness, so the Particular Causes of it mu^^ be fetched from the Particular
kinds and degrees of Sin.

Now Sin may be Considered thre^ ways.

First, In the Act. Secondly, In the Habit or Custom. Thirdly, In the
Affection, or Productive Principle of it.
In all which we shall show what a Darkening and Malign Influence Sin has upon
the Conscience or Mind of Man; and consequently with what Extreme Care, and
severe Vigilance the Conscience ought to be guarded, and watched over, in all
these Respects. And,

First, For Sin considered in the single Act. Every particular Commission of
any great Sin, such as are, for Instance, the Sins of Perjury, of Murder, of
Uncleanness, of Drunkenness, of Theft; and, above all, of Vndutyfulness to
Parents, (which being a Thing so much against Nature, nothing in Nature can be
said for it:) These I say, and the like Capital, Soul-Wasting Sins, even in any
one single Act or Commission of them, have a strangely efficacious Power to
cloud and darken the Conscience. Some of the Schoolmen are of Opinion, that
one single Act, if great, and extraordinary, has in it, the force of many
ordinary and lesser Acts, and so may produce a Habit. Which opinion how true
soever it may be of an Act of Demonstration producing a Habit of science in the
Intellect, yet I cannot think it true of any Moral Habits whatsoever. For it is
not to be thought, that St. Peter's denying and forswearing his Lord, left
behind it a Habit of Unbelief; nor that David's Murder and Adultery rendered Him
habitually Murderous and Adulterous. For no doubt it was not so.

But this I say. That every single Gross Act of Sin, is much the same thing to
the Conscience, that a great Blow or Fall is to the head, it stuns, and
bereaves it of all use of its senses for a time* Thus in the two forementioned
Sins of David, they so mazed and even stupifye^ His Conscience, that it lay as
it were ^^ a Swoon, and void of all Spiritual sen^^ for almost an whole Year.
For we do not find, that He came to Himself, or to any true sight or sense of
his Horrid guilt, till Nathan the Prophet came and Roused Him up with a Message
from God, nor did Nathan come to Him, till after the Child, begotten in that
Adultery, was born. Such a terrible Deadness, and Stupefaction did those two
Sins bring upon his Soul for so many Months together, during which time,
whatsoever Notion of Murder and Adultery David might have in general; yet, no
doubt, he had but very slight, and superficial Thoughts of the heinousness of
his own in particular. And what was the Reason of this? Why, his Conscience was
cast into a dead sleep, and could not so much as open its Eyes, so as to be
able to look either upwards, or inwards. This was his sad and forlorn Estate,
notwithstanding that long Course of Piety and Converse with God, which He was
now grown old in. For he had been an Early Practiser, and an Eminent Proficient
in the ways of God, and was now past the 50 th Year of his Age; and yet, we
see, that one or two such gross Sins dulled and deadned the spiritual Principle
within Him to such a degree, that they left Him for a long time (as it were)
dozed and benumbed, blind and insensible; and, no doubt, had not a peculiar
Grace from God raised Him up and recovered Him, he had continued so to his
Life's end.

For this is most certain, and worth our best Observation; that whatsoever
carries a Man off from God, will in the Natural Course, and tendency of it,
carry Him still further and further, till at length it leaves Him neither Will
nor Power to return. For Repentance is neither the Design, nor Work of mere
Nature; which immediately after the Commission of Sin never puts a Man upon
disowning or bewailing it; but upon studying and casting about Him how to
palliate and extenuate, and rather than fail, how to plead for and defend it*
This was the Course, which Adam too^ upon the first Sin, that ever Man
co^^mitted: And the same Course in the same Case will be taken by all the Son^
of Adam (if left to themselves) as long as the World stands.

Secondly, The frequent, and repeated Practice of Sin has also a mighty Power
in it to obscure and darken the Natural Light of Conscience. Nothing being more
certainly True, nor more Universally acknowledged than that Custom of Sinning,
takes away the sense of Sin; and we may add, the sight of it too. For though
the Darkness consequent upon any One Gross Act of Sin, be, (as we have showed)
very Great, yet that which is caused by custom of Sinning is much greater and
more hardly curable. Particular Acts of Sin do (as it were) cast a mist before
the Eye of Conscience, but Customary Sinning brings a kind of film upon it, and
it is not an ordinary ^kill, which can take off that. The former only closes
the Eye, but this latter puts it out; as leaving upon the ^oul a wretched
Impotence, either to judge or to do Well; much like the Spots of the Leopard
not to be Changed, or the Blackness of an Ethiopian not to be Washed off. For
by these very Things the Spirit of God in Ier. 13.23. expresses the Iron
incincible force of a wicked Custom.

Now the Reason, I conceive, that such a Custom brings such a darkness upon the
Mind or Conscience, is this: That a man Naturally designs to please himself in
all that He does; and that it is impossible for Him to find any Action really
pleasurable, while he Judges it absolutely Unlawful; since the Sting of this
must needs take off the Relish of the other, and it would be an intolerable
Torment to any Man's mind, to be always doing, and always condemning himself
for what He does. And for this cause, a Man shuts his Eyes, and stops his Ears
against all that His Reason would tell Him of the sinfulness of that Practice,
which long Custom, and frequency has endeared to Him. So that He becomes
studiously, and affectedly Ignorant of the Illness of the Course he takes, that
He may the mo^^ sensibly Taste the Pleasure of it. And thus, when an Inveterate,
Imperious Custom has so overruled all a Man's faculties, as neither to suffer
His Eyes to see, nor his Ears to hear, nor his mind to think of the Evil of
what He does; that is, when all the Instruments of Knowledge are forbid to do
their office, Ignorance and Obscurity must needs be upon the whole Soul. For
when the Windows are stopped up, no Wonder if the whole Room be Dark.

The Truth is, such an Habitual frequency of Sinning, does (as it were) Bar and
Bolt up the Conscience against the sharpest Reproofs, and the most Convincing
Instructions; so that when God by the Thunder of his Judgments, and the Voice
of His Ministers has been ringing Hell and Vengeance into the Ears of such a
Sinner, perhaps, like Felix, He may Tremble a little for the Present, and seem
to yield; and fall down before the over-powering Evidence of the Conviction;
but after a while, Custom overcoming Conscience, the Man goes his way, and
though He is Convinced, and satisfied what He ought to do, yet He actually does
what he uses to do: And all this because through the darkness of his Intellect
he Judges the present Pleasure of such a sinful Course, an over-balance to the
Evil of it.

For this is certain, That Nature has placed all Humane Choice in such an
Essential Dependence upon the Judgment, that no Man does any Thing, though
never so Vile, Wicked, and Inexcusable, but, all circumstances considered, he
Judges it, Pro hic and nunc, absolutely better for Him to do it, than not to do
it. And what a Darkness, and Delusion must Conscience needs be under, while it
makes a Man judge that really best for him, which directly tends to, and
generally ends in, his utter Ruin and Damnation! Custom is said to be a second
Nature, and if by the first we are already so bad, by the second (to be sure)
we shall be much worse.

Thirdly, Every Corrupt Passion, or Affection of the Mind, will certainly
pervert the judging, and obscure and darken the discerning Power of Conscience.
The Affections which the Greeks call (...) and the Latins Affectus Animi, are
of much the same use to the Soul, which the Members are of to the Body; serving
as the proper Instruments of most of its Actions; and are always attended with
a certain Preternatural Motion of the Blood and Spirits peculiar to each
Passion, or Affection. And as for the Seat or Fountain of them, Philosophers
both place them in, and derive them from the Heart. But not to insist upon mere
Speculations: The Passions or Affections are (as I may so call them) the mighty
Flights and Sallyings out of the Soul upon such objects as come before it; and
are generally accompanied with such Vehemence, that the Stoics reckoned them,
in their very Nature and Essence, as so many Irregularities, and Deviations
from Right Reason, and by no means incident to a wise or good Man.

But though better Philosophy has long since exploded this Opinion, and
Christianity, which is the greatest and the best, has taught us, that we may be
Angry and yet not Sin. Ephesians. 4.26. And that Godly Sorrow is neither a Paradox
nor a Contradiction, 2 Cor. 7.10. and consequently, that in every Passion or
Affection there is something purely Natural, which may both be distinguished
and divided too from what is sinful and irregular; yet notwithstanding all
this, it must be confessed, That the Nature of the Passions is such, that they
are extremely prone and apt to pass into Excess, and that when they do so,
nothing in the World is a greater hindrance to the Mind or Reason of Man, from
making a True, Clear, and Exact Judgment of Things, than the Passions thus
wrought up to any Thing of Ferment, or Agitation. It being as Impossible to
keep the Judging Faculty steady in such a Case, as it would be to view a Thing
distinctly and perfectly through a Perspective Glass, held by a shaking,
Paralytick hand.

When the Affections are once engaged, the Judgment is always Partial, and
Concerned. There is a strong Bent, or Bias upon it, it is possessed and gained
over, and as it were fee'd, and retained in their Cause, and thereby made
utterly unable to carry such an equal regard to the object, as to consider
Truth Nakedly, and stripped of all Foreign Respects; and, as such, to make it
the Rigid Inflexible Rule, which it is to Judge by; especially where Duty is
the Thing to be Judged of. For a Man will hardly be brought to Judge Right, and
True, when by such a Judgment he is sure to Condemn Himself.

But this being a Point of such high and Practical Importance, I will be yet
more particular about it, and show severally, in several Corrupt and Vicious
Affections, how Impossible it is for a Man to keep his Conscience rightly
Informed, and fit to guide and direct Him in all the Arduous Perplexing Cases
of Sin, and Duty, while He is actually under the Power of any of them. This I
know Men, generally, are not apt to believe, or to think that the flaws or
failures of their Morals can at all affect their Intellectuals. But I doubt not
but to make it not only Credible, but Undeniable.

Now the Vicious Affections which I shall single, and cull out of those Vast
Numbers, which the Heart of Man, that great Storehouse of the Devil, abounds
with, as some of the Principal, which thus Darken and Debauch the Conscience,
shall be these Three.

First, Sensuality. Secondly, Covetousness. Thirdly, Ambition.

Of each of which I shall speak particularly: and

First, For Sensuality, or a vehement delight in, and pursuit of Bodily
Pleasures. We may truly say of the Body, with Reference to the Soul, what was
said by the Poet of an ill Neighbor. Nemo tam prope tam proculque! None so
nearly joined in point of Vicinity, and yet so widely distant in point of
Interest and Inclinations.

The Ancient Philosophers generally holding the Soul of Man to be a Spiritual
Immaterial substance, could give no Account of the several failures and defects
in the Operations of it, (which they were sufficiently sensible of) but from
its Immersion into, and intimate conjunction with matter, called by the Greeks
(...). And accordingly all their complaints, and accusations were still
levelled at this (...) as the only cause of all that they found amiss in the
whole Frame and Constitution of Man's Nature. In a word, whatsoever was observed
by them, either Irregular, or Defective in the Workings of the Mind, was all
Charged upon the Body, as its great Clog, and Impediment. As the skilfulest
Artist in the World would make but sorry work of it, should he be forced to
make use of Tools no way fit for his Purpose.

But whether the fault be in the Spiritual, or Corporeal part of our Nature, or
rather in Both, certain it is, that no two Things in the World do more rise,
and grow upon the Fall of Each other, than the Flesh, and the Spirit. They
being like a kind of Balance in the hand of Nature, so that as one mounts up,
the other still sinks down; and the high Estate of the Body seldom, or never
fails to be the Low, declining Estate of the Soul. Which great contrariety, and
discord between them, the Apostle describes, as well as words can do, Galat.
5.7. The Flesh (says He) lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts
against the Flesh, and these two are contrary; like two mighty Princes, whose
Territories join, they are always encroaching, and Warring upon one Another.
And, as it most commonly falls out, that the Worse Cause has the Best success,
so when the Flesh and the Spirit come to a Battle, it is seldom but the Flesh
comes off Victorious. And therefore the same great Apostle who so constantly
exercised Himself to keep a Conscience void of Offense, did as constantly and
severely exercise Himself to keep under his Body and bring it into subjection,
1 Cor. 9.27. And the same, in all Ages, has been the Judgment, and Practice of
all such as have had any Experience in the ways of God, and the true methods of
Religion. For all Bodily Pleasure dulls, and weakens the Operations of the
Mind, even upon a Natural Account, and much more upon a Spiritual. Now the
Pleasures which Chiefly Affect, or rather Bewitch the Body, and by so doing
become the very Pest, and Poison of the Nobler and Intellectual Part of Man,
are those false, and fallacious Pleasures of Lust and Intemperance:

Of Each of which severally: and

First, For Lust. Nothing does, or can darken the mind, or Conscience of Man
more: Nay, it has a peculiar Efficacy this way, and for that cause may justly
be ranked amongst the very Powers of Darkness: It being that, which, (as
Naturalists observe,) strikes at the proper seat of the Understanding the
Brain. Something of that Blackness of Darkness: mentioned in the 13 th of St.
Jude, seeming to be of the very Nature, as well as Punishment of this Vice.

Nor does only the Reason of the thing it self, but also the Examples of such
as have been possessed with it, demonstrate as much. For had not Sampson (think
we) an Intolerable Darkness and Confusion upon his understanding, while He ran
Roving after every strumpet in that Brutish manner that He did? Was it not the
Eye of his Conscience which his Dalilah first put out, and so of a Judge of
Israel rendered Himself really a Judgment upon them? And when the two Angels (as
we read in 19. Gen.) struck, those Monsters, the Men of Sodom, with Blindness,
had not their own detestable Lust first stricken them with a greater? Or could
Herod have ever Thought Himself obliged by the Religion of an Oath, to have
Murdered the Baptist, had not his Lust, and His Herodias Imprisoned and
Murdered his Conscience first? For, surely, the Common Light of Nature, could
not but Teach Him that no Oath or Vow whatsoever could warrant the greatest
Prince upon Earth to take away the Life of an Innocent Person. But it seems his
besotted Conscience having broken through the seventh Commandment, the sixth
stood too near it to be safe long: and therefore his two great Casuists, the
Devil and his Herodias (the worse Devil of the Two) having allowed Him to lie,
and wallow in Adultery so long, easily persuaded Him that the same Salvo might
be found out for Murder also. So that it was His Lust obstinately continued in,
which thus darkened, and deluded his Conscience; and the same will, no doubt,
darken, and delude, and, in the End, extinguish the Conscience of any Man
Breathing, who shall surrender Himself up to it. The Light within him shall
grow every day less and less, and at length totally and finally go out, and
that in a stink too. So hard, or rather utterly unfeasible is it for Men to be
Zealous Votaries of the Blind God, without losing their Eyes in his Service,
and it is well if their Noses do not follow. From all which it appears, what a
Paradox it is in Morals, for any one under the Dominion of his lust, to think
to have a Right Judgment in Things relating to the state of his Soul: And the
same, in the

Second Place, holds equally in that other Branch of sensuality, Intemperance;
whereupon we find them both Joined together by the Prophet, Hosea 4.11.
Whoredom (says He) and Wine take away the Heart; that is, according to the
Language of Holy Writ, a Man's Judging and Discerning abilities. And therefore,
whosoever would preserve these Faculties (especially as to their discernment of
Spiritual objects) quick, and vigorous, must be sure to keep the upper Region
of His Soul clear and serene; which the Fumes of Meat and Drink l^xuriously
taken in, will never suffer it to be. We know the method, which this high and
exact Pattern of Spiritual Prudence, St. Paul, took to keep the great sentinel
of His Soul, his Conscience, always vigilant, and circumspect. It was by a
Constant, and severe Temperance, heightened with frequent Watchings and
Fastings, as He Himself tells us, 2 Cor. 11.27. In watchings often; in Fastings
often, etc. This was the Discipline which kept his senses exercised to a sure
and exquisite discrimination of Good, and Evil; and made the Lamp within Him
shine always with a Bright, and a Triumphant flame.

But Gluttony and all excess either in eating or drinking strangely clouds and
dulls the Intellectual Powers; and then, it is not to be expected, that the
Conscience should bear up, when the Understanding is drunk down. An Epicure's
Practice Naturally disposes a Man to an Epicure's Principles; that is, to an
equal looseness, and dissolution in Both: And He, who makes his Belly His
Business, will quickly come to have a Conscience of as large a swallow, as his
Throat; of which there wants not several scandalous and deplorable Instances.
Loads of meat and drink are fit for none but a Beast of Burden to bear; and He
is, much the greater Beast of the two, who carries his Burden in his Belly,
than He who carries it upon his Back. On the contrary Nothing is so great a
Friend to the mind of Man, as Abstinence; It strenghens the memory, clears the
Apprehension, and sharpens the Judgment, and in a word, gives Reason its full
scope of Acting; and when Reason has That, it is always a diligent, and
faithful Handmaid to Conscience. And therefore, where Men look no further than
mere Nature, (as many do not) let no Man expect to keep his Gluttony and his
Parts, His Drunkenness and his Wit, his Revellings, and his Judgment, and much
less His Conscience together. For neither Grace, nor Nature, will have it so.
It is an utter Contradiction to the methods of Both. Who has Woe? Who has
Sorrow? Who has Contentions? Who has Babbling? Who has wounds without Cause?
Who has Redness of Eyes? says Solomon, Prove. 23.29. Which Question He Himself
presently Answers in the next verse, They who tarry long at the wine, they who
seek after mixed wine. So say, I, who has a stupid Intellect, a Broken memory,
and a blasted wit, and (which is worse than all) a Blind and a Benighted
Conscience, but the Intemperate and Luxurious, the Epicure and the Smell-feast?
So Impossible is it for a Man to turn Sott, without making Himself a Blockhead
too. I know, this is not always the present effect of these Courses; but, at
long run, it will Infallibly be so; and Time, and Luxury together will as
certainly change the Inside, as it does the outside of the Best heads
whatsoever; and much more of such Heads as are strong for nothing but to bear
drink: concerning which, it ever was, and is, and will be a sure observation,
that such as are Ablest at the Barrel, are generally Weakest at the Book. And
thus much for the first great Darkner of Man's mind, sensuality; and, that, in
Both the Branches of it, Lust, and Intemperance.

Secondly, Another Vicious affection, which Clouds and Darkens the Conscience
is Covetousness. Concerning which it may truly be affirmed, that of all the
Vices incident to Humane Nature, none so powerfully and peculiarly Carries the
Soul downwards as Covetousness does. It makes it all Earth and Dirt, Burying
that Noble Thing which can never Die. So that while the Body is above ground,
the Soul is under it; and therefore must needs be in a state of Darkness, while
it Converses in the Regions of it.

How mightily this Vice Darkens and Debases the Mind, Scripture-Instancer do
abundantly show. When Moses would assign the proper Qualifications of a Judge,
(which office certainly calls for the Quickest Apprehension, and the solidest
Judgment that the Mind of Man is well Capable of) Deuteronomy. 16.19. Thou shall not
(says He) take a Gift. But why? He presently adds the Reason. Because a Gift
(says He) blinds the Eyes of the wise. And no wonder, for it perverts their
will; and then, who so Blind as the Man who resolves not to see? Gold, it
seems, being but a very bad help, and Cure of the Eyes in such Cases. In like
manner when Samuel would set the Credit of his Integrity clear above all the
Aspersions of Envy and Calumny it self, 1 Samuel 12.3. Of whose hands (says He)
have I received a Bribe to blind my Eyes therewith? Implying thereby, that for
a Man to be Gripe-handed and Clear-sighted too was Impossible. And again Eccl.
7.7. A gift (says the Wiseman) destroys the Heart. That is, (as we have shown
already) the Judging and Discerning Powers of the Soul. By all which, we see,
that in the Judgment of some of the wisest, and greatest Men that ever lived,
such as Moses, Samuel, Solomon. Himself, Covetousness Baffles and Befools the
mind, Blinds and Confounds the Reasoning Faculty, and that, not only in
ordinary Persons, but even in the Ablest, the Wisest, and most sagacious. And
to give you one Proof, above all, of the peculiar blinding Power of this Vice,
there is not the most Covetous wretch Breathing, who does so much as see or
perceive, that He is Covetous.

For, the Truth is, preach to the Conscience of a Covetous Person (if he may be
said to have any) with the Tongue of Men and Angels, and tell him of the Vanity
of the World, of Treasure in Heaven, and of the Necessity of being Rich toward
God and Liberal to his Poor Brother; and it is all but flat, insipid, and
ridiculous stuff to Him, who neither sees, nor feels, nor suffers any thing to
pass into His Heart, but through his Hands. You must preach to such an One of
Bargain and sale, Profits and Perquisits, Principal and Interest, use upon use;
and if you can persuade Him that Godliness is gain in his own sense, perhaps
you may do something with Him; otherwise, though you edge every word, you
speak, with Reason and Religion, Evidence and Demonstration, you shall never
affect, nor touch, nor so much as reach his Conscience; for it is kept sealed
up in a bag under Lock and Key, and you cannot come at it.

And thus much for the second base Affection, that blinds the mind of Man,
which is Covetousness. A thing directly Contrary to the very Spirit of
Christianity; which is a free, a large, and an open Spirit; A Spirit open to
God and Man, and always carrying Charity in one hand, and Generosity in the
other.

Thirdly, The third and last Vile affection, which I shall mention (as having
the same Darkening effect upon the Mind or Conscience) is Ambition. For as
Covetousness dulls the mind by pressing it down too much below it self, so
Ambition dazles it, by lifting it up as much above it self* But both of them
are sure to darken the light of it. For if you either look too intently down a
deep Precipice, upon a Thing at an extreme distance below you, or with the same
earnestness fix your Eye upon something at too great an Height above you; in
both cases you will find a Vertigo or Giddiness. And where there is a Giddiness
in the Head, there will be always a mist before the Eyes. And thus, no doubt,
it was only an Ambitious aspiring after high Things, which not long since
caused such a Woeful, scandalous Giddiness in some Men's Consciences, and made
them turn Round and Round from this to That, and from That to this, till at
length they knew not, what Bottom to fix upon. And this, in my Opinion, is a
Case that admits of no Vindication.

Pride, we know (which is always Cousin-German to Ambition) is Commonly
reckoned the Forerunner of a Fall. It was the Devil's sin and the Devil's
ruin, and has been ever since the Devil's strategem; who like an Expert
Wrestler usually gives a Man a Lift, before he gives Him a Throw. But how does
he do this? Why; by first blinding Him with Ambition; and when a Man either
cannot, or will not mind the Ground he stands upon, as a Thing (forsooth,) too
much below Him, he is then easily justled down, and thrust headlong into the
next ditch. The Truth is, in this case Men seem to ascend to an High station,
just as they use to leap down a very great steep: in both Cases they shut their
Eyes first; for in both, the danger is very dreadful, and the way to venture
upon it is not to see it.

Yea, so fatally does this touring, aspiring humor intoxicate and impose upon
Men's minds, that when the Devil stands Bobbing and Tantalizing their Gaping
hopes with some Preferment in Church, or State, they shall do the Basest, the
Vilest, and most Odious things Imaginable; and that, not only in defiance of
Conscience, but, which is yet more Impudent and Intolerable, shall even allege
Conscience it self as the very Reason for the doing them: So that such wretches
shall out of Mere Conscience (forsooth) betray the Country that bred, and the
Church that Baptized them, and having first practiced a dispensing Power upon
all Law within them, shall help to let the same loose upon all Laws without
them too. And when they have done, shall wipe their Mouths and with as boon a
Grace and as bold a Front look the World in the Face, as if they expected
Thanks for such Villainies, as a modest Malefactor would scarce presume to
expect a Pardon for.

But as for these Ambitious Animals, who could thus Sell their Credit, and
their Conscience, wade through Thick and Thin, and break through all that is
Sacred and Civil, only to make themselves High and Great, I shall say no more
of them but this, that instead of being advanced to what they so much desired,
it is well for them, that they have not been advanced to what they so highly
deserved. For this, I am sure of, that neither Papists, nor Fanatics (both of
them our mortal, Implacable Enemies) can conceive a Prayer more fully, and
effectually for their own Interest, than this, That the Church of England may
never want store of Ambitious, Time-serving Men. And if God should in his Anger
to this Poor Church, and Nation, grant them this, they doubt not, but in a
little time, to Grant, or rather Give themselves the rest. Let this therefore
be fixed upon as a certain maxim, that Ambition first blinds the Conscience,
and then leads the Man whither it will, and that is in the direct Course of it,
to the Devil.

I know, there are many more, irregular, and Corrupt Affections belonging to
the mind of Man, and all of them in their degree apt to darken and obscure the
Light of Conscience. Such as are Wrath, and Revenge, Envy, and Malice, Fear and
despair, with many such others, even too many a great deal, to be crowded into
one hours discourse. But the three forementioned, (which we have been Treating
of,) are, doubtless, the most Predominant, the most potent in their Influence,
and most Pernicious in their effect: as answering to those three Principal
objects, which, of all others, do the most absolutely command and domineer over
the desires of Men; to wit, the Pleasures of the World working upon their
sensuality; the Profits of the World upon their Covetousness; And lastly the
Honors of it upon their Ambition. Which three Powerful Incentives, meeting
with these three Violent Affections, are (as it were) the Great Trident in the
Tempters Hand, by which he strikes through the very Hearts and Souls of Men; or
as a mighty Three fold Cord, by which he first hampers, and then draws the
whole World after him, and that with such a Rapid swing, such an Irresistible
Fascination upon the understandings, as well as Appetites of Men, that as God
said heretofore Let there be Light, and there was Light; so this Proud Rival of
his Creator, and over-turner of the Creation, is still saying in Defiance of
him, Let there be Darkness, and accordingly there is Darkness; Darkness, upon
the Mind and Reason; Darkness, upon the Judgment and Conscience of all Mankind.
So that Hell it self seems to be nothing else, but the Devils finishing this
his great Work, and the Consummation of that Darkness in another World, which
he had so fatally begun in this.

And now, to sum up briefly the foregoing particulars. You have heard, of what
vast, and infinite moment it is to have a clear, impartial, and right-judging
Conscience. Such an one as a Man may reckon himself safe in the directions of,
as of a Guide, that will always tell him Truth, and Truth with Authority; and
that the Eye of Conscience may be always thus quick and lively, let constant
use be sure to keep it constantly open; and thereby ready and prepared to admit
and let in those Heavenly Beams, which are always streaming forth from God upon
Minds fitted to receive them.

And to this Purpose, let a Man fly from every Thing, which may leave either a
Foulness, or a Biass upon it; for the first will blacken, and the other will
distort it, and both be sure to darken it. Particularly let Him dread every
gross Act of Sin; for one great Stab may as certainly and speedily destroy Life
as forty lesser Wounds. Let Him also carry a Jealous Eye over every growing
Habit of Sin; for Custom is an over-match to Nature, and seldom Conquered by
Grace; and, above all, let Him keep aloof from all Commerce or Fellowship with
any Vicious and Base Affection; Especially from all Sensuality, which is not
only the Dirt, but the Black Dirt, which the Devil throws upon the Souls of
Men; accordingly let H^^ keep Himself untouched with the Hellish, unhallowed
heats of Lust, and the Noisome Steams, and Exhalations of Intemperance, which
never fail to leave a Brutish Dullness and Infatuation behind them. Likewise,
let Him bear himself above that sordid, and low Thing, that utter Contradiction
to all greatness of Mind, Covetousness; let Him disenslave Himself from the
Pelf of the World, from that amor sceleratus habendi; for all Love has
something of Blindness attending it; but the Love of Money especially. And,
lastly, let Him learn so to look upon the Honors, the Pomp, and Greatness of
the World, as to look through them too. Fools indeed are apt to be blown up by
them, and to Sacrifice all for them; sometimes venturing their very heads, only
to get a Feather in their Caps. But wise Men instead of looking above them,
choose rather to look about them and within them, and by so doing keep their
Eyes always in their heads: and maintain a Noble clearness in One, and
steadiness in the other. These, I say, are (...) of those ways, and methods, by
which this great Internal Light, the Judging Faculty of Conscience, may be
preserved in its Native Vigor, and Quickness. And to complete the foregoing
directions by the Addition of one word more; That we may the more surely
prevent our Affections from working too much upon our Judgment, let us wisely
beware of all such Things as may work too strongly upon our Affections.

If the light, that is in thee, be Darkness (says our Savior) how great must
that Darkness needs be! That is, how fatal, how destructive! And therefore I
shall close up all with those other Words of our Savior, John 12. While you
have the Light walk in the Light; so that the way to have it (we see) is to
walk in it. That is, by the Actions of a Pious, Innocent, and Well-governed
Life, to cherish, heighten, and improve it: For still so much Innocence, so
much Light; and on the other side to abhor, and loath whatsoever may any ways
discourage, and eclipse it; as every degree of Vice assuredly will. And thus by
continually feeding and Trimming our Lamps, we shall find that this Blessed
Light within us, will grow every day Stronger and Stronger, and flame out
Brighter and Brighter, till at length having lead us through this Vale of
Darkness and Mortality, it shall bring us to those happy Mansions where there
is Light and Life for evermore.

Which God (the great Author of Both) of his Infinite Mercy vouchsafe to us
all; To whom be rendered and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might,
Majesty and Dominion both now and for ever more. Amen. A SERMON Preached at
Westminster-Abbey, May 29. 1670.

MATT. V.44. But I say unto you, Love your Enemies.


BEfore we descend to the Prosecution of the Duty Enjoined in these words. It
is requisite that we Consider the Scheme and Form of them as they stand in
Relation to the Context. They are ushered in with the Adversative Particle [
But] which stands as a note of Opposition to something going before: and that
we have in the immediately preceding Verse. Ye have heard that it has been
said, Thou shall Love thy Neighbor, and hate thy Enemy. But I say unto you,
Love your Enemies. Which way of speaking has given Occasion to an Enquiry,
whether the Duty here Enjoined by Christ be opposed to the Mosaic Law, or
only to the Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, and their Corrupt Glosses
thereupon: some having made this and the next Chapter, not only a fuller
Explication and Vindication of the Mosaic Law, but an Addition of higher and
perfecter Rules of Piety and Morality to it.

For the better clearing of which Point, I conceive that the matter of all the
Commandments (the fourth only, as it determines the time of Gods solemn Worship
to the seventh day, excepted,) is of Natural, Moral Right, and by Consequence
carries with it a necessary and eternal obligation; as riseing from the
unalterable Relation, that a Rational Creature bears either to God, His
Neighbor, or Himself. For there are certain Rules of Deportment Suggested by
Nature to each of these, which to deviate from, or not come up to, would be
irrational, and Consequently Sinful. So that such Duties can by no means owe
their first obligation to any New Precept given by Christ, but springing from
an Earlier stock, obliged Men in all Ages and Places, since the World began.
Forasmuch as that General Habitude or Relation (upon which all particular
Instances of Duty are founded) which Men bore to God, their Neighbor, and
themselves, upon account of their being Rational Creatures, was Universally,
and Equally the same in all. So that for a Man to hate his Enemy, or to be
revengeful, or to be angry without a Cause, or to swear Rashly, or by Looks,
Words, or Actions, to behave himself Lasciviously, were, without question,
always Aberrations from the Dictates of Rightly Improved Reason; And
consequently in the very Nature of the Things themselves Unlawful. For if there
were not a Natural Evil and Immorality in the aforesaid Acts, nor a goodness in
the contrary, But that all this Issued from a positive Injunction of the one,
and Prohibition of the other; what Reason can be assigned, but that God might
have Commanded the said Acts, and made them Duties instead of forbidding them;
which yet certainly would be a very strange, or rather monstrous Assertion, but
nevertheless, by a necessity of sequel, unavoidable. From whence I conceive it
to be very clear, that, if the several particulars commanded or forbidden by
Christ, in that his great Sermon upon the Mount, had a Natural Good or Evil
respectively belonging to them: Christ thereby added no New Precept to the
Moral Law, which Eternally was, and will be the same, as being the Unalterable
Standard or Measure of the Behavior of a Rational Creature in all its
Relations and Capacities.

For we must not Think, that when the Law, either by Precept, or Prohibition,
takes notice only of the outward Act, and the Gospel afterward directs it self
to the thoughts and desires, the Motives and Causes of the said Act; or again,
when the Law gives only a General Precept, and the Gospel assigns several
particular Instances reducible to the same General I^junction, that therefore
the Gospel gives so many New Precepts Corrective, or Perfective of the
aforesaid Precepts of the Law. No, by no means; for it is a Rule which ever
was, and ever ought to be allowed in Interpreting the Divine Precepts, That
every such Precept does Vertually and Implicitly, and by a Parity of Reason,
contain in it more than it expressly declares; which is so true, that those
Persons, who impugn the Perfection of the old Moral Precepts, and upon that
Account oppose the Precepts of Christ to them, do yet find it necessary to
maintain, that even the Precepts of our Savior Himself, ought to extend their
obligation to many more particulars than are mentioned in them, and yet are not
to be looked upon, as at all the less perfect upon that Account. Which Rule of
Interpreting being admitted, and made use of as to the Precepts of the New
Testament, why ought it not to take place in those of the old also? And if it
ought (as there can be no shadow of Reason to the contrary) I dare undertake,
that there will be no need of multiplying of New Precepts in the Gospel, as
often as the Papists and Socinians have a Tu^^ to serve by them. For surely
every New Instance of Obedience does not of necessity infer a New Precept; and
for that Reason we may and do admit of several of the former without any need
of asserting the latter. The Unity of a Precept is founded in the General Unity
of its object, and every such General Comprehends many Particulars. The very
Institution of the Two Christian Sacraments, is rather the Assignation of two
new Instances of Obedience than of two new Precepts. For Christ having once
Authentically declared that God would be Worshipped by those two solemn Acts,
the Antecedent General Precept of Worshipping God according to his own Will,
was sufficient to oblige us to these two particular Branches of it, being thus
declared; and indeed to as many more as should from time to time be suggested
to our Practice. For otherwise, if the multiplication of new particular
I^st^^ces of Duty* should multiply Precept^ too, it would render them
innumerable, which would be extremely absurd and ridiculous.

And now, all that has been here alleged by us against the Necessity of
holding any new Precepts added to the Old Moral Law, as it obliged all Mankind,
(whether notified to them by the Light of Nature^ only, or by Revelation too) I
reckon may as truly be affirmed of the Law of Moses also, (still supposing it
a True and Perfect Transcript of the said Moral Law; as we have all the Reason
in the World to believe it was) for were it otherwise, it would be hard to
show, what Advantage it could be to the Jewish Church to have that Law
delivered to them; but on the Contrary it must needs have been rather a Snare
than a Privilege or Help to them, as Naturally giving them Occasion to look
upon that as the most perfect draught of their Duty, when yet it required of
them a lower degree of Obedience than Nature had before obliged them to; it
being a thing in it self most Rational, to suppose the latter declaration of a
Legislators mind, to be still the fuller and more Authentic. And therefore if
other duties had been incumbent upon the Jewish Church by the Law of Nature,
besides what were contained in the Law of Moses; it is not Imaginable how they
could avoid the Omission of those Duties while they acqu^^sced in the
Directions of Moses as a full and sufficie^^ Rule of Obedience, and had so m^^^
Reason so to do. Which yet surely must have rendered the whole Mosaic
dispensation by no means agreeable either to the Wisdom or Goodness of God
toward His Chosen People.

For though indeed the Moral Law as a Covenant promising Life upon Condition of
absolute indefective obedience, be now of no use to justify, (Sin having
disabled it for that use through the Incapacity of the Subject) yet as it is a
Rule directing our Obedience, and a Law binding to it, it still Continues in
full force, and will do as long as Humane Nature endures. And as for the
A^solute perfection of it in the Quality of a Rule directing, and a Law
obliging, can that be more amply declared, and irrefragably proved than as it
stands stated and represented to us, in the vast latitude of that Injunction,
Deuteronomy. 6.^. and Levit. 19.18. Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy
Heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength, and with all thy Mind, and
thy Neighbor as thy self. I say, is there any Higher degree of Obedience which
the Nature of Man is Capable of yielding to his Maker than this?

Nevertheless there are some Artists, I must confess, who can draw any thing
out of any thing, who answer, That these words are not to be understood of
Absolutely all, that a Man can do; but of all that he can be engaged to do by
the Law as proposed under such an Economy; namely as enforced with Temporal
Promises and Threatenings; so that upon these Terms, to Love God with all the
Heart, etc. is to Love Him with the Utmost of such an Obedience, as Laws
seconded with Temporal Blessings and Curses are able to produce. But to this I
answer,

First, That the Argument bears upon a supposition, by no means to be admitted,
to wit that the Law of Moses proceeded only upon Temporal Rewards and
Punishments. Which is most false, and contrary to the constantly received
Doctrine of the Christian Church; and particularly of the Church of England, as
it is declared in the sixth of Her Articles. But

Secondly, I add further; That the obliging Power of the Law is neither founded
in, nor to be measured by the Rewards and Punishments an^^xed to it* but by the
sole Authority of the Lawgiver springing from the Relation (which he bears) of
a Creator and Governor, to Mankind, and Consequently of the entire dependence
of Mankind upon Him; by virtue whereof they owe Him the utmost service, that
their Nature renders them Capable of doing him. And that, I am sure, is Capable
of Serving Him at a ^igher Rate, than the Consideration of any Temporal Rewards
or Punishments can raise it to: since oftentimes the bare Love of Virtue it
self will carry a Man further than these can: but however it is certain that
Eternal Rewards can do so; which yet add nothing to our Natural Powers of
Obeying though they draw them forth to an higher pitch of Obedience. And can we
then Imagine that God would sink his Law below these Powers, by Leaveing some
degree of Love and Service to Himself absolutely within the strength and Power
of Man, which He did not think fit by the Mosaic Law to oblige Him to (when
yet our Savior Himself promised Eternal Life to One, upon supposal of his
Performance of this Law.) Luke 10.28.? This certainly is very strange Divinity.
But after all, some may possibly reply, Does not the Gospel enjoin us that
Perfection and Height of Charity, which the Law never did, in Commanding us to
lay down our Life for our Brother? 1 Ioh. 3.16.

To which I Answer, That this is a Precept by no means absolute and universal,
but always to be Limited by these two Conditions. viz. First, That the Glory of
God, and Secondly, That the Eternal Welfare of the Soul of our Brother
indispensably requires this of us; upon the supposal of either of which I
affirm, it was as really a Duty from the Beginning of the World, as it was from
that very time, that the Apostle wrote these words; the very Common Voice of
Reason upon these Terms, and under these C^rcumstances, dictating and enjoining
no less, as founding it self upon these two Self-Evident and undeniable
Principles, ( viz.) That the Life of the Crea^^re ought, when Necessity calls,
to be Sacrificed to the Glory of Him who gave it, and Secondly, that we ought
to prefer the Eternal good of our Neighbor or Brother, before the highest
Temporal good of our selves. Which manifestly shows, that this High Instance of
Charity (as extraordinary as it appears) did not at length begin to be a Duty
by any Evangelic^^ Sanction, but was so ever since there was such Creatures in
the World as Men, and Consequently that all, both Jews and Gentiles (whether
they actually knew so much or no) would have sinned against this Duty of
Charity, should they have refused to promote the Glory of their Maker, or
Prevent the Destruction of their Brother's Immortal Soul, being called thereto,
by quitting this Temporal Life for the sake of either. And Consequently that
this is no such New Precept to be reckoned by Anno Domini, but as old as the
obligations of Charity, and of Right Reason, discoursing and acting upon the
Dictates of that Noble Principle.

And now to apply this General Discourse to the Particulars mentioned in this
Chapter. I affirm that Christ does by no means here set Himself against the Law
of Moses, as a Law either faulty or imperfect, and upon those Accounts needing
either Correction, or Addition, but only opposed the Corrupt Comments of the
Scribes and Pharisees upon the Law, as really Contradictions to it, rather than
Expositions of it: And that for these following Reasons.

First, Because the words in this Sermon mentioned and opposed by Christ, are
manifestly, for the most part, not the words of the Law it self, but of the
Scribes and Pharisees. As for instance, Whosoever shall Kill shall be in danger
of the Judgment. And again in the next Verse. He shall be in danger of the
Council. They all referr to the Pharisees way of expressing themselves; which
manifestly shows; that it was their Doctrine and Words which He was now
disputing against, and not the Law it self; which this is by no means the
Language of.

Secondly, That Expression. That is was said Some render it [ to those.]
by those of old time, was not uttered by Christ in his own Person, but by way
of Prosopopoeia, in the Person of the Scribes and Pharisees, whose Custom it
was to Preface and Authorize their Lectures and Glosses to the People, with the
Pompous Plea of Antiquity and Tradition. As if Christ had bespoken them thus.
You have been accustomed indeed to hear the Scribes and Pharisees tell you,
that This and This was said by those of old Time, but notwithstanding all these
pretenses I tell you that the Case is much otherwise, and that the True Account
and sense of the Law is Thus and Thus. This I say is the natural purport and
meaning of our Savior's words, throughout this Chapter.

Thirdly, That passage in the 43. v. of the same. Ye have heard that it has
been said ye shall love your Neighbor and hate your Enemy, is so far from
being the words of the Mosaic Law, that Moses Commands the clean Contrary to
the latter Clause, Exodus 23.4. If thou see thine Enemies Ox going astray,
thou shall surely bring it back to Him again; and if thou see the Ass of him
who hates thee lying under His Burden thou shall surely help Him. And if this
was the Voice of the Law then, can we Imagine that it would make it a Man's Duty
to relieve his Enemies Ox, or his Ass, and at the same time allow Him to hate
or malign his Person? This certainly is unaccountable and Incredible.

Fourthly, If Christ opposed his Precepts to those of the Mosaic Law, then God
speaking by Christ must Contradict Himself as speaking by Moses. For whatsoever
Moses spoke, He spoke as the Immediate Dictates of God from whom He received
the Law. But this is Absurd, and by no means Consistent with the Divine
Holiness and Veracity.

Fifthly, and lastly, Christ in all this discourse never calls any one of the
Doctrines opposed by Him the Words of Moses, or of the Law, but only the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, which shows that they, and they
only, were the Persons with whom He managed this whole Contest.

Let this therefore Rest with us as a firm Conclusion. That Moses and Christ
were at perfect Agreement, whatever the Controversy was between Him and the
Pharisees. And so from the Scheme an^ Context of the words, I pass to the Duty
enjoined (...) them which is to Love our Enemies: The discussion of which I
shall cast under these three General Heads.

First, I shall show Negatively what is not that Love, which we are here
commanded to show our Enemies. Secondly, I shall show positively wherein it
does Consist. Thirdly, I shall produce Arguments to enforce it.
And first for the First of these; what is not that Love, which we must show
our Enemies: this we shall find to exclude several things which would fain wear
this Name.

1. As first to treat an Enemy with a fair deportment and amicable Language, is
not the Love here enjoined by Christ. Love is a thing that scorns to dwell any
where but in the Heart. The Tongue is a Thing made for words, but what reality
is there in a Voice, what substance in a sound? and words are no more. The
Kindness of the Heart never kills, but that of the Tongue often does. And in an
ill sense of soft Answer may sometimes break the Bones. He who speaks me well,
proves himself a Rhetorician or a Courtier: but that is not to be a Friend.

Was ever the Hungry fed, or the Naked Clothed with good looks or fair
Speech^^? these are but thin Garments to keep out the Cold, and but a slender
repast to conjure down the rage of a Craving Appetite. My Enemy perhaps is
ready to Starve or Perish through Poverty, and I tell him I am heartily glad to
see Him, and should be very ready to serve him, but still my Hand is Close, and
my Purse shut; I neither bring him to my Table nor lodge him under my Roof; He
asks for Bread and I give him a Complement, a thing indeed not so hard as a
Stone, but altogether as dry. I treat him with Art and outside: and lastly at
parting, with all the Ceremonies of dearness^, I shake him by the hand, but put
nothing into it. In a word, I play with his Distress, and dally with that which
I will not be dallied with, Want and Misery, and a Clamorous Necessity.

For will fair words and a Courtly behavior pay Debts and discharge Scores? if
they could, there is a sort of Men that would not be so much in debt as they
are. Can a Man look and speak himself out of his Creditors hands? Surely then,
if my words cannot do this for my self, neither can they do it for my Enemy.
And therefore this has nothing of the Love spoken of in the Text. It is but a
Scene and a mere Mockery, for the receiving that cannot make my Enemy at all
the Richer, the giving of which makes me not one Penny the Poorer. It is indeed
the fashion of the World thus to amuse Men with empty Caresses, and to feast
them with Words and Air, Looks and Legs; nay, and it has this peculiar
privilege above all other Fashions, that it never alters; but certainly no Man
ever yet quenched his Thirst with looking upon a golden Cup, nor made a Meal
with the outside of a Lordly Dish.

But we are not to rest here; fair Speeches and Looks are not only very
Insignificant as to the real effects of Love, but are for the most part the
Instruments of hatred in the Execution of the greatest mischiefs. Few Men are
to be ruined till they are made Confident of the Contrary: and this cannot be
done by threats and roughness, and owning the mischief that a Man designs; but
the Pit-fall must be covered to invite the Man to Venture over it; all things
must be sweetened with professions of Love, Friendly Looks, and Embraces. For it
is Oil that whets the Razor, and the smoothest Edge is still the sharpest: they
are the Complacencies of an Enemy that Kill, the Closest Hugs that stifle, and
Love must be pretended before Malice can be effectually practiced. In a word he
must get into his Heart with fair Speeches and Promises, before he can come at
it with his Dagger. For surely no Man fishes with a bare hook, or thinks that
the Net it self can be any Enticement to the Bird.

But now, if these outward shows of fairness are short of the Love which we owe
to our Enemies. What can we say of those, who have not arrived so far as these,
and yet pretend to be Friends? disdain and distance, sour looks and sharp
words are all the expressions of Friendship that some Natures can manifest. I
confess where real Kindnesses are done, these circumstantial Garnitures of Love
(as I may so call them) may be dispensed with; and it is better to have a rough
Friend than a fawning Enemy: but those who neither do good Turns, nor give good
Looks, nor speak good Words, have a Love strangely subtle and metaphysical: for
other poor Mortals of an ordinary Capacity are forced to be ignorant of that
which they can neither see, hear, feel, nor understand. And thus much for the
first Negative; the Love that we are to show to Enemies, is not a fair external
Courtly deportment. It is not such a thing as may be learnt in a
Dancing-School, nor in those Shops of fallacy and dissimulation, the Courts and
Palaces of great Men, where Men's thoughts and words stand at an infinite
distance; and their tongues and minds hold no Correspondence or intercourse
with one another.

2. Fair Promises are not the Love, that our Savior here Commands us to show
our Enemies. And yet these are one step and advance above the former: for many
fair Speeches may be given, many Courteous Harangues uttered, and yet no
Promise made. And it is worth observing how some great ones often delude, and
simple ones suffer themselves to be deluded, by general discourses and
expressions of Courtesy. As, take you no Care, I will provide for you. I will
never see you want. Leave your business in my hands, and I will manage it with
as much or more concern than you could your self. What need you insist so much
upon this or that in particular. I design better things for you. But all this
while there is no particular determinate thing promised, so as to hold such an
one by any real solid Engagement (supposing that his Promise were such) but
perhaps when the next advantage comes in the way, the Man is forgot, and
balked: Yet still those general Speeches hold as true as ever they did, and so
will continue notwithstanding all particular defeats; as indeed being never
Calculated for any thing else but to keep up the expectation of easy Persons;
to feed them for the present, and to fail them in the Issue.

But now as these empty glozing words are short of Promises, so Promises are
equally short of Performances. Concerning both which I shall say this, That
there is no wise Man, but had rather have one Promise than a thousand Fair
words, and one Performance than ten thousand Promises. For what trouble is it
to Promise, what charge is it to spend a little breath, for a Man to give one
his word, who never intends to give him any thing else? and yet according to
the measures of the World this must sometimes pass for an high piece of Love;
and many poor unexperienced believing Souls, who have more honesty than wit,
think themselves rapt up into the Third Heaven, and actually possessed of some
notable Preferment, when they can say, I have such a great Persons Promise, for
such or such a thing. Have they so? Let them see if such a Promise will pay
Rent, buy Land, and maintain them like Gentlemen. It is at the best but a
future contingent; for either the Man may die, or his Interest may fail, or his
Mind may Change, or ten thousand Accidents may Intervene. Promises are a diet
which none ever yet thrived by, and a Man may feed upon them heartily and never
break his Fast. In a word, I may say of Humane Promises, what Expositors say of
Divine Prophecies, That they are never understood till they come to be
fullfilled.

But how speaks the Scripture of these matters? Why, in Romans 12.20. If thine
Enemy hunger feed Him, if he thirst give Him drink. It is not, promise Him Meat
and drink a Week hence, that is, perhaps two days after he is dead with Thirst
and Hunger. He who lives only upon Reversions, and maintains himself with hope,
and has nothing to cover him but the Cloths of dead Men, and the Promises of
the Living, will find just as much relief from them, as a Man in the depth of
Winter feels the heat of the following Summer.

But bare Promises are so far from answering Christ's Precept of loving our
Enemies, that if they are not realiz'd in Deeds, they become a Plague and a
great Calamity. For they raise an Expectation, which unsatisfied or defeated,
is the greatest of Torments, they betray a Man to a fallacious dependence,
which bereaves Him of the succors of his other Endeavors, and in the issue
leaves him to Inherit the shame and misery of a disappointment, and unable to
say any thing else for himself, but that he was Credulous, and the Promiser
False.

3. But thirdly and lastly, to advance a degree yet higher, to do one or two
kind Offices for an Enemy, is not to fulfill the Precept of loving Him. He who
Cloths a Naked Man with a pair of Gloves, and administers to one Perishing with
Thirst, a drop or two of Water, reaches not the measure of his Necessity, but
instead of Relieving, only upbraids his want, and passes a jest upon his
Condition. It is like pardoning a Man the Debt of a Penny, and in the mean time
suing Him fiercely for a Talent. Love is then only of reality and value when it
deals forth benefits in a full proportion to ones need: and when it shows it
self both in Universality and Constancy. Otherwise it is only a Trick to serve
a Turn, and carry on a design.

For he who would take a cleanly, unsuspected way to ruin his Adversary, must
pave the way to his destruction with some Courtesies of a lighter sort, the
sense of which shall take Him off from his guard, his wariness, and suspicion,
and so lay him open to such a Blow, as shall destroy him at once. The Skillful
Rider strokes and pleases the unruly Horse, only that he may come so near him,
as to get the Bit into his Mouth, and then he rides, and rules, and domineers
over him at his pleasure. So he who hates his Enemy with a Cunning equal to his
Malice, will not strain to do this or that good turn for him, so long as it
does not thwart, but rather promote the main design of his utter subversion.
For all this is but like the helping a Man over the style, who is going to be
hanged, which surely is no very great or difficult piece of Civility.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth we read of One whom the Grandees of the Court
procured to be made Secretary of State, only to break his Back in the Business
of the Queen of Scots, whose Death they were then projecting: Like true
Courtiers they first engage Him in that Fatal Scene, and then desert him in it,
using him only as a Tool to do a present State-job, and then to be Reproached
and Ruined for what he had done. And a little observation of the World may show
us, that there is not only a Course of Beheading, or Hanging, but also of
preferring Men out of the way. But this is not to love an Enemy, but to hate
him more artificially. He is ruined, more speciously indeed, but, not less
efficaciously than if he had been laid fast in a Dungeon, or banished his
Country, or by a packed Jury dispatched into another World.

2. And thus having done with the Negative. I come now to the second General
Thing proposed. Namely, to show positively what is Included in the Duty of
Loving our Enemies.

It Includes these three things.

1. A discharging the Mind of all Rancour and Virulence toward an Adversary.
The Scripture most significantly calls it the Leaven of Malice, and, we know,
that is of a spreading and fermenting Nature, and will in time diffuse a
sourness upon a Man's whole behavior: But we will suppose (which is yet seldom
found) that a Man has such an absolute Empire and Command over his heart, as
for ever to stifle his disgusts, and to manage his Actions in a constant
Contradiction to his Affections, and to maintain a Friendly Converse, while he
is hot with the rancour of an Enemy; yet all this is but the mystery of
dissimulation, and to Act a Part, instead of Acting a Friend.

Besides the Trouble and Anxiety to the very Person who thus behaves himself.
For Enmity is a Restless Thing, and not to be dissembled without some torment
to the Mind that entertains it. It is more easily removed than covered. It is
as if a Man should endeavor to keep the Sparks from flying out of a Furnace,
or as if a Birth should be stopped when it is ripe and ready for Delivery,
which surely would be a pain greater than that of Bringing forth.

He who is resolved to hate his Enemy, and yet resolves not to show it, has
turned the Edge of his hatred inwards, and becomes a Tyrant and an Enemy to
Himself, He could not wish his Mortal Adversary a greater Misery, than thus to
carry a Mind always big and swelling, and ever ready to burst, and yet never to
give it vent.

But on the other side, it is no pain for a Man to appear what he is, and to
declare a real Principle of Love in sensible demonstrations: Does a Man
therefore find that both his Duty and his Interest require, that he should
deport himself with all signs of Love to his Enemies? Let him but take this
Easy Course, as to entertain the thing in his heart, which he would manifest in
his Converse, and then he will find that his work is as Natural and Easy, as it
is for Fire to cast abroad a Flame. Art is difficult, but whatsoever is Natural
is Easy too.

2. To love an Enemy is to do him all the Real offices of Kindness, that
opportunity shall lay in our way. Love is of too substantial a Nature, to be
made up of mere Negatives, and withal too operative to terminate in bare
desires. Does Providence cast any of my Enemies Concernments under my Power. As
his Health, his Estate, Preferment, or any thing conducing to the Conveniences
of his Life? Why, in all this it gives me an opportunity to manifest, whether
or no I can reach the sublimity of this Precept of Loving my Enemies.

Is my Enemy Sick and Languishing, and it is in my Power to Cure him as Easily,
or to kill him as safely, as if I were his Physician; Christianity here
commands me to be concerned for his weakness, to show him a Remedy, and to
rescue him from the Grave; and in a word, to preserve that Life, which perhaps
would have once destroyed mine.

Do I see my Enemy defrauded and circumvented, and like to be undone in his
Estate? I must not sit still and see him ruined, and tell him I wish him well;
which is a contradiction in Practice, and an impudent ill-natured Sarcasm: but
I must contribute my hearty assistance to discover the fraud and to repel the
force: and as readily keep him from being poor, as relieve him if he were. I
must be as forward in the pursuit of the Thief who stole his goods who once
plundered mine, as if the injury had light upon my Friend, my Kinsman or My
self.

And lastly does it lie in my way to put in a word to dash or promote my
Enemy's business or Interest? to give him a secret blow, such an one as shall
strike his Interest to the ground for ever, and he never know the hand from
whence it came? Can I by my power obstruct his lawful Advantage, and
Preferments, and so reap the Diabolical satisfaction of a close Revenge? Can I
do him all the mischief Imaginable, and that easily, safely, and successfully;
and so applaud my self in my Power, my Wit, and my subtle Contrivances, for
which the World shall court me as Formidable and Considerable? Yet all these
wretched Practices and accursed Methods of growing great, and rising by the
fall of an Enemy, are to be detested as infinitely opposite to that Innocence
and Clearness of Spirit, that Openness and Freedom from design that becomes a
Professor of Christianity.

On the contrary, amidst all these opportunities of doing mischief, I must
espouse my Enemies just cause, as his Advocate or Solicitor. I must help it
forward by favorable Speeches of his Person, acknowledgment of his worth and
merit, by a fair construction of doubtful passages: and all this, if need be,
in secret, where my Enemy neither sees nor hears me do him these Services, and
consequently where I have all the Advantages and Temptations to do otherwise.
In short, the Gospel enjoins a greater Love to our Enemies, than Men, for the
most part, now adays show their Friends.

3. The last and crowning instance of our Love to our Enemies, is to pray for
them. For by this a Man, as it were, acknowledges himself unable to do enough
for his Enemy; and therefore he calls in the Assistance of Heaven, and engages
Omnipotence to complete the Kindness. He would fain outdo himself, and
therefore finding his own stores short and dry, he repairs to Infinity. Prayer
for a Man's self is indeed a Choice Duty, yet it is but a kind of lawful and
pious Selfishness. For who would not solicit for his own happiness, and be
Importunate for his own Concerns? But when I pray as heartily for my Enemy, as
I do for my daily Bread; when I strive with Prayers and Tears to make God his
Friend, who himself will not be mine; when I reckon his felicity amongst my own
necessities. Surely this is such a Love as, in a literal sense, may be said to
reach up to Heaven. For no body judges that a small and a trivial thing, for
which he dares to pray: No Man comes into the Presence of a King to beg Pins.
And therefore if a Man did not look upon the good of his Enemy, as a thing that
nearly affected himself, he could not own it as a matter of a Petition, and
endeavor to concern God about that, with which he will not concern himself.
And upon the same ground also is inferred the Necessity of a Man's personal
endeavoring the good and happiness of his Enemy: for Prayer without endeavor
is but an Affront to the Throne of Grace, and a Lazy throwing that, which is
our own duty, upon God. As if a Man should say, God forgive you, God Relieve
and Comfort you, for I will not. But if to pray for an Enemy be a duty, surely
the manner in which we do it, ought to be so too: and not such as shall turn a
Supplication for him into a Satyr against him, by representing him in our
Prayers under the Character of one void of all Grace and Goodness, and
consequently a much fitter object for God's Vengeance than his Mercy. And yet
there was a Time in which this way of Praying was in no small Vogue with a
certain sort of Men, who would allow neither the gift nor spirit of Prayer to
any but themselves. For if at any time they prayed for those whom they
accounted their Enemies (and that only because they had done so much to make
them so) it could not be properly called an interceding with God for them, but
a downright enditing and arraigning them before God as a pack of graceless
Wretches and Villains, and avowed Enemies to the Power and Purity of the
Gospel. This and the like, I say, was the devout Language of their Prayers,
sometimes by Intimation, and sometimes by direct Expression: And thus under the
Color and Cover of some Plausible Artificial words, it was but for them to
call those whom they maligned Antichrist, and themselves the Kingdom of Christ,
and then they might very laudably pray for the pulling down of the one, and the
setting up of the other, and thereby no doubt answer all the measures of a
Sanctified, Self-denying Petition. But as those days are at an end, so it were
to be wished that such kind of Praying were so too; See something upon the like
subject. Vol. 2 d. p. 160.
especially since Our Church, I am sure, has so much Charity, as to teach all
of her Communion to pray for those, who are not only Enemies to our Persons,
but also to our very Prayers.

And thus I have endeavored to show, what it is to Love our Enemies; though I
will not say that I have recounted all the Instances in which this Duty may
exert it self. For Love is Infinite, and the methods of its acting Various and
Innumerable. But I suppose that I have marked out those Generals which all
Particulars may be fairly Reduced to.

And now, before I proceed to the Motives and Arguments to enforce the Duty, I
shall, to prevent some Abuses of this Doctrine, show what is not Inconsistent
with this Loving our Enemies: And that is to defend and secure our selves
against them. I am to love my Enemy, but not so as to hate my self: if my Love
to Him be a Copy, I am sure the Love to my self ought to be the Original.
Charity is indeed to diffuse it self abroad, but yet it may Lawfully begin at
Home. For the Precept surely is not unnatural and irrational; nor can it state
the Duty of Christians in opposition to the Privileges of Men, and command us
tamely to surrender up our Lives and Estates as often as the hands of Violence
would wrest them from us. We may Love our Enemies, but we are not therefore to
be fond of their Enmity. And though I am commanded when my Enemy Thirsts to
give him Drink, yet it is not when he thirsts for my Blood. It is my Duty to
give him an Alms, but not to let him take my Estate. Princes and Governors
may very well secure themselves with Laws and Arms against implacable Enemies
for all this Precept: they are not bound to Leave the State Defenseless,
against the Projects, Plots, and Insurrections of those who are pleased to
think themselves persecuted if they are not permitted to Reign. We may with a
very fair comportment with this Precept Love our Enemies Persons, while we hate
their Principles and counterplot their designs.

I come now to the third and last thing viz. to assign Motives and Arguments to
enforce this Love to our Enemy: and they shall be taken 1. From the Condition
of our Enemies Person. 2. From the Excellency of the Duty. 3. From the great
Examples that recommend it: and,


For the first of these, if we Consider our Enemy: we shall find that he
sustains several Capacities, which may give him a just Claim to our Charitable
affection.

1. As first he is joined with us in the Society and Community of the same
Nature. He is a Man. And so far bears the Image and Superscription of our
Heavenly Father. He may cease to be our Friend, but He cannot cease to be our
Brother. For we all descended from the same Loins, and though Esau hates Jacob,
and Jacob supplants Esau, yet they once lay in the same Womb: and therefore the
saying of Moses may be extended to all Men at Variance; Why do ye wrong one to
another, for ye are Brethren? If my Enemy were a Snake or a Viper, I could do
no more than hate and trample upon Him: but shall I hate the seed of the Woman,
as much as I do that of the Serpent? We hold that God Loves the most Sinful of
his Creatures so far as they are his Creatures; and the very Devils could not
Sin themselves out of an excellent Nature* though out of an Happy Condition.

Even War which is the Rage of Mankind and observes no Laws but its own, yet it
offers quarter to an Enemy; I suppose, because Enmity does not obliterate
Humanity, nor wholly Cancel the Sympathies of Nature. For every Man does, or (I
am sure) he may, see something of himself in his Enemy, and a transcript of
those perfections for which he Values himself.

And therefore those Unhumane Butcheries which some Men have acted upon others,
stand upon Record not only as the Crimes of Persons, but also as the reproach
of our very Nature, and excusable upon no other Color or Account whatsoever,
but that the Persons who acted such Cruelties upon other Men first ceased to be
Men themselves; and and were indeed to be reckoned as so many Anomalies and
Exceptions from Mankind; Persons of another Make or Mold from the rest of the
Sons of Adam, and deriving their original not from the Dust, but rather from
the stones of the Earth.

2. An Enemy notwithstanding his Enmity may be yet the proper object of our
Love, because it sometimes so falls out, that he is of the same Religion with
us; and the very business and design of Religion is to Unite, and to put (as it
were) a Spiritual Cognation and Kindred between Souls. I am sure, this is the
great purpose of the Christian Religion; which never joins Men to Christ but by
first joining them amongst themselves: and making them Members one of another,
as well as knitting them all to the same Head. By how much the more intolerable
were our late Zealots, in their pretenses to a more refined strain of Purity
and Converse with God; while in the mean time their Hearts could serve them to
plunder, worry, and undo their poor Brethren, only for their loyal adherence to
their Sovereign. Sequestring and Casting whole Families out of their Houses and
Livings to starve abroad in the wide World, against all the Laws of God and
Man; and who to this day breath the same Rage toward all Dissenters from them,
should they once more get the Reforming Sword into their Hands. What these
Men's Religion may teach them, I know not, but I am sure, it is so far from
teaching them to Love their Enemies, that they found their bitterest Enmities,
and most Inveterate hatreds only upon Religion: which has taught them first to
call their Malice Zeal, and then to think it their Duty to be Malicious and
Implacable.

3. An Enemy may be the proper Object of our Love, because, though perhaps he
is not capable of being changed and made a Friend by it, (which, for any thing
I know, is next to Impossible) yet he is capable of being shamed and rendered
Inexcusable. And shame may smooth over his Behavior, though no kindness can
change his Disposition: Upon which account it is, that so far as a Man shames
his Enemy, so far he also disarms him. For he leaves him stripped of the
Assistance and good Opinion of the World round about him; without which it is
impossible for any Man living to be Considerable, either in his Friendships or
his Enmities.

Love is the Fire that must both heap and kindle those Coals upon our Enemies
Heads, that shall either Melt or Consume Him. For that Man I account as good as
consumed and ruined, whom all People, even upon the common concern of Mankind,
abhor for his Ingratitude, as a Pest and a Public Enemy. So that if my Enemy
is resolved to treat me Spightfully, notwithstanding all my endeavors to
befriend and oblige Him; and if he will still revile and rail at me, after I
have employed both Tongue and Hand to serve and promote Him, surely I shall by
this means at least make his Virulent words Recoil upon his Bold Face, and his
Foul Mouth; and so turn that stream of public Hatred and Detestation justly
upon Himself, which he was ende^vouring to bring upon me. And if I do no more,
it is yet worth while, even upon a Temporal Account to obey this Precept of
Christ, of Loving my Enemy* And thus much for the first general Argument to
enforce this Duty, grounded upon the Condition of my Enemies Person.

2. A Second Motive or Argument to the same shall be taken from the excellency
of the Duty it self. It is the highest Perfection that Humane Nature can reach
unto. It is an Imitation of the Divine Goodness, which shines upon the he^ds,
and rains upon the fields of the Sinful and Unjust; and heaps Blessings upon
those, who are busy only to heap up wrath to themselves. To Love ^n Enemy is to
stretch Humanity as far as it will go. It is an Heroic Action, and such an one
as grows not upon an ordinary Plebiean Spirit.

The Excellency of the Duty, is sufficiently proclaimed by the difficulty of
its Practice. For how hard is it, when the Passions are high, and the sense of
an Injury quick, and Power ready, for a Man to deny himself in that luscious
morsel of Revenge! To do Violence to himself, instead of doing it to his Enemy!
and to command down the strongest Principles, and the greatest heats, that
usually act the Soul when it exerts it self upon such objects.

And the difficulty of such a behavior is no less declared by its being so
rarely and seldom observed in Men. For who almost can we see who opens his Arms
to his Enemies, or puts any other bounds to his hatred of him but satiety or
disability; either because it is even glutted with having done so much against
him already, or wants Power to do more. Indeed where such a Pitch of Love is
found, it appears glorious and glistering in the Eyes of all, and much admired
and commended it is, but yet for the most part no otherwise than as we see Men
Admiring and Commending some rare piece of Art, which, they never intend to
Imitate, nor so much as to attempt an Imitation of. Nothing certainly but an
Excellent Disposition improved by a mighty grace, can bear a Man up to this
perfection.

3. The third Motive or Argument, shall be drawn from the great Examples which
recommend this Duty to us. And first of all from that of our Blessed Savior,
whose Footsteps in the Paths of Love we may trace out and follow by his own
Blood. He gave his Life for Sinners. That is for Enemies, yea and Enemies, with
the highest aggravation, for nothing can make one Man so much an Enemy to
another, as Sin makes him an Enemy to God.

I say unto you Love your Enemies, (says Christ) That is, I emphatically, I who
say it by my Example as much as by my Precept. For Christ went about doing
good, Acts 10.38. Yea, and he did it still in a Miracle. Every work that he
did, was Equally Beneficial and Miraculous. And the place where he did such
Wonders of Charity was Jerusalem a City red with the blood God's Messengers,
and Paved with the Sculls of Prophets. A City which He knew, would shortly
complete all its Cruelty and impiety in His own Murder, though He was the
promised and long expected Messiah. And in the Prologue to this Murder, his
Violent Attachment, when one of his Enemies was wounded he bestowed a Miracle
upon his Cure. So tender was he of his Mortal Enemies. Like a Lamb that affords
wherewithal, both to feed and cloth its very Butcher, Nay and while he was
actually hanging upon the Cross, he uttered a passionate prayer for the
forgiveness of his Murderers. So desirous was he, that though they had the sole
Acting, yet that He himself should have the whole feeling of their Sin. In
fine, now that He sits at the Right hand of his Father Triumphant, and
governing the World, from whence he could with much more ease confound his most
dareing Enemies, than the most Potent Grandee can crush his meanest and most
servile dependants, yet he treats them with all the methods of Patience and
Arts of Reconcilement, and in a word endures with much long suffering, those
Vessels of Wrath who seem even Resolved to Perish, and obstinately set to fit
themselves for destruction.

And now, though after such an Example, this sort of Argument for the Loving
our Enemies can be carried no higher, yet blessed be God, that is not so wholly
Exhausted by any one Example, but that it may be carried further; and that by
several Instances, which though they do by no mean^ come up to a just
Comparison with it, yet ought to be owned for noble Imitations of it. And such
an one this happy Day affords us, a day Consecrated to the solemn Commemoration
of the Nativity and Return of a Prince who having been most barbarously driven
out of his Kingdoms, and afterward as miraculously restored to them, brought
with him the greatest, the brightest and most stupendous Instance of this
Virtue, that, next to what has been observed of our Savior himself, was ever
yet shown by Man. Providence seeming to have raised up this Prince, as ^t had
done his Father before Him, to give the World a Glorious Demonstration, that
the most injured of Men, might be the most merciful of Men too. For after the
highest of wrongs and Contumelies that a Sovereign could suffer from his
Subjects; Scorning all Revenge, as more below him than the very Persons whom he
might have been revenged upon, he gloried in nothing so much as in giving Mercy
the upper hand of Majesty it self, making Amnesty his Symbol or Motto, and
Forgiveness the peculiar signalizing Character of his Reign; herein Resembling
the Almighty Himself (as far as mortality can) who seems to claim a greater
Glory for Sparing and Redeeming Man, than for Creating Him. So that in a word,
as our Savior has made Love to our Enemies one of the Chiefest badges of our
Religion, so our King has almost made it the very mark of our Allegiance.

Thus even to a Prodigy Merciful has he shown Himself; Merciful by Inclination,
and merciful by Extraction; merciful in his Example and merciful in hi^ Laws,
and thereby expressing the utmost dutifulness of a Son, as well as the highest
Magnanimity and Clemency of a Prince; while He is still making that good upon
the Throne which the Royal Martyr his Father had enjoined upon the Scaffold;
where He dyed pardoning and praying for those, whose malice he was then falling
a Victim to: And this with a Charity so unparalleled, and a devotion so
^ervent, that the Voice of his Prayers, it is to be hoped, drowned the very Cry
of his Blood. But I Love not to dwell upon such Tragedies, save only to
illustrate the height of one Contrary by the height of another; and therefore
as an humble follower of the Princely Pattern here set before us, I shall draw
a Veil of silence over all; especially since it surpasses the Power of Words
sufficiently to set forth either the greatness of the Crimes forgiven, or of
the mercy that forgave them.

But to draw to a close: We have here had the highest and the hardest Duty
perhaps belonging to a Christian, both recommended to our Judgment by Argument,
and to our Practice by Example; and what remains, but that we submit our
Judgment to the one, and govern our Practice by the other? And for that
Purpose, that we beg of God an Assistance equal to the Difficulty of the Duty
enjoined; for certainly it is not an ordinary measure of Grace that can conquer
the opposition, that Flesh and Blood and corrupt Reason it self, after all its
convictions, will be sure to make to it. The greatest miseries that befall us
in this World are from Enemies, and so long as Men naturally desire to be
happy, it will be naturally as hard to them to Love those who, they know, are
the grand Obstacles to their being so. The Light of Nature will convince a Man
of many Duties, which it will never enable him to perform. And if we should
look no further than bare Nature, this seems to be one cut out rather for our
Admiration than our Practice. It being not more difficult (where Grace does not
Interpose) to cut off a Right Hand, than to reach it heartily to the Relief of
an inveterate Implacable Adversary. And yet God expects this from us, and that
so peremptorily, that he has made the Pardon of our Enemies the Indispensable
Condition of our own. And therefore that Wretch (whosoever he was) who being
pressed hard upon his Deathbed to Pardon a notable Enemy; which he had,
answered, That if He died indeed, he Pardoned Him, but if He lived He would be
Revenged on Him. That Wretch I say, and every other such Image of the Devil, no
doubt went out of the World so, that he had better never have come into it. In
fine after we have said the utmost upon this Subject that we can, I believe we
shall find this the Result of all, That He is an happy Man who has no Enemies,
and he a much happier, who has never so many, and can Pardon them.

God preserve us from the one, or enable us to do the other. To whom be rendered
and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion, both now
and for evermore. Amen. False Foundations removed, AND True ones laid for such
Wise Builders as design to build for Eternity.

IN A SERMON Preached at St. Mary's Oxon, before the University, December. 10.
1661.

MATT. VII.26, 27. And every one that hears these sayings of Mine, and does
them not, shall be likened unto a foolish Man which built his House upon the
Sand.

And the Rain descended and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and beat upon
that House and it fell and great was the fall of it.


IT seems to have been all along the Prime Art and method of the great Enemy of
Souls, not being able to root the Sense of Religion out of Men's hearts, yet by
his Sophistries and Delusions to defeat the Design of it upon their Lives; and
either by empty Notions, or false persuasions to take them off from the main
business of Religion, which is Duty and Obedience, by bribing the Conscience to
rest satisfied with something less. A project extremely suitable to the corrupt
Nature of Man; whose chief, or rather sole quarrel to Religion is the severity
of its Precepts, and the Difficulty of their Practice. So that although it is
as Natural for him to desire to be happy, as to breath, yet he had rather lose
and miss of happiness than seek it in the way of Holiness. Upon which Account
nothing speaks so full and home to the very inmost Desires of his Soul, as
those Doctrines and Opinions, which would persuade him, that it may, and shall
be well with him hereafter, without any Necessity of his living well here.
Which great Mystery of Iniquity being carefully managed by the utmost skill of
the Tempter, and greedily embraced by a Man's own Treacherous affections, lies
at the bottom of all false Religions, and eats out the very Heart and Vitals of
the True. For in the strength of this, some hope to be saved by Believing well;
some by Meaning well; some by Paying well; and some by shedding a few insipid
Tears, and uttering a few hard words against those Sins which they have no
other Controversy with, but that they were so unkind as to leave the Sinner
before he was willing to leave them. For, all this Men can well enough submit
to, as not forceing them to abandon any one of their Beloved Lusts. And
therefore they will not think themselves hardly dealt with though you require
Faith of them, if you will but dispense with Good Works. They will abound, and
even overflow with good Intentions, if you will allow them in quite contrary
Actions. And you shall not want for Sacrifice, if that may Compound for
Obedience; nor Lastly will they grudge to find Money, if some body else will
find Merit. But to Live well, and to Do well, are Things of too hard a
Digestion.

Accordingly our Savior, who well knew all these false hopes and Fallacious
Reasonings of the Heart of Man (which is never so subtle as when it would
deceive it self) tells his hearers, that all these little, trifling Inventions
will avail them Nothing, and that in the Business of Religion, and the great
concern of Souls; all that is short of Obedience and a Good Life, is Nothing
but Trick and Evasion, Froth and Folly; and consequently that if they build
upon such deceitful Grounds, and with such slight materials, they must and can
expect no other, than after all their cost and pains, to have their House fall
upon their Heads, and so perish in the Ruin. And with this Terrible Application
in these two last Verses, which I have pitched upon for my Text, he concludes
his Divine Sermon, and Discourse from the Mount.

The words of the Text being too plain and easy to need any Nice or large
Explication, I shall manage the discussion of them in these four Particulars.

First, In showing the Reasons upon which I conclude Practice or Obedience, in
the great Business of a Man's Eternal Happiness, to be the best and surest
Foundation for him to build upon. Secondly, In showing the False Foundations
upon which many build, and accordingly in Time of Trial, Miscarry. Thirdly, In
showing the Causes, why such Miscarry, and fall away in time of Trial or
Temptation. Fourthly, and Lastly, In showing wherein the Fatal greatness of
their Fall consists.
And First for the first of These. viz. to show the Reasons why Practice or
Obedience is the best and surest Foundation, (still supposing it bottomed upon
the merits of Christ) for a Man to build his designs for Heaven) and the hopes
of his Salvation upon; I shall mention Three.

First, Because, according to the ordinary way, and Economy of God's working
upon the Hearts of Men, nothing but Practice can change our Corrupt Nature; and
Practice continued, and persevered in, by the Grace of God, Will. We all
acknowledge (that is, all who are not wise above the Articles of our Church)
that there is an Universal stain and depravation upon Man's Nature, that does
incapacitate him for the Fruition, and Infinitely pure Converse of God. The
Removal of which cannot be effected, but by introducing the contrary habit of
Holiness, which shall by degrees expel, and purge out the other. And the only
way to produce an habit, is by the frequent repetition of Congenial Actions.
Every Pious Action leaves a certain Tincture, or disposition upon the Soul,
which being seconded by Actions of the same Nature, whether by the
superaddition of new Degrees, or a more radicate fixation of the same, grows at
length into an Habit, or Quality, of the Force and Energy of a second Nature.

I confess the Habit of Holiness, finding no Principles of Production in a
Nature wholly corrupt, must needs be produced by Supernatural Infusion, and
consequently proceed, not from Acquisition, but Gift. It must be brought into
the Soul, it cannot grow, or spring out of of it. But then we must remember
that most excellent, and true. Rule of the Schools, that Habitus infusi
obtinentur per modum acquisitorum. It is indeed a supernatural effect, but (as
I may so speak) wrought in a Natural way. The Spirit of God imitating the
Course of Nature, even then, when it works something above it.

A person in the State of Nature or Unregeneracy cannot by the sole strength of
his most improved Performances, acquire an Habit of True Grace or Holiness.
But, as in the Rain, it is not the bare Water that fructifies, but a secret
Spirit, or Nitre descending with it, and joined to it, that has this Virtue,
and produces this effect: So in the Duties of a mere Natural Man, there is
sometimes an hidden, Divine Influence, that keeps pace with those Actions, and
together with each performance, imprints a holy disposition upon the Soul;
which after a long Series of the like Actions influenced by the same Divine
Principle, comes at length to be of that force and firmness as to outgrow, and
work out the Contrary Qualities of inherent Corruption.

We have an illustration of this, though not a Parallel Instance, in Natural
Actions, which by frequency imprint an habit, or permanent facility of Acting
upon the Agent. Godliness is in some sense an Art or Mystery, and we all know
that it is Practice chiefly, that makes the Artist.

Secondly, A second Reason for our Assertion, is, Because Action is the highest
Perfection, and Drawing forth of the utmost Power, Vigor, and Activity of Man's
Nature. God is pleased to Vouchsafe the best that He can give, only to the Best
that we can do. And Action is^ undoubtedly our best, because the most
Difficult; for in such cases, Worth, and Difficulty are inseparable Companions.
The properest and most raised Conception that we have of God, is, that He is a
Pure Act, a Perpetual, Incessant Motion. And next to Him, in the Rank of
Beings, are the Angels, as approaching nearest to Him in this Perfection; being
all Flame, and Agility, ministering Spirits, always busy and upon the Wing, for
the Execution of His Great Commands about the Government of the World. And
indeed Doing is nothing else but the Noblest Improvement of Being. It is not
(as some nice Speculators make it) an airy, diminutive entity, or Accident
distinct from the Substance of the Soul; but to define it more sutably to it
self, and to the Soul too, Action is properly the Soul in its best Posture.

Thirdly, A Third Reason is, because the main End, Drift, and Design of
Religion is the Active part of it. Profession is only the Badge of a Christian,
Belief the beginning, but Practice is the Nature, and Custom the Perfection.
For it is this, which translates Christianity from a bare Notion into a Real
Business; from useless Speculations into Substantial Duties; and from an Idea
in the Brain into an Existence in the Life. An Upright Conversation is the
bringing of the General Theorems of Religion into the particular Instances of
solid Experience* and if it were not for this, Religion would exist no where,
but in the Bible* The Grand deciding Question at the last day will be, not What
have you said? or What have you believed? but What have you done more than
others?

But that the very Life of Religion consists in Practice, will appear yet
further from those subordinate Ends to which it is designed in this World, and
which are as Real^y, though not as Principally, the purpose of it, as the
Utmost attainment of the Beatifick Vision, and the very last Period of our
Salvation; And these are Two.

First, The Honoring of God before the World. God will not have His Worship,
like His Nature, Invisible. Next to Authority it self is the Pomp, and
Manifestation of it. And to be acknowledged is something more than to be
Obeyed. For what is Sovereignty unknown, or Majesty unobserved? What Glory were
it for the Sun to direct the Affairs, if he did not also attract the Eyes of
the World? It is his open and Universal Light, more than his Occult Influence,
that we love and admire him for. Religion, if confined to the Heart, is not so
much entertained, as imprisoned. That indeed is to be its Fountain, but not its
Channel. The Water arises in one Place, but it streams in another; and
Fountains would not be so much valued if they did not produce Rivers.

One great End of Religion is to proclaim and publish God's Sovereignty, and
there is no such way to Cause Men to Glorify our Heavenly Father, as by Causing
our Light to shine before them; Which, I am sure, it cannot do, but as it beams
through our good Works. When a Man leads a Pious and Good Life, every hour he
Lives is virtually an Act of Worship. But if inward Grace is not exerted, and
drawn forth into outward Practice, Men have no Inspection into our Hearts, to
discern it there. And let this be fixed upon as a standing Principle, That it
is not possible for us to Honor God before men, but only by those Acts of
Worship, that are observeable by men. It is our Faith indeed that recognizes
Him for our God, but it is our Obedience only, that declares Him to be our Lord.

Secondly, The other End of Religion in this World, is the good and mutual*
advantage of Mankind in the Way of Society. And herein did the admirable
Wisdom, and Goodness of God appear, that He was pleased to calculate and
contrive such an Instrument to govern, as might also benefit, the World. God
planted Religion amongst Men as a Tree of Life; which, though it was to spring
upwards directly to Himself, yet it was to spread its Branches to the Benefit
of all below.

There is hardly any Necessity, or Convenience of Mankind, but what is in a
large measure served, and provided for by this great blessing (as well as
Business) of the World, Religion. And he who is a Christian, is not only a
better Man, but also a better Neighbor, a better Subject, and a truer Friend,
than he that is not so. For was ever any thing more for the good of Mankind,
than to forgive Injuries, to love and caress our mortal adversaries, and
instead of our Enemy, to hate only our Revenge?

Of such a double, yet benign, Aspect is Christianity both to God and Man; like
Incense, while it ascends to Heaven it perfumes all about it; at the same time
both Instrumental to God's Worship, and the worshippers Refreshment. As it
holds up one hand in Supplication, so it reaches forth the other in Benefaction.

But now, if it be one great End of Religion, thus to contribute to the support
and Benefit of Society, surely it must needs consist in the Active Piety of our
Lives, not in Empty Thoughts and Fruitless persuasions. For what can one Man be
the better for what Another Thinks or Believes? When a Poor Man begs an Alms of
me, can I believe my Bread into his Mouth, or my Money into his Hand? Believing
without Doing is a very Cheap, and Easy, but withal a very Worthless way of
being Religious.

And thus having given the Reasons, why the Active part of Religion is the only
sure Bottom for us to build upon. I now proceed to the second Thing Proposed,
namely, to show, Those false and Sandy Foundations, which many venture to build
upon, and are a^^ordingly deceived by. Which though they are exceedingly
Various, and, according to the multiplicity of Men's tempers, businesses, and
occasions, almost Infinite, and like the Sand mentioned in my Text, not only
infirm, but Numberless also; yet according to the best of my poor Judgment and
Observation, I shall reduce them to these three heads. The

First of which is a Naked, Unoperative Faith: ask but some upon what Grounds
they look to be saved, and they will answer, because they firmly believe, that
through the Merits of Christ their Sins are forgiven them. But since it is hard
for a Man in his right wits to be confident of a Thing, which he does not at
all know; such as are more Cautious will tell you further, That to desire to
Believe is to Believe, and to desire to Repent is to Repent. But as this is
absurd and impossible, since no Act can be its own Object without being not it
self; for as much as the Act and the Object are distinct things; and
consequently a desire to believe can no more be Belief, than a desire to be
saved can be Salvation; so it is further intolerable upon this Account, that it
quite dispirits Religion, by placing it in Languid, Abortive Velleities, and so
cuts the Nerves of all Endeavor, by rating Glory at a bare Desire, and
Eternity at a Wish.

But because the Poison of this Opinion does so easily enter, and so strangely
intoxicate, I shall presume to give an Antidote against it in this one
observation, namely, That all along the Scripture, Where Justification is
ascribed to Faith alone, There the word Faith is still used by a Metonymy of
the Antecedent for the Consequent, and does not signify abstractedly a mere
Persuasion, but the Obedience of an Holy Life performed in the strength and
virtue of such a Persuasion. Not that this Justifies meritoriously by any
inherent Worth or Value in it self, but instrumentally as a Condition appointed
by God, upon the performance of which, He freely imputes to us Christ's
Righteousness, which is the sole, proper, and formal Cause of our
Justification. So that, That Instrumentality, which some, in the Business of
Justification, attribute to one single Act of Credence, is by this ascribed to
the whole aggregate Series of Gospel Obedience, as being that which gives us a
Title to a perfect Righteousness without us, by which alone we stand justified
before God. And this seems with full accord both to Scripture and Reason to
state the Business of Justification by an equal poize both against the Arrogant
Assertions of Self-Iusticiaries on the one hand, and the wild Opinions of the
Antinomians on the other.

But whether the Obedience of a Pious Life, performed out of a Belief, or
Persuasion of the Truth of the Gospel, ought to pass for that Faith which
Justifies, or only for the Effect or Consequent of it; yet certainly it is such
an Effect as issues by a kind of con-natural, constant Efficiency and Result
from it. So that how much soever they are distinguishable by their Respective
Actions from one another, they are absolutely Inseparable by a mutual and a
necessary Connection: it belonging no less to the Faith which Justifies to be
Operative, than to Justify: Indeed, upon an Essential Account, more; For as
much as it is Operative by its Nature, but Justifies only by Institution.

Secondly, The second false Ground which some build upon, is a fond Reliance
upon the goodness of their Heart, and the Honesty of their Intention. A
profitable, and therefore a very prevailing fallacy: And such an one as the
Devil seldom uses, but with success; It being one of his old and long
experimented Fetches, by the Pretenses of a Good Heart, to supplant the
Necessity of a Good Life. But to allege the Honesty of the Mind against the
Charge of an Evil Course, is a Protestation against the Fact, which does not
Excuse, but Enhance its Guilt. As it would look like a very strange and odd
Commendation of a Tree to Apologize for the Sourness of its Fruit, by pleading
that all its goodness lay in the Root.

But in the discourses of Reason, such is the weakness, and shortness of its
Reach, that it seldom suggests Arguments a Priore for any Thing, but by a low
and humble Gradation creeps from the Effects up to the Cause, because these
first strike and Alarm the Senses; and therefore St. James speaks as good
Philosophy as Divinity when He says, Iam. 2.18. Show me thy Faith by thy Works.
Every Action being the most lively Pourtraicture, and impartial Expression of
its Efficient Principle, as the Complexion is the best Comment upon the
Constitution. For in natural Productions ^here is no Hypocrisy.

Only we must observe here, that Good and Evil Actions bear a very different
Relation to their Respective Principles. As it is between Truth and Falsehood in
Argumentation, So it is between Good and Evil in matters of Practice. For
though from an Artificial contrivance of false Principles or Premises may
emerge a True Conclusion, yet from True Premises cannot ensue a False: So,
though an Evil Heart may frame it self to the doing of an Action in its kind or
Nature Good, yet a Renewed, Sanctified Principle cannot of its self design
Actions really Vicious. The reason of which is, Because the former, in such a
Case, acts upon a Principle of Dissimulation; and no Man by dissembling affects
to appear worse than he is, but better. But all this while, I speak not of a
single Action, but of a Conversation, or Course of Acting. For a Pious Man may
do an Evil action upon Temptation or Surprise, but not by the Tenor of his
standing Principles and Resolutions. But when a Man's Sin is his Business and
the formed Purpose of his Life; and his Piety shrinks only into Meaning and
Intention; When he tells me His heart is right with God, while his hand is in
my Pocket, he upbraids my Reason, and outfaces the Common Principle of natural
discourse with an Impudence equal to the Absurdity.

This therefore, I affirm, That he who places his Christianity only in his
Heart, and his Religion in his Meaning, has fairly secured himself against a
discovery in case he should have none; but yet, for all that, shall at the last
find his Portion with those who indeed have none. And the Truth is, those who
are thus intentionally Pious do in a very ill and untoward sense verify that
Philosophical Maxim, That what they so much pretend to be Chief, and First in
their Intention, is always Last (if at all) in the Execution.

Thirdly, The third, and last false ground, that I shall mention, upon which
some Men build to their Confusion, is Party and Singularity. If an implicit
Faith be (as some say) the Property of a Roman Catholic, then, I am sure,
Popery may be found, where the name of Papist is adhorred. For what account can
some give of their Religion, or of that Assurance of their Salvation (which
they so much boast of) but that they have wholly resigned themselves up to the
Guidance and Dictates of those, who have the Front, and Boldness to usurp the
Title of the Godly. To be of such a Party, of such a Name, nay of such a
sneaking look, is to some the very Spirit, and Characteristick mark of
Christianity.

See what St. Paul himself built upon before His Conversion to Christ, Acts
26.5. I was (says He) after the strictest Sect of our Religion a Pharisee. So
that it was the Reputation of the Sect, upon which St. Paul then embarked His
Salvation. Now the Nature of this Fraternity or Sect we may Learn from the
Origination of their Name Pharisee; it being derived from Parasch, separavit,
discrevit, whence in Greek they were called (...). Suidas.

Again. (...). Hesych. So that the Pharisees properly were and might be called
the Jewish Cathari, or Puritans.


(...), separati. So that the Words amount to this, That St. Paul before He was
a Christian, was a Rigid Separatist.

But Singularity is not Sincerity, though too often and mischievously mistaken
for it; And as an House built upon the Sand is likely to be ruined by Storms;
so an House built out of the Road is exposed to the Invasion of Robbers, and
wants both the Convenience and Assistance of Society: Christ is not therefore
called the Corner stone in the Spiritual building, as if He intended that His
Church should consist only of Corners or be driven into them. There is a
By-path as well as a Broad-way to Destruction. And it both argues the Nature,
and portends the Doom of Chaff, upon Agitation to separate and Divide from the
Wheat. But to such as Venture their Eternal Interest upon such a Bottom I shall
only suggest these two Words.

First, That admitting, but not granting, that the Party which they adhere to,
may be truly Pious; yet the Piety of the Party cannot sanctify its Proselytes.
A Church may be properly called Holy, when yet that Holiness does not diffuse
it self to each particular Member: the Reason of which is, Because the whole
may receive Denomination from a Quality inherent only in some of its Parts.
Company may occasion, but it cannot transfuse. Holiness. No Man's Righteousness
but Christ's alone can be imputed to another. To rate a Man by the Nature of his
Companions, is a Rule frequent indeed, but not Infallible. Judas was as much a
Wretch amongst the Apostles, as amongst the Priests. And therefore it is but a
poor Argument for a Man to derive his Saintship from the Virtues of the Society
he belongs to, and to conclude himself no Weed, only because he grows amongst
the Corn.

Secondly, Such an adhesion to a Party carries in it a strong suspicion and
Tang of the rankest of all ill Qualities, Spiritual Pride. There are Two Things
natural almost to all Men.

First, A desire of Pre-eminence in any Perfection, but especially Religious.
Secondly, A Spirit of Opposition or Contradiction to such as are not of their
own Mind or Way. Now both these are eminently gratifyed by a Man's listing
himself of a Party in Religion. And I doubt not but some are more really proud
of the affected sordidness of a pretended Mortification, than others are of the
greatest affluence, and splendour of Life: And that many who call the Execution
of Law and Justice Persecution, do yet suffer it with an Higher and more
pleasing Relish of Pride, than others can inflict it. For it is not true Zeal
rising from an Hearty concernment for Religion, but an ill, restless, cross
humor, which is imped with Smart, and quickened with Opposition. The Godly
Party is little better than a Contradiction in the Adjunct; for he who is truly
Godly, is humble and peaceable, and will neither make, nor be of a Party,
according to the Common sense of that word. Let such Pretenders therefore
suspect the Sandiness and Hollowness of their Foundation; and know, that such
Imitators of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram build upon the same Ground upon which
they stood, and into which they sunk. And certainly that Man's Condition is
very unsafe, who accounts his Sin his Perfection, and so makes the Object of
his Repentance, the Ground of his Salvation.

And thus I have discovered some of those false and deceiving Grounds upon
which many bottom their Eternal State, and by which they think themselves in
the Direct way to Life, and Happiness while God knows they are in the High and
Broad Road to Perdition.

Pass we now to the third thing proposed, which is to show, Whence it is that
such ill founded structures are, upon Trial, sure to fall. For the
Demonstration of which we must observe, that to the Violent Dissolution of any
Thing two Things concur. First, An assault or impression from without.
Secondly, An inherent Weakness within. One is the Active, the other the Passive
Principle of every Change. For so much as there is of Weakness, there is of
Non-resistance, and so far as any Thing yields or not resists, the contrary
Impression enters, and by degrees weakens, and at length destroys the
subsistence of the Thing opposed.

As for the First of these, The force and opposition from without. It comes
from the (...), the true common Enemy, the implacable, insatiable Devourer of
Souls, the Devil; who will be sure to plant his Engines of battery against
every Spiritual building which does but look toward Heaven. The opposition he
makes, our Savior here Emphatically describes by the Winds blowing, the Rain
descending, and the Floods coming, which is not an insignificant Rhetorication
of the same Thing by several Expressions (like some Pulpit bombast made only to
measure an Hour Glass) but an Exact Description of those Three methods, by
which this assault of the Devil prevails and becomes Victorious.

First, The First is, That it is sudden and unexpected. The Devil usually
comes upon the Soul as he fell from Heaven, like Lightning. And he shows no
small Art and Policy by his so doing: For Quickness prevents Preparation, and
so Enervates Opposition. It is observed of Caesar that he did Plurima and
maxima bella sola celeritate conficere; So that almost in all his Expeditions
he seldom came to any Place, but his Coming was before the Report of it. And we
shall find, that the Roman Eagles owed most of their great Conquests as much to
their Swiftness as to their Force. And the same is here the Devil's method in
his Warfare against Souls. Upon which account also the same character that
Tully gave the forementioned Caesar in his Epistles to Atticus, may much more
fitly agree to him, That he is Monstrum horribile Celeritatis and Vigilantiae.
He flies to his Prey, he fetches his blow quick and sure. He can shoot a
Temptation in a Glance, and convey the Poison of his suggestions quicker than
the agitation of thought, or the ^^rictures of Fancy. It is the sudden Trip in
Wrestling that fetches a Man to the ground.

Thus St. Peter, that Giant in Faith, was shamefully foiled by a sudden though
weak Assault. While he ^its in the High Priest's hall warming himself and
thinking nothing, one confounds him with this quick unexpected Charge, Matthew.
26.69. Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee. The surprise of the onset
prevented his deliberating Powers from rallying together those succors of
habitual Grace, which, being alarmed by a more Gradual approach of the
Temptation, would have easily repulsed it. But the Devil will never Caution the
Soul into a posture of defense by presenting the Temptation at a Distance. He
bites and shows his Teeth at the same instant; and so prevents the foresight of
the Eye, by Exceeding it in Quickness.

Secondly, His assaults are furious, and impetuous. Temptations come very
often, as the Devil himself is said to do, in a Storm. And a Gust of Wind, as
it rises on a sudden, so it rushes with Vehemence. And if the similitude does
not yet speak high enough; to the Violence of a Storm the Text adds the
Prevailing Rage of a Flood. And we know the Tyranny of this Element when it
once embodies into a Torrent, and runs with the United Force of many Waters. It
scorns all confinement and tears down the proudest Opposition, as Virgil fully
describes it.

" -- Rapidus montano flumine torrens,
"Sternit agros, sternit sata laeta, boumque labores.
"Praecipitesque trahit Sylvas --
With a Parallel encounter does the Devil draw upon the poor fortifications of
outward Civility, good Desires, imperfect Resolutions, and the like, which are
no more able to abide the shock of such Batteries, than a morning dew is able
to bear the scorching Fury of the Sun; or than such little banks as Children
use to raise in sport, are able to stem or stand against the outrageous
breaking in of the Sea. Every Temptation has this Property of Water, either to
insinuate, or to force its Way.

Thirdly, The Devil in his Assaults is restless and importunate. The Wind is
here said not only to blow, but Emphatically to beat upon the House. And as in
a Tempest the Blasts are both sudden and Violent in their onset, so they are
frequent in their Returns. Importunity is the Only Coaction that the Will
knows. Where the Devil cannot persuade, he will, if he can, even weary into a
consent. It is often Charging that wins the Field. The Tempter, if he is
repulsed in a Battle, will lengthen his Assault into a Siege. For the mind may
have often a sudden heat of Valor to repel the One, and yet not constancy to
endure the Other. A rejected Proposal shall be reinforced with continual fresh
supplies of more Urgent and repeated Persuasions.

See him Thrice renewing the Combat with our Savior; and indeed after he has
had the Impudence to begin a Temptation, it is always his Prudence to pursue
it. Otherwise, opposition only attempted serves not for Conquest, but
Admonition. His assaults are here said to come like the Rain, and the Rain
never falls in one single drop; and yet if it did, even a Drop would hollow and
dig its way by frequency and assiduity.

It is observed by the Learned Verulam, What advantage bold and importunate Men
have over others, nay even so as to prevail upon Men of Wisdom and Rosolution,
because, as he excellently notes, The Wisest Men have their Weak times: And
then I infer, that he who is Importunate at all Times, must needs catch them at
those.

So when the Tempter continues his Importunity, and siege about a Soul, he has
all these Advantages over it; As to view its strongholds, and to spy where
they are least fortifyed. To observe the Intervals and Cessations of Duty. When
Devotion Ebbs, and the Spiritual Guards draw off: When the Affections Revel,
and slide into a Posture of security; and then to renew, and bring on the
Assault a fresh, and so to force a Victorious entrance for his Temptations.

It is here, as with the Greeks before Troy; it was not their Armies, nor their
Achilles, but their Ten Years Siege that got the Conquest. What a violent Flame
cannot presently melt down, a constant, though a gentle heat will at length
exhale. It is our known Duty to fight and resist the Devil; and we shall find
that scarce any Temptation ever encounters the Soul without its second.

So then, you see here the First Cause of this great Overthrow, namely, The
Assault and Impression made from without by the Tempter; which in the next
place is rendered Effectual by the Impotence and Non-resistance of the Soul,
that is so opposed; which peculiarly answers his threefold Opposition with
three Contrary Qualifications.

First, As First, That it is frequently unprepared. The Soul (God knows) is but
seldom upon the Watch; Its Spiritual Armor is seldom buckled on. The Business,
the Cares, and the Pleasures of the World, draw it off from its own defense.
Business imploys, Care distracts, and Pleasure lulls it asleep. And is this a
Posture to receive an Enemy in? An Enemy Cunning, Watchful, and Malicious? An
Enemy who never sleeps, nor loyters, nor overlooks an advantage.

Secondly, As it is unprepared, so it is also weak and feeble. The Spirit (says
our Savior) is willing, but the Flesh is weak. And such is the Condition of
Man in this World, that much more of Flesh than Spirit goes to his
Constitution. Nay is not Grace it self described under the Weakness of smoking
Flax, or a bruised Reed? Of which how quickly is one Extinguished, and how
easily is the other broke!

Thirdly, As it is both unprepared, and weak; so it is also inconstant. Peter
will die for his Master at one time, and not many Hours after deny, and
forswear Him. Steadfastness is the Result of strength, and how then can
Constancy dwell with weakness? The greatest strength of the mind is in its
Resolutions, and yet how often do they Change! Even in the weightiest concerns,
Men too frequently put them on and off with their Clothes. They deceive, when
they are most trusted; suddenly starting, and flying in pieces like a broken
bow; and like a bow again, even when strongest, they can hardly be kept always
Bent. We see what fair and promising beginings some made, Luke 8.13. They heard
the Word, they received it with joy, but having not Root, they believed only
for a while, and so in Time of Temptation fell away.

Constancy is the Crowning Virtue. Matthew. 10.22. He who endures to the End
shall be saved. But then Constancy and Perseverance are the gift of God, and
above the Production of mere Nature; it being no small Paradox to imagine that
where the stock it self is slight and infirm, any thing which grows out of it
should be strong.

And thus having shown the Threefold Impotence of the Soul answerable to the
Threefold Opposition made against it by the Devil; What can we conclude? But
that where Vnpreparedness is encountered with unexpected Force, Weakness with
Violence, Inconstancy with Importunity, there Destruction must needs be, not
the Effect of Chance, but Nature, and, by the closest connection of Causes,
unavoidable.

It now remains that in the Last place we show, wherein the Greatness of this
fall consists. The House fell and great was the Fall thereof. In short it may
appear upon these two accounts.

First, That it is scandalous, and diffuses a Contagion to others, and a blot
upon Religion. A falling House is a bad Neighbor. It is the Property of Evil
as well as of Good to be Communicative. We still suppose the Building here
mentioned in the Text, to have had all the Advantages of visible Representment,
all the Pomp and Flourish of external Ornament, a Stately superstructure, and a
Beautyful appearance; and therefore such an one must needs Perish as remarkably
as it stood. That which is seen afar off while it stands, is heard of much
further when it Falls.

An Eminent Professor is the concern of a Whole Profession. As to Nonplus an
Aristotle would look, not only like a Slur to a particular Philosopher, but
like a Baffle to Philosophy it self.

The Devil will let a Man build and Practice high, that he may at length fetch
him down with the greater shame; and so make even a Christian an Argument
against Christianity. The subduing of any soul is a Conquest, but of such an
One a Triumph. A signal Professor cannot Perish without a Train, and in his
very Destruction his Example is Authentic.

Secondly, The Greatness of the Fall here spoken of appears also in this, That
such an One is hardly and very rarely recovered. He whose House falls, has not
usually either Riches or Heart to build Another. It is the Business of a Life
once to build.

God indeed can cement the Ruins, and heal the Breaches of an Apostate Soul,
but usually a shipwrack'd Faith and a defloured Conscience admit of no Repair.
Like the Present time, which, when once gone, never returns.

What may be within the Compass of Omnipotence, the Secret of a Decree, or the
Unlimited Strains of Extraordinary Grace, is not here disputed: But as it would
be Arrogance for us Men to define the Power of Grace; so it is the Height of
Spiritual Prudence to observe its Methods. And upon such Observation we shall
find, that the Recovery of such Apostates is not the Custom but the Prerogative
of Mercy.

A Man is ruined but once. A miscarriage in the New Birth is dangerous, and
very Fatal it generally proves to pass the Critical Seasons of a defeated
Conversion.

And thus I have at length dispatched, what (...) at first proposed. Now the
Words themselves being (as I said before) Christ's application of His Own
Sermon, cannot be improved into a Better, and consequently need not into
Another; except what their own natural Consequence does suggest; and that is,
What our Savior Himself intimates elsewhere, Namely, That he who is about to
build, would first sit down and consider what it is like to cost him. For
building is Chargeable, especially if a Man lays out his Money like a Fool
Would a Man build for Eternity, that is in other words, Would he be Saved? Let
him consider with himself, what charges he is willing to be at, that he may be
so. Nothing under an Universal, sincere Obedience to all the Precepts of the
Gospel, can entitle him to the Benefits of it; and thus far and deep he must
go, if he will lay his Foundation true. It is in hard and a Rocky work, I
confess, but the difficulty of laying it will be abundantly recompensed by the
Firmness of it when it is laid.

But it is a sad and mortifying Consideration to think upon what false and
sinking Grounds, or rather upon what Whirlepools and Quicksands many venture to
build. Some you shall have amusing their Consciences with a set of Fantastical
New-Coin'd Phrases, such as Laying hold on Christ, getting into Christ, and
rolling themselves upon Christ, and the like: by which if they mean any Thing
else but obeying the Precepts of Christ, and a Rational hope of Salvation
thereupon, (which, it is certain, that generally they do not mean) it is all
but a Iargon of empty, senseless Metaphors; and though many venture their Souls
upon them, despising good works and strict living as mere Morality and perhaps
as Popery, yet being thoroughly looked into and examined, after all their Noise,
they are really nothing but Words, and Wind.

Another flatters himself that he has lived in full Assurance of his Salvation
for Ten, or Twenty, or perhaps Thirty years; that is, in other Words, The Man
has been Ignorant, and Confident very long.

Ay, but says another, I am a great Hearer and Lover of Sermons, (especially
of Lectures.) And it is this which is the very delight of my Righteous Soul,
and the main business of my Life; and though indeed according to the good old
Puritan Custom, I use to walk, and talk out the Prayers before the Church Door,
or without the Choire, yet I am sure to be always in at Sermon. Nay, I have so
entirely devoted my whole Time to the hearing of Sermons, that I must Confess,
I have hardly any left to Practice them. And will not all this set me right for
Heaven? Yes, no doubt, if a Man were to be pulled up to Heaven by the Ears; or
the Gospel would but reverse its Rule, and declare That not the Doers of the
Word, but the Hearers only should be justified.

But then in comes a fourth, and tells us, That He is a Saint of yet an higher
Class, as having got far above all their Mean, Beggarly, Steeple-house
Dispensations, by an happy Exchange of them for the Purer and more Refined
Ordinances of the Conventicle; where he is sure to meet with Powerful Teaching
indeed, and to hear Will Worship and Superstition runn'd down, And the Priests
of Baal paid off, and the Follies and Fopperies of their great Idol the
Common Prayer laid open with a Witness, (not without some Edifying Flings at
the King and Court too, sometimes) by all which his Faith is now grown so
Strong, that he can no more doubt of his going to Heaven, than that there is
such a Place as Heaven to go to.

So that if the Conscience of such an One should at any time offer to grumble
at Him, He would presently stop its Mouth with this, That he is of such an Ones
Congregation. And then, Conscience say thy worst. Or if the guilt of some old
Perjuries or Extortions should begin to look stern upon Him: Why then all those
old scores shall be cleared off with a Comfortable Persuasion, That such as he
cannot fall from Grace, though it is shrewdly to be feared, That his only way
of proving this must be, That there can be no losing or falling from that which
a Man never had.

But ah! Thou Poor, Blind, Self-deluding, and Deluded Soul! are these the best
Evidences thou have for Heaven? These the Grounds upon which thou hopest for
Salvation? Assure thy self that God will deal with thee upon very different
Terms.

For he absolutely enjoins thee to do whatsoever Christ has Commanded; and to
avoid whatsoever He has forbidden. And Christ has commanded thee to be poor in
Spirit, and to be pure in Heart. To subdue thy unruly Appetites, to curb thy
Lust, to restrain thy Anger, and to suppress thy Revenge. And if any thing
proves an hindrance to thee in thy Duty, though it be as dear to thee as thy
Right Eye, to pluck it out; and as useful to thee as thy Right Hand, to cut it
off and cast it from thee. He will have thee ready to endure Persecutions,
Revilings, and all manner of Slanders, not only patiently, but also cheerfully
for the Truths sake. He calls upon thee to Love thine Enemies, and to do Good
for Evil: To bless those that Curse thee, and to pray for those that
Despitefully use thee. He Commands thee in all Things, strictly to do as thou
would be done by; and not to cheat, lie, or overreach thy Neighbor; and
then call it a fetching over the Wicked, the better to enable thee to relieve
the Godly. He will not allow thee to resist Evil, and much less to resist thy
Governor. He commands thee to be Charitable without Vainglory, and Devout
without Ostentation. In short, He requires thee to be meek and lowly, chaste and
temperate, just and merciful; and in a word (so far as the poor measures of
Humanity will reach) Perfect as thy Heavenly Father is Perfect.

This is the sum of those Divine Sayings of our Savior, which he himself
refers to in my Text, and which if a Man Hears and Does, all the Powers of Hell
shall never shake him. And nothing but a constant, impartial, universal
Practice of these will or can speak Peace to thy Conscience here, and stand
between Thee and the Wrath of God hereafter. As for all other Pretenses, they
are nothing but Death and Damnation, dressed up in Fair Words and False Shows;
nothing but Ginns, and Snares, and Trepans for Souls; Contrived by the Devil,
and Managed by such as the Devil sets on Work.

But I have done, and the Result of all that I have said, or can say is, That
every Spiritual Builder would be persuaded to Translate his Foundation from the
Sand to the Rock; and not presume upon Christ as his Savior, till by a full
Obedience to His Laws, he has owned Him for his Sovereign. And this is properly
to Believe in Him: This is truly to Build upon a Rock; even that Rock of Ages,
upon which, every one that wears the Name of Christ, must by an inevitable
Dilemma, either Build, or Split.

Now to God, who is able to Build us up in our most Holy Faith, to Establish us
here, and to Save us hereafter, be rendered and ascribed as is most Due, all
Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen. A True
State and Account OF THE Plea of a Tender Conscience. IN A SERMON Preached at
Christ-Church, Oxon. before the University, IN Michaelmass Term, 1672.

1 COR. VIII.12. But when ye Sin so against the Brethren, and Wound their Weak
Conscience, ye Sin against Christ.


I Shall by God's Assistance from these words debate the Case of a Weak, or (as
some improperly enough call it) a Tender Conscience: And with what Evidence I
can, show both what it is, and what Privileges it may justly claim from this
and such other places of Scripture. One great one we have here set down, and
that indeed so great, that it looks more like a Prerogative than a Privilege.
Namely, that to Wound or Sin against it, is no less a Crime than to Sin against
Christ Himself.

Our Apostle in two places of his Epistles treats professedly of this Argument:
To wit in the 14 th of the Romans and in this 8 th of the 1 Cor. For the better
understanding of his design and meaning in both which places, it ^ill be
requisite to give some brief account of the Subject Matter, and Occasion of
them. In the 14 th Chapter of the Romans he speaks of such as had been Converted
from Judaism to Christianity; some of which being but new Converts, were not
yet so perfectly and entirely Christians, but that they still observed the
Ordinances of the Mosaical Law, as supposing it still in Force. Others on the
contrary, being more confirmed and grown up in the knowledge of their Christian
Liberty, and thereby being fully satisfied, that the Ceremonial part of the
Mosaic Law was abolished and took away, observed not that difference of Days
and Meats which was prescribed in that Law, but looked upon one Day as another,
and indifferently ate any kind of Meats, being persuaded in their Conscience,
that Christ had took away all such distinction, and made the use of all Lawful.
Nevertheless, the former sort of Converts not understanding, that it was the
Design of Christianity to abroga^e any thing once established by Moses, had
their Consciences still in Bondage to a Religious Observation of whatsoever had
been enjoined in his Law. And thereupon, though they owned Christ, yet if any
Meat prohibited by Moses was set before them, they held themselves bound rather
to fast, or to eat only Herbs, than by eating such Meat, to break the Law (as
they thought) and thereby to Defile themselves. This was their Case.

But in this 8 th Chapter of 1 Cor. St. Paul speaks of Persons newly Converted
from Idolatry, and that touching the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of eating Meats
offered to Idols. Concerning which offerings we must know, that besides what
was eaten of them in the Idols Temple, (which eating was an Act of Religious
Worship and Communion with the Idol, as our eating the Bread in the Sacrament
is a Communion with Christ) besides this I say, there was a certain Portion of
those Sacrifices which fell to the Priests, and which they having no use of,
sold to those, who afterward exposed it to ^ale promiscuously amongst other
Meats upon the Shambles, from whence it was accordingly bought up and spent in
private Families, without any distinction whether it had, or had not been
offered to Idols. Now, as for the former way of eating Meats thus offered,
namely, in the Idols Temple; this the Apostle utterly disallows as absolutely
Unlawful; But the latter only under some Circumstances. For he allows that it
might be lawfully bought amongst other Meat in the Market, and being so bought
might be eaten in any private House without the least Sin. Only with this
Caution; That whereas there were some, who well understood, that Meat could
have no defiling quality imprinted upon it by its Consecration to an Idol, And
others on the contrary, having not so much knowledge, supposed that the
Consecration of it to the Idol, left upon it such a Polluting quality and near
Relation to the Idol as defiled the Eater, The former sort might freely and
Innocently eat such Meats in private Families, provided it was not before those
of the latter sort; who through weakness having an Opinion of the Unlawfulness
of such Meats, might nevertheless be induced to use the same Liberty, though
their Consciences, in the mean time, having quite another Judgment in this
matter, esteemed the eating them little better than Idolatry. Now the Argument
by which the Apostle abridges the liberty of the former sort of Converts in
condescension to those of the latter sort, proceeds upon the strength of this
Assertion; That the Lawfulness of Men's Actions, depends not solely either upon
the lawfulness of their subject matter, nor yet upon the Conscience of the
doers of them considered in it self, but as considered with reference to the
Consciences of others; to whom by the law of Charity they stand bound so to
behave themselves, as by none of their Actions to give them occasion of Sin.
And this was the Case of the Persons here treated of by the Apostle in this
Chapter. Which Historical account of the subject matter of the words being thus
premised, I shall cast the prosecution of them under these Three Heads.

1. I shall show what a Weak Conscience is. 2. What it is to Wound or Sin
against it. 3. I shall lay down some Conclusions or Assertions, naturally
resulting from the foregoing Particulars.
And First for the first of these what a Weak Conscience is. I said at first
that such a Conscience was improperly called Tender: which in the sense it
commonly bears, is an expression of our own framing, and no where to be met
with in the Scriptures; Tenderness applied to Conscience properly imports
quickness and exactness of sense, which is the Perfection of this Faculty,
whose duty it is to be Spiritual Watch to give us warning of whatsoever
concerns us. It is indeed the Eye of the Soul; and though the Eye is naturally
the most tender and delicate part of the Body, yet it is not therefore called
Weak, so long as its sight is quick and strong. Conscience, the more sensible
it is to accuse or excuse (which is its office) and to spy out every little
thing which may annoy or defile the Soul, so much the more Tender it is to be
accounted, but not therefore so much the more Weak: which sufficiently shows,
Weakness and Tenderness of Conscience, to be in strictness of speech two
different things. And the same appears yet further from those Contraries, to
which they stand Respectively opposed. A Tender Conscience being opposed to a
Hard or Seared Conscience: Such a one as either wholly or in a great measure
has lost the distinguishing sense of Good and Evil, Honest and Dishonest. But a
Weak Conscience is opposed to a Strong: Which very strength (we show) consisted
in the Tenderness or Quickness of its discerning or Perceptive Power, whereupon
we read of Strong Men and Babes in Christ; which denominations take their Rise
from the strength or weakness of the Conscience. For such as the Conscience is,
such must be the Christian.

And here, let none think my Insisting upon the distinction of these Terms
either Nice or Needless: For it is no small Artifice of Fraud to prepossess the
Minds of Men, by representing a bad thing under a good Name, and calling
Weakness of Conscience which is a defect, by the Name of Tenderness which is a
Perfection. Words govern the Generality of the World, who seldom go (...) deep
as to look into Things: And Impostors well know how likely their Cause is to
succeed, if their Terms can but once be admitted.

As for the Place now before us; it is evident, that the weakness of Conscience
here spoken of is opposed to Faith. So that in Romans 14. Such an one is said to
be Weak in the Faith, and v. 2. One [Believeth] that he may eat all things;
another who is [Weak] eats Herbs. Where observe that He who believes, is
opposed to him who is Weak. Now by Faith here is not meant that act or quality
by which a Man is justified, but signifies the same with Knowledge. As 1 Cor.
8.10. If any Man see thee who have [Knowledge] sit at meat in the Idols Temple,
shall not the Conscience of Him who is weak be emboldened to do so too? And in
v. 7. Howbeit there is not in every Man this [Knowledge] for some with
Conscience of the Idol eat it as a thing offered to an Idol, and their
Conscience being [Weak] is defiled. So that, as in that Chapter to the Romans,
Weakness of Conscience is opposed to Faith: here in this Chapter to the
Corinthians the same Weakness is opposed to Knowledge. Which from the Identity
of the Case treated of in both Places, together with other Circumstances,
Evidently demonstrate Faith and Knowledge to be here taken for the same thing.
In short therefore the Faith here spoken of is a clear Knowledge of what is
Unlawful, and what only Indifferent, together with a firm persuasion of the
Lawful use of such Indifferent Things, all Circumstances being duly observed in
the using of them. And therefore on the other side, the Weak Conscience is such
an one, as judges otherwise of the Nature of Things, than indeed it is,
supposing that to be unlawful in it self, which really is not so, and thereupon
abstaining from the use of it, as of a thing Unlawful.

From whence it follows that Weakness of Conscience implies in it these three
things.

First, An Ignorance of the Lawfulness of some certain thing or Action.
Secondly, A suspicion ensuing thereupon of its Unlawfulness. Thirdly, A
Religious fear to use or Practice it, grounded upon that Ignorance or
suspicion.
And first, for the first of these Ingredients, Ignorance: which is indeed the
chief and principal of all the three, as being the Original of the other Two.
Concerning this we must (as the groundwork of all) observe, that it ought by
all means to be such an Ignorance, as may in Propriety of Speech and sense bear
the Denomination of Weakness. Which it is certain that every sort of Ignorance
neither does nor can. For since Weakness is properly the Privation or Absence
of Power. That Ignorance only can receive this Name, which is not founded upon
any Vicious Action or Omission of the Will. I say Action or Omission. For a Man
may either positively design and will the Ignorance of a Thing, by studiously
avoiding all means to inform himself of it; much like the shuting of ones Eyes
against the Light, or re^using to come to Church. Or it may be founded upon
some Omission; as when the will, though it does not designedly avoid and put
from it the means of Knowledge, yet neglects to look after them. Now the
Ignorance which is Occasioned either of these ways is Willing, and consequently
Sinful: Though usually for distinction sake the former is with more Emphasis
termed not only Willing but Wilful; as being the direct object of an Act of
Volition, and upon that Account stamped with an higher Aggravation.

That Ignorance therefore that renders and denominates the Conscience Weak,
must be such an one as is not Willing; which is Evident upon a double account.

First, Because it must be such an one, as renders it in some degree excusable;
but so far as any defect is resolved into the will, it is in that degree
inexcusable.

Secondly, Because it must be such an Ignorance as renders the Person having
it, the object of Pity and Compassion. But no Man Pities another for any Evil
lying upon Him, which he would not help, but which he could not. One is his
Burden, the other his Choice; Vertually at least, since he might have Chosen
its Prevention. So that it must be such an Ignorance, as is not (all
Circumstances considered) under the present power of a Man's Will to remedy.
And Consequently it must be resolved into one of these two Causes.

First, The Natural weakness of the understanding faculty. Secondly, The want
of opportunities or means of Knowledge.
^ther of which makes Ignorance Necessary; as it is Impossible for Him to see
who wants Eyes, and Equally Impossible for Him who wants Light; the former
being the Organ, the other the Means of Seeing. But as touching the Natural
weakness or disability of the understanding faculty, we must observe, that this
may be either Total, as in case of Ideotism, Phrensy, or the like; which wholly
deprives a Man of the use of his Reason: but Persons in this Condition fall not
under the present Consideration. or Secondly, this disability of the
understanding may be only in part, and as to a certain degree of its exercise.
From whence it is, that one Man apprehends the same thing under the same
advantages of Proposal much more slowly and difficultly than Another. Which
defect being in no Man's Power to prevent, but coming with him into the World;
all that Ignorance, which is inevitably caused by it, neither can, nor ever
shall be charged upon the Will. But then withal, as this defect does not wholly
deprive a Man of the Power of k^^wing, but only of the Readiness, Easiness, and
Quickness of it; (upon which account Knowledge becomes more difficult to him in
the Acquisition); So this Weakness, Dullness, or Slowness of a Man's
Intellectual Powers, can never totally excuse Him for being Ignorant of what it
was his Duty to know; since it was in the Power of his Will by Labor and
Industry to have supplied (and as it were) to have pieced up these Failures in
his Apprehension; and so at length, to have acquired the Knowledge of that by
Study and Pains, which he could not by the Slowness of his Understanding take
in at first.

But then, this must be also confessed, that by reason of this diversity in the
quickness or slowness of Men's Understandings; one Man may be sooner
inexcusable for his Ignorance of the same thing than another. For God will
allow a Man of slower Parts to be Ignorant of a thing longer than a Person
endued with more Quick and Pregnant Sense. He ^^^ects from Men only according
to the Proportions of his giving to them; still making an Equality and
Commensuration between a Man's Obligations and his Powers. And thus much for
the first and grand Ingredient of Weakness of Conscience which is Ignorance.

Secondly, The Second is a suspicion of the Unlawfulness of any Thing or
Action. And this is manifestly something more than a bare Ignorance of its
Lawfulness. Though indeed such an Ignorance is of it self enough to make the
forbearance of any Thing or Action necessary. For as much as nothing ought to
be done but in Faith; that is in a full persuasion of the Lawfulness of what we
do. Which he can be no more said to do, who is Ignorant of the Lawfulness of
what he goes about, than he who suspects it to be Unlawful. How be it this
suspicion adds to the guilt of the Action, in case it be done during its
continuance. Because all suspicion is grounded upon some Arguments, which leave
not the Opinion of the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of a Thing Equal, as in (...)
of mere Ignorance, but rather incline us to a belief that it is Unlawful. For
it is one thing not to know whether a Thing be Lawful, another to doubt and
shrewdly to suspect that it is not so. Now this indeed is the usual Concomitant
of Weakness of Conscience, as being the natural product of Ignorance, which
seldom stops in it self: Men in the dark being generally fearful and apt to
suspect the worst. But yet this suspicion is not essentially requisite to make
a Conscience Weak; though where it is so, it makes that Weakness greater and
more troublesome. For Ignorance is properly that in which this Weakness
consists. Ignorance makes the fore, suspicion inflames it.

Thirdly, The third and last thing that goes to the making up of this Weakness
of Conscience, is a Religious Abstinence from the use of that thing of the
Lawfulness whereof it is thus Ignorant or Suspicious. It brings a Man to that
Condition in the 2 d of Coloss. and the 21 st v. (...) Touch not, Taste not,
Handle not. It lays a tie and a restraint upon his Practice, and enslaves him
to the Prejudice of a mistaking Conscience, under no less a Penalty than that
of the Divine Wrath and Eternal Damnation; Bonds not to be shook off, and
Fences not to be broke through by any one who values the Eternal Welfare of his
Soul.

Now from these three things put together, I conceive, we may collect this full
description of a Weak Conscience. Namely, that it is such an one, as obliges a
Man to forbear any Thing or Action, from a suspicion that it is Unlawful, or at
least an Ignorance that it is Lawful; which suspicion or Ignorance was not
caused or occasioned by his own Will, but either by the natural Weakness of his
Understanding, or the want of such means of Knowledge, as were absolutely
necessary to inform Him.

This description ought well to be observed and remembered in the several Parts
of it, as being that which must give light into all the following Particulars.

And thus much for the first thing p^^posed, which was to show, what this Weak
Conscience is. I proceed now to the

Second, Which is to show, what it is to Wound or Sin against it. It implies I
conceive these two Things.

First, To grieve, afflict, or discompose it; or, in a word, to Rob it of its
Peace. For there is that concernment for God's Honor dwelling in every truly
Pious Heart, which makes it troubled at the Sight of any Action by which it
supposes God to be dishonored. Rivers of Tears (says David) run down my Eyes
because Men keep not thy Statutes; and am I not grieved with those who rise up
against Thee? Every Sin directly strikes at God, but collaterally the scandal
of it reaches all about us. And as Piety Commands us not to Offend God, so
Charity enjoins us not to Grieve our Neighbor.

Secondly, The other Thing employed in the Wounding of a Weak Conscience, is to
encourage or embolden it to act something against its present Judgment o^
Persuasion: which is in other terms, to offend, or cast a stumbling block
before it. That is, to do something, which may administer to it an occasion of
falling, or bringing it self under the guilt of Sin. So that as the former was
a breach upon the Peace, this is properly a wound upon the Purity of the
Conscience.

Now the Conscience may be induced to Act counter to its present persuasion,
two ways.

1 st, By Example, 2 d, By Command.

First. And first for Example; which is the Case here expressly mentioned, and
Principally intended. According to that of the Apostle in the 10 th v. of this
8 th of 1 Cor. where he says, that the Conscience of Him who is Weak, is
Emboldened to Eat things offered to Idols, by seeing Him who has Knowledge sit
at Meat in the Idols Temple: So that it is the seeing of another do so, which
makes the Weak Person conclude that he may do so too. Now the Reason of that
persuasive force which is in Example, is from a kind of Implicit Faith in the
Goodness and Lawfulness of another Actings, grounded upon a supposall of his
Piety and Judgment, which in the Weak Conscience of One, who beholds Him,
naturally frames such a kind of Ratiocination as this. I, for my part, by the
best of my Understanding can be no way satisfied of the Lawfulness of my doing
such an Action, nevertheless such an one whom I esteem a Person truly Pious and
more Judicious than my self, makes no scruple of doing it at all, which surely
he would, if it were indeed Unlawful: And therefore if it be Lawful for him to
do thus and thus, why may it not be so likewise for me, albeit my own Reason, I
confess, would perswad^ me otherwise?

So that here is the force of Example to Persuade, and thereby in this Case to
Wound; in that it induces a Man to Act by an Implicit Faith in the private
Judgment of another, against the express Dictates and Persuasions of his own. A
thing directly against the Law of God and Nature, which has appointed every
Man's Reason or Conscience to be the Immediate Guide or Governor of his
Actions.

Secondly. The second way by which the Conscience may be induced to Act
contrary to its present Persuasion, is by Command; as when a Person in Power
enjoins the doing something, of the Lawfulness of which a Man is not persuaded:
But concerning this, these two things are to be observed.

First. That it is not so clear that a mere Command can Wound the Conscience
this way; that is, by emboldening it to Act against its present Persuasion: For
so to embolden it, is to make it Willing to Act in this manner; but a Command
as such, makes not a Man willing to do the Thing Commanded, but lays only an
Obligation upon the Action that is to be done. Nevertheless since a Command
seldom comes proposed Naked in it self, but with the Conjunction of Reward upon
Performance of the thing Commanded, or of Penalties upon the Omission; one
whereof works upon a Man's hopes, the other upon his fears; by both of which
ways, the will of Man is apt to be prevailed upon; therefore in this sense a
Command enjoining a Man to do something against his Judgment, may be said to
Wound his Conscience: not as a bare Command (for so it has nothing to allure or
gain the Will, (and it is certain that it cannot force it) but as a Command
attended with those Things which are apt to entice and gain upon it. Add to
this also, that a Command coming from a Person noted for his Piety and
Knowledge has the force of an Example: For as much as the Reputation of the
Person derives the same Credit upon his Law.

Secondly. The other Thing here to be observed, is that a Command may be
considered two ways.

First, As descending from one private Person upon another, as from a Father
upon a Son, from a Master upon his Servant, from a Guardian upon his Pupil, or
the like. And I question not but the Principal Design of the Apostle in this
Chapter extends not beyond private Persons; but directly proposes rules only
for the Charitable and Inoffensive deportment of one private Person toward
another. Nevertheless, since by manifest Analogy of Reason, the Case of
Magistrates or public Persons may here come into Consideration; Therefore in
the

Second Place ^a Command may be Considered as descending from a Magistrate or
Public Person upon Persons under his Jurisdiction: and so I affirm that the
Supreme Magistrate in the making of Laws, or giving out Commands, stands not
under any obligation from his Office to frame those Laws to the Good or
Advantage of any Particular Persons, but only of the Community or Majority of
the People, which are properly the Trust Committed to Him. So that if his
Reason or Conscience, upon the best Information he can get, tells Him that the
making of such or such a Law tends to the good of these, and that so apparently
that without it they would be unavoidably hurt in matters of the greatest
Moment: if this Law now becomes an occasion of Sin to some particular Persons,
its being so is wholly accidental and extrinsick to the design of the Law and
consequently concerns not the Civil Magistrate, nor makes Him chargeable with
those Sins in the least. For surely where the Public good of all or most of
the People, comes into Competition with the Private good of some Particulars,
so that both cannot possibly be served by the same means, There Charity as well
as bare Reason, will teach, that the Private must stoop to the Public rather
than the Public be made a Sacrifice to the Private. In God's Government of the
World it is the Public concern of Mankind, that there should be Summer and
Winter in their respective Seasons, and yet there are Millions of Sick and Weak
Persons to whose distempers the approach of either of those Seasons will prove
certainly Mortal. Is it now think we rational that God should suspend a Summer
or a Winter only to comply with the distemper of those Crazy, Bodily-Weak
Brethren and thereby to incommode all the World besides?

The case is much alike here, However this indeed must be confessed, that if
the Magistrate or Supreme Power, should make a Law which he knew would be a
direct occasion of Sin to the Generality or Majority of his People, the making
of such a Law would be in Him a Sin and a Breach of his Trust: but still I
affirm that his Office obliges Him only to provide for the good of the main
Body of his People; and if it so falls out, that Particulars come to have an
Interest distinct from, or opposite to that, he is not, during such its
opposition, at all bound to regard or Provide for it: Nor to answer for the
Inconveniences which may attend such Persons either in their Civil or Spiritual
Concerns.

And thus much concerning the second Thing proposed, which was to show what it
is to Wound or Sin against a Weak Conscience, namely that it is either to
grieve it, or to embolden it to Sin. And if it be now objected against this,
that the Text calls a Sinning against a Weak Conscience, a Sinning against
Christ, to whom we can no ways properly be said to administer any occasion, or
inducement to Sin. I answer that this expression of [ Sinning against] being
applied to Christ, imports only a grieving or disobeying Him: Though, as it is
applied to the Weak Conscience it signifies the other Thing too. It being not
unusual in Scripture for the same word to be repeated in the very same sentence
under a diverse signification. Having thus finished the two first Things, I
come now to the

Third and last, which is to set down those Conclusions, which by way of
Consequence, and Deduction naturally result from the foregoing Particulars.
Which Conclusions are these.

1.
That no Man having been brought up, or for any length of time continued in the
Communion of a Church, Teaching and Professing the true Religion; if he have
but also the common use of his Reason, can justly plead Weakness of Conscience
in the Sense in which it was here used by the Apostle.

2.
That as such Weakness of Conscience can upon no sufficient ground be Actually
pleaded, so upon much less can it be continued in.

3.
That supposing it might be both pleaded and continued in, yet the Plea of it
ought by no means to be admitted by the civil Magistrate in prejudice of any
laws either actually made or to be made by Him, for the General good of his
People. Of each of which in their order.

First. And first for the first of these. That no Man, etc. This conclusion is
of so much force and use rightly applied, that it is a wonder it has not been
more insisted upon, against those who disturb the Church with this Plea, for as
much as it would wholly cashier and pluck it up by the very Roots. And Men
mistake the Method of disputing with these pretenders to Weak Consciences now
adays; not considering that the very supposition that they either have or can
have (...) ^eak Conscience ought by no means to be granted them; nor are we to
debate with them, how far and to what degree this their Weakness ought to be
yielded to, but absolutely to deny, that amongst us, and under our
circumstances there is any such thing.

St. Paul indeed speaks of such a Conscience in those first times of Preaching
the Gospel, and accordingly urges a compliance with it, but where the cases are
wholly different, there the Privileges applicable to both cannot be the same.
In both these places in which this Apostle treats of this matter, I show that
the Persons to whom he addresses Himself were but new Converts. Some of which
were just converted and come off from Judaism, whose Reverence to the Law of
Moses had been sucked in by them with their very Milk, and been still kept up
in the Minds of all that People, to that strange height almost of Adoration,
that it is no wonder if their Opinion of the continuance of that Law even after
Christ's Death, and their Ignorance of its Abrogation, were for a time
invincible. And for the other sort of new Converts, they were such as had been
converted from Heathenism and Idolatry, and consequently looked upon every
thing in use amongst those Heathens with a suspicion and a jealousy so strong,
that considering the Weakness of Humane Nature, it was impossible presently to
remove it; and therefore they were in Charity for some time to be complied
with. For as the prejudices and prepossessions of Education are exceeding
hardly removed and broke, so being once broke, the Aversions of the Mind from
them, running into the other extreme, are altogether as impetuous and as hardly
governable by impartial Reason; whereupon shadows are oftentimes mistook for
substances, whilst Men through immoderate fearfulness first create to
themselves appearances of Evil, and then fly from them.

But what is all this to the Case of those now adays amongst us? who from their
Cradle have, or mig^^ have had the Principles of True Religion instilled into
them; who have still grown up in a Church which protests against Idolatry and
Superstition; and enjoins nothing that has any just appearance of such things
upon it, but offers to vindicate every thing practiced and enjoined by it from
any such imputation: these Men surely can have no Reason to entertain those
Jealousies and Prejudices which possessed Men, who had been bred up all their
days in Judaism or Idolatry, and were but newly converted from it. Especially
if we add this also, that the Goodness of God makes nothing our Duty either to
believe or practice, but what lies plain and obvious to any common
apprehension, which will not be wanting to it self. Which things since the
Church Inculcates to all within it, teaching them to know by all the ordinary
means of Knowledge whatsoever it is their Duty to know; it is evident, that no
Man amongst us can justifiably plead Weakness of Conscience in that se^^e, in
which their Consciences were Weak, whom St. Paul deals with either in that
Epistle of his to the Romans, or in this to the Corinthians. For can any Man
living in the Church allege any tolerable cause why he should be Ignorant of
his Catechism, a thing so short and plain, and yet so full as to all things
necessary to be believed or practiced by a Christian, that common Sense, and
common Industry may make any one a Master of it?

The sum of all therefore is this, That he only can plead Weakness of
Conscience upon Scripture Grounds, who is excusably Ignorant of some Point of
Duty or Privilege. He only is excusably Ignorant, whose Ignorance is not the
Effect of his Will. That Ignorance only is not so, which is caused either by
want of Ability of Understanding, or of Opportunities and Means of Knowledge.
But he who has the common use of Reason has sufficient Ability, and he who
lives in a Church Professing the true Religion, has sufficient Opportunity and
Means of knowing, whatsoever ^oncerns him either to know or do.

From a joint Connection and an unavoidable Coherence of which Propositions one
with another, it clearly appears, that it is not Weakness but Want of
Conscience, which is the true Distemper of those Persons who at this day
disturb the Church.

Secondly. The second Assertion or Conclusion was this. That as such Weakness
of Conscience can upon no sufficient ground be actually pleaded, so upon much
less can it be continued in. This must needs be confessed by all, that a Weak
Conscience in the Apostle's sense is an Imperfection, and consequently ought by
all means to be removed or laid down. For as certainly as growth and
proficiency in Knowledge under the means of Grace is a Duty, so certainly is it
a Duty not to persist in this Weakness of Conscience, which has its foundation
only in the defect of such Knowledge. So that St. Paul himself who is here
willing, that for the present it should be complied with, elsewhere upbraids
and reprehends Men sharply for continuing under it. As in the 1 st of Cor. the
3 d Chap. and the (...), and 3 d. verses. He calls such Babes, and such as were
to be Fed with Milk, and not with Meat. And to show yet further the
Imperfection of this Estate, he says, that upon this account he could not treat
them as Spiritual Persons, but as Carnal. The same Reprehension he repeats in
Heb. 5.12. Where he again upbraids them with this Appellation of Babes, telling
them that whereas for the time they ought to have been Teachers of others, they
continued in their Spiritual Childhood so long, that they had need, that one
taught them again which were the first principles of the Oracles of God. And to
show that these were such Weak Consciences as we are here discoursing of, in
the 14 th v. He opposes them to such as were of full Age, and that by reason of
use, had their Senses exercised to discern both Good and Evil. The want of
which discernment is properly that thing wherein this Weakness of Conscience
does consist. Whereupon the Apostle in the next Chapter calls upon such to go
on to Perfection; which surely implies, that this their present Condition was
not the Perfection which they were to rest in.

And it were worth the while, in our Contest with the Pretenders to Weak or
Tender Consciences amongst us, to enquire of them, how long they think it fit
for them to continue Weak? and whether they look upon their Weakness and
Ignorance as their Freehold, and as that which they resolve to keep for term
of Life, and to live and die Babes in the Knowledge of the Religion they
Profess, to to grow up into Childhood, and at length go out of the World
Infants and Weaklings of Threescore or Fourscore Years Old?

This certainly they must intend; for so far are they from looking upon that
Weakness or Tenderness of Conscience which they plead, as an Imperfection, and
consequently to be out grown or removed by them, that they own it as a Badge of
a more Refined and Advanced Piety, and of such a growth and Attainment in the
ways of God, that they look down upon all others as Christians of a lower form,
as Moral Men, and Ignorant of the Mystery of the Gospel: Words which I have
often heard from these Impostors, and which infallibly show, that the Persons
whom St. Paul dealt with, and those whom we contend with, are not the same kind
of Men: for as much as they own not the same Duty. But that (it seems) which
was the Infancy and Defect of those Persons, must pass for the perfection, and
really is the design of these. And whereas St. Paul said to the former, that if
they doubted they were damned if they ate, these (for ought appears) account it
Damnation not to doubt; where doubting of their Duty may prove a serving of
their Interest.

I proceed now to the third and last Conclusion. Which is this: That supposing
this weakness of Conscience might be both pleaded and continued in, yet the
Plea of it ought by no means to be admitted by the Civil Magistrate in
prejudice to any Laws either Actually made or to be made by Him for the General
Good of his People. This was sufficien^ly manifest in what I laid down before:
to wit, that the Magistrate is (...) ways obliged to frame his Laws to the good
of any particular Persons, where it stands separate from the good of the
Community or Majority of the People. Which consideration alone though it be
sufficient to discharge the Magistrate from any obligation to admit of such
Pleas, yet there are other and more forcible reasons why they are by no means
to be admited. I shall assign two in General.

First, The first taken from the Ill and Fatal Consequences which inevitably
ensue upon their Admission. Secondly, The other taken from the Qualification
and Temper of the Persons who make these Pleas.
As for the Ill Consequences springing from the admission of them, (though
according to the fertile Nature of every absurd Principle they are indeed
innumerable) yet I shall insist only upon these three.

First, The first is; That there can be no Bounds or Limits put to this plea,
nor any possibility of defining the just Number of particulars to which it may
extend. For it being founded in Ignorance and Error (as has been shown) it is
Evident that it may reach to all those Things of which Men may be Ignorant, and
about which they may Err. So that there is no duty, but Men may doubt and
scruple the doing of it, pretending that their Consciences are not satisfied
that it is a Duty or ought to be done. Nor is there any Action almost so wicked
and unjust, but they may pretend, that their Consciences either prompt them to
it as Necessary, or allow them in it as Lawful. As there was one in the last
blessed Times of Rebellion and Reformation who Murdered his own Mother for
kneeling at the Sacrament, alleging that it was Idolatry, and that his
Conscience told him it was his Duty to destroy Idolaters. And let any Man
living (if he can) state exactly how far Conscience will doubt and be
unsatisfied; and give me any Reason, I say any solid Reason, why, if it may
plead dissatisfaction in this or that thing, it may not upon the same Principle
plead it in any other Thing whatsoever. And so, if the obligation of our Laws
must then only begin, when this Plea shall end; I fear, we shall never see
either the End of one, or the beginning of the other.

Secondly, The second Ill Consequence is this. That as there can be no bounding
of this Plea in respect of the particulars about which it may be made, so when
it is made, there can be no possible evidence of the sincerity of it. For all
the Evidence producible must be the word of Him who makes this Plea; for as
much as He only can be Judge of his own Thoughts and Conscience, and tell
whether they be really under such a persuasion and dissatisfaction or no. But
where Men may pretend Conscience in the behalf of Interest, I see no reason why
their word should be taken in behalf of their Conscience. And yet, if we hold
to the Principle, upon which this Plea relies, no other proof of it can be had.
Which if it be admitted I suppose there needs no other Argument to demonstrate,
that this and the former Consequence together are of that Absurd Nature, and
malign Influence, that they must forthwith open the Floodgates to all
Confusion, and like a mighty Torrent bear down before them all Law, Right,
Justice, and whatsoever else the Societies of Mankind are settled by and
supported with. But to proceed to yet a further and more destructive
Consequence. In the

Third Place, The admission of this Plea absolutely binds the Hands of the
Magistrate, and subjects him to the Conscience of those whose Duty it is to be
subject to Him. For let the Civil Power make what Laws it will; if Conscience
shall come and put in its exception against them, it must be heard, and exempt
the Person, who makes the Exception, from the Binding Power of those Laws. For
since Conscience commands in the Name of God, the Issue of the question must
be, whether God, or the Magistrate is to be obeyed, and then the Decision is
like to be very Easy. This Consequence is so direct, and withal so strong, that
there is no Bar against it. So that, whereas heretofore the Magistrate passed
for God's Vicegerent here on Earth, the Weak Conscience is now resolved to keep
that Office for it self, and to prefer the Magistrate to the Dignity of being
its under Officer; For the Magistrate must make only such Laws, as such
Consciences will have made, and such Laws only must be obeyed, as these
Consciences shall judge fit to be obeyed. So that upon these Terms it is not
the King, but the Tender Conscience that has got the Negative Voice, upon the
making of all our Laws, and which is more, upon the observing them too, when
they are made.

I dare affirm that it is as Impossible for any Government or Politic Body
without a standing force, to subsist or support it self in the allowance of
this Principle, as it is for the Natural Body to live and thrive with a dagger
sticking in its Vitals. Nor can any thing be fuller of Contradiction and
Ridiculous Paradox, than to think to Reconcile the Sovereignty of the
Magistrate, and the safety of Government, with the sturdy Pleas of dissenting
Consciences. It being all one, as if the Scepter should be put into the
Subjects hand, in order to his being Governed by it.

I could add yet further, that, considering Things and Persons barely in
themselves, it is ten to one but God rather speaks in the Conscience of a
Lawful Christian Magistrate making a Law, than in the Conscience of any Private
Persons whatsoever dissenting from it.

And thus much for the first general reason against admitting the Pleas of Weak
or (as some falsely call them) Tender Consciences: the

Second General Reason shall be taken from those qualities, which usually
accompany the said Pleas; of which there are Two,

First, Partiality. Secondly, Hypocrisy.

First, And first for Partiality. Few make this Plea themselves, who being once
got into Power will endure it in others. Consult History for the Practices of
such in Germany, and your own Memories for the Practices of the late Saints in
England. In their general Comprehensive Toleration, you know, Prelacy stood
always joined with Popery, and both were excepted together. Nor was there any
Toleration allowed for the Liturgy, and established Worship of the Church of
England, though the users of it pleaded Conscience never so much for its use;
and the known Laws of God and Man, for the Rule of that their Conscience.

But those Zealots were above that Legal ordinance of doing as they would be
done by; Nor were their Consciences any longer Spiritually Weak, when their
Interest was once grown Temporally strong. And then, notwithstanding all their
pleas of Tenderness and outcries against Persecution, whoever came under them
and closed not with them, found them to be Men whose Bowels were Brass, and
whose Hearts were as hard as their Foreheads.

Secondly, The other Qualification which generally goes along with this Plea,
and so renders it not fit to be admitted, is Hypocrisy. Divines generally agree
upon this as a certain evidence of the sincerity of the Heart, when it has an
equal respect unto all God's Commands, and makes Duty as Duty one of the
Principal Reasons of its obedience; the Consequence of which is, that its
Obedience must needs be Universal. Now upon the same ground, If Conscience be
really, even in their own sense, Tender, and doubts of the Lawfulness of such
or such a Practice, because it carries in it some Appearance and Semblance of
Evil, though yet it dare not positively affirm that it is so, Surely it must,
and will be equally afraid of every other Practice which carries in it the same
appearance of Evil; and utterly abhor and fly from those Practices which the
Universal Consent of all Nations and Religions Condemns as evidently Wicked and
unjust.

But the Tenderness, we have to deal with, is quite of another Nature, being
such an one as makes Men scruple at the Lawfulness of a Set Form of Divine
Worship, at the use of some solemn Rites and Ceremonies in the Service of God;
but makes them not stick at all at Sacrilege, which St. Paul equals to
Idolatry; nor at Rebellion, which the Prophet makes as bad as Withcraft; nor at
the Murder of their King, and the Robbing and undoing their fellow Subjects;
Villainies, which not only Christianity proscribes, but the Common Reason of
Mankind rises up against, and by the very light of Nature Condemns. And did not
those, who plead Tenderness of Conscience amongst us, do all these things? Nay
did they not do them in the very strength of this Plea?

In a word, are the particulars alleged True, or are they not? If not, then
let Shame, and Confusion, and a Just Judgment from God light upon those, who
make such Charges, where they are not due. But if all which has been alleged
be True, then in the Name of the God of Truth, let not those pass for Weak, and
much less for ^ender Consciences, which can digest such horrid Clamorous
Impieties. Nor let them abuse the World, nor disturb the Church by a false Cry
of Superstition, and a Causeless Separation from her thereupon: Especially if
they will but calmly and seriously Consider, whose Ends by all this they
certainly serve, whose Work they do, and whose Wages they have so much Cause to
dread.

In fine, the Result of the whole discourse is this. That since the Weakness of
Conscience, spoken of by St. Paul, is grounded upon some Ignorance for the
present excusable; and since none amongst us enjoying the means of Knowledge
daily held forth by the Church, together with the Common use of his Reason, can
be excusably Ignorant of any Thing which he is concerned to know, the Plea of
such Weakness can have no Place amongst us, much less can it be allowably
continued in, and least of all can it be suffered to control the Civil
Magistrate either in the making, or the execution of Laws: But ought wholly to
be rejected, as well for its pernicious Consequences, to wit that it is
boundless, and that the Truth of it is no ways discoverable, and withal that
it Subjects the Sovereign Power to those, who are to be Subject to it, and
Governed by it: as also for the partiality and Cruelty of its Pleaders, who
deny that to others which they claim to themselves; together with their
Hypocrisy in stopping at Mole-Hills and leaping over Mountains, in Practicing
things notoriously unjust, while they stick at things indifferent, and at the
most but doubtful.

From all which it follows, That how much soever such Pretenders may beguile
Factious and Unstable Minds, deceiving others and being deceived themselves;
and how much soever they may Mock the Powers of this World, yet God is not
Mocked, who Searches the Heart, and looks through the Pretense, and will Reward
every Man according to his Work, whatsoever may be his Profession.

To which God be rendered and ascribed as is most due, all Praise, Might,
Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for Evermore. Amen. Christianity
Mysterious, AND THE Wisdom of God in making it so, Proved in a SERMON PREACHED
At Westminster-Abbey, April 29. 1694.

1 COR. II.7. But we speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, etc.


THE two great works, which God has been pleased to signalize His Infinite
Wisdom, and Power by, were the Creation of the World and the Redemption of
Mankind; the first of them declared by Moses, and the other by Christ Himself
bringing Life and Immortality to Light through the Gospel. But yet so, that, as
in the opening of the Day, the Appearance of Light does not presently, and
totally drive away all darkness, but that some degrees remain and mingle with
it: So neither has this Glorious Revelation of the Gospel quite cleared off the
obscurity of many great Things revealed in it; but that, as God has hereby
vouchsafed us Light enough to inform and Guide our Faith; So He has left
Darkness enough to Exercise it too. Upon which account the Apostle here
designing to set forth the transcendent Worth of the Gospel above all other
Doctrines whatsoever, recommends it to our Esteem, by these two Qualifications
and Properties Eminently belonging to it, as First, That it is the Wisdom of
God; and Secondly, That it is the Wisdom of God in a Mystery.


As to the first of which, namely, The Gospel's being the Wisdom of God, that
is to say, the Grand Instance and Product of it; If we would take a survey of
the Nature of Wisdom according to the Sense of the Ancient Philosophers, we
shall find Aristotle in the sixth of his Ethics and the seventh Chapter
defining it. (...), that is, The Understanding and Knowledge of Things in their
Nature the most Excellent and Valuable. Where, though it ought to be supposed,
that Aristotle carried his Notion no higher, nor farther than the things of
Nature, and that St. Paul pointed chiefly at Things Revealed and Supernatural;
Yet I cannot see, but that the Terms made use of by that great Philosopher in
the Definition or rather Description of Wisdom laid down by him, do with full
propriety and fitness fall in with the Account here given of this Divine Wisdom
by our Apostle in the Text: and that, whether we take it for a Wisdom
respecting Speculation, or relating to practice; the Things treated of in the
Gospel (about which the said Wisdom is employed) being certainly the Noblest
and most Excellent that can be, upon both Accounts. And though it be hard to
determine whether of the two ought to have the Pre-eminence; yet, I think, we
may rationally enough Conclude, That the Wisdom here spoken of is principally
of a Practical Import; as denoting to us God's admirable and steady bringing
about His great Ends and Purposes, by means most suitable and proper to them,
and particularly His accomplishing His grand design of Mercy upon the World by
the Promulgation of the Gospel; A Doctrine containing in it all the Treasures
of Divine Wisdom, so far as the same Wisdom has thought fit to reveal them. And
yet such has been the blindness and baseness of Men's Minds even from the
Apostles time down along to ours (as bad as any) that this very Wisdom has not
failed to meet with a Sect of Men, who Voting themselves the only Wits and Wise
Men of the World (as the greatest Sots may easily do) have made it their
business to ridicule and reproach it as downright foolishness; but yet such a
sort of foolishness (if the Testimony of an Apostle may outweigh the scoff's of
a Buffoon) as is Infinitely wiser than all the Wisdom of Men. For the very
wisest of Men do not always compass what they design, but this certainly and
effectually does, as being not only the Wisdom; but

Secondly, The Power of God too, the first Infallible, the other Irresistible.
In a word, the Wisdom here spoken of, is a Messenger which always goes as far
as sent; an Instrument which never fails or lurches the Great Agent who imploys
it, either in Reaching the End He directs it to, or in Finishing the Work He
intends it for. So that, in short, there could not be an higher and a nobler
Elogy to express the Gospel by, than by representing it to us as the Wisdom of
God. For as Wisdom in general is the Noblest and most Sublime Perfection of an
Intellectual Nature, and particularly in God Himself is the Leading, Ruling
Attribute prescribing to all the rest; so a Commendation drawn from thence must
needs be the most glorious that can possibly pass upon any Action or Design
proceeding from such an One. And the Apostle seems here most peculiarly to have
directed this Encomium of the Gopel, as a Defiance to the Philosophers of his
Time, the Flustring Vain glorious Greeks, who pretended so much to magnify, and
even Adore the Wisdom they professed, and, with great modesty (no doubt)
confined wholly to themselves: A Wisdom, I think, little to be envyed them;
being such, as none, who had it, could be the better, nor consequently the
wiser for.

And thus much for the first Thing contained in the Words, and proposed from
them; namely, That the Gospel is the Wisdom of God. I proceed now to the
Second, which we shall chiefly insist upon, and that is concerning the
Mysteriousness of it; as That it is the Wisdom of God in a Mystery. For the
prosecution of which we shall enquire into, and endeavor to give some Account
of the Reasons (so far as we may presume to judge of them) why God should
deliver to Mankind a Religion so full of Mysteries as the Christian Religion
certainly is, and was ever accounted to be. Now the Reasons of this in general
I conceive may be stated upon these two Grounds.

First, The Nature and Quality of the Things treated of in the Christian
Religion. And

Secondly, The Ends to which all Religion (both as to the General, and
Particular Nature of it) is designed, with relation to the Influence which it
ought to have upon the minds of Men.

And first of all: For the Nature of the Things themselves, which are the
Subject matter of the Christian Religion; there are in them these three
Qualifications or Properties, which do and must of Necessity render them
Mysterious, Obscure, and of difficult Apprehension. As,

First, Their surpassing Greatness and Inequality to the mind of Man. The
Christian Religion, as to a great part of it, is but a kind of Comment upon the
Divine Nature; an Instrument to convey right Conceptions of God into the Soul
of Man, so far as it is capable of receiving them. But now God (we know) is an
Infinite Being, without any Bounds or Limitations of His Essence, Wonderful in
His Actings, Inconceivable in His Purposes, and Inexpressible in His
Attributes; which yet, as Great as they are, if severally taken, give us but an
Incomplete Representation of Him. He is another World in Himself, too high for
our Speculations, and too great for our Descriptions. For how can such Vast and
Mighty things be crowded into a little, finite Understanding! Heaven, I
confess, enters into us, as we must into That, by a very narrow Passage. But
how shall the King of Glory whom the Heavens themselves cannot contain enter in
by these Doors? by a Weak (Imagination, a slender Notion, and a contracted
Intellect? How shall these poor short faculties measure the Lengths of His
Eternity, the Breadth and Expansions of His Immensity, the Heights of His
Prescience, and the Depths of His Decrees? and last of all, that Unutterable,
Incomprehensible Mystery of Two Natures United into one Person, and again of
one and the same Nature diffused into a Triple Personality? All which being
some of the Prime, Fundamental matters treated of in our Religion, how can it
be otherwise than a Systeme of Mysteries, and a knot of dark, inexplicable
Propositions? Since it exhibits to us such Things as the very Condition of our
Nature renders us Incapable of clearly understanding.

The Socinians indeed, who would obtrude upon the World, (and of late more
daringly than ever) a New Christianity of their own Inventing, will admit of
nothing Mysterious in this Religion, or such as the Natural Reason of Man
cannot have a clear and Comprehensive perception of: and this not only in
defiance of the express Words of Scripture so frequently and fully affirming
the contrary, but also of the constant, universal sense of all Antiquity
Unanimously confessing an Incomprehensibility in many of the Articles of the
Christian Faith. So that these bold Persons stand alone by themselves, upon a
new bottom, and an Upstart Principle, not much above an Hundred years old,
spitting upon all Antiquity before them; and (as some have well observed of
them who have wrote against them) are the only Sect of Men in the World, who
ever pretended to set up, or own a Religion without either a Mystery or a
Sacrifice belonging to it. For, as we have shown, that they deny the first, so
they equally explode the latter, by denying Christ to be properly a Priest, or
His Death to have been a Propitiatory Oblation for the Sins of the World. And
now are not these blessed New Lights (think we) fit to be encouraged, courted,
and have Panegyricks made upon their Wonderful Abilities, forsooth? Whilst they
on the other side are employing the utmost of those abilities (such as they
are) in Blaspheming our Savior, and Overturning our Religion? But this is
their hour, and the Power of Darkness. For it is a Truth too too manifest to be
denied, That there have been more Innovations upon, and Blasphemies against the
Chief Articles of our Faith published in this Kingdom, and that after a more
Audacious and Scandalous manner, within these several years last past, than
have been known here for some Centuries of years before (even those times of
Confusion both in Church and State betwixt Forty One and Sixty not excepted:)
And what this may produce and end in, God only at present knows, and I wish the
whole Nation may not at length feel.

Secondly, A second Qualification of the Chief Things treated of in our
Religion (and which must needs render them Mysterious) is their Spirituality
and Abstraction from all Sensible and Corporeal Matter. Of which sort of Things
it is impossible for the Understanding of Man to form to it self an exact Idea,
or Representation. So that when we hear, or read that God is a Spirit, and that
Angels and the Souls of Men are Spirits, our Apprehensions are utterly at a
loss how to frame any Notion or Resemblance of them, but are put to float and
wander in an endless Maze of Guesses and Conjectures, and know not certainly
what to fix upon. For in this Case we can fetch in no Information, or Relief to
our Understandings from our Senses; no Picture or Draught of these Things from
the Reports of the Eye; but we are left Entirely to the uncertainties of Fancy,
to the Flights and Ventures of a bold Imagination. And here to illustrate the
Case a little, let us imagine a Man, who was born blind, able upon bare
Hearsay, to conceive in his Mind all the Varieties, and Curiosities of Color,
to draw an exact Scheme of Constantinople, or a Map of France; to describe the
Towns, point out the Rivers, and distinguish the Situations of these, and the
like Great and Extraordinary Places: And when such an One is able to do all
this, and not before, then perhaps may we also apprehend what a Spirit, an
Angel, or an Immaterial Being is. The difficulty of understanding which
sufficiently appears from this One consideration: That in all the Descriptions
which we make of God, Angels, and Spirits, we still describe them by such
Things as we see, and when we have done, we profess that they are Invisible.
But then to do this Argument right again on the other side; As it would be
extremely sottish, and irrational for a blind man to conclude, and affirm
positively, That there neither are, nor can be any such Things, as Colors,
Pictures, or Landskips, because he finds, that he cannot form to Himself any
true Notion, Idea, or Mental Perception of them: So would it be equally, or
rather superlatively more Unreasonable, for us to deny the Great Articles of
our Christianity because we cannot frame in our Minds any Clear, Explicit, and
Exact Representation of them. And yet this is the true state of the whole
matter, and of the Ratiocination of some Men about it, how Absurd, and
Inconsequent soever, we see, it is. Let this therefore be another and a second
Cause, why the Christian Religion which treats of, and is conversant about such
Things, must of Necessity be Mysterious.

Thirdly, A third Property of Matters belonging to Christianity, and which also
renders them mysterious, is their Strangeness and Vnreducibleness to the common
Methods and observations of Nature. I for my part cannot look upon any Thing
(whatsoever others can) as a more Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion
than Christ's satisfaction for Sin; by which alone the lost Sons of Adam are
reconciled to their offended God, and so put into new Capacities of Salvation;
and yet perhaps there is nothing more surprising, strange, and out of the road
of Common Reason than this, if compared with the general course, and way of
Men's Acting. For that He who was the offended Person should project and provide
a satisfaction to Himself in the behalf of Him who had offended Him, and with
so much Zeal concern Himself to solicit a Reconciliation with those whom He
had no need of being Reconciled unto, but might with equal Justice and Honor
have destroyed them, was a Thing quite beside the Common course of the World;
and much more was it so, That a Father should deliver up an Innocent and
Infinitely beloved Son to be sacrificed for the redemption of His justly hated
and abhorred Enemies; and on the other hand, that a Son who loved His Father as
much as He could be loved by Him, should lay down His Life for the Declared
Rebels and Enemies of Him whom He so transcendently loved, and of Himself too:
This I say was such a transaction, as we can find nothing like, or Analogous to
in all the dealings of Men, and cannot but be owned as wholly beside, if not
also directly contrary to all humane methods. And so true is this, that several
Things expressly affirmed of God in Scripture relating to the Prime Articles of
our Faith are denied, or eluded by the (...) and Socinians, because they Cross
and Contradict the Notions taken up by them from what they have observed in
Created Beings, and particularly in Men; which yet is a gross fallacy and
inconsequence concluding ab imparibus tamquam paribus, and more than
sufficiently confuted and blown off, by that one passage of the Prophet
concerning Almighty God; that His Thoughts are not as our Thoughts, nor His
Ways as our Ways. Isa. 55.8. to which we may add, that neither is His Nature as
our Nature, nor his Divine Persons as our Persons. And if so, where is the
Socinian Logic in arguing from one to the Other? And yet it is manifest, that
they hardly make use of any other way of arguing concerning the main points in
controversy between them and the Church but this.

But there are also two other Principal Articles of the Christian Religion,
which do as much transcend the common Notice and observation of Mankind as the
former. One of which is the Conversion and Change of a Man's Sinful Nature,
commonly called the Work of Regen^^^^^^on or the New Birth, concerning which
Men are apt to Wonder (and deservedly too) by what strange Power and Efficacy
it should come to pass, That ever any One should be brought to conquer, and
shake off those Inveterate Appetites and Desires which are both so Violent in
their Actings, and so early in their Original, (as being born with him); and to
have other New ones, and those absolutely contrary to the former planted in
their room: So that when our Savior in John 3. discoursed of these things to
Nicodemus, a great Rabbi amongst the Jews, and told him that he must be born
again; he was presently amazed, and non-plus'd at it, as at a great Paradox and
Impossibility; and forth with began to Question, How can these Things be? In
which indeed, he said no more, than what the hearts of most Men living are apt
to say concerning most of the Articles of our Christian Religion.

But above all, the Article of the Resurrection seems to lie marvellously cross
to (...) ^ommon Experience of Mankind. For who ever was yet seen by them after
a Total Consumption into Dust and Ashes, to rise again, and to resume the same
Numerical body? This is a Thing which amongst all the rare Occurrences of the
World, all the Wonders, and Anomalies of Nature, was never yet met with in any
One single instance; and consequently, Men must needs be apt to startle, and to
be full of Thought, and Scruple, upon the proposal of so strange a Thing to
their Understandings. And if any one should think, that he can make this out by
bare reason, (as possibly some Opiniators may) let him by all means in the next
place try the strength of his doughty Reason about Transubstantiation, or turn
Knight Errant in Divinity, encounter Giants and Windmills, and adventure to
explain things impossible to be explained. This therefore is a Third Cause of
the Unavoidable Mysteriousness of the chief Articles of the Christian Religion;
namely, That most of them fall, neither within the common course of Men's
Actings, nor the compass of their Observa^^o^.

And thus much for the First Ground of the Gospel's being delivered to the
World in a Mystery; namely, the Nature and Quality of the Things treated of in
the Gospel. I come now to the*

Second Ground, which is stated upon some of the Principal Ends and Designs of
Religion. But before I enter upon the discussion of this, may it not be
Objected? That the Grand Design of Religion is to engage Men in the Practice of
such Things, as it commands? And that this must needs be so much the more
easily effected, by how much the more Clearly such Things are represented to
Men's Understandings, without any Mystery or Obscurity in them. For as much as
the way to obey a Law, is to know it; and the way to know it, is to have it
plainly, and clearly propounded to such as are concerned about it.

Now to this I answer, First, That it is as much the Design of Religion to
oblige Men to believe the Credenda, as to Practice the Agenda of it: and
Secondly, That notwithstanding the obscurity and Mysteriousness of the Credenda
considered in themselves, there is yet as Clear a Reason for the belief of
these, as for the Practice of the other. They exceed indeed the Natural force
of Humane Reason to Comprehend them Scientifically, and are therefore proposed,
not to our Knowledge, but to our Belief; For as much as Belief supplies the
want of Knowledge, where Knowledge is not to be had; and is properly the Mind's
assent to a thing upon the Credit of His Testimony, who shall report it to us.
And thus we assent to the Great and Mysterious Points of our Faith. For know
and understand them thoroughly we cannot; but since God has revealed and
affirmed them to be True we may with the highest Reason, upon His bare Word,
believe and assent to them as such.

But then as for those Things, that concern our Practice (upon which only the
objection proceeds) they indeed are of that clearness, that Innate Evidence,
and Perspicuity, even in themselves, that they do (as it were) meet our
U^derstandings half way, and being once proposed to us need not our Study, but
only our Acceptance; as presenting themselves to our first, our easiest, and
most early Apprehensions. So that, in some things, it is much more difficult
for a Man, upon a very ordinary use of his Judgment, to be Ignorant of his Duty
than to Learn it; as it would be much harder for him, while he is awake, to
keep his Eyes always shut, than open.

In sum, the Articles of our Faith are those Depths, in which the Elephant may
swim; and the Rules of our Practice those Shallows in which the Lamb may wade.
But as both Light and Darkness make but one nat^^^l Day; So here, both the
clearness of the Agenda, and the obscurity or Mystery of the Credenda of the
Gospel, constitute but one Entire Religion. And so much in Answer to this
Objection. Which being thus remo^ed I come now to show, That the Mysteriousness
of those parts of the Gospel, called the Credenda, or matters of our Faith, is
most subservient to the Great, Important Ends of Religion; and that upon these
following Accounts.

First, Because Religion in the Prime Institution of it was designed to make
Impressions of Awe and Reverential Fear upon Men's minds. The mind of Man is
naturally licentious; and there is nothing, which it is more averse from, than
Duty. Nothing which it more abhors than Restraint. It would, if let alone, lash
out, and Wantonize in a boundless enjoyment and Gratification of all its
Appetites, and Inclinations. And therefore God, who designed Man to a
Supernatural End, thought fit also to engage him to a way of living above the
bare course of Nature; and for that purpose to oblige him to a severe
abridgment, and control of his mere Natural Desires. And this can never be
done, but by imprinting upon his judgment such apprehensions of Dread, and
Terror, as may stave off an Eager, and Luxurious Appetite from its desired
satisfactions; which the Infinite Wisdom of God has thought fit in some measure
to do by Non-plussing the World with ^^rtain New and Unaccountable Revelations
of Himself and the Divine Methods of a Mysterious Religion.

To protect which from the saucy Encroachments of bold minds, He has hedged it
in with a Sacred and Majestic obscurity, in some of the Principal parts of it.
Which, that it is the most effectual way to secure a Reverence to it from such
minds, is as certain, as the Universal Experience of Mankind can make it: It
being an Observation too frequent and common to be at all doubted of, That
Familiarity breeds Contempt; and it holds, not more in Point of Converse, than
in Point of Knowledge. For as Easiness of access, ^^^nkness and Openness of
Behavior does by Degrees lay a Man open to Scorn and Contempt, especially from
some Dispositions; so a full inspection, and penetration into all the
Difficulties and Secrets of any Object is apt to make ^he mind insult over it,
as over a Conquered Thing: for all Knowledge is a kind of Conquest over the
Thing we know.

Distance preserves respect, and we still imagine some transcendent Worth in
things above our reach. Moses was never more Reverenced than when he wore his
Veil. Nay the very Sanctum Sanctorum would not have had such a Veneration from
the Jews had they been permitted to enter into it, and to gaze and stare upon
it, as often as they did upon the other parts of the Temple. The High Priest
himself, who alone was suffered to enter into it, yet was to do so but once a
year; lest the frequency of the sight might insensibly lessen that Adoration,
which so Sacred a Thing was still to maintain upon his Thoughts.

Many Men, who in their Absence have been great and admired for their fame,
find a diminution of that respect upon their Personal Presence: Even the great
Apostle St. Paul himself found it so; as he himself tells us 2 Cor. 10.10. And
upon the same account it (...), that the Kings of some Nations, to keep up a
living and a constant awe of themselves in the minds of their subjects, show
themselves to them (...) once a year: and even that perhaps may be something
with the oftenest, considering, that Persons, whose Greatness generally
consists rather in the Height of their Condition, than in the Depth of their
Understanding, seldom appear freely, and openly, but they Expose themselves in
more senses, than one.

In all great Respect, or Honor shown there is something of Wonder; but a
Thing often seen (we know) be it never so Excellent, yet ceasing thereby to be
New, it ceases also to be Wondered at. For as much as it is not the Worth or
Excellency but the strangeness of a Thing which draws the Eyes and Admiration
of Men after it; For can any thing in Nature be imagined more glorious and
beautiful than the Sun shining in his full Might, and yet how many more
Spectators and Wonderers does the same Sun find under an Eclipse?

But to p^^sue this Notion and Observation yet further, I conceive it will not
be amiss to consider, how it has been the Custom of all the Sober, and Wise
Nations of the World still to reserve the Great Rites of their Religion in
Occulto; Thus, how studiously did the Egyptians, those great Masters of all
Learning, lock up their Sacred Things from all Access, and Knowledge of the
Vulgar! Whereupon their Gods were pictured, and represented with their Finger
upon their Mouth, thereby (as it were) enjoining silence to their Votaries, and
forbidding all Publication of their Mysteries. Nor was this all, but for the
better concealing of the Sacra Arcana of their Religion, they used also a
peculiar Character unknown to the Common People, and understood only by
themselves; and last of all, that they might yet the more surely keep off all
others from any acquaintance with These Secrets, the Priesthood was made
Hereditary amongst them, by which means they easily secured, and confined the
knowledge of their Sacerdotal Rites wholly within their own Family. The like
also is reported of the Phoenicians, the Babylonians, and the Graecians, that
they had their (...), and their (...)* their Sacred and peculiar way of
writing, by which they rescued the Revered Mysteries of their Religion from the
rude Inspection of the Rout. And Lastly, that the same course of Secrecy, and
Concealment was also followed by the Romans, though in a different way, and not
by the use of such peculiar Characters, is sufficiently evident, from that
known Introduction, and Prologue to their Sacred Rites, Procul est^ profani; by
which they drove far away the Profano, and such were all those accounted, who
were not actually engaged in the said Religious Performances. And now to what
purpose do these several instances serve, but to show us, That, as in the
Jewish Church the People were not suffered to enter into the Holy of Holies,
nor to pry or look into the Ark, no nor so much as to touch it, and all this by
the Particular, Express Prohibition of God Himself; so amongst the Heathens,
the most Civilized, Learned, and best Reputed Nations for wisdom have, by the
bare Light and Conduct of their Natural Reason, still taken the same way to
establish in Men's Minds a Veneration for their Religion? That is, by keeping
the Chief Parts and Mysteries of it shut up from the promiscuous View, and
Notice of that sort of Men, who are but too quickly brought (God knows) to
slight and nauseate, what they once think they understand.

Now that the several Religions of the forementioned Nations of the Gentiles
were false and Idolatrous, I readily own; but that their method of preserving
the Reverence of them (which is all that I here insist upon) was founded upon
any persuasion they had of the falsehood, and Idolatry of the said Religions,
this I absolutely deny, since it is not imaginable that any sort of Men
whatsoever, could heartily own and profess any sort of Religion, which they
themselves fully believed to be false; and therefore since it could not be but
that they believed their several Religions True, (though really and indeed they
were not so) yet the way, which they took to keep up an Awful esteem of them in
the hearts of such as professed them, was no doubt founded upon an Excellent
Philosophy, and Knowledge of the temper of Man's mind in relation to Sacred
matters. So that, although their Subject was bad, yet, their Argumentation, and
discourse upon it was highly Rational.

Secondly, A second Ground of the Mysteriousness of Religion (as it is
delivered by God to Mankind) is His most Wise Purpose thereby to humble the
Pride and haughtiness of Man's reason* A quality so peculiarly odious to God,
that it may be said, not so much to imprint upon Men the image, as to
Communicate to them the very Essence of Lucifer. The way by which Man first
fell from his Original Integrity and Happiness was by Pride founded upon an
Irregular desire of Knowledge; and therefore it seems to be a course most
agreeable to the Divine Wisdom to contrive Man's Recovery by such a Method, as
should abase and Nonplus him in that very Perfection, whereof the Ambitious
Improvement first cast him down from that glorious Condition. In short, Man
would be like God in Knowledge, and so he fell; and now if he will be like him
in Happiness too, God will effect it in such a way, as shall convince him to
his face, that he knows nothing. The whole course of his Salvation, shall be
all Riddle and Mystery to him; he shall (as I may so express it) be carried up
to Heaven in a Cloud. Instead of Evidence springing from Things themselves, and
clear Knowledge growing from such an evidence, his Understanding must now be
contented with the poor, dimn Light of Faith; which (as I have shown) guides
only in the Strength and Light of another Knowledge, and is properly a Seeing
with another Eyes; as being otherwise wholly unable to inform us about the
great Things of our Peace, by any Immediate inspection of those Things
themselves.

Whereupon we find the Gospel set up (as it were) in Triumph over all that
Wisdom, and Philosophy, which the Learned and more Refined parts of the World
so much boasted of, and Valued themselves upon; as we have it in the 1 Cor. 1.
from the 17th to the end of the Chap. Where is the Wise, where is the Scribe,
and where is the Disputer of this World? God is there said to have made Foolish
the very Wisdom of it. So that when the World by Wisdom knew not God; that is,
by all their Philosophy could not find out, either how He was to be served, or
by what means to be enjoyed, this Grand Discovery was made to them by the
foolishness of Preaching (as the World then esteemed it;) nay and of Preaching
the Cross too; A thing utterly exploded both by Jew, and Greek, as the greatest
Absurdity imaginable, and contrary to all their Received Principles, and
Reasonings about the way of Man's attaining to true Happiness. And yet, as high
as they bore themselves, their strongest Reasonings were to bend to this
Weakness of God, (as the Apostle in derision of those, who thought it so, there
calls it) and their sublimest Wisdom to stoop to this Foolishness, if so be
they were not resolved to be too strong, and too Wise (forsooth) to be saved.
For as the Primitive effect of Knowledge was first to puff up, and then to
throw down; So the contrary method of Grace and Faith is first to depress, and
then to Advance.

The Difficulty, and strangeness of some of the Chief Articles of our Religion,
such as are those of the Trinity, and of the Incarnation, and Satisfaction of
Christ, are Notable Instruments in the hand of God to keep the Soul low and
humble, and to check those Self-Complacencies which it is apt to grow into by
an Overweening conceit of its own Opinions, more than by any other Thing
whatsoever. For Man naturally, is scarce so fond of the Offspring of his Body,
as of that of his Soul. His Notions are his Darlings; So that neither Children,
nor Self are half so Dear to him, as the Only begotten of his Mind. And
therefore in the Dispensations of Religion God will have this only Begotten,
this Best-beloved, this Isaac of our Souls (above all other Offerings that a
Man can bring Him) to be sacrificed, and given up to Him.

Thirdly, God in great Wisdom has been pleased to put a Mysteriousness into the
Greatest Articles of our Religion, thereby to engage us in a closer, and more
diligent Search into them. He would have them the Objects of our Study, and for
that Purpose has rendered them hard and difficult. For no Man studies Things
plain and Evident, and such as by their Native clearness do even prevent our
Search, and of their own accord offer themselves to our Understandings. The
Foundation of all enquiry is the obscurity as well as Worth of the Thing
enquired after. And God has thought good to make the Constitution, and
Complexion of our Religion such, as may fit it to be our Business and our Task;
to require, and take up all our Intellectual strengths, and, in a word, to try
the force of our Best, our Noblest, and most Active Faculties. For if it were
not so, then surely Humane Literature could no ways promote the Study of
Divinity, nor could skill in the Liberal Arts and Sciences be any step to raise
us to those higher Speculations. But so the Experience of the World (maugre all
Fanatic Pretenses, all Naked Truths, and Naked Gospels, or rather shameful
Nakedness instead of either Truth or Gospel) has ever yet found it to be. For
still the Schools are and must be the standing Nurseries of the Church. And all
the Cultivation and Refinement they can bestow upon the best Wits in the use of
the most unwearied industry, are but a means to facilitate their advance
higher, and to let them in more easily at the Strait Gate of those more hidden
and involved Propositions, which Christianity would employ and exercise the
mind of Man with. For suppose, that we could grasp in the whole Compass of
Nature, as to all the Particulars and Varieties of Being and Motion, yet we
should find it a Vast, if not an Impossible Leap from thence to ascend to the
full Comprehension of any one of God's Attributes; and much more from thence to
the Mysterious Economy of the Divine Persons; and lastly to the astonishing
Work of the Worlds Redemption by the blood of the Son of God himself,
condescending to be a Man, that He might die for us. All which were Things
hidden from the Wise and Prudent, in spite of all their Wisdom and Prudence;
as being Heights above the Reach, and Depths beyond the Fathom of any Mortal
Intellect.

We are Commanded by Christ to Search the Scriptures as the Great Repository of
all the Truths and Mysteries of our Religion; and whosoever shall apply himself
to a through Performance of this high Command, shall find Difficulty and
Abstruseness enough in the Things Searched into to perpetuate his Search. For
they are a rich Mine, which the greatest Wit and Diligence may dig in for ever,
and still find new matter to entertain the busiest Contemplation with, even to
the utmost Period of the most Extended life. For no Man can outlive the
Reasons of Enquiry, so long as he carries any thing of Ignorance about him: And
that every Man must, and shall do while he is in this State of Mortality. For
he, who himself is but a part of Nature, shall never compass, or comprehend it
all.

Truth (we are told) dwells Low, and in a Bottom; and the most Valued things of
the Creation are concealed, and hidden by the Great Creator of them from the
common View of the World. Gold and Diamonds, with the most Precious Stones and
Metals lie couched and covered in the Bowels of the Earth; the very Condition
of their Being giving them their Burial too. So that Violence must be done to
Nature, before she will produce and bring them forth.

And then, as for what concerns the mind of Man, God has in His Wise Providence
cast things so, as to make the business of Men in this World Improvement; that
so the very Work of their condition may still remind them of the Imperfection
of it. For, surely, he who is still pressing forward has not yet obtained the
Prize. Nor has he, who is only Growing in Knowledge, yet arrived to the full
stature of it. Growth is Progress; and all Progress designs, and tends to the
Acquisition of something, which the Growing Person is not yet Possessed of.

Fourthly, The fourth and Last Reason which I shall allege of the Mysterious
Dispensation of the Gospel here, is, That the full, Entire knowledge of it may
be one Principal Part of our Felicity and Blessedness hereafter. All those
Heights and Depths which we now stand so much amazed at, and which so confound
and baffle the subtlest and most Piercing Apprehension, shall then be made
Clear, Open and Familiar to us. God shall then display the Hidden Glories of
His Nature, and withal Fortify the Eye of the Soul so, that it shall be able to
behold and take them in, so far as the Capacities of an humane Intellect shall
enable it to do. We shall then see the Mysteries of the Trinity, and of the
Incarnation of Christ, and of the Resurrection of the Dead unriddled and made
plain to us; all the Knots of God's De^rees and Providence untyed and made fit
for our Understanding, as well as our Admiration. We shall then be transported
with a Nobler kind of Wonder, not the Effect of Ignorance, but the Product of a
Clearer, and more Advanced Knowledge. We shall Admire, and Adore the Works and
Attributes of the Great God, because we shall see the Glorious Excellency of
the one, and the Admirable Contrivances of the Other, made evident to our very
Reason: So as to inform and satisfy that, which before they could only astonish
and amaze.

The Happiness of Heaven shall be an Happiness of Vision and of Knowledge; and
we shall there pass from the Darkness of our Native Ignorance, from the Dusk
and Twilight of our former Notions into the Broad Light of an Everlasting Day.
A Day, which shall leave nothing Undiscovered to us, which can be fit for us to
know; And therefore the Apostle comparing our Present with our Future Condition
in respect of those different measures of Knowledge allotted to each of them, 1
Cor. 13.12. tells us, That here we see but darkly and in a glass; and a glass
(we know) often gives us a false, but always a Faint representation of the
Object: but then, says he, shall we see God face to face. And again, Here we
know but in Part, but there we shall know as we are known* and that, which is
Perfect, being come, then that which is in Part shall be done away. Reason
being then unclogged from the Body shall have its full Flight, and a free,
uncontrolled Passage into all things Intelligible. We shall then surmount these
Beggarly Rudiments, and mean helps of Knowledge, which now by many little steps
gradually raise us to some short Speculation of the Nature of Things. Our
knowledge shall be then Intuitive and above Discourse; not proceeding by a long
Circuit of Antecedents and Consequents, as now in this Vale of Imperfection, it
is forced to do; but it shall then fully inform the whole Mind, and take in the
whole Object, by one single, and substantial Act.

For as, in that Condition, we shall Enjoy the Happiness, so we shall also
imitate the Perfection of Angels, Who outshine the rest of the Creation in
nothing more than in a transcendent ability of Knowing and Judging; which is
the very Glory and crowning Excellency of a created Nature. Faith it self shall
be then accounted too mean a thing to accompany us in that Estate; for being
only conversant about Things not seen, it can have no Admittance into that
Place, the peculiar Privilege of which shall be to convey to us the Knowledge
of those Things by Sight, which before we took wholly upon Trust. And thus I
have given you some account, First of the Mysteriousness of the Gospel, and
then of the Reasons of it; and that both from the Nature of the Things
themselves which are treated of in it, as also from those Great Ends and
Purposes, which God in His Infinite Wisdom has designed it to.

From all which discourse several very weighty Inferences might be drawn, but I
shall collect and draw from thence only these Three; As,

First, The High Reasonableness of Men's relying upon the judgment of the whole
Church in General, and of their Respective Teachers, and Spiritual Guides in
Particular, rather than upon their own Private judgments, in such Important,
and Mysterious Points of Religion, as we have been hitherto discoursing of; I
say, upon the judgment of those, who have made it their Constant Business, as
well as their Avowed Profession to acquaint themselves with these Mysteries (so
far as Humane Reason can attain to them) and that in order to the Instruction
and Information of Others.

Certain it is, that there is no other Profession in the World, besides this of
Divinity, wherein Men do not own something of a Mystery, and accordingly reckon
it both highly Rational, and absolutely Necessary in many cases, to resign and
submit their own Judgments to the Judgments of such as Profess a skill in any
Art or Science whatsoever. For whose Judgment ought in all Reason to be
followed about any Thing, His, who has made it his whole Work and Calling to
Understand that Thing; or His, who has bestowed his whole Time, Parts, and
Labor upon something else, which is wholly Foreign to it, and has no Cognation
at all with it?

But there is not only Reason to persuade, but also Authority to oblige Men in
the Present Case. For see, in what Notable Words the Prophet asserts this
Privilege to the Priesthood under the Mosaic Economy. Mal. 2.7. The Priests
lips (says he) should preserve Knowledge, and the People should seek the Law at
his mouth; (adding this as a reason of the same) For (says he) He is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

For which words, no doubt, this Prophet would have passed for a Man of Heat
now a days: for, in Good earnest, they run very high; and look very severely
upon our so much applauded, or rather doated upon Liberty of Conscience, and
are so far from casting the least Eye of favor upon it, that they are a more
direct, and mortal Stab to it, than all the Pleas, Arguments, and Apologies, I
could ever yet read, or hear of, have been a Defense of it.

Nor does the same Privilege sink one jot lower under the Christian
Constitution; For, as we have already shown, that the Gospel is full of
Mysteries, so 1 Cor. 4.1. the Ministers of the Gospel are declared the Stewards
of these Mysteries; and whatsoever any one dispenses as a Steward, he dispenses
with the Authority and in the Strength of an Office and Commission; and I
believe it will be hard to Prove, that a Minister of the Gospel can be obliged
to dispense or declare any Thing to the People, which the People are not upon
his Declaration of it equally bound to Believe and Assent to.

An Implicit Faith indeed in our Spiritual Guides (such as the Church of Rome
holds) I own to be a great Absurdity, but a Due Deference, and Submission to
the Judgment of the said Guides in the discharge of their Ministry, I affirm to
be as great a Duty. And I state the measures of this Submission, in a Belief
of, and an Obedience to All that a Man's Spiritual Guide shall in that Capacity
declare, and enjoin, provided that a Man does not certainly know, or at least,
upon very great and just grounds, doubt any thing to the contrary: (which Two
conditions, I allow, ought always to be supposed in this Case) and then, if no
objection, from either of these, shall interpose, I affirm, that every Man
stands obliged by the Duty he owes to his Spiritual Pastor, to believe and obey
whatsoever his said Pastor shall by virtue of his Pastoral Office deliver to
him. In a word, if Men would but seriously and impartially consider these Three
Things. First, That the Gospel or Christian Religion is, for the most Part of
it, made up of Mysteries. Secondly, That God has appointed a certain Order of
Men to declare, and dispense these Mysteries. And Thirdly, and Lastly, That it
was His Wisdom thus to order Both these; Certainly Men would both treat the
Gospel it self more like a Mystery, and the Ministers of the Gospel, more like
the Dispensers of so high and Sacred a Mystery than the Guise and Fashion of
our Present Blessed Times disposes them to do; that is, in other Words, Men
would be less confident of their own Understandings, and more apt to pay a
Reverence and Submission to the Understandings of those, who are both more
Conversant in these matters than they can pretend to be, and whom the same
Wisdom of God has thought fit to appoint over them as their Guides. For the
contrary Practice can proceed from nothing but an High Self-Opinion, and a
Man's being Wise in his own conceit, which is a sure way to be so in no Bodies
else.

In fine, every one is apt to think himself able to be his own Divine, his own
Priest, and his own Teacher, and he should do well to be his own Physician, and
his own Lawyer too: And then, as upon such a Course, he finds himself speed in
the Matters of this World, let him upon the same reckon of his success in the
other.

Secondly. We learn also from the foregoing Particulars the gross
Unreasonableness, and the manifest Sophistry of Men's making whatsoever they
find by themselves not Intelligible, (that is to say, by Humane Reason not
Comprehensible) the measure whereby they would Conclude the same also to be
Impossible. This I say is a mere Fallacy, and a Wretched Inconsequence: and yet
nothing occurs more commonly, (and that as a Principle taken for granted) in
the late Writings of some Heterodox, Pert, Unwary Men; and particularly, it is
the main hinge upon which all the Socinian Arguments against the Mysteries of
our Religion turn, and depend; but withal so extremely remote is it from all
Truth, that there is not the least show or shadow of Reason assignable for it,
but upon this one Supposition, namely, That the Reason or Mind of Man is
capable of Comprehending, or thoroughly Understanding whatsoever it is possible
for an Infinite Divine Power to do. This, I say, must be supposed, for no other
Foundation can support the Truth of this Proposition, to wit, That whatsoever
is humanly not Intelligible, is, and ought to be reckoned, upon the same
account, also Impossible. But then every one must needs see, and explode the
horrible falseness of the forementioned Supposition, upon which alone this
Assertion is built; and consequently this Assertion it self must needs be
altogether as false.

For who can comprehend, or thoroughly understand how the Soul is united to, and
how it acts by, and upon the Body? Who can comprehend or give a full account
how Sensation is performed? Or who can lay open to us the whole Mechanism of
Motion in all the Springs and Wheels of it? Nay, who can resolve and clear off
all the Difficulties about the Composition of a continued Quantity, as whether
it is Compounded of Parts Divisible or Indivisible? Both of which are attended
with insuperable Objections: And yet all these things are not only Possible but
also Actually Existent in Nature. From all which therefore, and from a thousand
more such Instances (which might easily be produced) I conclude, That for any
one to deny or reject the Mysteries of our Religion as Impossible, because of
the Incomprehensibleness of them is upon all true Principles, both of Divinity
and Philosophy utterly Inconsequent, and Irrational.

Thirdly. In the Third and last place, we learn also from what has been
discoursed, the great Vanity and Extravagant Presumption of such as pretend to
clear up all Mysteries, and determine all Controversies in Religion. The
Attempts of which sort of Men I can liken to nothing so properly as to those
Pretenses to Infallible Cures, which we daily see posted up in every corner of
the Streets; and I think it is great pity, but that both these sort of
Pretenses were Posted up together. For I know no Universal, Infallible Remedy,
which certainly Cures, or rather carries off all Diseases, and puts an end to
all Disputes, but Death: Which yet, for all that, is a Remedy not much in
Request. Quacks, and Mountebanks, are, doubtless, a very dangerous sort of Men
in Physic, but much more so in Divinity: They are both of them always very
large in Pretense and Promise, but short in Performance, and generally Fatal in
their Practice. For there are several Depths and Difficulties (as I noted
before) both in Philosophy and Divinity, which Men of Parts and solid Learning,
after all their Study, find they cannot come to the bottom of, but are forced
to give them over as Things Unresolveable, and will by no means be brought to
Pronounce dogmatically on either side of the Question.

Amongst which said Difficulties perhaps there is hardly a greater, and more
undecideable Problem in Natural Theology, and which has not only Exercised but
even Crucified the greatest Wits of all Ages, than the Reconciling of the
Immutable Certainty of God's foreknowledge with the Freedom and Contingency of
all Humane Acts, both Good and Evil, so fore-known by Him. Both parts of which
Problem are certainly true, but how to explain and make out the Accord between
them without overthrowing one of them, has hitherto exceeded the force of Man's
Reason. And therefore Socinus very roundly, or rather indeed very profanely
denies any such Prescience of future Contingents to be in God at all. But as
profane as he was in thus cutting asunder this knot, others have been as
ridiculous in pretending to untie it. For do not some in their Discourses about
the Di^^ne Attributes and Decrees, promise the World such a clear account, such
an open explicit Scheme of these great Things as should make them plain and
evident, even to the meanest Capacities? And the Truth is, if to any Capacities
at all, it must be to the meanest; for to those of an higher pitch, and a
larger compass, these Things neither are, nor will, nor ever can be made
evident. And if such Persons could but obtain of Heaven a continuance of Life,
till they made good what they so confidently undertake, they would be in a sure
way to outlive not only Methusalah, but even the World it self. But then, in
come some other Undertakers, and promise us the same or greater Wonders in
Christian Theology, offering by some new whimsical explications of their own to
make the deepest Mysteries of our Christian Faith, as plain, easy, and
intelligible (forsooth) as that two and two make four; that is, in other words,
they will represent and render them such Mysteries as shall have nothing at all
Mystical in them.

And now is not this, think we, a most profound invention, and much like the
discovery of some New Foundland, some O Brazile in Divinity? with so much
absurd confidence do some Discourse or rather Romance upon the most Mysterious
Points of the Christian Faith; that any Man of Sense and Sobriety, would be apt
to think such Persons not only beside their Subject, but beside themselves too.
And the like censure we may justly pass upon all other such idle Pretenders;
the true Character of which sort of Men is, That he who thinks and says he can
understand all Mysteries, and resolve all Controversies, undeniably shows, that
he really understands none.

In the mean time, we may here observe the true way, by which these Great and
Adorable Mysteries of our Religion, come first to be Ridiculed, and Blasphemed,
and at length totally laid aside by some; and that is, by their being first
innovated upon, and new modelled by the bold, senseless, and absurd
Explications of others. For, first of all such Innovators break down those
sacred Mounds which Antiquity had placed about these Articles, and then
Heretics and Blasphemers, rush in upon them, trample them under foot, and
quite throw them out of our Creed. This course we have seen taken amongst us,
and the Church (God bless it, and those who are over it) has been hitherto
profoundly silent at it; but how long God (whose Honor is most concerned) will
be so too, none can tell. For if some Novellists may put what sense they please
upon the Writings of Moses, and others do the like with the Articles of the
Christian Church also, (and the greatest encouragement attend both) I cannot
see, (unless some extraordinary Providence prevent it) but that both these
Religions are in a direct way to be run down amongst us, and that in a very
short time too.

Let every Sober, Humble, and Discreet Christian therefore be advised to dread
all tampering with the Mysteries of our Faith, either by any new, and
unwarrantable explications of them, or descants upon them. The Great Apostle of
the Gentiles, who, I am sure, had as clear a knowledge of the whole Mystery of
the Gospel, as any in his time, and a greater plenty of Revelations than any
one could pretend to since him, treated these matters with much another kind of
Reverence, crying out with Horror and Amazement, O the Depth and
Vnsearchableness of the things of God. In Romans 11.33. And again, Who is
sufficient for these Things! In 2 Cor. 2.16. This was his Judgment, these were
his Thoughts of these Dreadful and Mysterious Depths; and the same, no doubt,
will be the thoughts and judgment of all others concerning them, who have any
thing of Depth themselves. For as the same Apostle again has it in that most
noted place in the 1 Timothy 3.16. Without Controversy great is the Mystery of
Godliness: God manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, believed on in the World, and received up into Glory.

To which God Infinitely Wise, Holy, and Great, be rendered and ascribed, as is
most Due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore.
Amen. THE Lineal Descent OF Jesus of Nazareth From David by his Blessed Mother
the Virgin Mary.

Proved in a DISCOURSE On Revel. xxii.16.

Revel. xxii.16. latter part. I am the Root and the Offspring of David, and
the Bright and Morning Star.


THE Words here pitched upon by me, are the Words of Christ now glorified in
Heaven, and seem (as it were) by the Union of a double Festival, to represent
to us both the Nativity and Epiphamy, while they lead us to the Birth of Christ
by the direction of a Star: though with this difference, I confess, that both
the Means directing and the Term directed to do in this place coincide; and
Christ the Person speaking as well as spoken of, is here the only Star to
direct us to Himself. The Nativity of Christ is certainly a Compendium of the
whole Gospel, in that it thus both begins and ends it, reaching from the first
Chapter of St. Matthew, to this last of the Revelation; which latter though it
be confessedly a Book of Mysteries and a System of occult Divinity; yet surely
it can contain nothing more Mysterious and Stupendous than the Mystery here
wrapped up in the Text, where we have Christ declaring himself both the Root, and
the Offspring of David. For that any one should be both Father and Son to the
same Person, produce himself, be Cause and Effect too, and so the Copy give
Being to its Original, seems at first sight so very strange and unaccountable,
that were it not to be adored as a Mystery, it would be exploded as a
Contradiction. But since the Gospel has lifted us above our Reason, and taught
us one of the great Arcana of Heaven, by assuring us that Divinity and Humanity
may cohabit in one subsistence, that two Natures may concur in the same Person,
and Heaven and Earth mingle without Confusion; we being thus taught and
persuaded, shall here endeavor to exhibit the whole Economy of Christ's
Glorious Person, and to show what a Miracle He was, as well as what Miracles He
did, by considering him under these three several Respects.

First, As the Root. Secondly, As the Offspring of David. And

Thirdly, As He is here termed, The Bright and Morning Star.

And First for the first of these

Christ was the Root of David; but How? Certainly in respect of something in
him which had a Being before David. But his humanity had not so, being of a
much later date, and therefore, as a mere Man, he could not be the Root of
David; whereupon it follows that he must have been so in respect of some other
Nature: But what that Nature was will be the Question. The Arians who denied
his Divinity, but granted his Pre-existence to his Humanity (which the
Socinians absolutely deny) held him to be the first Born of the Creation; the
first, and most Glorious Creature which God made, A Spiritual Substance
produced by him long before the Foundation of the World, and afterward in the
fullness of time sent into a Body, and so made Incarnate. This is what they
hold; whereby it appears how much they differ from the School of Socinus,
though some with great impertinence confound them. Arius taught that Christ had
a Spiritual Subsistence before the World began: Socinus held that he was a mere
Man, and had no subsistence or being at all, till such time as he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin Mary. I shall not much concern my
self about these two Opinions, as they stand in Opposition to one another; but
only remark this of them, That Socinus asserts a thing considered barely in it
self more agreeable to Reason, which can much better conceive of Christ as a
Man naturally consisting of Soul and Body, than as such an Heterogeneous
Composition of a Body and (I know not what) strange Spiritual Substance
Existing before the Creation, as the Arians represent him: But then on the
other side, the Opinion of Arius is of the two, much more difficult to be
confuted by Scripture: For as to Socinus, the chief Arguments brought from
thence against him, are not such as are taken from the Name or Actions of God,
attributed to Christ; which he thinks he easily answers by asserting that God
is a Name not of Nature, but of Power and Dominion; and that Christ is called
God because of the Power and Government of all things put into his Hands; as
earthly Kings also, in their proportion, have in Scripture the same Title, upon
the same account. But the Arguments which bear hardest upon Socinus, are such
as are taken from those Scriptures, which beyond all possibility of Rational
Contradiction, declare the Pre-existence and Precedent Being of Christ to his
Conception, such as Ioh. 8. 58. Before Abraham was, I am. And in Ioh. 17.5.
Glorify me, O Father, with the Glory which I had with thee, before the World
was; which all the Socinians in the World could never yet give any clear,
proper, and natural exposition of; but unnaturally and illogically pervert and
distort them in defyance of Sense, and Reason, and all the received ways of
Interpretation. But now as for Arius, the Allegation of these and the like
Scriptures prejudice not his Hypothesis at all; who grants Christ to have been
a Glorious Spiritual Substance, of an Existence not only before Abraham, but
also before Adam, and the Angels themselves, and the whole Host of the
Creation. But what? Was Christ then the Root of David only in respect of this
Spiritual, Pre-existing, Created Substance, first found out and set up by
Arius? No, certainly; for the Scripture, and (the best Comment upon the
Scripture) a general Council, and that also the first and most Famous, even the
Council of Nice have condemned this. And all those Scriptures which make Christ
either One with, or equal to the Father, clearly confute and overthrow so
absurd, as well as blasphemous an Assertion. Let this therefore be fixed upon,
that Christ was the Root, or Original of David, as he was of all Mankind
besides; Namely, in respect of His Divinity; of that Infinite, Eternal Power,
which displayed it self in the Works of the Creation. For by him all things
were made, as the Evangelist tells us. John 1.3. But how ready natural Reason
will be to rise up against this Assertion, I am not Ignorant; and how [that
Jesus of Nazareth, a Man like our selves, should be accounted by Nature God,
the Creator of the World, Omniscient, Omnipotent, and Eternal] is looked upon
by many as a Proposition not only false, but foolish, and fitter to be laughed
than disputed out of the World, this also is no surprise to us. But then on the
other side, That this is a thing not to be founded upon, or to take its rise
from the bare discourses of Reason, he must be very much a Stranger to Reason
Himself, who shall venture to deny; for if it may be proved by Reason, (as I
doubt not but it may) that the Scripture is the Word of God, addressed to Men;
and consequently ought to be understood and interpreted according to the
familiar natural way of construction, proper to humane Writings; then I affirm
that to deny Christ to be naturally God, is irrational; when, His being so, is
so frequently asserted throughout the whole Scripture, and that in as clear
terms, as it is possible for one Man to express his Mind by to another, if it
were his purpose to declare this very Thing to Him.

And therefore I have often wondered at the preposterous Tenets of Socinus, and
that not so much for his denying the natural Deity of our Savior, as that he
should do it after he had wrote a Book for the Authority of the Scripture. For
upon the same reasons that He and his Sect deny the Deity of Christ, I should
rather deny the Scripture to be of Divine Authority. They say, for Christ to be
God is a thing absurd and impossible; from which I should argue, that that
Writing or Doctrine, which affirms a thing absurd and impossible, cannot be
true, and much less the Word of God. And that the Gospel affirms so much of
Christ we may appeal to the judgment of any impartial Heathen, who understands
the Language in which it is Written. But he who first denies the Deity of
Christ as absurd and impossible, and thereupon rejects the Divine Authority of
the Scripture for affirming it, may be presumed upon the supposal of the former
to do the latter very Rationally. So that he who would take the most proper and
direct way to Convince such an one of his Heresy (if there be any convincing of
one who first takes up his Opinion, and then seeks for Reasons for it) must
not, I conceive, endeavor in the first place to Convince him out of Scripture
[ That Jesus Christ is God] but turn the whole force and stress of his
Disputation to the proof of this [That the Scripture is the Word of God to
Mankind, and upon that account ought to be interpreted as the Writings of Men
use, and ought to be] and if so, he who will make sense of them, must grant the
Divinity of Christ to be clearly asserted in them, and irrefragably inferred
from them. In short, if the Adversaries of Christ's Divinity can prove Christ
not to be God, they must by consequence prove that the Scriptures Naturally and
Grammatically interpreted, are not the Word of God: But on the contrary, the
Church being assured that the Scriptures so interpreted are the Word of God, is
consequently assured also, that Christ is, and must be God. Nevertheless if
according to the unreasonable demands of the Men of this Sect, this and all
other Mysteries of our Religion should be put to answer for themselves at the
Bar of Humane Reason, I would fain know, wherein consists the Paradox of
asserting Christ to be God? For no Man says that his Humane Nature is his
Divine, or that he is God as he is Man. But we assert that he who is God is
also Man, by having two Natures united into one and the same Subsistence. And
if the Soul which is an Immaterial Substance is united to the Body, which is a
Material; though the case is not altogether the same, yet it is so very near,
that we may well ask, what Repugnancy there is, but that the Divine Nature may
as well be united to the Humane? I believe if we reduce things to our way of
Conception, we shall find it altogether as hard to conceive the Conjunction of
the two former, as of the two latter: and this, notwithstanding that other
Difference also of finite and infinite between them: for why a finite and an
Infinite Being may not be United to one Another by an Intimate and inseparable
Relation, and an Assumption of the finite, into the Personal subsistence of the
Infinite, I believe it will be hard for any one to give a Solid and
Demonstrative Reason: For Scoffs and Railery (the Usual Arguments brought
against it) I am sure, are not so. But I forget my self; for the Persons here
disputed against believe not the Soul to be either immaterial or Tantum id mihi
videtur statui posse, post hanc Vitam, Hominis Animam sive Animum non ita per
se subsistere, ut ulla praemia poenasve sentiar, vel etiam illa sentiendi sit
capax.

And again. In ipso primo homine to^ius immortalitatis rationem uni gratiae Dei
tribuo; nec in ipsa* Creatione quicquam immortalis Vitae in homine agnosco.
Socin. Ep. 5. ad Joh. Volkelium. See more of the like nature cited by the
Learned Dr. Ashwell in his Dissertation de Socino and Socinianismo. Page 187,
88, 89, etc.


naturally immortal; but are much the same with the Sadduces, and upon that
account fitter to be crushed by the civil Magistrate, as destructive to
Government and Society, than to be confuted as merely Heretics in Religion.

I conclude therefore against the Scoffs of the Heathens, the Disputations of
the Jews, the Impiety of Arius, and the Bold, Blasphemous Assertions of
Socinus, that the Man Christ Jesus, Born at Bethlem, of the Virgin Mary, is
God, God by Nature, the Maker of all Things, the Fountain of Being, the Ancient
of Days, the First and the Last, of whose Being there was no Beginning, and of
whose Kingdom there shall be no end. And in this one Proposition the very Life
and Heart of Christianity does consist. For as, That there is a God, is the
grand Foundation of Religion in general: So, that Jesus Christ is God, is the
Foundation of the Christian Religion; and, I believe, it will one day be found,
that he who will not acknowledge Christ for his Creator, shall never have him
for his Redeemer.

Having thus shown how Christ was the Root and Original of David, pass we now
to the next thing proposed, which is to show

Secondly, That He was His Offspring too, and so, having asserted his Divinity,
to clear also his Humanity. That the Christian Religion be True, is the Eternal
Concernment of all those who believe it, and look to be saved by it. And that
it be so, depends upon Jesus Christ's being the true promised Messiah, (the
grand and chief thing asserted by him in his Gospel); and lastly, Christ's
being the true Messiah depends upon his being the Son of David, and King of the
Jews. So that unless this be evinced, the whole Foundation of Christianity must
totter and fall, as being a cheat, and an Imposture upon the World. And
therefore let us undertake to clear this great, important Truth, and to
demonstrate that Jesus of Nazareth, was the true seed of David and Rightful
King of the Jews.

His Pedigree is drawn down by two of the Evangelists, by St. Matthew. in his 1
st. Chapter and by St. Luke in his 3 d. from whence our adversaries oppose us
with these two great difficulties.

First, That these two Evangelists disagree in deducing of His Pedigree.

Secondly, That supposing they were proved to agree, yet both of their
Pedigrees terminate in Joseph, and therefore belong not to Jesus, who was not
indeed the Son of Joseph, but of Mary.

In answer to which we are to observe, that concerning this whole Matter there
are two Opinions.

First, That both in St. Matthew. and St. Luke only the Pedigree of Joseph is
recounted, in the first his Natural, in the other his Legal: For it being a
known Custom among the Jews, that, a Man dying without issue, his Brother
should Marry his* Widow, and raise up seed to him, Eli hereupon dying without
any Child, Jacob took his Wife and of her begat Joseph; who by this means was
Naturally the Son of Jacob as St. Matthew. deduces it; and Legally or reputedly
the Son of Eli, as St. Luke. And then to make Jacob and Eli Brothers, who are
there set down in different lines, it is said that Matthan of the line of
Solomon, and Melchi of the line of Nathan, successively Married the same Woman
( Estha by Name) of whom Matthan begat Jacob, and Melchi begat Eli: Whereupon
Jacob and Eli being Brothers by the Mother, though of different Fathers, Eli
dying without issue Jacob was obliged by Law to Marry his Relict, and so to
raise up seed to his Brother Eli.

Now all this is grounded upon an Ancient story of one Julius Africanus
recorded by Eusebius, in his first Book and seventh Chapter. And of late
Faustus Socinus, (who having denied Christ's Divine Nature was resolved to cut
Him short both Root and Branch, and to deny His Humane too; at least as to the
most Considerable circumstance of it, which concerned the credit of His being
the true Messiah) he, I say, catches at this forlorn story, and ascribes much
to it in that Book of his called his Lectiones Sacrae; and though generally a
professed despiser of Antiquity, yet when he thinks it may make any thing for his
purpose, he can catch at every fabulous scrap of it, and thereupon vouches this
as Authentic, even for its Antiquity. From which Opinion it follows, that
Christ was only the Reputed Son of David, that is to say, because His Mother
was Married to one who was really of David's Line. And this the whole Sect of
Socinus affirms to be sufficient to denominate and make Christ the Son of
David, and accordingly allow Him so to be upon no other or nearer Account.

But of the Authors and Assertors of this Opinion we may well demand, that
admitting Christ might upon this account be called the Son of David in the
large and loose way of that Denomination, yet how could He for this only reason
be called the seed of David? Nay, and, what is yet more full and express, be
said to be made of the seed of David, as it is in Romans 1.3. And further, to be
the Fruit of his loins. As it is in Acts 2.30. I say, with what propriety or
accord with the common use of speaking, could one Man be said to be another
Man's seed and the fruit of his loins, when he had no other Relation to him in
the World, than that his Mother only Married with a Person who stood so related
to that Other. I believe the Jews would desire no greater a Concession from us
than this, whereby to conclude and argue Jesus of Nazareth not to have been the
true Messiah. Let us therefore leave this Opinion to it self, as destructive to
the main foundation of our Religion, and fit to be owned by none but the mortal
Enemies of Christ and Christianity, the Jews and the Socinians; and so pass to
the

Second Opinion, which is, that both Joseph and Mary came from David by true
and real Descent, and that, as Ioseph's Genealogy and Pedigree is set down in
that line, which St. Matthew. gives an account of; so the Virgin Mary's lineage
is recited in that which is recorded by St. Luke; which Opinion as it has been
generally received by Divines of the greatest note, and best answers those
difficulties and objections which the other is beset with; so I shall endeavor
fully to clear and set it down in these following Propositions.

I.
First. The first Proposition is this, That the designs of the two Evangelists
in their respective Deductions of our Savior's Pedigree, are very different.
For St. Matthew intends only to set down His Political or Royal Pedigree, by
which he had right to the Crown of the Jews; but St. Luke shows his Natural
Descent through the several successions of those from whom He took Flesh and
Blood. And that this is so, besides that natural Reason taken from the
impossibility of one and the same Person's having two several Fathers, as St.
Matthew. and St. Luke seem at first sight to import: We have these farther
Arguments for the said Assertion; as First, that St. Matthew. begins his
reckoning only from Abraham; to whom the first promise of the Kingdom was made.
Genesis 17.6. But St. Luke runs his line up to Adam the first Head and Fountain of
Humane Nature; which fairly shows that one deduced only His Title to the Crown,
the other the Natural Descent of his Humanity. And then in the Second Place,
that St. Matthew used the word [ begat] only in a Political sense is further
clear from this, That he applies it to him who had no Child, even to Ieconiah,
of whom it is expressly said in Jeremiah 22.33 that God wrote him Childless.
Whereupon, being deposed by the King of Babylon, Zedekiah his Uncle was made
King, and afterward upon the removal of him also for his Rebellion, (there
remaining no more of the Line of Solomon) Sulatheil being next of Kin was
declared King of the Jews. Which Salathiel, upon that account, is said to be
begot by Ieconiah, in St. Matthew; not because he was naturally his Son, but
Legally and Politically so; as succeeding him in the Inheritance of the Crown.
For though in 1 Chronicles. 3. 17. there is mention of Assir, and of Salathiel, as
it were of two Sons of Ieconiah; As it stands rectifyed by Junius and
Tremellius, who place the Comma after Assir, and not between Jeconiah, and that.
yet in truth Assir there is not the proper name of a Person, nor of any Son of
Ieconiah, but is only an Appellative of Ieconiah Himself, signifying one under
Captivity, or in Bonds as Ieconiah then was in Babylon, when Salathiel was
declared King. And that Salathiel is not there set down as his Son in a Natural
sense, is evident from the 16. Verse of the same Chap. where Zedekiah is
likewise said to be his Son; though naturally he was his Uncle; yet because
Zedekiah first succeeded him in the Kingdom, and Salathiel next, Ieconiah still
surviving, therefore both of them in that Political sense, I spoke of, are said
to be his Sons, whom, in the Natural sense, the Prophet Jeremy (as has been
shown) declares to have been Childless.

2.
Note that those four Sons of David by Bathsheba mentioned in 1 Chronicles. 3.5. are
not there set down according to the order of their Birth. For Solomon, though
last named* was certainly Born first; and Nathan (as he is generally reckoned)
immediately next.
The second Proposition is this. That as David had several Sons by former Wives,
so by Bathsheba also he had three, besides Solomon, of which the Eldest next to
him was Nathan: And that Christ descended naturally from David, not by Solomon,
but by Nathan. And accordingly that St. Luke deduces only Nathan's Line; upon
which account it is, that the Jews at this day in opposition to the Christians
make it one main Article of their Creed, that the Messiah was to descend
naturally from Solomon; and accordingly pronounce a Curse upon all those who
assert the contrary: Though to this very hour they have not been able to assign
who was the Son of Ieconiah, whom God wrote Childless; nor to show any solid
Reason, why, if Jeconiah had any natural Issue of his own, the Crown and
Scepter of Judah, came to be devolved upon the Line of Nathan, as it actually
was in Salathiel and his Successors. Add to this (which is a thing well worth
observing) that although it is frequently said in Scripture, that the Messiah
should descend from David, yet it is never said that he should descend from
Solomon. For though in 1 Chronicles. 22.10. it is said of Solomon, that God would
establish the Throne of his Kingdom over Israel for ever, yet it is not said,
that he would establish it in his Seed or Line; and besides, the Kingdom, here
spoken of and intended, was the Spiritual Kingdom over the Church of God,
typifyed in that Temporal one of Solomon: Which Spiritual Kingdom was
established only in the Person of the Messiah, whom we believe to have been
Jesus of Nazareth, the Great King and Head of the Church, God blessed for ever.

3.
The third Proposition is this, That the Crown of Judah being now come into the
Line of Nathan in Salathiel, (whose immediate Son was Pedaiah (though not
mentioned in the Succession, because he died before his Fathers assumption to
the Crown) and next to Salathiel, the Great and Renowned Zorobabel,) for as
much as Matthew and Luke agree from Jeconiah to Zorobabel, (after whom they
divide, each ascribing to him a different Successor, viz. one of them Abiud,
and the other Rhesa,) we are rationally to suppose, that these two were the
Sons of Zorobabel: and that from Abiud the elder Brother, (who only had right
to the Crown and Kingdom) lineally descended Joseph, according to the
Calculation of St. Matthew; and that from Rhesa the younger Brother, descended
Mary, of whom Jesus was Born, according to St. Luke's description: For though
in the above mentioned 3. Chap. of 1 Chronicles. (where there is an account given of
Zorobabel's Sons) there occur not the names of Abiud and Rhesa; yet it being
common with the Jews for one Man sometimes to have two Names, there is ground
enough for us, without any presumption, to believe and conclude that it so
happened here.

4.
The fourth Proposition is this, That it was the Custom of the Jews not to
reckon the Woman by Name in her Pedigree, but to reckon the Husband in right of
his Wife. For which Reason Joseph is twice reckoned, viz. First in his own
right by St. Matthew; And, Secondly in his Wife Mary's right by St. Luke. For
Mary was properly the Daughter of Eli; and Joseph who is there reckoned after
him, is so reckoned not as his Natural Son, but as his Son-in-Law, instead of
his Wife Mary, according to that Custom of the Jews. Whereupon it is noted by
Chemnitius, that St. Luke does not say that Joseph was the Son of Eli, or Eli
begat Ieseph, as St. Matthew precisely does, that Jacob begat Joseph, but
(...), who was of Eli, that is, was related to him, and belonged to his Family,
viz. as his Son-in-Law. Nor ought any to object against Mary's being the
Daughter of Eli that ancient and received tradition, which reports her the
Daughter of Ioachim and Anna; for, as the Learned Bishop Mountague observes Eli
and Ioachim, however they are two words, (and very different) are yet but one
name, and signify but one Person; Eli being but (...), a diminutive of Eliakim,
and Eliakim the same with Iehojachim or Joachim, as appears from 2 Kings 23.34.
and 2 Chronicles. 36.4. quoting withal two noted Jewish Rabbis, Acts and Monuments
of the Church, P. 522.
viz. Macana Ben Nehemiae, and Rabbi Hacadosh, in Confirmation of the same, and
with particular Application of it to the Father of the Blessed Virgin, there
pointed out by them as the Mother of the Messiah.

5.
The fifth and last Proposition is this, That although Jesus of Nazareth
naturally descended only from Mary, yet he derives not his Title to the Crown
and Kingdom of the Jews originally by the Line of Mary, (for as much as she
sprang from the Line of Rhesa the younger Son of Zorobabel) but received that
from Joseph, who was of the elder Line by Abiud; which Line of Abiud failing in
Joseph, as having no Issue, the right of Inheritance devolved upon one of the
younger Line, viz. upon Mary, and consequently upon Jesus her Son and Legal
Heir. From whence there rises this unanswerable Argument, both against the
Opinion of those who affirm Joseph to have had other Children by a former Wife;
as also against that old Heresy of Helvidius, who against the general and
constant sense of the Church, denied the perpetual Virginity of Mary, affirming
that Joseph had other Children by her after the Birth of Jesus. Spanhemius in
his Dubia Evangelica, concludes against the Opinion of Helvidius (which I much
marvel at) merely upon the account of Decency and Congruity, as judging it more
suitable and agreeable to that honorable esteem we ought to have of our Blessed
Savior's Mother, to hold that after his Birth she remained a perpetual Virgin.
But I add, that to assert so, seems not only decent, but of as absolute
necessity, as that Jesus Christ the Messiah was to be of right King of the
Jews. For had Joseph had any Children either by Mary, or any other Wife, they
as coming from the elder Line of Abiud by Joseph their Father, must have
claimed the Inheritance of the Kingdom in his right, and not Jesus the Son of
Mary, who descended from a younger Line, and so could not legally inherit, but
upon default of Issue from Joseph the only remaining Heir of the Elder. For
this was the Law of Moses, which in this case would have barred Jesus from a
Title to the Kingdom of the Jews. But we know Jesus came to fulfill the Law in
every part and tittle of it; and therefore would never have owned himself King
of the Jews, contrary to the express injunctions and tenor of it. For though
it must be confessed that the Gospel makes mention of the Brothers and Sisters
of Jesus, yet it is known to be most usual in the Jewish Language to call any
collateral Kindred, as Cousins and Cousin-germans by that Name. And Antiquity
reports the Virgin Mary to have had two Sisters, the Children of which might
very well be called the Brethren of Jesus. So that from hence there can be no
necessity of granting that Jesus had any Brother or Sister either by his Mother
Mary, or his reputed and legal Father Joseph.

And thus I have endeavored to make out our Blessed Savior's descent from the
Line of David. But as for that Opinion which asserts him to have been of the
Tribe of Levi, because his Mother Mary was Cousin to Elizabeth who was of that
Tribe, it is very Weak and Groundless. For no Man asserts Jesus to have been so
of the House of David as to exclude all Relation to other Tribes and Families,
with which by mutual Marriages he might well contract a Kindred; it being
prohibited to none but Heiresses to Marry out of their own Family. And as for
another Opinion, which (in order to the making of Christ a Priest) affirms
Nathan the Son of David, from whom Christ descended, to have been a Priest, as
Solomon was a King, and so to have founded a Sacerdotal line as Solomon did a
Royal; this being a conceit both so Groundless in it self, and withal so
expressly contradicted by the Scripture, which in Heb. 7. 13. so positively
affirms that no Man of the Tribe of Judah, ever gave attendance at the Altar, I
say upon this account it deserves no further Thought, and much less Confutation.

Now to sum up all that has been delivered, it briefly amounts to thus much,
That the Royal Line of David by Solomon being extinct in Ieconiah, the Crown
and Kingdom passed into the immediately Younger Line of Nathan (another Son of
David) in Salathiel and Zorobabel; which Zorobabel having two Sons Abiud and
Rhesa, the Royal dignity descended of right upon the Line of Abiud, of which
Joseph was the last, who Marrying the Virgin Mary, which sprung from the Line
of Rhesa the younger Son of Zorobabel, and withal having no issue Himself, his
Right passes into the Line of Mary being the next of kin, and by that means
upon Jesus her Son. Whereupon, He was both naturally the Son of David, and also
Legally the King of the Jews; which latter is accounted to us by St. Matthew,
as the former is by St. Luke; who delivers down the Pedigree of Mary the Mother
of Jesus, and Daughter of Eli: though Joseph her Husband only stands there
named according to the known way of the Jews Computing their Genealogies.

And this to me seems a most clear, full, and manifest deduction of our
Savior's Pedigree from David, which yet I shall further confirm with this one
Consideration; That whatsoever Cavils the modern Jews, and others make now
adays against the Genealogies recorded by the Evangelists; yet the Jews their
Contemporaries who were most nice and exactly skillful in things of this
Nature, and with all most maliciously bent against Christ, and Christianity,
never offered to quarrel against, or invalidate the Accounts they have given us
of this particular; which had they been faulty, the Jews would most certainly
have done; this giving them so vast an advantage against us. And this
consideration alone, were we now not able particularly to clear these matters,
is of that weig^^ and substance, that, so far as terms of Moral certainty can
demonstrate a thing, it ought with every sober and judicious person to have
even the force of a Demonstration. But the discussion, which has already passed
upon this subject, will afford us ground firm enough for the most Rational and
Impartial belief to stand upon. However if any one knows some other way of
clearing this great Article of our Faith, which may better accord all
difficulties, and lie open to fewer and lesser exceptions, he will do a worthy
service to the Christian Religion to produce it, and none shall be more
thankful to him for it than my self.

Having thus finished the second part of my Text which speaks, Christ the
offspring of David, according to His Humane Nature; as the First, declared Him
the Root of David in respect of His Divine, I shall descend now to that

Third and Last part of the Text, which represents Him to us under the glorious
Denomination of the Bright and Morning Star.

Three things there are Considerable in a Star.

First, The Nature of its Substance. Secondly, The Manner of its Appearance.
Thirdly, The Quality of its Operation.
In every one of which respects Christ bears a lively Resemblance to it.

First, And First for the Nature of its Substance. It is commonly defined in
Philosophy the Purest, and most refined part of its Orb; by which it is
distinguished from all those Meteors and shining Nothings that ascend no
further than the Air, how high soever the mistake and ignorance of Vulgar Eyes
may place them; as also from the other parts of the Celestial Sphere or Orb in
which it is. In like manner, was not Christ the Purest and the Noblest part of
the World, which was the Sphere and Orb wherein, during His Humiliation, He was
pleased to move? He was the very Flower, the Extract and Quintessence of
Mankind Uniting all the perfections of it in His Person, without any alloy or
mixture of imperfection. Upon which account David by the Spirit of Prophecy
calls Him fairer than the Sons of Men, as being anointed with the oil of
gladness above His fellows: that is, the graces of the Spirit descended not
upon Him in those minute portions, and stinted measures that they do upon other
Mortals. Their drop was nothing to His Ocean.

And to show yet further of how pure a Make He was, we know Him to have been
wholly untoucht with any thing of that Original Stain, which has Universally
sunk into the Nature of all Men besides. He was a Second Adam without any of
the guilt contracted by the First; He was born a Man without any Humane
Imperfections; A Rose without thorns. He was nothing but Purity it self; Virtue
clothed in a Body and Innocence Incarnate. So blameless and free from all
shadow of guilt, that the very Jews His bitter Enemies gave Him this
Testimony, that He had done all things well, Mark. 7.37. And even Pilate His
unjust Judge, though he took from Him His Life, yet left Him His Innocence,
declaring openly That he found in Him no fault at all, John 18.38.

There are spots (they say) not in the Moon only, but also in the face of the
Sun it self: But this Star was of a greater, and more unblemisht Luster; for
not the least Spot was ever discovered in it: though malice and envy it self
were the Perspectives through which most of the World beheld it. And as it is
the Privilege of the Celestial Luminaries to receive no Tincture, Sullage or
Defilement from the most noisome sinks and dunghills here below, but to
maintain a Pure, Untainted, Virgin light in spite of all their Exhalations: So
our Savior shined in the World with such an invincible Light of Holiness as
suffered nothing of the corrupt manners and depraved Converse of Men to rub the
least filth or pollution upon Him. He was not capable of receiving any
Impression from all the Sin and villainy which like a Contagion fastened upon
every Soul round about Him. In a Word He was Pure, Righteous and Undefiled, not
only above the World, but, what is more, in the Midst of it.

Secondly, The next thing considerable in a Star is the manner of its
Appearance. It appears but small and of a little Compass; So that, although our
reason assures us that it is bigger than the whole Earth, yet our sight would
seem to persuade us that it is not much bigger than a Diamond sparkling upon
the Circle of a little Ring. And now how appositely does this consideration
also suit the Condition of our Savior! Who both in His rising and shining upon
the World seemed in the Eyes of all Men but a small and a Contemptible thing; a
poor, helpless Man; first living upon a Trade, and then upon something that was
much meaner, namely, upon Alms. Whereupon, what slight thoughts had they of His
Person! as if He had been no more than an ordinary soul, joined to an Ordinary
Body; and so sent into the World to take His Course in the common lot of
Mortality. They little dreamed of a Deity, and of something greater than the
World lodged in that little Tabernacle of His Flesh. So that notwithstanding
His being the Great and Almighty God, the Lord of Hosts, and King of Kings, yet
the generality of Men took Him for but a mean Person, and such another living
piece of clay as themselves. And what could be the cause of His being thought
so, but the same that makes Stars to be thought little things, even their
height and vast distance from poor, earthly spectators? So the Glories of
Christ's Person were by the very transcendency of their height placed above the
reach and ken of a mortal apprehension. And God must yet elevate our Reason by
Revelation, or the Son of God Himself will still seem but a small thing in our
Eyes. For Carnal reason measures the greatest things by all the disadvantages
of their outward appearance, just as little Children judge of the proportion of
the Sun and Moon, reckoning that to be the smalness of the Object, which is
only the Distance of the Beholder, or the Weakness of the Organ.

Third. The third and Last thing to be considered in a Star: is the Quality of
its Operation, which is Twofold. First, Open and Visible, by its Light.
Secondly, Secret and Invisible, by its influence. And

First, This Morning Star Operates by its Brightness and Luster; in respect of
which it is the first fruits of Light, and, as it were, Day in its Minority:
clearing the Heavenly Stage, and chasing away all other Stars till it reigns in
the Firmament alone. And now to make good the Comparison between Christ and
this, we shall show how He by His appearence chaced away many things much
admired and gazed at by the World; and particularly these Three.

First, Much of the Heathenish Worship and Superstition; which not only like a
Cloud, but like a black and a dark Night, had for along time covered the face
of the whole earth, and made such Triumphs over the reason of Mankind, that in
nothing more appeared the Ruins and Decays of our Nature. And it was
unquestionably the greatest and severest Instance of the Divine Wrath upon Man
for his Original Apostasy from God, thus to leave him confounded and uncertain
in the management of the greatest affair, and Concernment of his Soul, his
Religion. So that, as it was then ordered, it was nothing else but a strange,
confused Compound of Absurdity, and Impiety* For as to the Object of their
Worship, the Apostle tells us that they Worshipped Devils. 1 Cor. 10.20. and
elsewhere they worshipped men like themselves. Nay, Birds and Beasts and Creeping
things; and, as Historians tell us, Roots and Herbs, Leeks, and Onions; yea and
their own base Desires and Affections; Deifying and building Temples to Lust,
Anger, Revenge and the like. In sum, They Worshipped all things but God, who
only of all things was to have been Worshipped.

Now upon the Comeing of Christ very much, though not all, of this Idolatrous
Trumpery and Superstition was driven out of the World. So that many of the
Oracles (those great instruments of Delusion) ceased about the Time of our
Savior's Nativity. The Divine Power then dispossessing the Devil of his
greater Temples, as well as of his lesser, the bodies of Men: and so casting
down the Throne of Fallacy and Superstition, by which he had so long enslaved
the Vassal World; and led it Captive at his Pleasure.

Secondly, As the Heathenish false Worship, so also the Jewish imperfect
Worship began to be done away by the Coming of Christ. The Jews indeed drew
their Religion from a Purer Fountain than the Gentiles; God Himself being the
Author of it, and so both Ennobling and Warranting it with the Stamp of Divine
Authority. Yet God was pleased to limit His Operations in this particular to
the Narrowness and small Capacities of the subject which He had to deal with;
and therefore the Jews being naturally of a gross and sensual apprehension of
things, had the Economy of their Religion, in many parts of it, brought down
to their temper, and were trained to Spirituals by the ministry of Carnal
Ordinances. Which yet God was pleased to advance in their signification, by
making them Types and Shaddows of that Glorious Archetype, that was to Come
into the World, His Own Son; both in Person and Office by admirable Mystery and
Contrivance fitted to be the Great Redeemer of Mankind. He therefore being the
Person to Whom all the Prophets bore Witness, to Whom all Ceremonies pointed,
and Whom all the various Types prefigured, it was but reason That when He
actually appeared in the World, all that previous Pomp and Apparatus, should go
off the Stage, and like Shadows vanish before the Substance. And accordingly,
we look upon the whole Mosaical Institution as having received its Period by
Christ, as defunct and ceased, and the Church now grown up to that Virility and
Stature, as to be above the Discipline of beggarly Rudiments, and, like an
Adult Heir passing from the Pedagogy of Tutors, to assume its full Liberty and
Inheritance. For those, whom Christ makes free, are free indeed.

Thirdly, And Lastly, All pretended false Messiah's vanished upon the
appearance of Christ the True One. A Crown will not want Pretenders to Claim
it, nor Usurpers, if their power serves them, to possess it. And hereupon the
Messiaship was pretended to by several Impostors: but Fallacy and falsehood
being naturally weak, they still sunk and came to Nothing. It must be confessed
indeed, that there rose up such Counterfeits after Christ, as well as before
Him; yet still I think their defeat ought to be ascribed to His Coming: because
as a Light scatters the Darkness on all sides of it: So there was such a
Demonstration and Evidence given of Jesus's being the True Messiah by his
Coming in the Flesh, that it cast its discovering Influence both backwards and
forwards; and equally baffled and confuted the Pretenses of those who went
before and of those who Rose up after Him. So Potent and Victorious is Truth;
especially when it comes upon such an Errand from Heaven as to save the World.

Amongst those several false Messias's it is remarkable that one called himself
Barchocab, or the Son of a Star: but by his fall he quickly showed himself of a
Nature far differing from this Glorious Morning Star mentioned in the Text;
Which even then was fixed in Heaven, while it shone upon the Earth. It was not
the Transitory light of a Comet, which shines and glares for a while and then
presently vanishes into Nothing; but a Light, Durable and Immortal, and such an
One as shall outlive the Sun, and shine and burn when Heaven and Earth and the
whole World shall be reduced to Cinders.

Having thus shown how Christ resembled a Star in respect of His external
visible shinings to the World, by which He drove away much of the Heathenish
Idolatry; all the Jewish Ceremonies; together with the Pretenses of all
counterfeit Messias's, as the light dispels and chaces away the Darkness. Come
we now in the

Second place to see how He resembles a Star also in respect of its Internal,
secret Operation, and Influence upon all Sublunary, Inferior beings. And indeed
this is the Noblest and the greatest part of the Resemblance. Stars are thought
to Operate powerfully even then, when they do not appear; and are felt by their
Effects when they are not seen by their Light. In like manner, Christ often
strikes the Soul, and darts a secret beam into the heart without alarming
either the Eye or Ear of the Person wrought upon. And this is called both
properly and elegantly by St. Peter in 2 Ep. ^.19. The Day-star's arising in
our Hearts; that is, by the secret silent workings of His Spirit He illuminates
the Judgment, bends the Will and the Affections, and at last changes the whole
Man: and this is that powerful but still Voice by which He speaks Eternal Peace
to the Souls of His Elect in the Admirable but Mysterious Work of their
Conversion. So that our great Concern and enquiry should be, whether those
Heavenly Beams have reached us inwardly, and pierced into our Minds, as well as
shone in our Faces; and whether the Influence of this Star upon us has been
such as to govern and draw us after it, as it did the Wisemen, and thereby both
make and prove us Wise unto Salvation. For Light is Operative as well as
Beautiful, and by working upon the Spirits, affects the Heart as well as
pleases the Eye. Above all things therefore, let us be strict and impartial in
this search, where the Thing Searched for is of such Consequence. For since
there are False Lights, Light it self should be tried: And if we would know
infallibly whether it be the Light from Above, by which we are led and live,
and whether this Morning Star has had its full efficacy upon, or rather within
us; Let us see whether or no It has scattered the Clouds and darkness of our
Spiritual Ignorance, and the noysom foggs of our Lusts and vile Affections? Do
we live as the Sons of Light? Do we walk as in the Day; without stumbling into
the mire of our old Sins? These are the only sure Evidences that Christ is not
only a Star in Himself, but such an One also to us. For when the Dayspring
from on high visits us truly and effectually, it first takes us out of these
Shaddows of Death, and then guides our Feet into the Ways of Peace.

To Which God of His Mercy Vouchsafe to bring us all; To Whom be Rendered and
Ascribed as is most due All Honor, etc. Jesus of Nazareth PROVED The True, and
Only promised Messiah.

IN A SERMON Preached At St Mary's, Oxon.

Before the University, ON Christmas Day, 1665.

JOHN I.11. He came to His Own, and His Own received Him not.


I cannot think it directly requisite to the prosecution of these Words (nor
will the Time allotted for it permit) to assert and vindicate the foregoing
verses from the perverse Interpretations of that false Pretender to reason, and
real Subverter all Religion, Socinus; Who in the Exposition of this Chapter,
together with some part of the 8 th (both of them taken from the Posthumous
Papers of his Uncle Lelius) laid the foundation of that great Babel of
Blasphemies, with which he afterward so amuzed and pestered the Christian
World, and under Color of Reforming and Refining (forsooth) the best of
Religions, has employed the utmost of his skill and art to bring Men indeed to
believe none. And therefore no small cause of Grief must it needs be to all
pious minds that such horrid Opinions should find so ready a Reception and so
fatal a Welcome in so many parts of the World as they have done; considering
both what they tend to, and whom they come from. For they tend only to give us
such a Christ and Savior as neither the Prophets, nor Evangelists know, nor
speak any thing of. And as for their Original, if we would trace them up to
that, through some of the chief Branches of their Infamous Pedigree we must
carry them a little backward from hence; First to the forementioned Faustus
Socinus and his Uncle Lelius, and from them to Gentilis, and then to Servetus,
and so through a long Interval to Mahomet and his Sect, and from them to
Photinus, and from him to Arius, and from Arius to Paulus Samosatenus, and from
him to Ebion and Cerinthus, and from them to Simon Magus, and so in a direct
Line to the Devil himself: Under whose Conduct in the several Ages of the
Church these Wretches successively have been some of the most Notorious
opposers of the Divinity of our Savior, and would undoubtedly have overthrown
the belief of it in the World, could they by all their Arts of wresting,
corrupting and false interpreting the Holy Text, have brought the Scriptures to
speak for them; which they could never yet do. And amongst all the Scriptures,
No One has stood so directly and immoveably in their way, as this first Chapter
of St. John's Gospel. A Chapter carrying in it so bright and full an Assertion
of the Eternal Godhead of the Son, that a Man must put common sense and reason
extremely upon the Rack before he can give any tolerable Exposition of it to
the contrary. So that an Eminent Dutch Critic (who could find in his heart (as
much as in him lay) to interpret away that Noble and Pregnant place of
Scripture, John 8.58. Before Abraham was I am, from being any Proof at all of
Christ's Eternal Pre-existence to His Incarnation, and so to give up one of the
main Forts of the Christian Religion to the Socinians,) has yet been forced by
the over-powering Evidence of this Chapter, (notwithstanding all his shifts,
too manifestly showing what he would be at) to express himself upon this
Subject more agreeably to the sense of the Catholic Church, than in many other
places he had done. And well indeed might he, even for shame it self, do so
much, when it is certain that he might have done a great deal more. For such a
Commanding Majesty is there in every Period almost of this Chapter, that it has
forced even Heathens, and Atheists (Persons who valued themselves not a little
upon their Philosophy) to submit to the Controlling truth of the Propositions
here delivered, and instead of contradicting or disputing to fall down and
worship. For the things here uttered were Mysteries kept hid from Ages, and
such as God had for Four Thousand Years together by all the Wise Arts and
Methods of His Providence been preparing the World for, before it could be fit
or ripe to receive them: and therefore a most Worthy subject they must needs
have been for this beloved Apostle to impart to Mankind, who having so long
lain in the Bosom of Truth it Self, received all things from that Great
Original by more Intimate and Immediate Communications than any of the rest of
the Apostles were honored with. In a Word He was of the Cabinet; and therefore
no wonder if He spoke Oracles.

In the Text we have these two parts.

First, Christ's Coming into the World, in those Words He came to His Own.
Secondly, Christ's entertainment being Come, in those other Words, His Own
received Him not.
In the former of which there being an Account given us of one of the greatest
and most Stupendous Actions that the World was ever yet Witness of, there
cannot, I suppose, be a Truer measure taken of the Nature of it than by a
distinct Consideration of the several Circumstances belonging to it, which are
these.

First, The Person Who came. Secondly, The Condition from which He came.
Thirdly, The Persons to whom He came. And Fourthly, And Lastly, the Time of His
coming,
Of all which in their Order. And,

1. First for the Person who came. It was the Second Person in the Glorious
Trinity, the Ever Blessed and Eternal Son of God, Concerning Whom it is a
miracle and a Kind of Paradox to our Reason, (Considering the Condition of his
Person,) how He could be said to come at all: for since all coming is motion or
progression from a place in which we were, to a place in which we were not
before; and since Infinity implies an actual comprehension of, and a presence
to all places, it is hard to conceive how He Who was God, could be said to come
any whither, Whose Infinity had made all Progression to, or acquisition of a
New place impossible. But Christ, who delighted to mingle every Mercy with
miracle and wonder, took a finite Nature into the Society and Union of His
Person; whereupon, what was impossible to a Divine Nature, was rendered very
possible to a Divine Person; which could rightfully and properly entitle it
self to all the respective Actions and Properties of either Nature comprehended
within its Personality. So that being made Man, He could do all things that Man
could do, except only Sin. Every thing that was purely humane, and had nothing
of any Sinful deficiency or turpitude cleaving to it, fell within the Verge and
compass of His Actions. But now was there ever any Wonder comparable to this!
to behold Divinity thus clothed in Flesh! the Creator of all things humbled
not only to the Company, but also to the Cognation of His Creatures! It is as
if we should imagine the whole World not only Represented upon, but also
contained in one of our little artificial globes; or the body of the Sun
invelop'd in a Cloud as big as a Man's hand; all which would be looked upon as
astonishing Impossibilities; and yet as short of the other, as the greatest
finite is of an infinite, between which the Disparity is immeasurable. For that
God should thus in a manner Transform Himself, and subdue and Master all His
Glories to a possibility of humane apprehension and converse, the best reason
would have thought it such a thing as God could not do, had it not seen it
actually done. It is (as it were) to cancel the Essential distances of things,
to remove the bounds of Nature, to bring Heaven and Earth, and (what is more)
both ends of the Contradiction together.

And thereupon some, who think it an Imputation upon their Reason, to believe
any thing but what they can demonstrate, (which is no thanks to them at all)
have invented several strange Hypotheses, and Salvo's to clear up these things
to their apprehensions. As that the Divine Nature was never personally united
to the humane, but only passed through it in a kind of imaginary, Fantastic
way, that is, (to speak plainly) in some way or other, which neither Scripture,
Sense nor Reason know any thing of. And others have by one bold stroke cut off
all such Relation of it to the Divine Nature, and in much another sense, than
that of the Psalmist, made Christ altogether such an one as themselves, that
is, a mere Man. (...), for Socinus would needs be as good a Man as his Savior.

But this Opinion, whatsoever ground it may have got in this latter Age of the
Church, yet no sooner was it vented and defended by Photinus Bishop of Sirmium,
but it was immediately crushed, and universally rejected by the Church. So that
although several other Heresies had their course, and were but at length
extinguished, and not without some difficulty, yet this, like an indigested
Meteor, appeared and disappeared almost at the same time. However Socinus
beginning where Photinus had long before left off, licked up his deserted
forlorn opinion, and lighting upon worse times has found much better success.

But is it true that Christ came into the World? Then sure, I am apt to think,
that this is a solid inference, that He had an Existence, and a Being before He
came hither; since every motion or passage from one place or condition to
another supposes the thing or person so moving to have actually existed under
both Terms, to wit, as well under that from which, as that to which he passes.
But if Christ had nothing but an humane Nature, which never existed till it was
in the World, how could that possibly be said to come into the World? The fruit
that grows upon a tree, and so had the first moment of its existence there,
cannot with any Propriety or truth of speech be said to have come to that tree,
since that must suppose it to have been somewhere else before. I am far from
building so great and so concerning a Truth merely upon the stress of this way
of Expression; yet till the Reasoning grounded upon it be disproved, I suppose
it is not therefore to be despised, though it may be seconded with much better.

But the Men, whom we contend with, seem hugely injurious to Him, Whom they
call their Savior, while they even crucify Him in His Divinity, which the Jews
could never do; making His very kindness an Argument against His Prerogative.
For His condescending to be a Man makes them infer that He is no more; and
Faith must stop here, because Sight can go no further. But if a Prince shall
deign to be familiar and to converse with those upon whom he might trample,
shall His condescension therefore Unking Him? And His familiarity rob Him of
His Royalty? The case is the same with Christ. Men cannot persuade themselves
that a Deity and Infinity should lie. within so narrow a compass as the
contemptible dimensions of an Humane body. That Omnipotence, Omniscience and
Omnipresence should be ever wrapped in swaddling cloths, and abased to the homely
usages of a Stable and a manger. That the glorious Artificer of the whole
Universe, Who spread out the Heavens like a curtain, and laid the foundations
of the Earth could ever turn Carpenter, and exercise an inglorious trade in a
little Cell. They cannot imagine, that He who commands the Cattle upon a
thousand hills, and takes up the Ocean in the hollow of His hand could be
subject to the meannesses of hunger and thirst, and be afflicted in all His
appetites. That He who once created, and at present governs, and shall
hereafter Judge the World, should be abused in all His concerns and relations,
be scourged, spit upon, mocked, and at last crucified. All which are passages
which lie extremely cross to the Notions and conceptions that Reason has framed
to it self of that high and impassible perfection that resides in the Divine
Nature. For it is natural to Men to be very hardly brought to judge things to
be any more, than what they appear; and it is also as natural to them to
measure all appearances by sense, or at the furthest by Reason, though neither
of them is a competent Judge of the Things which we are here discoursing of.

2. The second thing to be considered is the State or Condition from which
Christ came; and that was from the bosom of His Father, from the
Incomprehensible, surpassing Glories of the Godhead, from an Eternal enjoyment
of an absolute, uninterrupted Bliss and Pleasure in the mutual, ineffable
intercourses between Him and His Father. The Heaven of Heavens was his
habitation and Legions of Cherubims and Seraphims his humble and constant
attendants. Yet he was pleased to disrobe himself of all this Magnificence, to
lay aside his Scepters and his Glories, and in a Word to empty Himself as far
as the Essential fullness of the Deity could be capable of such a dispensation.

And now, if by the poor measures and proportions of a Man, we may take an
estimate of this Great Action, we shall quickly find how irksom it is to Flesh
and Blood to have been happy, to descend some steps lower, to exchange the
estate of a Prince for that of a Peasant, and to view our happiness only by the
help of memory, and long reflections. For how hard a task must obedience needs
be to a Spirit accustomed to Rule, and to Dominion! how uneasy must the leather
and the frieze ^it upon the shoulder that used to shine with the purple and the
Ermin! All change must be grievous to an estate of absolute, entire, unmingled
happiness; But then to change to the lowest pitch, and that at first, without
inuring the mind to the burden by gradual, intermediate lessenings and
declensions, this is the sharpest and most afflicting calamity that humane
Nature can be capable of. And yet what is all this to Christ's humiliation? He
who tumbles from a Tower surely has a greater blow than he who slides from a
Molehill. And we may as well compare the falling of a Crumb from the Table to
the falling of a Star from the Firmament, as think the abasement of an
Alexander from his Imperial Throne, and from the Head of all the Persian and
Macedonian greatness to the condition of the meanest Scullion that followed his
Camp, any ways comparable to the descension of him who was the brightness of
His Father's Glory, and the express Image of His Person, to the Condition of a
Man, much less of a Servant, and crucified Malefactor. For so was Christ
treated: this was the strange leap that he made from the greatest height to the
lowest bottom: concerning which it might be well pronounced the greatest wonder
in the World, that he should be able so far to humble himself, were it not yet
a greater that he could be willing. And thus much for the second Circumstance.

3. The Third is, The Persons to Whom He came, expressed by that endearing Term
His Own; and this in a more peculiar advanced sense of Propriety. For all the
Nations of the World were His own by Creation, and what is consequent to it by
the Right of Possession and absolute Dominion: but the Jews were his Own by a
Fraternal Right of Consanguinity. He was pleased to derive his humanity from
the same stock, to give them the Honor of being able to call the God of
Heaven, and the Savior of the World their Brother.

They were His Own also by the Right of Churchship, as selected and enclosed by
God from amidst all other Nations, to be the Seat of his Worship, and the great
Conservatory of all the Sacred Oracles and means of Salvation. The Gentiles
might be called God's own, as a Man calls his Hall or his Parlour his own,
which yet others pass through and make use of; but the Jews were so, as a Man
accounts his closet, or his Cabinet his own; that is, by a peculiar,
uncommunicable destination of it to his own use.

Those who have that hardy curiosity, as to examine the Reason of God's
Actions, (which Men of Reason should still suppose,) wonder that, since the
Design of Christ's coming was Universal and extending to all Mankind, he should
address himself to so inconsiderable a spot of the World, as that of Palestine,
confining the scene of all his Life and Actions to such a small handful of Men;
whereas it would have seemed much more suitable to the purposes of his coming,
to have made Rome, at that time the Metropolis of the Western World, and
holding an intercourse with all Nations, the Place of his Nativity and abode;
As when a Prince would promulge a Law, because he cannot with any convenience
do it in all places, therefore he does it in the most eminent and conspicuous.
To which Argument frequently urged by the Enemies of Christianity, he who would
seek for a satisfactory answer from any thing but the absoluteness of God's
Sovereignty, will find himself defeated in his attempt. It was the mere result
of the Divine Good Pleasure, that the Fountain of Life should derive a Blessing
to all Nations, from so narrow and contemptible an Head.

And here, I cannot but think it observeable, that all the passages of the
whole Work of Man's Redemption carry in them the marks, not only of Mercy, but
of Mercy acting by an unaccountable Sovereignty: And that for this very Reason
(as may be supposed) to convince the World that it was purely Mercy on God's
part, without any thing of Merit on Man's, that did all. For when God reveals a
Savior to some few, but denies Him to more; sends Him to a People despised,
but passes over Nations Victorious, Honorable, and Renowned, He thereby gives
the World to know, that his own Will is the Reason of His Proceedings. For it
is worth remarking, that there is nothing that befalls Men equally and alike,
but they are prone to ascribe it either to Nature or Merit. But where the Plea
of the Receivers is equal, and yet the Dispensation of the Benefits vastly
unequal, there Men are taught that the thing received is Grace; and that they
have no claim to it, but the courtesy of the Dispenser, and the largess of
Heaven; which cannot be questioned, because it Waters my Field, while it
Scorches and dries up my Neighbor's. If the Sun is pleased to Shine upon a
Turf, and to Gild a Dunghill, when perhaps he never looks into the Bedchamber
of a Prince, we cannot yet accuse him for Partiality. That short, but most
significant saying in the Evangelist, May I not do what I will with my own?
Matt. 20.15. being a full and solid Answer to all such Objections.

4. The fourth and last Circumstance of Christ's coming related to the time of
it: He came to the Jews, when they were in their lowest and worst Condition,
and that in a double respect, National, and Ecclesiastical.

1. And first upon a Civil or National account. It was not then with them as in
those Triumphant days of Solomon, when for Plenty, Riches, and Grandeur, they
had little cause either to make Friends, or to fear Enemies, but shone as the
Envy and Terror of all the surrounding Neighborhood. At the best now they
were but a remnant, and a piece of an often scattered, conquered, and
captivated Nation: But two Tribes of twelve, and those under the Roman Yoke,
tributary and oppressed, and void of any other Privilege but only to obey, and
to be fleeced quietly by whosoever was appointed their Governor. This was
their Condition: And could there (...) any inducement upon the common
principles and methods of kindness to visit them in that Estate? Which could be
nothing else but only to share with them in servitude, and to bear a part in
their Oppression.

The measure of Men's kindness and visits bestowed upon one another, is usually
the Prosperity, the Greatness, and the Interest of the Persons whom they visit;
that is, because their favor is profitable, and their ill will formidable; in
a word, Men visit others, because they are kind to themselves. But who ever saw
Coaches and Liveries thronging at the Door of the Orphan, or the Widow,
(unless peradventure a Rich One) or before the House or Prison of an afflicted,
decayed Friend? No, at such a time we account them not so much as our own; that
unfriends and unbrothers, and dissolves all Relations, and it is seldom the
Dialect of My Good Friend, any longer than it is My Great Friend.

But it was another sort of Love that warmed the Breast of our Savior, He
visits his kindred, nay He makes them so in the lowest ebb of all their outward
Enjoyments. When to be a Jew was a name of Disgrace, and to be circumcised a
mark of Infamy. So that they might very well be a peculiar People, not only
because God separated them from all other Nations, but because all other
Nations separated Themselves from Them.

Secondly, Consider them upon an Ecclesiastical account, and so we shall find
them as corrupted for a Church as they were despised for a Nation. Even in the
days of the Prophet Isaiah, 1. c. 21. v. it was his Complaint, That the
faithful City was become an Harlot; that is, notable for two things, as Harlots
usually are, Paint and Impurity. Which growing corruption, in all the
intervening time, from thence to the Coming of Christ, received a
proportionable improvement. So that their Teachers and most Seraphick, adored
Doctors of the Law were still ranckt with Hypocrites. For the Text of Moses was
used only to Authorize a false Comment, and to warrant the Impiety of a
perverse Interpretation. Still for all their Villainies and Hypocrisies they
borrowed a Veil from Moses: and his Name was quoted and pretended as a glorious
Expedient to countenance and Varnish over well contrived Corruptions. Nay, and
they proceeded so high, that those who vouched the Authority of Moses most,
denied the being of Immaterial Substances and the Immortality of the Soul, in
which is wrapped up the very Spirit and Vital breath of all Religions: and these
Men had formed themselves into a standing and considerable Sect called the
Sadducees: so considerable, that one of them once stepped into the
High Priesthood. So that whether you look upon the Sadducees or the Pharisees,
they had brought the Jewish Church to that pass, that they established iniquity
by a Law; or which is worse, turned the Law it self into Iniquity.

Now the State of things being thus amongst the Jews at the time of Christ's
coming; it eminently offers to us the consideration of these two things.

First, The invincible strength of Christ's Love, that it should come leaping
over such mountains of opposition; that it should Triumph over so much Jewish
baseness and villainy, and be gracious even in spite of Malice it self. It did
not knock at, but even break open their doors. Blessing and Happiness was in a
manner thrust upon them. Heaven would have took them by force, as they should
have took Heaven: So that they were fain to take pains to rid themselves of
their happiness, and it cost them Labor and Violence to become Miserable.

Secondly, It declares to us the Immovable Veracity of God's promise. For
surely, if any thing could reverse a Promise, and Unty the bands of a Decree,
it would have been that uncontrolled impiety which then reigned in the Jewish
Church; and that to such a Degree, that the Temple it self was profaned into a
Den of Thieves, a Rendevous of Haglers and Drovers; and a Place not for the
Sacrificing, but for the selling of sheep and oxen. So that God might well have
forgot his Promise to his People, when they had altered the very subject of the
Promise, and as much as in them lay had ceased to be his People.

We have here finished the first part of the Text, and took an account of
Christ's coming to His own; and his coming through so many obstacles: may we
not therefore now expect to see him find a Magnificent Reception; and a Welcome
as extraordinary as his kindness? For where should any one expect a Welcome if
not coming to his Own? And coming also not to Charge but to Enrich them; not to
share what they had but to Recover what they had Lost; and in a word, to change
their Temporals into Eternals; and bring an overflowing performance and
fruition to those who had lived hitherto only upon promise and expectation? But
it fell out much otherwise, His Own received Him not.

Nor indeed if we look further into the World shall we find this Usage so very
strange or wonderful. For Kindred is not Friendship but only an Opportunity of
nearer converse; which is the true Cause of, and natural inducement to it. It
is not to have the same blood in ones Veins, to have lain in the same Womb, or
to bend the knee to the same Father, but to have the same Inclinations, the
same Affections, and the same Soul, that makes the Friend. Otherwise Jacob may
supplant Esau, and Esau hate and design the Death of Jacob. And we constantly
see the Grand-Seignior's Coronation-Purple dipped in the Blood of his Murdered
Brethren, Sacrificed to Reason of State, or at least to his own unreasonable
fears and suspicions. But Friends strive not, who shall kill; but who shall die
first. If then the Love of kindred is so small, surely the Love of Contrymen
and Neighbors can promise but little more. A Prophet may without the help of
his Prophetic Spirit foresee that he shall have but little honor in His own
Country. Men naturally malign the Greatness or Virtue of a Fellow-Citizen or a
Domestic, they think the nearness of it upbraids and obscures them. It is a
trouble to have the Sun still shining in their Faces.

And therefore the Jews in this followed but the Common practice of Men, whose
emulation usually preys upon the next Superior in the same family, company, or
profession. The bitterest and the loudest scolding is for the most part amongst
those of the same street. In short, there is a kind of ill disposition in most
Men much resembling that of Dogs; they bark at what is high and remote from
them, and bite what is next.

Now in this second part of the Text, in which is represented the Entertainment
which Christ found in the World, expressed to us by those Words, His own
received Him not, we shall consider these three things.

1. The Grounds upon which the Jews rejected Christ. 2. The Unreasonableness of
those Grounds. And 3. The great Arguments that they had to the Contrary.
As to the First of these; to reckon up all the Pretenses that the Jews allege
for their not acknowledging of Christ would be as endless, as the Tales and
Fooleries of their Rabbis: A sort of Men noted for nothing more than two very
ill Qualities, to wit, that they are still given to invent and write Lies; and
those such unlikely and incredible Lies, that none can believe them but such as
write them. But the Exceptions, which seem to carry most of Reason and Argument
with them, are these Two.

First, That Christ came not as a Temporal Prince. Secondly, That they looked
upon him as an Underminer and a Destroyer of the Law of Moses.
1. As for the First. It was a Persuasion which had sunk into their very Veins
and Marrow; a Persuasion which they built upon as the Grand Fundamental Article
of all their Creed, That their Messiah should be a Temporal Prince; nor can any
thing beat their Posterity out of it to this day. They fansied nothing but
Triumphs and Trophies; and all the Nations of the Earth licking the Dust before
them under the Victorious Conduct of their Messiah; They expected such an One
as should disenslave them from the Roman Yoke; make the Senate stoop to their
Sanhedrim; and the Capitol do homage to their Temple. Nay and we find the
Disciples themselves leavened with the same Conceit: their minds still ran upon
the Grandeurs of an Earthly Sovereignty, upon Sitting at Christ's right and
left hand in His Kingdom, banqueting and making merry at His Table, and who
should have the greatest Office and Place under him. So Carnal were the
Thoughts even of those who owned Christ for the Messiah; but how much more of
the rest of the Jews who contemned and hated him to the same degree? So that
while they were feeding themselves with such fancies and expectations, how can
we suppose that they would receive a Person bearing himself for the Messiah,
and yet in the poor habit and profession of a mean mechanic; as also preaching
to them nothing but Humility, Self-denial, and a Contempt of those Glories and
Temporal felicities, the enjoyment of which they had made the very design of
their Religion? Surely the frustration of their hopes, and the huge contrariety
of these things to their beloved, preconceived Notions, could not but enrage
them to the greatest disdain and rejection of his Person and Doctrine
imaginable.

And acordingly it did so. For they scorned, persecuted, and even spat upon him
long before his Crucifixion: and no doubt, between Rage and Derision, a
Thousand Flouts were thrown at him: As, what shall we receive a threadbare
Messiah? a fellow fitter to wield a Saw or an Hatchet than a Scepter? For is
not this the Carpenter's Son? And have we not seen him in his shop, and his
Cottage amongst his pitiful Kindred? And can such an One be a fit Person to
step into the Throne of David? To redeem Israel, and to Cope with all the Roman
Power? No, it is absurd, unreasonable, and impossible: and to be in bondage to
the Romans is nobler than to be freed by the hand of such a Deliverer.

2. Their other Grand exception against him was, that he set himself against
the Law of Moses. Their Reverence to which was so Sacred, that they judged it
the unchangeable Rule of all Humane Actions, and that their Messiah at his
coming was to impose the observation of it upon all Nations, and so to
establish it for ever; Nay and they had an equal Reverence for all the parts of
it, as well the Judicial and Ceremonial as the Moral; and (being naturally of a
gross and a thick conception of things) perhaps a much greater. For still we
shall find them more zealous in tything Mint, and Rue and Cummin, and washing
pots and platters (where chiefly their mind was) than in the Prime Duties of
Mercy and Justice. And as for their beloved Sabbath, they placed the
Celebration of it more in doing nothing, than in doing Good; and rather in
sitting still, than a rescuing a Life or saving a Soul. So that when Christ
came to interpret and reduce the Moral Law to its inward Vigor and
Spirituality, they, whose Soul was of so gross a make, that it was scarce a
Spirit, presently defied him as a Samaritan and an Impostor, and would by no
means hear of such strange, impracticable Notions. But when from refining and
correcting their Expositions, and sense of the Moral Law he proceeded also to
foretell and declare the approaching destruction of their Temple, and therewith
a Period to be put to all their Rites and Ceremonies, they grew impatient and
could hold no longer, but sought to Kill him, and thereby Thought that they did
God good service, and Moses too. So wonderfully (it seems) were these Men
concerned for God's honor that they had no way to show it, but by rejecting
his Son out of deference to his Servant.

We have seen here the two great exceptions which so blocked up the Minds and
Hearts of the Jewish Nation against Jesus Christ their True Messiah, that when
He came to His Own, His Own rejected and threw Him off. I come now in the next
place

2. To show the weakness and unreasonableness of these Exceptions. And

First, For Christ's being a Temporal Monarch, who should subdue and bring all
Nations under the Jewish Scepter. I answer, That it was so far from necessary,
that it was absolutely impossbile, that the Messiah should be such an one; and
that upon the Account of a double supposition; neither of which I conceive will
be denied by the Jews themselves.

1. The First is the professed Design of His Coming, which was to be a Blesing
to all Nations: for it is over and over declared in Scripture that in the seed
of Abraham, that is, in the Messiah, all Nations of the Earth should be
blessed. But now if they mean this of a Temporal blessing, as I am sure they
intend no other, then I demand how this can agree with his being such a Prince,
as according to their description must conquer all People and enslave them to
the Jews as Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water, as their Vassals and
Tributaries, and in a word, liable upon all occasions to be insulted over by
the worst conditioned People in the World? A worthy blessing indeed, and such
an one, as I believe few Nations would desire to be beholden to the seed of
Abraham for. For there is no Nation or People, that can need the coming of a
Messiah to bless them in this manner: since they may bless themselves so
whenever they please; if they will but send Messengers to some of their
Neighbors, wiser and powerfuller than themselves, and declare their Estates
and Country at their service, provided they will but come and make them slaves
without calling them so; by sending Armies to take Possession of their Forts
and Garrisons, to seize their Lands, Moneys, and whatsoever else they have; and
in a word, to oppress, beggar, and squeeze them as dry as a Pumice, and then
trample upon them because they can get no more out of them; Let any people, I
say, as they shall like this, apply to some Potent Overgrown Prince (whom the
fools, his Neighbors, shall have made so) and I dare undertake that upon a
word speaking they shall find him ready to be such a Messiah to them at any
Time. And yet this was all that the Gentile World could gain by those
Magnificent Promises of the Messiah (as Universal a Blessing as the Prophets
had foretold he should be) if the Jews Opinion concerning the Nature of his
Kingdom over the rest of the World should take place. But since they judge such
a kind of Government so great a Blessing to Mankind, it is pity but they
should have a large and lasting Enjoyment of it themselves, and be made to feel
what it is to be peeled and polled, fleeced and flayed, taxed and trod upon by
the several Governments they should happen to fall under; and so find the same
usage from other Princes which they had so liberally designed for them, under
their supposed Messiah: As indeed through the just Judgment of God they have in
a great measure found ever since the Crucifixion of Christ.

Second. The other supposition upon which I disprove the Messiah's being such a
Temporal Prince, is the unquestionable Truth of all the Prophecies recorded of
Him in Scripture; many of which declare only his Sufferings, his Humility, his
Low Despised Estate; and so are utterly incompatible with such a Princely
Condition. Those two, the first Psalm. 22. the other in Isai. 53. are sufficient
proofs of this. It Is not to be denied indeed, that several have attempted to
make them have no respect at all to the Messiah; but still the Truth has been
superior to all such attempts. The Jewish Rabbis for the most part understand
them of the whole Body of the People of Israel: And See more of this in the
following discourse on Esaias 53.8.
one we know amongst our Christian Interpreters, (though it will be hard to
Christen his Interpretation) who will needs have this whole 53 d. Chap. of
Isai. to relate only to the Prophet Jeremy, in the first and Historical Sense
of it: Little certainly to the service of Christianity; unless we can think the
properest way for confirming our Faith (especially against its mortal
Adversaries the Jews) be to strip it of the chief supports which the Old
Testament affords it. But every little fetch of Wit and Criticism must not
think to bear down the whole stream of Christian, Catholic Interpreters; and
much less the apparent force and evidence of so clear a Prophecy.

And therefore to return to the Rabbis themselves, the most Learned of them
after all such fruitless attempts understand those Prophecies only of the
Messiah: But then being fond of his Temporal Reign and Greatness; some of them
have invented the (...) of two several Messiahs, Messiah Ben David, and Messiah
Ben Joseph. One whereof was to be Potent and Victorious, the other Low,
Afflicted, and at length Killed. A bold unheard of Fiction, and never known to
the Ancient Jewish Church, till the Modern Rabbis began to Dote and Blaspheme
at all Adventures. But there is no shift so Senceless and Groundless which an
obstinate adherence to a desperate Cause, will not drive the Defenders of it
to. It is clear therefore that all the Pretense which the Jews have of the
Temporal Reign and Greatness of their Messiah is sufficiently answered, and cut
off by these two Considerations: For to argue with them further from the
Spirituality of the Messiah's Kingdom, as that the end of it was to abstract
from all Carnal, Earthly, Sensual Enjoyments, as the certain hinderers of
Piety, and underminers of the Spirit, would be but a begging of the Question,
as to the Jews, who would contend as positively that this was not to be the
intent of it. And besides the truth is, their Principles and Temper are so
hugely estranged from such Considerations, that a Man might as well read a
Lecture of Music or Astronomy to an Ox, or an Ass, as go about to persuade
them that their Messiah was only to plant his Kingdom in Men's Hearts, and by
infusing into them the Graces of Humility, Temperance, and Heavenly Mindedness,
to conquer their Corruptions, and reign over their Carnal Affections, which
they had a great deal rather should reign over them. And thus much for answer
to their first Exception.

Secondly, I come now to show the Unreasonableness of the other, grounded upon
a Pretense, that Christ was a Supplanter of the Authority of Moses, and an
Enemy to the Law. And here for answer to this, I grant that Christ designed the
Abrogation of their Ceremonial Law, and yet for all this I affirm that Christ
made good that Word of his to the utmost, That He came not to destroy the Law,
but to fulfill it. For we must know, that to destroy a Constitution, and to
abrogate, or merely to put an end to it are very different. To destroy a thing,
is to cause it to cease from that use to which it is designed, and to which it
ought to serve: But so did not Christ to the Ceremonial Law; the design of
which was to foresignify and point at the Messiah who was to come. So that the
Messiah being come, and having finished the Work for which he came, the use of
it continued no longer; for being only to relate to a thing future, when that
thing was past, and so ceased to be future, the Relation, surely, grounded upon
that Futurity must needs cease also. In a Word, if to fulfill a Prophecy be to
destroy it, then Christ by abrogating the Ceremonial Law may be said also to
have destroyed it. A Prophecy fullfilled is no longer a Prophecy; the very
Subject Matter of it being hereby took away; So a Type is no longer a Type when
the Thing typified comes to be actually exhibited. But the Jews, who stripped
all these things from any Relation to a Spiritual Design, thought that their
Temple was to stand for ever; their Circumcision and Sabbaths to be perpetual,
their New Mons never to Change, and the difference of Meats, and of clean and
unclean Beasts to be unalterable. For alas, poor ignorant Wretches! All their
Religion (as they had made it) was only to hate Hoggs, and to Butcher Sheep and
Oxen. A Religion which they might very well have practiced, had they Sacrificed
to no other God, but their Belly. Having thus shown the Unreasonableness of the
Jews exceptions against Christ. I come now to

3. The Third and Last Thing, which is to show, that they had great Reason for
the contrary, High Arguments to induce them to receive and embrace him for
their Messiah. It is not the business of an hour, nor of a Day to draw forth
all those reasons which make for this Purpose, and to urge them according to
their full Latitude and dignity: and therefore being to speak to those, who
need not be convinced of that which they believe already, I shall mention but
Two, and those very briefly.

1. The First shall be taken from this; That all the signs and marks of the
Messiah did most eminently appear in Christ: of all which signs I shall fix
upon one as the most Notable, which is the Time of his Coming. It was exactly
when the Scepter, (or Government) was departed from Judah, according to that
Prophecy of Jacob. And at the end of Daniel's weeks; at which time he foretold
that the Messiah should come. Upon a Consideration of which one of their own
Rabbis, but fifty years before Christ said that it was impossible for the
coming of the Messiah to be deferred beyond fifty Years. A proportion of time
vastly different from that of above sixteen hundred, and yet after this also,
they can hear no news of such a Messiah as they expect. The same Daniel also
affirms, that after the coming and cutting off of the Messiah, the City and the
Temple should be destroyed. As clear therefore as it is, that the City and
Temple are destroyed, so clear is it, that their Messiah came before that
destruction. From all which we may well insist upon that charge made against
them by our Savior, Ye Fools, ye can discern the Face of the Sky, and of the
Heavens, but how is it that ye do not discern this time? A time as evident as
if it were pointed out by a Sun Beam upon a Dial. And therefore the modern Jews
being pinched with the force of this Argument, fly to their old stale Evasion,
That the promise of the time of the Messiah's coming was not absolute but
conditional; which Condition failing upon the great Sins of the Jews, the time
of his coming has been accordingly deferred. But this Answer signifies nothing.
For the very design of the Messiah's coming, was to take away Sins and be a
Propitiation for them, even according to their own Rabbis words and
confession: And therefore it is ridiculous to make the Jews Sins the hindrances
of his coming, when he made the Atonement of Sins the chief Reason why he
should come. In a word, if the Messiah was to come within such a certain period
of time, (which time is long since expired) and while the City and Temple were
yet standing, which shortly after Christ's coming were demolished; then either
that Jesus was the Messiah, or let them show some other about that time, to
whom that Title might better belong.

2. A second Reason shall be taken from the whole course and tenor of Christ's
behavior amongst the Jews. Every Miracle that he did was an act of Mercy and
Charity, and designed to Cure as well as to Convince. He went about doing good,
he conversed amongst them like a walking Balsom, breathing Health and Recovery
wheresoever he came. Show me so much as one Miracle ever wrought by him to make
a Man Lame or Blind, to incommode an Enemy, or to revenge Himself; Or show me
any one done by him to serve an Earthly Interest. As for Gain and Gold he
renounced it. Poverty was His fee, and the only recompense of all His Cures:
And had he not been sold till he sold himself, the High Priests might have kept
their thirty pieces of Silver for a better use. Nor was Fame and Honor the
bait that allured Him: For he despised a Kingship, and regarded not their
Hosanna's. He embraced a Cross, and declined not the Shame. And as for Pleasure
and Softness of Life, He was so far from the least approach to it, that He had
not where to lay his Head, while the Foxes of the World had very warm places
where to lay theirs. He lived as well as wrought Miracles. Miracles of
Austerity, Fasting, and Praying, long Journies, and course Receptions; so that
if we compare his Doctrine with his Example, His very Precepts were
Dispensations and Indulgences, in comparison of the Rigors He imposed upon
himself.

Let that Jew therefore, who shall except against Christ as an Impostor, (as
they all do) declare what carnal or secular Interest he drove at; and if not,
what there is in the Nature of Man, that can prompt him to an endurance of all
these Hardships, to serve no Temporal end or advantage whatsoever. For did ever
any sober Person toil and labor, and at length expose himself to a cruel
Death, only to make Men believe that, which he neither did nor could believe
Himself? And so by dying in, and for a lie, must procure himself Damnation in
the next World, as well as Destruction in this? But if, for all this, they will
still make Christ a Deceiver, they must introduce upon Mankind new Principles
of Acting, cancel, and overturn the old, acknowledged methods of Nature; and,
in a word, either affirm that Christ was not a Man, or that he was influenced
by Ends and Inclinations contrary to all the rest of Mankind: one of which must
unavoidably follow; but neither of them ought to be admitted, where Sense or
Reason is so much as pretended to.

And thus I have at length finished what I first proposed to be discoursed of
from these Words, He came to His Own and His Own received Him not. In which,
that Men may not run themselves into a dangerous mistake by thinking the Jews
the only Persons concerned in these Words, and consequently that the Guilt here
charged upon them could affect None else; we must know, that although upon the
score of the Natural Cognation between Christ and the Jews, the Text calls them
by that appropriating Character His Own, and accordingly speaks of His coming
to them as such, yet that all the Nations of the World, who have had the Gospel
preached unto them, are as really His Own, as any of the Race of Abraham could
be, (if those may be called His Own whom He had so dearly bought) and
consequently that we are as capable of having Christ come to us, as the Jews
themselves were. And accordingly he actually has, and every day does Come to
us; not in the same manner, indeed, but to the same Purpose; Not in the form of
a Servant, but with the Majesty of a Savior; that is to say, He comes to us in
His Word, in His Sacraments, and in all the benefits of His Incarnation; and
those exhibited to us with as much reality and effect, as if with our very Eyes
we beheld the Person of our Benefactor. And then on the other hand, as we are
altogether as capable of His Coming to us, as his Kindred and Contemporaries
the Jews themselves were; so are we likewise as Capable of not Receiving Him,
as those Wretches were or could be. And therefore let no Man flatter Himself
with reference to Christ, as the Jews, in much the like case, did with
reference to the old Prophets; boasting (forsooth) that had they lived in the
days of their Fathers they would have had no hand in the blood of those Holy
Messengers of God. Matthew. 23.30. Let no vicious Person, I say, though never so
noted, and professed a Christian, conclude from hence, that had he lived when and
where our Savior did, nothing could have induced him to use Him as those
Miscreants had done. For though I know that such Men, (as bad as they are) do
with great confidence averr all this, and think themselves in very good
earnest, while they do so; yet as, in general, he who thinks he cannot deceive
himself, does not sufficiently know himself; So, in this particular case, every
Hypocrite or wicked Liver professing Christianity, while he thinks and speaks
in this manner, is really imposing upon himself by a false persuasion; and
would (though he may not know so much) have born the very same Malignity
toward our Savior, which those Jews are recorded to have done; and under the
same Circumstances would have infallibly treated Him with the same Barbarity.
For why did the Jews themselves use Him so? Why? because the Doctrines He
preached to them were directly contrary to their Lusts and corrupt Affections,
and defeated their expectations of a Wordly Messiah, Who should have answered
their sensual desires with the Plenties and Glories of such an Earthly Kingdom,
as they had wholly set their gross Hearts and Souls upon. Accordingly, Let us
now but shift the Scene, and suppose Christ in Person preaching the same
Doctrines amongst us, and withal as much hated and runn'd down for an Impostor
by the whole National power, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, as it then fared with
him amongst the Jews; and then no doubt we should see all such Vicious Persons,
finding themselves pricked and galled with his severe precepts, quickly fall in
with the stream of public Vogue and Authority, and as eagerly set for the
taking away His life, as against Reforming their own. To which we may further
Add this, That our Savior himself passes the very same Estimate upon every
such wicked Professor of His Gospel, which he then did upon the Jews
themselves, in that his irrefragable Expostulation with them Why call you Me
Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I command you? Luke 6.46. implying
thereby, That this was the greatest Hostility and Affront, that Men could
possibly pass upon him. And no doubt, but the Jews themselves, who avowedly
rejected Christ, and his Doctrine, out of an almost invincible prejudice
infused into them by their Teachers and Rulers, concerning the utter
inconsistency of both with the Mosaic Constitution, were much more excusable
before God, than any Christians can be, who acknowledging the Divine Authority
both of his Person, and his Gospel, do yet reverse and contradict that in their
Lives and Actions, which they avow in their Creeds, and solemn Declarations.
For he, who prefers a base pleasure or profit before Christ, spits in his Face,
as much as the Jews did: And he who debauches his immortal Soul and prostitutes
it to the vile and low services of Lust and Sensuality, Crucifies His Savior
afresh, and puts him to as open a shame as ever Pontius Pilate, the High
Priest, or those mercenary Tools, the very Soldiers themselves did. They do
not indeed pierce His Side, but (what is worse) they strike a Dagger into his
Heart.

And now, if the passing of all these Indignities upon One, who came into the
World, only to save it (and to Redeem those very Persons who used him so) is
not able to work upon our Ingenuity, should not the consequences of it at least
work upon our Fears, and make us consider, whether, as we affect to Sin like
the Jews, it may not be our Doom to suffer like the Jews too? To which purpose,
let us but represent to our selves the woeful estate of Jerusalem bleeding under
the Rage and Rapine of the Roman Armies; together with that Face of Horror and
Confusion, which then sat upon that wretched People, when the casting off their
Messiah had turned their Advocate into their Judge, their Savior into their
Enemy; and by a long refusal of his mercy, made them ripe for the utmost
Executions of his Justice. After which proceeding of the Divine Vengeance
against such Sinners, should it not (one would think) be both the Interest and
Wisdom of the stoutest and most daring Sinners in the World, forthwith to make
Peace with their Redeemer upon his own terms? And, (as hard a lesson as it
seems) to take his Yoke upon their Necks, rather than with the Jews to draw His
Blood upon their Heads; especially since one of the two must and will assuredly
be their Case: For the methods of Grace are fixed, and the measures stated: And
as little allowance of Mercy will be made to such Christians, as reject Christ
in his Laws, as to those very Jews who nailed him to his Cross.

In fine, Christ comes to us in his Ordinances, with Life in one Hand, and
Death in the other. To such, as receive him not, he brings the Abiding Wrath of
God, a present Curse, and a future Damnation. But to as many as shall receive
Him (according to the expression immediately after the Text) He gives Power to
become the Sons of God. That is, in other words, to be as Happy, both in this
World, and the next, as Infinite Goodness acting by Infinite Wisdom can make
them.

To Him therefore, who alone can do such great Things for those who serve Him,
be rendered and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and
Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen. A SERMON Preached On Good Friday, At
Christ-Church, Oxon.

Before the University, ON March the 20th 1667/8.

Isaiah liii.8. latter part. -- For the Transgression of my People was He
stricken.


THIS great and Eloquent Prophet, the Evangelist of the Jewish Church (as
without any impropriety he may be called) from the 13. v. of the foregoing
Chapter to the end of this, seems rapt up with the contemplation of a Great
Person under strange and unusual afflictions. Whose Character, with all the
heights of Rhetoric, which the Genius of Grief and Prophecy together could
raise him to, he here sets himself with full purpose to describe. In all which
description there is no one passage, which does not speak something
extraordinary and supernatural of the Person described, and withal represent
the Describer of it in the highest Degree of Ecstacy and Rapture; so that
nothing could transcend the height of the expression, but the sublimity of its
Subject. For still it fastens upon him the Marks and Tokens of something more
than a Man, indeed more than a Creature. Ascribing Actions to him, which
surmount any created Power; and so visibly, upon all Principles of Reason,
above the strength and reach of the strongest Arm of Flesh, that if the Person
here spoken of be but a Man, I am sure it requires the Wit of more than a Man
to make sense of the Prophecy. Who that Great Person therefore was, here so
magnificently set forth by the Prophet, is the thing now to be enquired into.
In which enquiry we shall find several Opinions, and every one of them
pretending to give the right Interpretation of the Place. I shall reduce them
all to these two.

First, The Opinion of the Ancient. Secondly, The Opinion of some Later
Interpreters.
First, As for the Ancient Interpreters I may boldly, and truly say, that it
was the general sense of all the old Jewish Rabbis, that the Person intended
in this Prophecy, was the Messiah. Take the affirmation of Rabbi Alschech in
his Comment upon this Prophecy, Rabbini nostri beatae memoriae uno ore statuunt
juxta receptam traditionem hic de Rege Messia sermonem esse. And though their
Opinion of the Temporal Greatness of their Messiah might (if any thing) tempt
them to draw this Prophecy another way, (since it declares the low, abject, and
oppressed Condition of the Person here treated of) yet to show that a suffering
Messiah was no such Paradox in the Divinity of the Ancient Jewish Rabbis, it
was a constant received speech among them, that dividing all the Afflictions of
the People of God into three parts, one third was to fall upon the Messiah.

And as for the Doctors and Fathers of the Christian Church, they do all with
one Unanimous Breath declare this to be a Prophecy of the Messiah, and this
Messiah to be Jesus Christ. And so full are they to this purpose, that Esaias
upon the account of this Prophecy is Styled by some of them Evangelista, and
Paulus Propheticus. Nor was ever the least intimation given of any other sense
of it, till, a little before this last Century, a new Christianity has
endeavored to get footing in the Christian World.

Second, The other Opinion is of the Later Interpreters; amongst which I
account the Jewish, that is, such as have wrote after a Thousand Years since
Christ's time. Whose Opinion in this matter will be found to have this Eminent
property of Falsity, that it is very Various. For having departed from the old
received Interpretation they are no ways agreed what they shall substitute in
the room of it. Some will have the Subject of this Prophecy to have been the
People of Israel. Some indefinitely any Just or Righteous Person. Some affirm
it to have been Josiah; and one among the rest will needs have the Person here
spoken of to have been the Prophet Jeremy. The Authors of each of which
Opinions give us such insipid Stories upon this Chapter, as are fitter to be
ushered in with the grave and solemn Preface of [ once upon a time] than to be
accounted Interpretations of the Word of God.

He who contends for the Prophet Jeremy, is one Rabbi Saadias Haggaon; and he
stands alone, not being countenanced by any of his Jewish Brethren, till one in
the Christian Church thought fit to be his second; and out of his Zeal
(forsooth) to the Christian Faith, to wrest one of the strongest Arguments out
of the Hands of the Christian Church, which it has fought with against Judaism,
ever since it was a Church. And thus much I shall with confidence, (because
with evidence) affirm, that if such Prophecies may be proved to have had their
first and literal Completion in the Person of any besides Jesus of Nazareth,
all Arguments proving them to belong to Him at a second hand, and by
accommodation (as the word is) are but vain and precarious to the Jew; who
will, and indeed upon his Hypothesis, may reject them as easily, as we can
allege them, and then convince him, who can.

But how can this Prophecy be made to agree to Jeremy? With what Truth or
Propriety could he be said to have been Exalted and Extolled, and to have been
very High? To have been Stricken for our Transgressions; and to have had the
Iniquity of us all laid upon Him? How could it be said of him, who shall
declare his Generation? And that he should see his Seed, and prolong his Days;
and also that he should divide the Spoil with the Mighty? With the like
Expressions?

Why, yes says our Expositor, He was Exalted, and very High; because the
Caldeans had him in admiration, which yet is more than we read of; and thanks
to a good Invention for it: Though it must be confessed, that upon his being
drawn out of the Dungeon, he was something Higher and more Exalted than he was
before. In the next place he was Stricken for Transgression, and had our
Iniquities laid upon him; because by the Sin and Injurious dealing of the Jews
He was cruelly and unworthily used; as, indeed, all, or most, of the Prophets
were both before, and after him. And then for that saying, Who shall declare
his Generation? The meaning of that, we are told, is, who shall reckon his
Years? For he shall live to be very Aged: Though yet we know no more of his
Age, but that he Prophesied about forty Years; whereas some others have
Prophesied much longer; and particularly Hosea who Prophesied about fourscore.
As for the other Expression of his seeing his Seed, and prolonging his Days,
that we are taught must signify, that he should see many of his Converts in
Egypt, where he should live for a long time. Though yet, we read not of any one
of those Converts; nor of any such prolonging his Days there; but that it is a
constant Tradition of Antiquity, that he died an untimely, disastrous Death,
being knocked on the Head in Egypt, by his wicked Countrymen, with a Fuller's
Club. And in the last place, for his dividing the Spoil with the Mighty; that
we are informed, was fullfilled in this, That Nebuzaradan, Captain of the
Chaldean Host (as we find it in Jeremy 40.5.) gave him a Reward and some
Victuals (that is to say, a small supply, or modicum of Meat and Money, for his
present support) and so sent him away. A worthy glorious dividing of the Spoil
indeed; and much after the same rate that the Poor may be said to divide the
Spoil, when they take their shares of what is given them at Richmen's Doors.

So then we have here an Interpretation, but as for the sense of it, that, for
ought I see, must shift for it self. But whether thus to drag and hale words
both from Sense and Context, and then to squeeze whatsoever meaning we please
out of them, be not (as I may speak with some change of the Prophet's Phrase)
to draw lies with cords of Blasphemy, and Nonsense, as it were, with a
Cart-rope, let any sober and impartial Hearer or Reader be Judge. For
whatsoever titles the itch of Novelty and Socinianism has thought fit to
Dignify such Immortal, Incomparable, Incomprehensible Interpreters with; yet if
these Interpretations ought to take place, the said Prophecies (which all,
before Grotius, Having had the opportunity and happiness of a frequent Converse
with Dr. Pocock (the late Hebrew, and Arabic Professor to the University of
Oxon, and the greatest Master certainly of the Eastern Languages, and Learning,
which this or any other Age or Nation has Bred) I asked him (more than once, as
I had occasion) what he thought of Grotius's Exposition of Isaiah 53. and his
Application of that Prophecy, in the first sense and design of it to the Person
of the Prophet Jeremy? To which, smiling and shaking his Head, he answered.
Why, what else can be thought or said of it but that in this the Opiniator,
overruled the Annotator, and the Man had a mind to indulge his Fancy? This
account gave that great Man of it; though he was as great in Modesty, as he was
in Learning (greater than which none could be) and withal had a particular
respect for Grotius, as having been personally acquainted with him. But the
truth is, the matter lay deeper than so; for there was a certain party of Men,
whom Grotius had unhappily engaged himself with, who were extremely disgusted
at the Book de Satisfactione Christi, written by him against Socinus; and
therefore he was to pacify (or rather satisfy) these Men by turning his Pen
another way in his Annotations; which also was the true reason, that he never
answered Cr^llius. A shrewd Argument, no doubt, to such as shall well consider
these matters, that those in the Low Countries, who at that time went by the
name of Remonstrants and Arminians, were indeed a great deal more.
and the aforesaid Rabby Saadias, Unanimously fixed (in the first sense of
them) upon the sole Person of the Messiah) might have been actually fullfilled;
and consequently the Veracity of God in the said Prophecies strictly accounted
for; though Jesus of Nazareth had never been Born. Which being so, would any
one have thought that the Author of the Book, de Veritate Religionis
Christianae, and de satisfactione Christi could be also the Author of such
Interpretations as these? No Age certainly ever produced a mightier Man in all
sorts of Learning than Grotius, nor more happily furnished with all sorts of
Arms, both Offensive and Defensive for the Vindication of the Christian Faith;
had he not in his Annotations too frequently turned the Edge of them the wrong
way.

Well therefore, taking it for manifest, and that upon all the grounds of
Rational and unforced Interpretation, that the Person here spoken of was the
Messiah, and that this Messiah could be no other than Jesus of Nazareth, the
Great Mediator of the second Covenant, very God, and very Man, in whom every
tittle of this Prophecy is most exactly verifyed, and to whom it does most
peculiarly and incommunicably agree: We shall proceed now to take an account of
the several parts of the Text, in which we have these three things considerable.

First, The suffering it self, He was stricken. Secondly, The Nature of the
suffering, which was Penal, and Expiatory, He was stricken for Transgression:
And Thirdly, The Ground and Cause of this suffering, which was God's propriety
in, and relation to the Persons for whom Christ was stricken, employed in this
word, My People. For the Transgression of My People was he stricken.
Of each of which in their order: And

First, For the suffering it self. He was stricken. The very word imports
violence and invasion from without. It was not a suffering upon the stock of
the mere internal weaknesses of Nature, which carries the seeds and causes of
its dissolution in its own bowels, and so by degrees withers and decays, and at
length dies, like a Lamp that for want of Oil can burn no longer; but like a
Torch in its full flame beat and ruffled, and at length blown out by the breath
of a North Wind; So was Christ dealt with in the very prime and vigor of his
Years, being by main force torn and stricken out of the World. Blows did the
work of time, and Stripes and Spears were instead of Age to put a period to his
afflicted Life. Now the Greatness of this Suffering will be made out to us upon
these three accounts.

First, Upon the Account of the Latitude and Extent of it. Secondly, Of the
Intenseness and Sharpness of it: And Thirdly, Of the Person inflicting it.
First, As for the Latitude or Extent of it. The Blow reached every part of His
humanity, carrying the grief all over, till by an Universal diffusion of it
self, it entered according to the Psalmists expression, like water into His
bowels, or like Oil into His bones. It spread it self into every part of his
Body, as if it had been another Soul. Nothing was free from suffering that
could suffer. Suffering seemed to be his Portion, his Inheritance, nay his very
Property. Even the Religion, that he came to propagate and establish was a
suffering Religion, and, by the severest method of establishment, he gave the
First and the Greatest Instance of it in himself. He, who would recount every
part of Christ that suffered, must read a Lecture of Anatomy. From the Crown of
the Head to the Sole of the Foot there was nothing but the traces of pain and
suffering: they made long furrows upon His back (says the Psalmist) they did
(as it were) tear and plow up his innocent Body. In his Person we might have
seen Grief in its height and supremacy; Grief Triumphant, Crowned and arrayed
in Purple; Grief reigning and doing the utmost that it was able. It is a
Subject too well known, and too frequently discoursed of, to make descriptions
of the Thorns, the Spears, and the Nails that acted their several parts in this
Tragedy; and that so, that the very Narrative of our Savior's Passion cannot
but beget another in every pious hearer of it. But when we have said the utmost
of his Bodily sufferings, we still know that Nature has provided a support able
to mate and stand up against all these: for the strength and firmness of a
Resolved Mind will bear a Man above his Infirmity; as the Breath bears up the
Body from sinking: But when the supporter it self fails, when the Primum vivens
and the Vltimum moriens has had a mortal blow, and the Iron enters into the
very Soul, then baffled Nature must surrender and quit the Combat, unless
seconded and held up by something greater and mightier than it self. And this
was our Savior's Condition. There was a Sword which reached his very Spirit,
and pierced his Soul, till it Bled through his Body; for they were the
Struggles and Agonies of the inward Man, the Labors and Strivings of his
restless Thoughts, which cast his Body into that Prodigious Sweat. For though
it was the Flesh that Sweated, it was the Spirit that took the Pains. It was
that, which was then treading the Wine Press of God's Wrath alone, till it made
him Red in his Apparel, and dyed all his Garments with Blood. What thought can
reach, or Tongue express, what our Savior then felt within his own Breast! The
Image of all the Sins of the World for which he was to suffer, then appeared
clear and lively, and express to his Mind. All the vile and horrid
circumstances of them stood (as it were) particularly ranged before his Eyes in
all their dismal Colors. He saw how much the Honor of the Great God was
abused by them, and how many millions of Poor Souls they must inevitably have
cast under the Pressures of a Wrath Infinite and Intolerable, should he not
have turned the Blow upon himself. The horror of which then filled and amazed
his vast Apprehensive Soul; and those Apprehensions could not but affect his
tender Heart then brimful of the highest Zeal for God's Glory, and the most
relenting Compassion for the Souls of Men; till it fermented and boiled over
with Transport and Agony, and even forced its way through all his Body in those
strange Ebullitions of Blood, not to be paralleled by the sufferings of any
Person recorded in any History whatsoever. It was this, which drew those
doleful words from him, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, etc. (...). It was
surrounded and (as it were) besieged with an Army of Sorrows. And believe it,
his Soul was too big, and of too strong a make to bend under an ordinary
Sorrow. It was not any of those little things, which make us put the Finger in
the Eye, as loss of Estate, Friends, Preferment, Interest, and the like; things
too mean to raise a tumult in the Breast of a resolved Stoic, and much less in
His, who both placed and preached Happiness, not only in the want, but in the
very defyance of them.

And now after this his Agony in the Garden, I need not much insist upon the
Wounds given his Reputation by the Sword of a Blaspheming Tongue, the sharpest
of all others, and which like a Poisoned Dagger, hurting both with Edge and
Venom too, at the same time both makes a Wound and prevents its Cure. Even a
guilty Person feels the sting of a malicious Report; and if so, much more must
one, who is innocent; and yet infinitely more must He, who was not only
Innocent, but Innocence it self. Reputation is tender, and for it to be blown
upon is to be tainted; like a Glass, the clearer and finer it is, the more it
suffers by the least Breath. And therefore for him, who came to destroy the
Kingdom of Satan, to be traduced as a Partner with, and an Agent for Beelzebub:
For Him, whose greatest Repasts were Prayer and abstinence, and the most rigid
severities upon Himself, to be taxed as a Wine-bibber and a Good Fellow: For
Him who came into the World, both in Life and Death to bear Witness to the
Truth, to suffer as an Impostor and a Deceiver; what could be more grievous and
afflicting to a great Innocence, joined with as great an Apprehension!

However, his Church gains this great Advantage of Comfort by it, that the
worst of sufferings comes sanctified to our Hands by the Person of our grand
Example. Who was reviled and slandered, and tossed upon the Tongues of Men
before us. A greater Martyrdom questionless than to be cast, as the Primitive
Christians were, to the Mouths of Lions, which are tender and merciful compared
to the Mouths of Men; whether we look upon that bitter Spirit which acted in
those Jews, or in some Christians now adays worse than Jews: Men, who seem to
have outdone all before them in the Arts of a more refined Malice, and
improved Calumny. Qualities lately sprung up out of the stock of a spreading
Atheism, and a domineering, reigning Sensuality; Sins now made National and
Authentic, and so much both Judgment and Mercy-proof, that it is well if we
can be cured without being cut off. But to return to the business before us. We
have now seen the first thing setting forth the greatness of this suffering; to
wit the Latitude and Extent of it; as that it seized both Body and Soul, and
every Part and Faculty of both.

Second. The next thing declaring its greatness was the intenseness and
sharpness of it. We have seen already how far it went, we are now to consider
how deep. It fell not on him like a dew or mist, which only wets the surface of
the Ground, but like a pouring soaking Rain which descends into the very Bowels
of it. There was pain enough in every single part to have been spread in lesser
Proportions over the whole Man. Christ suffered only the exquisiteness and
heights of pain, without any of those mitigations which God is pleased to
temper and allay it with as it befalls other Men; like a Man who drinks only
the Spirits of a Liquor separated and extracted from the dull, unactive Body of
the Liquor it self. All the force and activity, the stings and fierceness of
that troublesome thing were (as it were) drained and distilled, and abridged
into that Cup which Christ drank off. There was something sharper than Vinegar,
and bitterer than Gall, which that draught was prepared and made up with. We
cannot indeed say, that the sufferings of Christ were long in duration, for to
be violent and lasting too, is above the methods or measures of Nature. But he
who lived at that rate, that he might be said to live an Age every hour, was
able to suffer so too: and to comprize the greatest torments in the shortest
space; which yet by their shortness lost nothing of their Force and Keenness;
as a Penknife is as sharp as a Spear, though not so long. That which promotes
and adds to the Impressions of pain, is the delicate and exact Crasis and
Constitution of the Part, or Faculty aggrieved. And there is no doubt but the
very Fabric and Complexion of our Savior's Body was a Masterpiece of Nature,
a thing absolutely and exactly framed, and of that fineness as to have the
quickest and most sensible touches of every Object; and withal to have these
advanced by the communion of his admirably made Body, with his high and
vigorous Intellectuals. All which made him drink in Pain more deeply, feel
every lash, every wound with so much a closer, and a more affecting sense. For
it is not to be doubted but a dull Fellow can endure the Paroxysms of a Fever,
or the Torments of the Gout or Stone, much better than a Man of a quick mind
and an exalted Fancy; because in one, Pain beats upon a Rock or an Anvil, in
the other it prints it self upon wax. One is even born with a kind of Lethargy
and stupefaction into the World, armed with an Iron body and a leaden Soul
against all the apprensions of ordinary sorrow; so that there is need of some
pain to awaken such an one, and to convince him that he is alive; but our
Savior, who had an Understanding too quick to let any Thing that was
Intelligible escape it, took in the dolorous afflicting object in its full
dimensions. He saw the utmost Evil of every one of those strokes, which the
guilt of our Sins inflicted on Him. And what His Eye saw, His heart
proportionably felt: For surely they must needs have been inconceiveably
afflicting, in the Actual Endurance, which were so dreadful in their very
approach, that the horror of them put the Man of God's right hand, the Man made
strong for that very purpose, to start back, and decline the Blow, could the
avoidance of it have stood with the Decrees of Heaven. Father if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from Me. Which yet was not the Voice of cowardice,
but of humane Nature; Nature, which by its first and most Essential Principle
would have saved it self, might it have consisted with the Saving of the World.

Thirdly, The third thing setting forth the greatness of this suffering, is the
Cause and Author of it, which was God Himself. The measure of every passion is
the Operation of the Agent. And then, we know what Omnipotence can do;
Omnipotence employed or rather inflamed by Justice; in whose Quarrel it was
then Engaged. We must not measure the Divine strokes by the proportion of those
blows, which are inflicted by the greatest and most exasperated mortal; The
Condition of whose Nature sets bounds to his Power, when it cannot to his Rage.
So that, in the utmost executions of it he acts but like a Wasp; very angrily
indeed; but very weakly. Every blow inflicted by the fiercest Tyrant can reach
no further than the Body; and the Body is but the dwelling place, not any part
of the Soul; and consequently can no more communicate its Ruins to that, than a
Man can be said to be wounded in his Person, because a wall of his House was
broken down. Upon which account there have been some, whose Souls have been so
fortifyed with Philosophy, and great principles as to enable them to laugh in
Phalaris's Bull; to sing upon the Rack; and to despise the flames. For still,
when God Torments us by the Instrumental mediation of the Creature, his Anger
can fall upon us in no greater proportions than what can pass through the
narrow capacities of a created Being. For be the Fountain never so full, yet if
it communicates it self by a little pipe the stream can be but small and
inconsiderable, and equal to the measures of the Conveyance. God can no more
give His Power, than His Glory to another; there is no mortal arm can draw His
bow. God cannot Thunder or Lighten by Proxy. He alone is the Father of Spirits,
and none can reach the Conscience, but He who made it. And therefore being to
discharge the utmost of His Vindictive Justice upon the Sins of Mankind then
charged upon our Savior, He took the Sword into His Own Hand, entered the
lists, and dealt with Him immediately by Himself. And then we find the
Difference of our Savior's suffering by the difference of His behavior. While
He was Buffetted, Scourged, and Nailed to the Cross, we hear nothing from Him,
but like a Lamb before the shearers He was dumb: not because He could not, but
because He scorned to roar under the Impressions of a Finite anger. But when
God reached forth His Hand, and darted His immediate Rebukes into His very Soul
and Spirit, (as He did while He was hanging upon the Cross) then He cries out,
My God, My God, why have Thou forsaken Me! Silence upon such a loss would have
been but stupidity, and patience an absurdity; for when God withdrew his
Presence from him, that Darkness which then covered the face of the whole
Earth, was but a faint Emblem of that Blacker Cloud of despair which had
overcast His Soul. It is not possible for us to conceive the utmost weight of
those heavy strokes inflicted by the Almighty Himself upon our Savior. All the
Representations and little draughts of them made by Words and Fancy are vastly
short of the keen impressions of Sense. But yet that which gives us the nearest
resemblance of them, surely, is the Torment of a guilty mind under a State of
Desertion; when God shall turn the worm of Conscience into a Scorpion and smite
it with the secret invisible stings of his Wrath, such as shall fester and rage
inwardly, gnaw and rake the very entrails of the Soul. The Burden and anguish
of this has been sometimes so insupportable; that some have professed
themselves to envy the condition of Judas and the Damned Spirits, as thinking
the Endurance of those flames more tolerable than the expectation, and
accordingly have done violence to their own lives, and so fled to Hell as to a
Sanctuary, and chose Damnation as a Release. Far were such persons (God knows)
from bettering their Condition by completing that which they could not bear in
the very beginnings and foretasts of it: yet however it demonstrates to us the
unspeakable wretchedness of a guilty Soul, Laboring under the Hand of God. And
by the way, let the boldest, the hardiest, and the securest Sinner know that
God is able, without ever touching him either in his Estate, his Health, his
Reputation, or any other outward enjoyment dear to him, but merely by letting a
few drops of his Wrath fall upon his guilty Conscience, so to scald and gall
him with the lively Sense of Sin, that he shall live a continual Terror to
himself, carry about him an Hell in his own Breast; which shall Echo to him
such Peals of Vengeance every Hour, that all the Wine and Music, all the
Honors and Greatness of the World shall not be able to minister the least ease
to his heart-sick and desponding Soul. Now in these Torments of a guilty
Conscience we have some little Image of the pains then suffered by our Savior,
the greatness of both being founded upon the same Reason; Namely, That God is
the sole and immediate Inflicter of such strokes: And then surely the suffering
must needs be grievous, when Infinite Justice passes Sentence, and Infinite
Power does Execution.

And thus I have finished the first general thing proposed from the Text, which
was the Suffering it self, expressed in these words, He was stricken, and that,
by considering the Latitude, the Intenseness, and also the Cause of it. All of
them so many Arguments to demonstrate to us its unparalled Greatness.

2. The Second general thing proposed was the Nature and quality of this
suffering; Namely, That it was Penal and Expiatory, He was stricken for
Transgression. And to prove that it was Penal, there needs no other Argument to
any clear, unbiassed Understanding than the natural, genuine and unconstrained
use of the Word. For what other sense can there be of a Man's being stricken or
suffering for Sin, but his being punished for Sin? And that I am sure is spoke
so plain and loud by the Universal Voice of the whole Book of God, that
Scripture must be Crucified as well as Christ, to give any other tolerable
sense of it. But since Heresy has made such bold invasions upon those Sacred
Writings, we will consider both those senses which these words are asserted to
be capable of.

1. First of all then, some assert, That to be stricken for Transgression
imports not here a Punishment for Sins past, but a Prevention or taking away of
Sin for the future. So that Christ is said to be stricken, to suffer, and to
die for Sin, because by all this He confirmed to us an Excellent and Holy
Doctrine, the belief of which has in it a natural Aptness to draw Men off from
their Sins. In a word, because Christianity tends to make Men holy, and cease
from Sin, and because Christ by His blood sealed the Truth of Christianity,
therefore is He said to die for Sin; A strange and remote deduction, and such
an one as the Common rules and use of speaking would never have suggested. But
then besides, because it is easy to come upon the Authors of this perverse
Interpretation by demanding of them what fitness there could be in Christ's
death to confirm His Doctrine? And what Reason the World could have to believe
Christianity True, because the Author of it, a Pious, Innocent, Excellent
Person was basely and cruelly put to Death? Therefore they further say that
this Effect of its confirmation is really and indeed to be ascribed to His
subsequent Resurrection, though only his Death be still mentioned; that being
the most difficult and Heroic passage of all, that he either did or suffered
for our sakes, and consequently the greatest Instance of his Patience, and
persuasion of the Truth of that Doctrine for which he suffered. But by their
favor, if Christ is said no otherwise to die for Sin, than because he
delivered a Doctrine, the design of which was to draw Men off from Sin, and
which was confirmed to be true only by his Resurrection; How comes it to pass
that this effect is still joined with his Death, but never with his
Resurrection? It being said over and over, that He dyed for Sin, suffered and
bled for Sin, but never that He rose again for Sin. It is, indeed, said once
that he rose again for our justification; but in the very foregoing words it is
said, that he was delivered to death for our Offenses: Which shows that those
words for our Offenses, and for our justification, have there a very different
sense, and bear a different relation to the words with which they are joined in
that, as well as in the other Scriptures. But this whole Invention is so forced
and far fetched, and so much out of the Road of Common reason, that it is
impossible it should gain, but by the strengths and prepossessions of
Prejudice; and where prejudice stands for judgment, for ought I see, it is as
vain to urge Arguments as to quote Scriptures.

2. The other sense of these words, and which alone the Catholic Church
receives for true, is, That Christ's being stricken for Sin, signifies his
being punished for Sin. The word [ For] in this case denoting the Antecedent
Meritorious cause of his suffering, and not the Final, as the School of Socinus
does assert; and, consequently, must directly relate to the removal of the
guilt of Sin, and not the Power, as is also affirmed by the same Persons. Now
that Christ's suffering and being stricken for Transgression imports that
suffering to have been Penal and Expiatory, as it might with the highest
Evidence be demonstrated from several Scriptures: so at this time I shall
confine my self within the limits of the Chapter, from whence I took my Text:
and here I shall found the proof of it upon these two expressions.

First, That Christ is said to have born our Sins, in the 12. v. Now to bear
Sin is an Hebrew Phrase for that, which in Latin is Luere peccatum, and in
English to be punished for Sin. And if to bear another Man's Sin or iniquity by
suffering, does not imply the undergoing of the punishment due to that Man's
Sin; We must invent a new way of expounding Profane Writers as well as Sacred,
and of interpreting the common speeches of Men, as well as the word of God.

Secondly, The other Argument shall be taken from that Expression which
declares Christ to have been made a Sacrifice, or an Offering for Sin, in the
10. v. When Thou shall make His Soul an Offering for Sin. The proof of what I
here affirm, is grounded upon the use and design of a Sacrifice, as it has been
used by all Nations in the World; which was to appease the Deity by paying down
a Life for Sin, and that by the substitution of a Sacrifice, whether of Man or
Beast, to die and pay down his Life instead of the Sinner. For there was a
tacit acknowledgment universally fixed in the Hearts of all Mankind, that the
Wages of Sin was Death, and that without shedding of blood there could be no
Remission: upon which was built the reason of all their Sacrifices and Victims.
So surely therefore as Christ was a Sacrifice, and as the design of a Sacrifice
is to pay down a Life for Sin, and as to pay down a Life for Sin is to be
Punished for Sin: so sure it is, that Christ's Death and Sufferings were Penal.
Now it being clear that the foundation of all Punishment is compensation or
exchange; that is to say, something paid down to divine Justice for something
done against it; and since all compensation implies a Retribution equivalent to
the Injury done, therefore, that Christ might be qualified to be a Sacrifice
fit to undergo the full Punishment due for the Sins of Mankind, two things were
required.

1. An infinite dignity in his Person; for since the Evil and Demerit of Sin
was Infinite; and since Christ was so to suffer for it, as not to remain under
those sufferings for an Infinite duration; that Infinity therefore was to be
made up some other way; which could not be, but by the Infinite worth and
Dignity of his Person, grasping in all the Perfections and Glories of the
Deity, and by consequence deriving an Infinite Value to his Sufferings. 2. The
other Qualification required was a perfect Innocence in the Person to suffer:
for so much was specified by the Paschal Lamb, of which we still read in
Scripture, That it was to be a Lamb without blemish. And there is no doubt, but
had Christ had any Sin of his own to have satisfied for, he had been very
unable to satisfy for other Men's. He who is going to Gaol for his own debts,
is very unfit to be a Security for another.
But now this perfect Innocence, which I affirm necessary to render Christ a
fit and proper Sacrifice, is urged by our Adversaries to be the very Reason why
Christ's sufferings could not be Penal; since Punishment in the very Nature and
Essence of it imports a Relation to Sin. To this I answer, That Punishment does
indeed import an Essential Relation to Sin; but not of Necessity to the Sin of
the Person upon whom it is inflicted: as might be evinced by innumerable
Instances, as well as undeniable reasons.

If it be replied, that God has declared that the Soul that Sins shall die.

I answer; That this is only a Positive Law, according to which God declares he
will proceed in the ordinary course of his Providence; but it is not of Natural
and Eternal Obligation, so as Universally to bind God in all cases; but that he
may when he Pleases deal otherwise with his Creature. But this will receive
further light from the Discussion of the third and last General head, to which
we now proceed. Namely,

3. The ground and Cause of this suffering, which was God's Propriety in, and
relation to the Persons for whom Christ suffered, specified in these words My
People, For the Transgression of my People was He stricken.

If it be here asked, upon what account the Persons here spoken of were
denominated and made God's People? I answer, that they were so by an Eternal
Covenant and Transaction between the Father and the Son; by which the Father,
upon certain Conditions to be performed by the Son, consigned over some Persons
to him to be His People. For our better understanding of which we are to
observe that the business of Man's Redemption proceeds upon a twofold Covenant.

First, An Eternal Covenant made between the Father and the Son, by which the
Father agreed to give both Grace and Glory to a certain Number of Sinners, upon
Condition that Christ would assume their Nature and pay down such a Ransom to
his Justice, as should both satisfy for their Sin, and withal Merit such a
measure of Grace as should effectually Work in them all things necessary to
their Salvation. And this Covenant may be properly called a Covenant of
suretiship or Redemption. Upon which alone and not upon any Covenant made
between God and Men in their own Persons is built the Infallibility of the
future Believing, Repenting and finally Persevering of such as Christ from all
Eternity undertook to make his People.

Secondly, The other is a Covenant made in time, and actually entered into by
God and Men; by which God on his part Promises to Men Eternal Salvation, upon
Condition of Faith and Repentance on Theirs. And this is called in Scripture
the second Covenant or the Covenant of Grace, and stands opposed to that which
is there called the First Covenant or the Covenant of Works.

Now by that Eternal Compact or Transaction between the Father and the Son (of
which alone we now speak) was this Donation of a certain determinate number of
Persons made to Christ to be his People; by virtue of which Agreement or
Transaction he was in the fullness of time to suffer for them, and to
accomplish the whole Word of their Redemption from first to last. For to affirm
that Christ dyed only to verify a Proposition. [ That whosoever believed should
be saved] but in the mean time to leave the whole issue of things in reference
to Persons so loose and undetermined, That it was a Question, whether ever any
one should actually believe, and very possible that none ever might; and
consequently that after Christ had suffered, had been stricken, and dyed for
Transgression, yet, for any thing that he had done, in all this, he might never
have had a People; this certainly is a strange and new Gospel, and such as the
Doctrine of our Church seems utterly unacquainted with.

Having thus shown the Foundation upon which the Persons here spoken of are
called by the Prophet God's People: Namely, An Eternal Covenant, in which God
the Father and the Son mutually agreed upon the Terms of their Redemption; We
are now to observe, that the same Thing, that thus denominates and makes them
God's People, makes them under the same Relation to belong also to Christ, and
that not only upon the Account of his Nature that he was God, but chiefly of
his Office, that he was their Mediator; which capacity made him equally
concerned in that Eternal Covenant; He accepting and agreeing to those Terms
that were proposed, and offered him by the Father. By His Acceptance of which
he became both a Mystical head, and a Surety to those, for whom he so
undertook. And this Relation of his to them was the Cause, why he both might
be, and actually was stricken by God for their Transgression, without any
Violation of the Divine Justice, notwithstanding the perfect Innocence of his
Person. For to render it just to inflict a Punishment upon an Innocent Person
instead of another, either of these two Causes are sufficient.

First, An intimate Conjunction between those Persons; and that either Natural
as between Father and Son, or Political as between King and People; and the
like. Or

Secondly, The Voluntary Consent and Will of an Innocent Person to undergo the
Punishment due to the Nocent; as it is between a Man and his Surety.

Accordingly, from that Covenant by which the Father made over a certain number
of Persons to the Son to be His People, there arose this twofold Relation of
Christ to them.

1. Of a King to his People, or of a Mystical Head to his Members; so that
Legally, and Politically they suffered as really in Christ, as the whole body
suffers when the head is wounded, or struck through with a dart. 2. The other
Relation is of a Surety: so that the Satisfaction paid down by Christ to God's
Justice for Sin, is, in estimation of Law, as really accounted to be paid down
by the Saints, as if they had paid it in their own Persons.
And this is a further, and withal a full answer to that objection formerly
hinted from the Innocence of Christ's Person, as if it rendered him incapable
of Punishment. For his own, free, voluntary consent to be a Surety for Sinners,
and responsible for all, that Divine Justice could charge them with,
Transferred the guilt and obligation from their Persons, to his Own.

In a word, the Compact between Christ and his Father, made him a King, a
Mystical Head, and also a Surety to some certain Persons; and his being so,
made them His People, and their being his People did, upon that account, make
it both just, and equitable for him to suffer, and to be stricken for their
Transgression, which is the result of the Text, and the Thing undertook by us
to be proved.

I have now finished the several things proposed from the Text. In which having
set before you how much Christ has suffered, and all for our sakes; I hope it
will kindle the Workings of a pious Ingenuity in every one of our Breasts. For
I am sure if Christ's suffering for us were the Doctrine, Gratitude should make
our Readiness to suffer for Him the Application. Christianity I show was a
suffering Religion; and there are two sorts of suffering to which it will
certainly expose every genuine Professor of it.

1. The First is from himself. 2. The Second from the World.
1. And First it will engage him in a suffering from himself; even that Grand
suffering of Self-denial and Mortification; the sharpest and most indispensable
of all others; in which every Christian is not only to be the Sufferer, but
himself also the Executioner. He who is Christ's (says the Apostle) has
crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts. A severe Discipline
certainly, in which a Man is to act his fiercest anger upon his Dearest
Friends. For could Nature ever yet suggest to any one the hatred of his own
Flesh? the Crucifixion of his Desires, and the stabbing of his most beloved
affections? Nature indeed cannot, will not prompt it; but Christianity which
rises many strains above Nature, both must and will. The best Sacrifice to a
Crucified Savior is a Crucified Lust, a bleeding Heart, and a dying
Corruption: We cannot bring, nor indeed does Christ expect a recompense for
what he has suffered for us; yet that, which he will accept, as if it were a
recompense, is for us to deal cruelly with that body of Sin, which has caused
the acting of all those Cruelties upon him. Let the Ambitious Man lay his Pride
in the dust, the Covetous Man deposite his Treasures in the Banks of Charity
and Liberality, and let the Voluptuous Epicure renonuce his Cups and his
Whores; and this will be a present to Heaven better than an whole Hecatomb: nor
could the Fruit of his Body fall so grateful a Sacrifice upon God's Altars, as
the Sin of his Soul. But it is like, the Jolly World about us will but scoff at
the Paradox of such Practices, and explode them as Madness and Melancholy: Yet
let those Sons of pleasure know, that such as scorn to be thus Melancholy in
this World, will have but little cause to be Merry in the next.

2. The other kind of suffering in which Christianity will engage a Man is from
the World. Such is the Genius and Nature of the Christian Religion, that it
must unavoidably bring him, who owns it, in the power of it, under Temporal
troubles and afflictions. In the World (says Christ) ye shall have tribulation.
And he spoke it not so much by a Spirit of Prophecy, as Philosophy: and by an
actual sight of it in its pregnant Causes. For the contrariety of the
Principles and Maxims of Christianity to those of the World, cannot but engage
Men in such practices as shall also thwart the Customs and Modes which govern
the Actions of the World. But where there is contrariety there will be
fighting, and where there is fighting the weaker, I am sure, must suffer; and
generally the Christian is so in all Worldly encounters, whose chief
Defensatives lie not in that Armor that is Sword-proof, or Bulletproof; and
who wears no Breast Plate upon, but within his Breast; that is, his Innocence,
his Conscience, and his Confidence in a Reconciled God. Suffering is a thing
which all Men abhor, and that because they are ashamed of it; and their being
so is grounded upon this Opinion; that To suffer, in the very Nature of it
seems to impeach the suffering Person, either in the Reputation of his Power,
or of his Innocence; that is, he suffers, either because he is weak and cannot
hinder it, or because he is faulty and so deserves it. But with every Christian
Christ is an abundant answer to both these Objections. For when we see
Omnipotence hanging upon the Cross, and God himself scourged and spit upon; and
when we see him who could have commanded fire from Heaven, and Legions of
Angels to his rescue, yet surrendering himself quietly to the will of his
Murderers, surely no mortal Man, who is but dirt, and worms-meat at the best,
can pretend himself too great, and too high to suffer. And again when we behold
Virtue, Innocence, and Purity more than Angelical, crucified between Thieves
and Malefactors, shall any Man whose Birth and Actions revile and speak him a
Sinner to his face, thing himself too good to come under the Cross, and to take
his share in the common Lot of Christianity? It Is not the suffering it self,
but the Cause of it, that is dishonorable. And even in the worst and most
shameful of sufferings, though the Hangman does the Execution, yet it is the
Crime alone which does the Disgrace.

Christ commands us nothing, but he enforces it with Arguments from his Person
as well as from his Word; and it is well if we can make a due use of them. For
God knows how soon he may call us from our easy Speculations, and Theories of
Suffering to the Practical Experience of it. How soon he may draw us forth for
Persecution and the Fiery trial. Only this we may be sure of, that if these
things be brought upon us for His honor, it will be for Ours too to endure
them. And be our distresses never so great, our calamities never so strange,
and unusual, yet we have both our Savior's Example to direct, and his Promise
to support us, who has left it upon record in his Everlasting Gospel, That if
we suffer with Him, we shall also Reign with Him.

To Whom therefore be Rendered and Ascribed, as is most due, all Praise,
Mighty, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen. A SERMON Upon
the Resurrection, Preached On Easter Day, 1667.

ACTS II.24. (...).

Whom God has raised up, having loosed the Pains of Death: because it was not
possible that He should be holden of it.


IT is of Infinite Concern to Mankind, both as to their Welfare in this World
and the next, to preserve in their Minds, a full Belief of a Future Estate of
Happiness, or Misery, into which, according to the Quality of their Actions
here, they must for ever be disposed of hereafter. The Experience of all Ages
having found the Insufficiency of bare humane Restraints to Control the
Audacious Sinfulness of some Tempers and Dispositions, without holding them
under the Awe of this Persuasion. From which, though some by much and long
Sinning, and Preverse Ratiocinations caused thereby, have in a great Measure
disintangled their Consciences, yet these are but few and inconsiderable
compared with the rest of the World, in whose Minds, Education, and better
Principles, grafted upon the very Instincts of Nature, have fixed this
Persuasion too deep to be ever totally rooted out. And it is from the
Victorious Influence of this that the Common Peace of the World has been
maintained against those bold Invasions, which the Corruption of Man's Nature
would otherwise continually make upon it. But now as highly necessary as it is
for Men to believe such a Future Estate, yet it must be acknowledged, that with
the Generality of the World this Belief has stood hitherto upon very false, or,
at the best, very weak Foundations; and consequently, that it is of no small
Import to state and settle it upon Better. For the doing of which the most
effectual ways, I conceive, may be these Two.

1. By Revelation. 2. By Exemplification.
First, As to the first whereof, it must needs be, either by an Immediate
Declaration of this great Truth (not discoverable by Reason) by a Voice from
Heaven, or by God's Inspiring some certain Select Persons with the Knowledge of
it, and afterward enabling them to Attest it to the World by Miracles. And as
this is undoubtedly sufficient in it self for such a Purpose, so Providence has
not been Wanting, partly by Revelation, and partly by Tradition thereupon, to
keep alive amongst Men some Persuasion at least of this Important Truth all
along; as appears even from those fabulous accounts and stories which the
Heathen World still Clothed, or rather Corrupted it with. Nevertheless, such
has been the Prevalence of Humane Corruption and Infidelity, as in a great
Degree to frustrate all the Impressions, that bare Revelation, or Tradition,
could make upon Men's Minds; while they chiefly governed their Belief by the
Observation of their Senses, which, from the Daily occurring Instances of
Mortality, show them, that as the Tree fell so it lay: and that no Body was
ever seen by them, to return from the Mansions of the Dead; but that, for any
thing they could find to the contrary; all passed into Dust and Rottenness, and
Perpetual Oblivion.

Secondly, The other way therefore of Convincing the World of this momentous
Truth (in comparison of which all Science and Philosophy are but Trifles) must
be by Exemplification. That is to say, by giving the World an Instance, or
Example of it, in some Person, or Persons, who having been confessedly Dead,
should revive and return to Life again. And this, one would think, should be as
full and Unexceptionable a Proof that there may be a Resurrection of Men to a
future Estate as could be desired. Nothing striking the Mind of Man so
powerfully as Instances and Examples; which make a Truth not only Intelligible,
but even Palpable; sliding it into the Understanding through the Windows of
Sense, and by the most familiar, as well as most unquestionable perceptions of
the Eye. And accordingly, this Course God thought fit to take in the
Resurrection of Christ; by which he Condescended to give the World the greatest
satisfaction, that Infidelity it self could rationally insist upon: Howbeit,
notwithstanding so plain an Address both to Men's Reason and Sense too, neither
has this Course, proved so successful for Convincing of the World of a
Resurrection from the Dead, and a future Estate consequent thereupon, but that
Unbelief has been still putting in its objections against it. For it is not, I
confess, the Interest of such as Live ill in this World, to believe that there
shall be another; or that they shall be sensible of any Thing, after Death has
once done its Work upon them: and therefore let Truth, and Scripture, and even
Sense it self, say what they will for a Resurrection, Men, for ought appears,
will for ever square their Belief to their Desires, and their Desires to their
Corruptions; so that (as we find it in the 16 th of Luke and last v.) though
they should even see one rise from the Dead they would hardly be persuaded of
their own Resurrection. Such a sad and deplorable hardness of Heart, have Men
Sinned themselves into, that nothing shall convince them but what first pleases
them, be it never so much a Delusion. Nevertheless the most Wise and Just God
is not so to be mocked, who knows, that by Raising Christ from the Dead he has
done all that rationally can, or ought to be done for the Convincing of
Mankind, that there shall be a Resurrection; whether they will be Convinced by
it, or no. But now, if after all it should be asked, How is Christ's
Resurrection a Proof that the rest of Mankind shall rise from the Dead too? I
answer, That considered indeed as a bare Instance, or Example, it proves no
more, than that there may be such a Thing; since the same Infinite Power which
effected the One may as well effect the Other; but then, if we consider it as
an Argument, and a Confirmation of that Doctrine (whereof the Assertion of a
General Resurrection makes a principal part) I affirm that so taken it does not
only prove, that such a Thing may be, but also, That it actually shall be; and
that as certainly, as it is Impossible for the Divine Power to set its seal to
a Lie by ratifying an Imposture with such a Miracle: And thus, as Christ's
Resurrection irrefragably proves the Resurrection of the rest of Mankind, so it
no less proves Christ himself to have been the Messiah; for that, having all
along affirmed himself to be so, he made good the Truth of what he had so
affirmed by his miraculous rising again, and so gave as strong a Proof of his
Messiaship, as Infinite Power, joined with Equal Veracity, could give. And upon
this Account we have his Resurrection alleged by St. Peter for the same
Purpose, here in the Text, which was part of his Sermon to the Jews, concerning
Jesus Christ; whom he proves to be their True and long expected Messiah,
against all the Cavils of Prejudice and Unbelief, by this one invincible
Demonstration.

In the Text then we have these Three Things Considerable.

First, Christ's Resurrection and the Cause of it in these words, Whom God has
raised up.

Secondly, The manner by which it was effected, which was by loosing the Pains
of Death. And,

Thirdly, and Lastly, The Ground of it, which was its absolute Necessity,
expressed in these Words, It was not possible that He should be holden of it:
and,

1. For the first of these, The Cause of the Resurrection set forth in this
expression, Whom God has raised up. It was such an Action as proclaimed an
Omnipotent Agent, and carried the hand of God writ upon it in broad
Characters, Legible to the meanest Reason. Death is a disease which Art cannot
Cure: and the Grave a Prison which delivers back its Captives upon no humane
summons. To restore Life is only the Prerogative of him who gives it. Some
indeed have pretended by Art and Physical applications to recover the dead, but
the success has sufficiently upbraided the attempt. Physic may repair and
piece up Nature, but not Create it. Cordials, Plasters and Fomentations cannot
always stay a Life when it is going, much less can they remand it, when it is
gone. Neither is it in the Power of a Spirit or Demon good or bad to inspire a
new Life. For it is a Creation; and to Create is the incommunicable Prerogative
of a Power infinite and unlimited. Enter into a body they may, and so act and
move it after the manner of a Soul: but it is one thing to move, another to
animate a Carcass. You see the Devil could fetch up nothing of Samuel at the
request of Saul, but a shadow and a Resemblance, his Countenance and his
Mantle, which yet was not enough to cover the cheat, or to palliate the
Illusion. But I suppose no body will be very importunate for any further proof
of this, That if Christ was raised, it must be God who raised him. The Angel
might indeed roll away the stone from the Sepulcher, but not turn it into a Son
of Abraham; and a less Power than that which could do so, could not effect the
Resurrection.

2. I come now to the second thing, which is to show the manner by which God
wrought this Resurrection, set forth in those Words, having loosed the Pains of
Death. An expression not altogether so clear, but that it may well require a
further explication. For it may be enquired, with what propriety God could be
said to loose the Pains of Death, by Christ's Resurrection, when those Pains
continued not till the Resurrection, but determined and expired in the Death of
his Body? Upon which ground it is, that some have affirmed, That Christ
descended into the place of the damned; where during his Body's abode in the
Grave, they say, that in his Soul he really suffered the pains of Hell; and
this not unsutably to some Ancient Copies, which read it not (...) the Pains of
Death, but (...) the pains of Hell; and this also with much seeming consonance
to that Article of the Creed in which Christ is said to have descended into
hell. But to this I answer, That Christ suffered not any such pains in Hell, as
the forementioned opinion would pretend, which we may demonstrate from this,
That if Christ suffered any of those pains during His abode in the Grave, then
it was either in his Divine Nature, or in his Soul, or in his Body: But the
Divine Nature could not suffer, or be tormented, as being wholly impassible:
Nor yet could he suffer in his Soul; for as much as in the very same day of his
Death, that passed into Paradise, which surely is no place of pain: Nor Lastly,
in his Body, for that being Dead, and Consequently for the time bereaved of all
Sense, could not be capable of any Torment. And then, for answer to what was
alleged from the Ancient Copies, it is to be observed that the word (...)
(which some render Hell,) indifferently signifies also the Grave, and a state
of Death. And Lastly, for that Article of the Creed in which there is mention
made of Christ's descent into Hell, there are various expositions of it, but
the most rational and agreeable is, that it means His abode in the grave and
under the State of Death three Days and three nights, or rather three (...),
viz. part of the First, and Third, (so called by a Synechdoche of the part for
the whole) and the Second entirely: Whereby as his Burial signified his
entrance into the grave; So his descending into Hell signified his continuance
there and subjection to that Estate. And thus the three parts of his
humiliation in the last and grand Scene of it, do most appositely answer to the
three parts of his exaltation. For First, His Death answers to his Rising
again. Secondly, His Burial answers to his ascending into Heaven. And Thirdly,
His Descending into Hell, answers to his sitting at the Right hand of God, in a
State of never dying Glory, Honor and Immortality. But however, that his
descending into Hell mentioned in the Creed cannot signify his Local descent
into the place of the Damned, the former Argument disproving his suffering the
Pains of Hell, will by an easy Change of the Terms sufficiently evince this
also. For First, Christ could not descend according to His Divine Nature; since
that which is Infinite and fills all places could not acquire any new place.
And as for his Soul, that was in Paradise, and his body was laid in the Grave;
and being so, what part of Chirst could descend into Hell, (the whole Christ
being thus disposed of) needs a more than Ordinary apprehension to conceive.

We are therefore in the next place to see, how we can make out the Reason of
this Expression upon some other and better ground. In order to which, it is
very observable, that the same word which in the Greek Text is rendered by
(...), and in the English by Pains, in the Hebrew signifies not only pain, but
also a See Dr. Hammond's Annot. on the place.
cord or band, according to which it is very easy and proper to conceive, that
the Resurrection discharged Christ from the bands of Death: besides that this
rendition of the Word seems also most naturally to agree with the genuine
meaning of some other words in the same verse; as of (...) having loosed, which
is properly applicable to bands and not to pains; as also of (...), which
signifies properly to be bound with some cord or band; So that undoubtedly this
exposition would give the whole verse a much more natural and apposite
Construction, and withal remove the diffiulty. But

Secondly, Because the Evangelist St. Luke follows the Translation of the
Septuagint, (who little minding the Hebrew pointings rendered the Word (...) not
by (...) Cords or Bands but by (...) Pains) we are therefore not to baulk so
great an Authority, but to see how the Scheme of the Text may be made clear,
and agreeable, even to this Exposition,

To this therefore I answer,

First, That the Words contain in them an Hebraism, viz. the pains of death,
for a painful death; as it is said, Matthew. 24.15. The abomination of
desolation, for an abominable desolation; and so the Resurrection loosed Christ
from a painful Death, not indeed painful in sensu Composito, as if it were so
at the time of his release from it, but in a divided sense (as the Logicians
speak) it loosed him from a Continuance under that Death; which, relating to
the Time of his suffering it, was so painful.

2. But Secondly, I answer further. That though the pains of Death ceased long
before the Resurrection, so that this could not in strictness of sense be said
to remove them: yet, taking in a Metonymy of the Cause for the Effect, the
Pains of Death might be properly said to have been loosed, in the Resurrection,
because that Estate of Death into which Christ was brought by those foregoing
pains was then conquered and completely Triumphed over. Captivity under Death
and the Grave was the Effect and Consequent of those Pains, and therefore the
same Deliverance which discharged Christ from the one might not improperly be
said to loose Him from the other. And thus Christ was no sooner bound, but
within a little time he was loosed again. He was not so much buried, as for a
while deposited in the Grave for a small inconsiderable space; So that even in
this respect he may not inelegantly be said to have tasted of Death; for a
taste is transient, short, and quickly past. God rescued him from that Estate,
as a Prey from the Mighty and a Captive from the strong: and though he was in
the very Iaws of Death, yet he was not devoured. Corruption, the common Lot of
Mortality, seized not on him. Worms and Putrefaction durst not approach him.
His Body was Sacred and inviolable; as sweet under ground as above it, and in
Death it self retaining One of the highest Privileges of the Living.

3. Come we now to the Last and principal thing proposed; namely, The Ground of
Christ's Resurrection, which was its absolute Necessity, expressed in these
Words, Because it was not possible that He should be holden of it: and that
according to the strictest and most received sense of the word [ Possible]. For
it was not only Par and aequum, that Christ should not always be detained under
Death, because of his Innocence, (as Grotius precariously, and to serve an
Hypothesis, would have the word (...) here signify) but it was absolutely
necessary that he should not, and impossible that he should continue under the
Bands of Death, from the Peculiar Condition of his Person, as well as upon
several other Accounts. And accordingly this Impossibility was founded upon
these Five Things.

1. The Union of Christ's Humane Nature to the Divine. 2. God's Immutability.
3. His Justice. 4. The Necessity of Christ's being believed upon. 5. And
Lastly, the Nature of his Priesthood.
First of all then, The Hypostatical Union of Christ's Humane Nature to His
Divine, rendered a perpetual Duration under Death absolutely impossible. For how
could that which was united to the Great Source and Principle of Life be
finally prevailed over by Death, and pass into an Estate of perpetual darkness
and oblivion? Even while Christ's body was divided from his Soul, yet it ceased
not to maintain an intimate indissolvable Relation to his Divinity. It was
assumed into the same Person; for according to the Creed of Athanasius, As the
Soul and Body make one Man; so the Divine Nature and the Humane make One
Christ. And if so, is it imaginable that the Son of God could have one of his
Natures rent wholly from his Person? His Divinity (as it were) buoyed up his
sinking Humanity; and preserved it from a total Dissolution: for, as while the
Soul continues joined to the Body, (still speaking in sensu composito) Death
cannot pass upon it; for, as much as that is the proper Effect of their
Separation; So, while Christ's Manhood was retained in a Personal conjunction
with His Godhead, the bands of death were but feeble and insignificant, like
the Withs and Cords upon Sampson, while he was inspired with the mighty
Presence, and Assistance of God's Spirit.

It was possible indeed that the Divine Nature might for a while suspend its
supporting influence, and so deliver over the Humane Nature to pain and death,
but it was impossible for it to let go the relation it bore to it. A Man may
suffer his Child to fall to the ground, and yet not wholly quit his hold of
him, but still Keep it in his power to recover, and lift him up at his
pleasure. Thus the Divine Nature of Christ did for a while hide it self from
his Humanity, but not desert it; put it into the Chambers of death, but not
lock the Everlasting Doors upon it. The Sun may be clouded and yet not
Eclipsed, and Eclipsed but not stopped in his Course, and much less forced out
of his Orb. It is a Mystery to be admired, that any thing belonging to the
Person of Christ should suffer, but it is a Paradox to be exploded that it
should perish. For surely that Nature which diffusing it self throughout the
Universe communicates an enlivening Influence to every part of it, and quickens
the least spire of grass according to the measure of its Nature, and the
proportion of its capacity, would not wholly leave a Nature assumed into its
Bosom, and, what is more, into the very Unity of the Divine Person, breathless
and inanimate, and dismantled of its Prime and Noblest Perfection. For Life is
so high a Perfection of Being, that in this respect the least Fly or Mite is a
more noble Being than a Star. And God has expressly declared himself, not the
God of the Dead, but of the Living: and this in respect of the very Persons of
Men; but how much more with reference to what belongs to the Person of his Son?
For when Natures come to Unite so near, as mutually to interchange Names and
Attributes, and to verify the Appellation by which God is said to be Man, and
Man to be God; surely Man so privileged and advanced, cannot for ever lie under
Death, without an insufferable invasion upon the entireness of that Glorious
Person, whose Perfection is as inviolable, as it is incomprehensible.

2. The Second Ground of the Impossibility of Christ's continuance under Death,
was that Great and Glorious Attribute of God, His Immutability. Christ's
Resurrection was founded upon the same bottom with the consolation and
Salvation of Believers, expressed in that full declaration made by God of
Himself. Mala. 3.6. I the Lord change not: therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not
consumed. Now the Immutability of God, as it had an influence upon Christ's
Resurrection, was Twofold.

First, In respect of his Decree or Purpose. Secondly, In respect of his Word
or Promise.
And First for his Decree. God had from all Eternity designed this, and sealed
it by an irreversible Purpose. For can we imagine that Christ's Resurrection
was not decreed as well as his Death and sufferings? and these in the 23. v. of
this Chapter are expressly said, to have been determined by God. It is a known
rule in Divinity, that whatsoever God does in Time that He purposed to do from
Eternity; for there can be no new Purposes in God: since he who takes up a new
purpose, does so because he sees some ground to induce him to such a purpose,
which he did not see before: but this can have no place in an Infinite
knowledge, which by one Comprehensive Intuition sees all things as Present,
before ever they come to pass. So that there can be no new Emergency that can
alter the Divine Resolutions. And therefore it having been Absolutely purposed
to raise Christ from the Dead, his Resurrection was as fixed and Necessary, as
the Purpose of God was Irrevocable. A Purpose which Commenced from Eternity,
and was declared in the very Beginnings of Time; a Purpose not to be Changed
nor so much as bent, and much less broke, by all the Created Powers in Heaven
and Earth, and in Hell besides. For though indeed Death is a great Conqueror,
and his Bands much too strong for Nature and Mortality: Yet when over-matched
by a Decree, This Conqueror, as old as he has grown in Conquest, must surrender
back his spoils, unbind his Captives, and in a word even Death it self must
receive its Doom. From all which it is manifest, That where there is a Divine
Decree, there is always an Omnipotence to second it; and Consequently, That by
the Concurrence of Both no less a Power was employed to raise Christ out of the
Grave, than that which first raised the World it self out of Nothing.

2. Let us consider God's immutability in respect of his Word and Promise, for
these also were engaged in this affair. In what a clear Prophecy was this
foretold, and dictated by that Spirit, which could not lie? Psalm 16.10. Thou
shall not suffer Thy Holy One to see corruption. And Christ also had frequently
foretold the same of himself. Now when God says a thing, he gives his Veracity
in pawn to see it fully performed. Heaven and Earth may pass away sooner than
one Iota of a Divine Promise fall to the ground. Few things are recorded of
Christ, but the rear of the Narrative is still brought up with this; That such
a thing was done, That it might be fullfilled what was spoken by such, or such
a Prophet; Such a firm, unshaken, adamantine connection is there between a
Prophecy and its accomplishment. All things that are written in the Prophets
concerning Me (says Christ) must come to pass. And surely then the most
Illustrious Passage that concerned him could not remain under an uncertainty
and contingency of event. So that, What is most Emphatically said concerning
the persevering obstinacy and Infidelity of the Jews, John 12.39, 40. That they
could not believe, because, that Esaias had said, that God blinded their Eyes,
and hardened their Hearts, that they should not see with their Eyes, nor
understand with their Hearts, and so be converted and He should heal them, The
same, I affirm, may with as great an Emphasis, and a much greater clearness to
our Reason, be affirmed of Christ, that therefore Death could not hold him,
because the Kingly Prophet had long before sung the Triumphs of His glorious
Resurrection in the forementioned Prediction. In a Word, whatsoever God
purposes or promises, passes from Contingent and merely Possible into Certain
and Necessary: and whatsoever is Necessary, the contrary of it is so far
Impossible.

But when I say that the Divine decree or promise imprints a Necessity upon
things; it may to prevent misapprehension be needful to Explain what kind of
Necessity this is, that so the liberty of second Causes be not thereby wholly
cashiered and took away. For this therefore, we are to observe that the Schools
distinguish of a Twofold necessity Physical and Logical, or Causal and
Consequential; which Terms are Commonly thus explained; viz. That Physical or
Causal Necessity is, when a thing by an Efficient, Productive Influence
certainly and naturally causes such an Effect: and in this sense neither the
Divine Decree nor Promise makes things necessary; for neither the decree nor
promise, by it self produces or effects the Thing decreed or promised; nor
exerts any active influence upon Second Causes so as to impell them to do any
thing; but in point of Action are wholly ineffective. Secondly, Logical or
Consequential Necessity is, when a thing does not efficiently cause an Event,
but yet by certain infallible Consequence does infer it. Thus the
foreknowledge of any Event, if it be true and certain, does certainly and
necessarily infer, that there must be such an event: for as much as the
certainty of knowledge depends upon the certainty of the thing known. And in
this sense it is, that God's decree and promise give a necessary Existence to
the thing decreed or promised, that is to say, they infer it by a necessary
infallible consequence: So that it was as impossible for Christ not to rise
from the Dead, as it was for God absolutely to decree and promise a thing, and
yet for that thing not to come to pass.

The Third Reason of the Impossibility of Christ's detention under a State of
Death, was from the Justice of God. God in the whole procedure of Christ's
sufferings must be considered as a Judge exacting, and Christ as a Person
paying down a recompense or satisfaction for Sin. For though Christ was as pure
and undefiled with the least spot of Sin as purity and innocence it self: yet
he was pleased to make himself the greatest Sinner in the World by Imputation
and rendering himself a surety responsible for our debts. For as it is said, 2
Cor. 5.21. He who knew no Sin was made Sin for us. When the Justice of God was
lifting up the Sword of Vengeance over our Heads, Christ snatched us away from
the blow, and substituted his Own Body in our Room, to receive the whole stroke
of that dreadful Retribution inflicted by the Hand of an Angry Omnipotence.

But now, as God was pleased so to comport with his Justice, as not to put up
the injury done it by Sin without an Equivalent compensation; so this being
once paid down that proceeding was to cease. The Punishment due to Sin was
Death, which being paid by Christ, Divine Justice could not any longer detain
him in his Grave. For what had this been else but to keep him in Prison after
the debt was paid? Satisfaction disarms Justice and payment cancells the Bond.
And that which Christ exhibited was full measure pressed down and running over,
even adequate to the nicest proportions, and the most exact demands of that
severe and unrelenting Attribute of God. So that his Release proceeded not upon
Terms of Courtesy but of Claim. The gates of Death flew open before him out of
duty; and even that Justice which was Infinite, was yet circumscribed within
the inviolable limits of what was due. Otherwise guilt would even grow out of
expiation, the reckoning be enflamed by being paid, and punishment it self not
appease but exasperate Justice. Revenge indeed in the hand of a sinful mortal
Man is for the most part vast, unlimited and unreasonable; but Revenge in the
Hands of an Infinite Justice is not so Infinite as to be also Indefinite, but
in all its actings proceeds by Rule and Determination, and cannot possibly
surpass the bounds put to it by the Merits of the Cause, and the Measure of the
Offense. It is not the effect of mere choice and will, but springs out of the
unalterable relation of Equality between Things and Actions. In a word, The
same Justice of God which required him to deliver Christ to Death, did
afterward as much engage him to deliver him from it.

4. The Fourth Ground of the Impossibility of Christ's perpetual continuance
under Death was the Necessity of his being Believed in as a Savior, and the
impossibility of his being so without rising from the dead. As Christ by his
Death paid down a Satisfaction for Sin, so it was necessary that it should be
declared to the World by such Arguments as might found a Rational Belief of it;
So that Men's Unbelief should be rendered inexcusable. But how could the World
believe that he fully had satisfied for Sin, so long as they saw Death, the
known wages of Sin, maintain its full force and power over him, holding him,
like an obnoxious Person, in Durance and Captivity? When a Man is once
imprisoned for debt, none can conclude the debt either paid by him or forgiven
to him, but by the release of his person. Who could believe Christ to have been
a God and a Savior while he was hanging upon the Tree? A dying, crucified God,
a Savior of the World who could not save himself, would have been exploded by
the Universal consent of Reason as an horrible Paradox and absurdity. Had not
the Resurrection followed the Crucifixion, that scoff of the Jews had stood as
an unanswerable Argument against him. Mark 15.31. Himself He cannot save; and
in the 32. v. Let Him come down from the Cross, and we will believe in Him.
Otherwise, surely, that which was the lowest instance of humane weakness and
mortality could be no competent demonstration of a Deity. To save is the effect
of Power, and of such a Power as prevails to a complete victory and a Triumph.
But it is expressly affirmed, 2 Cor. 13.4. That Christ was crucified through
weakness. Death was too hard for his humanity, and bore away the spoils of it
for a Time. So that, while Christ was in the Grave, Men might as well have
expected, that a person hung in chains should come down and head an Army, as
imagine that a dead body, continuing such, should be able to Triumph over Sin
and Death, which so potently Triumphs over the Living. The discourse of the Two
Disciples going to Emmaus, and expecting no such thing as a Resurrection, was
upon that supposition hugely rational, and significant. Luke 24.21. We trusted
(said they) that this had been He who should have redeemed Israel: thereby
clearly implying that upon his Death they had let that confidence fall to the
ground together with Him. For they could not imagine that a breathless carcass
could chase away the Roman Eagles, and so recover the Kingdom and Nation of the
Jews, from under their subjection; which was the Redemption that even the
Disciples (till they were further enlightened) promised themselves from their
Messiah. But the Argument would equally, nay more strongly. hold against a
Spiritual Redemption, supposing his continuance under a State of Death, as
being a thing in it self much more difficult. For how could such an one break
the Kingdom of darkness and set his Foot upon Principalities and Powers, and
Spiritual Wickednesses in High places, Who himself fell a Sacrifice to the
wickedness of mortal Men; and remained a Captive in the lower parts of the
Earth, reduced to a Condition not only below Men's Envy, but below their very
Feet?

5. The Fifth, and Last Ground of the Impossibility of Christ's perpetual
continuance under a State of Death was the Nature of the Priesthood, which he
had took upon him. The Apostle, Heb. 8.4. says, That if He were upon Earth He
should not be a Priest. Certainly then much less could he be so, should He
continue under the Earth. The two great works of his Priesthood were to offer
Sacrifice, and then to make intercession for Sinners, correspondent to the two
works of the Mosaical Priesthood; in which the Priest first slew the Lamb, and
then with the blood of it entered into the Holy of Holies, there to appear
before God in the behalf of the People. Christ therefore after that he had
offered himself upon the Cross was to enter into Heaven, and there presenting
himself to the Father to make that Sacrifice effectual to all the Intents and
Purposes of it. Upon which Account the Apostle, to express his fitness for the
Priesthood infinitely beyond any of the Sons of Aaron, states it upon this,
Heb. 7.25. That He lives for ever to make intercession for us, and upon that
very score also is able to save to the uttermost. But surely the dead could not
intercede for the Living, nor was the Grave a Sanctum Sanctorum. Had not Christ
risen again, His blood indeed might have cried for Vengeance upon his
Murderers, but not for Mercy upon Believers. In short, It had spoke no better
things than the blood of Abel, which called for nothing but a fearful Judgment
upon the Head of him who shed it. Christ's Death merited a Redemption for the
World, but Christ while dead could not show forth the full effects of that
Redemption. He made the purchase at his Death, but He could not take Possession
till he was returned to Life. Ever since Christ ascended into Heaven, He has
been pursuing the great Work begun by him upon the Cross, and applying the
virtue of his Sacrifice to those for whom it was offered. It is affirmed by
some, and that not without great probability of Reason, That the Souls of the
Saints who dyed before Christ's resurrection did not actually enter into a
State of Complete Glory till Christ the Great Captain of their Salvation upon
his Ascension first entered into it himself, and then made way for others. So
that according to that Divine Anthem of the Church, After that he had overcome
the sharpness of death, then at length, and not till then, He opened the
Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers. And thus I have given five several reasons,
why it was not possible that a State of Death should finally prevail over
Christ, which was the thing to be proved. And I have nothing further to
recommend to your consideration, but only Two things, which the very Nature of
the Subject seems of it self to imprint upon all pious Minds.

1. The First is a Dehortation from Sin, and that indeed the strongest that can
be. For can we imagine that the Second Person in the Glorious Trinity, would
concern himself to take upon him our Flesh, and to suffer, and die, and at
length rise again, only to render us the more secure and confident in our Sins?
Would he neither see, nor endure any Corruption in his Dead Body, that we
should harbor all the Filth and Corruption imaginable in our Immortal Souls?
Did he Conquer and Triumph over Death, that we should be the Slaves and
Captives of that which is worse than Death? Christ has declared that he will
dwell in those, whom he assumes into the Society of his Mystical Body: But can
we think, that he who passed from a clean, new Sepulcher into an Heavenly
Mansion, will descend from thence to take up his Habitation in the Rotten
Sepulcher of an heart possessed and polluted with the Love of that which he
infinitely Hates? It will little avail us, That Christ rose from a Temporal
Death unless we also rise from a Spiritual. For those who do not Imitate as
well as Believe Christ's Resurrection, must expect no benefit by it.

2. Christ's Resurrection is an high and Sovereign Consolation against Death.
Death we know is the Grand Enemy of Mankind, the Merciless Tyrant over Nature,
and the King of Terrors. But, Blessed be God, Christ has given a Mortal blow to
his Power, and broke his Scepter. And if we by a through Conquest of our Sins,
and Rising from them can be but able to say, O Sin where is thy Power? We may
very Rationally and Warrantably, say thereupon, O Death where is thy Sting? So
that when we come to resign back these frail Bodies, these Vessels of Mortality
to the Dust from whence they were taken, we may yet say of our Souls as Christ
did of the Damosel whom he raised up, That she was not dead, but only Slept;
for, in like manner, we shall as certainly rise out of the Grave, and Triumph
over the dishonours of its Rottenness and Putrefaction, as we rise in the
Morning out of our Beds, with Bodies refreshed and advanced into Higher and
Nobler Perfections. For the Head being once risen, we may be sure the Members
cannot stay long behind. And Christ is already risen, and gone before, to
prepare Mansions for all those who belong to him under that High Relation, That
where He is, They (to their Eternal Comfort) may be also, rejoicing and singing
Praises and Hallelujahs to him who sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for
Ever and Ever.

To Whom Be Rendered and Ascribed, as is most due, all Glory, Might, Majesty,
and Dominion, to Eternal Ages. Amen. THE Christian Pentecost: OR, THE Solemn
Effusion of the Holy Ghost; IN THE Several Miraculous Gifts Conferred by Him
upon the Apostles, and first Christians.

Set forth in a SERMON Preached At Westminster-Abbey, 1692.

1 COR. XII.4. Now there are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit.


OUR Blessed Savior having Newly Changed his Crown of Thorns, for a Crown of
Glory, and ascending up on high took Possession of his Royal Estate and
Sovereignty; according to the Custom of Princes, is here treating with this
Lower World, (now at so great a distance from him) by his Ambassador. And, for
the greater Splendor of the Embassy, and Authority of the Message, by an
Ambassador no ways Inferior to Himself, even the Holy Ghost, the Third Person
in the Blessed Trinity, in Glory Equal, in Majesty Coeternal; and therefore
most peculiarly fit, not only as a Deputy, but as a kind of Alter Idem to
supply his Place and Presence here upon Earth: and indeed had he not been Equal
to him in the Godhead, he could no more have supplied his Place, than he could
have filled it: which we know, in the Accounts of the World, are Things
extremely different; as by sad and scandalous Experience, is too often found.

Now the sum of this his Glorious Negotiation was to Confirm, and ratify
Christ's Doctrine, to seal the New Charter of the Worlds Blessedness given by
Christ Himself, and drawn up by his Apostles: and Certainly, it was not a
greater Work first to Publish, than it was afterward to Confirm it. For
Christianity, being a Religion, made up of Truth, and Miracle, could not
Receive its Growth from any Power less than that, which first gave it its
Birth. And being withal a Doctrine Contrary to Corrupt Nature, and to those
Things, which Men most Eagerly Loved; to wit, their Worldly Interests, and
their Carnal Lusts, it must needs have quickly decayed, and withered, and dyed
away, if not Watered by the same Hand of Omnipotence by which it was first
planted.

Nothing could keep it up, but such a standing, mighty Power, as should be able
upon all occasions to Countermand, and Control Nature; such an one, as should,
at the same time, both Instruct and Astonish; and baffle the Disputes of Reason
by the Obvious overpowering Convictions of Sense.

And this was the Design of the Spirit's Mission. That the same Holy Ghost, who
had given Christ his Conception, might now give Christianity its Confirmation.
And this he did by that wonderful and various Effusion of his Miraculous Gifts
upon the first Messengers, and Propagators of this Divine Religion. For as our
Savior himself said, John 4.48. Unless you see signs and wonders you will not
believe. So that Sight was to introduce Belief: and accordingly, the first
Conquest, and Conviction was made upon the Eye, and from thence passed
victorious to the Heart.

This therefore was their Rhetoric, this their method of Persuasion. Their
Words were Works; Divinity and Physic went together: They Cured the Body, and
thereby Convinced the Soul: They Conveyed and enforced all their Exhortations,
not by the Arts of Eloquence, but by the Gift of Tongues; These were the
Speakers, and Miracle the Interpreter.

Now in Treating of these Words, I shall Consider these Three Things.

First, What those Gifts were, which were conferred by the Spirit both upon the
Apostles, and first Professors of Christianity. Secondly, What is Imported, and
to be understood by their Diversity; and Thirdly, And Lastly, What are the
Consequences of their Emanation from one and the same Spirit.
First, And first, for the first of them. These Gifts are called in the
Original (...), that is to say, Acts of Grace or favor; and signify here
certain Qualities and Perfections, which the Spirit of God freely bestowed upon
Men, for the better Enabling them, to Preach the Gospel, and to settle the
Christian Religion in the World: and accordingly we will Consider them under
that known Dichotomy, or Division, by which they stand divided into Ordinary,
and Extraordinary.

And first, for the Ordinary Gifts of the Spirit, these he conveys to us by the
mediation of our own Endeavors. And as He, who both makes the Watch, and Winds
up the Wheels of it, may not Improperly be said to be the Author of its motion,
so God, who first Created and since sustains the Powers and Faculties of the
Soul, may justly be called the Cause of all those Perfections, and
Improvements, which the said faculties shall attain unto by their Respective
Operations. For that which gives the form, gives also the Consequents of that
form; and the Principle, with all its appendant Actions, is to be referred to
the same Donor.

But God forbid, that I should determine God's Title to our Actions barely in
his giving us the Power and Faculty of Acting. Durandus indeed, an Eminent
Schoolman held so, and so must Pelagius, and his followers hold too, if they
will be True to, and abide by their own Principles.

But undoubtedly, God does not only give the Power, but also vouchsafes an
Active Influence, and Concurrence to the production of every particular Action,
so far, as it has either a Natural, or a Moral goodness in it.

And therefore, in all acquired Gifts, or Habits, such as are those of
Philosophy, Oratory, or Divinity, we are properly (...) Co-workers with God.
And God ordinarily gives them to none, but to such as Labor hard for them.
They are so his Gifts, that they are also our own Acquisitions. His assistance,
and our own study are the joint, and adequate Cause of these Perfections. And
to imagine the Contrary, is all one, as if a Man should think to be a Scholar,
barely by his Master's Teaching, without his own Learning. In all these Cases,
God is ready to do his Part, but not to do both His own, and ours too.

Secondly, The other sort of the Spirit's Gifts are Extraordinary. Which are so
absolutely and entirely from God, that the Soul, into which they are Conveyed,
Contributes nothing to the obtaining of them but a bare Reception: As when you
pour some generous Wine, or Liquor into a Cask or Vessel, that affords nothing
to its own fullness, but a mere Capacity; the rest it owes wholly to the
Liberal hand that infused it. And, no doubt, from an Allusion to this, such
endowments are said to be by way of Infusion from the Holy Ghost.

Of which kind were the Gift of Miracles, the Gift of Healing, the Gift of
Prophecy and of Speaking with Tongues; which great things might indeed be the
object of Men's Admiration, and sometimes also the motive of their Envy, but
never the Effect, or Purchase of their own endeavors.

Now concerning these Gifts we must observe also, that there was no small
difference amongst them, as to the manner of their inexistence in the Persons
who had them.

For one of them, to wit the Gift of Tongues, after its first Infusion by the
Spirit, might be in a Man by habitual Inherence, as a standing Principle, or
Power Residing in the Soul, and enabling it upon any Occasion to express it
self in several Languages. There being no difference between the Acquired and
the Supernatural knowledge of Tongues, as to the Nature and Quality of the
Things themselves, but only in respect of their first obtainment, that one is
by industrious Acquisition, the other by Divine Infusion.

But then for the Gifts of healing the Sick, raising the Dead, and the like; in
as much, as these were Immediate Emanations from, and peculiar Effects of an
Infinite and Divine Power. Such a Power could not be made habitually to inhere,
and reside in the Apostles; nor indeed in any Created Being whatsoever. But
only by an Exterior assistance, the Power of God was ready at hand, upon
Special, and Emergent Occasions, at their Invocation, or Word, (as God should
think fit) to produce such Miraculous effects: For if this Power of healing had
been habitually Lodged in the Apostles, so that they might exert, and make use
of it when they pleased, it will be hard to give a Satisfactory Reason, why St.
Paul should leave Trophimus at Miletum sick, as we find he did, 2 Timothy 4.20.

And then Lastly, for the Gift of Prophecy, and foretelling future Events;
neither was this in the Soul by constant Inhes^on, and habitual Abode; but (as
we may not unfitly express it) only by sudden Strictures, by Transient
Immissions, and Representations of the Ideas of Things future, to the
Imagination. In a word, It was in the mind not as an Inhabitant, but as a
Guest; that is, by intermittent Returns and Ecstasies, by Occasional Raptures
and Revelations; as is clear from what we read of the Prophets in the Old
Testament. And thus much I thought good to discourse of the Nature of these
Gifts; and to show, what kind of Things they were; how they Qualified, and
affected the Apostles, and Primitive Christians, in the Exercise of them; that
so, we may not abuse our Understandings by an empty Notion of the Word, without
a clear and distinct Apprehension of the Thing.

And here, I doubt not, but some will be apt to enquire, how long these
extraordinary, and miraculous Gifts Continued in the Church? For the Resolution
of which, the very Nature of the Thing it self will suggest thus much, That the
Conferring of these Gifts, being in order to the Establishment of a Church, and
the settling of a New Religion in the World, their Duration was to be
proportioned to the Need, which that New Religion had of such Credentials, and
Instruments of Confirmation. For when Christianity first appeared in the World,
it found it under the mighty Prejudice, and Prepossession of Two Contrary
Religions, but both of them Equally bent, and set against That, to wit,
Gentilism, and Judaism. Which Prejudices nothing could Conquer, but the Arm of
Omnipotence it self (as it were) made bare before them, in such stupendous
Works, as could not but Convince them to their face, that it was a Religion,
which came from God. But when these Prejudices were once Removed, by the Actual
Entertainment of, and Submission to the Christian Faith, there could not be the
same use or need of Miracles then, which there was before. For still we must
remember, That the State of a Church in its Infancy and First Beginnings, and
in its Maturity and Continuance is very different, and Consequently that the
Exigencies of it, under each Condition, must equally differ too. It is a much
harder work first to advance, and put a thing into Motion, than to Continue and
keep up that motion being once begun. For though indeed (as we observed before)
there is an Omnipotence required to maintain as well, as first to set up the
Christian Church, yet it does not therefore follow that this Omnipotence must
still exert it self to the same Degree, and after the same way, in One Case,
that it does in the Other. Wherefore the use, and Purpose of Miracles being
Extraordinary, and to serve only for a time; they were not by their Continuance
to thwart their Design, nor to be made Common by their Being Perpetual. The
Exact period of their Duration can hardly be assigned; but manifest it is from
all History that they (or at least some of them) Continued long after the
Apostles time; as we may gather from the several Ages of those Eminent Fathers
and Christian Writers, who have so freely given in their Testimony Concerning
the ejecting of evil Spirits from Persons Possessed, as very Common in their
time in the Christian Church; A Power no doubt Supernatural, and therefore
miraculous: such as were Justin Martyr, who lived something before the middle
of the Second Century, and Irenaeus who lived about Thirty Years after, and
Tertullian who lived in the latter End of the Second, and the beginning of the
Third, and Minutius Felix thereabouts, and St. Cyprian about the middle of the
Third, and Lactantius about the beginning of the Fourth. All these, I say,
according to the Times they lived in, speak of this Power of Casting out Devils
(but more Especially Tertullian in the Twenty third Chapter of his Apologetick)
with so much Assurance, that it must needs prove it to have been very frequent
amongst the Christians in those days; As several passages in those formentioned
Writers particularly declare: Which might easily be produced and Rehearsed by
us, could we spare Room enough for them in so short a discourse.

But however, certain it is, that now these Extraordinary and Miraculous Powers
are ceased, and that upon as good Reason, as at first they began. For when the
Spiritual Building is Consummate, and not only the Corner Stone laid, but the
Superstructure also finished, to what Purpose should the Scaffolds any longer
stand? Which when they leave off to Contribute to the Building, can serve for
little else but to upbraid the folly of the Builder. Besides, that by so long a
Continuance Miracle would almost turn into Nature; or, at least look very like
it; the Rarities of Heaven would grow Cheap, and Common, and, (which is very
preposterous to Conceive), they would be Miracles without a Wonder.

The Papists indeed, who having swallowed, and digested the Belief of so many
Monstrous Contradictions, would do but very unwisely, and disagreeably to
themselves, if, for ever after, they should stick at any advantageous
Absurdity; these, I say hold, that the Gift of Miracles still continues
ordinary in their Church; and that the Christian Religion has still the same
need of such Miraculous Confirmations, as it had at first.

Where, if by the Christian they mean their own Popish Religion, I am so fully
of their mind, that I think, there is need, not only of Daily, but even of
hourly, or rather continual Miracles, to Confirm it; if it were but in that one
single Article of Transubstantiation. But then, we know whose Badge, and
Character the Scripture makes it, to Come in Lying Wonders; and we know also,
that Lying Wonders are true Impostures: and theirs are of that Nature, that the
fallacy is so gross, and the Cheat so Transparent in them, that, as it hardens
the Jews, and Mahumetans with a desperate, Invincible Prejudice against
Christianity; as a Thing as false as those Miracles, which they see it
recommended by; so, I am Confident, that it Causes many Christians, also to
nauseate their own Religion, and to fall into secret Atheism; being Apt to
Think (as even these Impostors also pretend) that the very Miracles of the
Apostles might be of the same Nature, with those which they see daily Acted by
these Spiritual Juglers: so that hereby the grand Proof of Christianity falls
to the ground, and has no force, or hold upon Men's minds at all. Whereas our
Savior Himself laid the main Stress and Credit of his Gospel, and of his
Mission from God, upon his Miracles. The Works that I do (says He) bear Witness
of me, John 10.25. And, Believe me for my very Works sake, John 14.11. And, had
I not done amongst them the Works which no other Man did, they had not had Sin.
John 15.24. So that we see here, that the Credit of all turned upon his
Miracles, his mighty and Supernatural Works.

But as, we know, it often falls out, that, when a Man has once got the
Character of a Liar, even Truth it self is suspected, if not absolutely
disbelieved when it comes from the Mouth of such an one. So these
Miracle-Mongers ^aving alarmed the World round about t^em to a discernment of
their Tricks, when they came afterward to Preach Christianity, especially to
Infidels, and to pre^^ it upon Men's belief in the strength of those Miraculous
Works which were truly and really done by Christ; yet, since they pretend the
same of their own Works too, (which all People see through, and know to be
Lies, and Impostures) all, that they Preach of Christ, is presently looked upon
as false, and fictitious, and leaves the minds of Men locked up under a fixed,
obstinate, and impregnable Infidelity. Such a fatal blow has the Legerdemain of
those Wretches given to the Christian Religion, and such jealousies have they
raised in some Men's Thoughts against it, by their false Miracles and Fabulous
Stories of the Romantic feats of their Pretended Saints. In all which there is
nothing indeed strange or Miraculous, but the Impudence and Impiety of such as
report and make them, and the folly of such as can believe them.

2. Pass we now to the second Thing proposed, which is to show, what is meant
by this Diversity of Gifts, mentioned in the Text. It Imports, I conceive these
Two Things.

1. Something by way of Affirmation, which is Variety. 2. Something by way of
Negation, which is Contrariety.
1. And first, for the first of them. It imports Variety; of which Excellent
Qualification, it is hard to say, whether it makes more for Use or Ornament. It
is the very Beauty of Providence, and the Delight of the World. It is that
which keeps alive Desire, which would otherwise flag and tire, and be quickly
weary of any one single Object. It both supplies our Affections, and Entertains
our Admiration; Equally serving the Innocent Pleasures, and the Important
Occasions of Life. And now all these Advantages God would have this desirable
Quality derive even upon his Church too. In which great Body there are, and
must be several Members having their several Uses, Offices, and Stations: as in
the 28 th v. of this Chapter (where my Text is) the Apostle tells us, that God
has placed in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Preachers; after that Miracles; then Gifts of healing, helps, Governments,
Diversities of Tongues. The particular Function, and Employment of so many
parts subserving the Joint Interest, and Design of the whole. As the motion of
a Clock is a Complicated motion of so many Wheels fitly put together; and Life
it self, but the Result of so many several Operations, all issuing from, and
Contributing to the support of the same Body. The great help, and furtherance
of Action, is order; and the Parent of order is Distinction. No sense, faculty,
or Member must Encroach upon, or interfere with the Duty, and Office of
another. For as the same Apostle discourses in the two next verses, Are all
Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? Are all Workers of Miracles? Have
all the Gift of Healing? Do all Speak with Tongues? Do all Interpret? No; but
as in the Natural Body the Eye does not Speak, nor the Tongue see; so neither
in the Spiritual, is every one, who has the Gift of Prophecy, endued also with
the Gift and Spirit of Government; every one, who may speak well, and
pertinently enough upon a Text, is not therefore presently fit to rule a
Diocese; nor is a Nimble Tongue always attended with a strong and a steady
Head. If all were Preachers, who should Govern? or rather indeed, who could be
governed? If the Body of the Church were all Ear, Men would be only hearers of
the Word, and where would then be the Doers? For such, I am sure, we are most
to seek for in our days, in which, sad experience shows that Hearing of Sermons
has, with most, swallowed up and devoured the Practice of them; and manifestly
serves instead of it; rendering many Zealots amongst us, as really guilty of the
Superstition of resting in the bare Opus Operatum of this Duty, as the Papists
are, or can be Charged to be in any of their Religious Performances whatsoever.
The Apostle justly reproaches such with Itching Ears, 2 Timothy 4.3. And I cannot
see, but that the Itch in the Ear, is as bad a distemper, as in any other part
of the Body, and perhaps a Worse.

But to proceed: God has use of all the several Tempers and Constitutions of
Men, to serve the Occasions and Exigences of his Church by. Amongst which some
are of a Sanguine, Cheerful, and Debonair Disposition, having their
Imaginations, for the most part, filled and taken up with Pleasing Ideas, and
Images of Things; seldom or never Troubling their Thoughts, either by looking
too deep into them, or dwelling too long upon them. And these are not properly
framed to serve the Church either in the knotty, dark and less pleasing parts
of Religion, but are fitted rather for the Airy Joyful Offices of Devotion;
such as are praise and Thanksgiving, Iubilations, and Halleluja's; which,
though indeed not so difficult, are yet as pleasing a Work to God as any other.
For they are the Noble Employment of Saints and Angels; and a lively
resemblance of the Glorified and Beatifick State; in which all that the Blessed
Spirits do, is to rejoice in the God, who made, and saved them, to sing his
Praises, and to adore his Perfections.

Again, there are others of a melancholy, reserved and severe Temper, who think
much and Speak little; and these are the fittest to serve the Church in the
Pensive, Afflictive Parts of Religion; in the Austerities of Repentance and
Mortification, in a Retirement from the World, and a settled Composure of their
Thoughts to self-reflexion and meditation. And such also are the ablest to deal
with troubled and distressed Consciences, to meet with their doubts, and to
answer their Objections, and to ransack every Corner of their shifting, and
fallacious hearts, and, in a word, to lay before them the true State of their
Souls, having so frequently descended into, and took a strict Account of their
own. And this is so great a Work, that there are not many, whose Minds and
Tempers are Capable of it, who yet may be serviceable enough to the Church in
other Things. And it is the same Thoughtful and reserved Temper of Spirit,
which must enable others to serve the Church in the hard and controversial
parts of Religion. Which sort of Men, (though they should never rub Men's
Itching Ears from the Pulpit,) the Church can no more be without, than a
Garrison can be without Soldiers, or a City without Walls; or than a Man can
defend Himself with his Tongue, when his Enemy comes against Him with his
Sword. And therefore, great pity it is, that such as God has eminently and
peculiarly furnished, and (as it were) cut out for this service, should be cast
upon, and compelled to the Popular, Speaking, Noisy part of Divinity; it being
all one, as if, when a Town is besieged, the Governor of it, should call off a
Valiant and expert Soldier from the Walls, to sing Him a Song or Play Him a
Lesson upon the Violin at a Banquet, and then turn him out of Town, because He
could not sing and play as well as He could fight. And yet as ridiculous as
this is, it is but too like the irrational and absurd Humor of the present
Age: which thinks all sense and Worth confined wholly to the Pulpit. And many
Excellent Persons, because they cannot make a Noise with Chapter and Verse, and
Harangue it twice a Day to factious Tradesmen, and Ignorant Old Women, are
esteemed of as Nothing, and scarce Thought worthy to eat the Church's Bread.
But for all these false Notions, and wrong measures of Things and Persons, so
scandalously prevalent amongst us, Wisdom (as our Savior tells us) is and will
be justified of Her Children.

But then again, there are others besides these, who are of a Warmer and more
fervent Spirit, having much of heat, and fire in their Constitution: And God
may and does serve his Church even by such kind of Persons as these also, as
being particularly fitted to Preach the Terrifying Rigours, and Curses of the
Law to obstinate daring Sinners; Which is a Work as absolutely Necessary, and
of as high as Consequence to the good of Souls, as it is, that Men should be
driven, if they cannot be drawn off from their Sins; that they should be cut
and launced if they cannot otherwise be Cured, and that the Terrible Trump of
the last Judgment should be always Sounding in their Ears, if nothing else can
awaken them. But then, while such Persons, are thus busied in Preaching of
Judgment, it is much to be wished, that they would do it with Judgment too; and
not Preach Hell and Damnation to Sinners so, as if they were pleased with what
they preached; No; let them rather take heed, that they mistake not their own
fierce Temper for the mind of God: for some I have known to do so; and that at
such a Rate, that it was easy enough to distinguish the Humor of the Speaker
from the Nature of the Thing he spoke. Let Ministers threaten Death and
Destruction even to the very worst of Men in such a manner, that it may appear
to all their sober Hearers, that they do not desire, but fear that these
dreadful Things should come to pass: let them declare God's Wrath against the
hardened and impenitent, as I have seen a Judge Condemn a Malefactor, with
Tears in his Eyes: for surely much more should a dispenser of the Word, while
he is pronouncing the infinitely more killing Sentence of the Divine Law,
grieve with an inward, bleeding compassion for the misery of those forlorn
Wretches, whom it is like to pass upon. But I never knew any of the Geneva, or
Scotch model (which sort of Sanctified Reprobationers we abound with) either
use, or like this way of Preaching in my Life; but generally Whips and
Scorpions, Wrath and Vengeance, Fire and Brimstone, made both Top and Bottom,
Front, and Rear, First and Last of all their Discourses.

But then on the Contrary, there are others again, of a Gentler, a Softer, and
more Tender Genius; and these are full as serviceable for the Work of the
Ministry, as the former sort could be, though not in the same way; as being
much fitter to represent the Meekness of Moses, than to Preach his Law; to bind
up the broken hearted, to speak Comfort, and Refreshment to the weary, and to
take off the Burden from the heavy Laden. Nature it self seems peculiarly to
have fitted such for the dispensations of Grace. And when they are once put
into the Ministry, they are (as it were) marked and singled out by Providence,
to do those benign Offices to the Souls of Men, which Persons of a rougher, and
more vehement Disposition are by no means so fit, or able to do. These are the
Men, whom God pitches upon for the Heralds of his Mercy, with a peculiar
Emphasis and felicity of Address, to proclaim and issue out the pardons of the
Gospel, to close up the wounds which the Legal Preacher had made, to bath and
supple them with the Oil of Gladness; and in a word, to Crown the sorrows of
Repentance with the Joys of Assurance. And thus we have seen how the Gospel
must have both its Boanarges and its Barnabas, Sons of Thunder, and Sons of
Consolation: the first (as it were,) to Cleanse the Air and Purge the Soul,
before it can be fit for the Refreshments of a Sunshine, the Beams of Mercy,
and the Smiles of a Savior.

David had shown himself but a mean Psalmist, had his skill reached no further
than to one Note: and therefore, Psalm. 101. 1 st v. we have him Singing of
Judgment as well as Mercy; and so raising the sweetest Harmony out of the
seeming discord of the most disagreeing Attributes. There can be no Composition
in any thing, without some multiplicity and diversity of Parts: and therefore
we have a Catalogue of those Gifts, which did (as it were) compound and make up
the Primitive Church in the 8, 9, and 10 th verses of this 12 th Chapter of the
1 st to the Corinthians. Where the Apostle tells us, That to one is given the
Word of Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge, to another Faith; with many
more such like Gifts there reckoned up; and indeed so many and various were the
Gifts poured out by the Spirit of God upon the first Preachers of the Gospel,
that there is need almost of the Gift of Tongues to rehearse them.

Of which great Variety, as we have hitherto observed the Use, so it is
intended also for the Ornament of the Church. I say Ornament; for I cannot
persuade my self, that God ever designed his Church for a Rude, Naked,
Unbeautified Lump; or lay to the Foundations of Purity in the Ruins of
decency. The Entrance and Gate of Solomon's Temple was called Beautiful: and,
as there were several Orders of Priests and Levites belonging to it, so they
had their several Offices, their several Chambers and Apartments in that
Temple. It was a kind of Representation of Heaven; in which, our Savior tells
us, there are many Mansions. But behold! there are Wiser, much Wiser, than
Solomon amongst us, who will have it quite otherwise in the Christian Church.
Nothing of Order or Distinction, nothing of Splendor or Dress must be allowed
of here. No, they are all for lying in the Dust before God, (as their word is,)
and therefore will have nothing but Dust and Nastiness for the Churches
Furniture: To attempt a Confutation of such Persons would be superfluous: and
indeed I have no more to say for those, who contend for such a sordid, and mean
Condition of the Church, but, that in this, they do not so much speak their
Devotion as their Education: it being generally found that a slovenly way of
breeding disposes Men to a kind of slovenly Religion.

Much, might be spoken by way of Analogy between the Internal, and External,
the Spiritual and the Material Ornaments of the Church; But both of them serve
to dress, and set off the Spouse of Christ; the first to recommend Her to his
own Eyes, and the latter to the Eyes of the World.

Where would be the Beauty of the Heavens themselves, if it were not for the
multitude of the Stars, and the Variety of their Influences? and then for the
Earth here below and those who dwell therein, certainly we might live, without
the Plumes of Peacocks, and the Curious Colors of Flowers; without so many
different Odors, so many several Tastes, and such an Infinite diversity of Airs
and Sounds. But where would then be the glory and luster of the Universe? the
flourish and gaiety of Nature? if our Senses were forced to be always poring
upon the same Things, without the Diversion of Change, and the quickening Relish
of Variety? And now, when matters stand thus, may we not justly say, If God so
clothes the Fields, so paints the Flowers, and paves the very places we Tread
upon, and with such curiosity provides for all our senses, which yet are but
the Servants, and under Officers of the Soul; shall He not much more provide
for the Soul it self and his own service thereby, in the Glorious Economy, and
great Concernments of the Church? and moreover, does not such a Liberal
Effusion of Gifts equally Argue both the Power and the Bounty of the Giver?
Number, and multitude are the signs of Riches, and the materials of Plenty; And
therefore though Unity in the Government and Communion of the Church is indeed
a great blessing, yet in the Gifts and endowments of it, it would be but Penury
and a Curse. But

Secondly, As this diversity of the Spirits Gifts imports Variety, so it
excludes Contrariety. Different they are, but they are not opposite. There is
no Jarr, no Combat, or Contest between them, but all are disposed of with
mutual Agreements, and a happy subordination: For as Variety adorns, so
Opposition destroys; Things most different in Nature, may yet be united in the
same design; and the most distant Lines, may meet an^ Clasp in the same Center.

As for Instance, One would Think that the Spirit of Meekness, and the Spirit
of Zeal stood at that distance of Contrariety, as to defy all Possibility
either of likeness, or Reconcilement; and yet (as we have already shown) they
both may and do equally serve and carry on the great End and business of
Religion. And the same Spirit, which Baptizes with Water, Baptizes also with
Fire. It is an Art to attain the same End by several Methods: and to make
things of a quite contrary Operation, to concur in one and the same Effect.

Come we now to the third and last Thing proposed from the Words; which is to
show, What are the Consequences of this Emanation of so many and different
Gifts from one and the same Spirit: I shall instance in Four, directly, and
naturally deducible from it: As

First, If the Spirit Works such Variety of Gifts, and those in so vast a
Multitude, and for the most part above the force of Nature, certainly it is but
Rational to Conclude. That it is a Being superior to Nature, and so may justly
Challenge to it self a Deity. There have been several who have impugned the
Deity of the Holy Ghost, though not in the same manner; but the Principal of
them come within these two sorts.

1. Macedonius and his followers, who allowed Him to be a Person, but denied
his Deity. Affirming Him to be the Chief Angel, the supreme and most Excellent
of those Blessed Spirits, employed by God in Administering the Affairs of the
Church, and Conveying good suggestions to the minds of Men, and for that cause
to be called the Holy Spirit, and sometimes simply and (...), or by way of
Eminence The Spirit. And the same was held also by one Biddle an Heretic of
some Note here in England, a little before the Restoration. That is to say
while Confusion and Toleration gave Countenance to almost all Religions, except
the True. 2. But secondly, Socinus and his School, deny both the Deity of the
Holy Ghost, and his Personal subsistence too; not granting Him to be a Person,
but only the Power of God. To wit, That Vis or (...), by which he effects, or
produces Things. And, amongst those, who assert this, none have given such bold
strokes at the Deity of the Holy Ghost, as Crellius, in his Book de uno Deo
Patre, and his other de Spiritu Sancto.
Now to draw forth and Insist upon all the Arguments and Texts of Scripture,
which use to be traversed on both sides in this Controversy, would be a Thing
neither to be done within this Compass of time, nor perhaps so proper for this
Exercise, and therefore, let it suffice us upon the warrant of express
Scripture, not Sophisticated by Nice and forced Expositions, but plainly
interpreted by the General Tradition of the Church (to which all private
Reason, ought in Reason to give place) to confess and adore the Deity of the
Holy Ghost.

Now, this Holy Spirit is in the Church, as the Soul in the Natural Body. For
as the same Soul does in and by the several parts of the Body exercise several
functions, and Operations; so the Holy Ghost, while He animates the mystical
Body of Christ, Causes in it several Gifts, and Powers, by which He Enables it
to exert Variety of Actions. And as in the River Nilus, it is the same fountain
which supplies the seven streams. So when we read of the seven Spirits,
Revelation 4.5. They are but so many several Gifts of the same Spirit, all
bearing the Name and Title of their Donor; as it is usual for so many several
Volumes to bear the single denomination of their Author; and we say properly
enough, that such an one has read Cicero or Plutarch, when he has read their
Works.

But now surely this Glorious Person or Being, who thus enlightens the minds of
all Men coming into the World in some measure, and of the Church more
Especially, cannot be in the Rank and Number of Created Beings. The Heathens
attributed a kind of Divinity, or Godhead to springs, because of that Continual
Inexhaustible Emanation from them, Resembling a kind of Infinity. But here we
see the very Gifts of the Spirit to be Divine: and where we find such a
Divinity in the stream, certainly we may well ascribe it in a more transcendent
manner, to the Fountain; Besides, if the Holy Ghost were not God, I cannot see,
how our Bodies could be well called his Temples; since none but God can
Challenge to Himself the Prerogative of a Temple. And so much for the first
Consequent. But

Secondly, This great diversity of the Spirits Gifts may read a Lecture of
Humility to some, and of Contentment to others: God indeed, in this great
Scheme of the Creation, has drawn some Capital Letters, set forth some
Masterpieces, and furnished them with Higher Abilities than ordinary, and
given them Gifts (as it were) with both hands. But for all that, none can brag
of a Monopoly of them, none has so absolutely engrossed them all, as to be that
Thing of which we may say, Here we see, what and how much God can do. No; God
has wrote upon no Created Being the utmost stint of his Power, but only the
free Issues, and Products of his Pleasure. God has made no Man in Opprobrium
Naturae; only to overlook his Fellow Creatures, to upbraid them with their
Defects, and to discourage them with the Amazing distance of the Comparison. He
has filled no Man's Intellectuals so full, but He has left some Vacuities in
them, that may sometimes send Him for supplies to Minds of a much Lower Pitch.
He has Stocked no Land, or Country with Such Universal Plenty, without the
mixture of some wants, to be the ground and Cause of Commerce: for mutual
wants, and mutual perfections together, are the Bond and Cement of
Conversation. The vast Knowledge and Ruling Abilities of Moses, might yet stand
in need of Aaron's Elocution. And He who speaks with the Tongue of Angels, and
the greatest Fluency of Spiritual Rhetoric, may yet be at a loss, when He
comes to matters of Controversy, and to assert the Truth against the Assaults,
and Sophistry of a subtle opponent. God indeed can, and sometimes happily does
unite both these Gifts in the same Person. But where He does not, let not Him
who can Preach, condemn Him who can only Dispute; neither let Him who can
dispute, despise, Him who can only Preach; For, (as we have shown before) the
Church is served by both, and has equally need of some Men to speak and declare
the Word, and of others to Defend it: it being enough, and too often more than
enough, for one Man to maintain, what another says. In which Work, the speaking
part is indeed the more Easy, but the Defensive the more glorious.

And, as this may give some Check to the Presumption of the most raised
Understandings, so it should prevent the despondency of the meanest. For the
Apostle makes this very use of it in the 21. and 22. v. Where He would not have
even the lowest and poorest member of the Church to be dejected, upon the
Consideration of what it wants, but rather be Comforted in the sense of what it
has. Let not the foot Trample upon it self because it does not rule the Body,
but consider, that it has the honor to support it: Nay the greatest Abilities
are sometimes beholding to the very meanest, if but for this only, that without
them, they would want the Gloss and Luster of a Foyl. The Two Talents went into
Heaven as easily as the Five. And God has put a Peculiar usefulness even into
the smallest Members of the Body, answerable to some Need or Defect in the
greatest; thereby to level them to a mutual Intercourse of Compliance and
Benefaction; which alone can keep things equal, and is indeed the very Poise
and b^last of Society. And thus much for the second Consequent. But,

Thirdly, The foregoing Doctrine affords us also a Touchstone for the Trial of
Spirits. For, such as are the Gifts, such must be also the Spirit from which
they flow. And since both of them have been so much pretended to, it is well
for the Church, that it has rule of judgment, and a note of Discrimination.
There is none, who is not wilfully a stranger to the Affairs of our Israel,
but has had the Noise and blusters of Gifted Brethren, and of persons
pretending to the Spirit, ringing in his Ears. Concerning which Plea of theirs,
since we all know, that there are Spirits, both Good and Bad, it cannot be
denied, but that in some sense they might have the Spirit (such a Spirit as it
was) and that in a very large measure. But as for their Gifts, we must Examine
them by the standard of those here mentioned by the Apostle.

And first, for that of Prophecy. These Men were once full of a Prophecy that
the World should be destroyed in the Year 1656, Because (forsooth) the Flood
came upon the Old World in that Year Reckoning from the Creation. And again,
that the Downfall of Pope and Antichrist, together with that of Monarchy and
Episcopacy, (which they always accounted as Limbs of Antichrist) should be in
the Year 1666. And that because some Remarkable mention is made of the Number
666 in the Revelation; with many other such like Predictions; The Event of all
which has shown, that those Men were not of God's Privy Council; but on the
Contrary that all their Prophecies were like those of Almanacks, which warn
every Wise Body to prepare against foul weather, by their foretelling Fair.

And then, for the Gift of Healing, let a bleeding Church and State show, how
notably they were gifted that way. They played the Surgeons indeed with a
Witness, but we never yet heard that they Acted the Physician; all their
Practice upon the Body Politic was with Powder and Ball, Sword and Pistol. No
saving of Life with those Men, but by Purging away the Estate.

And likewise for the Gift of discerning of Spirits. They had their Tryers,
that is, a Court appointed for the Trial of Ministers; but most properly called
Cromwell's Inquisition; In which they would pretend to know Men's hearts, and
inward Bent of their Spirits (as their word was) by their very looks. But the
Truth is, as the Chief Pretense of those Tryers was to enquire into Men's
Gifts, so if they found them but well Gifted in the Hand, they never looked any
further; for a full and Free hand was with them, an Abundant demonstration of a
Gracious Heart; a word in great request in those times.

And moreover, for the Gift of diverse Tongues, it is certain; that they scarce
spoke the same Thing for two days together. Though otherwise it must be
Confessed, that they were none of the greatest Linguists; their own Mother
Tongue serving all their Occasions, without ever so much as looking into the
Fathers, who always spoke the Language of the Beast to such as could not
understand them. Latin was with them a Mortal Crime, and Greek, instead of
being owned for the Language of the Holy Ghost, (as in the New Testament it is)
was looked upon like the Sin against it; so that in a Word, they had all the
Confusions of Babel amongst them without the Diversity of Tongues.

And then Lastly, For the Gift of Interpreting; they thought themselves no
ordinary Men at Expounding a Chapter; if the Turning of a few Rational
significant Words and Sentences into a loose, tedious, Impertinent Harangue
could be called an Exposition. But above all, for their Interpreting Gift, you
must take them upon Ezekiel, Daniel, and the Revelation; and from thence (as it
were) out of a Dark Prophetic Cloud, Thundering against the Old Cavaleirs, and
the Church of England, and (as I may but too appositely express it) breaking
them upon the wheels in Ezekiel, Casting them to the Beasts in Daniel, and
pouring upon them all the Vials in the Revelation. After which, let any one
deny it who durst, that the Black Decree was Absolutely passed upon those
Malignants, and that they were all of them, to a Man, Sons of Reprobation.

And thus, I think, I have Reckoned up most of the Extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, and Compared them with those of our late Gifted Brethren. Amongst all
which Divine Gifts, I must declare, that I cannot find the Gift of Canting and
whining, and making Faces; that is, of Speaking Bad sense with worse looks;
which yet, those Men used to call the Language of Canaan. Nor can I find the
Gift of uttering every sudden, crude, undigested thought coming over their
minds, and of being Impudently bold and Familiar with Almighty God in Prayer.

I cannot find the Gift of exploding the Mysteries, and peculiar Credenda of
the Gospel; in order to the turning Christianity into bare Morality.

I cannot find the Gift of accounting Tenderness of Conscience against Law, as
a Thing Sacred, but Tenderness of Conscience according to Law, as a Crime to be
prosecuted almost to Death.

In a word, I cannot find the Gifts, of Rebelling, Notwithstanding the
Sanctified Character they bear in the Republicans New Gospel, viz. Ludlow's
Memoirs: and in the Judgment of those who like such Practices, and therefore
Publish such Books: to the manifest Affront of the Monarchy they live under. A
strange Unaccountable way doubtless of Supporting it.
Plundering, Sequestring, Robbing Churches, and Murdering Kings, and all this
purely for the sake of Conscience and Religion.

These Things I say, (whether it be through the Weakness of my discerning
Faculties, or whatsoever else may be the Cause) I cannot, for my Life find
amongst the Primitive Gifts of the Spirit.

And therefore, wheresoever I do find them, let Men talk never so much of
Inward Motions, and Extraordinary Calls of the Spirit, of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, and of the Public good, of Moderation and of an Healing Spirit, and
the like; yet long and sad Experience having taught us the true meaning of all
these fine and fallacious Terms, I must needs say, both of them, and the Spirit
from which they proceed, in those words of St. James 3.18. That they descend
not from above, but are Earthly, Sensual and Devilish. These are the Names
which God knows and calls them by, though Schismatics and Hypocrites may call
them Reformation. But

Fourthly, In the fourth and last place, This Emanation of Gifts from the
Spirit, assures us that Knowledge and Learning, are by no means opposite to
Grace; since we see Gifts as well as Graces conferred by the same Spirit. But
amongst those of the late Reforming Age (whom we have been speaking of) all
Learning was utterly cried down. So that with them the best Preachers were such
as could not read, and the ablest Divines such as could not write. In all their
Preachments they so highly pretended to the Spirit, that they could hardly so
much as spell the Letter. To be blind was with them the Proper Qualification of
a Spiritual Guide, and to be Book-Learned (as they called it) and to be
Irreligious were almost Terms Convertible. None were thought fit for the
Ministry but Tradesmen, and Mechanics, because none else were allowed to have
the Spirit. Those only were accounted like St. Paul, who could work with their
hands, and in a litteral sense, drive the Nail home, and be able to make a
Pulpit before they preached in it.

But the Spirit in the Primitive Church took quite another Method; being still
as Careful to furnish the Head as to sanctify the Heart; and, as He wrought
Miracles to found and establish a Church by these extraordinary Gifts, so it
would have been a greater Miracle to have done it without them.

God, as He is the giver of Grace, so He is the Father of Lights; He neither
Admits Darkness in Himself, nor approves it in others. And therefore those who
place all Religion in the Heats of a furious Zeal, without the due
Illuminations of Knowledge, Know not of what Spirit they are; indeed of such a
Spirit, as begins in Darkness, Leads to it, and Ends in it.

But, certainly, we shall one day find, that a Religion so much Resembling
Hell, neither was, nor could be the Readiest way to Heaven. But on the
Contrary, That the Spirit always Guides, and instructs before He saves; and
that, as He brings to Happiness only by the ways of Holiness; so He never leads
to true Holiness, but by the Paths of Knowledge.

To which Holy Spirit, together with the Father and the Son; Three Persons and
one God, be rendered and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty,
and Dominion, both now, and for evermore. Amen. THE Peculiar Care AND Concern
of Providence FOR THE Protection and Defense of Kings, Set forth in a SERMON
Preached At Westminster-Abbey, Nov. 5. 1675.

Psalm CXLIV.10. former part. It is He, that gives Salvation unto Kings.


THE greatest and most magnificent Title, by which God exhibits himself to the
Sons of Men, is, that he is King of Kings, and that the Governors of the Earth
are his Subjects, Princes and Emperors his Vassals, and Thrones his
Footstools; and Consequently that there is no Absolute Monarch in the World,
but One. And from the same also it follows, that there is nothing, which
Subjects can justly expect from their Prince, but Princes may expect from God;
And nothing which Princes Demand from their Subjects, but God in a higher
manner, and by a better Claim requires from them. Now the Relation between
Prince and Subject essentially involves in it these two things;

First, Obedience from the subject to all the Laws and just Commands of his
Prince. And accordingly as Kings themselves have a Sovereign over them, so they
have Laws over them too. Laws, which lay the same obligation upon Crowned
heads, that they do upon the meanest Peasant. For no Prerogative can bar Piety.
No Man is too Great, to be bound to be good. He who weilds the Scepter, and
shines in the Throne has a great Account to make, and a great Master to make it
to. And there is no Man sent into the World to Rule, who is not sent also to
Obey.

Secondly, The other thing imported in this Relation is Protection Vouchsafed
from the Sovereign to the subject. Upon which account it is, that as God with
one hand gives a Law, so with the other he Defends the Obedient. And this is
the highest Prerogative of Worldly Empire, and the brightest Jewel in the
Diadems of Princes, that by being Gods immediate Subjects they are His
immediate Care; and entitled to his more Especial Protection; that they have
both an Omniscience, in a peculiar manner, to wake over them, and an
Omnipotence to support them; And that they are not the Legions which they
Command, but the God whom they Obey, who must both guard their Persons and
secure their Regalia. For it is He, and He only who gives Salvation unto Kings.

The Words of the Text, with a little Variation, run naturally into this one
Proposition, which, containing in it the full sense of them, shall be the
subject of our following Discourse, viz. That God in the Government of the
World, exercises a peculiar and extraordinary Providence over the Persons and
Lives of Princes.

The Prosecution of which Proposition shall lie in these four things.

First, To show upon what account any Act of God's Providence may be said to be
peculiar and extraordinary. Secondly, To show, how and by what means, God does
after such an extraordinary manner save and deliver Princes. Thirdly, To show
the Reasons why He does so. And Fourthly, And Lastly, To draw something by way
of Inference and Conclusion from the whole.
Of all which in their Order: And

First, For the first of these; which is to show upon what account any Act of
God's Providence may be said to be Peculiar and Extraordinary. Providence in
the Government of the World acts for the most part by the mediation of second
Causes: which, though they proceed according to a Principle of Nature, and a
settled Course and Tenor of Acting, (supposing still the same Circumstances,)
yet Providence acting by them may, in several Instances of it, be said to be
extraordinary, upon a threefold account: As,

First, When a thing falls out besides the Common and Usual Operation of its
proper Cause. As for instance, it is usual and natural for a Man meeting his
Enemy upon full advantage, to prosecute that advantage against him, and by no
means to let him escape. Yet sometimes it falls out quite otherwise. Esau had
conceived a mortal Grudge and Enmity against his Brother Jacob; yet as soon as
he meets Him, he falls upon him, in a very different way from that of Enemies,
and embraces him. Ahab having upon Conquest got Benhadad, his Inveterate Enemy
into his hands, not only spares his Life, but treats him kindly and lets him
go. That a Brother unprovoked should hate, and a stranger not obliged should
love, is against the usual Actings of the Heart of Man. Yet thus it was with
Joseph, and no doubt, with many others, in which, and the like cases, I
conceive, things so falling out, may be said to come to pass by an
Extraordinary Act of Providence; it being manifest, that the Persons concerned
in them do not act as Men of the same Principles and Interests under the same
Circumstances use to do. For Interest, we say, will not lie, nor make a Man
false to Himself, whatsoever it may make him to Others.

Secondly, Providence may be said to Act Extraordinarily, when a thing falls
out beside, or Contrary to the Design of expert, politic and shrewd Persons,
contriving or Acting in it. As when a Man by the utmost of his Wit and Skill,
projects the Compassing of such or such a thing, fits means to his End, lays
Antecedents and Consequents directly and appositely for the bringing about his
Purpose; but in the Issue and Result, finds all broken and baffled, and the
Event contrary to his Intention; and the order of Causes and Counsels so
studiously framed by him, to produce an effect opposite to, and destructive of
the Design driven at by those Means and Arts. In this case also, I say, we may
rationally acknowledge an Extraordinary Act of Providence. For as much as the
Man himself is made instrumental to the effecting of something perfectly
against his own Will and Judgment, and that by those very ways and methods,
which in themselves were the most proper to prevent, and the most unlikely to
bring to pass, such an Event. The World all the while standing amazed at it,
and the Credit of the Politician sinking: for that, nothing seems to cast so
just a Reproach even upon Reason it self, as for Persons Noted for it to act as
Notably against it.

Thirdly, and Lastly, Providence may be said to act in an Extraordinary way,
when a thing comes to pass visibly and apparently beyond the Power of the Cause
immediately employed in it. As that a Man dumb all his Life before, should on
the sudden speak: as it is said, that the Son of Craesus did, upon the fight
of a Murder ready to have been Committed upon the Person of his Prince and
Father. That a small Company should rout and scatter an Army, or (in the
Language of Scripture) that one should chase an hundred, and an hundred put Ten
Thousand to flight. That Persons of mean parts, and little or no Experience
should frustrate and overreach the Counsels of old, beaten, through-paced
Politicians. These effects, I say, are manifestly above the Ability and stated
way of working belonging the Causes from whence they flow. Nevertheless such
things are sometimes seen upon the great Stage of the World, to the Wonder and
Astonishment of the Beholders, who are wholly unable, by the Common method and
discourses of Reason, to give a Satisfactory Account of these strange
Phenomenon, by resolving them into any thing Visible in their immediate Agents:
In which case therefore, I conceive, that the whole Order and Connection of
these things one with another, may be reckoned an Act of Providence
Extraordinary.

And thus much for the first general thing proposed, which was to show upon
what Account the Works of Providence come to be thus distinguished; which
Consideration it will be easy for every one to make application of to the
ensuing particulars. I proceed now to the

Second General thing proposed; which is to show How and by what means God does
after such an Extraordinary manner save and deliver Princes.

I shall mention seven.

1. By endowing them with a more than ordinary Sagacity, and Quickness of
Understanding above other Men. Kings they say have a long Reach with their Arm,
but they have a further with their Mind. In 1 Kings 4.29. God is said to have
given Solomon Largeness of Heart even as the sand on the sea shore. And in
Prove. 25.5. The Heart of Kings is said to be unsearchable. In the former Text
the Royal Mind is compared to the Sand on the Sea shore for Compass, and in
this latter it may seem to Vie with the Sea it self for Depth. And does not
this days Solemnity give us an Eminent proof of this? For when this horrid
Conspiracy, contrived in Hell and Darkness, was Conveyed to one of the
Confederates under the shelter of an Equivocal Writing, our apprehensive and
quick-Scented King presently Smoaked the Ambiguous Paper, and Sounding the
Depths of the Black Intrigue, found that at the Bottom of it, which few Mortals
besides (though of the Quickest faculties) could have discovered from it; who
had not had their Conjectures alarmed by some Glimmerings of Light into that
Dark Project before. Such a piercing Judgment does God often give to these his
Deputies. A Judgment which looks into, or rather through and through all
others, but is looked into by none.

And there is nothing that both adorns and secures a Prince Comparably to this
discerning faculty: for by this, as by a great Light kindling many others, he
commands the use of the best understandings and Judgments throughout his
Dominions, calling them to his Council, and so seeing with their Eyes,
apprehending and contriving with their heads; all their Knowledge and
Experience, like Rivers paying Tribute to the Ocean, being conveyed into and
swallowed up in his Royal Breast. It is both the safety and felicity of a
Prince to have a wise Council, but it must be his Own Wisdom which provides Him
one. Wisdom is a Noble Quality and not discernible but by it self. It is Art
that must judge of Art; and He who discovers Wisdom in another must do it by
the Idea He first had of it in his own Brain. Now as the first and chief
external safeguard of a Prince is in his Council; and as it is his discerning
faculty which must furnish him with this, so his next safety is in the choice
of his Friends: and it is the same discerning faculty which must secure him
here too. For it is this that must distinguish between friendship and flattery,
the most baneful mischief that can be practiced by one Man upon another, and
shadows do not more Inseparably follow Bodies, than flattery does the Persons
of great Men. Flatterers are the Bosom Enemies of Princes, laying Trains for
them, not at all less destructive, than that which was discovered this day;
Contriving their Ruin acceptably, pleasingly, and according to their own hearts
desire. Poison has frequently destroyed Kings, but none has been so
efficaciously mortal as that drank in by the Ear. He who meets his Enemy in the
Field knows how to encounter Him, but he who meets him at his Table, in his
Chamber or in his Closet, finds his Enemy got within Him before he is aware of
him, Killing him with Smiles and Kisses, and acting the Assassinate under the
Masquerade of a Counselor or a Confident: the surest, but the basest way of
destroying a Man.

But now, it is the Prince's Wisdom, and discerning Spirit, that must be His
rescue from the Plots of this friendly Traitor. It is a most Remarkable Speech
of Solomon, Prove. 20.8. That the King sitting on the Throne of Judgment
scatters away all Evil with his Eye. And the Nature of this Evil is
peculiarly such, that to discover, is to defeat it. It is a work of Darkness
which the Light never looks upon, but it scatters too.

Nothing is so Notable in the Royal Bird, the Eagle, as the Quickness of his
Eye. The sight is the sense of Empire and Command; that which is always first
and leads the way in every great Action. For so far as a Prince sees, so far
properly he rules. And while he keeps his Eye open and his Breast shut, he
cannot be surprised.

And thus much for the first way by which Providence saves and delivers
Princes; namely by endowing them with a more than ordinary Sagacity and
Quickness of Understanding above other Men.

2. God saves and delivers Sovereign Princes by giving them a singular Courage
and Presence of Mind in cases of difficulty and Danger. As soon as ever the
Sacred Oil had Anointed Saul King, it is said, 1 Samuel 10.9. that God gave him
another heart. That is, a great and a Kingly Spirit, raising his Thoughts above
the Common Level and Designs of a Private Condition. And a little after, when
there was a General Consternation over all Israel, upon the Invasion of the
Ammonites, though the Report of it met Saul in his former mean Employment,
Coming from the Field after his Fathers Herd: yet it is said in the 11. Chapter
of the same Book and 6. v. That the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard
these tidings. That is, the Royal Spirit, which he had received at his
Anointing, then began to Stir and Act, and flame out like it self; taking him
presently from following an Herd and putting Him in the Head of an Army. It is
incredible to Consider the motion of some minds upon the sudden surprise of
danger; and how much in such cases some will even out-act themselves. How much
quicker their Wit is to invent and their Courage to execute than at other
times. Tullus Hostilius, in the midst of a Battle, surprised with the Treachery
of Metius Suffetius falling off with a great part of his Army to the Enemy,
cries out to his Soldiers that it was by his order, and thereby confirmed their
hearts from fainting through the Apprehension of Treachery, into a present and
Glorious Victory by their supposing it a contrived Stratagem.

Next to Wisdom the greatest gift of Heaven is Resolution. It is that which
gives and obtains Kingdoms, that turns Swords into Scepters, that Crowns the
Valiant with Victory, and the Victorious often with a Diadem. It was answered
by a Neighboring Prince to one alleging a Flaw in the Title of Hen. 7. to the
Kingdom of England, that he had three of the best Titles to his Kingdom of any
Prince living: Being the Wisest Prince, the Valiantest Prince, and the Richest
Prince in Christendom.

Presence of mind to get out of a Plunge, and upon the sudden to Unravel the
Knots and Intricacies of a Perplexed business, argues a Head and a Heart made
for great things. It is a kind of Ecstacy and Inspiration, a Beam of Divine
light darting in upon Reason, and exalting it to a Pitch of Operation beyond
its natural and accustomed measures; and perhaps there was never any Person in
the World remarkably and heroically great, without some such kind of
Enthusiasm, that is, such a mighty Principle, as at certain times raised him up
to strange unaccountable heights of Wit and Courage. And therefore whosoever He
is, who in the strength of such a Spirit can look the most menacing dangers in
the face, and when the state of all Things about Him seems desperate, can yet
bear his great Heart above despair, such an one for the most part makes fortune
it self bend and fall down to him, difficulties vanish, and dangers fly before
Him; so much is Victory the Claim of the Valiant, and success the Birthright
of the Bold. And this is the second way by which Providence gives Salvation
unto Kings.

3. God saves and delivers Sovereign Princes, by disposing of Events and
Accidents, in a strange Concurrence for their Advantage and preservation.
Nothing indeed is or can be properly Accidental to God; but Accidents are so
called in respect of the Intention, or Expectation of second Causes; when
things fall out beside their Knowledge or design. And there is nothing, in
which Providence so much Triumphs over, and (as I may so say) laughs at the
Profoundest Wisdom of Men as in the stable, certain Knowledge and disposal of
all Casual Events. In respect of which the Clearest mortal Intellect is wholly
in the Dark. And upon this Account, as loose as these Events seem to hang upon
one another, yet they are all knit and linked together, in a firm Chain, and
the highest link of that Chain as the Poets speak most truly and
Philosophically (though in a fable), is fastened to Jupiter's Chair: that is,
it is held and managed by an Unerring Providence: the Chain indeed may wave and
shake this way, and that way, but still the hand that holds it is steady, and
the Eye that Guides it Infallible.

Now nothing has so Powerful an Influence upon the great Turns of Affairs, and
the Lives and Fortunes of great Persons, as the little, unobserved, unprojected
Events of things. For could any thing be greater than the Preservation of a
great Prince and his next Heir to the Crown, together with his Nobles and the
Chief of his Clergy, from certain, imminent, and prepared destruction? And was
not all this effected by a pityful small Accident in the mistake of the
superscription of a Letter? Did not the oversight of one syllable preserve a
Church and a State too? And might it not be truly said of that Contemptible
Paper, that it did Caesarem vehere and fortunam Caesaris, and that the Fate of
three Kingdoms was wrapped and sealed up in it?

A little Error of the Eye, a misguidance of the hand, a slip of the foot, a
starting of an Horse, a sudden mist, or a great shower, or a Word undesignedly
cast forth in an Army, has turned the stream of Victory from one side to
another, and thereby disposed of the fortune of Empires and whole Nations. No
Prince ever returns safe out of a Battle, but may remember how many Blows, and
See a late Signal Instance of this in a Prince, who had his Shoulder so Kindly
Kissed, by a Cannon Bullet, (as the late Archbishop, by a peculiar strain of
Rhetoric, Expresses this Wonderful Passage in his Sermon at Court: upon
Jeremiah 9* 23, 24. Page 34.) For well indeed might it pass for Wonderful; the
Salutes from the Mouth of a Cannon, being Commonly so boisterous, that they
seldom Kiss, but they Kill too.
Bullets have gone by Him, that might as Easily have gone through Him, and by
what little odd unforeseeable Chances Death has been turned aside, which seemed
in a full, ready, and direct Career to have been posting to him. All which
Passages, if we do not acknowledge to have been Guided to their Respective Ends
and Effects, by the Conduct of a Superior, and a Divine Hand, we do by the same
Assertion Casheir all Providence, strip the Almighty of his Noblest
Prerogative, and make God not the Governor, but the mere Spectator of the
World. And thus much for the third way. The

Fourth, By which God saves and delivers Sovereign Princes, is by wonderfully
inclining the Hearts and Wills of Men to a Benign Affection toward them.
Hearts and Wills are things that Princes themselves cannot Command, and yet the
only Things in the strength of which they do Command. For the Heart is the
grand spring of Action, and He who governs that part, does by Consequence
Command the whole. But now, this is the incommunicable Prerogative of God; who,
and who only, can either by Power or by Knowledge reach the Heart. For as it is
said, Prove. 21.1. That the Heart of the King is in God's hand, and that as the
Rivers of Water He turns it which way soever He will. So are the hearts of
the People too; which like a mighty stream or Torrent, He turns this way, or
that way, according to the Wise Counsels of his Providence. For if He intends
to advance a Prince, they shall be a stream to bear Him up from sinking; if to
forsake or ruin a Prince, they shall overflow, and swell, and rush in upon Him
with such a furious ungoverned Tide as no Power or Arts of State shall be able
to divert or to withstand. God can turn the Hearts of a Nation suddenly and
Irresistibly. He has done so more than once or twice, and may do so again.

Thus, for instance, when David fled before Absalom, and was forced to leave
the Royal City, it was the General Affection of his People, (God touching their
Hearts,) which brought Him back and Resettled Him in his Throne, so that in 2 Samuel 19.14. it is said of Him, That he bowed the Hearts of all the Men of Judah
even as the Heart of one Man; so that they sent this word unto the King, Return
thou and all thy servants. And just such another message did the Lords and
Commons of England send our Banished David in the Year Sixty. For what was it
else which so gloriously restored the King? Plots were nothing, and Foreign
Assistance less than nothing. It was an Universal, Invincible Current of the
Peoples Wills and Affections, that bore down all those Mountains of Opposition,
which so many Years had been raising up against Him, and at length (in spite
of Guilt and Malice) brought Him in free and unshackled, absolute and
victorious over the Heads of his Armed Enemies. It was his Peoples Hearts which
made their Hands useless to his Restoration.

On the other side, when the greatest part of the Kingdom was rent from the
House of David, and Transferred to Jeroboam; in 1 Kings 12.14. the Prophet
expressly tells them, That this thing was from God: that is, He by a secret
overruling Energy upon the Hearts and Affections of the People, took them off
from one, and inclined and carried them over to the other. And it is often by
this alone, that the Great Lord of Lords and Controuler of Monarchs puts
down one and sets up another. He can raise Armies of Hearts to drive any
King out of his Kingdom without striking a stroke; as on the Contrary, where he
intends to own and support the Royal Estate of any Monarch, He shall set Him up
a Throne in every one of his subjects Breasts. So that according to that
Scripture-Expression, Their Desire shall be to Him and He shall rule over them.
And certainly, where Affection binds, Allegiance must needs be very Easy: And a
pleasant thing to Rule, where there is no heart to Resist.

5. God saves and delivers Sovereign Princes by rescuing them from unseen and
unknown mischiefs prepared against them. This is most Evident. For if a
Prince's own observation can bear Witness to many deliverances vouchsafed him
by Providence, Providence it self can certainly bear Witness to many more,
which He is wholly Ignorant of. Forasmuch, as in every Man, but especially in
Princes, their Concerns reach further, and Carry a Wider Compass than their
Knowledge can: It being impossible that any Man living should know all that is
spoken or done concerning Him, and consequently be aware of all the mischievous
Blows levelled against Him. How many secret Cabals and Plots have been against
the Reputation, the Interest, and sometimes the Life also of every Considerable
Person in the World, which never yet came to their Eye, or their Ear, nor,
(thanks to the Care of a Guardian Providence) ever troubled so much as a
Thought, nor hurt so much as an Hair of their head! And yet the Contrivers of
them have wanted neither Will, nor Wit, nor Power (the natural force of Causes
Considered) to add Execution to Intention, and to give Fire to their Trains,
and Efficacy to their cursed Projects, had not an invisible, overswaying Power
baffled and disappointed all the Artifices of their Malice, and stifled the
Base Conception before the Birth.

And this is a way of deliverance so Eminent for the mercy of it, that if a
Prince or great Person can be obliged to Providence for any, it must be for
this. For when a Man knows the Danger he is in, all his senses quickly take the
Allarm, call up the Spirits, and arm his Courage to meet the approaching Evil,
and to defend himself. But when he knows nothing of the Impending mischief, he
lies open and defenseless, like a Man bound, and naked, and sleeping, while a
Dagger is directed to his Breast. And for a Merciful Tender Providence then to
step in to his assistance, to ward off the Fatal blow, and to turn the
approaching Edge from his unguarded Heart, this surely is the height of mercy,
and engrosses the Glory of the deliverance wholly to the Divine Goodness,
without allowing any Mortal Wit or Courage the least share, or concurrence in
it. No Prince can tell what the Discontents of ill Subjects, the Emulation of
Neighbor States or Princes have been designing, endeavoring and projecting
against Him: all which Counsels by a Controuling Power from above, have from
time to time been made abortive and frustraneous. Let Princes therefore Reckon
upon this, and know assuredly, that they stand endebted to Providence for more
deliverances than they can know. And if the Protecting Mercies of Heaven thus
surpass their Knowledge, surely it is but Reason, that their sense of them, and
gratitude for them should surmount Expression.

Sixthly, God saves and delivers Sovereign Princes by imprinting a certain Awe
and Dread of their Persons and Authority upon the minds of their Subjects. And
there is not any one thing, which seems so manifestly to prove Government a
thing perfectly Divine both as to its Original and Continuance in the World as
this. For what is there in any one Mortal Man, that can strike a dread into,
and command a subjection from so many Thousands as every Prince almost has
under his Government, should things be rated according to the mere natural
Power of second Causes? For the strength of one Man can do nothing against so
many; and his Wisdom and Counsel but little more: and those who are to obey
him, know so much, and yet for all that they yield Him absolute Subjection,
dread his Threatenings, Tremble at his Frowns, and lay their Necks under his
Feet. Now from from whence can all this be, but from a Secret Work of the
Divine Power, Investing Sovereign Princes with certain Marks and Rays of that
Divine Image, which overawes, and controuls the Spirits of Men they know not
How nor Why? But yet they feel themselves actually wrought upon, and kept under
by them, and that very frequently against their will.

And this is that properly which in Kings we call Majesty, and which no doubt
is a kind of shadow or Portraiture of the Divine Authority drawn upon the looks
and Persons of Princes, which makes them Commanders of Men's fears, and thereby
Capable of governing them in all their concerns. Non fero fulgur oculorum
tuorum, is the Language of every Subjects heart, struck with the awful Aspect
of a resolute and magnanimous Prince. There is a Majesty in his Countenance
that puts Lightning into his Looks and Thunder into his Words. In Dan. 5.19. it
is said of Nebuchadnezzar, that God gave him such a Majesty, that all People,
Nations and Languages trembled before Him. When Alexander the Great found his
whole Army in a Mutiny, and Resolute not to March forward, but to return to
their own Country, against any Arguments or Persuasions that He could use; he
At the same time uttering these Words (so suitable to his Kingly Mind and
Courage) Iam scietis, and quantum sine Rege valeat exercitus, and quid opis in
me uno sit. Quin. Curtius. Libr. X.
leaps down from the place, upon which he had been speaking to them, and
arguing with them, and laying hold of thirteen of the most forward and violent
Mutineers, causes them to be bound hand and foot, (in the face of his whole
Army looking on), and then thrown into the Sea. All which this Terrible and
Victorious Army to which he himself owed his greatness, and which but even now
was upon such high and daring Terms with him, quietly sees and suffers, and
with a sneaking abject behavior return to their Tents, as if a Lion had
Charged and Chased a Flock of Sheep into their folds. Nay the History says
further, that they were Fearful and Sollicitous and Inquisitive what the King
meant to do with the rest of them. By which and the like passages Kings may see
what they are, and what they may do if they will but own their high Office with
an equal Courage, and be true to that Sovereignty and Character which God has
stamped upon them. Alexander, as great as he was, was but one Man: but he was a
Prince, and as such acted by a Commission from Heaven, as one of the Almighty's
Vicegerents, and upon that Account able to Encounter as well as to Lead his
Army. A King acting as a King, has all the Power of Heaven to bear him out; the
Stars in their Courses shall fight for him; the Angels are his Guards, and the
Lord of Hosts their Captain. And this is the Sixth way by which God saves and
delivers Princes. Namely by the Authority and Majesty of their Persons.

7. In the seventh and last place. God saves and delivers Sovereign Princes, by
disposing their hearts to such Virtuous and Pious Courses, as he has promised a
blessing to, and by restraining them from those ways, to which he has denounced
a Curse. And this is the greatest deliverance of all; as having a prospect upon
the felicity of both Worlds, and laying a foundation for all other
Deliverances. For it is this, that qualifies, and renders a Man a Subject
Capable of, and fit for a Deliverance. King Abimelech was about to do an Action
that would certainly have drawn Death and Confusion after it. Thou art but a
Dead Man (says God to Him) in Genesis 20.3. But preventing Grace snatched Him from
the Brink of Destruction, and delivered him from Death by restraining Him from
the Sin: I withheld thee (says God in the 6 th) from Sining against me. See
the force of Princely Piety in the Person of Hezekiah. God tells him that he
should die, and bids him prepare for it. But Piety is stronger than Death, and
reverses the fatal Edict. The Assyrians Invade his Kingdom, and take his fenced
Cities, but how does he withstand them? Why he puts on Sackcloath for his
Armor, and it was neither the Valor nor the Number of his Troops, but the
Prayer of Hezekiah and the Irresistible force of a King fighting upon his knees
that routed Sennacherib.

Virtue Entitles a Prince to all the Mercies of Heaven, all the Favors, all
the Endearments of Providence. It has a present and a future Influence; one
upon his Person, the other upon his Posterity. So that in 1 Kings 11. when God
declared his purpose to Remove the Kingdom from the House of Solomon for all
his Idolatries and Abominations, Yet in the 34. v. he says, howbeit I will make
him King all the days of his Life, for my Servant David's sake, because He kept
my Commandments and my Statutes. And in the 32. v. He declares, that his Son
after Him should have one Tribe for his Servant David's sake. Nay the Piety of
a King diffuses a Blessing, and a Protection upon the whole Kingdom: For how
often upon the Provocations of Judah, did the Memory of David's Piety (as it
were) disarm the Divine Vengeance; and interpose between them and the
destroying Sentence? So that in the second Book of Kings, it is said three
several times, upon three several Remarkable Occasions, that God would not
destroy Judah and Jerusalem for his Servant David's sake. And who knows, but
the Piety, the Virtues, and the Christian sufferings of the late Martyred King,
may be one great preservative of the present Peace of this wretched and
ungrateful Nation? so that when God lately sent his Destroying Angel, with his
drawn Sword, over Poland, Germany, Holland and other Countries; He has looked
upon the Blood of that Royal Martyr shed for the Rights and Liberties of his
Kingdoms, and bid the Destroying Angel pass over England and draw no more Blood
there, where the Memory of that Sacred Blood had made such an Atonement and
expiation, and cried aloud for Mercy upon all; even those that shed it not
excepted. Certain it is, that the Virtues of a Prince are a blessing to more
than to Himself and His Family. They are a public Seminary of Blessings; they
are the Palladiums and and the strong holds, nay the Common stock and the
Inheritance of the Kingdom, and (in a word) an Exchequer that can never be shut
up.

And thus much for the second General thing proposed, which was to show the
several ways and means, by which God does after such an extraordinary manner
save and deliver Sovereign Princes: All which, for Memories sake, it may not be
amiss to rehearse and sum up in short: As namely he delivers them.

1. By endowing them with a more than Ordinary Sagacity and Quickness of
Understanding above other Men. 2. By giving them a singular Courage and
Presence of Mind in Cases of Difficulty and Danger. 3. By disposing of Events
and Accidents in a strange Concurrence for their advantage and preservation. 4.
By Wonderfully Inclining the Hearts and Wills of Men to a benign affection
toward them. 5. By rescuing them from unseen and unknown mischiefs prepared
against them. 6. By Imprinting a Certain Awe and Dread of their Persons and
Authority upon the minds of the People. 7. Seventhly, and lastly. By disposing
their hearts to such Virtuous and Pious Courses, as God has Promised a Blessing
to, and by restraining them from those ways to which He has denounced a Curse.
And these are the several ways, by which Providence gives salvation unto Kings.
I proceed now to the

3. General thing proposed which is to show the Reasons, why Providence is so
much concerned in the Salvation and deliverance of Kings. Which that we may the
better do, we must know, that there are two things, by which God supports the
Societies of Mankind, which He will certainly maintain and preserve, as long as
He suffers the World to last, and Men to live in it; and these are Government
and Religion; which being so, I suppose, we need allege no other Reason for
Gods peculiar Care over the Persons and lives of Sovereign Princes, if we
demonstrate.

1. That they are the greatest Instruments in the hand of Providence to support
Government and Civil Society in the World. And

2. That they have the most Powerful Influence upon the concerns of Religion
and the Preservation of the Church, of all other Persons whatsoever.

And first for the first of these. That Kings are the greatest Instruments in
the hand of Providence to support Government, and Civil Society in the World:
The Proof of which I conceive will be fully made out by these two things.

1. By showing that Monarchy, or Kingly Government, is the most excellent and
best Adapted to the Ends of Government, and the Benefit of Society. And 2. That
the greatness or strength of a Monarchy depends chiefly upon the Personal
Qualifications of the Prince or Monarch.
1. And first; let us show that Monarchy or Kingly Government, is the most
Excellent and best adapted to the Ends of Government and the benefit of
Society. This is too large and Noble a subject to be fully managed in such a
discourse. At present let it suffice to say, That Monarchy in the kind of
Government is the First, and Consequently the most Perfect of all other sorts.
It is an Image of the Divine Supremacy, Man's Imitation of Providence, a Copy
of God's Government of the Universe in a lesser draught. For the World has but
one Sovereign Ruler, as well as but one Maker; and every Prince is both his
Lieutenant, and his Resemblance too. The Excellency of any Government consists
in the Natural firmness of its Constitution, freeing it from the Principles of
dissolution. And the Dissolution of Government, as of most other Things,
proceeds chiefly from the Internal Fightings and Conflicts of Contrary parts.
But now Unity excludes Contrariety, and that which is but One cannot disagree
or jarr with it self. It is multitude only that admits of the Contests of
particulars, and a Commonwealth, where Governors cannot govern themselves.
That which like a worm eats out the every heart of Government, is the
Emulation, the Ambition, and the discord of the Parties invested with it. But
the Supremacy placed in One Cuts off all these: for no Man is his own Rival, no
Man envies Himself, or designs to Trip up his own Heels; whatsoever he may
Chance to do.

And to show the Naturalness of Monarchy, all other Forms of Government
insensibly partake of it, and slide into it. For look upon any Aristocracy or
Democracy, and still you shall find some one Ruling Active Person amongst the
rest, who does every thing, and carries all before Him. Was not De Wit amongst
our Neighbors a kind of King in a Commonwealth? and was not that Usurper here
amongst our selves a Monarch in Reality of Fact, before He wore the Title, or
assumed the Office? Moreover, when any Commonwealth is forced to Defend it
self by War, it finds it necessary to appoint one General over all, as this
very Commonwealth found to its cost, and to make the Conduct of its Armies at
least Monarchical. Nay the Romans themselves in their greatest Exigencies of
State, had recourse to their Dictatorship, which was a Perfect Monarchy for the
time. And when they sent out their Armies under the Conduct of two Consuls, yet
those Consuls were to Command the whole Army by Turns, one, one Day, and
another another; which was a Tacit Confession of the Necessity of a single
Conduct for the Right Management of great Affairs. And I think upon a full
survey of the Roman story, we may truly pronounce, that the greatest defeats
that were ever given that Commonwealth, in any lasting War, have been from
this, that the Custom of shifting Consuls every Year, hindered the Conduct of
the whole War from being continued in the hands of one experienced Commander.
In their Wars with Hannibal nothing is more manifest. From all which I infer,
that Kingly Government is the most Natural, Excellent, and Beneficial to
Society of all others: and that in every Commonwealth, (in spite of its
Constitution) there will be something of Monarchy; And that if a Republic ever
Atchieves any thing great or considerable, it is still by virtue of something
in it that is Monarchical.

Secondly, The next thing, is to show, That the greatness or strength of a
Monarchy depends Chiefly upon the Personal Qualifications of the Prince or
Monarch. It ebbs or flows according to the Rising or falling of his Spirit. For
still it is the Person that makes the Place Considerable and not the Place Him.
And we shall find in every Government that the Activity and Bravery of the
Prince, is the Soul Politic which animates, and upholds all. When Alexander
the Great died the Grecian Monarchy expired with Him. He was both the Emperor
and the Empire too. And after the Death of Julius and Augustus Caesar, those
great Commanding Souls, the Roman Empire declined every day, falling into the
hands of Brutes and Sots, who could scarce wield the weight of their own
Bellies, and much less the Burden of such vast Dominions. The present grandeur
of the Papacy is entirely owing to the Prudence and governing Arts of some of
the Popes; and it never suffered any great Blow, but when a weak, or a
Voluptuous Person Sat in the Chair. And here amongst our selves, both the
Protector, and the New Protectorship died in one Man, though the name indeed
survived a while in another; and it was quickly seen, how ridiculous it was for
any one to attempt to succeed into his Power, who could not succeed into his
Spirit.

But it is Evident from Reason, that the fate and fortune of Governments, must
Naturally follow the Personal Abilities of the Governor: For what is there
else, that the strength of a Kingdom can be supposed to lean upon, but one of
these three? Its Treasure, its Military Power, or its Laws. But now, none of
all these can signify any thing where the Prince is not endued with that Royal
skill, that is requisite to the Du^ Management of them. For surely the bare
Image of a Prince upon the Coin of any Nation can neither Improve or Employ the
Treasure of it; Nor can the Military force of a Kingdom do much to strengthen
it, should the Prince either wear a Padlock upon his Sword, nor draw it in
defense of his Enemies. Nor lastly can the Laws much Contribute to the support
of it, if the Execution of them be either Neglected or discountenanced: for it
is not how Laws are made, nor how they are Interpreted, but how they are used,
that must influence the Public. By all which we see what moment there is in
the sole Person of a Prince. For as He is qualified or disposed, so all these
great things become helpful or ineffectual. The Treasure, Arms, and Laws of a
Nation are all virtually in Him. And it is He who must breath Life and efficacy
into them all. Which is the first great Reason, why God extends such a
particular Providence over the Persons of Kings, namely because the main
Concerns of Civil Government and Society, which Providence so much tenders the
Preservation of, are Principally deposited in them.

Secondly, The other great Reason is, Because Princes have the most Powerful
Influence upon the concerns of Religion, and the Preservation of the Church, of
all other Persons whatsoever. Religion is indeed an immortal seed and the
Church is proof against the very gates of Hell, as being founded upon a
Promise, and so standing Fast in the Eternal strength of God's Veracity.
Nevertheless, as to its outward State and Circumstances in this World, it must
clasp about the secular Power, and as that frowns or smiles upon it, so it must
droop or flourish. Accordingly God has declared Kings the Nursing Fathers of
his Church: and every Prince by the Essential Inherent Right of his Crown is,
or should be a defender of the Faith. He holds it by a Charter from Heaven;
long before the Pope's Donation, who never gives any thing to Princes but what
was their own before. Every Christian King is within his own Dominions the
great Pastor, both to rule Christ's Flock, and to see it fed, though He does
not feed it Himself.

We know how glorious a Deliverance our Church Received this Day; and it was by
the Wisdom of that Head which wore the Crown, that God vouchsafed it to Her.
King and Church then, (as it is seldom otherwise) were both designed to the same
Fate. But God preserved the King, and the King the Church. And who knows but
for such a Day as this, God paved his way before Him in such a peaceable
Entrance into the English Throne, so much above and against the Expectation of
the World round about Him, and of the Court of Rome Especially; which, it is
well known, had other designs upon the Anvil at that time. And as he then saved
the Church from Perishing by one Blow; so he afterward supported it from dying
gradually, either by the Encroachments of Superstition, or the attempts of
Innovation.

And it is observable, (which I speak not in flattery, but in a Profound sense
of a Blessing which the whole Kingdom can never be Thankful enough for;) That
none of the Families that ever Reigned over this Nation, have to their Power
been so careful and tender of the Church, kept their hands so clean from any
thing that might look like Sacrilege, been so Zealous of its Privileges, and so
kind to its Ministers, as the Royal Family that now sways the Scepter in the
Succession of three several Princes. And I doubt not but as Sacrilege has
blasted the mightiest Families with a Curse, so the Abhorrence of it will and
must perpetuate a Bl^ssing upon this.

And thus having dispatched the several Heads at first proposed, and shown upon
what accounts the Actings of God's Providence may be said to be extraordinary:
and by what ways and means this extraordinary Providence saves and delivers
Princes; as also the Reasons why it does so. I proceed now to the

Fourth and last thing proposed. Which is to make some useful deductions from
what has been delivered, and it shall be by way of Information concerning two
Things.

First, The Duty and Behavior of Princes toward God. Secondly, The Duty and
Behavior of Subjects toward their Prince.
First, And first for that of Princes toward God. It shows them from whom, in
their Distress they are to expect, and to whom, in their Glory, they are to
Ascribe all their Deliverances. David was as great a Warrior, and as Valiant a
Prince as ever Reigned. In all his Wars success waited upon his Courage, and
Victory did Homage to his Sword, yet He tells us that He would neither trust in
his Sword nor in his Bow, nor in the Alliance of Princes. All Auxiliaries but
those from above, He found weak fickle and fallacious. And as Princes are to
own their Great deliverer, so are they to show the World that they do so, by
setting a Due Estimate upon the deliverance: especially when it is shown, in so
signal an Instance, as that which we now Commemorate. And whosoever He is, who
really and Cordially Values any Notable Deliverance vouchsafed Him by God,
surely above all things it will concern Him,
not to Court the mischief from which He has been Delivered. But

Secondly, Which most properly belongs to us. We Learn from the Premises the
Duty and Behavior of Subjects toward their Princes. Does not God by such a
peculiar protecting Providence over Kings point out to us the Sacredness of
their Persons? and Command a Reverence, where He Himself thinks fit to place an
Honor? does not every extraordinary deliverance of a Prince, carry this
Inscription upon it in the Brightest Characters, Touch not mine Anointed? Whom
God has placed upon the Throne, shall any Humane Power presume to drag to the
Bar? or shall Royal Heads be Crowned and Anointed only to prepare them to be
Sacrificed upon a Scaffold?

As for our parts, when we Reflect upon our Prince, signalized by so many
strange unparalleled Rescues, ought they not both to endear him to our
Allegiance, and in a manner Consecrate him to our Veneration? For is not this
He, whom in the Loins of his Royal Progenitor, God, by this days Mercy, (as I
may so say) delivered before he was Born? He, for whose sake God has since
wrought so many Miracles? Covering his head in the day of Battle, and which is
more, securing it after Battle, when such a Price was set upon it? Is not this
He, whom the same Providence followed into Banishment and gave him safety and
Honor, where he had not so much as to lay his Head, or to set his foot upon,
that He could call his own? is not this He whom God brought back again by a
Miracle as great as that by which he brought Israel out of Egypt, not dividing
but (as it were) drying up a Red Sea, before Him? Is not this He, whom neither
the Plots of his Enemies at home, nor the United strength of those abroad have
been able to shake or supplant? And lastly is not this He whom neither the
Barbarous Injuries of his Rebel Subjects at Home; nor the Temptations of
Foreign Princes abroad, nor all the Arts of Rome besides, could in his greatest
Extremity bring over to the Romish Profession; but that after all, He returned,
and since his Return still continues in the same Communion, which He was of
when he went from us, Carolus a Carolo firm and Immovable like the Son of a
Father, who could rather part with his Crowns, Kingdoms, and his very Life,
than quit his Honor or give up his Religion?

For all which glorious Things done for Him and by Him, may the same God who
has hitherto delivered Him, order His affairs so, that he may never need
another Deliverance, but that He may grow old in Peace and Honor; And be as
great as the Love of his Friends and the Fears of his Enemies can make Him;
Commanding the Hearts of the One in spite of the Hearts of the Other; and, in
a word, Continue to Reign over us till Mortality shall be swallowed up of
Immortality, and a Temporal Crown Changed into an Eternal.

Which God of His Infinite mercy grant; to Whom be rendered and ascribed as is
most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion, both now and for evermore.
Amen. FINIS.

