TRITHEISM CHARGED UPON Dr SHERLOCK's New Notion of the TRINITY. AND The Charge
made good, in an Answer to the Defense of the said Notion against The
Animadversions UPON Dr. Sherlock's Book, Entitled, A Vindication of the
Doctrine of the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity, etc. By a Divine of the Church
of England.

LONDON, Printed for John Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, MDCXCV.

TO ALL Professors of Divinity in the Two UNIVERSITIES OF THIS KINGDOM.
Reverend and Learned Sirs,
SInce the Work, I here present you with, needs so great a Patronage, it were
to be wished, that it could bring something with it, besides the Cause defended
by it, worthy of such Patrons, as I address it to. But, as much below you, as I
know it to be, I could think of none, to whom I could so properly apply my
self, as Those, whose eminent Stations in our Universities have made them the
Fittest, as well as Ablest to countenance a Defense of so high a Point, and so
vital a Part of our Religion. Our Church's Enemies of late seem to have
diverted their main Attacks from her Outworks in matters of Discipline and
Ceremony; and now, it is no less than her very Capitol which they invade; her
Palladium (if I may allude to such Expressions) which they would rob her of;
even the Prime, the Grand, and Distinguishing Article of our Christianity, the
Article of the Blessed Trinity it self; without the Belief of which, I dare
aver, that a Man can no more be a Christian, than he can, without a Rational
Soul, be a Man. And this is now the Point so fiercely laid at, and assaulted
both by Socinianism on the one hand, and by Tritheism or rather Paganism on the
other. For, as the former would run it down by stripping the Godhead of a
Ternary of Persons, so the other would as effectually, but more scandalously
overthrow it by introducing a Trinity of Gods; as they inevitably do, who
assert the Three Divine Persons to be Three distinct Infinite Minds, or
Spirits; which I positively affirm, is equivalent to the asserting the said
Three Persons to be Three Gods. And I doubt not of your learned Concurrence
with me, and Abettment of me in this Affirmation.

And I do moreover refer it to your profound, and known Learning, to consider
and to judge, whether ever the Catholic Church explained the Trinity by
Self-Consciousness, as that [wherein] the Personality, Personal Unity, and
Distinction of each of the Divine Persons does properly and formally consist:
and by Mutual Consciousness, as that [wherein] consists the Essential Unity of
the said Persons, and [whereby] they are all Three essentially one God:
together with several other such like Terms set down in the Collection
immediately subjoined to this Epistle: And lastly, whether the Primitive Church
having decreed, and denounced an Anathema to all Users of any (...) in these
Mysteries, the Church of England, and the Nurseries thereof, the Universities,
ought to suffer the greatest Mystery of our Christian Faith to be perplexed,
confounded, and even ridiculed by this Man's pretending to explain it by such
odd, Uncouth, as well as new Expressions; which were never entertained as Terms
of any Note or Use even in Philosophy, till Des Carts and his Followers
introduced them; and that without the least thought (that appears) of applying
them to the Trinity. I desire, I say, all our Learned Divines seriously to
consider, what this must tend to, and will, in all likelihood, end in.

The Arguments which this daring Innovator (whom I write against) pretends to
support his Tritheism, and Innovations by, are but slight and trivial; or
rather indeed bare bold Assertions without Arguments: And those also (in the
Opinion of most) so thoroughly broken, and confuted already, that what they need
more, is rather a Discountenance, than a Confutation. Nor indeed is there any
thing formidable in the whole Book, (which I have here answered) but that one
word appearing in the Front of it, viz. [licensed]: and that I must confess
looks very formidably and threatningly, both upon our Church and Religion: and
it cannot but go to the heart of every Well-wisher to Both, to consider what
Advantage our watchful Enemies the Papists will be sure to make of it; who in
such Cases never fail to take whatsoever is given them.

And now, Reverend Sirs, what can my design be in thus applying my self to you?
Surely it is not so to offer you my poor Judgment, as at all to prescribe to
Yours. No; I understand you and my self too well, to be guilty of so sottish a
Presumption; Nor is it to put you upon writing Books against this Innovator;
for that I think extremely below you. But since the World has heard of such a
Thing, as the Decretum Oxoniense (and that so justly to the Credit of that
University;) If now, Both our Universities would concur in passing their
Theological Censure upon such Propositions as have of late so much impugned our
Faith, and disgraced our Church; as that of Oxford had passed before upon such
Doctrines, as undermined and struck at our Civil Government, (as I think all
Christians should be at least as zealous for the former, as for the latter) it
could not but highly vindicate the Honor of the Church of England, the
Orthodoxy of our Clergy, and of our Two great Seminaries of Learning; which, I
assure you, many Foreigners (how undeservedly soever) begin to be something
suspicious of, and dissatisfied about, by reason of some late Books published
amongst us, and not yet answered by us. And for what concerns this Author's
first Discourse concerning the Trinity, I have been assured from a very
Authentic hand, corresponding with several Persons of Note for Learning in
Germany, that it had given no small offense to the Divines abroad; and
particularly, that those learned Gentlemen at Lipsick (who write the
Transactions) would have censured the new, Heterodox Notions, and equally new,
and unjustifiable Expositions of Scripture (which it is full of, and those not
wholly unreflected upon by them neither,) at much another rate, than they have
done in the Remarks of the Year 1691. p. 216. but that out of a peculiar
respect to the Church of England, they forbore, in expectation that some Divine
of her own Communion would undertake the Confutation of it. And therefore since
those Animadversions upon it, came out so opportunely, as an Answer to so just
an Expectation, as well as to so Ill a Book; which had both given such offense
to foreign Churches, and brought such Scandal upon our own, I hope this Defense
of them will find an Acceptance worthy of Those Great Injured Truths asserted
in that Discourse, and re-asserted in this. For, high time certainly it is, for
all who heartily espouse the Concerns of our Excellent Church (so Practiced
upon on all Hands) now, if ever, to appear for Her; Considering, That from a
New Christianity (the Grand Project of some of late) the Natural and Next step
is to None.

And so, Reverend Sirs, to create you no further trouble, having with all the
Respect and Reverence due to such great and renowned Bodies, given you an
account of the Occasion of this Address to you, as a Thing well deserving your
most serious Thoughts, and representing the cause of our Venerable, Old
Religion now at stake, (as in truth it is) I humbly leave the whole matter
before you, and remain

(As by Duty, and Inclination equally bound,) Honored Sirs, Your most
faithful, and devoted Servant, A. A.

A Collection of several Choice, New Theological Terms made use of in Two
Books; One Entitled, A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and ever
Blessed Trinity, etc. The other, A Defense of Dr. Sherlock 's Notion of the
Trinity, etc. and first Introduced by the said Doctor, for giving the Church a
better Explication and a clearer Notion of a Trinity in Unity than it has had
for above sixteen hundred years before. Which Collection is as follows.
SElf-Consciousness, Vind. p. 49. l. 27. Mutual Consciousness, Vind. p. 52. l.
4. Natural Self-Consciousness, Def. p. 8. l. 7. Natural Mutual Consciousness,
Def. p. 18. l. 8. Intimate conscious Knowledge, Vind. p. 59. l. 4. Conscious
life, Def. p. 60. l. 20. Self conscious Principle, Def. p. 67. l. 16. Natural
Principle of mutual Consciousness, Def. p. 67. l. 22. Conscious Union, Def. p.
9. l. 10. Natural Unity of Mutual Consciousness, Def. p. 33. l. 2. Communion of
Mutual Consciousness, Def. p. 72. l. 9. Self-Conscious Love, and Self-Conscious
Complacency, Def. p. 68. l. 2, and 4. Intellectual Sensation, Def. p. 77. l.
16. Self-Sensation, Def. p. 39. l. 24. Conscious Sensation, Def. p. 8. l. 4.
Self Conscious Sensation, Def. p. 7. l. 15. Natural Self Conscious Sensation,
Def. p. 7. l. 30. Natural Mutual Conscious Sensation, Def. p. 8. l. 2. Feeling
each other's Knowledge, Vind. p. 56. l. 24. Self-Consciousness between the
Father and the Son, Vind. p. 60. l. 14. The Son's feeling the Father's Will and
Wisdom in himself, Vind. p. 60. l. 22. The Son, the Self Conscious Image of his
Father's Will and Knowledge, Vind. p. 60. at the end. Continuity of Sensation,
Def. p. 7. l. 12, 13. Three distinct Infinite Minds, Vind. p. 66. l. 22. One
Individual Nature subsisting thrice, not by multiplying but only by Repeating
it self, Def. p. 24. l. 2, 3. The Divine Nature repeated in its Image without
multiplication, Def. p. 37. l. 1. The same Substance repeated in Three distinct
Subsistences, Def. p. 91. l. 8. The same Individual Nature repeated in its
living Image, Def. p. 70. l. 4. One Eternal Infinite Mind repeated in Three
Subsistences, Def. p. 94. l. 6, etc.
Which Terms (with some others like-them) are to be substituted in the room of
Nature, Essence, Substance, Subsistence, Suppositum, Person, Hypostasis, and
Relation.

All which (though constantly used hitherto both by Fathers and Councils) yet
serving only (as this Author affirms) to pervert and confound men's Notions and
Discourses about the Divine Nature and Persons, ought utterly to be exploded
and laid aside, as mere Gibberish and Gypsy Cant; especially by such as
account all Greek and Latin so too.

Several New, Heterodox, and Extraordinary Propositions, partly in Divinity,
and partly in Philosophy, extracted out of the Two forementioned Books.
1. THE Three Divine Persons are Three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits; and
not to hold so, is both Heresy and Nonsense, Vind. p. 66. l. 25. 2. Unless
every Person of the Blessed Trinity, considered as a distinct Person, be
allowed to be a distinct Infinite Eternal Mind, we shall have nothing left us
but a Trinity of mere Modes, Names, and Postures, Defen. page 8. lin. 24. and
page 30. lin. 24. 3. That which makes a Spirit (whether Finite or Infinite) and
consequently each of the Divine Persons (which according to this Author are
Three distinct Infinite Spirits) One with it self, and distinct from all
others, is Self-Consciousness, and Nothing else. Vind. p. 67. lin. 11. p. 68.
lin. 5. and 13. and 74. lin. 15, etc. 4. A natural Self-Consciousness makes a
Natural Person, Def. p. 8. lin. 7. 5. If the formal Reason of Personality be
that which makes a Mind or Person (which with this Author are always Terms
convertible) one with it self, and distinguishes it from all others, then
Self-Consciousness is the formal Reason of Personality, Def. p. 37. l. 8, 9,
10, etc. 6. Mutual Consciousness is that which formally unites the Divine
Persons in Nature or Essence, and makes them all essentially and numerically
one God, Vind. p. 68. l. 6, 7, 8. and p. 84* l. 29* and elsewhere frequently.
7. There is no other mutual In-being or In-dwelling of the Father in the Son,
and of the Son in the Father (called by the Fathers (...)) conceivable or
possible, but by mutual Consciousness, Def. p. 9. l. 15, 16, etc. 8. The Son
and the Holy Ghost are in the Father as in their Cause, Vind. p. 69. l. 29.
Which Term Divines generally decline the use of, using the word [ Principle]
instead thereof. However this overthrows the foregoing Proposition, viz. That
the Son can be no otherwise in the Father, than by mutual Consciousness. 9. The
(...) used, (with reference to the Divine Persons) by the Nicene Fathers, is
not sufficient to prove a Numerical Unity of Nature or Essence in the said
Persons, Def. p. 69. l. 1, 2, etc. 10. The Unity of the Divine Nature in the
Three Divine Persons is partly specific, partly numerical, Def. p. 17. l. 27.
11. It is impossible to conceive a more close and intimate Union in Nature than
mutual Consciousness, Def. p. 35. l. 22. Whereas an Union in one Numerical
Essence or Nature is and must be (in the very Conception or Notion of it)
greater and more intimate, as being the Ground, the Reason, and Foundation of
the other. 12. The very Nature and Subsistence of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost is wholly Relative, Def. p. 27. l. 21. And for their Subsistence, I grant
it to be so; but if their Nature be wholly Relative too, I am sure there is
nothing absolute belonging to the Deity. 13. The Case of a Man and his living
Image (though even by this Author's own confession a mere Fiction or
Supposition) is a plain Account of the essential Unity between God the Father
and God the Son, Def. p. 21. l. 10. That is to say, in a Romance we have a
clear Explication of the (...) of the first and second Person of the Trinity.
And in Two, who are actually separate and loco-distant from one another, we
have a plain Account of the Union of Two, who both in their Essence and Persons
are actually and absolutely inseparable. 14. If the Three Divine Persons be
considered as Three Infinite Minds, distinguished from each other by a
Self-Consciousness of their own, and essentially united to each other by a
mutual Consciousness (which is the only way of distinguishing and uniting
Minds) then a Trinity in Unity is a very plain and intelligible Notion, Vind.
p. 73. l. 17. from whence follows another Proposition, viz. the 15. That the
Divine Persons have no other Distinction but what they have by
Self-Consciousness, and no other Union but what they have by mutual
Consciousness. And consequently, That the Trinity thus stated, really amounts
to no more than a Council or Cabal of Gods; and that it is in no degree so much
Profaneness, for the Socinians to call it so, as for this Man, by his Three
distinct Infinite Minds, to make it so. 16. The Three Divine Persons in the
Godhead are not only modally distinguished, Vind. p. 83. l. last But generally
all the Divines in Christendom hold them to be so distinguished, and no
otherwise. 17. There are no Modes, no more than there are Qualities and
Accidents in the Deity, Vind. p. 84. l. first. 18. Persons distinct, yet not
separate, but essentially one by mutual Consciousness, do not act upon each
other, Def. p. 73. l. 23. 19. The Divine Nature or Essence is not a single or
singular Nature, Def. p. 18. l. 13. 20. It is absurd to say, That the one
Divine Nature of the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost is Incarnate, and yet none
but the Son Incarnate, Def. p. 18. l. last and p. 19. l. first. 21. One single
Essence can subsist but once, or have but one Subsistence, Def. p. 19. l. 23.
and p. 24. l. 29. and yet (for all this) it follows. 22. One Eternal Infinite
Mind is [ repeated] in Three Subsistences, Def. p. 94. l. 6. 23. There is no
Distinction between the Divine Essence and a Divine Person, Def. p. 91. l. 28.
And yet all Divines speak of the Divine Essence as communicable or common to
the Persons; and account of the former as Absolute, and of the latter as
Relative; and that surely ^mports Distinction. 24. The Divine Essence makes the
Person, ibid. 25. The Divine Essence must be acknowledged to be a Person, Def.
p. 92. l. 19. 26. No man has an Idea of an Intelligent Nature or Essence
distinguished from a Person, Def. p. 92. l. 10. 27. [ Infinite Mind] and [
Infinite Intelligent Person] are Terms as equipollent and convertible as [ God]
and [infinite Mind] Def. p. 81. l. 23, etc. 28. There are in God Acts of
Sensation, of a different kind and species from Acts of Knowledge: and
Self-Consciousness and mutual Consciousness are of the former sort, Def. p. 77.
l. 10, etc. 29. It is the Soul only that can be happy or miserable, rewarded or
punished in or out of the Body, Def. 54. l. 31. And if so; what need (say I)
can there be of a Resurrection? Such Doctrines certainly (backed with License
and Authority) may come to something in time. 30. We can frame no Idea of
Substance, but what we have from Matter, Vind. p. 69. l. first. 31. We cannot
imagine how any Substance should be without a Beginning, Vind. p. 70. l. 6. And
if that be true, then I affirm that Nothing can be imagined to be so. 32. The
Nature of a Spirit consists in Vital internal Sensation, Def. p. 7. l. 11. 33.
The Unity of a Spirit consists in Continuity of Sensation, Def. ibid. 34. One
Numerical Nature, whether Finite or Infinite, may be repeated without being
multiplied: Of the first whereof he often gives us an Instance in a man and his
living Image, Def. p. 91. l. 10. and of the other in the Divine Nature, it
self, Def. p. 31. l. first. 35. A man and his living Image are two distinct
men, though the Image is not another man, Def. p. 31. l. 19, and 21. 36. An
Image is wholly and entirely the same with the Prototype, Def. p. 28. l. 16.
37. The Soul is the person, and the Body only the Organ or Instrument of it,
Def. p. 51. l. 2. p. 57. l. 11. and p. 58. l. 16. 38. The whole entire
Personality is in the Soul, Def. p. 50. l. 20. 39. The Soul is the person* and
the Body is taken into the Unity of the said person, Def. p. 60. l. 22. 40. The
Soul is not properly part of the Person, Def: p. 61. l. 3. 41. The Body is not
a Part of the Person, Def. p. 60. l. 23. 42. The Soul is a Complete Being, Def.
p. 49. l. 30. 43. The Soul may be a complete and perfect Person, and yet not a
perfect Man, Def. p. 49. l. 28* Whereas a Person implies all the essential
perfections of a Man, and something more. 44. A Man with a Body Blind, Deaf,
and Lame, is not a perfect Man, [ viz. upon a Natural and essential Account,
not so.] Def. p. 50. l. 10. 45. All Union between Natures is a Natural Union,
Def. p. 49. l. 16. 46. The Soul is as much the same with or without the Body,
as the Body with or without its Clothes, Def. p. 60. l. 29. 47. Unless there be
two Personalities as well as Two Natures ( viz. Soul and Body) the Two Natures
cannot be two parts of one human Personality, as they are parts of a Man, Def.
45. l. 25. Now, what gross Ignorance is this! For an human Personality, no less
than a Particular Humanity, essentially and metaphysically implies and connotes
Parts* Though only the Person and Man himself in the Concrete is actually and
Physically compounded of them. To which I add, that Two Personalities can never
be two parts of any essential compound whatsoever, but Two Natures may, and in
the Present instance certainly are. See this further explained, p. 115, 116.
These Propositions (with several others like them) are his New Dogmata in
Divinity and Philosophy: which as they are most absurd and false in themselves,
so the Consequences of many of them, with reference to the Incarnation of our
Blessed Savior, I leave to the Thinking and Judicious Reader himself to draw
out, and to the Church ^o^ judge of. And possibly some time or other,
Foreigners also may be presented with a View of them, in a Language, which they
understand better than they do ours.

THE CONTENTS Humbly Presented To the Reader's perusal before he proceeds to
read the following BOOK.
AN Account of the Civil Language bestowed by the Defender upon the
Animadverter, and Animadversions Page 2, 3 The Objection about the word
[Mystery] proved only the Blunder of the Objector 4. The Defender wearies the
Reader with a nauseous Repetition of his old confuted Hypothesis, without any
new Argument to enforce it 7 He begins it with a gross Untruth 7, 8, 9 He adds
another as gross 9, 10, etc. He does not (as he falsely affirms) concur
perfectly with the Schoolmen in stating the Unity of the Godhead 11 The
Vnconceivableness of the Mystery of the Trinity, never accounted by the
Christian Church any Objection against it at all 12 The Fathers way of
explaining the Trinity wrongfully slighted and reflected upon by this Author
12, 13, 14 There is no such thing as Spiritual Sensation; it being no better
than a Contradiction in Adjecto 15, 16, etc. The Nature of a Spirit proved not
to consist in Vital internal Sensation 17, 18, 19 The Trinity in Unity, not
explicable by Sensation and Continuity of Sensation 20, 21 No man's feeling
himself a distinct Person, can be the Reason of his being so 22, 23 The
Defender's Complement to the Animadverter returned 24 Mutual Consciousness can
never make three distinct Spirits essentially one 26, 27 Mutual Consciousness
(according to this Author's Principles) must consist of three distinct Acts 27,
28 His profane Assertion concerning the Trinity 30 Each of the Divine Persons,
as a distinct Person, is not a distinct Infinite Mind; with a Refutation of his
Argument brought to prove it so 31, 32, 33, 34 His absurd Assertions concerning
the (...) of the Divine Persons 35, 36, 37 His vain endeavor to justify his
Hypothesis of three distinct infinite Minds, from the Allusions used by the
Fathers about the Trinity 38, 39 An extraordinary Discovery made by this Author
of Resemblance without Likeness 40, 41 His gross Mistakes and precarious
Assertions concerning the sense and use of the Term [Person] from p. 41, to 50
His ridiculous pleading [Theological use] for the word [Minds] as importing the
same with [Persons], while none can be proved to use it so but himself, and
some few Heretics besides 46, 47 The (...) a sufficient proof of a Numerical
Unity of Nature or Essence in the Divine Persons 51 All Specific Unity of
Nature (or any thing analogous to it) in the Divine Persons proved absurd, and
impossible 52, 53 The Divine Nature proved against this Author to be a single
or singular Nature, together with a Refutation of some other of his false and
heretical Assertions, from p. 54, to 60 The Unity of the Divine Nature in the
three Persons proved not to be (as this Defender would have it) partly
Specifical, and partly Numerical 55, 56 The Testimony of Victorinus Afer of
little or no Authority with Reference to the Doctrine of the Trinity 60, 61 Two
other of this Defender's scandalous Assertions refuted 61, 62 His Romance of a
Man and his living Image, so absurdly and profanely brought by him as an
Explication of the Essential Union of the Divine Persons, examined and
exploded, from p. 63, to 80 His gross Ignorance of the sense and import of the
term Emanation 73 The proper and true Sense of it explained ibid. An account
both of the Nature of an Image in general, and of an Image by Reflection in
particular 65, 66 The Animadverter's Objection, That Dr. Sherlock has stated a
Trinity in Unity so, as utterly to overthrow the Mysteriousness of it, enforced
and made good 81, 82 The Mysteriousness of the same denied also by Le-Clerk in
his Theological Epistles under the Name of Liberius de Sancto Amore: where the
Reader may find the Materials of this Author's new Hypothesis; and where this
Author himself may be supposed also to have found them before; from p. 82, to
85 The School-Terms defended, and the Use of them asserted against this
Illiterate Innovator 86, 87 The Term [Formal Reason of a Thing] further
explained and insisted upon 89, 90 The true state of the Point in dispute
between Dr. Sherlock and the Animadverter, fully and particularly represented,
from p. 91, to 99 His Blunder about Convertibility and Proprium quarto modo 99,
100, etc. His flying from the Act of Self-Consciousness to the Principle
thereof, proved a mere shift and an utter change of the Question 101, 102, etc.
The Animadverter's first Argument, proving Self-Consciousness neither Act nor
Principle to be the formal Reason of Personality in created Beings, enforced,
from p. 101, to 108 The second Argument vindicated; and the defects of the
Boetian Definition of a Person noted, from p. 108, to 112 The third Argument
for the same confirmed also 112, 113, etc. The Dispute concerning the
Personality of the Soul both in and out of the Body, resumed and carried on
against this Author and all his H^terodox, Vnphilosophical Assertions
concerning it, thoroughly canvased and confuted, from p. 114, to 151 Every man
constituted such (according to this Author's avowed Principles) not by an
Essential Composition, but by an Hypostatick Union of the Soul with the Body,
from p. 147, to 150 The Defender's pretended Answer to the fourth Chapter of
the Animadversions, proving Self-Consciousness not to be the formal Reason of
Personality in the Divine Persons, examined, and the several Arguments, there
produced against it, made good, from p. 152, to 171 He manifestly gives up the
Point in dispute between him and his Adversary, and that in several places,
viz. 153, 154. item 160, 161. and 168. and 204, etc. His Blasphemy 170 The
Animadverter's Arguments brought to prove, That mutual Consciousness cannot be
that which makes (as this Author affirms) the three Divine Persons essentially
one God, in like manner confirmed and enforced, from p. 171, to 183, etc. His
Shifting Pretense, That by Mutual Consciousness he means the Principle, not the
Act thereof, irrefragably overthrown from his own repeated Expressions and
Assertions p. 172, to 178 The Thing it self effectually disproved by Reason and
Argument p. 178, to 182 How the Divine Knowledge is diversified 190, 191 The
Communion of the Divine Persons with one-another asserted and proved not to be
formally the same with the Union of the said Persons 193, 194 A downright,
shameless, unconscionable Lie affirmed by this Defender, 195, 196 His silly
Cavils about [Union of Nature] and about [Personality] answered 156, 157, 158
No (...), or Mutual Indwelling of Minds in one another 199 This Author's great
Ignorance in exploding all Priority and Posteriority from our Conceptions and
Discourses of God, exposed and laid open, and the Necessity of admitting the
same, unanswerably proved against him p. 199, to 203 His Pretense of not
disputing about the Essences of Things shown impertinent to the purpose he
alleges it for; and withal, grossly contradictious to what he himself had
positively affirmed elsewhere 204, 205 How Knowledge, and how all Arts and
Sciences are distinguished and denominated from their respective Objects,
(which this Author is utterly ignorant of,) shown and explained 207, 208
Sensation in God, as wholly differing (according to this Author,) in kind from
the Divine Knowledge, disproved and exploded p. 208, to 213 His scandalous
Falsification in quite changing the state of the present Question, contrary to
his own positive, frequent, and express Assertions throughout the Vindication,
etc. p. 214, to 218 The same made yet more manifest, by collating what he says
here, with what he had affirmed there, ibid. The true state of the Question
substituted in the room of the preceding false one, 219 His vain Endeavor to
rescue his Hypothesis of three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits from the
Charge of Tritheism, 220 His Assertion of the Equipollency of the Terms
[Infinite Mind] and [Infinite Intelligent Person] proved intolerably false, and
absurd, 223, 224, etc. The difference between [Three Infinite Persons] and
[Three Infinite Minds] 228 A Syllogism very learnedly formed by this Defender
for his old Friends the Socinians, with two Terms and no more, 229 The Nature,
Import, and Force of the Equipollency of Terms declared, 234, 235, 236 The
Assertion of [Three distinct Infinite Minds] inevitably inferrs a plurality of
Gods; but the Assertion of [Three distinct Infinite Persons] does not so; and
the reason of the Difference plainly shown, 237, 238, 239, etc. The Defender
confuted by his own express concession, 244 His New-coin'd, and never before
heard of* Expression, viz. That the Divine Nature is [Repeated] in Three
Subsistences ought by no means to be endured, but utterly rejected; (as absurd
both in Philosophy and Theology) 242, item 260, etc. This Defender manifestly
ignorant what the true definition of Substance is, 247 His equally gross and
ridiculous Ignorance, in supposing a Res Cogitans to be a different thing from
a Substantia Cogitans or Intelligens, 249 Naturae Rationalis Individua
Substantia, an Essential Predicate indeed, but not the Definition of a Person
250 The Three Divine Persons proved not to be Three distinct Substances, but
Three distinct Minds proved necessarily to be so, 251 Proved, That the Fathers,
by the (...), as applied to the Divine Persons, never meant to conclude a
Specific, but only a Numerical Unity of Nature or Substance belonging to them,
by showing how far they argued against the Arians from the said (...) 253, 254
That the Ancients never admitted three individual Substances in the Godhead,
proved from the Latin Church's refusing (for a long time) the use of the
words (...) 255 This Author's fulsome Ignorance in supposing a Numerical
Difference not to be an Essential Difference 257 It is impossible for three
Minds to exist in one infinite Mind or Substance, so as thereby to become
essentially one 259 It is impossible for any two or more Substances to be
absolutely inseparable; which is another Demonstration, That the three Divine
Persons cannot be three distinct Substances, Minds, or Spirits ibid. The
Animadverter's Argument against three Substances in the Godhead asserted and
confirmed, 262 The Defender's scandalous Assertion concerning the Divine
Essence and a Divine Person examined and overthrown, p. 263, to 267 A notable
Passage out of Faustinus, against the admission of Three Individual Substances
in the Godhead, 268 The Animadverter's Third Argument against the Three Divine
Persons being Three distinct Minds, vindicated; and the force of it proved to
be founded not in the mere Opposition of the Numeral Terms [One] and [Three],
but in the peculiar Nature and Condition of the Subject which they are here
applied to, 270, 271 Three Infinite Minds can no more be essentially One
Infinite Mind, than Three Persons can upon any account whatsoever be naturally
One Person 272 For Three to be One, and One to be Three, in respect of one and
the same kind of Unity or Diversity, is impossible, ibid. A Ridiculous Cavil of
the Defender, proceeding from his gross Ignorance of the Sense and Use of the
word [Attribute] as applied to God. 275 The Defender's perpetual Blunder, in
concluding each of the Divine Persons to be a distinct Infinite Mind, because
[Infinite Mind] belongs distinctly to each of them p. 277, to 280 To assert the
Three Divine Persons to be Three Infinite Minds utterly irreconcilable to the
form of the Athanasian Creed, ibid. The same Individual Divine Nature belongs
in common to all the Divine Persons; but upon the same account on which it is
common to them all, it does not belong distinctly to each or any of them, 279 A
Notable Passage out of a Latin Tract inserted into Athanasius's Works expressly
denying the Three Divine Persons to be Three Spirits, 281 The Blasphemy charged
upon the Passages extracted out of Dr. Sherlock's Book of the Knowledge of
Jesus, by the Animadverter in his Preface, still insisted upon, and the Charge
made good against him, 283, 284 Good and Charitable Advice given to this
Author, 285, 286 A summary Account of the several Ways and Shifts made use of
by the Defender throughout this whole Defense, p. 286, to 289 Some Instances of
the extraordinary Virtues of Mr. Dean's [Meaning], showing of what singular use
it is to him upon more occasions than One p. 289, to 292 The Complaint made by
some against the Animadverter, as if he had treated Mr. Dean (forsooth) with
too much sharpness, shown to be partial and unreasonable, and consequently not
worth regarding, 293, 294 The Animadverter's Resolution how to deal with him
for the future 294 His Scurrility toward the Animadverter, in six several
Instances, laid open and remarked upon: such as, for example, his traducing him
as, One who can only make a shift to read and to transcribe; and as one who
must be taught to construe the Fathers; calling him withal Grinning Dog, etc.
p. 294, to 302 A brief Vindication of the Animadverter against the Objections
and unprovoked Spite of the Socinian Considerer, p. 302, to 312 A memorable
Saying of a certain Dean to a poor Widow, desiring to renew her Lease with him,
308 Dr. Sherlock, and not the Animadverter, a Favorite of the Socinians, 302,
303, 304, etc. A Remark or two upon the little Oxford-Excommunicate, lately
expelled from Exeter College, 313 This New Hypothesis sufficiently debated and
confuted already, and the Truth asserted against it by Argument; and
consequently the Exertion of the Episcopal Censure and Authority the fittest
way to deal both with That and its Author for the future, 315 The whole closed
up with a remarkable Expression applied to the present Subject.
Some ERRATA of the Press.
IN the Table of New Heterod. Propositions page the last lin. 15. for of judge
of r. to judge of, p. 22. l. 5. for entire read entire, p. 49. l. 12. for 26th
r. 25th, p. 60. l. 14. for singulur r. singular, p. 73. l. 5. dele E. p. 76. l.
25. for Effential r. Essential, p. 83. l. 11. for (...) r. (...), p. 174. l.
15. for coutradicting r. contradicting, p. 236. l. 14. for In^inite r.
infinite, p. 244. l. 31. for Thnig r. Thing, p. 246. l. 27. for consist* r.
consist? p. 251. l. 1. for Substancs r. Substance, p. 280. l. 22. for is
evident r. is as evident, p. 302. l. 15. for 7. r. 6. Where Adimadverter
occurrs, r. Animadverter. For and indeed, r. or rather indeed, p. 313. last
line but two.

TRITHEISM CHARGED, etc.
AS it may justly be accounted a needless, so it is certainly a Nauseous Task
to attempt the Confutation of a Book more than sufficiently confuted already,
by the very Book, which it was wrote against. For so much I dare, and shall
averr, That there is not one Passage in all this Defense of Dr. Sherlock's
Notion of the Trinity, (as it is called) carrying with it so much as the Face
of an Argument, (as none carries with it any more) but what may be fully,
thoroughly, and with advantage answered out of the Animadversions. Nevertheless
the Expectation of the World may possibly claim an Answer, though such a
Pamphlet can neither require nor deserve one. And were not the World so severe
an Exactor in such Cases, this pitiful Piece should for me lie unanswered, and
despised for ever; so little do I think it for the Credit of any one to fight
with a Shadow, or a Vizard, or to combat an Adversary, who is better a great
deal at Hiding than at Defending himself. The Animadverter from the very first
declared, That in this Controversy he would concern himself with none but the
Author himself, whom he first wrote against; nor with him neither, but in case
of a Just and Scholastic Reply made to his whole Discourse. And now, how this
puny Thing, called a Defense, comes up to the first of these Qualifications,
viz. the Iustness or Commensuration of it to the Book it pretends to answer,
will be quickly se^n: For if we measure that Book by all the Particulars
contained in it, it answers not so much as the fortieth Part of it; and if we
measure it by the Number of Chapters, it catches indeed or rather snapps at
several Parts of three Chapters, (far from examining the whole even of these
Three) but as for the other Nine Chapters, and the whole Preface, they are
entirely passed over by it, not only not answered, but (upon the Matter) scarce
so much as touched. So that by a new and rare Metonymy of the fourth or fifth,
and in some respect of the fortieth Part for the whole, this doughty Piece must
be called an Answer to the Animadversions. For if the Reader will needs have
such an Answer, he must seek for it in the Title Page, for in the Book it self
he shall never find it. And then, in the next place, for what concerns the
Scholastic Character of the same, that will eminently appear from those choice
and Scholastic Terms, which it is all along embellished and set off with. Such
as are these, that follow, with Reference to the Animadverter himself, viz.
Ingenious Blunderer, Trifling Author, Wandering Wit, Wrangling Wit, Leviathan,
One whose Risibility will prove him a Man, though he is seldom in so good a
Humor as to laugh without grinning, which belongs to another Species, viz. a
Dog. A notable Man, and one that can make a shift to read, and to transcribe.
And then for the Animadversions, they are uncharacterized by senseless Mistakes,
School-Terms instead of Sense, Gypsy-Cant, perfect Gibberish, Ignorance and
Raving, an hundred Absurdities and Fooleries, Huffing, Swaggering and Scolding,
a great scolding Book, Want of Sense, etc. with several more of the like
Gravel-Lane Elegancies; and all of them such peculiar Strictures of this
Author's Genius, that he might very well spare his Name, where he had made
himself so well known by his Mark. For all the foregoing
Oyster-Wive-Kennel-Rhetorick, seems so naturally to flow from him who had been
so long Rector of St. Botolph's (with the well-spoken Billingsgate under his
Cure) that (as much a Teacher as he was) it may well be questioned, whether he
has learned more from his Parish, or his Parish from him. But after all, may I
not ask him this short Question? Where is the Wit and Smartness of Thought?
Where are the peculiar Graces, and lucky Hits of Fancy, that should recommend
the foregoing Expressions to the Learned and Ingenious? No, nothing of all this
is to be found in this Man's Words or way of speaking. But all savor of the
Porter, the Car-Man, and the Water-Man, and a pleasant Scene it must needs be
to the Reader, to see the Master of the Temple thus laying about him in the
Language of the Stairs. But what Men draw in from their Education, generally
sticks by them for Term of Life, and it is not to be expected, That a Mouth so
long accustomed to throw Dirt, should ever leave it off, till it comes to be
stopped with it.

Leaving therefore his ill Language, and worse Breeding to himself and others
like him, I shall now address my self to an Examination of the wonderful Work
he has presented the World with. And in this I shall begin with the concluding
Passage of it, (especially since it relates to that which lies first in the
Animadversions.) And that is a Masterpiece of Critical Learning indeed; The
Objection about the derivation of a Mystery, proved only a Blunder of the
Objector.
viz. His charging the Animadverter with a Blunder for deriving a Mystery from
(...) or (...). For says he very Learnedly, A Mystery is a Thing, and therefore
how can it be derived from a Word? And now is any Man alive able to stand his
ground against such an over-bearing Objection? Nevertheless, to answer it as
Calmly as may be; Does the Animadverter indeed absolutely, and in Terminis say,
That a Mystery is derived from (...) or (...), etc? Or rather does not the
Defender quote the Animadverter as the Devil quoted Scripture, with the
Principal words left out, which should govern the whole Sentence? For if we
consult the Animadversions, The words are not, A Mystery is derived from (...),
etc. But A Mystery (according to the common signification of the word) is
derived so or so. And will this Man of Criticism deny that there may be a
Verbal as well as a Real Consideration of a Thing, or that a Mystery, or any
other Thing whatsoever, may not be considered and treated of according to it is
Name as well as according to it is Nature, and that these are two distinct
Considerations of almost every Thing that falls under Discourse, and so
distinct, that one may pass upon a Thing without the other? Let him deny this
if he can, and show some other Reason besides his own Spite and Ignorance for
such a Partial, Malicious Half-quotation of the Animadverters words. But
perhaps he has here a Quarrel at the Particle [ A] and instead of [A Mystery]
would have it only [ Mystery]. But if this should pervert the meaning of the
Sentence in English, I suppose it will equally pervert the same in Latin too;
since what is sense or nonsense in one Language must be equally so in Another.
And therefore we will try how the matter is like to prove, according to this
Method. For I think it may be no less a Charity to this Author sometimes to
turn English for him into Latin, than what was before shown him by the
Animadverter, in now and then turning a piece of Latin for him into English.
Now the words in the Animadverter being these. A Mystery, according to the
common signification of the word, is derived either from the Greek (...), etc.
must in Latin run thus. Mysterium secundum vulgariter receptum vocis hujusce
usum derivatur vel a Graeco vocabulo (...), etc. Now let this* Aristarchus
declare, whether there is any failure either of Sense or Propriety in the
Sentence thus translated, and where it is. And if this be a true and proper
Translation, then I am sure that what appears so in Latin must be equally so
in English. But why should I spend words in disputing a thing so obvious to any
Man of Sense? For will any one living, who is so, deny it to be a most
pertinent and proper way to give an Account of Things by the signification of
the words which they are couched under? and withal, to prove and make good
that signification yet further, by its derivation from another and more remote
word? What Judgment the Reader will pass upon this Man's Temper and Abilities
for this Objection, I know not; but for my own part, I protest I can hardly
think him well in his Wits, that he should offer such stuff to Public View,
which one grain of sense would convince him deserves rather to be hooted at
than replied to.

But this is not all; for we have him again at his old Blunder about the
Anti-Nicene Fathers, p. 17. l. 2. though he had been so deservedly corrected
and exposed for it before. But whosoever, or whatsoever these Anti-Nicene
Fathers were, I find it past my skill to persuade the World that the Greek
(...) and the Latin ante, signify the same Thing; though to this Author, I
confess they may, to whom Hebrew, Greek and Latin come all alike.

And again, in a Greek Quotation, p. 22. (in which sort of Quotations he never
fails to show his Parts) we have these words. (...), instead of (...), etc.
which indeed is but a false Concord; and that, we know, ought to pass but for a
^light thing in a Grammarian above Ordinances. So that we see here that the
Trade of Blunders, Solecisms, and false Syntax (as dead as all other Trading
is) continues as Quick and full upon this Author's hands as ever. And the truth
is, I have had such Experience of him, and know him by so true a measure, that
wheresoever there is any thing of Grammar in the Case, I never expect any other
or better from him: And I heartily pity all Greek or Latin that falls under
his hands.

And so I pass from his Critical to his Polemical Achievements; not doubting
but I shall find him so extremely like himself in both, that neither shall the
Critic have any Cause to laugh at the Disputant, nor the Disputant to reproach
the Critic. Now his whole Work consists of these Two Parts.

I. First, A general Scheme or Draught of his Hypothesis. II. Secondly, An
Answer (as he calls it) to the Animadverter's Arguments.
I. As to the First of which, since it is not brought by way of Reply to the
Animadversions, it might justly be slighted, and, according to all the Laws of
Disputation, passed over without the least notice taken of it: And so much the
more, because it is little else but a dull tedious Crambe recocta of his
Self-Consciousness and Mutual-Consciousness served up again and again, and
obtruded upon the Reader ad nauseam usque: as if the bare Repetition of his
baffled Notions were enough to recover and set them upon their legs again.
Nevertheless, that he may not think Tautology a Thing of such Virtue, as to be
able to re-settle his broken Hypothesis upon any firmer ground than it stood on
before; what has been here offered by him, by way of After-game in his forlorn
Defense of it, shall be duly and fairly examined.

And here, to show the World that he can write with as little regard to Truth,
as sense of Shame, he begins his Discourse with a very gross Falsehood, viz.
That all that he affirmed in his Vindication, etc. concerning a Trinity in
Unity, was, That it is a Possible and Intelligible Notion, and no other in
Sense and Substance than what the Ancient Fathers made use of to represent this
great Mystery by, though expressed in other Terms, etc. p. 4. l. 18.

Now the first part of this Assertion I affirm in the Face of the World to be
scandalously false. For he has not only asserted his Notion of a Trinity in
Unity (the only Thing here in Debate) to be Possible and Intelligible; but also
Plain and Easy, and such as solves all Doubts and Difficulties, and ^lears off
all seeming Contradictions about it. These are his Words, Vindicat. Pref. p. 1.
l. 13. B. p. 66, 68, and 85. And I do here demand of him, Whether they are so
or no? If they are not, Let him declare me an Impudent Falsificator; and if
they are, Let him, or any of his Friends of the Tritheistical Tribe, prove,
That barely Possible and Intelligible (which is all that he here pretends to)
signify the same with Plain and Easy, and solving all Doubts and Difficulties
about the Trinity, (which are the very Words of his Vindication) if they can.

As for the next Thing asserted by him, and that with every whit as great a
Falsehood as the former, viz. That his Doctrine is the same with that of the
Fathers, though expressed in other Words. He ought (as he has been several
times urged and required) to have given the World a solid Reason, why the
Fathers Meaning should not be rather gathered from their own than from his
Words? And why, if they had the same meaning with him, they did not express it
in the same Words; the Words being so easy, and obvious at hand to be made use
of, and the Fathers withal so great Masters of Philosophy, Rhetoric, and
Expression? And I defy any Man of Sense alive to give a satisfactory Answer to
these Queries; But not one Tittle does this Author answer to these, or to all
that have been alleged or argued at large, against this his confident
bold-begging Asseveration in the 6 th, 7 th, and 8 th Chapters of the
Animadversions.

In the next place, with the same Assurance and Untruth, he tells us, That the
Substance of the Article of the Trinity is not concerned in his Hypothesis,
Defen. p. 4. And that there is no Innovation made by it in the Faith, nor any
Alteration of the least Term in it, p. 5. Which (as I said) is a very confident
Assertion, and it were well if the Truth of it could support the Confidence.
For notorious it is, that this Man has advanced not only such Terms but Notions
too, in his Explication of the Trinity, as the Catholic Church never yet made
use of, and such as the generality of our own Church do at this day condemn as
Novel and Heretical. And then, can this Man say, That he has innovated nothing
upon the Substance of this Article, which certainly does not consist merely in
the Words of it? Suppose an Arian should come and brazen it out, and pretend
Orthodoxy as to the Trinity, by saying, That he owns Three Persons and One God;
as in a certain sense of his own, he may, and no doubt, upon occasion, would:
Shall this Profession now warrant him Orthodox in this Article, when if he
should be put to it, to explain this Profession, he would never acknowledge
those Three Persons to be That One God? It is therefore mere Trifling to
allege the Verbal Profession of a Form, where it is evident that a Man
maintains such Doctrines as utterly overthrow the Sense of that Form. For
whosoever holds any Proposition inconsistent with, or subversive of another
Proposition held by him, can no more be said truly to own that other
Proposition, than if he actually and in terminis denied it; since surely there
may be a Real and Vertual, as well as a Verbal and Express Denial of Things.
But this Author thinks it an abundant Proof of his Orthodoxy in the Point
before us, that he pleads his entire acknowledgment of the Athanasian Creed in
all the Parts and Expressions of it. But by his favor I must tell him, that
neither is this sufficient, unless he could prove that he cannot Contradict
Himself. Forasmuch as a Man (He himself especially) may make a Verbal
profession even of that Creed also, and yet own and maintain Assertions
directly contrary to, and inconsistent with the Sense and Design of it. Now the
Design of this Creed is to assert such a perfect Unity in the Divine Nature or
Essence, and every essential Attribute of it, as shall exclude all
Multiplication of each, notwithstanding the Plurality and incommunicable
Distinction of the Divine Persons. This, I say, is the Design of the Athanasian
Creed, and does our Author's Hypothesis fall in and agree with it? If so, let
us make Trial of it, by casting the Principal Part of his Hypothesis into the
Athanasian Form, thus. The Father is [Infinite Spirit], the Son is [Infinite
Spirit], and the Holy Ghost is [Infinite Spirit] and yet they are not Three
Infinite Spirits, but one Infinite Spirit. So runs the Athanasian Form; but
then the illative Proposition, viz. That they are not Three Infinite Spirits,
is a direct Contradiction to this Author's Hypothesis, who positively affirms,
That the Three Divine Persons are Three Infinite Spirits; and I as positively
affirm, That Three Infinite Spirits are Three Gods. And this, I suppose, makes
an Alteration in this Article with a vengeance, an Alteration in the very
Substance of it, if a Total Subversion can with any Propriety of Speech be
called an Alteration. But this Author defends not himself only by his
Acknowledgment of the Athanasian Creed, but also by alleging his perfect
Concurrence with the Schoolmen, viz. That he asserts the Unity of the Godhead
in as high Terms as ever the Schools did, even a Natural Numerical Unity
thereof, p. 5. lin. 3. But does not this Man in his Vindication, p. 114. lin.
26. tell us, That the Fathers (and Gregory Nyssen in particular) asserted a
Specific Unity of the Divine Nature, and meant no other by the (...), than an
Union in such an one, and that for so holding, none ought to quarrel or find
fault with them, forasmuch as they asserted also a Numerical Unity of the said
Nature? And therefore if this Author did indeed hold the Unity of the Godhead,
in as high Terms as the Schools did, I would Know, what should make him talk
thus of a Specific Unity of the Deity in the forecited place, and not only
there, but of something Analogous to this Specific Unity, even in this Defense
also, p. 17. l. 19. For I am sure the Schools allow of no such Thing. Nor is
this all, but he also advances an Absurdity so peculiarly his own, (how falsely
soever he may charge the Fathers) that none, who had but drank in the first
Elements of Logic and Philosophy, ever held, or, I believe, so much as dreamed
of before; viz. Such an Unity in the Divine Nature, as is partly Specifical,
and partly Numerical; that is to say, partly Universal, and partly Particular,
p. 17. l. 26. A thing so monstrously illogical and contradictious, That to
mention it is to confute it. So that the Reader may here see how grossly he is
like to be imposed upon; if he takes this Author's word for a Just and True
Account of his Hypothesis.

But he is now entering upon his Grand Project (and a great one it is
undoubtedly) viz. To give the World a fuller, a clearer, and a more
Intelligible Notion of a Trinity in Unity, than all the Fathers and the
Catholic Church ever had of it for above sixteen hundred Years before. And, as
a Preparation to this, he tells us, page 5. lin. 16. That the Great Objection
all along against the Article of the Trinity has been the Unconceivableness of
it: And therefore, no doubt, there must needs be the highest Reason and
Necessity in the World for the Churches admitting this Man's New Explication of
it, as the only sure Expedient to remove this mighty Objection, and so to
render a Trinity in Unity for ever after Plain, Easy, and Intelligible. But I
must remind this Author, by the way, That the Catholic Church, having ever
looked upon this as the greatest of Mysteries, never made the Unconceivableness
of it any Objection against it at all: and She had been very inconsistent with
Her self, if she had. But he tells us here, That the Fathers indeed endeavored
to help our Conceptions and Imaginations of this mysterious Union by some
sensible Images, such as the Union of the Sun, its Light, and Splendor, of a
Fountain and its Streams, and of a Tree and its Branches; p. 6. l. 5. Adding
very gravely, That every one Knows this, who has looked into the Fathers, (as
no doubt Mr. Dean has, and so have most Booksellers too). But he proceeds and
tells us, That these material Images might serve to render the Notion of a
Trinity in Unity Possible and Credible, p. 6. And if they did so much, I
affirm, that they did that, which the Catholic Church (being otherwise certain
of the Article it self from the Scripture) then fully acquiesced in, without
venturing or proceeding any further. And where then, I pray, was the Defect of
these material Images and Resemblances, as they were used and applied by the
Fathers? Why, our Author in the next Words tells us, That the Defect of them
was in this, That they could not help us to conceive what kind of Union it is
that is between the Divine Persons, p. 6. l. 16. But this I deny, as utterly
false. For first, this Mysterious Union of the Divine Persons, which the
Fathers endeavored to give the World some Resemblance of, was, as to the Kind
of it, an Union in Nature, Essence, or Substance; and that in Opposition to an
Union by bare Consent, or any other Union whatsoever, less than that in Nature
or Essence. So that the Kind of Union is here assigned. And then, as for what
he says of the Inability of these Resemblances to help us to conceive of this
Kind of Union; If he means, that they could not help us to any Conception of it
at all, this also is false; for so far as the Resemblance reached, the
Conception formed thereupon might reach too; the first indeed was but
Imperfect, and consequently the other could be but Proportionable. But if He
means, that the said Resemblances could not help us to a full and perfect
Conception of this Union, I must tell him, That neither did the Fathers then
pretend to it, nor the Church to this Day need it. And I demand of him whether
he, or any Man living, can frame in his Mind such a Conception of it? Or can
inform us how, and by what particular Way this Substantial Union passes through
all the Divine Persons so, that with full reserve of their Personal
Incommunicable distinctions they shall yet become one, in, and by one and the
same Numerical Divine Nature, common to them all? No; the Learnedest Doctors of
the Christian Church have always looked upon this as a Mystery beyond their
Reach; and though they were sufficiently satisfied of the Possibility and
Credibility of the Thing it self by the forementioned Resemblances, and (which
was a much greater Conviction) stood assured of the Truth of it by Divine
Revelation, yet as to a full and comprehensive Knowledge of the matter of the
Article, they ever accounted it above their Conceptions or Explications, and
revered it with a Distance suitable to such Apprehensions. This I say was the
Judgment and discreet Conduct of the Catholic Church about this important
Point of Faith.

But this Author, it seems, is of another Mind, and having took up a quite
different design is resolved upon a very different Method; and accordingly he
here declares, that the Dean (that is himself) is certainly in the Right (as he
always is, if you will take his own word for it) in searching for some Image or
Resemblance of this Mysterious Union in the Unity of a Spirit; giving us this
Reason for it, That God is a Spirit, and that a Mind or Spirit is the truest
Image of God that is in Nature, page 6. lin. 21. And this may be allowed him
for a good Reason, provided it be joined with Another, without which it is no
Reason at all; And that is, That he himself Knows, or (in the Language of des
Carts from whom he is now borrowing) has a clear and distinct perception, what
a Spirit, and what the Unity of a Spirit is, and wherein it consists; for
otherwise he goes about to explain one unknown Thing by another, which is
equally unknown it self. Which kind of method, I must tell him, the Fathers in
the Resemblances they gave of a Trinity (and which he so much slights) were too
good Disputants to make use of. And therefore it is to be hoped, that this
Author both has himself, and will impart to us, such a clear and distinct
Notion of a Spirit, and of the Unity of a Spirit, as may be fit to found such
an Explication of the Trinity upon, as he has promised to oblige the World
with. And this we must expect to find (if we find it at all) in the following
Propositions, viz.

That we know nothing of a Spirit, nor of the Unity of a Spirit neither, but
what we feel in our selves, p. 6. at the end. And this we are to look upon as
the Cornerstone in the New Structure he intends us of a Cartesian Trinity.
After which he advances two other Propositions, p. 7.

1. That the very Nature of a Spirit consists in Internal or vital Sensation.
2. That the Unity of a Spirit consists in the Continuity of its Sensation.
Both which Propositions must be Examined. And here in the

First place, I deny that there is any such Thing as Sensation, whether
Internal or External, belonging to Spirits not vitally united to Organized
Bodies. For Sensation is properly the perception of a sensible Object by a
sensible Species of it imprinted upon and received into the proper Organ by
which each sensitive faculty operates and exerts it self. This, I say, is
Sensation, and accordingly, as it is External or Internal, so it has External
or Internal Organs allotted to it; but still both of them Corporeal. And
therefore for this Man to talk of Spiritual Sensation is nonsense and a
contradiction in the Terms, and consequently not to be allowed. It is true
indeed that the word [Sence] with the derivatives of it [sensible] [sentiment]
and the like, do often signify intellectually, as [ sic sentio] is as much as
sic judico, sic existimo. And [ this is my sense of such a Thing] is all one as
to say [this is my opinion of it] and accordingly so far it may and does agree
to Spirits (though yet I cannot remember that I ever read the Term [ Sensation]
signifying intellectually but amongst the Cartesians.) But the Question here is
not about the word [Sence] so taken, viz. in a large, popular, and improper
signification; but, as this Author still takes it, Strictly, Properly, and
Philosophically, and as contra-distinct to Knowledge, and as he speaks of it,
Defen. p. 77. lin. 21. Where he says, that he who cannot distinguish between
Intellectual Sense and Knowledge, is as unfit to meddle in this controversy, as
a blind man is to dispute of Colors. I say, in this sense, and as thus taken
by this Author, I absolutely deny that there is any such Thing as Sensation
belonging to separate Spirits. For all cognitive or perceptive Acts, that a
Spirit is capable of, are Acts of Cogitation or Intellection, direct or reflex.
And I do here further affirm, that nothing can be alleged as perceivable by
this supposed Sensation, which a Spirit does not fully perceive by the said
Acts of Cogitation or Intellection. So that if there really were such a thing
as this Sensation, it could be of no use at all to a Spirit to perceive any
thing by, whether without or within it self. And therefore I would have this
Author take notice, that I both deny the thing, and challenge him in his next
Defense to prove, by Argument, that there are in Spirits, not vitally united to
Bodies, any such Things as Acts of Spiritual Sensation, distinct from Acts of
Cogitation or Intellection. For all Sensation, in the very essential Notion of
it, imports a dependence upon Matter: and it is not this Author's getting a
Cartesian mis-applied Word by the end that can overruled the Sense, which both
Philosophers and Divines have universally hitherto understood, and used it in.
In the

2 d. place, I affirm it to be the greatest Absurdity and Paradox in the World
to hold, That the Nature of any Thing consists in any Act proceeding from that
Thing; and consequently I deny that the Nature of a Spirit does or can consist
in Sensation, (allowing the Word here for Disputation sake). Forasmuch as this
Sensation (still supposing such a Thing in a Spirit) must proceed and flow from
the Nature of that Spirit; and, upon that account being Postnate to it, cannot
be that wherein the said Nature does consist. This I know to be in effect the
same Argument with the first, brought by the Animadverter to prove it
Impossible for Self-Consciousness to be that wherein the Personality of Created
Beings does consist. And so long as the Being or Entity of the Agent must in
Order of Nature precede its Action, I affirm the Argument to be unanswerable,
and am not ashamed again and again to own it for a Demonstration. Nevertheless,
since this Author, to evade the force of the forementioned Argument, shamefully
changes the Terms of it, by putting the Principle instead of the Act it self,
page 39. it is not impossible but that (in his next Defense) he may do the same
here, and tell us, That by Sensation he means not the Act but the Principle of
Sensation; that is to say, that he means that by it, which the word never did,
or can properly signify. In short therefore, I demand of this Man, whether this
Term [Sensation] so often used by him signifies the Act, or the Principle of
Action. If he owns it to signify the Act (as all Men of Sense and Philosophy
know it does) then I affirm, that it cannot signify the Principle of Action but
by a Metonymy of the effect for the Cause: And I do affirm further, that (since
in declaring the strict and Philosophical Truth of Things, Tropes and
Metonymies are by no means to be allowed of) no Man's after-meaning ought in
dispute to be admitted in bar of the Confutation of his express words. For if
this should take place, there could be no discoursing ad idem, and consequently
no Argumentation in any Case. And yet this is this Author's constant way (and
that even to the Degree of Impudence) that being baffled in his words he still
takes Sanctuary in his meaning, which practice we shall have frequent occasion
to expose him for. But however to cut off all subterfuge from this Shifter, if
we here admit Sensation to be taken for the Principle of Sensation, it is
certain, that this Principle must be the Essence of the Spirit which this
Sensation is said to belong to; (the Essence of every Thing being the proper
Productive Principle of all the Operations of that Thing;) But then we must
observe also, That the Essence of every Thing sustains the office of a double
Principle. First of an Internal Principle giving Being to the Thing of which it
is the Essence; and Secondly of an efficient Principle of all the Actions or
Operations belonging to that Thing; and it discharges the office of the former
antecedently in Nature to that of the Latter: So that the same Essence is a
Principle of Being before it is a Principle of Action, even with reference to
the same Agent; and consequently as it is a Principle of Action it is not
properly and formally a Principle of Being. And this Argument with any one
acquainted with the True Principles of Philosophy (of which this Author
understands not one Tittle) quite overthrows that assertion of his, viz. That
the very Nature of a Spirit consists in Sensation, and that whether we take it
for the Act, or Principle of Sensation; and plucks it up by the very roots. But
I shall refer the Reader, for his further satisfaction, to my Vindication of
the forementioned Argument, where I shall more fully canvas and confute this
pitiful shift; not being willing to anticipate that here, which will come in
more directly and naturally in another place. Thirdly, As I have shown, That
the Nature of a Spirit cannot consist in Sensation, so I affirm, That neither
can the Unity of a Spirit consist in the fame. For Unity being the first
Transcendental mode or Affection of Being, and so in reality the same with it,
and consequently in order of Nature preceding all Acts flowing from it, can
never consist in any such Act or Number of Acts whatsoever. These Arguments I
know are wholly Metaphysical; but the Dispute being about Spirits, as to the
Nature, Unity, and Actings of them (things essentially abstracted from matter)
the very condition of the subject neither affords not admits of any other.

Well; but notwithstanding what has been argued against bare Sensation, may not
the Unity of a Spirit consist in continuity of Sensation? For this is it, which
this Author here expressly asserts, p. 7. In answer to which I must demand of
him, whether he has a clear and distinct Knowledge what this continuity of
Sensation is, and wherein it does consist? If he has such a Knowledge of it,
why then does he usher it in with those Terms of doubting and uncertainty ( as
I may so speak) for [ so speaks, and so says] must not be admitted in giving a
Philosophical state and account of Things. But if on the other side this Author
has not a distinct Knowledge of Continuity of Sensation (as it is manifest from
his inability clearly to express it, that he has not) then let us consider what
an Explication of an Unity in Trinity he is like to give us from a Thing which
he neither distinctly knows, nor can clearly express. For if he could do the
former, what Reason can there be why he should not be able to do the latter?
Now his method in explaining the Trinity (which he promises us such great
Things from) is this. He first tells us, That he is certainly in the right in
seeking for an Image of the mysterious Unity of the Divine Persons in the Unity
of a Spirit, p. 6. l. 21. and in the next place he tells us, That we can know
nothing of the Unity of a Spirit but what we feel in our selves. And here in
the last place he tells us, That all that we feel in our selves is this
Continuity of Sensation: but what this is he does not express, and gives us but
too much Reason from his own words to conclude that he cannot. So that here we
have an Explication of Unity in Trinity by Continuity of Sensation, but who
shall explain to us this Explication it self? For admit that the Unity of a
Created Spirit ^arries in it the nearest Resemblance to the Unity of the
Godhead in the Three Persons, yet how can this Unity of a Created Spirit be
explained by Continuity of Sensation, when the very Terms of this Explication
import a direct contradiction to the Nature of the Thing pretended to be
explained by them? For I defy all Mankind to form in their Minds such a
Conception of Continuity as does not essentially imply in it connection of
Parts; and where there are Parts there must be extension, and consequently
Divisibility: So that the sum of all is this, That the mysterious Unity of the
Trinity is explained to us by the Unity of a Spirit; and the Unity of a Spirit
which can have neither Parts, Extension, nor Divisibility, is explained to us
by something which necessarily implies them all. For in giving an Account of
the Nature of a Thing by Continuity, nothing but a Real Continuity, a
Continuity properly so called can take place. And it will be in vain here for
this Author to plead that we Know not the Nature of a Spirit. For this he had
told us before (in the 7 th, and 8 th pages of his Vindication) and that
therefore not being able to express it adequately, we must be contented to
express it as well as we can, viz. [by so speaks, and so says, and by
Continuity where there can be no Parts]; for such a Plea, though admitted,
would manifestly give up his Cause, by showing that he had undertook to explain
the Unity in Trinity by such an Unity as he himself can neither conceive nor
express. We have seen therefore what these two Propositions, viz. That the very
Nature of a Spirit consists in Internal Sensation; and the Unity of a Spirit in
Continuity of Sensation; amount to: but let us now see how he proves them; for,
I fancy, the World will hardly take them upon his bare (...).

And here, supposing that I need not tell the Reader, That this Author, by
Sensation, and Continuity of Sensation, means Self-Consciousness; we shall find
that his Argument runs thus. So far as a Man feels himself, or is
self-conscious, so far he is one ^^tire Person. For it is a self-evident
Proposition, That in an Intelligent Self-Conscious Being, [self] can reach no
further than he feels himself. And I would desire any thinking Man to tell me,
how he Knows himself to be a distinct and separate Person from all other Men,
but only by this, That he feels his own Thoughts, Volitions, Passions, etc. but
feels nothing of all this in other Men, p. 7. l. 14.

But what wretched Inconsequences are these? Self can reach or exist no further
than a Man feels himself, and therefore a Man's feeling himself and his
Existence is that wherein Self and the Existence of self does consist: It
follows indeed from hence, That his Feeling is the measure of his Existence. So
that one cannot extend beyond the other, but that does not therefore place his
Existence in his feeling that he does exist. A particular determined Portion of
Matter cannot reach or exist beyond the Quantity that bounds or determines it;
but does the Existence and Being of that Matter therefore consist in this
Quantity? The Body of a Man cannot extend further than its just Stature, but
does the Body therefore consist in its Stature? Again, A Man cannot (as this
Author-says) Know himself to be a separate distinct Person from all other Men,
but by Self-Consciousness and Internal Sensation, and therefore, forsooth,
these are and must be the Things wherein his being a distinct Person does
consist. And let any one alive show that this Argument proves any more if he
can. But this Man confounds the Principle of Knowledge with the Principle of
Being all along. Whereas the Point here is, Whether the Unity and Distinction
of a Spirit consists in Internal Sensation as the formal Reason of it, not
whether Internal Sensation be that, whereby alone a Spirit can Know it self to
be one with it self, and distinct from all others? For though this latter be
granted to this Author as often as he pleases; yet the former will be as
stiffly denied him. I find and feel my self to be one Man, and to be distinct
and separate from all others; but does this therefore make me to be so? Or does
my being so consist in my feeling my self to be so? One would think that a Man
should be ashamed to argue at this Rate; especially having been baffled in it
more than once. But it is a Custom, which he is grown old in, To be baffled and
to talk on, and it is too late to cure him of it now.

In the mean time there are some other choice Things, which deserve our
consideration, and particularly this: So far (says He) as a man feels himself,
or is Self-Conscious, he is one entire Person, where this Self-Conscious
Sensation ends he becomes a distinct and separate Person, p. 7. l. 13. But is
it possible for the mind of Man to imagine any one to be an entire Person, and
consequently one in himself, and yet nor distinct from all others besides? when
the very essential Notion of Unity connotes Distinction too; and when according
to all the Rules of Philosophy, that which is the Principle of Constitution to
any thing, is the Principle also of Distinction to the same. Every Thing being
distinguished from all other Things by what it is in it self. Continuity of
Sensation (he says) makes a Man one in himself, and the ending, or ne plus
ultra of that Sensation makes him a distinct Person. And yet he appeals to
every Thinking Man whether he knows himself to be a distinct Person any other
way than by this Self-Conscious Sensation. Whereas he had said but just before,
that it is the ending of this Self-Conscious Sensation which makes him a
distinct Person: and if so, can he then know himself to be a distinct and
separate Person by that which must be at an end before he can be a distinct
Person? Certainly a grosser and more fullsome contradiction scarce ever dropped
from the Tongue or Pen of Man: and if this be not Nonsense in the highest, and
gibberish truly so called, I dare averr, that Bedlam affords none.

But his Complement to the Animadverter must not be passed over so; for whose
Instruction, (forsooth) he says, he was so large in his Discourse about
Sensation and Self-Consciousness, p. 7. For since he is so very kind, he must
give me leave to be as Charitable in my Admonitions, as he was liberal in his
Instructions; and accordingly to advise him for the future to keep his
Instructions to himself, and what he can spare, to bestow upon his Boys, that
so they may not at their Father's Age come to need such correction as their
Father has had. And whereas he says, the Animadverter understood not one word
of his Hypothesis, I must here tell him in the Animadverter's Name, That he
accounts it no disparagement at all to any Man of Sense not to understand Him,
who speaks none.

But he proceeds, and to show us how methodical he is in his Absurdities, he
tells us, That the Dean (as certainly no man living was ever so much a Dean in
his own Eyes) having observed, That the Unity of a single Spirit consists in
such a Natural Self-Conscious Sensation, this led him on to that other Notion
of mutual Consciousness which may be between Three distinct Spirits, and make
them Naturally one (as much as Three can be one). p. 7. l. 29. And that in good
earnest is a limitation with a Witness; a limitation amounting to an utter
Negation of the Thing, which it is applied to: It being impossible for Three
distinct Absolute Beings (which Three distinct Spirits certainly are) to be One
by one Numerical Nature belonging in common to them. But besides, observe the
fallacy couched under this Ambiguous Parenthesis (as much as Three can be one)
for by [Three] here he may either mean Three Spirits, or Three Persons: And he
imposes grossly upon his Reader, and begs the Question besides, if he supposes
that Three Divine Persons cannot be more United than Three Spirits; or that
mutual Consciousness is the greatest Union that Three Persons are capable of.
Both which are utterly false, and the very Things now under Dispute. And we
shall presently show the vast disparity between Persons and Spirits, with
reference to the Union, which each of them may admit. But our Author goes on
thus. If (says he) a Natural Self-Conscious Sensation makes a Spirit one with
it self, why should not a mutual Conscious Sensation Unite Three into One? For
if Natural Unity extends as far as Conscious Sensation, then if Conscious
Sensation extends to Three, why should not These Three be acknowledged to be
Naturally One? p. 8. l. 1. To which I answer First, That it has been already
shown, that although this Conscious Sensation be that whereby a Spirit knows it
self to be One and distinct from all others, yet it is not that which makes it
so (and the supposing of this is the (...), which runs through this Man's whole
Hypothesis) and consequently, whatsoever is argued from this supposition,
toward the proving the same of mutual Consciousness with reference to Three
Spirits, which had been asserted of Self-Consciousness with reference to one,
must fall to the ground with it. But secondly, Because he asks a Reason why
mutual Consciousness may not give Natural Unity to Three Spirits, as well as
Self-Consciousness does to one? (though the former is the greater Absurdity of
the Two) yet since both Assertions are equally false, I shall give this one
Reason against Both, viz. Because Consciousness or Sensation is not properly
Nature but an Affection of Nature, or an Act springing from it; and therefore
Unity of Consciousness or Sensation cannot be properly Unity of Nature, nor
consequently can it constitute the subject it belongs to, Naturally One. And
whereas, according to his Sophistical way, he calls it a Natural Self-Conscious
Sensation, p. 7. l. 30. If by Natural he means that wherein Nature does
consist, or which gives Being and Unity to a Thing, in that Sense, (as it has
been proved all along) Self-Consciousness cannot be termed Natural: But if by
Natural he means that which proceeds from Nature that is true, but comes not up
to his Purpose. Well; but supposing that Consciousness or Sensation were indeed
the Nature of the Thing Conscious, or (in other words) that, wherein the Being
of the said Thing did consist, and consequently that Unity of Consciousness
were Unity of Nature too (as it is certain that neither of them are) yet for
that very cause I deny that this Consciousness, and Unity of Consciousness can
belong in common to Three distinct Absolute Beings. For as much as every
Absolute Being is constituted such by a Particular, Proper, and Distinct Nature
of it is own, belonging to it and included in it, and distinguishing it from
every other Absolute Being besides; and therefore it is impossible for any
particular Nature Numerically one, to be in any more Absolute Beings, than in
one Alone. In three several Persons indeed, whose several Personalities, and
Personal Distinctions consist properly in Three Distinct Relations, nothing
hinders but that the same Numerical Nature (if Infinite) may be in them all;
for as much as the same Numerical Nature may sustain all these Three distinct
Relations. And herein consists the great Disparity between Spirits which are
absolute Beings, and the Divine Persons which are not so; and this is true
Reason and Consequence, and proof against all that this Novellist can allege
against it. But after all, in the third and last place, The very ground upon
which this Man builds from first to last, in proving That Mutual-Consciousness
or Sensation gives natural Unity to Three distinct Spirits, is false, and sinks
under him. For he supposes all along, that this Mutual-Consciousness is one
Numerical Natural Act, which upon his Principle, viz. [ That the Three Divine
Persons are Three Infinite Spirits.] I utterly deny; and on the contrary affirm
it to be only a complex and collective Unity consisting of and containing in it
Three distinct Acts of Consciousness, whereof one belongs to each of his Three
Spirits, and is that whereby each Spirit knows or feels (let him call it which
he will) all that is in, or is known or felt by the other Two Spirits. This I
affirm, and challenge this Author, when he enters upon this dispute again, to
disprove. For whatsoever is the Act of an Absolute, distinct Being, must it
self be as distinct as that Being is. And so his Principal Notion of Three
distinct Spirits being naturally one, by one Mutual Consciousness extending to
them all, falls to nothing. For surely Three distinct Consciousnesses, or Acts
of Consciousness (which this Mutual Consciousness consists of) can never make
Three Spirits naturally One; since these Three Acts are not Naturally but only
Collectively one themselves; and accordingly under that Unity and no other can
they be expressed by that one Denomination [ Mutual Consciousness.]

But he proceeds, and to show the World what an Iron-Necessity, or rather what
a Cruel Bondage one Imperious Absurdity will bring the Maintainer of it under;
he tells us in the 8 th page, That it was This, (viz. his Notion of
Self-Consciousness, and Mutual-Consciousness) that forced the Dean (as no
Absurdity affects Mr. Dean's Privilege of standing alone by it self) to speak
of the Three Infinite and Eternal Persons in the Godhead, under the Character
of Three Infinite and Eternal Minds. For this Conscious Sensation, whether
Self-Consciousness or Mutual-Consciousness, can belong only to Minds. Which
latter I here absolutely deny; and in this one word [ Minds] plurally used by
him he manifestly begs the Question again, and supposes the Chief Thing to be
proved, viz. That there is a Plurality of Infinite Minds to which this
Self-Consciousness and Mutual-Consciousness must belong: For what [ Minds] else
can he here mean? Not finite or created Minds, For he himself in the 67 th page
of his Vindication, denies that this Mutual-Consciousness can belong to any
created Minds or Spirits. So that it is evident, that he here speaks of
Infinite Minds, (which (as I said) being the Thing chiefly disputed, ought to
have been proved by him before presumed:) and consequently that he speaks also
of such a Self-Consciousness and such a Mutual-Consciousness as import Infinite
Knowledge; and since they do so, I deny that they can belong to any more [
Minds] than one, I say, than to One Eternal Infinite Mind, which is God blessed
for ever. For being Acts of Knowledge they follow and flow from the Divine
Essence and Nature common to the Three Persons; and are no more than the Divine
Omniscience terminating upon all and each of the Persons, as so many Particular
Objects contained within its adequate Object, which is all Things Knowable.
Admitting therefore that this Self-Consciousness, and Mutual-Consciousness
(being nothing else but the Divine Omniscience thus diversely terminated) may
infer a Plurality of Persons Knowable in the Godhead, yet I utterly deny that
they do or can infer in it a Plurality of Minds: forasmuch as the said Acts
belong to the Three Divine Persons (as has been just now observed) by virtue of
that One Infinite Mind, from which they flow, and which is numerically one and
the same in all Three.

But this Author is now upon an higher strain, and resolving (under the
Protection of a License) to open himself farther than before, tells us in plain
Terms, That if every Person in the Trinity, considered as a distinct Person, be
not a distinct Infinite and Eternal Mind, there is (he confesses) an end of his
Notion, p. 8. And I think it had been well for the Church and himself too, if
it had never had a Beginning. But then he adds (with unsufferable Presumption
and equal Falsehood), That with that there will be an End of a Trinity of
Persons also, and that we shall have nothing left but a Trinity of Modes,
Postures, and Names, not in the Unity of the Godhead, but in the Unity of One
Person, who is the whole Deity. These are his detestably Heretical and
senseless Words. In answer to which I demand of this Confident Man, How he
dares, in defiance of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, place a Trinity of
Modes, Postures, and Names upon the same Level, as if they all indifferently
amounted but to the same Thing? Whereas Names are certainly of Arbitrary
Imposition, whether God or Man imposes them; and Postures none ascribe to God
but that silly Sort of Men, the Anthropomorphites. But as for Modes, they
result eternally and necessarily from the Divine Nature, and eternally and
inseparably remain in it, and withal import such distinct Relations as can
never coincide in one and the same Person: and how then can this Ignorant Man
talk of the Unity of one Person who is the whole Deity or Godhead, when these
Three Relations can never concur in such an Unity of Person, but all of them
may and do concur in the Unity of the Godhead? In a word, I do here ask this
bold Man, whether he will venture to affirm, That the Divine Nature, determined
or modified by such a certain subsistence or subsisting Relation is a mere Mode
or no? and I do here leave it to his second Thoughts, whether he will venture
to say so. And if not, why does he here against his Conscience reproach the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church (for so it is) as if it established a Trinity
of mere Modes? Which it is so far from, that I do here affirm against this
Author, and others who speak like him upon this Subject, That according to the
sense of the Catholic Church, The Three Divine Persons are Three distinct
Relative Modes of Subsistence, or Three subsisting Relations of one and the
same Infinite Divine Nature included in all and each of them; or again, They
are the Divine Nature it self subsisting with Three distinct Relations. This, I
say, I affirm, and doubt not but that to all Men of sense it confutes the Three
Divine Persons being Three mere Modes, and shows, withal, what an irrational
Blasphemous Cavil it is to call them so. For certainly a Mode in concretion
with the Essence, cannot with the least pretense of Reason be called a mere
Mode. And This I do again avouch for the Doctrine of the Catholic Church
concerning the Trinity; and do over and over challenge this Pert Novellist to
disprove it if he can.

But in the next place he is for confirming his Tr^^^theistical Assertion with
this Invincible Argument (as he thinks, Poor Man!) p. 8, 9. If (says he) every
distinct Person in the Godhead considered as Distinct, be not an Infinite and
Eternal Mind, as it must be, if every distinct Person be God (unless any Thing
else than an Infinite Mind can be God) then, though it be an unusual way of
speaking to call them Three Eternal Minds, yet there is no Heresy in it, nor
any intended by it. In answer to which I must tell him, That I shall not much
concern my self about what he intends (it being his old way, when he is pressed
with his Words, to fly to his Intentions) but shall only consider what his
words express or infer: And whether they carry any Heresy in them or no, shall
appear presently. And in order to this, I must remind him of these Two Things.

First, That [ God] and [ Infinite Eternal Mind] are Terms perfectly
equipollent. And

Secondly, That in Terms equipollent, putting one in the room of the other, you
may argue with the same consequence from one, that you can from the other.

According to which rule we will try the force of his Argument, by proposing it
with the bare change of one of the forementioned Terms for the other, Thus. If
every distinct Person in the Godhead, considered as distinct be [God] as it
must be if every distinct Person be an Infinite and Eternal Mind [unless any
thing else than [God] can be an [Infinite Mind] then though it be an unusual
way of speaking to call them Three Gods, yet there is no Heresy in it; nor (in
spite of his words) any intended by it.

Now let this Author consider how he will allow of this Conclusion; for if his
own Conclusion holds good, this is certainly good also; since the Validity of
the Consequence is the same in Both; the Matter of the Argument being the same,
and the Form of it the same too. There must be therefore a gross Fallacy in the
Argument it self, and it lies in the Homonomy of the Term [ as distinct]. For
the English Particle [ as], and the Latin [ qua or quatenus], thus applied has
Two Significations. 1. The first importing any Qualification specifying,
affecting, or any way denominating the Subject: and so [a Person as distinct],
signifies no more than [a Person who is distinct, or a Person under this
Qualification or Denomination]: 2. But, secondly, the other Signification of
the Particle [ as] is causal, and imports a causal Connection of the Term to
which it is joined, with some Predicate or Attribute belonging to the Subject;
and so [a Person as distinct], signifies as much as [a Person because distinct,
or by reason of his distinction]. And this makes an Attribute to be necessarily
and universally predicated of its Subject; so that if the Subject be
multiplied, the Thing predicated of it must be multiplied too; but in the
former Signification of the Particle [ as] it is not so; for as much as the
Predication imported thereby is only Accidental, and has no causal, necessary,
nor Universal Connection with it is Subject. Accordingly in the causal sense of
the Term [ as distinct] I must tell him, that no Person in the Godhead [ as
distinct] is an Infinite Eternal Mind; that is to say, This Attribute belongs
not formally to his Distinction; and that his Distinction is not the cause or
reason that it is affirmed of him. For it is an Attribute Springing from the
Divine Nature, which is in the Person, and not from his Personality or Personal
Distinction; for as much as that does not properly and formally make him to be
God, nor is that wherein his Godhead does precisely consist, though by Reason
of the Persons including in him the Nature, it does indeed imply and suppose
him to be God. And thus all the Ancient Orthodox Divines and Doctors of the
Church distinguish in each Person Two things, though intimately and inseparably
United, viz. The Godhead or Divine Nature, and the Personal distinguishing
Relation, so that what agrees to the Person upon one Account, does not properly
belong to him upon the other; and consequently to make the Personal Distinction
the Proper Reason of any essential Predication, is utterly false and illogical.
And accordingly to say, that [ Infinite, Eternal Mind], which is an Essential
Attribute of the Divine Nature as such, belongs to any One Person, by reason of
his Personal Distinction, is false; forasmuch as this would infer it to belong
to that Person only, since his Personal Distinction belongs only to himself. It
belongs indeed to him, though distinct, but not because distinct: but wholly
because of his Divine Nature, which belonging equally to all the Divine
Persons, all the Essential Attributes of the said Nature must equally belong to
all the Three Persons too. From all which it follows, That since [ Infinite
Eternal Mind] is an Attribute not springing from Personal Distinction even in
Distinct Persons, nor agreeing to the said Persons* upon that account, but
springing wholly from that One Divine Nature which is Common to them All; it
can never infer, the Three Persons, though Distinct, to be Three Infinite
Eternal Minds; since, as I show before, the Connection between [a Distinct
Person] as the Subject, and between [ Infinite Mind] as the Predicate, not
being causal, the Multiplication of the Subject can never infer the
Multiplication of the Predicate. And this I affirm to be a full and true
Account of this Matter, and a clear Solution of the Fallacy which this Man's
whole Argument depended upon; and consequently that his Tritheistical
Hypothesis, That the Three Distinct Divine Persons must be therefore Three
Distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, is, even by his own Confession, (would he
stand to it) at an end. And the Truth is, there is nothing in his whole Book
but pitiful wretched Fallacy joined with gross Ignorance of the Subject he
writes of, from first to last.

And yet, after all This, he makes his Hypothesis the only Rule to understand
most of the Scriptures by, which represent to us the Union between the Father
and the Son: and particularly that about the (...), expressed John 14. v. 11.
by the Son's being in the Father, and the Father in the Son. For (says he) That
the Father should be in the Son, and the Son in the Father, so as perfectly to
comprehend and be comprehended, with several like Expressions, is made very
Possible and Intelligible by a mutual conscious Sensation, but nothing else
will afford us any Conception of it, Def. p. 9. To which I answer, what if it
does not? And what Christian is concerned to have any such Conception? For did
the Catholic Church ever pretend to any beyond the bare Knowledge of the
Signification and Sense of the Terms in which it was revealed? And did not the
bare Revelation of it sufficiently make out the Possibility of it to us,
without any further Explication? What does this Profane Man mean thus to state
the very Possibility of a Thing expressly revealed in Scripture, upon his
Newfound Exposition of it; so that, unless this be admitted, we must (even in
spite of Revelation) look upon it as Impossible? Good God! whither are we
running? But to show moreover, That his Exposition is as Forced as New, Our
Savior expresses this Circumincession by words importing mutual Inexistence:
But, says this Man, (a Man made, it seems, to Correct Revelation it self, by
putting it into properer Words.) That such a mutual Inexistence cannot be
conceived Possible, unless we understand it of Mutual Consciousness; that is,
of quite another Thing from what the Words signify: for certain it is, that
mutual Inexistence is not mutual Consciousness, nor can mutual Consciousness be
mutual Inexistence. But, in short, will this Man say, That the mutual
Inexistence of the Father and the Son (understood according to the very Letter)
implies in it a Contradiction? I question whether he will dare say so,
whatsoever the Thing asserted by him may infer: For as for that pitiful
Objection, against the same Thing's comprehending another Thing and being
comprehended by it, etc. it is a mere Toy, founded only in that old Maxim,
Omne continens est majus contento, drawn off from Material Quantitative Beings,
and so not applicable to Immaterial and Spiritual; as has been fully shown in
the 9 th Chapter of the Animadversions, p. 299, and 300. But if this Author
will not venture to say, that such a mutual Inexistence (understood according
to the Letter) implies in it a Contradiction, then let him give the Church a
Satisfactory Reason, Why our Savior's Words should not be understood in their
own Natural, Proper Sense, but in this Man's New Sense, which is both Improper
and Figurative, and never heard of before. But with a bold Front he says, That
the (...) here spoken of is not otherwise Possible and Intelligible, (which Two
Words he is perpetually jumbling together, as if there might not be many things
Possible, and yet by Humane Reason not Intelligible). But I must here tell him
(what I dare say he knew not before) viz. That it is one thing Positively to
apprehend and know a Thing not to be Possible (which I defy him to prove this
mutual Inexistence (even understood literally) not to be); and another Thing
not to apprehend or Know, How or by what way a Thing is Possible. And this
latter I affirm ought never to supersede our Assent to any Thing, if revealed
to us; nor to make us doubt of the Revelation, nor are we at all concerned
about any further Explication of the Thing so Revealed, nor whether we ever
know any more of it or no; And this is my Opinion may serve an (...)-Man (which
is but another word for a Theological Quack) a great deal of trouble. But so
far is this Man's Mutual-Consciousness from being the only Thing that can
render this (...) intelligible, That unless a Mutual Inexistence be
presupposed, no such Thing as a Mutual-Consciousness can here take place; since
it is essentially founded in that. For surely Father and Son must exist
mutually in one Another, before they can know or be conscious to themselves
that they do so. But this point of the (...) has been so fully debated, and so
thoroughly cleared in the Animadversions, both in the seventh Chapter from page
201, to the 207. inclusively, and in the ninth Chapter from page 295, to 301.
that there needed not to have been so much as one word said of it here. But, as
I hinted before, though this Writer be confuted never so often, he takes no
notice of it; but still keeps on Writing, and (for ought I see) will never hold
his hand, till the Bookseller holds his.

In the next place, he seems to fall a pitch Lower than usual, and to be upon
the complaining strain, as that Men are spightful, and will not treat Mr. Dean
and his Absurdities, according to their Dignity: nor allow him such fair
Quarter as other Writers (he says) have met with in the same Cause. Adding
withal, That it is not to be expected, that in a matter of so high in Nature,
we should have such a comprehension of it, as to leave no difficulties
unexplained. Which I confess would be a fair Allegation from another Man; but
not from him. For has he not declared, That his Notion of a Trinity solves all
doubts and difficulties about it? See his Vindication, p. 66. l. 2. and 85. l.
last, and where all difficulties are solved, can there remain any Vnexplained?
Now I ask this Man, Are the words here quoted by me his, or are they not? If
they are his, then let all Mankind judge whether this Man has not eaten shame
and drunk after it (as the word is); who can, without the least sense of it, so
grossly contradict himself in the face of the World. But however let us hear
what he says. And here we have him alleging the Fathers setting forth the
Trinity by the Sun, and its light and splendour, by a Tree and it is Branches, a
Fountain and it is Streams, or a Mathematical Cube: and then bringing up the
Rear of all with these Questions. Are not these Accounts (says he) much more
chargeable with Tritheism, or Sabellianism, than the Account he gives of them
by Three Minds or Spirits? For are not the Sun and its light and splendour, as
much Three, but not so much one as Three Conscious Minds? p. 9. To which I
answer peremptorily, That the Sun and its light and splendour (not being Three
distinct Supposita) are much more one, than Three distinct Minds or Spirits
(which are Three Supposita) can possibly be; and cannot be more Three, than
Three distinct Minds or Spirits necessarily and essentially are. But I would
have the Reader here observe, what a wretched Sophism he is now Trumping upon
him, by arguing ab Imparibus tanquam paribus. For is an Account of a Thing by
way of Allusion, and an Account analogous to a Definition, all one? Is a
similitude or bare Resemblance of a Thing, and a proper Representation or
Description of the Nature of that Thing the same? Is there not a wide
difference between showing what a Thing is like, and what it really and
properly is? And to demonstrate that the Fathers applied the fore-alleged
Instances of Resemblance to the Trinity in a quite different way from what this
Author here does, when he represents the Three Divine Persons as Three Infinite
Minds, can he show us, That the Fathers ever positively affirmed or predicated
any of the said Resemblances used by them, of the Three Divine Persons so, as
to say, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are Sun, Light, and Splendour? But this
Author Categorically affirms, That Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are Three
distinct Minds or Spirits; and will he call this a bare Resemblance, and no
more? Nay; does he not give this as their True and proper Denomination, joining
them together and affirming one of the other by a strict, and logical
Predication? and must this pass for a mere Resemblance too? Wherefore I would
have his Ignorance take notice for the future, that an Allusion to a thing per
modum similitudinis, and a proper Account of it, quoad rei veritatem, and
dogmatically representing the Nature of the said Thing, do vastly differ, and
consequently, That to argue from one to the other can be fit for none but him,
whose Known Talent it is only to shift and to shuffle, and instead of answering
his Adversary, to put a Trick upon his Reader.

But he tells us, That he is now for discoursing something in general
concerning a Trinity in Unity, and concerning the words whereby to express it.
And here, as a foretast of the rest, it is something pleasant to see how he
expresses himself page 10. lines 17, 18. Where, having said, that a Trinity in
Unity is such a Distinction and such an Union (and why not Unity?) as is
peculiar to the Godhead. He adds, That there are some faint Resemblances of it
in Nature, yet Nature has nothing like it. Now I would have this Acute Author
tell me, How there can be Resemblances without Likeness, or Likeness without
Resemblance? For I never knew Two Things resemble one Another, but they were
like one Another too: Resemblance being nothing else but the Agreement of Two
or more Things in any one Qualification: and it is that Agreement which renders
and denominates them properly like. But if this Man means by Likeness an entire
Universal Agreement in all Respects, I must take the boldness to tell him that
he speaks Nonsense. Forasmuch as to be properly like a Thing, and to be an
Absolute Exact Copy of a Thing, wholly differ: there being a Rule in Logic,
(which I can assure him is as little a Friend to him, as he can be to that)
That Omne simile est dissimile; that is, That all Likeness, in the very Essence
of it, imports a Disagreement, in some Respects, as well as it denotes an
Agreement in others. After which horrible Thick-piece of Nonsense it might
justly be expected, that I should sprinkle this Rude Author with some of those
Rhetorical Flowers which he had so liberally bestowed upon the Animadverter;
such as Ingenious Blunderer, and one without Sense or Reason, etc. but I shall
only admire him under the Character which he has so modestly assumed to
himself, page 43. of being (forsooth) an (...)-Man; since if ever he could
pretend to that Title, it must be here: for surely to find out a Resemblance
where there is no Likeness must be an (...) worthy of the greatest and most
celebrated Invention. Otherwise to give it its due Character, it is a
confounded, shameless, Nonsensical contradiction, and it is hard to imagine
what it is like, unless it be this Author's Case of Non-resistance, set off
with Horse and Arms, as a Comment upon the Text, or a Gloss upon the Case.

And now in accounting for the words by which the Trinity is expressed
(according to his usual way of complementing the Fathers) he tells us, page 12.
line 18, 19. That they in their disputes upon this subject wanted words
adequately to express their sense. Which I for my part can see no Reason to
grant him: for though their sense and conceptions fell exceedingly short of the
sublimity of that subject (as when a finite Reason discourses of an Infinite
Being, it cannot but do) yet it is wholly gratis dictum, That the Fathers
wanted words fully and adequately to express their own sense and conception of
it* for surely, so far as any one conceives of a Thing, if he has a Command of
the Language he makes use of (as the Fathers plentifully had) he may express
himself proportionably to what he conceives.

But not to insist any further upon this. We have our Author in the next place
upon no small Trial of his skill, and that in such an Instance as (he well
knows) will very nearly affect his whole Hypothesis. For finding the World not
very ready to digest his Scandalous Notion of Three distinct Infinite Minds or
Spirits, he would fain slide it out of their sight by casting a mist before
their Eyes; and that is by offering to persuade the World, That the word [
Mind] may be as well applied to the Three in the Godhead as the word [ Person].
To which purpose he tells us page 13 line 17. That the word [Person] signifies
not only distinct but also separate subsistence, and was first used to signify
separately subsisting Beings, such as Men and Angels, and from thence was
applied by Theological use to signify also Persons having only a distinct
subsistence, as these in the Blessed Trinity have no more. Thus says He. In
Answer to which, and in direct contradiction to what he has here affirmed, I
deny that the Term [Person] does, or ever did signify separate subsistence, but
only complete subsistence. For though in its original use it signified indeed
separately subsisting Persons, such as Men and Angels; yet I deny that it
signified them under the Particular Notion, or formality of separate, or
properly denoted their separation, but only their completeness. And this is
undeniably proved from the Received Definition of a Person, That it is an
Intelligent Completely subsisting Nature, or an Intelligent Nature with, or
under a complete subsistence. So that an Intelligent Nature is one part of the
Definition, and the complete subsistence of it the other; which making up the
whole of it, it is manifest that it is Indifferent to signify all Intelligent
Natures thus completely subsisting, whether they be separate or only distinct;
and that without any regard either to their Separation or bare Distinction;
forasmuch as neither of these make any part of the Definition of a Person, as
has been shown: And therefore though I grant that the word [ Person] was first
applied to signify separate Subsistences, and afterward used to signify the
Subsistences of the Godhead which were only distinct but not separate, yet I
deny, that it did this by a Translation of the word from one sense or
signification to another, but only by enlarging and extending the use of it
(mark that) to more Things, than it was actually applied to at first; yet still
so, that it was applied with the same* Propriety to them all, and without the
least change of its original Signification. From all which I infer, That the
word [ Person] is a common Term equally drawn off from, and equally predicable
of [Persons] under both these ways of Subsistence, viz. Separate and barely
Distinct.

But before I proceed further, I shall from the foregoing Particulars remark
these Two Things.

First, That this Author, by asserting the word [ Person] to signify
originally, not only distinct but (what is more) Separate Subsistence, has
given the Socinians that Advantage, which the contrary Notion of it quite cuts
them off from: For most of their Arguments against a Trinity of Persons in the
Godhead are drawn from a Supposal, That the very Notion of a Person imports and
signifies a separately subsisting Being; and if this Author asserts the same
too, he fairly plays so much of the Game into their hands; and he must not
think to resume it at his pleasure, and to beat them off from the True and
Proper Signification of the Term (as he makes it) without being told by them,
That it is wholly precarious for him so to do, and a mere Petitio Principii.

But, Secondly, I must tell him also, (which yet can be no News to any one)
that he does by the same very grossly contradict himself: For having in the 13
th. Page said, that the Term [ Person] signifies not only a Distinct, but
something more, viz. a separate Subsistence: afterward in the 15 th Page, He
says, That the Word [ Person] is properly enough applied to the Three Divine
Persons: because all that is essential to the Notion of a Person belongs to
each of them, though they do not subsist sepa^ately: which is a manifest
Contradiction to what he had said before in the 13 th Page. For if a Person
signifies (as he there affirms) not only a Distinct, but also a Separate
Subsistence; then how can the Word [ Person] be properly applied to these Three
Subsistences, which are Distinct but not Separate? Or how can he truly affirm,
That all that is essential to the Notion of a Person, belongs to each of them,
if a [ Person] signifies (as he said before) not only a Distinct, but a
Separate Subsistence)? For whatsoever is included in the proper Signification
of it, must needs be essentially included in the Notion of it too. But let him
go on: for while he is contradicting himself, he is in his Element; and it
would be as unkind, as difficult, to offer to take him out of it.

But he proceeds; and with great confidence, and without the least pretense of
Proof, tells us, That it has by Use obtained, That the Term [ Persons]
signifies such as have a separate Subsistence, and the Term [ Subsistences]
such as have only a Distinct Subsistence, as those of the Trinity have, and no
more.

To which I answer positively, That no such Distinguishing Use has ever yet
obtained; but that the Use of Both Terms is, and all along has been
promiscuous; the Persons of the Trinity having for these 14 or 15 Centuries at
least, been as often and commonly expressed by the Term [ Persons] as by the
Term [ Subsistences], if not much oftener. And therefore this Difference of the
Signification of these Terms is perfectly arbitrary, and of this Man's own
Invention; as he who takes upon him to make Divinity may as well take upon him
to make Distinctions too. And therefore whereas he would make the word [
Person] signify one sort of Persons, and the word [ Subsistence] signify
another sort; I do again tell him here, That [ Person] is a common word to
both, and in this Mystery differs no more from [ Subsistence] than Two
synonymous Words differ from one Another: And I challenge him to produce out of
the Writers of the Church any thing so much as tending to a Proof, That it is
otherwise.

But he now comes (as he says) to apply this Discourse of his about Persons and
Subsistences to his own Hypothesis about Minds or Spirits; and that in these
Words; What I have said of the Word [ Person] is with equal Reason applicable
to the Word [ Mind]. The Animadverter (he says) objects against the Dean, That
a Mind or Spirit is an Absolute Being, Nature and Substance. And I grant it is
so in the Common Use of the Word, as applied to Created Minds and Spirits, but
so is a Person also as much as Mind. p. 16. l. 10. But stay here, good Sir,
stay a little. For this I utterly deny, having before demonstratively shown,
That though the word [ Person] in the Original Use of it. was actually applied
to Beings of an Absolute and Separate Subsistence, (such as Angels and Men),
yet that even then they never signified them under the Proper Formality of
Absolute and Separate, but only of Complete Subsistences; and by consequence
equally agreed to all Complete Subsistences, whether Separate and Absolute, or
only Distinct and Relative, as the Divine Persons are; so that here is not only
the Use of the word [ Person], but also the Definition of it; making it equally
applicable to both these sorts of Subsistence, viz. Absolute and Relative. But,
on the other side, I would fain know of this Author, Whether the Definition of
a Mind or Spirit, can agree to any but to an Absolute Being, Nature or
Substance? and if it can agree to none else, how it can be applied to a
Subsistence perfectly Relative, (as all the Divine Subsistences are) so as in
its Original and properest Signification to signify that too? which yet (as I
have shown) the Definition of a [ Person] properly does.

Well, but admitting (though not granting) that the Term [ Mind or Spirit] may
be drawn off from its Proper and Received Signification and Definition, so,
that Three Minds or Spirits may signify Three Distinct Relative Subsistences
of one and the same Infinite and Eternal Mind or Spirit included in All or Each
of them: I say, if the Term [ Three Minds] may be brought to this
Signification, it must have been by a long received Custom, which this Man
calls Theological Use: And then I require this Author to show us such a
Theological Use of this word [ Mind]; that is, a Concurrence of all Divines for
several Ages throughout the Catholic Church expressing the Three Divine
Subsistences or Persons of the Godhead by Three Distinct Infinite Minds* that
is to say, Three Relatives by Three Absolutes. The Term [ Persons] indeed has
been applied to these Three Subsistences; and that both from the Original
Signification and Definition of the Word, as also from the constant Use of it
by the Church for many Centuries; But the term [ Infinite Minds] was never
plurally applied to them upon either of these Accounts by any Orthodox Divine
or Writer; unless this Particular Author's making use of it in his pretended
Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, etc. can be called the Theological
Use of the Word: for I suppose, That neither are all Divines included in him,
nor is he to be thought equivalent to them all, whatsoever he may think
himself. Nevertheless for his own and the Worlds satisfaction, I shall show him
what Theological use of the word [ Three Minds or Spirits] instead of [ Three
Divine Persons] I meet with. And first of all Theodoret in his first Book
Haereticarum fabularum, and the 18 Chapter tells us of a certain Sect called
the Peratae, who held in the Divine Nature (...): So that here is one
Theological use of the word [ Minds or Spirits] thus applied, for him. And
Valentinus Gentilis held in the Godhead Three Eternal Spirits or Minds; of
which one was called by him the Essentiator, and the other Two the Essentiati.
(In which I cannot see what he differs from this Author.) So that here is
another Theological Use of this word for him. And thirdly his Friend Stephanus
Curcellaeus, in his Treatise de Trinitate, frequently calls the Divine Person
Tres aeternos Spiritus, asserting a Specific Unity between them (which this
Author also would fain be at) and denying a Numerical. So that here is a Third
Theological use of the same word to comfort and encourage him. And I wish him
all the Credit and Satisfaction that such Theological Company can give him. In
the mean time, whereas he tells the World in the close of this Paragraph, That
when the Dean (as he calls him) speaks of Three distinct Infinite Minds which
are essentially and inseparably one, he could [mean] nothing more (where he
gives us meaning against words again) than Three distinct Intelligent but not
separate Subsistences, p. 16. l. 20. I must tell him in answer to This, That if
he here speaks of Three distinct Minds as Essentially one by one and the same
Numerical Essence (which is the only Essential Unity here spoken of with
reference to the Trinity) it is an intolerable contradiction: Forasmuch as each
Mind or Spirit being one, by a particular Essence of it is own constituting it
such a Particular Mind or Spirit, Three distinct Minds or Spirits can never be
essentially one, by one Numerical Essence belonging to them all; which yet the
Three Persons in the Blessed Trinity are and must be. And whereas he says, That
by Three Minds he means Three Intelligent Subsistences. I ask him whether these
Three Subsistences are Relative or Absolute. If he says Relative, I do here
tell him, that then they are not Three Minds (a Mind being defined An
Intelligent Immaterial Substance;) which imports nothing Relative in it at all.
But if he says, that these Subsistences are Absolute, I then affirm, That they
are not the Three Persons in the Trinity; which, as such, both are and of
Necessity must be Relative. So that it is evident, that this Man knows not
which way to turn himself, nor how to speak of the subject he is treating of,
with any consistency with common sense. And this makes his Boldness the more
unpardonable in saying, That he needs ask no other Pardon for affirming the
Three Divine Persons to be Three Infinite Minds, but for the use of a word
which the Schools had not Consecrated, p. 16. l. 24. In answer to which, since
he here charges the non-using of it only upon the Schools, I challenge him to
show me any other Writers of the Church, accounted Orthodox, who have made use
of it; or affirmed the Three Divine Persons to be Three distinct Minds or
Spirits. Let him, I say, assign them, if he can. And if he cannot, the using of
the word thus applied, must even by his own Confession, p. 9. l. 3. be an
unusual way of speaking at least; that is to say, a (...); and if it were no
more than so, let him show ^ow he is able to justify the Use of that, See the
Preface to the Animadvers. p. 7.
which a General Council had denounced an Anathema to the Users of, in these
high Points about the Trinity and Incarnation. But this is not all, for I come
upon him yet further, and demand of him, how he will answer to the Church, not
only his presuming to introduce such a (...) in treating of this high Mystery,
and that in the Room of the anciently received Terms; but his venturing to do
this, when he himself confesses and declares, as he does in the 2^ th page.
lin. 13. That there could not have been more proper Terms used by the Church to
express a Trinity in Unity by, than those Ancient ones made use of all along
about it: viz. than Three Subsistences in one Individual Nature, which (he
says) differ nothing from each other but in their different manner of
Subsistence. These are his Words. And when the Impartial Reader has perused
them, and compared them with what is cited out of his Vindication concerning
this very Term [ Subsistence and Subsistences] amongst others set down in the
second Chapter of the Animadversions, and the 63 and 64 th pages: I suppose he
will find it high time to bless himself. For I here challenge this shameless
Man to reconcile, or do any thing like reconciling, what he says here, to what
he has said there, if he can. And yet as great a Perversion, as a word
mis-applied and forced from its true Signification must inevitably cause in so
nice, as well as great, a Point as this is, it is not however barely this
Author's not hereafter using this Term [ Three Minds as equipollent to Three
Persons] that will justify him, if he still retains the Sense of it; and
therefore I must here tell him, That if he holds the Three Divine Persons to be
Three Distinct Infinite Absolute Beings, Three Distinct Infinite Spirits, Three
Distinct Infinite Substances, (as Substance stands contradistinct to
Subsistence); let him abandon and lay aside the Use of the word [ Minds] never
so much, he is yet a Tritheist, and a Real Assertor of Three Gods.

But after all, the Judicious Reader may here observe, what a pleasant Manager
of Controversy this Man is. For he first asserted, the Three Divine Persons to
be Three Distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, affirming withal, in most impudent
manner, That to hold otherwise was Heresy and Nonsense; see his Vindicat. p.
66. lin. 26. But when the World cried out of this scandalous Tritheism, and the
Animadverter, even in the Judgment of the Animadverter's spightfullest Enemies,
See a Pamphlet Entitled, The Trinity set in its true Light, p. 5. lin. 28.
had thoroughly confuted it: and, on the contrary, maintained, That the Three
Divine Persons are Three Distinct Subsistences of one and the same Infinite
Eternal Mind, included in, or belonging to all and each of them; Why then, this
Man (according to his Excellent and Known Talent of Tacking about) fairly comes
over to his Adversary so far as to proclaim shamelesly to the World, That
though he spoke indeed of [ Minds], yet he meant only [ Subsistences]; whereas
it is impossible that Minds should be Subsistences, or Subsistences Minds. Such
a Felicity is it for a Man, whose [Word] is so apt to throw him into a Plunge,
to have a trusty [ Meaning] still ready at hand, to fetch him out again. But if
this be to defend an Hypothesis, then the way to carry a Cause is to give it
up, and the surest Conquest, to quit the Field.

In the next place, he passes from the distinction of the Divine Persons to the
Unity and Identity of their Divine Nature. And here (according to his constant
custom of charging the Fathers with some defect or other in expressing
themselves) he tells us, That they were at a greater loss for words to express
this latter by, than the former, p. 16. l. 26. There being but one word to do
it, viz. the (...) and this too of it self not sufficient. Concerning which I
must tell him in the first Place, That the Truth receives no prejudice at all
from there being no other [ one word] to express this Unity or Identity of the
Godhead in the Divine Persons by; since (God be thanked) there are several very
significant words and ways to explain this [ one word] by. But the main
question is, whether the (...) be sufficient to express this or no? And here I
must tell this presuming Man who denies it to be so, First, That the Nicene
Fathers and the Catholic Church with them then thought it so. And secondly,
That the Nature of the Thing necessarily proves it so. And in order to this I
would have him take notice, That the sense of the word (...) is to be measured
by the proper condition of the (...) which it relates to, and therefore, though
the word (...) may in it self be indifferent to signify either a specific or
numerical Agreement in Nature, (according as the Nature is to which it refers)
yet when the (...) is joined with an (...) importing such an Essential Unity in
it as renders it incapable of all multiplication, (as an Eus summa perfectum,
or an Infinite Nature in the very notion of it must be) there the (...) must of
necessity signify an Agreement in a numerical Unity and Identity of Nature, and
no other: for still the condition of the (...) is to measure the sense of the
(...). And accordingly I do affirm against this Man, That there is no such
Thing as Specific Unity or Identity, or any Thing like it, or Analogous to it
belonging to the Divine Nature; but only a Numerical Unity and no more. Which
being the highest and perfectest sort of Unity, is above, and instead of all
other Unities whatsoever. And the reason of this is, because all Specific
Unity of Nature is founded in the Imperfection and defect of the said Nature,
as rendering it capable of multiplication; which is certainly a defect; And let
him take this Rule with him for once, which I defy him to overthrow, viz. That
in Naturam non multiplicabilem non cadit Vnitas Specifica: for as much as
Specific Unity is but one common conception of the Mind gathered from the
Agreement it finds in a Plurality of Particular Natures amongst themselves; as
every Created Individual has it is particular distinct Nature to it self, and
not a Part of a Common Nature shared amongst all the Individuals. But will this
Man affirm, that there are Three particular Divine Natures out of which the
Mind may form such a Specific Unity as we have been speaking of? Let him
therefore either renounce his very share in common sense and Reason, or
disclaim this abominable Absurdity of a Specific Unity in the Divine Nature,
or of any Thing so much as like it, or Analogous to it, or (in his own words,
p. 17.) that perfectly answers it. And whereas he alleges the Fathers
explaining the (...) by examples of a Specific Unity in Created Beings, I tell
him that the Fathers used not these Examples as Instances for representation of
the like Unity amongst the Divine Persons; but as a ground for arguing aa
minore ad majus against the Arians, who would not allow so much as a Specific
Unity of Nature between the Father and the Son: whereupon the Fathers thus
argued against them, If you will allow the Generation of a Son in the Divine
Nature, certainly it ought to be more perfect, or at least as perfect as that
which we observe in men: and since the perfection of Generation in them, is for
a Father to produce his like, shall men generate others of the same nature with
themselves, and shall God generate one of quite another Nature from his own, as
a Finite Nature must necessarily be? This was the force of their Argument, and
it was directed against the Arians; but never were these Explications alleged
as adequate Representations of the same Unity of Nature in the Divine Persons,
that was in Men. But (as it was intimated before in the Animadversions) no
doubt this Author has been all along pursuing this Tritheistical Whimsey of a
Specific Unity, only in order to the providing an Unity of Nature for his
Three Infinite Minds or Spirits: which (by all the Wit of Men and Angels) can
never be proved capable of any greater Unity than Specific. But this Point
about a Specific Unity of the Godhead has been so thoroughly debated, and the
Impossibility of it so clearly demonstrated by the Animadverter, Chap. 7. from
the 178 to the 188 page, That this Man should have done well to have answered
what was to be found there before he troubled the Reader with the same old
baffled story again. I conclude therefore against this Author, that the (...)
applied to the Divine Persons, does fully and sufficiently express the
Numerical Unity and Identity of the Divine Nature belonging to them, without
importing any Thing of Specific Unity in the same, or any thing so much as
Analogous to it.

After he has done with the (...) he excepts against the Terms [ Single and
Singular] as applied to the Divine Nature: But he first draws them off from
their proper and received Signification, according to which all Divines,
whether Schoolmen or others, have in treating of the Divine Nature, generally
used them, expressing the said Nature by no word more commonly than by
Singularis essentia, and singularis Natura. And does this Man now think to take
this word by a wrong, exotic signification (of which more presently) and in
the strength of that to run down and casheir the True and Genuine sense of it?
Which, besides the confusion it must needs bring upon all Discourses about the
Godhead, and the Divine Persons, will not fail also to give mighty scandal to
all sober and learned Men, both Papists and Protestants, who are concerned to
have these weighty Points, not only truly stated, but also warily treated of.
For my own part I must declare, That I never met with stranger and more
untheological Assertions, than what this Author has concerning the Application
of the Terms [ single and singular] to the Divine Nature; and yet the true
sense of them lies pain and obvious almost in all Scholastic Writers. So that
whatsoever is signified by Hoc unum, Individuum, and numerice unum, the same
also is signified by singular; they being all but Synonymous words to express
that greatest and perfectest Unity which we call Numerical; and it will be hard
to assign where we may properly apply any one of them, and not as properly
apply the other. So that if this Author would but have understood these and the
like Terms in the same sense in which both Philosophers and Divines use them,
he could never have abused the Subject he wrote upon, nor exposed himself with
such false and scandalous Assertions as these that follow.

1. That the Unity of Nature between the Eternal Father and Son is such an
Unity as is both Specific and Numerical. 2. That the Divine Nature is not a
Single or Singular Nature, p. 18. lin. 13. 3. That upon supposal of the
Singleness or Singularity of the Divine Nature, the whole Divine Nature cannot
be Incarnate in the Incarnation of the Son, without the Incarnation of the
whole Trinity thereby, p. 18. lin. 18. 4. That one Single Nature can subsist
but once, or have but one Subsistence, p. 19. lin. 23.
All which Four Propositions I find in the compass of less than three whole
Pages, viz. 17, 18, 19. And they are of that vile Import, that I defy either
Arian or Socinian to speak more against the Unity of the Three Divine Persons
in one and the same Infinite Divine Nature, than this Man in some of the
forementioned Propositions has done. But I shall consider them particularly,
though they are much fitter for the Public Censure of the Church, than for any
Private Man's Confutation. And first for the

1. First Proposition, viz, That the Unity of Nature between the Eternal Father
and Son is such an Unity as is both Specifical and Numerical.

This is fully and plainly asserted by this Author, (though not in these very
Words) as the Reader will find in the 17 th page and 19 th line of this
Defense. Where speaking of the Unity of Nature between the Eternal Father and
Son, he affirms, That there must be that in it that perfectly answers that
Specific Sameness of Nature that is between Father and Son in Humane Persons;
of which, but four or five Lines before, he had given an Instance in Abraham
and Isaac; and withal, that it must not only perfectly answer, but much out do
it too. But now, on the one hand, Nothing can perfectly answer one Instance of
Specific Unity or Sameness, but another Instance of the same Kind; forasmuch
as Two Kinds or Sorts of Unity can never perfectly answer one another; nor, on
the other hand, can any Sort of Unity out do a Specific Unity but a Numerical;
For no one Specific Unity can do more toward the Uniting the Things it
belongs to, than another; there being but one and the same formal Effect common
to all Specific Unities, which is to render and denominate their respective
Subjects Specifically one and no more. This, I say, is all that a Specific
Unity can do, and if more be done, it must be by a Numerical. But again, in the
27 th Line of the same Page, He tells us to the same purpose, That the Unity or
Sameness of Nature between the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, is not a mere
Specific Sameness; which Words must imply and infer, That it is a Specific
Sameness, though he affirms it to be also something more. To which Passages we
may add Two more altogether as full for this Complex Sort of Unity, viz. One in
page 114. line 26. and the Other, p. 121. l. 22. of his Vindication.

From all which it is manifest, That this Author holds such an Unity or
Sameness of Nature in the Divine Persons, as is both Specific and Numerical;
which I affirm to be as gross an Absurdity as the Reason of Man can well
imagine. For a Specific and a Numerical Unity are not Two degrees of one Kind,
but Two several Kinds of Unities. Two Unities differing toto genere; and
consequently such as cannot possibly coincide into any one Unity which shall
comprehend and partake of both. For a Numerical Unity is the Unity of One
Individual Nature or Being and no more, and a Specifical Unity is the Unity of
Several Particular Individual Natures or Beings: and therefore unless the same
Thing can both be One Individual and no more, and be Several Particular
Individuals too, for any one to assert the same Unity to be both Specifical and
Numerical, (as this Author undeniably does) is a monstrous Contradiction. But
this has been so fully laid open already (as to that part of it especially,
which concerns a Specific Unity in the Divine Nature); that to say any more of
it would be but a needless Repetition: And so I proceed to the

2. Second Proposition, viz. That the Divine Nature is not a single or singular
Nature, Def. p. 18. l. 13. which I, on the contrary, positively assert it to
be, upon these following Considerations.

First, That the Divine Nature is either a Singular, or an Universal Nature;
but not an Universal, and therefore a Singular. The Consequence is manifest,
because singular and universal adequately divide Being; and therefore there can
be nothing but what must fall under one of the Members of the Division: and
then, that the Divine Nature cannot be Universal, is as evident; because if so,
it must be drawn off from several particular Natures; but there are not several
particular Divine Natures for it to be abstracted or drawn off from. Add to
this, That the Denial of the Singularity of the Divine Nature would overthrow
its very Existence, for nothing exists but Singulars.

Secondly, Individuality and Singularity of Nature are the same thing, both of
them importing the greatest and perfectest degree of Unity, which is Numerical;
and consequently since this very Author affirms the Individuality of the Divine
Nature, p. 18. line 12. the Singularity of it must be granted too.

Thirdly, This Man all along supposes Singleness or Singularity essentially to
imply in it Subsistence, but this is a gross Mistake; for neither does it imply
it in the Essential Notion, nor yet in the Real Existence of the Thing. Not in
the first, For the Singularity of a Thing belongs to its Essence, even as
prescinding and abstracting from its Subsistence, as something posterior to it;
and therefore it does not essentially imply it. And accordingly, when we
consider the Divine Nature abstracted from its respective Subsistences, (which
we may and often do) we still consider it as one Numerical Individual
Substance, that is to say, in its highest Unity and Singularity; and therefore
the Essential Notion of Singularity does not imply Subsistence in it. Nor, in
the next place, does it necessarily imply the same, as it actually exists: For
the Second Person of the Trinity assumed the Humane Nature without its proper
Subsistence, but not without its proper Singularity. For it was one Numerical
Individual Single Humane Nature which he took upon him; so that upon this
Account also Singularity does not necessarily infer Subsistence.

But here I think fit to observe, that the word single or singular (which are
here the same; there being but one Latin word singular for both) may be taken
in Two very different Senses. First, In its strict and most proper Sense; for
Numerical or Individual Unity of Nature. Or, Secondly, in a larger and less
proper Sense, for that which has but one Subsistence only; and this is not so
properly called single, as solitary, and by no means applicable to the Divine
Nature, which has not only One, but Three Subsistences belonging to it. This
was the Sense in which the Sabellians used the word, or rather which they put
upon it, contending for, and allowing only a (...), that is, such a Divine
Nature as was capable but of One Subsistence and no more. But such a Singleness
in the Divine Nature the Catholic Church neither knew nor owned, and yet still
maintained the Individuality and Numerical Unity, and consequently the true and
proper Singularity of the same. And will this Man now, from the Improper
Signification of the word [ Single or Singular], as applied by the Sabellians
to the Divine Nature, deny the Divine Nature to be a Single or Singular Nature,
according to the true, proper and generally received Sense of Singularity,
which, both with Logicians and Philosophers, is so perfectly the same with
Numerical Unity, that it is impossible for any thing to be Numerically One and
not Singular too? But how positively soever he denies the Singleness or
Singularity of the Divine Nature here, he asserts it as positively (and that as
the Universal Concurring Sense of all the Fathers) in his Vindication, p. 121.
line 18. where he roundly tells us, That all the Fathers assert the Singularity
of the Godhead, or Numerical Unity of the Divine Essence, and that the Three
Divine Persons are united in this One Numerical Essence, which (according to
the Fathers) he calls the Singularity of the Godhead. This, I say, he expressly
says in the place alleged; and I desire him to reconcile it to what he says
every whit as expressly, in page 18. line 12. of this Defense, viz. That the
Divine Nature is One Individual Nature, but not one single or singular Nature:
And again, that one single Nature can be but One Person, whether in God, or
Man; and yet further, p. 19. line 23. That it is demonstrable that one single
Nature can have but one Subsistence. So that if he will abide by what he says
in this Defense, he absolutely casheirs whatsoever he himself had elsewhere
owned to be the sense and language of all the Fathers; and (he might have
added) of the Schoolmen, and all other Divines besides; nor is this all, but he
utterly overthrows also a Trinity of Persons by averring it demonstrable, that
there can be no plurality of Subsistences in one single or singular Nature; and
if no plurality of Subsistences, then I am sure no plurality of Persons
neither. But (thanks be to God) though he uses this Big word Demonstrable, yet
what he calls Demonstration, others account not so much as a probable Proof,
where he is the Demonstrator: And let none wonder that he can so scandalously
contradict himself in Two Books, who so often does it in the space of Two lines.

But, methinks, what he alleges out of Victorinus Afer, for disproving the
singularity of the Divine Nature in Three Persons, comes something with the
latest, viz. those Notable Words of his, Non oportet, nec fas est dicere, Vnam
esse substantiam, Tres esse Personas, p. 19. l. 2. In opposition to which one
forlorn Testimony it were easy to allege forty Fathers at least constantly
expressing the Trinity by Vna substantia, and Tres Personae; but that I think
it very needless to assign who does so, when it is hard to assign who does not.
And therefore as for his thus recurring to Victorinus Afer; I must take the
Boldness to tell him, that this is not so much a Quoting as a Weeding of
Antiquity; since surely a more Incompetent Authority in the present subject
could not well be found; as the Circumstances of the Man might easily evince.
For this Victorinus was old before he became a Christian; and when, upon his
becoming so, he betook himself to write upon some Articles of the Christian
Faith, he did it so perplexedly and obscurely, and very often so dangerously
and unjustifiably, as to his way of expressing himself, that the Learned Dr.
Cave (but with a modesty equal to his Learning) gives this Character of him in
his Historia Literar. p. 181. Non videtur ubique Fidei Dogmata satis accurate
percepisse, saltem non satis feliciter expressisse. So that for ought I see,
this Defender might as well have quoted the Epistolae obscurorum virorum, or
even himself for the Elegancies of the Latin Tongue, as Victorinus Afer for an
Authentic Director, how we ought to conceive, or to express our selves about
the Article of the Trinity; But to conclude this head; what design this Man
could have in thus stripping the Divine Nature of it is singularity by making a
difference between this, and it is Individuality (unless he thinks hereby the
better to introduce his Tritheism, and, in time, to give another sense even of
Individuality too) I cannot imagine. But I doubt not but his not duly stateing
and distinguishing the Terms used in disputation, will quickly drive him
headlong into the grossest Heresies. And so I pass to

3. His Third Proposition, which runs thus, That upon supposal of the
singleness or singularity of the Divine Nature, the whole Divine Nature cannot
be incarnate in the Incarnation of the Son, but the whole Trinity must thereby
be incarnate too.

Now this blessed Proposition is borrowed from the Socinians also; and is as
arrant Socinianism as any part of that whole Heresy. But the Answer to it is
this, That in the Incarnation of the second Person, the whole Divine Nature is
incarnate, but not wholly; That is to say, non-quoad omnem suum subsistendi
modum, not in respect of all its Modes or ways of subsisting, but only of one
Alone, viz. that founded in Filiation, and proper only to the second Person of
the Trinity; And therefore since the Godhead is not incarnate under that proper
mode of subsisting, which it has in the Father, nor under that other which it
has in the Holy Ghost; the Incarnation of the whole Divine Nature in the Son
does not infer the Incarnation of the whole Trinity, since the said Nature is
not hereby Incarnate as to those other Two modes of Subsistence, which it has
respectively in those other Two Persons. And this passage I recommend to the
Reader's Observation, as one Notable Instance of those Intolerable Heterodoxies
which this Man's denying all Modes in the Divine Nature, will and must
inevitably plunge him into.

4. As for his Fourth and last Proposition, viz. That one single Nature can
subsist but once, or have but one Subsistence.

This is so beyond all bounds of shame, Scandalous and Heretical, and so
absolutely destroys Three Personal Subsistences in one single Divine Nature,
That I shall say nothing in Answer to it (having sufficiently overthrown it by
what was said before) but only set down the Doctrine held by all Catholic
Divines, and Writers in direct opposition to it.

Viz. That one and the same Numerical, Individual, single Divine Nature has
Three distinct Persons, or Subsistences so belonging to it, that it exists in
Common in them all, and severally in each of them.

This I affirm to be the Catholic Doctrine, and shall say no more to the
fore-recited shameful Proposition, but leave both it and it is Author to be
argued down by that Authority which is much abler and fitter to deal with such
Persons and Doctrines, than any Disputant can be. In the mean time, if these
Villainous Heterodoxies should (as was hinted before in the Animadversions,
Chap. 12.) chance to cross the Water, with what Tragical out cries and
clamorous reflections upon our Church would both Papists and Protestants from
all Parts Echo them back to us again? Only our poor Church has this one small
happiness amongst her many unhappinesses at present, that many of those who
receive her Revenues, and wear her Honors, and (in requital of Both, invade her
Doctrines) yet (thanks be to God) neither do nor can carry her disgrace further
than the Reach of their Native Tongue.

But our Innovator rests not in his former Explications of the Trinity, but
offers us another and a plainer, and that is by a Man and his living Image, (if
any one could tell where to find it). However the Notion of it is, as the rest
were* perfectly his own; and (if possible) extremely more Absurd. And to lay it
before the Reader it is thus: He considers a Man seeing himself represented by
Reflection from a Glass, or some such Body, (for it is an Image by Reflection
only which he here professes to speak of). Now, says he, let us suppose this to
be a living Image, and that such an one as should exactly answer it is
Prototype, not only in its external Features, Colors, and Postures, but also
in the internal Acts of the Soul; such as Knowledge, Volition, Joy, Grief, etc.
So that as the Man himself Knew, or Willed any Thing, the Image likewise should
exactly Know and Will the same. This supposed, He tells us further, That this
Image would be another Person from the Prototype, but not another Man;
forasmuch as he supposes the Prototype and the Image to have the same Numerical
Humane Nature in them both, and that so, as to perform all the Acts of a Man
both in the One, and in the Other. This is the Account he gives us of this
living Image, in order to his Explication of the Trinity by it. And I shall
bring it under a particular Examination. But before I do so, I require this
Author to tell me, Whether, in page 6. of this Defense, he does not profess to
lay the Foundation of his New Hypothesis in giving an Account of the Mysterious
Union of the Divine Persons by the Unity of a Spirit? And whether he does not
withal declare himself certainly in the Right, in pitching upon that as the
best way of explaining the said Union; and not the best only, but indeed the
only fit and proper way of doing it? forasmuch as in the strength of it he does
with great Contempt reject all the Material, sensible Representations which the
Fathers were wont to set forth this Mystery by; making it his Business to
substitute his own Account of this Mysterious Union of the Persons from the
Unity of a Spirit, as the only thing that could make it Intelligible: This is
certainly so, as appears from the forecited place; and since it cannot be
denied, I desire this Author, in the next place, to inform me how the
Explication of this Mysterious Union by a Man and his living Image, is
explaining it by the Unity of a Spirit: and whether the Man, or his Image, or
both, be Spirits, and the Resemblance between them be this Unity of a Spirit,
which he spoke of in the place alleged? And if they are not, I demand with
what face he can reject the Material Representations made by the Fathers of
this Mysterious Union, and give the World another of his own from an Instance
altogether as gross and Material, but withal Impossible and Unintelligible; as
shall appear in the process of what we have to say upon it? But all this
Author's Writings are such perfect Antipodes to themselves, that no Man who
knows him, will expect to find him consistent with himself in any thing. But to
proceed, I come now to examine, whether this Notion of a Man and his living
Image has in it such a peculiar fitness (as this Author pretends) to represent
and explain to us the Mystery of the Trinity; and in order to it I shall lay
down this Assertion, viz.

That a Notion supposing a Thing Impossible, and implying in it a Contradiction
to, and Inconsistency with it self, can never explain any, and much less the
highest Mystery of our Religion.

In order to the proving of which I shall consider Three Things.

1. What an Image in the proper Signification of the Word is. 2. What an Image
by Reflection is. 3. What is to be understood by an Impossible Supposition.
1. As to the first of which; An Image, according to the general Nature of it,
is such a Likeness of a Thing as both represents it, and proceeds from it; and
that, either as from a Principal Efficient producing it, or as from a Causa
exempla^is, at least, according to which it is produced. Which I add because of
Artificial Images, formed according to, and so proceeding from that Idea or
Pattern in the Mind of the Artificer, drawn from the Thing, which the Image
designed by him is to represent. So that an Image, whether Natural or
Artificial, essentially implies these Two Things as the General Conditions of
it, viz. A Representation of, and a Production either by, or from the Thing
represented by it.

2. Secondly, An Image by Reflection is, when the visible Species flowing from
any Thing, and striking upon some such Body as Glass, Water, or polished Metal,
are returned back from thence, and thereby represent the Body which they
originally flowed from. And such an Image this Author here speaks of; for he
says, It is a Man's Image by Reflection.

3. In the third place, An Impossible Supposition may be said to be so in a
double respect. First, In respect of all Natural, Second Causes, as exceeding
all the Force and Virtue of such Causes, to effect the Thing so supposed. And I
deny not, but that the Supposition of a Thing Impossible in this sense, may
have its Use sometimes to give us some Light into, and Explication of other
Things. Secondly, A thing may be said to be impossible in respect of a
Contradiction involved in it; so that no Power whatsoever can effect it. And
the Supposition of such Impossibles I affirm to be of no Use for the
Explication of any Thing whatsoever. Forasmuch as the Mind of Man can have no
formed Conception of them; and yet, whatsoever helps it to the Knowledge of
another Thing, must do it by being first known it self.

Which things premised, Let us now see what this Author holds and asserts
concerning this living Image set up by him, that we may hereby find whether it
involves in it any Contradiction or no; and it will appear, that he asserts
these Three Things concerning it.

1. That this living Image by Reflection has its whole and sole dependence upon
the Prototype. 2. That there is one and the same Numerical Humane Nature, both
in the Prototype and the Image. 3. That the Prototype and the Image are Two
distinct Persons.
These Things, I say, he asserts of his living Image; concerning which I remark
as follows.

1. That to assert an Image by Reflection to have its sole and total dependence
upon the Prototype, (as this Author says it has) while it has an equally
necessary and essential Dependence upon the Body, which it is reflected from,
is a Contradiction. 2. To assert, That One and the same Particular Humane
Nature subsists in Two Particular Persons locally distant from one another, (as
the Prototype and the Image are) is a Contradiction. 3. To assert, That an
Image by Reflection (which is a Being incapable of subsisting by it self) is a
completely subsisting Person, endued with an Humane Nature, and consequently
consisting of an Humane Soul and Body, is a Contradiction: and again, For It to
be an Humane Person, endued with an Humane Nature, (as this Author asserts it
is) and yet not to consist of such a Soul and Body, is another Contradiction.
These Absurdities, and innumerable more derivable from them, are all involved
in this Author's Notion of a Living Image by Reflection, having the same
Numerical Humane Nature with the Man himself, and having its sole Dependence
upon him, and yet being a separate Person from him.

But not to insist upon these Absurdities at present, (which common sense and
Reason must needs abhor, and fly from) yet since this Notion is designed to
explain and represent to us the Union (or rather Unity) of the Father and the
Son in one and the same Divine Nature, surely there ought at least to be no
gross disparity between this living Image and the Thing intended to be
explained by it, especially as to those particulars wherein the Resemblance
must and ought to consist. But whether this be so or no, will appear from the
following comparison. As First, There is a mutually necessary Existence, both
of the Father and the Son, so that the Father can be no more without the Son,
than the Son without the Father; the Relation being Inseparable. But it is not
so in the Man and his Image; for the Man may cease to be a Prototype, and
subsist without the Image, though the Image cannot subsist without the Man.
Secondly, The Son has an entire Total dependence upon the Father. But so has
not the Image upon the Prototype, as depending as much on the Body from which
it is reflected, as it does or can upon the Man whom it represents, and perhaps
more. Thirdly, The Father and the Son are mutually in one another, and that by
an Intimate Inexistence, as the words of our Savior expressly prove, John
14.11. But the Prototype, and the Image cannot be in one Another, as being
locally distant from each other. Fourthly, The Person of the Father, and of the
Son are only distinct, but otherwise inseparably United; But the Prototype and
the Image are so Divided, as to subsist in an Actual Separation from one
Another; The Place and Vbi of the one, (as we observed) being not the Place or
Vbi of the other.


And now, to sum up and draw the foregoing Particulars together. Let us on the
one side suppose Two Persons, viz. The Eternal Father and Son; and these first,
by a mutual Necessity Coexisting; and then one of them, viz. The Son, having
his sole and total dependence upon the other; and thirdly, Both of them
mutually inexisting in one Another; and lastly, Only distinct in their
Subsistence, but by no means Separate or Divided. Let all this, I say, be
supposed on the Part of the Eternal Father and Son; And on the other side, let
us suppose Two other Persons, viz. The Prototype and his Living Image, and
these, without any Necessary Coexistence with one Another; and the latter not
having it is sole dependence upon the former, and both of them such as cannot
mutually exist in one Another, and withal are not only distinct in their
respective Subsistences, but also actually separate and locally divided from
each other. Now, I say, when we have collated all these Disparities together,
must not that Comparison (think we) give us a blessed edifying, Representation
of the Unity of the Eternal Father, and Son in the same Numerical Divine
Nature, when one side of the Comparison is so far from being an Explication of,
that it is a direct, Irreconcilable contradiction to, the other?

But as we first waved the consideration of those monstrous Absurdities that
were involved in this notion of a Man and his living Image, with reference to
the Eternal Father and Son; so let us at present wave the forementioned gross
disparities between them also, yet still this Notion is utterly unfit to give
us any Explication of the Trinity, as being every whit as Difficult, if not
more Difficult for the Mind of Man to conceive, than the Trinity it self. For
the grand Difficulty here, is to conceive how one and the same Infinite Nature
can be in several distinct, though intimately United Persons; And the Thing,
which this Author would explain this by, is a Man and his Image, where he
supposes one and the same Numerically subsisting human Nature to be in Two
locally distinct, and separately subsisting Persons. But now in this Case, is
it not much more conceivable, that an Infinite Nature (whose boundless
perfection reaches to more ways of subsisting than one) should subsist in
several persons, and those only distinct; than that a Particular finite Nature
(which can have but one Subsistence) should subsist in Two Persons, and those
also locally distant, and separate from one Another? I appeal, I say, to any
Man of Judgment alive, whether this be not the greater and more inexplicable
Difficulty of the Two? For the mind of Man finds an utter Contradiction in
making a Finite Being exist at on^e in Two distant Places or Vbi's; but in the
former, though it finds an insuperable Difficulty, yet it can allege no
Contradiction. And therefore I say again, that it is in the highest degree
senceless and irrational to assign that as an Explication of a Thing, which is
more difficult, perplexed and Inconceivable, than the Thing it self which it
pretends to explain. Which yet is the case here of a Man and his living Image,
as the Notion of it has been stated and applied to the present subject.

So that this wonderful (...) of a clearer Idea of the Trinity, than ever the
World had before, has these Three Excellent Qualifications to recommend it.

1. That it supposes and builds upon several Things utterly contradictious and
impossible.

2. That it makes one Thing the Representation of another, between which yet
(as to the very particulars wherein the Resemblance should be) there is the
highest and utmost Disparity. And

Thirdly and lastly, That it offers to explain a Thing Difficult, obscure, and
by human Reason not Comprehensible, by another Thing which is ten times more so.

So that if this must be the Lot of the Church of England to sit down, and see
her most Holy Religion practiced upon by such wretched Innovations, as can tend
only to ridicule and expose the chief Articles of it to the Scorn of Arians,
and Socinians, and all this, under pretense of explaining them; I can but say,
God deliver our poor Church from such Explainers, and our Creed from such
Explications. And, as I heartily commiserate the Unhappy State of that, so I
really pity this Bold Man himself, that he should be thus suffered to go on
venting his Scandalous Heterodoxies, without finding either Friends to Counsel,
or Superiors to Control him.

Nevertheless should we, with a non obstante to what has been said, comply with
this Man's absurd Notion so far, as to allow his Prototype and his living Image
to bear such a peculiar Resemblance to the Eternal Father and Son, (as he
pretends, but can never prove them to do) yet how does this any way explain, or
give us (as he calls it) any Idea of the Trinity? For are the Father and the
Son the Trinity without the Holy Ghost? And how does this Prototype and living
Image set forth to us the Procession of the Holy Ghost from both of them, when
it makes no mention of any Third Person at all? The Son indeed issues from the
Father in the way of Knowledge, by a Reflex Act thereof, expressing his
Infinite Nature and Perfections; whereupon, as it is the Property both of
Knowledge, and of an Image to represent some thing, so if this Prototype and
living Image can be of any Use, to help our Notions of the Eternal Generation,
it must be by its Representing Quality. But now the Holy Ghost issues from the
Father and Son, per modum voluntatis, by an Eternal Incomprehensible Act of
Love streaming from them both; and the Property of Love, we know, is not to
represent (as Knowledge does) but to unite to the Object Known. And here, I
pray, what does the living Image do toward the setting forth of this? Why our
Author indeed makes the Prototype One Person, and his living Image Another; but
do these Two by an Act of Love, or any other Act proceeding jointly from both,
produce a Third Person? If not, what Idea of a Trinity can be drawn from these
Two? But if this Author will say, (as he says things no less Absurd) That the
Prototype and his living Image do produce some certain Third Person distinct
from Both of them, and so answering to the Holy Ghost in the Trinity; I desire
him to tell the World, what kind of Thing this Third Person is, and by what
Name it is to be called, and expressed; for I never yet heard or read of any
such, nor am I so much an (...)-Man, as to fetch it from my own Invention.

But, besides all the foregoing Absurdities, It is worth observing, what a
notable cast of his Ignorance he gives us about Emanation, Def. p. 28. l. 10.
And, in order to it, I think fit to show, What an Emanation and a Cause by
Emanation is. Now a Cause or Principle by (...) Emanation is that which
produces its Effect or Term, without any intervening Action really distinct
from either the Agent or Effect. And accordingly, That is properly called an
Emanation, or an Effect by Emanation, (for the word here signifies passively)
which issues immediately, naturally and necessarily (unless hindered by a
supernatural power) from the Substance of its productive Principle: Concerning
which, we are to observe also, That though a Cause or Principle by Emanation,
in a large sense, is reckoned an Efficient Cause, and reduced to it, yet in the
strictest and properest sense of an Efficient Cause, it is not so; as not
producing its Effect by an Action or Efficiency properly so called, but only by
Resultance or Efflux, (which are the best words which Philosophers have to
express the peculiar Causality of it by). And now to explain what I have said,
by Instances. All Properties are said to be Emanations or Effects resulting
from their Forms. And all Accidents immediately affecting and issuing from
their Subjects are Emanations. And all sensible and intelligible Species,
flowing from the Things which they represent, are Emanations. And the Light
issuing from the Sun is an Emanation. To all which we may add, the Substantial
derivative Modes belonging to the Divine Nature. Which being premised, let us
see what Propositions this Man advances upon this Subject. As First, That an
Image is not an Emanation but a Reflection: which is manifestly Oppositum in
Apposito. For an Image by Reflection in Things Material is Both; viz. an
Emanation from the Prototype or Exemplar, from which the Species Sensibiles
issue or proceed; and a Reflection from that (whether Medium or Object) upon
which they terminate, and from which, by Repercussion, they are returned back
again. Secondly, He tells us, That the Son and the Holy Ghost are not
Emanations from the Father. But on the contrary, I affirm, That the Son is an
Emanation from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from Both. For though Generation
expresses the particular way of the Son's issuing from the Father, and
Procession the particular way of the Holy Ghost's issuing both from Father and
Son, yet Emanation is here a general word properly applicable to, and
expressive of both of them. And accordingly Aquinas affirms, Non accipienda est
processio secundum quod est in Corporalibus, vel per motum localem, vel per
actionem aliquam causae in exteriorem effectum* ut calor a calefaciente in
calefactum. Sed secundum Emanationem intelligibilem, u^po^e Verbi
intelligibilis a Dicente quod manet in ipso: and sic fides Catholica
processionem ponit in divinis. Aquinas, 1^. P. Q. 27. Art. 1. in C.
That the Son proceeds from the Father, not as an Effect from a Cause. (viz. an
Efficient Cause properly so called) but by way of Intellectual Emanation:
Affirming withal, That this is the Catholic Faith. And one of higher Note in
the Church than Aquinas, even the Great Athanasius himself owns and commends
the Doctrine of Dionysius, concerning the Eternal Generation of the Son; for
that, in his explaining of it, and speaking of the Father as a (...) or Mind,
and of the Son as the (...), or Word of that Mind, he expressly calls the latter
an Emanation from the former, in those words, (...), where (...) signifies
properly Emanatio, aut Effluviam, which all know are Terms Synonymous, Athanas.
Tom. 1. p. 565. Edit. Colon. It is true indeed, That in the Son's issuing from
the Father, and the Holy Ghost's issuing from Both, there is, besides the
Terminus producens, and the Terminus productus, assigned also an Act or Action,
viz. Generation with reference to the Son, and Spiration to the Holy Ghost; yet
because these are not Actions or Efficiencies properly so called, viz. distinct
Entities from the Terminus producens, and productus, but really identified with
both, therefore the Production both of Son and Holy Ghost are truly and
properly to be reckoned Emanations. Thirdly, The Defender affirms, Than an
Emanation is of the same Substance, viz. specifically the same with that from
which it proceeds; of which I desire him to show me so much as one Instance in
the whole World, if he can. Fourthly, That an Emanation multiplies Natures and
Substances, as being individually distinct from that, from which it issues;
which yet in the Son's issuing from the Father, and the Holy Ghost's issuing
from both, is certainly false; for though these Emanations multiply Persons*
yet they do not multiply Substances. Nor are these two Propositions, viz. the
Third and Fourth, less false with reference to those other forementioned
Emanations or Emanative Effects, set down by us: for, since none of them all
are Substances, they can neither be said to be Substances specifically the same
with, nor Substances individually distinct from those several Substances from
which they flow. Fifthly, and lastly, he tells us, That when the Fathers call
the Holy Spirit (...), it is not in the Sense of Emanation, but of Mysterious
Procession. To which I answer as before, That he here opposes Things fairly
subordinate; viz. a General Term to a Particular. For Procession is really and
truly an Emanation; though every Emanation (it being a more general word) is
not a Procession: and therefore, for this Man to say, (as he here does) That
the Holy Ghost is called (...), not by Emanation but by Procession; is just as
if one should say of Peter, That he is not a living Creature, but a Man. From
all which it follows, That this Author is grossly ignorant of the True
Philosophical Sense of the Term Emanation; sometimes applying it to one Thing,
and sometimes denying it of another; but Both at a venture, and just as People
use to play at Blind-Man's Buff.

In fine, I conclude from what has been discoursed upon this whole Matter, That
this Autor's Fiction of a Man and his living Image ought not to be admitted or
endured, as at all Explicatory of the Trinity, but to be rejected as a most
senseless, self-repugnant, absurd Notion, as he has started it, and fit only to
abuse the Minds of Men with wrong and perverse Apprehensions of this great
Mystery. The Scriptures indeed call the Eternal Son the Image of the Father,
Coloss. 1.15. and speak also of Adam's begetting a Son after his own Likeness,
Genes. 5.3. But both these places import a quite different sort of Image from
the living Image insisted upon by this Author. For the Ratio Imaginis in both
these consist not barely in Representation and Production, but in such a
peculiar sort of Production, as is by Generation: For the Holy Spirit has all
the Natural E^^ential Perfections of the Father and the Son, and consequently a
substantial Likeness to both; and is withal produced by them, and proceeds from
them: But because this is not by a Generative Production, (which is the Proper,
Natural way of conveying Substantial Likeness) therefore the Latin Fathers
never give the Title of Image to the Holy Ghost; though some of the Greek
Fathers indeed upon the forementioned Account, sometimes in a less proper and
strict sense, do). From which it follows, That since the Son's being the Image
of the Father, consist not barely in his Representing him, or being produced by
him, but in his being produced by way of Generation, nothing can truly and
strictly represent How he is the Image of his Father, but a begotten Image, an
Image intellectually begotten; and begotten not only in the Likeness of a
Specific Nature* but of the same Numerical Nature with him, who begot it. And
since none of all these Conditions do or can possibly agree to this Author's
living Image with reference to its Prototype, it follows, That it can never be
a True and Proper Representation of the Eternal Image of the Father; as being
upon all Accounts wholly of another Kind, and therefore unspeakably
dishonorable in its Application to the Son of God.

The Fathers indeed sometimes set forth the substantial likeness between the
Eternal Father and the Son, by a Man's seeing himself in a Glass* But never did
they intend this for a true and proper Representation of, but only for a
Popular Allusion to the Mystery they were treating of* nor, as sufficient to
afford Arguments to prove any Thing strictly and logically conce^ning it,
(whereas this Author frequently argues, and that in the strictest way he can,
from this Case of a Man and his living Image) but only as Instances fit enough
to found Similitudes, Resemblances, and Illustrations upon; further than which,
they would never go. And this I think most worthy of our Particular Observation
concerning those great Men, as to the Case before us, viz. That in all their
Attempts to give the World some small, dim Resemblance of the Trinity, they
still drew their Allusions from Things that had a real Existence in Nature, and
were obvious to sense, (as unequal as they well knew them to the great subject
they applied them to.) But never did they venture to express or describe it by
impossible Suppositions, and Schemes of Things that never were nor could be,
nor by bold Fictions and Chimera's formed wholly in their own Brain: No, this
Province was wholly reserved for this Author, the great Corrector and Chastiser
of all that ever wrote before him: and especially ( as in Duty bound) of the
Fathers. For as to his Notion of a Man and his living Image, it is manifest,
that he does not offer it as a bare Resemblance of the Trinity, and no more,
but rather as a Parallel Instance, or, at least, very near one, and such as
gives us a True and Proper Representation of this Mystery; which, I must tell
him, is much more than a faint Resemblance of it, or a mere Allusion to it. For
in several places of this Book of his, he cites it and refers to it, as a Rule
whereby to speak and conceive rightly of the Trinity; and not only so, but also
as a medium whereby to argue concerning it; particularly p. 63. l. 20. p. 70.
l. 4. p. 87. l. 16, and 25. And to show us yet further, of what use and virtue
this extraordinary Notion is, he tells us, That this gives us ^n Account also
of the modi subsistendi, viz. of the Real Subsistence of the same Individual
Nature in Three, after a different manner, Def. p. 35. l. 15. And a more useful
piece of Instruction for our better understanding of the Trinity, no doubt,
there cannot be. But then are not these modi subsistenti, Modes? and has not
this Man several times, both in his Vindication and in this his Defense,
utterly denied all modes in God, putting them in the same Rank with Accidents,
and equally exploding both, with Reference to the Deity? Let him deny this, if
he can; and if he cannot, let the Reader take notice what a kind of Disputant
this is, who having first denied, That there are any Modes in God, is now for
offering us an Account or Explication what these Modes are. But this being only
an Absurdity and a Contradiction, is in this Author not much to be regarded.
But that which is infinitely more unjustifiable, is his audacious obstruding
the same Romance of a Man and his living Image, as the best Key for the
Interpretation of Scripture, and that in the most important points of Religion,
with great Profaneness calling this figment of his own making. The plain
Account of the Essential Unity between God the Father, and God the Son, p. 21.
l. 10. Which words are so derogatory to the Sacred and Mysterious Unity here
spoken of, that, I dar^ say, no Church in Christendom would have endured them
but this. For they manifestly contain in them these Two Scandalous Propositions.

First, That a Plain Account may be given by us of the most Mysterious,
Incomprehensible, and Unaccountable Thing, that God ever proposed to the Belief
of Men; as the Numerical Essential Unity (which is the Unity here spoken of)
between the Eternal Father and the Son confessedly is.

Secondly, That a mere Figment, a Romance, and an impossible supossition of
what never was, nor is, not can be, viz. A Man and his living Image, is a most
proper (if not absolutely the best) way, to give this plain Account of the said
Unity by.

These Propositions, I say, (which are evidently contained in his forecited
Assertion) are Intolerable. And I do here aver, that they are these daring
offers to give the World Plain Accounts, clear Ideas, new Representations, and
further Explications of the Trinity, (unknown to the Church heretofore) which
have not only driven this unhappy Man upon an Hypothesis, which is downright
Tritheism, but have also terribly shaken the whole Belief of this Article in
some Men's Minds, and quite extinguished, and cast it out of others. But such
effects must be expected from Heresy, when it can walk about and face the World
with a License in the Front of it.

But after all these high pretenses; does any one by this new piece of Imagery,
and this Man's Discourse upon it, find the Trinity more explained to him than
before? or rather does not the whole Discourse seem wrote in the S^raphick way
and style of Jacob Behmen or George Fox? it being nothing from first to last
but a mere Iargon of Unaccountable, Incoherent, Obscure, dark stuff, and
nothing so fit as a Dark Room to speak it in. How it may pass the World, I know
not, but, I fancy, not so currently as some imagined: And therefore if I might
advise the profound Author of it (since he has the Gazette so much at his
service) he should, upon Publication of the next Auction for Pictures, take
care to get his Living Image into the Collection.

And now, in his Conclusion of the Account given by him of his Hypothesis, he
endeavors to remove a great Objection against it: For both the Antapologist
and the Animadverter had charged him for stating the Notion of a Trinity in
Unity so, as utterly to take away the Mysteriousness of it; which Charge he
would here ward off; and he attempts to do it, by taking shelter in the
Ambiguity of the Term Intelligible; which may be either taken at large for that
which may in any degree be understood; And so, none doubts, but God or the
Divine Nature may be in some Respects Intelligible; and yet, for all that,
remain upon many other Accounts Inconceivable. Or, Secondly, Intelligible may
be taken for that which may be fully and perfectly understood; and whatsoever
is so, I am sure, can have nothing Inconceivable in it, unless conceiving be
one thing, and understanding another. Now I affirm, that where we may form a
Notion of a Thing not only True, but also Plain and Easy, and withal, such as
solves all doubts and difficulties about it, and clears off all seeming
Contradictions to it, that Thing is fully and perfectly Intelligible, and
consequently can upon no Account be reckoned Inconceivable. And such a Notion
of the Trinity, has this Author in his Vindication, etc. forty times told us,
that his Hypothesis affords, and therefore according to the said Hypothesis, a
Trinity in Unity can have nothing Mysterious or Inconceivable in it. As for the
Instance he brings of God's Eternity; which (as he says) must be owned to have
a great deal in it Inconceivable by our Reason, and yet to be Intelligible
enough so far as that Notion of it reaches, viz. That it is a duration without
Beginning or End, p. 36. l. 15. I say this comes not up to his Case. Since he
neither does nor can pretend, That this Account or Description of Eternity
makes the Notion of it so plain and easy as to solve all doubts and
difficulties about it, and clear off all seeming contradictions to it (which
yet he affirms that his Notion of a Trinity does). For if there could be such a
Notion of Eternity as should do all this, I affirm, that even that high
Attribute of God could have nothing Inconceivable remaining in it. Let him
therefore leave off such Sophistical Trifling with his Reader; since, for an
Object to be in some Degree Intelligible, is one Thing, and to be so
intelligible as to be plain and easy with all doubts and difficulties about it
solved, and all seeming contradictions cleared off, is quite Another. The
former indeed may consist with the Mysteriousness of the said object upon
several other Accounts, but this latter neither does nor can upon any Account
whatsoever. So that if this Man would but keep to the Question, and abide by
his own positive repeated Assertions (which he is perpetually shifting and
flying from) the Charge of his making the Trinity no mystery at all, stands as
full and clear against him, as that two Contradictory Propositions can never in
their full Latitude be verified of one and the same subject.

But since a Plain and easy Notion of a Trinity in Unity, and such as solves
all doubts and difficulties about it, must needs found very oddly in the Ears
of all sober Christians, who have hitherto accounted it Incomprehensible in the
very Notion of it, I cannot see how this Author will relieve himself, but by
finding some Theological Use of the word Mystery, that may overruled the common
and received sense of it. And here to help him in such a strait for once, I
will refer him to a Choice Author called Liberius de Sancto Amore (but his true
name is Le Clerk) who in his first Theological Epistle Entitled de Union
Hypostatica duarum Christi Naturarum, affirms, That a Mystery, and particularly
that of the Union of Two Natures in the Person of Christ (as it has been all
along accounted) has nothing (...) ( i.e.) Incomprehensible in it. Mysterium
magnum est, non quod sit in se (...), sed quia de eo sine Revelatione Novi
Testamenti nunquam homines cogitassent, p. 10. Again in this third Epistle
bearing this Title, In qua S. Trinitatis Mysterium explicatur, after he had
congratulated the present Age, that amongst the many Advantages accrewing to it
from the Cartesian Philosophers, they had made those Things plain, easy and
obvious to the World, which our Ancestors had represented as (...) ( i.e.)
unsearchable and unintelligible: He proceeds to these Passages with reference
to the Trinity, Mysterium illu^ quod hactenus Theologis omnibus crucem fixit,
facile explicatu esse, modo recta ineatur via, contendimus, p. 96. and that he
himself took this right way of explaining it, he all along supposes. And again,
p. 99. Horum alterutrum fuisse oportet, vel S. Trinitatis Mysterium facile tum
conceptu fuisse (scil. Temporibus Apostolorum) vel nullum tale Mysterium, quale
hodie creditur, ab Apostolis fuisse praedicatum. Again, p. 100. He tells his
Friend (and that with Equal Impudence and Falsehood) that upon the Principles of
the Reformed Churches, Necesse est fatearis, nihil esse in hoc negotio (...),
idque clara, nisi fallor, explicatione verum esse non frustra Tibi ostendemus.
And again, p. 102. Incomprehensibilis non alia de causa habita est S. Trinitas,
quam quia hactenus Theologorum omnium scopulus fuit, non quod in se capi non
possit, etc. So that we have here furnished our Author with some Theological
Use of that Expression (thanks to Le Clerk for it) That the Notion of a Trinity
is a plain and easy Notion, and contians a full solutionn of all doubts and
difficulties belonging to it. But then we are to take notice withal, that we
must not think to attain to such a Notion of it but conditionally, viz. by
following the Explications he gives us in his forementioned Epistle, De Union
Hypostatica, etc. nor can we (as he tells us) make use of the Notions there
laid down by him, to any purpose, without a previous and thorough knowledge of
the Cartesian Method. p. 7. (as indeed nothing can be so kindly as a New
Philosophy to graft a New Divinity upon). Well then, in this his first Epistle
he asserts (as he does likewise in the Two next,) That the Three Divine Persons
are Tres distinctae Cogitationes, or distincti modi cogitandi, or Distinctae
Series Cogitationum, in one and the same Divine Essence or Nature, sustaining
the said three Cogitations or Modes, or Series of Cogitation. He defines also
Cogitation to be quicquid in mente nostra fit cujus conscii sumus, p. 5. which
manifestly implies and amounts to Self-Consciousness. From which particulars so
prepared, it is not unlikely but that our Author, according to the old Rule of
Inventis addendi, might carry the Notion something further, and improve the
Three Cogitationes into Three Spiritus aut mentes Cogitantes ( Substantia
Cogitans being the Definition which Le Clerk gives of a Spirit, p. 6.) So that
as Le Clerk had provided three distinct Cogitations or Self-Consciousnesses,
our Author might very easily find out three distinct Minds or Spirits for them
to belong to: especially since Le Clerk had also marked him out a way to Unite
those Three Spirits again in that Proposition laid down by him, p. 7. Spiritus
per solam Cogitationem Vniri possunt, which might naturally enough lead our
Author to some Acquaintance with Mutual Consciousness too. And then for three
Distinct Infinite Spirits, which make the third part of his Hypothesis, though
Le Clerk (as we have observed) says nothing of them here, yet in his (...) or
Metaphysics, he speaks of the Three Divine Persons, as of Three Infinite Minds
United. Which Opinion (he says) is Platonic and Intelligible; and prefers it
before that of One Infinite Mind extended to Three distinct Cogitations, or
distinguished by Three Self-Consciousnesses. Which he says (as this Author says
also) was taught by the Fathers, though they knew not how to express. it
Intelligibly: and indeed is the same which he himself pretends to hold in these
Theological Epistles. So that, although, I readily own the Difference of these
Two Men's Hypotheses, according to the different molds they have cast them
into, yet since Le Clerk has furnished out Three Self-Consciousnesses, and
found out a way of Uniting Spirits by Mutual Consciousness, and lastly
preferred the Platonic Opinion of Three Infinite United Spirits or Minds, I
cannot for my life persuade my self, but that this Author took his Hints and
Rise from Le Clerk, and by a very little adding and changing made a shift to
patch up an Hypothesis of his own, out of Le Clerk's Materials; no other
objection appearing to me against it but that Le Clerk's Book was wrote in
Latin. But I leave it to the Learned and impartial Reader to judge of this. As
for the Book here spoken of, it is a small Octavo Printed at Saumur in France
(though expressed in the Title Page by Irenopolis). Anno Domini 1679. And very
narrowly escaped being burnt there also for the Heresy contained in it; some
good Friends of his (it seems) then in power, stopping the Sentence, and so
preventing the Disgrace. As no doubt this Author also has found several good
Friends of the same sort, who have stepped in between his writings and the
catching Element: though many Worthy and wise Men are still of Opinion, that
the flame which these wretched Papers have already kindled in our Poor Church,
will hardly go out, till the Church has paid its debt by kindling another upon
Them.

And thus I have examined and gone over the first general part of his Book,
giving us the same account again (which his Vindication had given us before) of
his dull, heavy Hypothesis. Heavy indeed in it self, but made ten times more so
by the Repetition. And so I pass to the other general part of his work
containing his pretended Answers to the Animadverter's Arguments. But before I
enter upon this, I have something to account with him

First, Concerning the Use of the School-Terms in general; and Secondly
concerning one more particularly used in the Animadversions.

1. As to the first of these, which this Author with so much Insolence and
Ignorance, professedly explodes, it is known, that they have been, and are
universally received, owned, and made use of in all matters of Scholastic
Debate, and Argumentation by Men of Learning all the World over. For besides,
that there is no Art, Science or Profession whatsoever, but what has its
peculiar Words and Terms appropriate to it, whereby the skilful in the said Art
express their Notions, and Conceptions of the Things belonging to it, I would
fain have this Opiniator tell me, whether the Community of the World, and
Philosophers consider the ^am^ Things after the same manner? and if they do
(...) whether they can or ought to speak of them in the same manner or no? Men
in common converse apprehend things only in their gross bulk, as they incur
into their Senses; but as long a Reason and the Mind of Man refines upon the
reports as Sense (which is the proper business of Philosophy) it will form to
it self several distinct Conceptions of the same Things, which the generality
of Men take no notice of; and accordingly it must either find, or make
different Terms, or words to express these different Conceptions by: And this,
Great Sir, by your leave, gave Rise to Philosophical Terms, which so much
offend you. And moreover, as long as there is Ambiguity in words founded upon
one and the same word's signifying several Things, it will be impossible to
discourse exactly and scientifically of the Nature of Things, without
distinguishing and sorting out these Significations: And this was the occasion
and ground of Philosophical Distinctions. And, now let this Man (to make his
Ignorance of these Terms and distinctions seem the result of his Judgment and
his Choice) laugh at all this if he pleases, (for Ridet saepe, qui ridendus
est) but, for all that, the sober and learned part of the World will not be put
off so. There is an admirable Discourse in the Ninth Book of Politian's
Epistles, wrote by Picus Mirandula, in defense of the Schoolmen, and their
Terms, to his Friend Hermolaus Barbarus; who being Ignorant of them (as this
Man and his Followers are) very ridiculously despised and scoffed at them, as
they likewise do. And the whole Epistle is wrote with so much strength of
Reason, such a felicity, and true stroke of Wit, joined with an equal Elegancy
of style, that (were it not wrote in Latin) I would desire this despiser of
the Schools to try his skill in answering it. Matters therefore standing thus,
all the Question now will be, whether such as Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas,
Scotus, and Durandus amongst the Ancienter, and Suarez, Estius, and Valentia
amongst the later Schoolmen, or such Punyes as this Author (of whose learned
accomplishments we have so fair a Specimen in the ninth and tenth Chapters of
the Animadversions) be the fitter Persons to prescribe proper Terms, Rules, and
ways of Expression to treat of Philosophical and Theological matters by? And
more particularly, whether Essence, Substance, Modes of Being, Person,
Subsistence, Relation and the like; Or Spiritual Sensation (which is a
Contradiction in the Terms) or Conscious Sensation (which is as much as knowing
Knowledge) or Self-Conscious Sensation, and mutual Conscious Sensation, and
natural Self-Conscious Sensation, and Natural Mutual Conscious Sensation,
together with Self-Consciousness, and mutual Consciousness, and continuity of
Sensation. I say, whether these latter (which are the arrantest Cant,
Gibberish, and Behmenistical Nonsense that ever the Christian Church and
Religion were abused with) or the former Terms used by the Schoolmen, and all
other Divines for several Ages, be the fitter and more significant to treat of
the Divine Nature and Persons by. I say again, let Christendom and the whole
World (except a few Novellists) be Judges of this. I do not deny, nor does any
one else that I know, but that there is some Refuse in this sort of Writers:
And that was all that the R. R. Antapologist reflected upon in his Answer to
this Author's Illiterate Apology. So that he need not, poor Man, be so much at
a loss to guess how this matter about the Schoolmen will be accorded (as he
says) between the Antapologist, Answer to the Antapology, p. 19. l. 6.
and the Animadverter. For both of them profess themselves much more at a loss
how to reconcile this Man to himself; and withal know very well how to
distinguish between what is useful and valuable in the Writings of the
Schoolmen, and what is useless and superfluous: but own themselves utterly
unable, in the Writings of this Author, to find or make any such distinction.
Now after this account of the School-Terms in general, I come in the

Second place to give some account also of that particular Term [ the formal
Reason of a Thing] frequently made use of in the Animadversions; which, though
sufficiently explained in the second Chapter of them, I shall however take into
some further consideration; since this Author would fain avoid any Argument
couched under it, by pleading that the Term it self is none of his. Which
indeed is readily granted him; but yet, if he asserts the Thing, (as he often
does) and the Animadverter puts it for him into a proper Scholastical Term, and
so fits it the better for Argumentation, the Term, I assure him, will affect
him, and his Arguments, whether he will admit and make use of it or no: for the
Animadverter will be judged by his Reader who understands Him, and not by his
Adversary who does not. Well then; by [ the formal Reason of a Thing] the
Animadverter understands that Internal Principle which makes a Thing to be what
it is. And as Unity inseparably attends Being, and distinction accompanies
Unity, the same is the Principle of all these; since that, which internally
makes a Thing such or such a Being, thereby also makes it one in it self, and
distinguishes it from all other Things besides. For still, according to all
Philosophy, Idem est Principium Constitutivum and Distinctivum; So that as
every Thing is constituted in such an order of Being by what it is, so it is
distinguished also by what it is from every Thing which it is not. And for this
Cause the Principle here spoken of is called [ Formal] because it is the Form
(taking the word in its larger sense as it comprehends also Essence) which
makes a Thing to be of such a Nature, and withal gives it Unity, Distinction,
and Denomination. And upon the same Account also, the Term [ Reason] is added
to the Term [ Formal] to show* That this gives the Natural and Proper Answer to
the Question, why a Thing is such or such, thus or thus? As if, for Instance,
it should be asked, why or for what Reason a Beast is said to be a sensible
Creature? the Answer is, because it has an Internal Principle of sense which
renders it so; so that this Principle of sense is the Formal Reason, whereby it
is both constituted and denominated sensible. And the like is to be said of
other. Things in the like Case. This is the Account, which I give of the
meaning of the Term [ Formal Reason,] as it occurs in the Animadversions, viz.
That it is that Internal Principle, which makes a Thing to be what it is, to be
one in it self, and distinct from all other Things, which it is not; and
lastly, is the Natural and Proper. Answer to all Enquiries a Priore, why or how
a Thing comes to be essentially such or such, according to its respective
Denomination? Of all which this Author being wholly ignorant, he thinks he has
so entirely cleared himself of this Term, and whatsoever has been argued
against him, under it, That he declares with Triumph, p. 78. l. 10. That if the
Animadverter thinks fit to try his skill again upon this Argumen^, he believes
he shall hear no more of the formal Reason of Pe^sonality and Vnion] nor of
other such like Term^. But this poor Man should remember how unhappy he has
been in his Prophecies. For so he had said before both of the Socinians, and of
the most learned Answerer of the Vindication of his Case, etc. viz. That he
belie^ed that he should hear from them no more; when yet he has heard from them
Both; and that in a strain so much above his low Talent, that few believe, that
either of them will ever hear more from him: and if ^s (they say) s^^ing is
believing, so f^^ling be bel^^ving too, I doubt not but by this time he Himself
also is o^ the same Opinion. And accordingly, I do here assure this Man of
Presumption, that I shall produce this and the like Terms in all Disputes with
him again and again (having herein the Company of all the Eminent Scholastic
Writers, both in Philosophy and Divinity, constantly using and avowing the use
of them:) and I doubt not but in the strength of them to break through all the
Co^^^b Argumentations of this his Sophistical and slight Discourse.

And so I go on* But before I come particularly to examine his shifting Answers
to the Animadverter's Arguments, I think fit to lay before the Reader the plain
and true state of the Point between this Author and him; as the most
unexceptionable Rule, whereby the Reader is desired to judge between them both.

Now the Chief Heads of dispute between them are these Three.

First, Concerning Self-Consciousness: and what dependence the Personality and
Personal Unity of Persons, both Create and Uncreate has upon it.

Secondly, Touching mutual Consciousness; and how far the Essential Unity of
the Three Divine Persons in one and the same Numerical Divine Nature depends
upon it. And

Thirdly, Whether the Three Divine Persons are Three Distinct Infinite Minds,
or Spirits, or no.

Concerning all which severally the Reader is in the first place to observe,
That this Author makes Self-Consciousness both in Beings Create and Uncreate,
the formal Reason of Personality, and Personal Unity, viz. That, which [makes]
a Person to be formally a Person, and formally one in himself; or (in other
words) that, wherein his Personal Being, Unity, and Original Distinction from
other things does consist. And so in the next place, for mutual Consciousness,
he makes the Essential Unity of Nature, or Essence belonging to the Three
Divine Persons, to consist formally in their mutual Consciousness. So that it
is this which renders them formally one in Nature or Essence. And lastly, He
positively affirms, that the Three Divine Persons in the Godhead are Three
distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, and that it is Heresy and Nonsense to
affirm otherwise. Vind. p. 66. l. 25.

Thus he holds, and asserts concerning these Three disputed Points, as will
appear from the following Passages in his Books, concerning each of them. And

1. For Self-Consciousness. The Self-Vnity of a Spirit, says he (universally by
the way reckoning a Spirit a Person) can be nothing else but
Self-Consciousness, viz. That it is Conscious to its own Thoughts, Reasonings,
Passions, which no other Spirit is conscious to but it self, Vind. p. 48. l.
32. This makes a Spirit numerically one. Vind. p. 49. l. 2. The
Self-Consciousness of every Person to it self (viz. of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost) [makes] them Three Distinct Persons, Vind. p. 68. l. 5. And, we
know no other Unity of a Mind or Spirit but Consciousness, Ibid. The Essential
Unity of a Spirit consists in Self-Consciousness, and it is nothing else, which
makes a Spirit one and distinguishes it from all other Spirits, Vind. p. 47. l.
15. The very Nature of a Spirit consists in Internal, vital Sensation, Defense
p. 7. l. 11. The Unity of a single Mind or Spirit consists in a Natural
Self-Conscious Sensation (Internal Sensation and Self-Sensation being still
with this Author the same with Self-Consciousness) Defense p. 7. l. 29. A
Natural Self-Consciousness makes one Natural Person, Defense p. 8. l. 7. And
Self-Consciousness makes a Mind or Spirit one with it self, and distinguishes
or separates it from all other Minds or Spirits, Defense p. 43. l. 1, 2, 3. And
last of all, more plainly. If this be what he (the Animadverter) means by the
formal Reason of Personality, viz. That which makes a Mind, Spirit, or Person
one, and either distinguishes or separates it from all other Minds, Spirits or
Persons, I do affirm, that Self-Consciousness is [ this formal Reason.] Defense
p. 38. l. 7, 8, 9, etc. I think it extremely needless to cite any more passages
upon this head; these being super-abundantly sufficient to prove, That all that
is contained in, and signified by [ the formal Reason of a Thing] is by this
Author here ascribed to and affirmed of Self-Consciousness, with reference to
Personality, Personal Unity and Distinction: and that therefore his Rejection
of the Term, while he so amply asserts the Thing, is groundless, and indeed
Senceless and Ridiculous. But

Secondly, As touching the next head in dispute which is Mutual-Consciousness,
he has these following Assertions, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, a^^ one by an
Internal Consciousness, as every Man is one with himself, that is, they feel
each other in themselves, and they are as essentially one by a mutual
Consciousness as every Man is one with himself, Vind. p. 56. l. 6. As the
Self-Consciousness of every Person to it self ( viz. of every Person in the
Godhead) makes the Three Distinct Persons, so the mutual Consciousness of all
Three Divine Persons makes them all but one Infinite God, Vind. p. 68. l. 5.
mutual Consciousness makes all Three Persons numerically one Divine Essence, or
one God, Vind. p. 84. l. 29. The Three Persons are essentially one God by a
mutual Self-Consciousness, Vind. p. 88. l. 32, 33. The Three Minds ( viz. The
Three Divine Persons) are all mutually conscious to each other* and therefore
as essentially one, as the same Mind is one with it self by a
Self-Consciousness, Vin. p. 91. l. 8. From all which it follows, That mutual
Consciousness is the formal Reason of the Essential Unity of the Three Divine
Persons in one and the same Divine Nature, or (in other words,) That which
properly makes them one in Nature, on lastly, That wherein the Unity and
Identity of their Nature does formally and properly consist. This, I say,
undeniably follows from the forementioned Passages cited out of this Author.
And so I pass to the

Third and last head in dispute, viz. Whether the Three Divine Persons be Three
distinct Minds or Spirits? Which this Author positively affirms; as appears
from the following Passages. The Three Divine Persons (says he) Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, are Three Infinite Minds really distinct from each other, Vind. p.
50. line at the end. And they are Three distinct Infinite Minds, p. 51. l. 5.
Again, The Persons are Perfectly Distinct, for they are Three distinct Infinite
Minds, and therefore Three distinct Infinite Persons, and to say, They are
Three Divine Persons, and not Three distinct Minds, is both Heresy and
Nonsense, Vind. p. 66. l. 26. The Three Persons are Three Minds, and therefore
as distinct as Three Minds, Vind. p. 91. l. 5. And again speaking of the Three
Divine Persons, I grant (says he) that They are Three Holy Spirits, Vind. p.
258. l. 28. And to add the Crowning and confirming Passage of all. If (says he)
every Person in the Trinity considered as a Distinct Person be not a Distinct
Infinite and Eternal Mind, there is, I confess, an end of the Dean's Notion,
but then, I doubt, there will be an end of a Trinity of Persons also, etc.
Defense p. 8. l. 24. 25, etc.

All which are the Positive assertions of this Author, and in all of them the
Things asserted by him are as positively denied by the Animadverter. And I
thought it highly necessary thus to draw them all together, and lay them before
the Reader, that so he may with one easy turn of his Eye, be able at any time
to have a full view of this Author's whole Hypothesis; and thereby to track him
in all his Sophistical windings and shiftings, in which he shall find him
sometimes denying, what he had before expressly affirmed, and sometimes quite
changing the state of the whole matter; which, I assure him, is the whole
design and artifice (such as it is) of this Book.

And accordingly, that I may from the Premises give a brief state of the Three
forementioned heads The dispute here in the first place between this Author and
the Animadverter, is not whether Self-Consciousness proves, infers, or declares
Personality, and Personal Unity, as a Sign or Effect of it, or a Consequent
from it? For this is not the Question. But whether it be the Formal Reason of
it, or (in other words) that wherein the said Personality and Personal Unity
properly does consist? which this Author has (and that in Terms signifying only
a Priore) over and over affirmed, and the Animadverter as positively denied and
disproved. And therefore, if this Author shall at any time take up with the
former, and say, that it is all one to him, if we allow Self-Consciousness to
infer and prove Personality and Personal Unity as the Sign, Effect or
Consequent thereof, or affirm it, in a Causal Sense, to be the Reason of the
same. This, I say, is manifestly t^ change the Question, and to give up the
Thing in Controversy between him and his Adversary.

In like manner, for Mutual Consciousness; since it is allowed on both sides,
That the Three Divine Persons are one in Nature and Essence, The Question is,
Whether Mutual Consciousness be that wherein this Unity of Nature or Essence
does consist, So that by Reason hereof the Three Divine Persons are formally
One in Nature or Essence? and not Whether this Mutual Consciousness proves,
infers, or declares them to be thus One? For this comes not up to the Point.
And consequently if this Author says, That he looks no further, and means no
more than this, (as his Meaning is still a Bottomless Pit) he evidently
abandons his own positive Assertion, and effectually gives up the whole Matter
in Dispute. For surely the Antecedent Reason of any Thing, and the bare Sign,
Proof, or Consequent of the same can never hold the same place in Argument, nor
produce the same Conclusion.

And so likewise in the Third and last place, the Question is not, whether the
Trinity be Three distinct Intelligent Persons, (which in a rightly stated Sense
is true) but whether these Persons be three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits?
That is to say, Three distinct Absolute Beings, Essences or Substances? which
it is impossible for them in any Sense to be. And consequently for this Man to
change the Term [ Minds] into that of [ Intelligent Persons], is quite to alter
the Question; and so, to relinquish the Thing which he himself had so often,
and expressly asserted; and that as the Principal part of his Hypothesis
contended for: As shall be fully demonstrated when I come to debate this
particular Head with him.

In the mean time, I have laid the Premises before the Reader, as the true
State of the Point, and as the Measure, which I will deal with this Man upon,
and resolve to hold him to. And so I address my self to the Examination of the
Answers which he pretends to bring to the Animadverter's Arguments. Where I
cannot but first observe the Complement which he ushers them in with; viz. That
the Animadverter in the very Entrance runs headlong past all recovery: which,
since it must needs bring his Head to the ground first, I heartily wish him
this Author's Forehead to endure it.

But to come to his Answers, The Animadverter having in direct contradiction to
this Author, denied Self-Consciousness to be the formal Reason, or Internal
constituent Principle of Personality in Finite Persons; This Author replies to
him these Two Things.

1. That he never said one word of the formal Reason of Personality, in his
whole Discourse upon the Trinity; nor has at all concerned himself about it. In
answer to which, I here tell him, that though he uses not the Term it self, yet
if he asserts the Thing signified by the Term, as he does by affirming, that
Self-Consciousness makes a Person to be properly what he is, or in other words
is that, wherein his Personality, or being a Person does consist, This is all,
that the Animadverter expresses by the Term [ Formal Reason of Personality] and
that he has affirmed this concerning Self-Consciousness, I refer the Reader to
the Passages newly cited to this Purpose out of his Books; which demonstrate
the same beyond all pretense or possibility of denial,

Secondly, He says, That it is only the Unity of a Spirit with it self and its
distinct, and separate Subsistence from all other Created Spirits, which
consists in Self-Consciousness. In answer to which I must tell him, That this
is that very Thing which the Animadverter affirms to be the formal Reason of a
Thing, viz. that which gives it Being, Unity in it self, and Distinction from
all other Things. I mean the Principal, Original Distinction, by which it is so
distinguished. So that the meaning of this Term being thus adjusted, I shall,
without any further regard to this Author's Exceptions proceed to dispute the
Thing it self in the Case now before us. In which he reasons thus, p. 37. at
the end. If that be one distinct separate Mind which is conscious only to it
self, and feels all that is in it self, and nothing else, and those be Two
distinct separate Minds, each of which is thus conscious to it self, and not to
each other, then the Dean has gained his Point. And no doubt he has, if a Mind
or Spirit's feeling it self one in it self, makes it to be so. And its feeling
it self a distinct, and separate mind from all other minds, gives it that
distinction and separation: otherwise, it is a most senceless and ridiculous
Inconsequence: For the dispute here is, Whether Self-Consciousness be the
Principle and Reason of Personal Being and Unity, not whether it be the Proof
of it, or that whereby a Man comes to know this of himself? This latter we may
allow it to be, but the former it can never be. For as much as the Consequent
may indeed infer, and prove both the Being and Unity of the Antecedent, but
cause, or give it, it neither does, nor can. So that when he says, That the
Dean has gained his Point; I suppose he means his Deanery; For otherwise
certainly there was never a more absurd inference made by Man, than to
conclude, that because a Spirit by an Intimate Self-Sensation (as he cants)
feels it self to be one and not another, therefore its feeling it self so, is
that very thing, which makes it so. And yet so very fond is he of this (...),
that there is no drawing or driving him off from it.

But the Defender, it seems, will prove his Point against the Animadverter from
his own Maxim laid down in the third Chapter of the Animadversions, page 70.
viz. That wheresoever the formal Reason of Personality is, there is
Personality: And again, That wheresoever Personality is, there is the Formal
Reason of Personality, viz. That they exist convertibly, and mutually, and
essentially infer one Another. Whereupon the Defender argues thus. That since
there is such a convertible Existence between Person and Self-Consciousness, as
the Proprium quarto modo of it, So that they mutually infer one another, it
must follow that Self-Consciousness (even according to the Animadverter's own
Rule) is and must be the formal Reason of Personality. To which wonderful piece
of Logic I have these Two Things to answer.

First, That Self-Consciousness neither exists convertibly with, nor is the
Proprium quarto modo of a Person: for though every Person be Self-Conscious,
yet every Thing that is Self-Conscious is not a Person: as the second and third
Arguments do sufficiently evince.

Secondly, That though a Thing always exists convertibly with its formal
Reason, yet every Thing which it exists convertibly with, is not therefore the
formal Reason of it. Which, had this Man been aware of, he could not have been
guilty of such a Blunder, as to make the Proprium quarto modo of a Thing the
Formal Reason of the same. For one and the same Thing may exist convertibly
with several Things, though there cannot be several formal Reasons of the same
Thing. And does this Man think that the Animadverter, by affirming a mutual and
convertible Existence between a Thing, and the formal Reason thereof, does
therefore deny, that Thing to exist convertibly with any Thing besides its
formal Reason? or that he affirms this convertible Existence to be that which
makes this formal Reason? no, it is enough to his Purpose, that it is one
inseparable Qualification belonging always to the formal Reason of a Thing,
though it does not belong to that alone. I suppose this Author may have heard
of that Maxim, Posita causa ponitur effectus; and so, Vice versa: which is
universally true of all causes and effects, relatively considered; so that here
is a convertible existence between them (for it is this properly, and not a
convertibility in direct Predication, which is here spoken of). Now I would
know whether this cause has not also its Specific Difference, and its
Property, and whether it may not sustain several Relations upon several
Accounts? And if so, will this new Logician say, That because this cause exists
convertibly with its effect, it cannot exist convertibly also with its
Specific Difference, and with its Property, and with its several correlates,
or if it does exist convertibly with all and each of these, that therefore all
and every one of them must be the formal Reason of it? I protest I am amazed at
his Ignorance, and must declare, that I can find nothing Invincible in all his
Arguments, but That. And I hope the Reader will take a True measure of his
Logical Talent from his Discourse about Proprium quarto modo: which way of
discoursing, though I shall not ascribe to him as his Property, yet it has so
much of a Property, that he is like to be known by it.

And so having made good what had been asserted by the Animadverter, concerning
the Formal Reason of Personality, I leave Self-Consciousness to shift for it
self, and proceed to vindicate the Animadverter's First Argument against it;
Argum. 1.
which is this, viz. That Self-Consciousness presupposes Personality in the
Thing to which it belongs, and therefore cannot be the Formal Reason of it;
forasmuch as nothing can be the formal Reason of that which is in Order of
Nature before it. This is the Sum of the Argument; and what says this Defender
to it? Why, he shifts the Terms, and from Self-Consciousness understood (as all
the World understands it) for an Act, passes to the Principle of
Self-Consciousness; affirming, That although indeed he speaks only of the Act,
yet that (by an unfathomable Meaning still) he intends only the Principle of
the said Act, as that alone which makes a Person, or gives Personality. And
accordingly he discourses, as follows: Suppose (says he) that a Man should
reason thus. Actual Knowledge presupposes a Mind, and therefore Knowledge [in
its Principle] is not, and cannot be the formal Reason of a Mind, Def. p. 39.
l. 13. To which I answer, 1. That the Dispute here is not con^^^ning the Formal
Reason of a Mind, but of a Person; and 2. That He who reasons in this manner,
quite alters the State of the Question; which proceeds not upon the Principle
but the Act of Self-Consciousness. And so, the true Reasoning must be This;
Actual Knowledge presupposes a Mind, and therefore Actual Knowledge neither is,
nor can be the Formal Reason of that Mind. This, Sir, is the true Arguing upon
the Point, according to the Terms, which, on both sides, it has still been
expressed by; and in which there is not the least mention of the Principle of
Self-Consciousness; which is newly and postliminiously thrust in, and is quite
another thing from Self-Consciousness it self. And this is evident, not only
from the proper unforced Signification of the Word, importing no more, than an
Act in Conjunction with its Object, viz. an Act of Knowledge, terminated upon
Self: but also from this Author's own Explication of it, as still setting in
forth by words importing bare Action. Such as are a Person's knowing himself,
and all his Internal Motions, as likewise his actual Feeling or Sensation of
the same. These, I say, are the words which he always expresses
Self-Consciousness by. And will this Man now persuade the World, that Acts of
Knowledge and Acts of Feeling or Sensation, signify the Principles of these
several Acts? This is so gross a changing the very subject of the Dispute, that
I need not make one step further toward the confutation of it. For having
beaten him off from his own Terms, which he himself proposed and declared his
Hypothesis by, the Argument stands good against him; and having disproved what
he had argued from the Act of Self-Consciousness, I am not con^^^^ed about the
new Medium he brings from the Principle; since the Act was the only Thing (so
far as words can express Things) which he has all along mentioned and insisted
upon.

Nevertheless, to pursue him through his Shifts, I will consider his
Self-Consciousness even in the Principle of it too; and, in order to this, I
shall observe, That in every Suppositum or completely subsisting Being, and
consequently in every Person (which is only a Rational Suppositum) considered
as an Agent, these Three Things are to be taken notice of. First, The Form or
Essence, Secondly, The Powers of Faculties; and Thirdly, The Acts proceeding
immediately from these Powers, but mediately from the Essence or Form it ^elf
operating by them. And now, let us see whether any of all these, as they belong
to a Person, give Personality or Personal Individuation to that Person. Where,
in the First place, I affirm, That neither can the Acts themselves, nor the
Powers from with they flow (reckoning the Act and Power of Self-Consciousness
amongst the rest) give Personality or Personal Subsistence to the Nature to
which they belong; and that as, for other Reasons, so particularly for this,
That both Acts and Powers are Accidents, and that no Accident can give
Personality, or be the Formal Reason of a Person; because the Formal Reason of
any Thing must be always of the same Kind or Rank of Being with the Thing it
self, which is formally constituted by it. But a Person is an Intelligent
Substance, completed by its proper Subsistence as by its Substantial Mode. And
nothing Substantial, whether it be a Substance it self, or but a Mode of
Substance (which is always reduced to it) is or can be of the same Kind with
any Accident; since these Two make the Two grand different Orders or Ranks of
Being, and consequently no Power or Faculty, nor Action proceeding from it, can
constitute the Nature they belong to, a Person, by being the Formal Reason
thereof. To which we may add this further Consideration; That no Accident can
give so much as a Natural Individuation to its Subject, and therefore much less
can it give Personality or Personal Subsistence to the same; This being a
Degree of Perfection in the way of Existence, beyond that of bare
Individuation, and consequently neither upon this Account can any Action, or
Power, or Faculty of the Soul constitute an Humane or Intelligent Nature, a
Person. In the next place therefore (having thus shown, That neither the Act
nor the Power of Self-Consciousness can give Personality). Let us see whether
it can be derived from an higher Principle of Action, viz. the Form of the
Self-Conscious Being, which is the Rational Soul? Now this, we shall find,
sustains the Capacity of a double Principle, viz. of a Constituent, as it
concurs with the Body informed by it, toward the Constitution of an Humane
Nature; and, Secondly, of an Efficient; and that both Emanative, in respect of
the Powers and Faculties belonging to it; and properly Effective, in respect of
all the Acts, whether Intellection, or Volition, etc. produced by the
Instrumental mediation of the said faculties. But now, under which of these
capacities is it the Formal Reason of a Person? why; under neither: For as much
as in the humane Nature of Christ it sustains Both of them, viz. of a principal
part concurring to the Constitution of the said Nature, both as to its being
and unity, and of an efficient Principle, giving it all the Powers and Acts
properly issuing from that Nature. But for all that, (we know) that it makes
not that Nature a Person by giving it a Proper humane subsistence. Since the
Humanity of Christ has no such subsistence, but subsists by that of the Eternal
(...); which shows, that the said Subsistence has no such necessary connection
with Nature absolutely considered, but that so considered (as in the Present
Case) Nature may be without it. For if it were necessarily included in Nature
(as Personality and the formal Reason thereof mutually and essentially imply
and infer one Another) the humane Nature of Christ could neither Naturally nor
Supernaturally be without its proper humane Subsistence any more than without
its Essence. For still we speak here, not of such a Subsistence as is opposed
to inhesion in a Subject, and so makes a Substance; but of such an one, as is
opposed to all Dependence upon another, as upon a Suppositum, and so makes a
Substance Complete, and incommunicable, by giving it its ultimate and most
perfect manner of Existing. But of this more again presently in my Examination
of his Answer to the Animadverter's next Argument. In the mean time, the sum of
what has been argued is this. That if Self-Consciousness neither in the Act,
nor in the faculty or Power, nor yet in its higher Principle, viz. the form or
essence from which it flows, can formally give Personality or Personal
Individuation to the Nature to which it belongs, then Self-Consciousness in no
respect whatsoever can be said to be the formal Reason of a Person. But you
will say, what is it then that formally constitutes a Person? In answer to
which, though it is sufficient for me to have overthrown my Adversary's
assertion, yet that I may not be only upon the Negative, I affirm, that that
which formally gives Personality, or constitutes a Person, is an Intelligent
Nature ultimately completed by its proper Subsistence. This, I say, I hold and
let this Man of Arrogance and Ignorance overthrow it if he can. As for what he
says p. 40. l. 3. of Self-Consciousness in the Abstract, viz. That it is as
capable of being the formal Reason of a Person, as Rationality is of being the
formal Reason of a Rational Nature, it needs no other Answer, than that it is
precariously and falsely said; For the True Parallel between these two reaches
no further than this; That as Rationality constitutes and denominates its
concrete Rational; so Self-Consciousness constitutes and denominates its
concrete Self-conscious. And what then? a [ Person] is not the proper concrete
of [ Self-Consciousness] but a Self-Conscious Nature or Being, whether it be a
Person or no; and a Self-Conscious Nature it may be, and yet not a Person. By
which it is manifest, that this Man understands not what Abstract and Concrete,
Person and Personality mean. He uses the Terms indeed at a venture, but they
may be so many Greek words in English Characters, for ought he knows.

But he will not give over the Animadverter so, but has another terrible
Objection against that assertion of his, viz. That Personality is the ground
and Principle of Action, wheresoever it is; Bragging (forsooth) that he has
been taught other and better Things, viz. That Natura est principium motus and
quietis, and consequently of all other Actions. But was he never taught also
the Difference between the Principium Quod, and the Principium Quo of an
Action? and does he not consider withal, that the Dispute here is not
indifferently of any sort of Actions, but only of such as are Personal, and
belong to a complete Agent, or Suppositum? And I would fain have this
wonderfully-taught Man, show me any such Action proceeding from Nature, as the
Principium Quo, which does not also proceed from the whole Suppositum, as the
Principium Quod; and as that which alone claims the proper Denomination of
Agent, in respect of the said Action. Which being the true state of this
matter, I suppose he has been told often enough, that it is a Complete
Subsistence added to Nature which makes a Suppositum, and to an Intelligent
Nature which makes a Person. I have no more to say to him upon this head, but
that, upon a Review of the Confirmation which I have now given the
forementioned Argument, viz. That Self-Consciousness cannot be the formal
Reason of Personality, because in order of Nature it follows and presupposes
it, I shall not stick (in spite of this Man's Ignorance) to affirm it again
and again a Demonstration of the Point against him. And therefore those words
of the Defender upon this occasion are very pleasant. I cannot (says he) but
think how this Animadverter must look when he reads over this Argument again
with its triumphant Conclusion, p. 41. l. 26. In answer to which he must give
me leave to tell him, that (thanks be to God) the Animadverter's looks are not
quite so bad yet, as to put him in any danger of being mistaken for this
Author's living Image. And as for his other scoff, that this Argument was worth
its weight in Gold, though, he fears, it will not much enrich the Buyer, p. 39.
l. 9. What is that to him? let him mind his own Markets, who never writes to
enrich the Buyer but the Seller; and that Seller is himself: and since he is
so, well is it for his Books, and his Bookseller too, that Men generally Buy,
before they Read. The Animadverter for his part affects not the Reputation of a
Scribler, and much less of an Huckster. But pass we now, to the Consideration
and Vindication of the Animadverter's second Argument against
Self-Consciousness, which proceeds thus.

Arg. 2.
The Humanity or Humane Nature of Christ is perfectly Conscious to it self of
all the Internal Acts, whether of Knowledge, Volition or desire, etc. that pass
in it, or belong to it, and yet the humanity, or humane Nature of Christ is not
a Person, and therefore Self-Consciousness does not properly and formally give
Personality; for as much as it may be in that, which is not a Person. Thus the
Animadverter. And what says our Author to the contrary? Why in the first place
(according to his constant custom of denying what he had before affirmed) he
says, p. 40. l. 10. That he never [expresly] taught that Self-Consciousness was
the formal Reason of Personality. And again, l. 27. That he no where makes
Self-Consciousness the formal Reason of Personality. But, as it is very
possible for a Man not always to understand his own words, so I would have this
good Man know, that he has over and over made Self-Consciousness the formal
Reason of Personality, whether he understands so much or no. For, if by his
forementioned denial of it, he means no more than that he never made use of the
Term [ Formal Reason] this is readily granted him; but then it is arrant
trifling, since it is certain, that he has taught, and asserted the Thing
signified by this Term, as effectually and plainly as if he had used the very
Term it self. For (to tell him again what I had told him before) the Formal
Reason of a Thing is that, which constitutes it such a Being, giving it withal
its proper Unity and Distinction, whether Natural, or Personal, according as
the Thing is, which it belongs to. For all these Three necessarily go together,
and essentially imply one another, and consequently there must be one and the
same Principle of them all. And now, if we would see whether or no this Author
applies all this to Self-Consciousness, with reference to Minds or Spirits
(which he constantly makes to be Persons) let the Reader cast his Eye back upon
some of the fore-alleged Passages; particularly upon that in Vindic. p. 49. l.
12. That this Self-Consciousness makes a Spirit numerically one with it self.
And in Vind. p. 68. l. 6. That the Self-Consciousness of every one of the
Persons (viz. in the Trinity) to it self makes them Three distinct Persons. And
again, Vind. p. 74. l. 13. That the Essential Unity of a Spirit consists in
Self-Consciousness, and that it is nothing else which makes a Spirit one, and
distinguishes it from all other Spirits. Likewise in this Defense p. 7. He
tells us expressly, That the Nature of a Spirit consists in Sensation, (which
with him is only another word for Self-Consciousness.) Nay; and to go no
further than the very next page to that in which he here so positively
declares, That he no where makes Self-Consciousness the formal Reason of
Personality, viz. Defense p. 43. He roundly affirms, That Self-Consciousness
makes a Mind or Spirit one with it self, and distinguishes or separates it from
all other Minds or Spirits. And that such a distinct and separate
Self-Conscious Mind is a Natural Person. Now I would have this Man in the first
place tell us, whether all these Passages have not in them a causal sense, but
only an Illative or Probative, and no more? And in the next place, I would have
him show me whether there be any Thing more signified by the [formal Reason of
Personality] than what the forecited Passages fully contain in them? and if he
cannot prove that there is any more signified by it (as there is not) then let
him for the future leave off shuffling, and own, that by what he has asserted
in the said Passages, he has made Self-Consciousness the formal Reason of
Personality with reference to Minds or Spirits, which he Universally affirms to
be Persons. And by this I hope the Judicious Reader will see with both Eyes,
what a slippery Self-Contradicting Caviller the Animadverter has to dispute
with. In the mean time the sum of the Animadverter's Argument against him
stands thus. This Author asserts every Mind or Spirit to be a Person; He places
this Personality in Self-Consciousness; he holds this Self-Consciousness to be
Essential to, and Inseparable from a Mind; (for as much as he positively
asserts the Nature of a Mind or Spirit to consist in it, Defen. p. 7. l. 11.)
whereupon it does and must follow, That since our Savior, in assuming the
humane Nature, assumed an humane Mind, Soul, or Spirit, he assumed an humane
Person too; for as much as its Personality was as Inseparable from it, as its
Self-Consciousness (from which it necessarily resulted) was. Nor will it avail
him to allege the Interposal of Supernatural and extraordinary Power in the
present Instance; since such Power, though never so extraordinary and
Supernatural, never destroys the Essence, or Essentially necessary Connection of
Things. And therefore if the Personality of a mind be implied in the very
Nature of a Mind, a Mind can be no more without its Personality than without
its Nature: which would be a direct Contradiction; to the effecting whereof the
Divine Power it self does not extend. But on the other side, when we state the
Personality of an humane Nature upon the complete Subsistence of it, which is a
mode not necessarily implied in it, the Humane Nature of Christ might very well
by the Divine Power be made to exist without it, and so in a supernatural way
be taken into, and supported by the Personal Subsistence of the Eternal Word.
And all this with full accord to the strictest Principles of Reason, without
the least necessity of making Two Persons in our Savior; whereas according to
this Author's Hypothesis, it is impossible for all the Reason of Minkind to
keep off an Humane Person as well as a Divine from belonging to our Savior by
his Incarnation or Assumption of the humane Nature. As for his taking shelter
in Boetius's Definition of a Person, that will not help him neither; since the
utmost that can be proved against it, is that Boethius was under a mistake (and
one Man's mistake certainly cannot make another in the right): For all, both
Schoolmen and other Divines agree, that this Definition strictly taken is
defective; and that instead of substantia Individua alone, it should be
substantia Individua, completa, and Incommunicabilis, or something Equivalent
to the Two last Terms. For otherwise this Definition also would infer Two
Persons in Christ; since there are Two Individual Substances belonging to him,
viz. an Humane and a Divine. But after all we have great reason to believe,
that Boethius here uses the word Substantia for Subsistentia, as several of the
Ancient Fathers of great note did, and particularly St. Hilary in his Books of
the Trinity very often, and St. Austin sometimes; And then the Boetian
Definition is perfect and good; and no such Consequence of a double Personality
in our Savior can be drawn from thence; For as much as the Son of God took our
humane Nature without its proper Subsistence, into the Subsistence of his own
Eternal Person.

Arg. 3.
And so I proceed to the Animadverter's Third Argument, proving
Self-Consciousness not to be the formal Reason of Personality in Created
Beings, which is this. The Soul in its separate state is conscious to its self
of all its own Internal Acts or Motions, etc. and yet the Soul in such a state
is not a Person, and therefore Self-Consciousness is not the formal Reason of
Personality: for if it were, it would constitute a Person wheresoever it was.
This Argument is of the same Nature with the former; each of them being brought
as a Particular Negative against an Universal Affirmative. And how does this
Defender confute it? Why; by the easiest way of Confutation, that it is
possible for Ignorance to give it; viz. by saying, That it is nothing to the
Purpose. But does he know what is and what is not an Argument? and what is to
confute an Assertion, or Position, and what is not? Let him know then, That to
confute an Argument is properly to conclude the Contradictory Proposition of
that which is held by the Respondent or Defendant, and is called by the Greeks
(...), and by the Latins Redargutio. And here, I would have this hardy
Ignoramus own before the World, if he dares, That one Negative Instance does
not overthrow an Universal Affirmative as really and effectually as Ten
Thousand. But possibly one, who can be of all sides, may be for both sides of
the Contradiction too, and hold, That Self-Consciousness is the formal Reason
of Personality, Personal Unity, and distinction wheresoever it is, and yet that
there may be a Self-Conscious Being, one in it self, and distinguished from all
others, which is not a Person; of which two Propositions this Man has affirmed
the former (though he uses not the Term Formal Reason), and the Animadverter
asserts the Latter. And the whole dispute shall be resumed, and the Thing
debated again presently. But as for that insufferably Rude and Scurrilous
Reflection here passed by him upon the Animadverter, p. 43. l. 33. I shall take
no further notice of it now, intending effectually to account with him, both
for that, and several other of his Billingsgate-Scurrilities, as soon as I
shall have finished the Argumentative part of my Reply. In the mean time he
declares in a Bravado, p. 44. l. 15. Th^^ if the Animadverter can prove, That
the Unity of a Mind and its distinction from all other Minds does not consist
in Self-Consciousness, the Dean is then a lost Man for ever, and must be
content to follow his triumphant Chariot. And I on the other side affirm, That
if the Essential Being, Unity, and original distinction of every Thing is and
must be in order of Nature before any Act can proceed, or be so much as
conceived to proceed, from the said Thing; then it has been already proved (and
that in Defense of the first Argument) beyond all Contradiction, That the
Original Unity of a Mind and its distinction from all other Minds, neither does
nor can consist in Self-Consciousness, Act or Power, these being in Nature
posterior to the said Unity and Distinction. And that one known short Axiom,
Agere praesupponit esse (to which we may add also, esse in se Vnum, and
distinctum ab aliis omnibus) utterly overthrows this part of his Senceless
Hypothesis. But as for his Scoff of following the Animadverter's Triumphant
Chariot in this Case, he will not claim his Promise, as knowing something much
fitter for him to follow than that, and some body as fit to follow him.

But I shall now come to debate the Personality of the Soul with him: which
dispute, he first tells us, is nothing at all to the Purpose; and then very
discreetly bestows the full fifth part of his whole work against the
Animadverter ( viz. Twenty Pages of 99.) wholly upon this very point, and this
he also calls making some short Reflections upon it: though more by half than
what he has made upon any Two or Three (and those principal) Parts or Branches
of the whole Controversy. But whereas he says, p. 44. l. 24. That all this was
done only with a purpose to expose Mr. Dean (forsooth) I must assure him that
it is a mistake; for that the Animadverter found this work effectually done to
his hands, before ever he set Pen to Paper.

But to proceed, This Author in his Vindication has asserted, That the Soul
without a Vital Union to an Humane Body, is a Person, Vind. p. 262, l. 17. And
not long after he tells us also* That the Soul as United with the Body is a
Person too, Vind. p. 268. l. 28. In opposition to both which Propositions the
Animadverter holds, That the Soul of Man is not a Person, and that neither in
its Conjunction with the Body, nor in its separation from it. And what says our
Author to this? Why in the first place he says, He grants, That the Person of a
Man, as it is used in common speech to signify a Man, must include both Soul
and Body as the constituent parts of an Humane Person; but that when we enquire
into the strict Notion of Personality, that must be a simple Uncompounded
Thing, as Indivisible as self is, which cannot consist of parts separate from
each other, p. 45. l. 11. Whereupon with much foolish Confidence he disputes
against the supposed Absurdity of Two Parts of Personality. To all which I have
several Things to Answer, As first, That he ought to prove, and not gratis only
to affirm, That the Philosophical sense of this Term [ Humane Person] and the
Popular commonly received sense of it, are not the same. Whereas I affirm they
are, and challenge him to prove the contrary if he can: For otherwise it is a
mere supposing the (...), and a gross Petitio Principii. Secondly, I must tell
him, That he disputes not ad Idem; for that he passes from the Concrete to the
Abstract: viz. from [ Person] which consists of Parts, to Personality which
does not; and then surely, when the dispute is concerning the having, or not
having Parts, there can be no concluding in that respect from one to the other.
Thirdly I tell him, that self is not a simple indivisible Uncompounded Thing,
but as compounded as the Man himself, and consists of Parts separable from one
another, viz. of Soul and Body, as the Man himself does, and is as much a
Concrete as he is. Fourthly and lastly, I must tell him, That though
Personality in the Abstract be a simple Indivisible Term (as all other
Abstracts are) and so cannot actually consist of Parts, yet it connotes and
implies a necessary inseparable Relation to the Essential parts of the
Concrete; and in this respect, parts are and may be ascribed to it, viz. by way
of Connotation, though not by way of Physical Composition. And therefore that
Question of his, viz. Will the Animadverter venture to make the Body part of
the Personality of a Man? is very easily answered, viz. That by actual, real,
and Physical Composition it is not so, but by Essential Connotation of, and
Relation to, the Body, as to part of the Concrete, it is so. That is to say,
Personality implies a Body as an Essential Part of a Person, though not of the
Personality it self. And so both his silly Objection, and his sillier Scoff of
a compounded Personality, page 48. and of the Bodies being a part of this
Personality, page 47. are at an end.

But his Absurdity in asserting a Beast to be a Person will never be so, but
stands as firm as ever. For whereas he says, Defense p. 46. l. 6. That he gave
notice of the Impropriety of the Expression, and used it only by way of
Allusion and Accommodation, Let the Reader but consult his Vind. p. 262. and he
will find every Tittle of this an Impudent falsehood. For he speaks not there so
much as one Syllable of the Impropriety of it; nor does he pretend to use it by
way of Allusion, but as a Real and a Proper Instance of the Nature of a Person,
dogmatically asserting a brute to be a Person as much as a Suppositum; and this
without the help or Qualification of either [a so say, or a so speak]. With
such a shameless front can this Man deny a Thing, as soon as ever he has
affirmed it: And yet before the Denial of it is well out of his mouth, he
offers with still a greater Impudence to justify it; affirming p. 47. That
Beasts may be said to have reason in a certain measure and degree, and moreover
proves their Rationality from their Self-Consciousness. So that we see here, of
what Virtue this Self-Consciousness is, that it can extend even to Beasts
themselves, and make them Rational. For having said That a Beast is
Self-Conscious, p. 46. l. 21. he adds, That wheresoever there is a Conscious
Life there is some degree of Reason. And is not this, think we, a blessed
Assertion, both in Philosophy and Divinity? For according to what he has here
asserted, a Beast may be properly defined Animal Rationale; And, which is more,
a Beast is not a different Species from a Man; for Rationality is the Specific
difference of a Man: And if a Beast has Reason to a certain degree (as he
affirms it has) then the difference between a Man and a Beast (the grinning
race it self not excepted) is only Gradual, and consequently neither is nor can
be Specifical. I shall say no more upon this subject, but leave the whole World
to consider what this Man is, and what fit Propositions these are to be
Licensed by Authority. However I would have the Reader observe, that this poor
Creature who explodes Parts in Personality (which his Adversary, in a strict
and proper Sense, never did, nor does assert) yet admits and holds Degrees in
Personality, p. 46. l. 22. For, says he, wheresoever there is a Conscious Life,
there must be some Degree of Reason; and that entitles them [viz. Beasts] to as
much share in Personality as they have in Reason. But let me tell this utter
stranger to all Philosophy, That as there is no such Thing as a magis and minus
in substance, so neither is there in substantial modes, of which Personality is
one, and the Principal one too. But he goes on and tells us, That no Man will
pretend, that an human^ Body, though united to a Reasonable Soul, has any
Reason or Sense either, p. 46. l. 27. And yet this very Man says, Vind. p. 269.
l. 18, 19. That the Body is conscious to all the Commands of the Will. Which
how it can be without any thing of Sense belonging to it, I must profess
surpasses all the Sense, that I am Master of, to conceive; and I cannot but
declare withal, That if a Thing may be Conscious, and yet have no sense at all
in it, I shall have a worse and a meaner opinion of Self-Consciousness than
ever I had before. But these and the like wonderful Things I suppose our Author
will tell us, that he speaks only by way of Allusion; which, next to his
meaning is the surest refuge he has (when he is baffled) to fly to.

And so from hence he comes to this Hypothetical Decision of the Point, viz.
That if Personality belongs only to a Reasonable Nature, it is certain, that
the Soul makes or constitutes the Person, p. 46. l. 31. Which is an
Extraordinary Consequence indeed; nevertheless I deny it as utterly false. For
in Men neither is the Soul all that is contained in a Reasonable Nature, nor a
Reasonable Nature all that is contained in a Person: And therefore, as the Soul
cannot adequately constitute a Reasonable Nature, so much less can it
adequately constitute a Person. A Reasonable or rather an Intelligent Nature,
may be either simple as the Divine and Angelical, or Compound as the humane
Nature is, which essentially consists of Soul and Body (as the whole World
agrees) and since it does so, I deny that the Soul can adequately make or
constitute either a Reasonable Nature, or Person (which includes in it the
Nature and something besides) any more than one Essential Part of the said
Nature or Person can do the joint office of Two. And whereas he adds, That the
Soul (as he may so speak) is the Center of Personality, I must tell him, that I
own the Soul to be the Principal constituent Part of the Person, but as for the
other Notion, I know no more of the Center of Personality than I do of the
Continuity of Sensation. Which word, as it is perfectly new, and not used
before, so it is very absurdly applied here; for I demand of him, how that can
be called the Center of Personality which diffuses it self through the whole
Person even to the utmost extremity of its subsistence; and consequently
reaches as far as the Personality of the said Person does or can; Nay, and (to
use his own Cant) as far as the conscious life extends? For certainly it must
needs be a pleasant thing to imagine a Center reaching as far as That, which
must be drawn to such a considerable distance from it one way, as well as
terminate in it Another. But if, after all this, our Author means by these
words the Center of Nonsense, I assure him his Writings are of a Compass large
enough to pass for the Circumference.

But let us see some more of his Monstrous Assertions. The Body, says he, is
part of the Man, and so part of the Person, but it does not make the Person,
but is taken into the Person by a Vital Union, p. 47. l. 7. To this I answer,
That for the Body to be actually a part of the Person, and yet, while it is so,
not to go to the making of the Person, as a Part to the making of the whole, is
a direct Contradiction. And whereas he talks, of its being taken into the
Person by a Vital Union: Let me tell him, That there is no such Thing as a
Vital Union in Created Beings, which is not also a Composition, that is to say,
A Concurrence of Parts to the Constitution of the whole; And let him show me in
Created Natures one Instance of such an Union as is not also a Composition, if
he can. So that all Composition, as such, is an Union of Parts, and all Vital
Union of Parts a Composition; and the Body is as essential, though not so noble
a Part of the Person as the Soul it self. For the Person of a Man supposes and
includes in it the whole humane Nature, and the humane Nature includes in it
the Essential parts of humane Nature, which are Soul and Body. But he tells us
further, That since all Life, Reason and Sensation are only in the Soul, the
whole Personality must be in the Soul also, though the Soul when United to the
Body is not the whole Person, p. 47. l. 22. To which I answer, That the whole
Person, and the whole Personality, adequately connote one Another, and belong
to one and the same suppositum; and that otherwise there would be no
Commensuration between the Abstract and the Concrete, but there would be an
essential part of the Concrete, to which the Abstract could not extend or
belong: which would be a gross absurdity. But besides, I deny the Thing
supposed by him, viz. That all Life, Reason and Sensation are only in the Soul.
For though they may be in the Soul as the Subjectum proximum and Principium
Quo, that is, as immediately proceeding from it, and subjected in it, yet they
are properly in the whole compound, viz. the whole Man or Person, as the
Subjectum ultimum, and Principium Quod; and as that which receives the whole
Denomination from what belongs immediately to any Part of it. For it is the
whole Man or Person, who is properly said to be a living, Reasonable, Sensible
Creature, though it be by Virtue of his Soul, as the Principium Quo, that he is
so.

After this comes another Absurdity, where he tells us, p. 48. l. 2. That an
Hypostatical Union is the swallowing up of a Natural Personality in its Union
with a superior Person. Which if it be so, Then, say I, where is the
Hypostatical Union of Christ's Person with the humane Nature? for the humane
Nature which was united to his Divine Person, had no Personality of its own to
be swallowed up: for Christ assumed it without any Subsistence or Personality
belonging to it; which it neither has, nor ever had; and consequently could
never be said to be lost or swallowed up by this Union: So that we have a new
sort of Heresy started; viz. That as Eutyches heretofore affirmed Christ's
Humane Nature to have been swallowed up by His Divine; so this Author holds an
Humane Personality to have belonged to this Humane Nature, which in like manner
is swallowed up by the Superior Person of the (...). But where these vile
Heterodoxies will stop, God only knows: For I cannot see, but this Innovator
may freely and uncontrollably vent as many of them as he pleases; and no doubt
he has a great many more such in Reserve, and will in due time produce them.

But the Animadverter had argued against the Personality of the Soul in
Conjunction with the Body, thus; If the Soul, in the Composition of a Man's
Person, were an entire Person it self; and* as such, concurred with the Body
toward the Constitution of the Man, then the Man would be an Imperfect
Accidental, and not a Perfect Natural Compound. He would be that which
Philosophy calls Unum per Accidens, that is, a Thing made up of such Beings as
cannot perfectly coalesce and unite into One, Animadvers. p. 75. And what says
he to this? Why, he tells us, That the Soul and the Body are vitally united,
and that the Animadverter's own beloved Philosophy never calls Things vitally
united Unum per Accidens. To which I answer, That no Created Person ever was or
could be vitally united to any Being distinct from it self: And therefore since
it is certain, That the Soul is vitally united to the Body, it is impossible
that the Soul should be a Person. For this beloved Philosophy teaches me, That
in Created Beings there can be no Vital Union but between Parts; and
consequently, that since there is a Vital Union between Soul and Body, this
Soul and Body must be united as concurrent Parts of the same Compound; And
this, by this Author's Favor must utterly destroy his senceless Notion of the
Personality of the Soul; since that which is a Part cannot be a Suppositum, or
completely subsisting Nature, and whatsoever is not so, can never be a Person.
So that the Animadverter's Argument stands good, viz. That in created Beings an
Entire Person united to a Body would make an Unum per Accidens; and
consequently that a Vital Union between them would be impossible: Yet
nevertheless, since it is certain, that there is actually such a Vital Union
between Soul and Body, it is upon the same account also as certain, That the
Soul (which must be one of the Terms of that Union, and by consequence a Part)
cannot be a Person. So that all this is but a mere Petitio Principii: first to
suppose the Soul a Person, which is the principal Thing in Dispute; and then to
say, that its being vitally united to the Body, keeps it from making a Man*
That, which we call Vnum per Accide^s. Whereas it is affirmed and argued
against him, That this very Vital Union of the Soul with the Body overthrows
the Soul's Personality, as a Thing which this Union is utterly inconsistent
with. In short, the Soul's being a Person (if it were so) can never prove it
vitally united to the Body, but its being vitally so united, irrefragably
proves it to be no Person.

But he is now for confounding the Animadverter with Two Questions, but still
in pursuit of the same Point. First, Whether the Eternal (...) before the
Incarnation were a Complete Being? which is readily answered in the
Affirmative, That he was. Secondly, Whether the Humane Nature assumed by him
were a Complete or Incomplete Being? I answer, That though it were a Perfect
Nature, yet since it was without a proper Natural Subsistence of its own, it
was upon that account an Incomplete Being. But then I add, that this was a
Peculiar, and a Supernatural Case; there being no other particular Humane
Nature in the World without its particular proper Subsistence but this alone,
which subsists wholly by a borrowed Subsistence, as being assumed into that of
the (...). But now what is all this to the Union between the Soul and Body,
which are vitally united as essential Parts of the whole Humane Person? But the
Person of the (...) is not vitally united to the Humane Nature as to a Part of
it. And though (as I noted before) it be impossible for a Finite Person to be
vitally united to any other Being distinct from it self, yet an Infinite Person
(as we see in the Person of our Savior) may be united to another distinct
Being or Nature. For this is neither a Composition, nor yet a Natural Union.
But to this our Author very Learnedly excepts, and affirms the Union between
the Person of Christ and his Humane Nature to be a Natural Union; and gives
this as a Reason for it, Because it is a Union of Natures, and that an Union of
Natures is a Natural Union by whatsoever Power it is done, p. 49. In answer to
which, though I might say, That This is not properly (at least not immediately)
an Union of Natures, but of the Divine Person of Christ to the Humane Nature,
which by and through the Person comes to be united to the Divine Nature; yet,
to let that pass, I absolutely deny both his Propositions, viz. That the Union
between the Person of Christ and his Humane Nature is a Natural Union. And that
all Union of Natures must be a Natural Union, by what Power soever it is
wrought. Both which are absolutely false. Forasmuch as a Natural Union is only
that which is wrought by a Natural Cause or Principle, acting according to the
Ordinary Course and Measures of Nature; which an Union between Two Natures so
vastly disproportioned as a Finite and an Infinite, can never be effected by:
For will this Man affirm, That GOD, by the ordinary Exercise of that Power, by
which He carries on the daily Production of Things in the World, (and which is
properly called Nature) united the Divine Person of the (...), and the Humane
Nature together? If this be not a Supernatural Effect, (and consequently no
Natural Union) let this Man assign me any one that ever was or can be reputed
such. And therefore let him take notice for the future, That it is not the bare
Terms or Extremes of an Union, as that it is between Two Natures, that can make
it Natural; But an Agent acting, and joining those Natures together, according
to the Ordinary Course of Nature, which must make it formally so; and which can
never be wrought by any Agent so working, where one of the Natures to be united
is Finite, and the other Infinite. But (as I said before) what is all this to
this present Argument, which has nothing to do with the Hypostatick Union, but
only with that way or kind of Union, by which Created Beings are united
together? And will this Man argue from one sort of Union to another, between
which there is no Cognation at all? Wherefore let the Charge not only of
Boldness, but Profaneness too rest upon him, who dares make the common way of
Natural Unions, the measure of a Supernatural; and that such a one as exceeds
all the Miracles that Omnipotence it self ever yet wrought in the World.

But now (as he tells us) he is for quitting the School-Terms, (which he never
understood) and for speaking so as. all may understand him. And here the first
Oracle thus delivered by him is this; viz. That the Soul may be a Complete and
Perfect Person, but not a Perfect Man, p. 49. l. 28. To which I answer, That a
perfect Man is essentially a Compound Nature or Being; And that an Humane
Person is essentially so too; And that therefore the Soul being as essentially
a simple Uncompounded Being, can neither be a Perfect Man, nor a Perfect
Person. But this is such a Proposition, that I shall say no more of it, but
leave it wholly to the Reader's Admiration. Nevertheless, to dis-encumber him
from such Stuff, as this Man's Ignorance is still throwing in his way, I think
fit here to note the Difference between a Perfect and a Complete Being. Now a
Thing is said to be Perfect in respect of its Essence, as wanting nothing that
is Essential to it. But it is called Complete in respect of its Subsistence, as
subsisting so by it self, as to be neither a Part, nor Adjunct of another
Thing. Accordingly the first of these is the Perfection of a Man considered
barely as a Man, as an Animal Rationale, compounded of Soul and Body. But the
other is the Perfection of a Person, or of a Man, considered not only as a
Rational Nature, but as a Rational Nature completely subsisting. From whence it
follows, That neither does the Perfection of a Man, nor the Perfection of a
Person, depend upon the Perfections or Operations belonging to him; as being
neither Essential to him as a Man, or as a Person; and consequently, though
they be never so defective, yet he who has the Essence or Essentials of a Man,
is a Perfect Man; and he who has this Essence or Nature of a Man, completed
with the Proper Subsistence of the same, is a Perfect Person.

But our Author is for explaining this matter to us further by an Instance: Let
us (says he) consider a Soul vitally United to a Body, with Organs so
indisposed for Sensation, that a Man can neither see, nor hear, nor taste, nor
smell, but only just lives and breaths, you will not say this is a perfect Man,
p. 50. l. 8. Yes, good Sir, I both will and do say so. For he who has the
perfect Essence of a Man, is a perfect Man, whether Halt, or Blind, or Deaf,
and as defective in the Actual Exercise of his faculties as of his Limbs. But
you will say, do not all these great defects render a Man more Imperfect than
he would be otherwise? Yes, as to his State or Condition they do, but not as to
his Nature or Essence: And therefore this Author may take notice, That there is
a twofold Perfection belonging to a Man, the first Essential, which we have
been hitherto speaking of, and properly consists in that perfection of Nature,
or Essence, without which he could not be a Man; The other is Extra-essential,
and in respect of the former Accidental, and may (as we have noted) be called a
perfection of State or Condition; and consists properly in an Integrity of
Parts, and a right disposition of the Faculties, enabling a Man to exert all
the Operations belonging to him. And I do here, according to all the Principles
of Philosophy, and the concurrent sense of Philosophers affirm, that
notwithstanding an Universal failure of all those Accidental Perfections, a Man
is as perfectly a Man by virtue of his bare Essence, and as perfectly a Person
by virtue of his Complete Subsistence, as if he had them all in their highest
Pitch. But our Author goes on; If (says he) a Complete Person may not be a
Complete and perfect Man, then the Formal Reason of Personality, and the
Natural Perfection of a Man, are Two Things, p. 50. l. 15. I grant they are so;
But utterly deny, That a Complete Person can be otherwise than a Perfect Man;
though there may be a Perfect Man who is not a Person. For every Person
includes in it a Nature Rationalis, (which makes a Perfect Man) and, besides
that, a Complete Subsistence of the same, which makes the Person; and whereas
he says, That the whole Personality must be in the Soul, if a Man be a perfect
Man, who is united to a Body which is worse than none, p. 50. l. 20. I must
tell him, first, That there is no such Thing as a Man's being united to a Body:
for though the Soul is united to a Body, yet the Man is not, but contains both
Body and Soul united to one Another. And I must tell him further, That the
Soul's being united to a Body which is worse than none, does not make that Body
less an Essential Part of the Man and of the Person, than if it were the most
accomplished Body in the World. In the mean time I must desire the Reader to
take Notice of the Intolerable Absurdity of this Author's affirming a Man to be
united to a Body, and that his own Body too: For, at this rate, the Man must be
one Term of the Union, and his Body the other. But still he goes boldly on, and
tells us, p. 51. l. 2, 3. That the Soul is the Person, and the Body only the
Instrument or Organ of it. In answer to which, I must tell him, That not the
Soul, but the whole Compositum is the Person, and that the Body is not the
Instrument of the Soul, as of the Principal Agent, but of the whole Compositum;
and, moreover, that the Soul is as much the Instrument of the said Compositum,
as the Body is or can be: and lastly, That Both of them are such Instruments,
as are also Vital, Essential Parts of the Compound, or Person; which makes them
of a quite different Kind from Instruments commonly so called, which are
dis-joined from the Agent that employs them. But he has not done yet, but tells
us; That our Bodies can be no part of our Personality, because they are in
continual Flux, so that we are no more the same for a Month, or a Year, than a
River is, whose Waters perpetually flow, and change their place; and yet we
feel our selves to be the same Persons still, and consequently that the
Personality rests wholly in the Soul, p. 51. l. 10. To which I answer, by
denying positively, That there is such a Total Change and Flux of our Bodies,
as of the Waters of a River; but that on the contrary the principal parts of
the Body remain the same from first to last; only with a due Accretion of
matter, till they come to their just Magnitude and Proportion; after which
there is little or no Efflux from them at all: and let this Man of Novelty
instead of Philosophy, prove it otherwise, if he can. But he is now falling to
his old Trade of proving his point by Impossible Suppositions, and it is a
mercy, that he does not plague his Reader with the Nonsense of Another living
Image. For suppose (says he) p. 51. l. 19. it were possible, That the Souls of
John and Peter should change Bodies, etc. I would ask the Animadverter, if he
thinks that such a Change of Bodies would make any Change of their Persons? But
before I answer this most wise question, I hope, that I also may have the
Privilege to propound another. Suppose then, say I, that Socrates and Xantippe
should change Bodies too, What would be the Effect and Consequence of such a
Change? Why it would be this, First, That the Soul of Socrates vitally joined
with a Female Body, would certainly make a Woman; and yet, according to this
Author's Principle, (affirming, that it is the Soul, and the Soul only, which
makes the Person) Socrates, with such a Change of Body, would continue the same
Person, and consequently the same Socrates still; and in like manner for
Xantippe; the Conjunction of her Soul, with a Body of another Sex, would
certainly make the whole Compound a Man, and yet nevertheless Xantippe would
continue the same Person, and the same Xantippe still: save only, I confess,
that upon such an Exchange of Bodies with her Husband Socrates, she would have
more right to wear the Breeches than she had before. So that this may pass for
another of his (...)'s. But to leave this Man of Questions and Suppositions to
his Trifling, and his Trifling to him (since they are not to be parted) I do
here, in Answer to his Question, tell him in plain Terms, That if Peter and
John should shift Bodies, it would make two other Numerically distinct Persons
from both of them. For the Persons of Peter and John would be first dissolved,
and then two new Essential Compositions, with a new Essential Compounding Part
in each of them, would certainly make two New Compositums. But this is such
Idle, Ridiculous Trash, that I am ashamed to Answer it, though he is not
ashamed to write it, and value himself upon it.

In the next place, he proceeds to prove the Personality of the Soul in a State
of Separation; and indeed, if it could have been proved to be a Person while it
is united to the Body, I will readily grant it to be so after its disjunction
from it. But on the contrary, if it were ever United to the Body, as an
Essential part of the whole Compound; I positively affirm, that no disunion of
it from the Body, can ever after make that which had been an Essential part, to
become a Suppositum, nor consequently a Person. This is what I Assert; And
accordingly the Animadverter's design in this dispute was to confute his
Adversarie's Assertion of the Personality of the Soul thus considered, by
Arguing against it ab Absurdo, and showing, what Paradoxes unavoidably issued
from it, and therefore that it must needs be False, since if it were True,
nothing but Truth could follow from it. And here, one of the Animadverter's
Arguments proceeded thus; If the Soul in such a state be a Person, then it is
either the same Person which the Man himself was, while he was living, and in
the Body, or it is another Person, etc. To which this Author (shrewdly no
doubt) replies, Pray what is this Person (says He) which He calls the Man
Himself which Lives in the Body, I hope it is not the Body which Lives in the
Body, and then I know no Man nor Person that Lives in the Body, but only the
Soul, p. 52. l. 20. Thus He. But does this weak Man think that this Expression
of a Man's being in the Body imports his being locally or properly in it, as a
Thing is kept in a Case, or shut up in a Bag? I must tell Him, that to say [ A
Man is in the Body, or Personally in a Body] is a form or way of speaking,
which has obtained in the World, and signifies no more than that He is in a
Bodily state or condition. And will His Ignorance then Exact the Popular use of
a Word of Phrase, according to the strictness of its litteral signification? Do
we not commonly say, That a Man is in a Passion, in Love, in a Rage, or in
Drink, and yet in Truth, and in strictness of Speech, all these Things are in
the Man, and not the Man in them? and much after the like manner, when we say a
Man is in the Body, the True sense of it is, that the Body is in the Man, as
the part properly is and must be in the whole. And as for that Expression in
St. Paul, I knew a Man in Christ fourteen Years ago, whether in the Body I
cannot tell, or whether out of the Body, God knows, such an one caught up to
the Third Heaven, etc. Which He alleges to prove, that the Soul of St. Paul out
of the Body, was the Person of St. Paul; This does not prove it at all; for his
Soul might be caught up into Heaven without the Body, and Hear all this without
being a Person, as well as the Souls of just Men do, which go to Heaven, and
there have such like discoveries made to them, but yet are not Persons for all
that; nor can this Author prove that they are. But the True meaning of the
forementioned words is no more than this; That St. Paul could not certainly
tell, whether the discovery of these Wonderful Things was made to Him by the
Ministry of his Bodily Senses, or whether the Revelation of them was made
immediately to his Mind, without being conveyed to it through his Senses. And
as this, I conceive, is all that can be gathered from hence, so is it far
enough from proving, that either his Soul was then separated from his Body, or,
if it were, that it was properly a Person during that Separation. But see how
he disputes further upon this matter. Does the Man (says He) and his Person
dye? then the Man is not Immortal; and if the Man and his Person lives, then
the Soul is the Man, and the Person, and the very same Person out of the Body,
that it was in it, p. 52. l. 29. All which as it is a Notorious Paradox, so the
proof of it is no more than one pitiful Branch of the fallacy called Ignoratio
Elenchi, which supposes a contradiction between Propositions where there is
none, by pretending to argue de eodem, when it does not. For certain it is,
That the whole Person of the Man truly and properly dies, as Death, in the
proper and received Sense of the word, imports a dissolution, or separation of
the Essential parts of the Person: And yet as certain also it is, That the same
Person is Immortal, and never dies, as Death imports an utter destruction of
the said parts. Both which Propositions are certainly and confessedly true, but
in their different Senses. Where, for this Man's further Instruction, I must
tell him also, That whatsoever immediately affects, or belongs to any part of
the Person (especially an Essential Part) does properly and ultimately
denominate the whole person; forasmuch as all Denomination rests in the
Suppositum. Thus Moses (which name certainly expresses the Person of Moses) is
said to have died, and been buried, Deuteronomy. 34.5, 6. though it was his Body only
that descended into the Grave: And the same Moses again is represented as
living and discoursing with our Savior, Luke 9.30. at which time it is certain
also, that it was only the Soul of Moses, that could do this. From whence I
argue, that if this Man will infer the Soul of Moses to have been the Person of
Moses, because he finds That, which could immediately belong only to his Soul,
attributed to his whole Person, it will follow, that he may with the same
Reason affirm the Body of Moses to have been the Person of Moses likewise,
since that which did and could belong only to his Body, we find equally
attributed to his whole Person too. This is plain consequence, and expressed in
proper Terms, whether this Man understands them or no. But he goes on, and
argues most invincibly thus; If the Personality be not compounded of Soul and
Body, the Soul may be the whole and same Person in the Body, and out of it, p.
53. l. 14. Now in the name of Sense and Logic what a Consequence is this, That
because Personality is not compounded of Soul and Body, therefore the Person is
not compounded so neither, and consequently, that the Soul may be the whole
Person? For will he conclude the same of the Concrete, which he does of the
Abstract? I have told him before, and tell him here again, That Personality
being an Abstract Form has neither parts nor composition properly and
Physically belonging to it; but only by Connotation, as it essentially connotes
and implies both these in its Concrete, which is here the Humane Person; and
consequently, since the Soul can neither have parts nor composition in it, it
is impossible that it should be that Person. I protest I am ashamed to dispute
any more against such gross Absurdities; but it is my ill fate to be forced to
follow this Blunderer through thick and thin.

But he is now for trying how he can fence against the Absurdities charged upon
his Assertion of the Personality of the Soul in its Separation from the Body.
For the Animadverter having proved, That if the Soul in that condition was a
Person, it was essentially another Person from what the Man himself was when he
was alive (forasmuch as a compound Person, and a simple uncompounded one, can
never be the same) he inferred from hence, That it would be one Person who
lives well or ill in this World, viz. The Man himself while he was personally
in the Body, and another Person who passes out of the Body into Heaven or Hell,
there to be rewarded or punished (at least till the Resurrection) for what,
that other Person had done well or ill here upon Earth. And what does he answer
to this? Why in the first place he repeats the same Cavil, that he used before,
and tells us, That to say that a Man is personally in the Body, if the Person
of the Man consists of Body and Soul, is downright Nonsense, p. 53. l. 28. To
which I reply as I did before; That if it be Nonsense, it is such as the whole
World commonly speaks, and (as I have already shown) such as signifies no more
than a Man's being personally in a Corporeal, or Bodily Estate; and let this
Man of Confidence instead of Sense show, either that all Mankind speaks in this
Absurdly, or intends any other thing by it than what I have said. But whereas
he speaks of the Personal Presence of the Man in the Body and the Absurdity of
it, p. 53. l. 1. It is purely his own Expression: for the Animadverter neither
uses it, nor has any Thing to do with it. For though he speaks of [ a Man's
being in the Body, and personally in the Body] because it is a way of speaking
commonly used, and thereby Authorized, yet he finds no such Expression used as
[a Man's Personal Presence in the Body, or his being personally present in the
Body] and therefore he neither speaks so, nor is responsible for such a way of
Speech, whether it be defensible or no. So that this Man may take his personal
presence (as he calls it) back again to himself, for it is a contemptible
thing, and none, that I know of, regard it. But in the next place he pretends
to return the charge of the same, or the like Absurdity upon the Animadverter
himself, thus: If (says he) the Man be a Person, and the Soul no Person, then
the Person sins, and that which is no Person suffers. And, if a Man be a whole
Person, and the Soul only a part of the Person, then the whole sins, and a part
suffers for the whole. And let him choose (says he) which is most agreeable to
the Principles of Reason and Divinity, p. 54. l. 21. To which I answer first,
That though a Part suffers for what it did in the whole, yet it does not suffer
for the whole. And secondly, That for a Part which bore its share in the Sin,
while it was joined with the Body, to bear its proportion of the Punishment
while it is disjoined from it, carries with it nothing incongruous either to
the Principles of Reason or Divinity. If indeed the Soul in its separation from
the Body should suffer the whole punishment due for the sins of the whole
Person, the Case would be very different. But I hope this Author (as Confident
and Heterodox as he is) will not affirm, that the Soul in its separate Estate
bears the whole punishment due to the Sinner; or that God inflicts it, till the
Soul and Body meet, and are reunited together at the Resurrection. But that one
Person should suffer for what was done by another Person, I am sure is not
resolvable into the stated Course, or Rule of God's dispensing Rewards, and
Punishments.

But he now lays about him at an higher rate: Does this profound Philosopher
(says He) think indeed that the Body either sins or suffers? p. 54. l. 24. My
reply to which shall be neither by an Absolute affirmation or negation, but by
Distinction. And here, that must be repeated and applied which was mentioned
before, viz. that we must distinguish between the Principal and Proper Agent,
or the Principium Quod, and between the Instrumental Principle, or Principium
Quo, by which that Agent is properly said to Act; Likewise between the
Subjectum Quod, which is also called the Ultimate Subject, and the subject of
Denomination, and between the Subjectum Quo, or Subjectum proximum, which is
the immediate subject of Inhesion. Accordingly I answer, That, as from the
Principium Quod, or Prime Agent, the sinful Act proceeds from the whole Person
or Suppositum; but as from the immediate Producing Principle, or Principium
Quo, the said Act proceeds from the Soul. In like manner, as the Subjectum
Quod, or Ultimate Subject of denomination, the whole Man or Person suffers; but
as the Subjectum Quo, or immediate Recipient of the Impression, it is the Body
that suffers: So that by Reason of this Subordination of the Principium Quo, to
the Principium Quod, and the Subjectum Quo to the Subjectum Quod, the Soul is
not properly denominated the Sinner, but the whole person who sins in and by
his Soul; nor the Body the Sufferer, but the whole Man who suffers in and
through both his Body and Soul too. And this is the true Answer to this his
silly Objection, and to that other too, viz. That Vice and Virtue are seated
only in the Soul, p. 54. l. 30. For we affirm them to be seated only in the
Soul as in the Subjectum Quo, or immediate subject of Inhesion, but in the
whole Person as the Ultimate and Proper Subject of Denomination. By which it is
manifest, that this Author's Ignorance of these Terms, or his inability to
apply them, has betrayed him into all these wretched Paradoxes about the
Personality of the Soul. But whereas in the next place he says, That as the
Body may be made the Instrument of Virtue or Vice, so it may be the instrument
of Rewards or Punishments, p. 54. l. 27. Could there well be a grosser Blunder
than to call that the Instrument of Rewards and Punishments, which is properly
the subject of them? For an Instrument is properly an inferior sort of
efficient cause, acting in the virtue and strength of the Principal; but a
Subject is not so. And the Principal Cause of Rewards and Punishments is God
himself; and if there be any Instrument or Instrumental Cause of the same, it
is properly that by which, and not that upon which he bestows the One and
inflicts the Other.

The next Thing he carps at is the Animadverter's way of concluding his
Argument. It is worth observing (says he) p. 55. l. 1. how notably he winds up
his Argument (and possibly the Animadverter may not be quite so well skilled in
the Art of winding, as this Man is in that of turning.) Nevertheless, as he
lays it before us, so let us consider it. If it be intolerably Absurd (as no
doubt it is) said the Animadverter, That the Soul in the other World should not
be responsible for what the Man himself in Person had done in this, etc. To
this replies our Author, What then? One would then expect the Conclusion should
be, That the Soul is the Man himself in Person, p. 55. l. 5. No; stay a little,
good Sir, you are not to form the Animadverter's Argument for him (for fear you
should cast it into a Syllogism consisting only of Two Terms as you have done
for the Socinians, p. 82.) but if the Animadverter had designed to give the
Principal Inference from the Thing it self there spoken of, the Consequence of
the forementioned Hypothetick should have been this, Then it is equally absurd
to affirm the Soul in the other World to be another Numerically distinct Person
from what the Man himself had been in This. This, Sir, would and should have
then been the Consequence. But since the Animadverter had sufficiently shown
this before; and moreover, since this Author had so often and so insolently
exploded all the Terms used by the Ancients in their Discourses, about the
Trinity, as good for nothing but to confound Men's Notions of it, he thought
fit by way of overplus to his Argument, to return the Reproach upon him, by
showing that he treated of Things in such false and such misapplied Terms, that
they must of Necessity throw all Discourse and reasoning about them into
Paradox and Confusion. In a word, the Animadverter had no intent here to show
the immediate Logical Consequence of the Thing laid down in that Hypothetick
Proposition; as being evident to the first apprehensions of all Mankind, and
having withal been effectually proved by what went before, viz. That one Person
could not be responsible for what had been done by another; But his sole
Purpose was to show by the present Instance the Intolerable Inconvenience of
this Man's way of discoursing of Things in words quite contrary to the sense
which the whole World took them in. For surely none before him (if he had but
one grain of Philosophy) ever affirmed The Soul to be the Person of the Man.
And therefore whereas he represents the Animadverter in this matter like one
who runs out at the back door to avoid paying the Reckoning: Let him not fear
it; for I assure him that he shall be effectually reckoned with, before I have
done with him, and Paid home too. In the mean time I would not have him despise
Back doors too much, considering what singular use they have been of, in
Conventicles, and possibly may be again.

But the Animadverter had argued further against him upon the same subject,
thus. That the Soul's thus changing its state forwards and backwards, from one
manner of subsistence to another, looks very odd and unnatural. As that from an
Incomplete state in the Body, it should pass to a Personal and Complete State
out of the Body (which state is yet preternatural to it) and then fall back
into an incomplete state again by its reunion to the body at the Resurrection;
(which yet, one would think, should rather improve our Principal Parts in all
respects, not merely relating to the Animal Life; as the bare subsistence of
them, I am sure, does not.) These things, I say, seem very uncouth and
improbable, and such as ought not, without manifest necessity, to be allowed
of: which here does not appear; since all this Inconvenience may be avoided, by
holding, That the Soul continues but a Part of the whole Person and no more in
all its conditions, Animadv. p. 77. And now, what has this Defender here to
except against? Why; as if he were upon a Trial of skill in Ribaldry, or
railing Prizes with his old Parishioners of Billingsgate; He says, It is all
mere GypsyCant (For it seems, none but Conventicle-Cant will down with Him) p.
56. l. 13. But for that, by his favor, the Animadverter will be judged by
Philosophers and Divines, and not by him who is neither. All that the
Animadverter thinks fit to say at present is this. That to subsist as a Part is
an incomplete state; and to subsist as a Person (which this Author holds the
Soul to be out of the Body) is a complete state. Again, that for the Soul to
subsist in the body is a state Natural to it, and to subsist out of the Body is
Preternatural. And accordingly the Animadverter affirms, That to make the Soul
first subsist as a part, viz. while it is in the Body, and then as a Person in
its separation from the Body; and then lastly, as a Part again in its Reunion
to the Body, at the Resurrection, is absurd and Preposterous. And if this Man
of scorn cannot understand this, I shall not concern my self to instruct him.
Only I think fit to state the sense of the word Natural, as it is used by the
Animadverter. Now it may be taken either in a strict and proper sense, Only for
that which is done by a Natural Agent or Principle, according to the stated
ordinary course and measure of Nature; Or secondly, it may be taken in a large
and less proper sense for that which agrees and suits with Nature, and any way
improves or advances it by adding to it some accidental or extra-essential
perfection. And this sense the Animadverter here does not use the word [
Natural] in, but speaks of it only in its first, proper, and Phisophical sense;
which quite blows off all this Man's Cobweb Arguments and Objections taken from
those Advantages of Grace, Happiness and Glory, which may attend the Soul after
its dislodgment from the Body. So that when he flourishes with these vaunting
Questions, p. 59. l. 15. Is not the Perfection of our Graces the perfection of
humane Nature? I answer, Yes; The Accidental perfection of our Nature it is,
but not the Essential. And again, Is not the Perfection of Nature a Natural
Perfection? I answer, Not always; but only when it is wrought by a Natural
Principle, and that in a Natural way. For God is to be considered both as
Author Naturae, and as Author Gratiae; And Divines always look upon these
considerations of him as so very different, that what God is said to do under
one of the said Capacities, he is reckoned not to do under the other. What he
does as Author Naturae, is properly Natural, and what he does as Author
Gratiae, is supernatural. And if this Author will abide by this Assertion, That
whatsoever perfects Nature is a Natural Perfection, then Grace and Glory are
and must be natural Perfections, and God never bestows any thing supernatural
upon the Souls of Men, either in this World, or the next. Which would be a
blessed assertion indeed, but much fitter to proceed from an arrant Heathen, or
an Atheist, than a Dignitary of the Church of England. In the mean time, I do
again affirm to this Man, That all the Gifts of Grace and Glory that God
bestows upon the Soul in its state of separation from the Body, make it not a
Person, nor any other than an Incompletely subsisting Being still. For being
essentially but a Part (whether in the Body, or out of the Body) it is
essentially incomplete, and consequently must be so for ever. And this
assertion the Animadverter has considered too well to be either shamed or
huffed out of it. But to pass from the Incomplete subsistence of the Soul to
the Naturalness, or Preternaturalness of its Estate, which quite differ from
the former; Those words of this Author, p. 55. l. 28. for the boldness and
absurdity of them are very Remarkable. How (says He) does the Soul's subsisting
in the Body, or out of the Body, change the Soul's manner of subsisting any
more than the Body changes its manner of subsisting when it is naked and when
clothed? A very learned Question indeed, as most of his are. To which I
answer. That though the Soul, as to its Incomplete state, changes not its
manner of Subsisting, as being always but a part and no more in any Condition,
yet as to the Naturalness or Preternaturalness of its state it does change the
manner of its Subsistence, and greatly too. And would any Man living, but
himself, affirm it to be as natural for the Soul to subsist in the Body, or out
of the Body, as it is for the Body to be clothed or uncloathed, when the Body
is vitally united to the Soul, and in the very Nature of it designed to concur
with the Soul, as an essential part toward the constitution of the whole Man,
whereas his Clothes are neither united to, nor part of, nor any way essential
to his Body? What Senceless Paradoxes are these? But he tells us in the last
line but one, That the Soul owes not its subsistence to the Body. And what
though it does not? it owes the Natural manner of its subsisting to its being
in the Body, for all that. And as for his saying in the next line, That the
Soul can neither subsist more nor less in or out of the Body, and that he knows
no degrees of Subsistence in the Soul. All this is mere Impertinence, since
none affirms the contrary; For Natural and Preternatural import not here
different degrees, but different sorts or conditions of Subsistence, and are
founded upon different states of the Soul, viz. Its conjunction with, or its
disjunction from the Body. But he goes on and tells us, p. 56. l. 30. That the
Souls of good Men out of the Body are more happy than in the Body, and
therefore not in a Preternatural state, which can never be a more happy state.
Which is no more than a fallacy of the Accident. Forasmuch as it is perfectly
accidental to a Natural or Preternatural State, that either of them are Happy
or not Happy. For if the Soul be out of the Body, let it be never so happy upon
other Accounts, it is still out of that estate which it was Naturally designed
to, and therefore in a state Preternatural. But he adds, p. 57. l. 9. That the
Natural progress of the Soul in this lapsed estate, is from a less perfect to a
more perfect, and from thence to the most perfect state of the Soul. All which
is true indeed of the moral perfection of the Soul, but not of the Natural; and
proves, that it is the duty of the Soul, and very agreeable to the Nature of
it, to make a progress in its moral accomplishments, but by no means necessary
or essential to it to proceed from a less to a more perfect Natural state. For
the Soul knows no Natural state but in its vital Union to a Natural Body: which
from first to last is equally Perfect and the same.

But this Man is not to be stopped in his Heterodoxies. And therefore, whereas
the Animadverter had all along asserted, That the Soul in a state of separation
from the Body is but a part of the Person still, by reason of its essential
Relation to the Compound. He here very insultingly as well as Ignorantly asks,
What is this compound, and where is this whole Man, which the Soul in its
separate estate is related to? p. 57. l. 27, and 30. To which I answer, That it
is that compound, and that whole Man of which the Soul was once actually a
Part, and of which it shall be a Part again at the Resurrection. But can it
then be part of a Compound which is not actually in being? Yes, by an Essential
Relation to it, it may be, and is so; though by an Actual Conjunction with the
other part of it, it cannot. But to show the captiousness of this Question,
Where is that Man, and where is that compound which the Soul, while separate,
must relate to as a Part, since it is certain, that it can be no Part of the
Body? I say, to show the silly Sophistry of this Question, Let us see it in
this obvious Instance: Suppose a Fowl or Beast divided into its several parts,
I now ask concerning each of these parts, where, and what That is, which it is
a Part of? For it cannot be a Part of any of the other parts, nor yet
(according to this Author) of the whole Beast, for that ceases, and there is no
such Thing as an whole Beast after the supposed Division. Nevertheless it is
certain, that it is still a Part, and relates to that Beast as a Part of it:
From which it is evident, that it must be understood of the whole Beast, that
was, though at present the whole of it be actually dissolved: And so in like
manner the Soul in its state of Separation still retains the Relation of a Part
to the whole Man, viz. the whole Man that was, though he does not now actually
exist. So that all such Questions are merely Sophistical, and proeeed a sensu
diviso ad sensum compositum. But he has another Question to confound the
Animadverter with, p. 57. l. 31. Does he mean (says He) That it is essential to
the Soul to live in an earthly Body? No, Sir, But he both means and says, That
it is essential to the Soul to relate to the Body, as a Concurrent part
naturally designed for the Constitution of the whole Man; and consequently,
that it cannot live out of the Body, but still in the capacity of a Part. Which
makes it essentially an Incomplete Being; as its being actually disjoined from
the Body, puts it into a Preternatural state besides. Well, but the
Animadverter says also, That the Soul has a Natural Aptitude to live in the
Body. To which this Author replies, So has it a Natural Aptitude to live out of
the Body too, p. 58. l. 15. But this, by his good leave, I deny; and affirm,
that it has only a non-Repugnancy to live out of the Body; but a Natural
aptitude which carries in it a positive Inclination or disposition to live out
of it, it has not; but on the contrary, a very strong one, both to continue in
the Body, and (as most judge) when separated from it to return to it. But, says
our Author, This no Man can know, p. 58. l. 21. I answer, That the mighty
aversion which the Soul has to part from the Body, is a sufficient proof of the
former, and a Rational Presumption of the latter. But says He again, Does not
St. Paul desire to be absent from the Body, and present with the Lord? p. 58.
l. 26. I answer, That this desire does not prove the Absence of St. Paul's Soul
from the Body a more Natural state to it, though it might upon a supernatural
Account, (and by reason of that corruption accidentally adhering to a bodily
estate,) be a more blessed one, and more desirable; as neither was this Desire
it self a Natural Desire, but such an one as proceeded from a Supernatural
Principle of Grace; as is evident from hence* that where there is one, who
(with St. Paul) desires this, there are Millions who desire the quite contrary:
which questionless is a surer Indication of the Bent and Tendency of Nature,
than St. Paul's Particular wish or desire could be. But to give this Author an
Instance which may show him his Ignorance in the midst of his Confidence: Let
us suppose a Diamond, or some other precious Stone placed in a King's Diadem,
Certainly it could not be placed more gloriously: But for all that, I ask His
Profoundness, whether this Diamond has not a more Natural place in its proper
Center (as low as it is) than in the Royal Diadem? And for the proof of this,
let it be but unfixed from its place there, and then we shall see whether it
would not fall from its former glorious situation, as low as possibly it could.
So that this very instance duly applied, were there no other answer to his
Impertinent Objections, would be sufficient. For Nature is one thing, and the
Accidental State and condition of a Thing is quite another. But the Paradoxes
vented by this Author upon this Subject are Innumerable.

And now after all that he has said, and that so confidently, and without any
Reserve, he has the face to run counter to himself so far as to ask, p. 60. l.
6. Whether he any where affirms the Soul, while united to the Body to be the
whole Person? To which I answer, That if the Person be the whole Person (as it
is and must be) he has affirmed it over and over, and there is hardly a Page
where he treats of this subject in which he does not affirm it, either
expressly, or by evident and direct consequence. Particularly Vind. p. 268. l.
28. The Soul (says he) is the Person: and Defense p. 51. l. 2. The Soul is the
Person, and the Body only the Instrument. And again, p. 60. l. 26. he affirms,
that the Soul, whether in the Body or out of the Body, is the same Person
still; and that its separation from the Body makes no more change in the
Person, than a Man's putting on or off his Clothes does in the Man. But if the
Soul in the Body is not the whole Person, and out of the Body it is so, I hope
that is a Change with a Witness: Nor does he only affirm it, while united to
the Body to be the Person, but he also denies it to be any Part of the Person,
p. 61. l. 3. and the Body likewise to be any Part of the Person, p. 60. l. 23.
And surely if the Soul be so the Person, as neither to be part of the Person it
self, nor yet admit the Body to be any part of it, then by immediate and
irresistible Consequence, The Soul (according to this Man) is and must be (even
when united to the Body) the whole Person. Add to this, that he affirms the
Soul thus united to be the only Seat of Personality, p. 60. l. 7. And if this
Man will deny that to be the whole Person, in which the whole Personality is,
he is rather to be exploded than disputed with.

But most remarkable are those wretched Assertions of his, by which he
directly, and inevitably makes the constitution of every Man living to consist
in an Hypostatick Union and Incarnation. For the proving of which, I shall
first give this Account of an Hypostatick Union, viz. That it is that whereby a
Person, or completely subsisting Intelligent Being assumes another Being or
Nature into the Unity of its own Subsistence; so that by virtue thereof the
Person assuming, and the Nature assumed, are both but one Person, yet so, that
the Nature assumed is not Part of the said Person. This I affirm to be an
Hypostatick Union, and I gather it both from what Scripture, and Reason
discoursing upon Scripture, teaches us concerning the Economy of Christ's
Person, which (according to the Unanimous Judgment of all Divines hitherto) is
the only Instance of an Hypostatick Union in the World.

But now let us see what a Parallel this Heady Venturous Man (to say no worse)
makes between this, and the Union of an humane Soul and Body in these following
Propositions.

The Eternal (...) is a Person. The Eternal (...) assumes the humane Nature
into the Unity of the same person. The Eternal (...) is vitally united to the
humane Nature assumed by it. The Eternal (...) and the humane Nature thus
assumed by it, and united to it, are but one and the same Person. The Eternal
(...) and the humane Nature assumed by it, are so One Person, that the Nature
assumed is no part of the said Person. The Humane Soul is a Person. The Humane
Soul receives the Body into the Unity of the same Person, p. 60. l. 22. The
Humane Soul, as a Person, is vitally United to the Body, p. 60. l. 21. The Body
being United to the Soul (which is the Person) becomes together with the Soul,
one and the same Person, p. 60. l. 19. The Soul and the Body United to the
Soul, as to the Person, so become one Person, that the Body is yet no part of
the Person, p. 60. l. 23.


I know there are some disparities (as to Finite and Infinite, Eternal and not
Eternal, etc.) between the respective Subjects of the Union here represented,
but as to the Union it self, and the Kind of it, I freely refer it to the
Learned Reader to judge, whether those Conditions which Divines peculiarly
assign and ascribe to that Supernatural Hypostatick Union, be not here
ascribed, by this Author, to the Natural Union between Soul and Body. And
indeed what other Kind of Union can it be? For the constitution of an human
Person, must be either by such an Union as this, or by an Essential concurrence
of Parts compounding it. But this (though maintained by all the World besides)
this Author utterly explodes as absurd, p. 48. l. 10. And the truth is, if
neither the Soul be a part of the Person, nor the Body be a part of the Person
(as he denies both of them to be) how can the Person be Such by an Essential
composition, where there are no Essential Parts to make the Composition? Or
what can be the Essential Parts, if the Body and Soul are not so? Nay, and as a
further proof of what he holds in this matter, in the 268, 269, 270, 271, pages
of his Vindication, he explains the Union between the second Person of the
Trinity and the humane Nature, and the Union between an humane Soul and Body,
by one Another; and that in many more particulars than that mentioned in the
Athanasian Creed.

But in the next place, touching the Incarnation of the Soul in the Body (which
I likewise charge this Author's Opinion with, as the direct result of it)
besides, that it must necessarily follow from such an Hypostatick Union of the
Soul with the Body, as has been described, he himself (to give him his due) in
plain and express Terms, owns so much by telling us, That the Soul is an
Embodied Person, p. 60. l. 26. and that is manifestly only another word for an
Incarnate Person: For the Eternal (...), I am sure, may be truly said to be an
Embodyed Person, by his Incarnation. So that the Parallel we see still holds.

From all which new Cartesian Divinity therefore it does and must follow, That
so many Men as there are in the World, so many Hypostatick Unions and
Incarnations there are also; and that a Man is properly constituted a Man by an
Hypostatick Union of the Soul with the Body, and by an Embodyment or
Incarnation of it in the Body. So that hereafter, if any one would express or
define an humane Person properly and exactly, he must not say, That it is an
Intelligent Being compounded of Soul and Body, and completely subsisting (for
that is the Gibberish of the Schools) but he must say, That an humane Person is
a Soul Incarnate. For our Oracle has declared it so, and therefore in that we
ought to rest. And now has not this Author, think we, shown himself an
(...)-Man indeed? For was there ever a more glorious (...), either in
Philosophy or Theology than this of a new Hypostatick Union and Incarnation?
Which having been so happily discovered, and so authentically vouched, possibly
when the Alterers of our Liturgy shall fall to work again, to alter what they
cannot mend, it may be brought into our Creed too.

But after all, there are Three Questions proposed in the Animadversions, p.
83, 84. mentioned indeed here, but not replied to. And since they are not, I do
here Challenge this Author to answer them; and I do it with more Scorn and
Triumph, than the Animadverter (as he pretends) at first propounded them. The
design of which Questions was to show, that according to this Author's
Assertions, The Soul in every Man and the Man himself, are and must be Two
distinct Persons, and they have shown it with that force and clearness, that
they stand not only unanswered, but against him unanswerable. And therefore to
direct his laughter to its Right object, I leave him and his Friend (some old
Conventicler, I suppose) to laugh at one another; and to take notice withal,
That nothing in Nature is more to be laughed at, than he who laughs at an
Argument because he cannot answer it.

I have now examined this Man's discourse about the Personality of the Soul,
and must profess, that I never met with so many vile Heterodoxies, in so small
a compass before. And what offense they will give to the Pious and Orthodox,
and what advantage to Heretics and Atheists, I doubt not but the complaints of
one, and the scoffs of the other, will in a short time declare. At present I
shall only venture to say thus much, that if this Audacious Innovator and
Abuser of our Excellent Religion, shall after all these scandalous Paradoxes
escape the censure of the Church, the Church must not expect to escape the
censure of the World: In the mean time I know no security that our Religion has
against such Invaders and Invasions but this; That though they get Ten thousand
Imprimatur's to introduce their New Christianity amongst us, yet (thanks be to
God) there is no such Thing as Licensing Heresy into Truth, or Nonsense into
Sense.

And so I now pass from hence to his pretended Answer to some part of the
fourth Chapter of the Animadversions. But before I enter upon it; it may be
pleasant to observe how at the Close of the preceding Dispute, he beggs his
Friend's Pardon for his long Excursion upon this Subject, p. 61. l. 14. whereas
before, at his Entrance upon the same, he had declared, That he would only make
some short Reflections upon it, p. 44. l. 26. And now, how short Reflections
can pass for a long Excursion, or a long Excursion be truly called short
Reflections, I must confess I do not understand. But catch this Man out of a
Self-Contradiction, and you may as well expect to catch him out of himself.

But let us see what he says to the Animadverter's Fourth Chapter: Why, he
says, That it is an Answer to it self, (though, I hope, not in this Author's
way, by contradicting it self): but how does this appear? Why, because (as he
tells us) it undertakes to prove, That Self-Consciousness is not the Formal
Reason of Personality in the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity. Nor (says
he) does the Dean say it is. No? Does he not say it? when it has been proved
over and over to his Face from his own Words, That he positively affirms
Self-Consciousness to be That, wherein their Personal Unity, and Distinction
from all others does essentially consist, Vindic. page 74. And to be That which
makes (I say makes) Each of the Divine Persons to be One in himself, and
Distinct from all others, page 68. Vind. And having affirmed the Three Divine
Persons to be Three Spirits, does he not say, That the Self-Vnity of a Spirit
can be nothing else but Self-Consciousness? Vindic. page 48. Again, Does he not
affirm, That the Nature of a Spirit consists in an Internal Self-Sensation,
which he uses only as another Word for Self-Consciousness? Defense, p. 7. Nay,
and does he not repeat the same in several places of both his Books, as we have
from several passages, cited out of them, before demonstrated? And now, what, I
pray, does the Animadverter, or any one else pretend the formal Reason of a
Thing to be but that which makes it originally and essentially one with it
self, and distinct from all other Things; or (in other Terms) that wherein the
said Unity and distinction does consist? Well: but having thus seen what this
Author has unsaid, let us see what it is that he does say: Why he tells us,
That the Question is only this, Whether Three Self-Consciousnesses do not prove
Three Persons, each of which is Self-Conscious, to be really distinct from one
Another? p. 61. l. 28. In answer to which, I do earnestly desire the observing
Reader to note, First, how shamelesly he falsifies in this matter,
contradicting his own most positive and frequently repeated Assertions; and
then how utterly he changes the whole question. For the Question has been all
along (as appears from what has been so faithfully quoted and set down) Not,
what proves the Divine Persons to be thus distinct, but what makes them so. And
will this Man say, That the proving of a Thing to be thus and thus, and the
making it to be so, are the same? And besides, supposing that
Self-Consciousness may prove the Divine Persons distinct, yet it can prove them
so only as a consequent Note or Sign, not as the original Cause or Reason of
that Distinction; or as an effect proves its cause, not as a cause proves its
effect. For the Person is originally distinguished by its personal Subsistence,
which Subsistence is not owing to any Act or Principle of Self-Consciousness,
as shall be fully proved against him in the Vindication of the fourth Argument.
In the mean time I do here refer it to every Man of sense to judge, whether by
this utter change of the Question this Author does not plainly give up the
whole Thing here in dispute between him and his Adversary. And accordingly we
shall see how by the help of this and the like wretched evasions, he endeavors
to slink away from the Animadverter's

Arg. 1.
First Argument, which is this, No personal Act can be the formal Reason of
Personality in the Person whose Act it is. But Self-Consciousness is a Personal
Act, and therefore cannot be the formal Reason of Personality. This is the
Argument, and what is the Defender's, or rather the Dean's Answer to it? Why he
tells us, That neither did he consider Self-Consciousness as a Personal Act,
nor assign it as the formal Reason of Personality. To the first of which I
answer, that it is as manifest and barefaced a falsehood as any that he has
uttered; and that if Knowledge, Self-Conscious feeling, or sensation be Acts,
and Things are to be understood by words, then Self-Consciousness, which he has
constantly expressed by the forementioned words, is as truly, really, and
properly an Act, and nothing else, as Knowledge, feeling or sensation are, or
can be said to be Acts. And as for the other part of his Answer, viz. That he
did not assign Self-Consciousness for the Formal Reason of Personality; We have
superabundantly proved, that he has plainly and fully asserted the thing, and
we must pardon the poor Untaught Man, for being Ignorant of the word.
Nevertheless he adds, That if we consider Self-Consciousness as a Personal Act,
though it cannot make the Person, yet it distinguishes one Person from another.
p. 62. l. 21. To which I answer, That nothing but that which makes the Person
can originally distinguish the Person, and consequently that Self-Consciousness
distinguishes one Person from another only by a secondary or consequent
Distinction, and for that Reason can no more originally distinguish than it can
make the Person. As for instance, a Man's Bodily Stature and Dimensions, with a
Concurrence of all other Accidents belonging to him, do really distinguish him
from other Men: but for all that, they do not originally distinguish him; for
it is only his individual Numerical Nature which does, or can do that. But it
is worth observing, how this Ignorant Man pursues his point, viz. that
Self-Consciousness is that which gives personal Unity and distinction: For
(says he) by this actual Self-Consciousness every Person feels himself to be
himself, and not to be another, p. 62. l. 23. And is not this, think we, a
Demonstration? Yes, no doubt it is so of the Ignorance of him, who thinks that
it can prove any Thing else but the Weakness of Him who uses it. For I appeal
to the whole World to judge, what a Consequence this is, viz. That because
every Person feels himself by Self-Consciousness to be himself, and not to be
another, therefore this Self-Consciousness is that which distinguishes him from
all others. For can a Person's perceiving his own Distinction, properly make,
or give him this Distinction? Upon the whole matter I must declare, that I
cannot think any one, who looks upon this as serious Arguing, worth arguing
against. And whereas he says, that this first Argument of the Animadverter has
been sufficiently exposed already, I shall securely venture it upon the Bottom
upon which it stands, without any fear of its being exposed any more than
answered, especially by one who never yet exposed any Thing or Person but
himself. And so I pass to the Animadverter's

Arg. 2.
Second Argument, Which proceeds thus. Nothing in the Nature of it absolute and
irrelative, can be the Formal Reason of Personality in the Persons of the
Blessed Trinity. But Self-Consciousness is a Thing in the Nature of it Absolute
and Irrelative, and therefore it cannot be the Reason of Personality in any of
the said Persons.

In reply to which Argument, thus fairly, formally, and Syllogistically
proposed, why does not this Author (as in all Regular Disputations it ought,
and uses to be done) apply an answer, either by denying one of the Two
Propositions, or by distinguishing one or more of the Terms? but this not being
to be done without Logic, our Author must be so far excused. And therefore he
very prudently wraps himself up in such a Cloud of Insignificant words, as may
enable him to escape his Adversary without encountering him.

For one of these two things he must of Necessity disprove, viz. Either first,
That the Divine Persons and Personalities are perfectly and wholly Relative. Or
Secondly, That Self-Consciousness is a Thing wholly absolute and Irrelative. As
to the first of which he himself elsewhere acknowledges and affirms; That the
Three Divine Persons are Three Relative Subsistences.

And let me tell him further, That they are so entirely Relative, that their
very Subsistere is Referri, and their Referri not only consequent upon, and
supervenient to their Subsistence (as it is in Created Persons) but one and the
same with it; so that by virtue thereof they are indifferently termed by all
Schoolmen and Divines, either Relative Subsistences, or Subsisting Relations.
The Concrete and the Abstract Terms in the Divine Persons being, by reason of
the peculiar condition of their Personality, as well as the Absolute
Transcendent Simplicity of the Divine Nature, only different ways of expressing
the same Thing. And therefore whereas this Author says, p. 63. l. 8. Does that
which makes John a Person make him a Father? I answer, No; but affirm also,
That, that which makes the first Person in the Trinity a Person makes him a
Father, and convertibly, that that which makes him a Father, (and that only)
makes him also a Person. And the Reason of the Difference here, is not, (as
this Ignorant Man alleges) because every humane Person has an Absolute Nature
belonging to him as the subject of the Relation; for each of the Divine Persons
has an Absolute Nature distinctly belonging to him (though not a distinct
Absolute Nature.) But the Difference lies in this. That an humane Person has
not only an Absolute Nature to be the Remote subject of the Relation, but also
an Absolute Personality as the Immediate subject of the same, by virtue whereof
the Person of John continues after the Relation of a Father ceases. But in the
Trinity every Person and Personality is wholly Relative, forasmuch as the very
Subsistence of each of them is so. So that the Eternal Father is and subsists
as a Father by having a Son, and not by knowing himself to be a Father; and by
Communicating his Essence to Another, not by an Act passed upon and wholly
Terminated in his own Person. No; this is postnate to the former, as all other
Personal Acts whatsoever, are and must be. And therefore the Godhead or Divine
Nature which is absolute, is not (as this Man precariously pretends) originally
distinguished by Three Self-Consciousnesses, p. 63. l. 24. But by Three
original Relative properties, viz. the Innascibility and Paternity of the first
Person, which make one Personal Property, and the Two distinct Originations of
the other Two Persons, whereby they are both mutually distinguished from, and
opposed to one Another, as all Relatives are. But this Man's offering here at
an Explication of these Divine Relations, by that exploded Figment of a Man and
his living Image, p. 63. l. 21. is an unsufferable Profaneness as well as an
arrant Petitio Principii. For will he pretend to explain a Thing in it self
obscure by another that is more obscure, and (which is worse) impossible
besides? Let him for the future learn, that no Man who understands what arguing
is, ought to bring that as a medium, either of Explication, or Probation, which
he knows to be doubtful, or has just cause to suspect that his Adversary may
reject as Absurd and Unreasonable.

But in the next place to show, whether Self-Consciousness be a Thing in the
Nature of it perfectly Absolute and Irrelative, and consequently unable to give
such a Subsistence and Personality to the Three Divine Persons as shall be
wholly Relative, There needs only a Repetition of what is said to this purpose
in the Animadversions, and which this Author has very discreetly said not so
much as one word to, viz. That Self-Consciousness is a Thing in the Nature of
it Absolute and Irrelative, as being that Act, by which each Person intimately
knows, and is conscious to himself of his own Being, Acts, Motions, and every
Thing personally belonging to him; so that as such, it terminates within, and
looks no further than that one Person, whom it is an entire survey and
comprehension of. And as it is an Absolute and Irrelative Term, so it may be
conceived distinctly and fully, without conceiving or implying the conception
of any Thing or Person besides. And now, what Relation does, or can such an Act
of Self-Consciousness imply in it? It is indeed on the contrary a direct
contradiction to all that is Relative. For it encloses the Person wholly within
himself; neither pointing nor looking further, nor referring to any one else,
Anim. p. 99. All which is so very plain and full, that I defy this Author, or
any Man alive to prove, either that this is not a True account of
Self-Consciousness, as to the Absolute and Irrelative Nature of it, or if it
be, that it can give a Subsistence purely Relative to the Person which it shall
belong to.

But to make short work with this Man of words without Sense. There are in
every Relation these Things to be considered. The subject of the Relation both
Remote and Immediate, the foundation of the Relation, the Correlate or Term of
the Relation; and lastly, the Relation it self. Accordingly to give an Instance
of this in the Paternal Relation of the First Person of the Blessed Trinity;
The Remote subject of it is the Divine Nature, the Immediate subject is the
Person of the Father, the foundation of it is that Eternal Act by which the
Father communicates his Nature to the Son, and the correlate or Term of the
Relation is the Son, and lastly, the Relation it self is that mutual respect
(resulting from the forementioned Act) which the Father and the Son
reciprocally hear to one Another. And here, I confess, that in the Divine
Relations there is a real Identity between the subject, the foundation, and the
relation it self, contrary to what it is in Created Persons, in whom they are
really distinguished. Upon the whole matter then, let this Man in the present
Instance of the Eternal Person of the Father show, that Self-Consciousness is
either the subject, the foundation, the correlate or Term of the Relation, or
lastly, the Relation it self: And then let him make it the formal Reason of a
Relative Personality, in that or in any other Person of the Trinity, if he can;
And if he cannot, I think a little less Confidence, with a little more
Knowledge, would do well.

But in the last place, quitting all that he had so peremptorily contended for
before, He tells us in plain Terms, p. 64. l. 5. That if each of the Divine
Persons have a Self-Consciousness of its own, this distinguishes the Divine
Persons, and proves them to be really Distinct; which is all that the Dean
desires. Now what Mr. Dean desires (more than what Deans generally do) I cannot
tell, but what he has declared, is this, viz. That Self-Consciousness makes
each of the Divine Persons to be one in himself, and distinct from all others;
and is that wherein the said Unity and Distinction properly and formally does
consist. And now, for Self-Consciousness to be the Cause and Reason of all
this, and for it only to prove this, I must tell him in the Name of Sense and
Logic are quite different things. And the first of them (as appears from the
fore-alleaged passages) he has asserted hitherto, and the latter he
fallaciously sneaks into now. But to the same repeated assertion, I must still
give the same Answer, viz. That Self-Consciousness can distinguish the Divine
Persons only by a Secondary Distinction, not by a Primary and Original; since
nothing can originally distinguish (as I have shown) but that which also
Constitutes: For still Philosophy will have one and the same Principle, both
Constitutive and Distinctive too. So that this is manifestly and fairly another
delivering up and quitting of the Point, which he had all along in his
Vindication asserted and disputed for. For there he had asserted, that
Self-Consciousness gave Original Self-Vnity and Distinction to each of the
Divine Persons, and here he declares himself content if we allow
Self-Consciousness but to prove the same. Though we have told him, that this is
wholly another Case: and it has been inculcated over and over; But (it seems)
there is no forcing it into his Pate any more than pouring a Pottle into a
Pint. And so I proceed to examine what he says to the Animadverter's

Third Argument, Arg. 3.
which proceeds thus. If Self-Consciousness be the formal Reason of Personality
in the Three Divine Persons, then there is no Repugnancy in the Nature and
Reason of the Thing it self, but that there might be three thousand Persons in
the Deity as well as Three. Which consequence appears from this, That neither
is there any Repugnancy that there might be so many Self-Consciousnesses, or
Self-Conscious Minds or Spirits for the Deity to be communicated to, nor any
repugnancy proved in the Nature of the Deity it self, that it should be so
communicated. This is the sum of the Argument, and what is this Defender's
Reply to it? Why he first tells us, That had the Dean said, That
Self-Consciousness [made] the Trinity, this had been a Notable Argument, p. 64.
l. 14. And will he grant This? Then I shall prove, That he did say it, and that
as fully as words could express it in his Vindication, p. 68. l. 4. Where he
has this Passage, As the Self-Consciousness of every Person to it self [makes]
them Three distinct Persons, so the mutual Consciousness of all the Three
Divine Persons makes them all but one Infinite God. Now I ask this
Self-Contradictor first, whether any words can be more plain and expressive
than these? And in the next place, whether they are not his own? If he doubts
it, let him turn to the place alleged. And if they are his own, then I hope,
That, that which [makes] the Divine Persons Three distinct Persons [makes] the
Trinity also: Unless the Three distinct Persons are one Thing, and the Trinity
Another. So that this Argument effectually concludes against this Shameless
Man, even by his own Concession. But he adds in the next place of the same
page, That he hopes however, that Self-Consciousness may distinguish the Three
Persons, p. 64. l. 16. To which it has been answered again and again, that it
can distinguish them only secondarily, and consequentially not primarily and
originally. But I am weary of these Repetitions, though he is not ashamed to
outdo Battus himself in Tautology. And therefore whereas he says further, That
Self-Consciousness proves the Distinction, though it does not limit the Number
of the Persons, p. 64. l. 23. I deny, that it can originally distinguish them
without limiting the Number of them also. For, as I have proved, nothing can
originally distinguish the Persons but that which makes them Persons: And that
which makes them Persons, by the very same, makes them Three Persons; it being
as essential to them to be Three, as to be Persons. And therefore to that
Question of his, Does the formal Reason of Personality make or limit the Number
of Persons? l. 33. ibid. I answer, That in Persons wholly Relative, as the
Divine Persons are, it does and must do so. For the further clearing of which,
it must be observed, That the Animadverter in the Present Argument considered
the Divine Nature as wholly abstracted from all Personality belonging to it,
and so in it self (as upon such an Abstraction it must needs be) only
communicable and Determinable; and consequently such, as cannot be supposed to
communicate or determine it self; but to receive this Communication and
Determination from the Personalities, considered as actually joined with it.
The number of which Personalities must be taken from such a Peculiarity of
their condition, as shall make one certain Number of them necessary and no
other; And that wherein this peculiarity of condition does consist, is the
Relative opposition of the said Persons to one another; by virtue whereof they
are necessarily Three and no more. For as there are Two and but Two such
Oppositions in this Divine Economy, viz. one between Generation and Filiation,
and the other between Spiration and Procession, accordingly there are Three and
but Three Personalities founded upon the said Oppositions: as is clearly shown
in the eight Chapter of the Anim. p. 244. But on the other side, since there is
nothing in the Nature of Self-Consciousness to determine it to any certain
Number of Self-Consciousnesses, it must follow that neither can any certain
Number of Personalities be derived from thence. In short, if the Divine Nature
or Essence thus Abstractedly taken on the one hand, cannot be supposed to
communicate or determine it self, and the Personalities on the other, which
alone should and can determine it, are of that Condition, as not to imply any
certain Number in themselves, but are Indifferent to any that can be assigned,
then it is impossible for the said Personalities to determine the Divine Nature
to Three Personal Subsistences and no more. And this I account a full and
sufficient proof, that the fixed Ternary Number of the Divine Persons can never
be stated upon Self-Consciousness; but (so far as the Influence of that
reaches) may be multiplied into any Number whatsoever. But says our Author,
That which naturally distinguishes Three Persons from each other, would
distinguish Three Thousand if there were so many, but does not prove that there
may be so many, p. 65. l. 11. To which I answer, that the Distinction all along
insisted upon hitherto, is not such an One as supposes or follows, but such an
one as Constitutes or makes the Person; and therefore it is Ridiculous to
argue, That supposing there were so many Persons, they might all be
distinguished by so many Self-Consciousnesses: For that is not the Point here,
but whether there be any Thing in the nature of Self-Consciousness, rendering it
incapable of such a multiplication or no; and if there be not, then it is
certain, that supposing there might be so many Self-Consciousnesses, there
might and would be also so many Persons: For as much as that which originally
and principally distinguishes any thing must of necessity constitute it too.
But he goes on and tells us, That though there may be no Repugnancy to such a
multiplication on the part of Self-Consciousness, yet on the Part of the Divine
Nature there may, and therefore that the Argument does not conclude, l. 15.
ibid. To which I answer, that the Divine Nature, as this Author considers it
actually determined by its respective Personalities, must needs have a
Repugnancy to any other, or greater multiplication of the same; But as the
Animadverter here considers it entirely abstracted from all Personal
Determination, I affirm, that it is impossible to prove a Repugnancy in it so
considered, to subsist in 3000. Self-Conscious Spirits any more than in Three:
And therefore I would have this Author take notice, That the Animadverter was
not concerned to conclude, That absolutely there might be so many Persons in
the Godhead; but, That so far as this Man's Hypothesis reached, and for ought
that could be determined from thence about the Number of the Divine Persons,
this might be so; and withal that nothing yet appeared on the Part of the
Divine Nature so Abstracted to prove, that it could not be so. And as this was
the utmost that the Animadverter undertook by this Argument, so it was
sufficient for him to prove thereby, the Absurdity of this Author's New
Hypothesis compared with the old received one of the Church; which makes it
utterly impossible that there should be any more than Three Persons in the
Godhead: and that from the peculiar Condition of the Persons themselves
necessarily determining them to the fixed number of three and no more; which
this Man's Hypothesis of Three Personal Self-Consciousnesses from the very
Nature of the Thing (as we have shown) can never do. And this was the sum of
the Animadverter's Argument, which this Man, with such a Magisterial Ignorance,
pronounces a mere Non sequitur: if we may take his word for a sequitur or non
sequitur, who has more Logic a great deal, to distinguish good money from bad,
than a true Consequence from a false. And so we are come at length to see upon
what Terms the Animadverter's Fourth Argument stands with this Defender.

Fourth Argument. Arg. 4.
If Three distinct Self-Consciousnesses formally Constitute Three distinct
Personalities, then Three distinct Self-Complacencies will constitute Three
distinct Personalities too. But our Author, I suppose will not allow of the
latter, and therefore neither ought he to assert the former. This is the
Animadverter's Fourth Argument upon the head of Self-Consciousness, with
reference to the Divine Persons; and he first declared, That he produced and
looked upon it only as an Argument ad Hominem: There being as much Reason to
state the formal constitution of a Person upon one, as upon the other; though
in Truth upon Neither. For all that could or can be alleged for
Self-Consciousness upon this Account, is, that it is Essential to each of the
Divine Persons, and inseparable from them; And so much I affirm, is allegeable
for Self-Complacency. Besides, that if this Author pleads no more for
Self-Consciousness, than that it barely distinguishes the Divine Persons from
one Another (as in this whole Defense (by way of Subterfuge) he pretends to no
more, and that also without proving it their Principal Distinction) I challenge
him to prove, that Self-Complacency does not distinguish the said Persons from
one Another as much as Self-Consciousness does or can do. To which we may add,
that Self-Complacency is the nobler Act of the Two, and a step beyond the
former; and for that Reason the fittest to give the perfectest state of Being
which is Personality; if Personality could depend upon, or be derived from any
personal Act; as the Animadverter has all along contended that it cannot.

But, says our Author, the Animadverter proceeds all along upon a Mistake, viz.
That by Self-Consciousness he understands the Acts of Self-Consciousness, p.
66. the end, whereas our Author understands only the Principle of it. To which
I answer, (as I have done several times before); First, That by
Self-Consciousness (which this very Man over and over expresses by Self-Feeling
or Sensation) nothing can properly be signified but an Act; and that we may as
well say, That Seeing, Hearing, Tasting and Smelling signify the Principle of
these Respective Acts, and not the Acts themselves, as that this Self-conscious
Feeling and Sensation do so. And this I shall immoveably insist upon, as the
genuine proper Signification of the Term, without the least Regard had to this
Man's Meaning; which in no Disputation ought to supersede or take place of the
Proper, universally Received Sense of his Words. For his Meaning is to himself,
his Words to the World. Nevertheless since (like one beaten off from his hold)
he flies from the Act to the Principle, I do here, in the second Place, deny
also, That the Principle of Self-Consciousness does or can constitute the
Person, or give Personal Unity or Distinction to it, (which I reckon to be all
but the same Thing:) Forasmuch as the first and Original Principle of all Acts
is the Nature and Essence of the Thing to which the said Acts belong. But then
the bare Essence or Nature of a thing, whether Create or Uncreate can never of
it self make or constitute that Thing a Person, but the Determination of the
said Nature by its proper and complete Subsistence, must do that. Accordingly
in the Subject here before us, The Principle of Self-Consciousness is no other
than the Divine Nature as it is an Infinite Omniscient Mind; which absolutely
considered, both as to its Being, and Actings being the same in all the Three
Divine Persons, can never constitute them Persons nor originally distinguish
them. And if there be any Distinction in this Infinite Omniscient Mind, either
as to the Manner of its Subsisting or Acting (for in that must lie all the
Distinction that it is capable of) it must be from the Personal Properties
determining and distinguishing both: and consequently since this Omniscient
Principle and its Actings receive all their Distinction antecedently from the
said Personal Properties or Personalities, it is impossible that these
Properties or Personalities should receive their Distinction from them. In
short, the bare Principle of Self-Consciousness is the Divine Intellect, or the
Divine Nature, as Omniscient, which of it self neither is the Person, nor
constitutes the Person; and the Actual Exercise of this Principle belongs to
the Person himself, who alone can be properly said to Act, and therefore must
be a Person antecedently to his Acting, (all Personal Acts proceeding from a
Suppositum:) from both which it follows, That Self-Consciousness, neither in
the Actual Exercise, nor yet in the Principle thereof, does or can constitute
the Divine Persons, or be the proper Formal Reason of their Personal Being,
Unity, and Distinction. And whereas he tells us again, That every Act of
Self-Consciousness proves a distinct Person, page 66. lin. 6, 7. This is an old
Story, and so often repeated, that it is almost come to the Cuckow's Note: but
he has been frequently told in Answer to it, and must be so told again; That
the Question is not, What proves a Person distinct, but what makes it so; and
that, not by any sort of Distinction, but only by a primary and Original. And
this is that, which I shall abide by, and am resolved to hold him to;
notwithstanding all his Wrigglings, and Turnings to get rid of it.

But it is now high time to remark upon some more of his Absurd, Untheological,
and indeed Scandalous Assertions. Which are these Three, as we find them, p.
67. l. 10. viz. That there are no Modes in the Divine Nature; nor secondly any
Affections in it; nor thirdly, that it admits of any Priority, so much as in
our conceptions of it.

To which I answer,

1. That if there are no Modes in the Divine Nature, there are no Persons in it
neither: For a Person is nothing else but the Godhead determined by a peculiar,
Incommunicable Mode of Subsistence. To the

Second I answer, That these prime and transcendental Affections of Being, viz.
Unity, Verity, and Bonity, do and must of necessity belong to the Divine
Nature, if we own it for a Real Being; as I hope this Man does; though I am not
sure of it. And then

Thirdly, If no Priority of conception is to be allowed in our Discourses about
the Divine Nature (as being incapable of any) we can never discourse of it* as
of a Being, which has Attributes belonging to it, or Immanent Acts flowing from
it, and resting in it: For there is no conceiving of the former but per modum
Subjecti and Adjuncti, nor of the latter but per modum Principii and Actionis,
in both of which there is necessarily employed a Priority and Posteriority of
conception. And I shall say no more of this Man here, but that in these
Assertions he opposes himself to all the Orthodox Divines in Christendom.

But that is the less to be wondered at, if we consider also the Profaneness of
some of his expressions here. For the Animadverter having urged, That
Self-Complacency might be as well alleged for the Reason of the Divine
Personalities as Self-Consciousness; This Man Blasphemously subjoins, p. 65. l.
29. Yes, and he might as well have added Self-displeasure, and
Self-condemnation, and as many more such Selfs as he could think of. Now, had
the discourse here been of Men, that is, of weak sinful Mortals, he might well
enough have mentioned such kind of Selfs, as Self-displeasure, and
Self-Condemnation and the like, provided that the omitted not the Prime Self of
all, and most peculiarly his own, which is Self-contradiction. But when the
discourse here is wholly of the Three Sacred Persons of the Trinity, each and
every one of which is God blessed for ever, for him to affirm Self-Condemnation
every whit as applicable to them as Self-Complacency, when Self-Condemnation on
the one hand must suppose Sin or Folly as the ground of it, and
Self-Complacency on the other is as essential to, and inseparable from all and
each of the Divine Persons, as any other Divine Perfection can be, this (let me
tell him) is downright Blasphemy. And therefore in requital of that scurrilous
Character of an Ingenious Blunderer, (which he has so insolently reproached the
Animadverter with,) I must and do here return upon him the just Charge of an
Impious Blasphemer, and that upon more accounts than this one; telling him
withal, that had he lived in the former Times of our Church, his Gown would
have been stripped off his back for his detestable Blasphemies and Heresies,
and some other place found out for him to perch in than the top of St. Paul's,
where at present he is placed, like a Church Weathercock, (as he is) notable
for nothing so much, as standing high and turning round. And now if he likes
not this kind of Treatment, let him thank his own Virulence for it, in passing
such base Reflections upon one (among many more) who, he might be sure, would
repay him, and certainly will, though he has not yet cleared the Debt

And thus having shown that the Animadverter's Arguments against
Self-Consciousness are not to be shook by any of this Author's Pitiful Cavils,
we will now pass to the Examination of what he opposes to the Arguments brought
by the Animadverter against his Mu^^^l Consciousness also: Of which the

First is this. Arg. ^.
No Act of knowledge can be the formal Reason of an Unity of Nature in the
Persons of the blessed Trinity. But an Act of mutual Consciousness is but an
Act of Knowledge, etc. And what answer does he give to this? Why the old one,
viz. That he no where asserts, That mutual Consciousness is the formal Reason
of this Unity, but only that the Three Persons who are thus mutually conscious
^o each other, must be essentially One, p. 68. l. 5. To this he has been still
answered, That though he uses not the Term, yet he asserts the Thing. And
whether he does not so here, let the Reader judge by that passage in this very
Defense, p. 66. l. 23. As Self-Consciousness (say^ he) makes a Person one with
itself, so a Natural (...) Consciousness makes Three Persons as Naturally one
as it ^s possible for Three to be one. And how far it does that, he (...) us in
his Vindication, p. 68. viz. That the mutual Consciousness of all the Three
Divine Persons makes them all but one Infinite God. And this I hope is
something more than only to assert, That Three Persons mutually conscious to
each other, must be essentially one (which none denies, provided that by
Persons he means not Three distinct Minds) for the words cited expressly say,
That this mutual Consciousness makes all the Three Persons to be essentially
one God: And whatsoever [ makes] them so, is the formal Reason of their being
so. And therefore this Man would do well to take notice for the future, That
whenever he asserts the Definition of a formal Reason, or of any Thing else,
he does by the very same assertion, assert the Definitum too; whether he owns
it or no. But because he is here making use of his old Subterfuge again (as I
think he will never have done with it) by pretending, That when he argues from
Self-Consciousness and mutual Consciousness, he means not the Act but the
Principle of each; whether that forlorn pretense is to be allowed of, the
Reader is left to judge yet further, from the following Considerations. As

First, From the Account which this Author himself gives of the Terms
Self-Consciousness and mutual Consciousness, in the Book wherein he first made
use of them, and built his whole Hypothesis upon them, viz. his Vindication,
etc. From every page of which, where the said words are mentioned, it may be
made out as clear as the Light, that he neither understands, nor uses them in
any other sense, but as they import the respective Acts of each of them. As
first p. 48. l. the last but one, where he tells us, That the Self-Vnity of a
Spirit can be nothing else but Self-Consciousness, he explains the same by its
being conscious to its own Thoughts, Reasonings, Passions, which no other
finite Spirit is conscious to, but it self. Which expressions neither do, nor
can signify any thing else but the Acts of Self-Consciousness. And again, p.
49. l. 2. This (says he) makes a finite Spirit numerically one, that every
Spirit feels its own thoughts and passions, but is not conscious to the
thoughts and passions of another Spirit. And again, p. 49. l. 7. If
three-created Spirits were so united as to be conscious to each others thoughts
and passions, I cannot see any Reason why we might not say, that three such
Persons were Numerically one, etc. Now what can any mortal Man make of all this
but Actual Consciousness? And what does his Metaphor of feeling mean, but
something which is as much an Act of the Mind, as that, in the proper sense of
it, is of the Body? So p. 50. l. 11. We know (says he) the Unity of a Spirit
reaches as far as its Self-Consciousness does, for that is one Spirit which
knows and feels it self and its own thoughts and motions, etc. In like manner,
for the Allusion, he quotes out of St. Austin, l. 15. ibid. Which (he says)
represents this much better by that Consciousness which is between those
distinct faculties in us, of Memory, Understanding, and Will. And what is that?
Why the very Acts of these faculties, which (as he says) know and feel
whatsoever is in each other, viz. We remember what we understand and will,
likewise, We understand what we remember and will; and lastly, We will, what we
remember and understand. All which, I suppose, are Acts of those respective
faculties, and not the faculties themselves. And yet this he translates to the
Trinity, l. 23. ibid. If (says he) we can suppose three Infinite Minds and
Persons thus conscious of whatsoever is in each other, etc. that is to say, by
Acts of Consciousness, as the forementioned faculties know and feel what is in
each other: (for otherwise that Particle [ thus] is insignificant, and means
nothing at all.) And he speaks it out fully and plainly, p. 52. l. 2. in these
words, This Intimate Union and Inbeing, when we speak of an essential Union of
pure and infinite Minds, is a mutual Consciousness. And what is that? Why, it
follows, It is (says he) as I may so speak, an Inward Sensation of each other,
to know and feel each other as they know and feel themselves. And yet more
plainly (if possible) Father, Son and Holy Ghost (says he) are one by an
Internal Consciousness, p. 56. l. 5. And then he explains the same in this
manner. If I may so speak (says he) because we want proper words to express it,
they feel each other in themselves, know the same Things by feeling each others
Knowledge, and will and love alike by feeling what each other loves and wills,
just as every Man feels his own thoughts, knowledge, will, and passions.

It were endless to transcribe all the Passages in his Vindic. which are to the
same Purpose, and the Reader may find five hundred more, if he has a mind to
it. But because a Person so eminent for contradicting and forgetting himself,
may perhaps have forgot what he had said in his Vindication, let us see what he
says in this very Defense, where he asserts the same Thing in the same words,
with reference to finite Spirits, p. 37. at the end. If that (says he) be one
distinct separate Mind which is conscious only to it self, which feels all that
is in it self, and nothing else; and those be (...) distinct separate Mind^,
each of which is thus conscious to it self, etc. And with respect to the Unity
in Trinity, p. 32. He expressly tells us, That the Dean places the Unity of the
Three Persons in mutual Consciousness, and then tells us what that is, viz.
That they have a conscious Sensation of each other in themselves, as they have
of themselves. And what, I ask, is having a conscious Sensation, but actual
Consciousness? And again, Can they be one before they are mutually conscious?
and before they know themselves to be one, and that even in the order of
conceiving it? p. 74. l. 16, 17, 18. And now what is all this to the Principle
of Consciousness? I have found it a Tedious task to transcribe so much of his
stuff, only to make a confident shifting Caviller see his own words, while he
will not own them. But by what has been quoted, it appears irrefragably, That
by Self-Consciousness and mutual Consciousness, and that both with respect to
Spirits finite and infinite, this Author could understand nothing but the Acts
of them, if these Terms [ is conscious, to be conscious, sensation, knowing,
feeling] do properly import Acts. And I defy the whole World, and this Author
himself, to make any other Rational sense of them. Upon the whole matter
therefore, I desire the Judicious Reader to consider with me these following
Particulars.

1. That this Author, throughout his whole Vindication, (wherein he first laid
down and verited his new Hypothesis of Self-Consciousness and mutual
Consciousness, and Three Infinite Minds,) never so much as once mentions [ The
Principle] of either of those Acts, even where he yet most professedly
undertakes to explain the said Terms; in excuse of which it will be in vain for
him to take shelter in [ so speaks, and so says] and to pretend, that we want
words to express the meaning of these Notions; for surely the word [ Principle]
was as obvious and easy to be thought on, when he wrote his Vindication, as it
could be since, in the writing this Defense of it. 2. That as he made no
mention of it in that former Book, so neither does he mention it in this
Defense; where, in like manner, he delivers and explains his Doctrine about the
said* Terms and Notions, but only when he finds himself pressed by his
Adversary; and then he flies to it as a shift, started on purpose, that he may
seem to say something to an Argument, which he cannot answer. 3. That, when he
mentions this [ Principle] of Consciousness upon this occasion, he never
expresses what it is, or what he means by it; when yet he lays all the stress
he can upon it, to keep off a baffle; and when withal it is far from being so
clear and certain, but that it may be stated more ways than one. Fourthly and
lastly, That if instead of Self-Consciousness and mutual Consciousness the Term
[ Principle of Self-Consciousness and mutual Consciousness] were substituted
throughout the Writings of this Author, it would so utterly pervert them, that
it would be impossible to make so much as common sense of most of those
Passages wherein it should occur.
All which particulars I desire the Learned Reader to lay together, and, when
he has thoroughly weighed them, to believe, if he can, that by
Self-Consciousness and mutual Consciousness, this Author understood only the [
Principle] of these Acts, but not the Acts themselves. And thus much for what
this Man could in reason be presumed to mean by these Terms. But then in the

Second place. The Reader is desired to take notice also, That the word
Consciousness (as determined by the constant and universal use of it) will not
bear this signification. And accordingly, I do challenge this confident Man, to
produce me so much as one English Writer (before this New Philosophy came to be
treated of in our own Tongue) who ever used the word Consciousness (of
whatsoever sort it was) to signify any Thing but the bare Act of the said
Consciousness. And whereas, to support his Arbitrary distinction he would
pretend a parallel Case, between the Term [ Consciousness] and the Term [
Reason] and thereupon conclude, that because [ Reason] is sometimes used to
signify the Rational Principle or Power, and sometimes also the Act of
Reasoning, therefore [ Consciousness may be so used too, p. 67. l. 27. I
answer, That there is no Parity in the Case; For as much as there has been
frequent and common use (which ought to fix the sense of words) for such a
double signification of the word [ Reason], but none at all for two
significations of the word [ Consciousness]. And therefore let me tell him
further, that since [ Consciousness] always imports the Act, it cannot answer
as a Parallel to the Term [ Reason], as Reason is indifferent to signify either
the Act or Principle, but as it is limited to the Act, and so signifies only
Ratiocination. And accordingly as Ratiocination can never signify the Principle
by which we Reason, so neither can Consciousness signify the Principle by which
we are conscious to our selves of any Thing. So that his allegation of the [
Principle] either of Self-Consciousness as the Reason of Personal Unity and
distinction, or of mutual Consciousness, as the Reason of the essential Unity
of the Divine Persons, which he had expressly before stated upon the respective
Acts of each, is nothing else but a Ridiculous shift, and the affixing a sense
to a word which it never had before, and which this Man's puny Authority ^s far
from being sufficient to give it now. I have now evinced, and that I hope to
the full satisfaction of the Judicious Reader, that this Author neither did nor
could, by the Terms Self-Consciousness and mutual Consciousness, understand the
Principles of these Acts, but only the Acts themselves; till he was forced to
use the word Principle, to elude (if he could) his Adversarie's Argument. Nor,
in the next place; That the words themselves can (according to their constantly
received sense) bear any such signification: After which, That I may leave him
no further subterfuge, I will now argue the same from the reason of the Thing
it self; and to that end, (supposing for the present) that he might, and did
all along, mean the Principle and not the Act, I will prove, that neither can
the Principle of mutual Consciousness be the formal Reason of the Essential
Unity of the Divine Persons; nor (in other words) That, [ wherein] the Unity of
their Nature does consist, or [whereby] they are Naturally and Essentially one
God; Both which this Author has expressly and in Terminis, more than once
asserted; though his skill reached not to the Philosophical Term made use of by
the Animadverter; who yet for his own part can indifferently make use of all
these Three Expressions, as equally for his purpose.

And here I must premise some things, which (though they have been sufficiently
shown already, yet in dealing with such an Everlasting Tautologist) must be
repeated again, viz.

First, That the formal Reason of a Thing, and the Thing whereof it is the
formal Reason, do so essentially cohere, and coexist in Nature, and so imply
one Another, that there is no conceiving of one, without the conception of the
other. So that in the natural way of our conceiving of any Two objects, where
either of them may be conceived of, without the other, there neither of those
Two can be the formal Reason of the other.

Secondly, That the Essential Unity of the Divine Persons is not a Specifical,
but a Numerical Unity of Nature; and consequently, that the community of one
end the ^ame Individual (...) to the said Persons, is that which renders them
naturally and essentially one God.

Which two considerations being thus laid down, I deny the Principle of mutual
Consciousness to be the formal Reason of the Unity of the Divine Persons, in
the same Individual Essence or Nature: and that for these following Reasons.

1. If the Divine Essence as it subsists in, and is common to the Three Divine
Persons, must, according to the Natural order of conceiving Things, be
conceived of, as one in it self, before it can be conceived of, as the
Principle of any Act, (and particularly that of mutual Consciousness) then its
being the Principle of that or any other Act in the Divine Persons, cannot be
the formal Reason of Unity of Essence in the said Persons. But the former is
true, and therefore the latter must be so too. The consquence is evident from
this. That the formal Reason of a Thing cannot be conceived of as Posterior to
that of which it is the formal Reason. And the Truth of the Assumption is as
clear: because Unity in order of Nature is the first affection or Attribute of
the Divine Essence, (whether as considered in it self, or as subsisting in the
Three Persons,) and therefore must be conceived of antecedently to any other
particular Perfection or Attribute belonging to the same, and consequently may
be conceived of, without it too: which makes it impossible for any such
Perfection or Attribute to be the formal Reason of this Unity. Accordingly,
since there is the same order of Priority and Posteriority between such of the
Divine Attributes as immediately affect and relate to the Divine Essence or
Being, and such as immediately import and relate to some Divine Act, which
there is between Being and Action themselves; and since withal, Unity is the
first and principal of the former sort, and the Divine Intellect (which is the
proper immediate Principle of all Acts of Consciousness in the Divine Persons)
is only an Attribute or Perfection of the second sort, it is impossible that
the said Principle of mutual Consciousness should be the formal Reason of the
Essential Unity of the Divine Persons, or that wherein the said Unity of
Essence properly consists.

2. The Formal Reason, that the Three Divine Persons are essentially one God,
is the Community of One and the same Individual Divine Nature to the said Three
Persons. But a Principle of mutual Consciousness is not a community of the same
Individual Nature to the Three Divine Persons* And therefore such a Principle
is not the formal Reason that the said Three Persons are essentially one God.
The Major is proved thus. Because we cannot conceive such a community of the
same Individual Divine Nature to the Three Persons, without conceiving a
Numerical Unity of the said Nature in the said Persons, nor vice versa, can we
conceive the latter without the former. The Minor is proved thus. No particular
perfection of the Divine Nature is properly and formally a Community of the
Divine Nature, considered under all its perfections; But the community of the
Divine Nature to the three Persons, is a community of the Divine Nature so
considered* And a Principle of mutual Consciousness is but a Particular
Perfection of the Divine Nature, viz. the Divine Intellect; which is the Divine
Nature as formally determined to one particular sort of Acts and Objects; and
therefore this Principle of mutual Consciousness is not formally the Community
of the Divine Nature to all the Three Persons.

3. If the Principle of mutual Consciousness in the Divine Persons must be
multiplied according to the Number of the said Persons, then it is impossible
that this Principle should give a Numerical Unity of Essence to those Persons.
But according to this Author's Hypothesis, the Principle of mutual
Consciousness is and must be multiplied according to the Number of the Divine
Persons; and therefore the said Principle can never be the formal Reason of a
Numerical Essential Unity in them. The consequence is evident, For three
Numerically distinct Principles can never (as such) formally give Numerical
Unity to any Thing; and much less to the most transcendently simple and
uncompounded of all Beings; as the Divine Nature in the three Persons
confessedly is. And then, as for the Assumption, viz. That according to this
Author's Hypothesis; the Principle of mutual Consciousness must be multiplied,
according to the Number of the Divine Persons, this also is as evident; Because
he asserts the three Divine Persons to be three distinct Infinite Minds, which
are Three distinct Essences: And since they are so, I affirm, that the
Principle of Action in every Mind or Essence, is and must be as distinct, as
the Mind or Essence which it belongs to, and which it is comprehended in. And
therefore since these three Numerically distinct Minds must have each of them a
Numerically distinct Principle of mutual Consciousness, it is impossible, that
these three distinct Principles should either have a Numerical Unity
themselves, or give a Numerical Unity of Essence to the said Three Infinite
Minds, or to the Divine Persons, which this Author holds to be Three such Minds.

4. If a Principle of mutual Consciousness may make Three Infinite Minds
essentially one Infinite Mind, then it may also make Three Infinite Intelligent
Persons essentially one Infinite Intelligent Person: But this latter is
impossible, and therefore the former must needs be so too. Nevertheless, the
consequence is evident, because, according to this Author [ Infinite Mind] and
[ Infinite Intelligent Person] are Terms perfectly equipollent, p. 32 l. 23.
and consequently, whatsoever is affirmed or denied of the one, must be equally
affirmed or denied of the other; so that if it be truly affirmed, that Three
distinct Infinite Minds, may by a Principle of mutual Consciousness, become
essentially one Infinite Mind, it may be as truly affirmed, that three Infinite
Intelligent Persons may become one Infinite Intelligent Person; since there is
a Perfect equipollence in these Two Predications. As for the Assumption, That
it is impossible for Three Infinite Intelligent Persons to be one Infinite
Intelligent Person, This is so Self-evident, that, I suppose, neither my Reader
not my Adversary, unless a Sabellian, will expect any further proof of it.

These are my Reasons, upon which I conclude, that this new (...) of a
Principle of mutual Consciousness, cannot formally give a Numerical Unity of
Essence to the Three Divine Persons: And I doubt not, but this Defender, who is
such an utter stranger to all Metaphysical Knowledge, will call these Arguments
as he does others in p. 2. l. 20. of this Defense, Thin, airy Weapons (though
by his favor, they may be never the less piercing for that) but I would have
him know, That Arguments drawn from, and founded upon the general Reason and
notions of Things, are as strong and conclusive, as any that are taken from any
particular material objects incurring into the sense. And as for the Divine
Nature in the Divine Persons (the only subject now before us) since it is a
Being absolutely and entirely simple, and (as the Schools call it)
Simplicissime simplex, I affirm, that there is no ground of Reason to discourse
of it Philosophically upon, but the Natural order and distinction of our
conceptions of it, founded upon the several Modes, Acts, and Objects belonging
to it; And this Man who explodes all prius and posterius, in the conceptions
which our Reason forms of the Deity, is extremely Ridiculous, and yet withal
affirms Three absolute distinct beings ( as three Minds are) in one Numerical
Absolute, and most simple being, is (if possible) infinitely more so. And
therefore, without adding any thing further, I leave the Reader to make himself
merry with that silly swaggering Conclusion, which he closes his wretched,
trifling, dodging answer to the Animadverter's Argument with. Thus (says he)
All his Arguments vanish like smoke, rise in a dark Cloud, but immediately
disperse and are seen no more till they return as such vapors use to do, in
Thunder and lightning, or some Threatening storm, p. 87. at the end. But was
there ever such a Rhodomontade in words, so Big with Nothing, and without one
grain of sense at the Bottom of them? For is this the way to expose an
Adversarie's Argument to contempt; first to represent it as vanishing into
smoke and vapor, and afterward returning in storm and thunder? But it shows,
that his Rhetoric keeps pace with his Logic, and that whether he would
describe, or prove a Thing, it is much at the same rate. In the mean time the
Reader may take this for an Observation, that will never fail him, viz. That
this Author is never so high upon the Huff, and Rant, as when he is lowest (nay
and knows himself lowest) in Point of Reason. And so I pass to the Vindication
of the

Arg. 2.
Second Argument, Which is this. If Unity of Nature in the Divine Persons be the
Cause, Reason, or Principle of mutual Consciousness in the said Persons, then
their mutual Consciousness is not the cause or principle of the Unity of their
Nature, but the former is true, and therefore the latter is so too. This is the
Argument, and a plainer and clearer there cannot well be. To which our Author
answers thus, That the Divine Persons may be thus essentially one by mutual
Consciousness, or mutual Consciousness may be essential to this Unity, though
they could not be thus actually conscious to each other, unless they were thus
united, as to have and to feel each other in themselves, Def. p. 68. l. 22.
Which Enigmatical, obscure, and confused stuff, if the Reader understands, it
is well; for I profess that I do not. But so far as the Term [ Essential] made
use of here, may seem to make any Thing for his Purpose, I answer, That mutual
Consciousness is Essential to the Unity of the Divine Nature in the Three
Persons, not as that, wherein this Unity does consist, but as that which is
essentially consequent upon it, and inseparable from it. So that there is an
Homonymy in the Term [ Essential] as either importing that Essential Principle,
wherein the Nature or Essence of a Thing is placed, or some thing necessarily
resulting from it; in which latter sense alone mutual Consciousness is
essential to the Unity of the Divine Nature. And whereas he says, That if by
Unity of Nature in the Divine Persons the Animadverter means the (...), That,
he says, is indeed a Necessary foundation of this mutual Consciousness, but not
the immediate Cause of it; For that, the Fathers, he pretends, were sensible,
that this (...) could not of it self make this Essential Unity; and therefore
added the (...) (which he affirms to be that very mutual Consciousness here
maintained by him) to perfect it, p. 68. l. 27. In which words there are
several very vile Heterodoxyes. For first, I affirm, That the (...) adequately,
perfectly, and sufficiently makes the Unity and Identity of the Divine Nature
in the Divine Persons: and that (as I have already shown) not merely from the
force of the word it self, but from the peculiar condition of the (...) which
it was applied to; which being Infinite could not possibly be otherwise than
numerically one and the same; and consequently that the (...) or agreement of
the Divine Persons in such an (...) could be no other than a Numerical Unity
and Identity of Nature belonging to them upon that account. And therefore I
deny, That the Fathers ever reckoned the (...) insufficient of it self to make
this Unity, and challenge him to prove they did. And I deny further, that they
ever alleged the (...) as an addition to the (...) to perfect this Unity, but
as an Explication and Illustration of it: and I add moreover, That the Fathers
never accounted this (...) either to be mutual Consciousness, or to consist in
it: but to be the mutual Inexistence, or Indwelling of the Divine Persons in
each other, founded upon, and resulting from their (...); mutual Inexistence
being no more mutual Consciousness, than bare Existence can be said to be
Knowledge: and lastly, I affirm, that the (...) ascribed to the Three Divine
Persons (to which this Author may add his (...) too, if he pleases) is not the
(...) it self, but a consequent, or effect of it; for as much as they are not
therefore in one another because they mutually know one another, but they thus
know one another, because by the essential Identity of their Nature, they
mutually are and exist in one Another. All which having been so fully proved in
the seventh Chapter of Animadv. p. 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206. and the ninth
Chapter, p. 295. 6, 7, 8, 9. and 300, 301. to allege it again, is in effect but
dictum dicere, which though it is the constant practice, or rather Trade of
this Author, is the scorn of the Animadverter. But to go on, the Animadverter
having said (as is here alleged) That Unity of Nature is the Cause and
Principle of mutual Consciousness (which being an Essential Property equally
belonging to all Three Persons, must issue and result from the Divine Nature,
and so can have no Antecedent Causal Influx upon the same Nature, Our Author,
in answer to this, tells us, That mutual Consciousness belongs not immediately
to Nature but to Persons, p. 69. l. 20. And I dare say, he tells us the best he
knows. But in reply to it I must tell him again, That it belongs immediately to
both, but upon a different account, viz. to Nature, as the immediately
producing Principle of the Act; and to the Person as to the immediate proper
subject of Denomination from the Act. But he adds, That he for his part will
not Philosophies upon Antecedent causal Influxes in the Divine Nature, p. 69.
l. 24. Nor does any one else, in the strict, proper, and Philosophical sense of
these Terms, pretend to do so, but only by accommodating them to help us with
the better Method and Distinction to conceive and discourse of so high a
Subject, as the Divine Nature is. And therefore it was not for nothing, That he
passed over the Nine preliminary Considerations, at the beginning of the fourth
Chapter of the Animadversions, without so much as touching upon them: For they
would have corrected his Ignorance, and taught him how these words are to be
understood and used about the Divine Nature and Persons. But his Modesty adds,
That it contents him to know, what is Essential, not Absolutely to the Unity of
the Divine Nature, but to the Unity in Trinity, p. 69. l. 29. And will this Man
say, That any Thing can be essential to the Unity of the one, which is not as
essential to the Unity of the other? For though we frequently use the word
Union of Persons, yet strictly speaking, it is improper: since it is not an
Union (which is but another word for Unition) but an Unity of Persons in
Nature, or an Unity of Nature in the Persons, which is the proper expression;
and therefore we neither say an Union in Trinity, nor a Trinity in Union, but
always apply the word Unity to both. But our Author closes this Paragraph with
these words, p. 69. at the end. That if mutual Consciousness be essential to
this Unity of Nature, so that the Three Persons are thus united, and cannot be
one without it, he will contend no further. And so far I think he does
discreetly; but too late. For whether he will contend further or no, his
Adversary both does and will; for as much as this Author has asserted a great
deal more than what this Concession amounts to, and if he does not prove all
that he has asserted, he is a baffled Person. For he has positively asserted
(as we have shown from his own words) that mutual Consciousness makes the Three
Divine Persons to be Naturally one, p. 66. Def. 26. and to be essentially one
God, Vind. p. 68. l. 6. And this, by his favor, is quite another thing, from
only asserting, that mutual Consciousness is essential to that Unity of Nature
which is in the Three Persons. For that it may be, as it is an essential
consequent of the said Unity of Nature, and no more; As also from asserting (as
he here does, p. 69. l. the last) That the three Divine Persons cannot be one
without it. For surely that which is only a Conditio sine qua non, and without
which the said Divine Persons cannot be one in Nature, and that which formally
makes them so, or wherein their Unity does consist, are wholly different
Things. And therefore since it is manifest, that this Man has no Logic, I
heartily wish that he had some shame. In the mean time, he is for showing (as
well as he can) how the Animadverter mistakes the whole matter in these words,
quoted from him, Anim. p. 108. l. 14. The Divine Nature or Essence being one
and the same in all the Three Persons, there is upon this account one and the
same knowledge in them also; And they are not one in Nature, by virtue of their
mutual Consciousness, but they are therefore mutually conscious, because the
Perfect Unity and Identity of their Nature makes them so. Thus the
Animadverter: and where is now the mistake? why our Author tells us, That Three
Persons who have the same Nature may know the same Things without feeling one
another's thoughts and knowledge in themselves, p. 70. l. 22. To which I answer
first, That the foundation of this reply is, That there is such a thing as
Feeling in God distinct from knowledge; which is the height of nonsense and
Absurdity; as shall be declared before we pass from this head of mutual
Consciousness. Secondly I utterly deny, That Persons who have the same Divine
Nature can know the same Things, I mean all the same Things (for that only here
can be insisted upon) without knowing each other's thoughts and knowledge in
themselves: For as much as whatsoever each of these Divine Persons knows, he
does and must know by an Infinite Act of Knowledge, comprehending both himself
and the other Two Persons; and all that is Knowable in the World besides; and
how each of the Divine Persons can know all this without mutually knowing one
another, I desire this Man to show. But he argues further, That if by one and
the same knowledge the Animadverter means that the knowledge of the Divine
Nature in the Three Persons is but one Individual Act, as the knowledge of one
single Person is, this destroys the Distinction of Persons: which cannot be
distinct without distinct personal Acts, as mutual knowledge is; and destroys
mutual Consciousness, for there is no place for mutual Consciousness, or mutual
Knowledge, where there is but one single Act of Knowledge, p. 70. l. 24. In
answer to which I observe these Two Notable Instances of his Great Ignorance.
First, His supposing and taking for granted the very Thing in dispute between
him and his Adversary, viz. That the Distinction of the Divine Persons depends
upon certain Distinct Acts of Knowledge, as the cause or antecedent Reason of
that Distinction; whereas his Adversary on the contrary affirms all Distinction
of Divine Knowledge (as well as all Diversification of the Divine Nature it
self) to be from the Distinction, or distinct Subsistence of the Divine
Persons, as the Prime and original Reason of it. And whereas this Author says
again, That the Divine Persons cannot be distinct without Distinct Personal
Acts, as mutual knowledge is, it is true, That they cannot be without them, as
Inseparably consequent upon their Personal Distinction, but not as constituent
of it. Secondly, The other Instance of his Ignorance here, is his affirming,
that there can be no place for mutual Consciousness or Knowledge, where there
is but one single or Individual Act of Knowledge. Which I utterly deny as
false; and in order to the proving it so. I do here observe, That there is but
one single Act of Knowledge in all the Three Divine Persons; that is to say,
single as to the Substance of the Act, though diversified by the several
modifications which it receives from the Persons whom it proceeds from; and
from the several respects it bears to the several objects, it terminates upon.
Which different modifications and respects do by no means infer diverse or
distinct Acts of Knowledge, but only variously modify, determine, and
distinguish one and the same Act. Accordingly, in the present Case, I do here
affirm to this Author, That mutual Consciousness is nothing else but one and
the same Act of Divine Knowledge, differently modified, as it proceeds
severally, and after a different manner from Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as
the Persons knowing, and jointly terminated in them all as the objects known;
as on the other side Self-Consciousness is no more than this one and the same
Act of Knowledge, as it issues only from one of the Persons, and terminates
upon the same too. Though I confess, if the Three Divine Persons were Three
distinct Minds or Spirits, mutual Consciousness could not be one Act only, but
must be Three. This I hold concerning the Divine Knowledge, and the respective
distinctions of it, and I leave this Author to try his best skill in Divinity
and Philosophy to confute it. In the mean time he gives us one Absurdity more
out of his inexhaustible stock, viz. That the (...), ascribed by the Fathers to
the Three Divine Persons, is that very mutual Consciousness which the Dean
means. For these are his words, p. 7. and the seven first lines: so that
according to him an Act of Volition, and an Act of Consciousness or Knowledge,
are formally and properly one and the same Act. In the last place, as to his
affirming, That Three distinct Subsistences of the same Individual nature, are
by mutual Consciousness essentially one, p. 71. l. 9. I answer, That if he
means hereby, That they are by mutual Consciousness made essentially one, as by
the Cause or Antecedent Reason of that Unity, I deny it; But if he means, That
they are thereby proved essentially one, as by an essential consequent of the
said Unity, I grant it. But this will do him but little service. For his
Hypothesis requires more. And so leaving this second Argument in its full force
against him. I proced to the

Third Argument, Arg. 3.
which is this. To affirm mutual Consciousness to be the cause of the Union of
the Three Divine Persons in the same Nature, is to confound the Union and
Communion of the said Persons together: which confusion ought by no means to be
allowed. To which he answers, That to affirm, that the Three Divine Persons are
essentially one by mutual Consciousness, is not to affirm, that mutual
Consciousness is the cause of their Union, p. 71. l. 18. But on the contrary, I
affirm, That if [for one Thing to be so or so, by another] does and must
signify causally: then to say, That Things or Persons are one by mutual
Consciousness, and yet that mutual Consciousness is not the cause or antecedent
Reason of their being one, is a direct contradiction in the Terms. And it is
hard to imagine, how a Man in his Senses can think otherwise. In the next
place, he passes impertinently from the Union of the Divine Persons to their
mutual Indwelling in each other (which are very different Things) affirming
withal, That his mutual Indwelling is their mutual Consciousness; though this
has been, and still is, peremptorily denied him, and the Reader, for the
Confutation of it, referred to the Two forecited Chapters of the
Animadversions; which this Author neither does nor can say one word in answer
to. Well; but how does he prove The mutual Inexistence, or Indwelling of the
Divine Persons, to be mutual Consciousness? Why; because (forsooth) they are in
one another as Minds, not as Bodies, p. 71. l. 30. But here, besides that we
deny his very supposition, viz. That the Three Divine Persons are Three Minds,
we deny also, That Three distinct Minds can be made Identically one in Nature
by any Consciousness or mutual Consciousness whatsoever; and in the Divine
Persons (who are neither Minds nor Bodies) it is the Unity and Identity of
their Essence, by which alone they are mutually in one another, as the sole
proper Reason of their being so. For there neither is nor can be such a Thing
as a (...) of distinct Minds, Essences, or Natures in one another. But he tells
us, That in the Divine Persons Union and Communion are one and the same Thing,
p. 72. l. 15. But if he means that they are formally, and in all respects the
same, I deny it; affirming withal, that they are as much distinguished as the
very Divine Essence and Personalities themselves are; and consequently, that
the Union of the Persons consists in their Identification in one and the same
Essence or Nature, and their Communion consists in those mutual Acts toward
each other, respectively issuing from and belonging to them by virtue of their
Personal Properties. But the Animadverter (he tells us) falsely represents both
the Communion of the Divine Persons with each other, and their mutual
Consciousness too, in these words cited from him, p. 72. l. 27. viz. That all
Acts of several Persons upon each other (as all that are mutual must be) are
properly Acts of Communion, by which the said Persons have an Intercourse among
themselves, as acting interchangeably upon one another. To which words of the
Animadverter this Author replies first, That this may be true in Persons
separate, but that Persons only distinct and not separate, do not Act upon one
Another; for that such acting must (as he says) signify an External Impression
made by one Person upon another, p. 72. at the end, and p. 73. at the
beginning: But will this Man here abide by this false and profane assertion?
For do not the Divine Persons mutually know and mutually love one another? and
do not these Acts of Knowledge and Love both mutually proceed from them, and
mutually terminate in them too? Or will he say that those Acts pass mutually
between them by an External Impression upon each other? Or lastly, That the
Divine Persons are any more than only distinct? Certainly such Propositions as
this Audacious man vents, the Church of England was never accustomed to hear or
endure before. But in the next place, after he had said that the Animadverter's
Assertion might hold true in Persons separate, but not in Persons only
distinct, which we have confuted; He says also, p. 72. at the end, That it
holds true of all other mutual Acts, excepting mutual Consciousness; which is a
fulsome and ridiculous begging of the Question by presuming an Exception where
he should first prove it, and is as arrant a Petitio Principii as ever appeared
in Argumentation. And I challenge him to prove how the Exception holds in
mutual Consciousness more than in mutual Complacency; though indeed in neither.
But he is now for calling the Animadverter to an account for that unwary and
improper expression (as he represents it) That all Acts of several Persons upon
one another are Acts of Communion, which (says he in the Gravel-lane Dialect)
makes Boys in a state of Communion with each other at boxing; and a match at
scolding (for it seems he cannot yet rid his head of Billingsgate) another
state of Communion. To which my answer in the first place is, That I am sorry
to find his ill breeding got so far into his Religion, as to dare to mingle
such sacred matters with such dirty and profane Comparisons. In the next
place, I would have him know, that the Animadverter abides by what he has said,
and accordingly would have this Man learn, that words in discourse, though
never so general and indefinite, are yet to be limited and determined in their
sense by the subject professedly treated of. And this in the present Case was
such an Act only as supposed Persons in a state of Agreement, and proceeded
from them, and passed between them, considered only as such. And I must tell
him further, That though the common use of the World has restrained the sense
of the word Communion and Communication, ad benigniorem partem, yet the literal
sense of it imports no more than a bare Interchange of Acts or Offices, whether
Friendly or hostile; and there may be as real and as proper a Communication of
ill Turns as of good; and sometimes of ill for good, as this Author very well
knows. But as for those words which he concludes this his Criticism with, That
had the Dea^ been pleased to have returned mutual Acts, he and the Animadverter
might have been long since in a very strict Communion with each other, p. 73.
l. 16. I shall only return him this one short word, That though all this may be
perfect Riddle to the Reader, yet I understand him very well, and could easily
give him such an answer, as should make him understand himself too.

But to let the Reader see that he is a foul a Disputant as he can be a Speaker
(and a fouler upon both accounts the World never had) with a Frontless
Impudence he declares here, p. 73. l. 23. That the Animadverter grants all that
he says, about the Notion of a Trinity in Unity: And in Particular, That every
Individual Person has a Self-Consciousness of its own, and every such
Self-Conscious Person is thereby one with it self, and distinguished from all
other Persons, In answer to which shameless Unconscionable Falsehood, I do here,
in the Face of the World, challenge the Author of it to prove, That the
Animadverter grants any one thing that is peculiar to his Hypothesis; and
particularly to show that place in the whole Book of the Animadversions, in
which the Animadverter owns, That a Self-Conscious Person, is by virtue of it is
Self-Consciousness one with it self, and primarily distinguished from all other
Persons, (which is the only distinction here spoken of.) I say, I do again and
again challenge this Man to prove this; and promise withal, That if he can do
it, I will forfeit to him more than ever he was born to; and if he cannot, I
humbly appeal to the most rigid, if but Impartial, Reader, whether I have not
all the cause in the World to proclaim him to all Mankind, for a downright
Liar, Slanderer, and Falsificator. And as hard as these words may sound, less
than this, upon such an occasion, I neither can nor will say. But we will see
what other holes he can pick in the Animadverter's Coat. And here he first
taxes him, p. 74. l. 1, 2. for the Improper use of the Term [ Union of Nature]
telling him, That the Dean (forsooth) would have said Unity of Nature (as the
same Dean not only would have said, but has said, That a Beast is a Person,
with several other such choice Proprieties, as Chrysome instead of Chrisme, and
Paraphrases instead of Periphrasis, and above an hundred Solecisms to boot.)
But I must here declare to this great Master of proper speaking, forsooth, (as
appears from the whole Tenth Chapter of the Animadversions) That had the
Animadverter, in the place cited by him, used the Term [ Vnion] instead of [
Vnity] (which upon this subject are often promiscuously made use of) surely
this Man had been the most unfit Person in the World to reflect upon him for
it; who has stated the Divine Nature in the Three Persons so, as to leave no
numerical real Unity in it at all, but only an Union instead thereof. For three
Distinct Infinite Minds (asserted by this Author) being Three distinct Natures
or Essences, neither have nor can have any such Unity in them; but being United
only by mutual Consciousness, are capable of no more than a Conjunction or
Union thereby; and that a very slender one too, and far from that Essential
Unity which belongs to the Divine Persons. But after all, I would have His
Critical Ignorance know, that the Animadverter, by [the Union of Nature] here
mentioned, understands (as he may very well and properly do) no other than [an
Union in respect of Nature]; so that it is really an Union of Persons Connoting
the Nature, as the Term, which they are United in: And accordingly the
Animadverter in defiance of this Man's long silly Parenthesis (which, it had
been more for his Credit to have spared than put in) still owns, and abides by
the Expression. But our Critic has not done yet. But whereas the Animadverter,
speaking of the Divine Persons, had used these words, Their Essence and
Personality, he here cries out (like one Big, and bringing forth nothing) What?
but one Personality as well as but one Essence in Three, p. 74. l. 11. But may
it please your Ignorance, good Sir, the Animadverter here spoke of Personality,
not with any respect to number of Particulars, but to the common Nature and
notion of the Thing, and consequently might, without the least impropriety, use
the Term Personality, without any Epithete of Plurality. For suppose, that in a
discourse of the general Nature of Celestial Bodies, one should speak of the
Sun and of the motion of the Heavens together; would this Philosopher of
Goatham presently cry out, What but one motion of the Heavens as well as but
one Sun? And to give an Instance in Divine matters, when the Prophet Ezekiel.
36.26. tells the Israelites, that God would give them [a new heart]; would this
wise Man, of the forenamed Society, cry out here, What? but One new heart
amongst so many thousand Men? For certain it is, that strictly speaking, the
heart here mentioned (which could be nothing else but a pious and gracious
disposition of Mind, inclining them to obey God) was to be multiplied,
according to the number of Individuals, which it was to be given to. But such
as understand the force of words, and the way of using them, know that there is
a kind of Grammatica Philosophica, by which we may judge when a single word
ought to signify singularly, and when indefinitely and including all the
Particulars that it may be applied to. But this, I confess, is Gibberish and a
Riddle (as all sense and learning is) to one who has neither Grammar nor
Philosophy. And so having answered his impertinent Cavils, I come to give an
answer to his equally impertinent Questions, with such great huff proposed by
him, p. 74. l. 17. As first, Can they, viz. the Divine Persons be one before
they are mutually conscious, even in the order of conceiving it? I answer, That
in order of conception they not only may, but necessarily must; and that as
necessarily, as it is impossible to conceive of ^^owledge without conceiving of
Entity or Being as the ^bject of it, and for that cause (in the Natural order
of ^^^ceiving, or apprehending Things) before it. The second Question is, Can
the Divine Persons be one before they are in one another? I answer, That in
Priority of Time they cannot; but that in order of Nature they may and must be
so conceived: For to be in one Another is but a subsequent circumstance of
Being, and consequently must presuppose the Being it self, whereof it is the
Circumstance, as in Nature preceding it. His third Question is, Can there be
any other mutual inbeing of Minds but by Mutual Consciousness? I Answer, First,
That the Divine Persons are not minds. Secondly, That there is no such Thing as
a mutual inbeing of Minds in one another: And thirdly and lastly, That the
Divine Persons are not properly and originally in one another by mutual
Consciousness, but by an Indentity of Essence, Nature, or Substance, common to
all Three.

But I shall now apply my self particularly to answer his noisome extravagant
Ignorance, in reproaching (even to the degree of Insultation) all use or
admission of Priority and Posteriority of Conception in apprehending or
discoursing of the Divine Nature. And in order to this, I shall lay before the
Reader some of his expressions concerning it; as p. 73. l. 20. After all this
huffing and swaggering (says he) This notable dispute issues in a mere
Metaphysical subtilty about the natural order of our conceptions of Things.
But, by his favor, they are not mere conceptions and no more; but conceptions
founded in the Nature and Reason of the Thing which they are employed about, as
it exerts different Acts, respects different objects, and sustains different
Relations and Considerations thereupon. But he goes on. What confounded work
(says he) does this make with the pure simple uncompounded Eternal Nature of
God, so to prove a Priority or Posteriority of Being, or Causality in the
Divine Nature from the order of our Conceptions? p. 74. l. 22. But can this Man
make it appear, That any Philosopher and Divine does this? No; they do not
pretend to prove a Priority or Posteriority of Being, or Causality in the
Divine Nature from the order of our Conceptions, for they professedly disavow
it; But they say and affirm, that there can be no discoursing of the Divine
Nature, by any Humane Reason, but by such an order of Priority and Posteriority
in our Conceptions of it. This, Sir, is their affirmation, and the other is
your Lie. For neither do Philosophers nor Divines ascribe these Things to God
formally, but only Virtually and Eminently, viz. That God as a pure simple Act
or Being, performs all those Acts immediately by one simple efficiency or
exertion of himself, Which a finite Being cannot do but by several Acts,
Powers, Faculties, and (sometimes) Parts enabling it to operate and produce
Things. No Man, I say, ascribes these things to the Divine Nature, in the
strict and Philosophical sense of the Terms, but by way of Analogy to what
reason observes in the Creature, and that also founded upon God's own
condescension to describe and represent himself to us in this manner. And what
the Animadverter says in the fifth Preliminary of his fourth Chapter, is
sufficient to blow off all these senseless Cavils, viz. That when the Terms,
Cause, formal Reason, Constituent, or Productive Principle and the like, are
used about the Divine Nature and Persons, they are not to be understood as
applicable to them in the strict and proper signification of the said Terms,
but only by way of Analogy; as really meaning no more than a causal or
necessary Dependence of one Notion, or Conceptus objectivus upon Another; so
that it is impossible for the Mind to conceive distinctly of the one, but as
depending upon, or proceeding from the other. In answer to all which, I defy
this Man to speak Three words of sense, if he can. And whereas he Ignorantly
says, That all such Conceptions are false, p. 74. l. 33. I must tell him on the
contrary, That where nothing is affirmed, or denied (as in bare conceptions
nothing is) there can be no Falsehood. It is a common Rule and Maxim in
Philosophy, and not to be over born by this weak man's little Objections, That
Abstrahentium non est mendacium. For to consider one thing without another,
(though it neither is nor can be without the other) is no Falsehood. And the
chief thing by which we form several distinct Conceptions of the Divine Nature,
is this Abstraction; by which the Mind first considers one Conceptus Objectivus
without the other, and then considers, and compares both together, according to
the respect they may have to each other, and the Natural Order which that
places them in. But I shall try what Metal that Confidence is made of, which
thus explodes all Priority and Posteriority in our Conceptions of God by these
following Questions. As, first, I demand of this man, Whether he does not own a
Necessity of our forming several Inadequate Conceptions of God, and that we
have no other way of conceiving of him? This, I am sure, he has asserted
several times, and if he had not, the whole World does: and therefore in the
next place I ask him, Whether many of these Inadequate Conceptions do not imply
a necessary and essential dependence of one upon the other? and if so, Whether
it be possible for the Mind of Man to form a Conception of one thing depending
upon another but seoundum Prius and Posterius? Again, I demand of him, Whether
we can consider God as an Intelligent Being and Agent, endued with
Understanding, Will, and Power, (as he in Scripture represents himself, and as
we must conceive of him, if we conceive and discourse of him at all) without
conceiving of him as willing a thing before he does it, and as understanding it
before he wills it? And again, I demand of him, Whether the Divine Nature and
Persons considered all together are not one pure, simple, uncompounded Act or
Being? I am sure all Orthodox Divines affirm it. And yet, I demand of this man,
Whether he or any one alive can conceive of the Father as begetting, and of the
Son as begotten, and of the Holy Ghost as proceeding from both, without a
Priority and Posteriority in the conceptions we form of them? And lastly, to
instance in his own whimsical Notion of Self-consciousness and mutual
Consciousness, I challenge him to prove it possible for the Mind of Man to
conceive how the Divine Persons can be mutually conscious to one-another, but
subsequently to each Person's being first conscious to himself; forasmuch as
their several Self-consciousnesses are properly the Object of their mutual
Consciousness, and so in order of Nature cannot but be before it. Nay, and to
go further, Does not this very man, in stating his Self-consciousness and
mutual Consciousness distinguish between the Act and the Principle? Which, though
it be but a mere Shift, (as has been shown) is yet a good Argument against
himself: For can any one conceive of a Principle, but as Prior to the Act? In
fine, I challenge this equally Insolent and Heterodox man, to satisfy the
World about him, by a clear and positive Answer to these two Questions, 1 st,
Whether all Divines, Schoolmen, and Philosophers (excepting perhaps such as
Conradus Vorstius, and Crellius, in their Books de Attributis Dei) do not in
treating of the Divine Nature unanimously acknowledge and affirm, That God is a
Pure, Simple, Uncompounded Act, Essence, or Being? And, 2 dly, Whether,
notwithstanding this acknowledgment and affirmation, they do not universally
treat of God in Terms necessarily importing and requiring a Priority and
Posteriority of Conception? But why do I dispute against such sottish
Paradoxes, which all the Schools in Christendom would hiss, or rather spit at
the Author of them for? But this poor ambitious Animalculum Gloriae has been
always affecting to signalize his little Self by the Character of holding what
the whole World besides denies, and of denying what it holds.

And now, in the close of this Argument, p. 75. l. 20. we have him again flying
off from his first Hypothesis; in which he had with so much earnestness
affirmed Self-consciousness to be that which made the Divine Persons originally
distinct both from one-another and all other things besides, and mutual
Consciousness to be that which made them naturally and essentially one. I say,
we have him quite falling down from their making, to their bare supposing,
inferring, and proving them to be so. Which (as the whole World must needs fee)
is wholly another thing, and absolutely quits and gives up the first assertion;
but that by his good leave, shall not serve his Turn: For (as he has been
several times told) he shall be still held to it, and justly accounted a
baffled Person, if he does not make it good. For in all Philosophy, and even in
common sense, making is one thing, and proving is another. And therefore,
whereas he says in the last place, viz. p. 75. lin. 30. That to dispute about
the Cause of Self-consciousness and mutual Consciousness, is to dispute about
the naked Essences or Essential Properties of Things, which the Dean rejected
from the Beginning, as without the compass of Human Knowledge. There are in
these words several things to be remarked upon. As, first, I must tell him,
That the Dispute here is not directly about the Cause of Self-consciousness or
mutual Consciousness: but whether Self-consciousness it self be the Cause or
formal Reason of Personality, Personal Unity and Distinction? and mutual
Consciousness be the formal Cause or Reason of the Essential Unity and Identity
of the Divine Persons in one and the same Nature? And in the next place
supposing that the Dispute here were about the Cause of Self-consciousness and
mutual Consciousness, yet I deny, that to dispute of them under the Notion of a
Cause or an Effect, is to dispute about the naked Essences or Essential
Properties of Things. Forasmuch as we may consider and dispute about the
Essences and Properties of Things, without any consideration of their Causality
at all: and on the other side we may know a thing to be actually a Cause, and
dispute of it as such, though we cannot tell what the Essence of the said thing
is. We do not indeed know (that is, by an immediate inspection of the Things
themselves) what the Essences or Forms of Things are: but we know that in every
Thing the Essence or Form of it is the Cause or Principle of all the Acts
proceeding from it and belonging to it, and consequently that no Act so
proceeding from the said Thing can be the Essence or Form of it, But 3 dly, and
lastly, in reply to his saying, That the Dean from the beginning rejected all
Disputes about the Essences and Essential Properties of Things, as without the
compass of Human Knowledge. I do here referr the Reader to the 9th* and 10th
Pages of the First Chapter of the Animadversions, to see there how horribly he
contradicts himself upon this Subject. For there it is proved against him, out
of page 7. of his Vindic. lin. 20. That he says that the Essences of Things,
cannot be known, but only their Properties and Qualities. Which surely inferrs,
that then their Properties may be known. And again, That as for the Essential
Properties, Operations, and Powers of Matter, sense, experience and observation
will tell us what they are. Vindicat. p. 8. line 15. Which Passages I would
have him reconcile to what he has said here, viz. That the Essential Properties
of Things are without the compass of Human Knowledge; which how they can be,
and yet Sense, Experience, and Observation be able to give us such an account
of them, as to tell us what they are, I must confess I cannot comprehend. And
whereas again he excludes here the Essences of Things (which I averr to be only
another word for the Natures of them) from the compass of Human Knowledge; does
not this very man, in this his Defense, p. 7. lin. 11. tell us, That the Nature
of a Spirit consists in Internal Vital Sensation? And now, after that he has
given us this account of the Nature of a Spirit, and told us wherein it does
consist, will he tell us, That he looks upon the Natures of Things as out of
the compass of Human Knowledge? I shall say no more of him at present, but
humbly beg the Reader seriously to reflect upon the Temper and Confidence of
this man. And so I dismiss him for an everlasting shameless Self-contradictor
as he is; and pass to the examination of what he brings against the
Animadverter's

Arg. 4.
Fourth and Last Argument, which proceeds equally against mutual Consciousness
and Self-consciousness too, and is founded upon that Rule of Philosophy; That
Entities or Beings ought not to be multiplied nor new Notions to be admitted,
where the old received ones are sufficient, and that therefore the Terms and
Notions of mutual Consciousness and Self-consciousness in the present Subject
ought to be rejected, not only as New and Suspicious, but as wholly needless
and superfluous: forasmuch as nothing can be signified by them, which is not
fully and clearly signified by that one plain word and known attribute, the
Divine Omniscience. To which the Defender replies in this fleering
Expostulation, p. 76. lin. 4. Pray what hurt have these seemingly innocent
words done? I answer, Too much a great deal (if we may believe his own words)
to suffer them to pass for so much as seemingly innocent. For, p. 8. lin. 19.
of this Defense, he tells us, That these were the words which directly led him
to the Assertion of Three Infinite Minds; which is direct Tritheism: and not
only so, but forced him also to the trouble of a long senceless Apology to
persuade the World, that by Minds he did not mean Minds: as we shall more
particularly show in the discussion of his Answers to the Animadverter's
Arguments upon that Subject. In the mean time he answers further, That
admitting that all that is imported by Self-consciousness and mutual
Consciousness may be fully signified by the Divine Omniscience, yet why (says
he) may not that one comprehensive Attribute very properly receive different
Names, according to its different Objects, as the several Arts and Sciences do?
To which I answer his Ignorance, That neither do several Arts nor Sciences, nor
yet several kinds of Action, receive their denomination from any of their
particular Objects, but only from their adequate and general Object formally
considered, that is, as apprehensible after such a certain way. As for
instance; Natural Philosophy is so denominated, not from this or that Natural
Body, but from Natural Body generally and universally considered; and that only
in order to the Knowledge of the Nature, Properties, and Affections thereof.
And so likewise in Natural Acts, such as those of Seeing and Hearing, and the
like; every particular different color which is seen does not give a diverse
denomination to the Act that perceives it, since it affects it only after the
same general way; nor does every different Sound or Tune diversely denominate
each particular Act of Hearing, which takes them in; but they have all one
general denomination from one adequate Object so considered as before
expressed; which to Seeing is omn^ visibile, quatenus visibile; and to Hearing,
omne audibile, quatenus audibile. And in like manner the adequate Object of
Omniscience is omne scibile, quatenus scibile; and the Three Divine Persons, as
this Omniscience terminates upon them, are as properly and truly Three
particular Objects of it, as any Three created Finite Beings may be. And it
would make very odd work (in good earnest) to distinguish the Divine
Omniscience by as many different Names as it has particular different Objects,
(which yet this man here most absurdly contends for); for according to this his
Assertion, Omniscience, as it terminates upon an Angel, must have one Name, as
upon a Man another, and as upon a Beast or a Fowl, another. And as God is said,
upon the Account of his Omniscience, to know and number the Stars, and to call
them all by their Names, Psalm. 147.4. his Omniscience being terminated
distinctly upon every one of them, must by consequence have as many different
denominations as there are Stars in the Firmament. And therefore let this
ignorant man know for the future, that the Divine Knowledge is denominated only
from its adequate Object, which comprehends all that is knowable, and that only
under this consideration, as knowable: And if he can prove [ Self] and [
Others] (as he speaks) not to come within the compass of that Object, then we
will allow, that the Knowledge distinctly terminated upon [ Self] and [ Others]
ought to receive from thence different denominations. But till then, he and his
Party may (to my knowledge) find much fitter Objects to apply their
Self-consciousness and mutual Consciousness to, than the Divine Persons.

But as if he had not sufficiently disturbed the Church with his Heretical
Novelties already, he is now for starting another as great as any of the rest.
For the World (it seems) has been hitherto under a Mistake, which he will now
graciously correct by informing us, That there is in Almighty God a certain
Thing specifically different from his Divine Knowledge, called Intellectual
Sensation, p. 77. lin. 22. And that he, who does not know the difference
between these, is as unfit to meddle in this Controversy as a blind man to
dispute of Colors. And accordingly he tells us, That though Self-consciousness
and mutual Consciousness may in some respect be called Knowledge, yet in truth
they are of a quite different kind from it. For that Self-consciousness is that
Intellectual Sensation by which each Person feels his own Thoughts, Knowledge,
Volitions, etc. and that the mutual Consciousness of the Three Persons is not
their Knowledge of each other, but their mutual Sensation and feeling each
other in themselves. So that this (...) Man has here given us a piece of New
Philosophy and Divinity, which the World knew nothing of before. But a Notion
so odd, as well as New, must not pass without Examination; and in order to
that, I shall advance this Proposition in direct contradiction to the Defender,
viz. That there is no such Thing in the Divine Nature as Spiritual Sensation
distinct from spiritual Knowledge or Intellection. And in opposition to the
contrary assertion, I offer these following considerations.

1. The Universal Authority of all Philosophers and Divines, both Schoolmen and
others, who have treated Scholastically of the Divine Nature and Attributes,
Unanimously acknowledging and asserting, That there are no other Immanent Acts
in God but Acts of Intellection and Volition (which are absolutely necessary to
the conceiving of God, as of an Intelligent Being) and consequently, that there
is no such Thing as an Act of Sensation in God distinct from These. 2. That God
is entirely and adequately comprehensible by himself these two ways: 1. By a
Representation of the entire Idea of all his own Divine Perfections to himself,
which is done by Intellection. And, 2. By way of Love of and complacency in
these his Infinite Perfections thus represented to him, which is done by
Volition; and consequently there can be no such Third way Necessary to
comprehend himself by, as this Author here calls Spiritual Sensation. 3. That
if there be such an Act in the Divine nature as Sensation distinct from
Intellection and Volition, then there is such a Thing also in the Divine Nature
as a Vis, or Potentia Sensitiva, different and distinct from the Vis
Intellectiva, and Volitiva, in the same. For since in the Case of mutual and
Self-Consciousness this Author has asserted in the said Nature, a Power or
Principle of Consciousness distinct from the Acts thereof, and has affirmed
likewise Consciousness and Self-sensation to be the same Thing, he must for the
same Reason necessarily assign also a Principle or Power of Sensation distinct
from the Acts of Sensation: That is to say, a certain new thing called a
Spiritual Sensitive Power in God, which is neither Intellective, nor Volitive,
and yet absolutely necessary for the said Acts of Spiritual Sensation to issue
from. But now for any one to assert the Addition of such a New Power to the
Divine Nature, is a thing in it self so uncouth and unphilosophical, and
contrary to the common sense of all the learned Men in the World, that there
needs not one word to be argued against it. And as for this Author, I desire
him to reconcile this new power in God with that zealous Harangue, p. p. 74,
75. made by him for the Actuality and simplicity of the Deity, even to the
Explosion of all Priority and Posteriority of our conceptions about it. But
4ly, If there be such a Thing as Sensation, and a Vis sensitiva in God,
distinct from the Vis Intellectiva, and Volitiva; let this Man assign a solid
Reason, if he can, why there are not four Persons in the Godhead. For (since,
as the Schools affirm, Totus Deus foecundus est, there being no Act in God but
what is productive of some thing) what should hinder, but that as the Father
communicates the Divine Essence, per Intellectum, and so begets a Son, and both
Father and Son communicate their Divine Essence, per voluntatem, and so breath
forth the Holy Ghost; so all Three should produce a fourth Person in the
Godhead, by communicating their Divine Essence by this way of Internal
Sensation? I will not, I declare, presume to assert any Thing in such a Case,
but shall leave it to the Learned and Judicious to judge of the whole matter.
But I am sure it must pre^s hard upon this New Invention.
And now after all, that we have here argued upon this point, I demand of this
Man, upon what ground he asserts in God such a Thing as Spiritual Sensation
distinct in kind from Divine Knowledge? (for it is his way to advance the most
Heterodox Propositions, without the least offer of a proof of them) why; I defy
all Mankind to find out any other ground of this assertion, besides the Thing
it self asserted by him, viz. That each of the Divine Persons intimately feels
himself to be what he is, and not another; and that feeling and knowing are
quite different Things. This is all that he says, or pretends to say. In answer
to which, I demand of him, whether he derives the Necessity of this Expression
of Feeling, as contra-distinct in God to Knowing, (this being the sole ground
of his assertion) from Scripture or Reason, or the proper signification of the
word it self requireing it? If from Scripture, let it be produced, and we
submit. If from Reason, let some Argument from the Nature of the Thing be
produced, proving that there is some Apprehensive Act in God of a quite
different kind from Knowledge: but no such Argument ever yet appeared. And much
less, in the Third and last place, can the genuine signification of the word
feeling infer this. For does the word feeling, in the proper use of it, signify
any thing Spiritual? or can it be properly applied to God, if it does not? No;
it is certain, that it properly signifies no such Thing, but on the contrary
only a Corporeal Act requiring a Corporeal subject to lodge it in. So that (as
has been observed before) Spiritual feeling is an arrant contradiction in
Adjecto. And therefore the Truth is, Feeling can be no otherwise applied to
Spiritual Beings, and especially to God himself than by a Trope and Metaphor;
and as seeing, hearing and smelling, are applied to him: and we may as well
ascribe to God a Self-Conscious seeing, a Self-Conscious hearing, and a
Self-Conscious smelling, and all distinct from his Knowledge, as a
Self-Conscious Feeling. God in Scripture is said to see and to hear, to express
to us the Clearness and Quickness of his Knowledge, and in like manner may be
said to feel, to express the Intimacy of his knowledge to the object known,
there being no Act of sense, in which there is so near an application of the
object to the faculty, as in feeling. So that this whole new assertion is
founded upon nothing but mere Trope and Metaphor, translating Terms from their
proper sensible signification to a figurative and spiritual; which nothing but
an absolute necessity, from the very Nature of Things can ever justify. And now
I desire all Professors of Divinity to consider the confidence of this Man, and
whither it may tend; who, by drawing words from their proper signification to a
Tropical (and this of his own head) shall presume to found a New Notion about
the Divine Nature and Actings. For let him prove any other ground for this
Notion of Spiritual sensation or feeling, distinct from Knowledge in God, if he
can. And therefore, since this is wholly a new Invention of his own, and not
hitherto proved by any Argument, but his own bare word affirming it, I do here
require him to produce his Arguments for it: for (it being a Proposition wholly
new) it is incumbent upon the Proposer of it, first to prove it, and not upon
his Adversary (maintaining the contrary Thesis, in actual and long possession)
to disprove it; but only to expect and answer his Arguments as they shall be
offered. I have, I confess, produced some Reasons against it already; but it
was more than what the Rules of Disputation obliged me to. And therefore, I do
here again call upon this Man to produce his Arguments for his new Assertion,
declaring withal, That I here undertake to maintain, this Thesis against him,
viz. That there is no such thing as Spiritual Sensation in God distinct, from
his Knowledge. This, I say, I declare my self ready to defend against him as
publicly as he has asserted the contrary Affirmative: And accordingly, in the
Face of the World, I challenge him to the Dispute, and do otherwise declare him
a disturber of the Church, and a perverter of our Religion by Paradoxes which
he is not able to speak one word in the Defense of.

In the next place we have him making his last effort to keep up his sinking
Cause and Credit with a downright Falsification, and an utter Change of the
whole Question, hitherto in dispute between him and his Adversary: and that in
these following words, p. 78. lin. 9. That he hopes, that if the Animadverter
will try his Skill again, he should hear no more of his formal Reasons of
Personality and Union, but that he will be pleased to speak to the True Point,
viz. Whether a Self-conscious person be not one with himself, The state of the
Question concerning Self-consciousness and mutual Consciousness, with reference
to the Divine Persons, changed and falsified by the Defender from what it is,
as delivered by Dr. Skerlock, in his Vindication, etc.
and distinguished from all other persons; and whether he does not feel himself
to be thus one, and thus distinguished by Self-consciousness; and whether Three
Divine Persons, who are thus mutually conscious to each other, be not naturally
and essentially United into One God? And all other Disputes are certainly
beside the Question. And if so, then I am sure his whole Vindication, and a
great part of his very Defense of it are so too. But has this man's Confidence
so totally swallowed up his Conscience, that he dares offer so notorious a
Falsehood to the World in print? I do here solemnly averr, That what he has now
set down as the True State of the Question between him and the Animadverter, is
as far from it, as the bare Consequent of any thing is or can be from being the
Cause of it. And that this may be made as clear to the Reader as the Day, he is
desired to take notice, that the Animadverter wrote against this man's new
Hypothesis about the Trinity, as he found it delivered in his Book entitled, A
Vindication of the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, etc. and consequently, that
the true state of the Question must be drawn from thence. And this has been
fully and fairly done already in those several Propositions quoted and set down
by me in my entrance upon the examination of his Answers to the Animadverter's
Arguments; where the Reader will find the true and whole state of the Question
laid before him in this man's own words; which though it be abundantly enough to
show his insufferable Falsification, yet to show it more fully still, (if
possible) and to save the Reader the trouble of casting his Eye backward and
forward, I will here set down both what he says in this his Defense, and what
he first asserted in his Vindication, together; that so, by comparing what he
retracts, or rather falsifies, here, with what he had so positively affirmed
there, the Reader may impartially judge, whether such a one upon such a Subject
can be fit either to dispute, or to be disputed with. And this shall be done in
the following Particulars. As, First, This Author, in his Defense, declares,
That the Question is only this; Whether Three Self-consciousnesses do not prove
Three Self-conscious Persons to be really distinct from each other. Defense, p.
61. l. 28. But in his Vindication he affirms, That the Self-consciousness of
every Person to itself makes them Three distinct Persons. Vind. p. 68. And will
any man alive here grant, or any Logic, but this Man's, allow, That, for
Self-consciousness only to prove the Three Divine Persons really distinct, as
he says in the Defense, and to make them so, as he says expressly in the
Vindication, is the same thing? Or that, Whether you put the Question
concerning the one, or concerning the other, it is one and the same Question
still? Secondly, In the same Defense he declares again, That if each of the
Three Persons have a Self-consciousness of their own, this distinguishes the
Persons, and proves them really distinct; which is all that he desires. Def. p.
64. at the beginning. But his Vindication, I must tell him, speaks much higher,
viz. That the Self-Vnity of a Spirit (which he reckons each of the Divine
Persons to be) is nothing else but Self-Consciousness, Vind. p. 48. And again,
The Essential Unity of a Spirit consists in Self-Consciousness, and it is
nothing else that makes a Spirit one, and distinguishes it from all others,
Vind. p. 74. Now to be That, which only proves the Three Persons Distinct, and
to be That, wherein their Unity and Distinction consists, and which originally
distinguishes them from all others, are Things extremely Different; For as much
as that may prove them Distinct, and secondarily distinguish them too, which
neither originally distinguishes them, nor is that in which their original
Unity and Distinction does consist. 3. He tells us in this Defense also, That
the Dean no where asserts, That mutual Consciousness is the formal Reason of
the Essential Unity of the Three Persons, but that Three Persons who are thus
mutually Conscious to each other, must be essentially one, Def. p. 68. l. 5. In
answer to which, he has been often told, That whatsoever makes or constitutes a
Thing essentially one, or is that wherein its Essential Unity does consist, is
the formal Reason of the said Unity. And as touching this, he affirms in this
very Defense, p. 66. That mutual Consciousness makes all Three Persons as much
one, as Three can be one. And likewise in his Vindication, That mutual
Consciousness makes all Three Persons Numerically one Divine Essence, or one
God, p. 84. And again, That the Three Persons are Essentially one God by a
mutual Consciousness, p. 88. Now this surely implies a great deal more, Than
that Three Persons thus mutually Conscious are Essentially one. For to say,
That Three mutually Conscious Persons are essentially one, and that they are
thus one by [or by reason of] their mutual Consciousness are Two quite
different Propositions; even as different as these, viz. That every Learned Man
is Rational, and, That his being learned is that [ by which] he is rational:
which latter is utterly false. 4. He goes on, and tells us again, That if
mutual Consciousness be essential to this Unity, so that Three Persons are thus
United (that is, are one in point of Knowledge, and cannot be one without it)
he will contend no further with any Man about it, Defense p. 69. at the latter
end. But whether he will or no, his Vindication will contend with him; in which
he has asserted much more than this amounts to, (as the immediate forecited
passages demonstrate) viz. That mutual Consciousness [makes] the Three Persons
essentially one God, and is That [by which] They are one, and [in which] their
essential Unity consists. And this I must tell him runs much higher than to say
only, That mutual Consciousness is essential to their Unity: for it may be so
only as a consequent essentially following it, and not as a Principle
essentially constituent of it, and wherein it does consist. But in the 5th and
last place, He declares himself more fully and roundly than before. If (says
he) Self-Consciousness necessarily results from and infers and proves a
distinction of Persons, and mutual Consciousness supposes, results from, infers
and proves the Unity of the Divine Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, it will
satisfy the Dean without Disputing the formal Reason of Personality and Union,
Def. p. 75. l. 20. To which I answer; that I am not at all concerned what will
satisfy the Dean, now that He is driven to the Wall, but what the Dean has
asserted before. And for this; as to the Point of Self-Consciousness in the
first place, he having several times, in his Vindication, asserted each of the
Divine Persons to be an Infinite Spirit, tells us, p. 74. Vind. That the
Essential Unity of a Spirit [consists] in Self-Consciousness: and that it is
nothing else, which makes a Spirit one, and distinguishes it from all others.
And, That the Self-Consciousness of every one of the Divine Persons to it self
[makes] them Three distinct Persons, Vind. p. 68. l. 5. And then, for mutual
Consciousness, he tells us, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one by an
Internal Consciousness, as every Man is one with himself, Vind. p. 56. l. 6.
And, that the Three Persons are essentially one God [by] a mutual
Consciousness, p. 88. 31. etc. And here, in this very Defense he tells us, That
the Dean places the Unity of the Divine Persons in their mutual Consciousness,
Defense p. 32. l. 9. And now (to sum up what he has said on both sides)
Whether, for Self-Consciousness to be That in which the Personal Unity of a
Spirit does [ consist]; and which [makes] a Spirit or Person one with it self,
and distinguishes it from all others; and [ makes] Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
Three distinct Persons: And likewise for mutual Consciousness to be That, which
[ makes] all the Three Persons to be essentially one God: and to be That [ by
which] they are so, and [ in which] their Unity is placed, be no more than to
suppose, prove, infer, and result from Both these, viz. their Personal and
their Essential Unity respectively; that is to say, whether the formal
Antecedent Reason of these be only the consequent of them, is left to every one
of common sense to judge.


But I shall trouble the Reader with no more of these Passages (though several
more might be alleged) not doubting but that by this time he thoroughly sees,
that the true state of the Question, and Point in dispute is this, The true
state of the Question concerning Self-consciousness and mutual Consciousness,
with reference to the Divine Persons, taken from Dr. Sherlock's own words in
his Vindication, etc.
viz. Whether Self-consciousness be that which [makes] each of the Divine
Persons properly a Person, that is to say, personally one with himself, and
distinct from all others, or (in other words) be that [by which] each Person is
so, and in which his being so does consist? And likewise whether mutual
Consciousness makes the Three Persons essentially one; or be that [ by which]
formally they are thus one, or [in which] their essential Unity does consist?
This I averr to be the true and plain state of the Question, as it is held in
the Affirmative by Dr. Sherlock throughout his whole Vindication on the one
side, and as it is opposed by the Animadverter on the other: and consequently,
that every one of those five forecited Passages is on the Vindicator's part a
direct concession and giving up of the Point in controversy between them.

And I must hereupon seriously and solemnly profess, That the only Difficulty
which I have yet met with in this Disputation, has been to make a proud,
shameless man own his own Words, and abide by his own plain, positive, and
repeated Assertions. Though I must tell him, That none is or can be more
baffled than he who in his Defense is brought to deny what before he had
affirmed. And thus we have here (as the Book calls it self) a Defense of Dr.
Sherlock's Notion of the Trinity, if Dr. Sherlock's denying his Words be
defending his Opinion.

But our Author comes now at length to clear himself of the Imputation of
Tritheism, and here he says, Defense p. 78. line last. That he heartily thanks
the Animadverter for being so civil to him as not to charge him with Tritheism
as his Opinion, but as the consequence of his Principles. And great reason, I
own, he has to thank him for so undeserved a Civility; though the Truth is, the
Animadverter rather judged it a piece of Charity while he was disputing with
one, who was still contradicting himself, to take him (as long as he could) by
the better end of the contradiction. Nevertheless, if the Defender will be
pleased to consult the Preface to the Animadversions, p. 16. l. 7. 2d Edition,
he will find that how favorably soever the Animadverter may be thought to
express himself in some other places, he speaks his thoughts more home and
fully in that. For there he affirms, that his Adversarie's opinion does not
only infer but also imply Tritheism; and this surely is as much more than the
other, as an Equipollent is more than a Consequent. And whatsoever the
Animadverter might think of this Author then, yet since his reading this
Defense (in which there is Ten times more Tritheism than was in his first Book)
and especially after that peremptory and profane Affirmation, Def. p. 8. l.
28. viz. That unless we admit the Three Divine Persons to be Three distinct
Minds, there is not only an end of the Dean's Notion, but (he fears) of the
Trinity too. After this, I say, the Animadverter declares, That he does not
only look upon his Opinion as downright Tritheism, but likewise accounts the
Author himself as arrant a Tritheist to all intents and purposes, as Peraticus
Euphrates (the beginner of the old Sect of the Peratae) or Johannes Philoponus,
or as even Valentinus Gentilis himself, or any other of the Tritheistick Name
and Tribe whatsoever; and that without any other difference, that he knows of,
between this Author and Valentinus Gentilis, save only that Valentinus by his
Tritheism got what he deserved, and this man with his Tritheism has got what he
does not deserve.

But let us see how he defends himself; and that in the first place is by
plainly confessing, That to affirm the Three Divine Persons to be Three
distinct Infinite Minds, is an unusual way of speaking, Def. p. 79. and
elsewhere, That it is an inconvenient way of speaking, p. 81. l. 33. and
likewise an improper way, p. 84. l. 24. And that, it may be, no body so
expressly used these Terms before himself, p. 81. l. 18. All this, I say, he
confesses; and therefore I desire the Reader to compare it with this Man's
professed Design; which was (having first proclaimed himself an (...)-man, and
flouted at all the Fathers, as neither able to conceive rightly, nor express
themselves properly about the Trinity) to offer a plain, an esie, and much more
intelligible account of this great Article, than the Christian Church was ever
yet acquainted with. And now must all this be done by Terms unusual,
inconvenient, and improper, and never used expressly upon this Subject (but hy
Heretics) before? Is this, I say, the way of giving the most intelligible
account of this Mystery, that was ever yet given of it; and that by throwing
aside the Account which the whole Christian World has hitherto acquiesced in,
to make room for it? If the Church will suffer Heresy and Impudence thus to
ride and impose upon her, she may; but little, I am sure, is it for her Credit,
that such things should be endured in Her Communion, and much less warranted by
Her Authority, and encouraged by her Preferments; when (as was shown in the
Preface to the Animadversions, p. 7.) the bare use of any (...) in these high
points, was with such rigor condemned by the Sixth General Council, and the
users of it so severely proceeded against.

Well, but if by this man's own Confession his Words are so unjustifiable, how
then does he think to bring himself off? Why, by the help of his old Friend his
Meaning, that constant Plea and Refuge of a Baffled Person. But still, I say,
what have we to do with this man's Meaning and Intentions against his plain,
clear, and unquestionable Words used at least Forty times over? For, are Men's
Words to be understood by their Meaning, or their Meaning by their Words? It is
a pleasant thing certainly, that when Mr. Dean has brought himself into a
Plunge by his Indefensible Expressions, Mr. Meaning must be called in to lift
him out, and wipe him clean again, with his Intentions; and that he can find
nothing else to defend himself with, but that Comical Salvo of the Renowned
Hugh Peter's, Give me that word again. But I would have this man know, that when
the Church heretofore found any one Heretical in his Words, She never owned or
supposed him Orthodox in his Meaning. And accordingly I must here declare
further, That I will not be overruled or balked in any Argument against him,
by what he means, or what he intends; but having encountered and driven him off
from his own plain, positive, express Words, (and that according to the Sense
in which all Mankind understands them) I shall leave his precarious forlorn
meaning to shift for it self.

Nevertheless, that we may not be too hard upon this [ Man of meaning] let us
see what his meaning here is: for possibly matters may be managed so, that
even this meaning it self may need another meaning to rescue and set it right.
He tells us therefore p. 80, 81. of this Defense, That by Three Infinite Minds
he means Three Infinite Intelligent Persons; affirming moreover, p. 80. l. 13.
That a mind is an Intelligent Person, and every Intelligent Person a mind. Both
which Propositions, if [ mind] be Universally taken in the first (as, by the
whole tenor of his Discourse here, it must be) are manifestly false. For a Man
is an Intelligent Person, and not a mind, and the Soul of Man on the other side
is a mind, but not a Person, and the Divine Nature or Essence likewise
absolutely considered is a mind, but not a Person, and consequently neither of
them can be said to be an Intelligent Person. But let us see whether Infinite
mind and Intelligent Person, do or can properly and logically import the same
Thing, which I utterly deny, and that for these Reasons.

1. Because [ Mind] signifies an Absolute Being; nothing relative belonging to
the Definition of it; nor was it ever used by Writers but in an Absol ute,
Irrelative sense; so that we have here both Signification and Definition,
together with Universal Use for the Absoluteness of the Term [ mind]. But the
Term [ Person] applied to the Divine Persons, is always Relative, and does and
must signify Relatively. 2. Because the Term [ Infinite mind] is adequately
predicated of God, and we properly say, that God is an Infinite Mind: But the
Term Infinite Intelligent Person cannot be so predicated of God: for if there
be Three such Intelligent Persons in the Godhead, we can no more, by a proper
and Natural Predication, say, that God is an Intelligent Person, that we can
say, That God is the Father. 3. Because if [ Infinite mind] and [ infinite
Intelligent Person] be Terms equipollent and importing the same Thing; Then,
since this Author elsewhere affirms, that Three Infinite minds may be one
Infinite mind, it will follow (as we observed before) that Three Infinite
Intelligent Persons may be also one Infinite Intelligent Person: for as much as
in Terms Equipollent, the same Things may, and must be equally affirmed and
denied of both of them. And this Consequence will affect this Author throughout
this whole Dispute.
From all which I conclude, That an Infinite mind is not formally and properly
an Infinite Intelligent Person, nor Equipollent to it, and since it is not so,
I conclude further, That unless it may be allowed to any particular Member of
the Catholic Church (and a private one too) to draw off a word from its proper
Signification, Definition, and Universally received use, and that in a
Principal Article of Faith; and to fasten an arbitrary sense of his own upon
it, quite different from all These (as a Relative sense is from an Absolute)
then it cannot be allowed to this Author to interpret Three Infinite Minds by
Three Infinite Intelligent Persons in the Article of the Trinity. For at this
Rate there can be nothing certain in any Article or Proposition of the
Christian Faith, as settled by Councils, and received by the Church. But to show
how far this Man of Confidence, without shame, can stretch his Interpreting
faculty, let this Notable Instance suffice. For having affirmed over and over,
in his Vindication, and particularly, p. 66. That not to acknowledge the Three
Divine Persons to be Three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, was Heresy and
Nonsense; Here, in his Defense, p. 81. l. 20. He tells us, That his meaning
there was, That to assert, Three distinct Divine Persons, who are not Three
distinct Infinite Intelligent Persons, was Heresy and Nonsense. And Nonsense no
doubt it is with a vengeance. But in answer to so wretched an Evasion, I demand
of this Man, whether ever he knew any Divine or Writer in the World, who owned
a Person, and did not understand by the same an Intelligent Person? Nay, so far
is he from having any ground for such a Pretense, that in strictness of speech,
the Term [ Intelligent] added to Person, is a mere Redundancy and Tautology.
For as much as it is Essentially Employed in the formal Notion of a Person,
which is defined Suppositum Intelligens: and therefore for this Man to suppose
any one to assert Three Persons, and to deny them to be Three Intelligent
Persons, is as much as to suppose that a Man may assert Three Persons, and yet
deny them to be Three Persons. The very supposal of which is certainly a Degree
of Nonsense next to the asserting it. But besides, I hope this Man is not so
very Ignorant, as to affirm that [ a Mind] and [ an Intelligent Person] have
the same signification. For suppose that it might be truly said [ That a Mind
is an Intelligent Person] that does not prove it to signify the same that [
Intelligent Person] does; any more than because Homo is truly said to be
Animal, therefore Homo and Animal are Terms perfectly Synonymous; and that by
one we are still to understand the other; which yet, if they properly signified
the same Thing, we certainly ought to do. In a word, I refer it to the whole
World to judge, Whether, if a Man may be suffered thus to interpret what he
writes or says, he may not upon these Terms discourse of Men, and explain his
meaning by Angels, discourse of Trees, and say, he means Houses? But such
Absurd Liberty, especially in strict disputation, must not be endured. And
accordingly, after all these shiftings and struglings, he begins to despond,
and plainly declares, p. 81. l. 19. That he will not contend about the Term
[Three Infinite Minds]: By which I must tell him, that he effectually gives up
the Thing in dispute; for as much as the main stress and force of the Argument
rests upon the proper and received sense of the Terms. And whereas he says,
that no body before him had so expressly used these Terms, [Three Infinite Minds
or Spirits] it has been already proved against him, that they were actually
used, and insisted upon long before, by several Heretics on the one Hand, and
condemned by the Catholic Church on the other.

But to show That He and his Tritheism are not to be parted so; but that,
however (to save a broken Pate) he quits the Term [ Three Infinite Minds] he
yet holds fast the Thing signified by it, (as if the Heresy lay not in the
Thing but in the word) He tells us, p. 81. l. 29. That if the Dean [thinks] an
Intelligent Person to be a Mind, and [means] no more by Three Minds than Three
Intelligent Persons] let the Animadverter confute him, if he can. Which is
just, as if he should say, If the Dean by a Cock means a Bull, let the
Animadverter confute him for saying a Cock has two horns and four legs, if he
can. But to his ridiculous Plea I answer, First, That the Animadverter will
dispute with no Man's thoughts or meaning, but with his words. Secondly, That
the Defender here quite changes the Question. Which is not, Whether an
Intelligent Person be a Mind: but whether A Mind be formally and Convertibly an
Intelligent Person; which has been already both denied and disprove: And
thirdly and lastly, That in the Holy Trinity the Animadverter admits (abating
still for the forementioned Absurdity of the Tautology) every Intelligent
Person to be a Mind but, for all that* denies Three Infinite Intelligen^
Persons to be Three Minds; For as much as they are Intelligent by virtue of one
Infinite Intelligent Mind common to them all. And whereas he adds, That of he
means by Three Minds Three Intelligent Persons, let the Animadverter try his
skill to make Tritheism of Three Minds, and excuse Three Intelligent Persons
from the same Charge. My answer is, First, That the Animadverter needs try his
skill no more where he finds no more strength to try it upon. Secondly, That
this Question is not to be determined by what he or any particular Man
whatsoever means by a Mind contrary to the sense of the whole World concerning
it: but by what the whole World means by the word [ Mind] though never so
contrary to his particular private sense thereof; which now after a baffle he
alleges to defend himself by. And then lastly, For the difference of charging
the Assertion of Three Infinite Minds with Tritheism, but not that of Three
Infinite Intelligent Persons, That also has been more than sufficiently proved
against him already, by having shown, that Three Infinite Minds are Three
Infinite Absolute Beings, and that an Infinite Absolute Being being convertibly
the same with God, there can be no multiplying of such a Being without a
Multiplication of Gods. But that on the other side, the Three Divine Persons,
being properly Three Relative Subsistences of one and the same Infinite
Absolute Being included in all and each of them, and a Relative subsistence
being capable of being multiplied without a Multiplication of the said Infinite
Absolute Being, it follows, That though Three Minds infer a Plurality of Gods,
yet Three Persons do not so. And let this Author, with all his Noise and
flounceing, disprove the Reason of this Difference between Minds and Persons,
if he can: For I will undertake, that the Animadverter will not only abide by
it, but also venture the issue of this whole Controversy upon it: And we shall
have more use of it again presently.

In the mean time let us examine his Answer to the Animadverter's first
Argument against his Three distinct Infinite Minds, which proceeds thus.

First Argument. Three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits are Three distinct
Gods. But the Three Divine Persons are not Three distinct Gods: And therefore
the Three Divine Persons are not Three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits.

And now how does he clear himself of this Argument? Why first, by reproaching
it for being proposed in Mode and Figure; and I on the contrary reproach him
for not answering it with the same Logical Regularity with which it was
proposed. Secondly, He alleges as Parallel to this Argument, an Argument
brought by the Socinians to prove, that there are not Three Persons in the
Godhead; Which (to show that Logic is as much an Enemy to him as he can be to
Logic) he sets down thus.

Three distinct Infinite Intelligent Persons are Three distinct Gods. But there
are not Three Distinct Gods; And therefore there are not Three distinct
Infinite Intelligent Persons in the Godhead.

In which Syllogism we have these two Terms viz. [Three distinct Infinite
Intelligent Persons] and [ Three distinct Gods.] But as for the Third Term I
desire this Author to show it me, for I must confess I cannot find it. I know
well enough how this Socinian Syllogism must be supplied and perfected; and
therefore (though it is not my business to correct his Blunders but to expose
them) I shall set it right for him thus.

Three distinct Infinite Intelligent Persons are Three distinct Gods, but
Father, Son and Holy Ghost are not Three distinct Gods, and therefore Father,
Son and Holy Ghost are not Three Infinite Intelligent Persons.

Thus I say this Socinian Argument ought to proceed; in which the Major
Proposition, and the Conclusion, are certainly false. But how does this affect
the Animadverter, or how does it prove his Argument, which proceeds upon a
different Major Terminus, to be false too? unless this declared Enemy of Logic
will have the Syllogistical form (which indeed is the same in both Arguments)
to determine the truth on falsehood of the Conclusion. But that we know, must be
here determined by the Truth or Falsehood of the matter of the Premises, or of
one of them, and not by the bare form of the Syllogism. Accordingly, if this
Man will prove a Parity between the Animadverter's Argument and that of the
Socinians, he must prove, That the Animadverter's Major Proposition, [ viz.
Three distinct Infinite Mind^ are Three distinct Gods] is of the very same
signification and import, and consequently of the same falsehood with that in
the Socinian Syllogism, viz. [That Three Infinite Intelligent Persons are Three
Gods]. But that is the Thing now in dispute; and the Animadverter denies it;
let us therefore see how this Defender proves it. Which he endeavors to do by
affirming, That the Proof of the Animadverter's Major Proposition will serve as
well for an Eternal Infinite Intelligent Person as for an Eternal Infinite
Mind, viz. Thus. God (says he) and Eternal Infinite Intelligent Person are
Terms as equipollent and convertible as God, and Infinite Mind or Spirit are.
These are his words, Def. p. 82. l. 21. And they are false and Heretical to the
Height. For will this Man after this open his mouth against Sabellius, who
asserted the very same Thing, viz. That God and infinite Intelligent Person are
Terms convertible and commensurate? But by his, and Sabellius's good leave, it
is absolutely denied him, that these are Terms convertible, as not being
adequately Predicable of one Another. For to say that God is an Intelligent
Person, (whether we take Person determinately or indeterminately) if there be
more Intelligent Persons than one in the Godhead, is (as was noted before) a
Proposition as Absurd and Illogical, as to say, That God is the Father, or That
God is the Son: the Predicate in such Propositions being of less compass than
the subject, which (where it is not larger) ought to be Commensurate to it at
least. And I do particularly insist upon This, That if the Term [ Three
Intelligent Persons] be adequately and convertibly predicated of [ God] the
Term [ an Intelligent Person] (which can signify no more than one Person)
cannot be adequately predicated of God too. For in all adequate Predications,
the subject must take in the whole compass of the Predicate, and the Predicate
answer and come up to the whole compass of the subject. What the Defender adds
next is very impertinent, viz. That the bare Terms from which the Animadverter
argues, do not prove this Distinction, to wit, between one Mind, and one
Infinite Intelligent Person, p. 83. l. 2. For if by bare Terms, he means Terms
stripped of their signification, such Terms, I confess, can prove Nothing but
the folly of him that uses them; but therefore I must tell this Man once for
all, That the Animadverter Argues from the Terms [Infinite Intelligent Mind]
and Infinite Intelligent Person] according to that Universally received sense
which they actually bear at Present all the Christian World over; how or which
way soever they came by it. This, I say, is that, which alone the Animadverter
argues from, and insists upon. For I hope this Author would not have the
Animadverter invade his Prerogative, which is to argue, not from Terms or
words, but from meanings nothing relating to them. I conclude therefore from
what has been said, that [ God] and [ Infinite Mind] are Terms every way
adequate and convertible (as even this Author himself grants) and that [ God]
and [ Infinite Intelligent Person] are not so. But he goes on, and tells us,
That it is custom only which has more reconciled us to the word [Person] than
[Mind]; and that, setting aside this Dispute ( viz. of the Trinity), it is the
sense of all Mankind (which he learnedly proves from its being the sense of the
Socinians) That the same Thing is to be understood by [an Infinite Mind] and
[an Infinite Person]. Thus He, p. 83. l. 4. But can any Thing be more absurd
and Ridiculous than to talk of setting aside this Dispute, viz. Concerning the
Trinity, when it is the Subject of this Dispute alone which we are here
concerned in? and to allege the sense of all Mankind about these Terms before
there was any Revelation of a Trinity to apply them to, and this also in
opposition to the Universal sense of the Christian Church concerning the same,
founded upon such a Previous Revelation? Those indeed who in Ancient Times
owned one God, but knew nothing of a Trinity, might use the Terms [ Infinite
Mind] and [ Infinite Person] indifferently, and take the latter in as absolute
a sense, as they did the former. But what is this to us Christians, after
General Councils, and the Universal constant use of the Church, has added a
Relative signification to the word [Person] as applied to this subject, but
never used the words [ Mind or Spirit] but (according to their Original and
Universal signification) in a sense Absolute and Irrelative? And therefore
admitting his Evangelist Plato (as he reads him, quoted by Dr. Cudworth) to
have held Three Infinite Minds to be one God, it is not at all the less an
Absurdity and a Contradiction to all Principles of Reason and Religion, for its
being held by Plato; though I confess it appears more manifestly so by this
Author's holding it too, whose talent lies so remarkably this way. But he tells
us, That the Dispute, whether there be one or Three Infinite Minds or
Intelligent Persons in the Godhead, is of an higher Nature than to be
determined by convertible Terms, p. 83. l. 12. which I positively deny; and
affirm, that although the Thing disputed, be of never so high a Nature, yet
Reason is able to determine these Two Things concerning it. First, Whether it
be contrary to Reason or no? And secondly, That if it be so, it ought not to be
reckoned as an Article of Religion. To both which I add, that to argue from
Terms convertible is as sure a way of Ratiocination as the Mind of Man can
proceed by; and consequently, that if Reason arguing this way, proves the
Absurdity and Impossibility of Three distinct Infinite Minds in one and the
same Infinite Mind or Godhead, we need no further Arguments to overthrow it.
But as for the Author's Complement to the Animadverter, viz. That he learnedly
proves what every Schoolboy knows. The Animadverter bids me tell him, that
Schoolboys generally know Greek, Latin, and Grammar; which is more than some
confident Writers, or rather Copy-mongers can pretend to. But he proceeds, and
says, that since the Animadverter has made [God] and [Infinite Mind or Spirit]
only equipollent and convertible Terms, the Defender may allow him this, and
still deny his Major Proposition [That therefore Three distinct Infinite Minds
or Spirits are Three distinct Gods.] For though God is an Infinite Mind, and an
Infinite Mind is God, yet it does not follow, That Three distinct Infinite
Minds are Three distinct Gods, no more, than that Three Infinite Intelligent
Persons are Three distinct Gods, p. 83. l. 27. All which is profound Reasoning
indeed, viz. That because in Terms not Equipollent or Convertible (as the Terms
[ God and [ Infinite Intelligent Person] are not) the multiplication of one
Term does not multiply the other, therefore neither must it do so in Terms
perfectly Equipollent, as [ God] and [ Infinite Mind] confessedly are.

But I shall divide my Answer to what he has here said, into Two parts, and
consider, First, The force of Arguing from Equipollents. And secondly, Examine
whether the Term [ Distinct Infinite Persons] (which puts the case as high as
it can be) does as much infer Three distinct Gods, or Three distinct Infinites,
as the Animadverter contends, that Three distinct Infinite Minds do and must.
And

First, For the matter of Equipollency. Whereas this Author in the forecited
place says, That he may allow the Animadverter, That [God] and [Infinite Mind
or Spirit] are equipollent and convertible, and yet deny, that therefore Three
distinct Minds are Three distinct Gods: I answer, That an Ignorant unwary
Adversary may allow a great deal more than will do him good: But whatsoever
this Man either grants or denies (as, for ought I see, Cross and Pile may be
the Logic he proceeds by in both) I do affirm, that if [ God] and [ Infinite
Mind] are Terms equipollent, then according to all the Principles of Reason,
and Rules of Argumentation, which have hitherto obtained in the World, the
multiplication of one equipollent necessarily and unavoidably infers the
multiplication of the other. And the better to make this out, and to relieve
his Ignorance in some measure, I would have him take notice. First, That the
Reason of this mutual Inference between Terms equipollent is, because the
equipollency of Terms imports a perfect formal Identity in their signification,
or Thing signified by those Terms (for I speak now of equipollent Terms only,
not Propositions): As for instance, Homo, and Animal Rationale, are Terms
properly and formally equipollent: and then, I hope, that for one and the same
thing (I say formally the same) to be multiplied, and not to be multiplied will
be granted impossible. In the next place, I must tell this Author, That the
Conditions of equipollent Terms are these.

First, That they require the same Signs, viz. of Universality, Singularity,
and Particularity. Secondly, That they require the same Predicates, whether
affirmative or negative. And thirdly and lastly, That they have the very same
consequents. These, I say, are the Necessary and Essential Conditions of
equipollents: for supposing a failure of any of them, they cannot be so much as
equipollent. Which thus premised, we are to observe further, That this Author
himself allows the Terms [ God] and [ Infinite Mind or Spirit] to be Terms
equipollent, p. 82. l. 25. From whence I infer, that if there be a plurality of
Infinite Minds, there must be a plurality of Gods too: since if one should be
multiplied and not the other, there could be no Identity of signification, nor
consequently equipollency in the Terms; which can never take place where one
equipollent Term may be truly affirmed, and the other as truly denied of any
Thing, or any Thing of either of them; which is so very plain, that that
fundamental ground of all discourse, Impossible est idem simul esse and non
esse, cannot be more self-evident. And therefore let us see what this Man
alleges next. If God (says he) be an Infinite Mind, and there be Three Infinite
Minds, it must follow, That each of these Infinite Minds distinctly, and by
himself considered, is God; not that these are Three distinct Gods, but one
God, p. 84. l. 7. But I affirm, that it must follow not only That each of them
[distinctly] is God, but that each of them is [a distinct] God: For since he
grants [ God] and [ Infinite Mind] to be Terms equipollent, and since Terms
equipollent must have the same Predicates and consequents, if the Term [
Distinct] be ascribed to and predicated of [ Infinite Mind] it must be
predicated of, and ascribed to the Term [ God] as to the other equipollent; and
so one must be as [ distinct] as the other: and then if each Infinite Mind be ^
[ distinct God] Three Infinite Minds must be Three distinct Gods; if there be
any such thing as consequence in the World: In a word, Distinction and
Multiplication are (according to this Author) Predicates belonging to [
Infinite Mind], and therefore by virtue of the equipollency of the Terms they
must equally belong to [ God] too. But this is not all that follows from this
Man's Assertions. For, as he grants here that the Terms [ Infinite Mind] and [
God] are equipollent, so he affirms, p. 82. l. 24. That [ God] and [ Infinite
Intelligent Person] are Terms equipollent also; whereupon, by the Rule of
equipollency, if there be [ but one God] there can be [but one Infinite
Intelligent Person] likewise: For as much as both equipollents must have the
same Predicates and consequents belonging to them. Which certainly represents
this Author's Hypothesis as the greatest Monster that ever the Tongue or Pen of
Man brought forth. For first, by owning the equipollency of [ God] and [
Infinite Mind] and withal asserting Three Infinite Minds, he inevitably brings
in Tritheism; and next, by asserting the equipollency of [ God] and Infinite
Intelligent Person] and thereby a Singularity of one as well as of the other,
he does as necessarily run into the contrary Heresy, which is Sabellianism. And
so I pass from the equipollency of Terms to the second Part of my Answer, which
was to examine, whether the Term [ Three distinct Infinite Persons] does not as
much infer a Plurality of Gods as the Term [ Three distinct Infinite Minds or
Spirits] does. Which the Defender here affirms, and the Animadverter as
positively denies. And both the Reason of his Denial and the Difference of the
Case are very full and clear. And (...) in This, That Three distinct Minds are
Three distinct Absolute Beings, Three Essences, Three Natures, each existing by
it self, without requiring any subject to inhere in, or to be supported by: And
every such Numerical Nature or Essence, must have its Numerical distinct
Attributes or Predicates so belonging to it, that one and the same Numerical
Attribute cannot belong to any other Numerical Distinct Nature besides, but
that each Numerical Nature must have its Numerically distinct Attributes,
confined wholly to it self: whereupon one and the same Numerical Infinity
(which is a Natural Attribute) cannot belong to more Numerically Distinct
Natures than to one alone. But now on the other side, Three Divine Persons are
not Three distinct Natures, Essences, or Absolute Beings, existing by
themselves (as Minds or Spirits do) but Three Modifications, or Relative
Subsistences of one and the same Nature, in which they all exist together, as
in their subject, and cannot possibly exist by themselves without it, whereupon
as one Numerical Nature is common to these several Subsistences, so the
Numerical Infinity of the said Nature, must together with it, belong in common
to the same. In short, Three Distinct Minds being Three Distinct Essences or
Natures, existing by themselves, can never be Infinite by one Numerical
Infinity, any more than one Numerical Nature belonging in common to them. But
on the contrary, Three Divine Persons, being properly* Three Subsistences of
one and the same Nature, may have one and the same Infinity, as well as Nature,
belonging to them all. But you will say, when there is mention of [ Three
distinct Infinite Persons] does not the Term [ Distinct] being joined to the
Term [ Infinite] import a distinction, and consequently a Plurality of
Infinites, and so of Gods too? I answer, No; Because the Term [ distinct]
though next in place to the Term [ Infinite] yet being but an Attribute, must
immediately, in construction, affect the Term [ Persons] as the proper subject
of it, and not the Term [ Infinite] which is but another Attribute it self, and
immediately affects the same subject too. So that [ Three distinct Infinite
Persons] signify but as much as Three distinct Persons who are Infinite: the
Term [ distinct] being here exegetical of the Numeral Term [ Three], and so
belonging directly to the [ Persons] not to their [ Infinity]: just as if we
should say [Three distinct Omniscient, or Omnipotent Persons] the Term [
distinct] belongs immediately and directly to the Persons, and is not properly
an Attribute of their Omniscience or Omnipotence. In like manner the Divine
Persons are said to be Three distinct Infinite Persons: but how? not by three
distinct Infinities, of which each Person has one of it self, but by one and
the same Numerical Infinity, common to all Three. And yet I own, that even this
one common Infinity belongs [ distinctly] that is to say, after [ a distinct
manner] to each of the Divine Persons, even as the Divine Nature it self does.
And this is what I insist upon as the True state of this matter, and shall add
no more, but leave it to the Learned and Impartial Reader to judge of the
Disparity of the Case: for nothing can prove a parallel in the Two forecited
Instances, or in the consequences of them, but that which prove Three absolute
entire Beings or Essences, and Three R^lative subsistences of one Numerical
Being or Essence to be the same; and that one and the same Numericall Attribute
may as well belong to Three such Absolute entire Beings or Essences, as to one
Numerical absolute Being under Three distinct Modes or Relations.

And by this we may judge of the Truth of the Defender's following words, viz.
That the Adimadverter was aware That the Objection of Three Gods would lie
against Three Persons as well as against Three Minds, p. 85. l. 13. To which I
answer, that the Animadverter never judged so, but yet judged it the Part of a
Disputant to answer any seeming Objection against the Truth defended by him,
and accordingly he produced and answered this, as such an one and no better.
But how did he answer it? Why, by showing that there was this difference
between them, viz. That the Notion of a Person in the Godhead essentially
importing an Absolute Being under a certain Relation, afforded something for
the Divine Persons to be distinguished by, and something for them to agree in;
but that the Notion of a Mind or Spirit, importing nothing but a bare Absolute
simple Being, without any such Relation, Three Infinite Minds or Spirits could
not be otherwise distinguished from one Another but by that whole Absolute
Being or Nature, and consequently by a Total Distinction. This Argument the
Defender repeats, adding withal. That the sum of it amounts to no more but
this, viz. That Three distinct Minds are Three distinct Gods because they are
distinguished, l. 20. But will this shameless Falsificator say so? and affirm,
That for several Beings or Essences to be distinguished by the whole of what
they are, is no more than barely to be distinguished? For are there not partial
Distinctions, and modal distinctions, and accidental distinctions of some
things? and will this Ignoramus say, That Things thus distinguished are
distinguished by the whole of what they are? But says he again, If
notwithstanding this Distinction they are essentially and inseparably one, they
are not Three distinct Gods, p. 85. l. 22. And, no doubt, they are not so, if
they are essentially one; as on the contrary, they must be so, if they are not
essentially one: But then can there be a grosser Absurdity in Nature than to
suppose it possible for Three distinct Essences (as three distinct Minds are)
to be essentially one? I must tell this Author, that it is a contradiction in
the Terms. All distinction of Essences by themselves being (as the very Term
imports) an Essential Distinction of the same: and for Three essentially
distinct Things to be essentially one, is for them to be Three, and One,
Distinct and not Distinct, in the same respect, which is absolutely impossible;
and would utterly confound the Distinction and Unity of the Divine Pesons,
which can never be Both of the same kind. And I am confident, that there is
hardly a Sophister of a Years standing in either of the Universities, but would
look upon this Proposition, viz. That Three distinct Essences, or essentially
distinct Minds, may yet be essentially one, as much fitter to be hissed at,
than disputed against.

But, says the Defender, are not Three Infinite Intelligent Persons as much
Three Absolute simple Beings and Essences as Three Minds? p. 85. l. 27. No; He
has been told again and again, that they are not; and that because Three
Persons are only Three distinct Relative Subsistences of one and the same
Infinite Intelligent Being, or Essence included in all and each of them.
Whereupon he repeats these following words out of the Animadversions, viz. That
the Divine Persons are Three Relatives, or one simple Being or Essence under
Three distinct Relations, and consequently differ from one another, not wholly,
and by all that is in them, but only by some mode or respect peculiar to each,
and upon that account causing their distinction. Thus the Animadverter. And
what says Sir Scorn and Ignorance to this? Why; that it is all perfect
Gibberish: That is in other words, That he is not able to answer or refute one
Tittle of it. For let me tell His Emptiness, that such Gibberish as it is, it
is the Language used by all the Divinity-Schools in Christendom, in the
Explication and account they give of this great Point of Divinity. And
accordingly I have transcribed the whole Passage, as avowing every Syllable of
it against this Ignorant Assumer, and desiring the Learned Reader to pass his
strictest Examination, and his severest censure upon it.

But let us see what follows. And here he asks the Question, What the Three
Divine Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence are? Three Relations, Three
Modes, Three Respects without some Being? p. 86. l. 17. I answer, That they are
neither Three bare Modes nor Relations or Respects, but Three Relative
Subsistences, or Subsisting Relations of one and the same Infinite Divine
Nature, Essence, or Mind, included in and belonging to all and each of the said
Subsistences. This is the Account which I have given, and still give of the
Three Divine Persons, and which (as I told him before) I shall firmly abide by;
and therefore without asking any more such silly Questions, let him reckon upon
it, and set himself to confute it, and prove, that it makes the Divine Persons
Three mere Modes or Relations, if he can. And whereas he says, That Three
Relatives are not Three Relations, but Three Things related to each other, p.
85. l. 15. I answer, that the first part of his Assertion, viz. That Three
Relatives are not Three Relations, is a mere Childish Cavil. For both Person
and Relation are sometimes taken in an Abstract, and sometimes in a Concrete
sense; and no Body says, that Persons are properly called Relations, but thus
concretely taken, and as Relation implies the Essence conjoined with it: though
yet, to help us to a better and more distinct conception of these Things, we
are sometimes forced to conceive and speak of one as Abstracted from the other:
but still as the Schools observe, Relative and Relation, in Divinis, are not
really distinct Things, but one and the same Thing under several ways of
Conception, and Expression. But it is the latter part of his Assertion, in
which we are most concerned; viz. That Three Relatives are Three Things related
to each other. Where, if he understands the word [ Things] in a strict
Metaphysical sense, for Three distinct entire Beings or Essences, I deny, That
the Three Divine Persons are in this sense Three [Things] related to each
other. But one Thing, that is to say, one entire Being or Essence under Three
distinct Relations, or Relative Subsistences, mutually respecting or referring
to one Another. And this indeed is the Point, which this Man has been driving
at all along, viz. That each of the Divine Persons has a distinct entire Being
or Essence of its own belonging to it, and that as really distinct from the
Beings or Essences of the other two, as one Being or Essence can be
distinguished from another. Which I affirm to be perfect, Rank, downright
Tritheism. Whereupon he tells us again (with his usual Confidence and no Proof)
That though the Three Divine Persons may, with respect to their Three Real
subsistences be called Three Infinite Eternal Minds, yet they are not Three
Absolute simple Beings or Essences, p. 87. l. 19. To which I answer. First,
That the Term [ Mind] is a Term properly importing [ Nature] not [
Subsistence], and consequently, That the Divine Persons can never be called
Three distinct Minds barely from their being Three distinct Subsistences (since
all these subsistences may be in one and the same Infinite Mind) but from their
being Three distinct Natures or Essences; which because they can never be,
neither can they be called Three distinct Minds. Secondly I affirm, That the
Term [ Mind] universally signifies an Absolute Being; and that to talk of a
Mind that is not an Absolute Being, is as much as to talk of a Man that is not
an Animal Rationale; and so well am I assured of this, That I do here Challenge
this Man to produce me so much as one Classick, one Scholastic, or Theological
Writer, or Christian Council, that ever used the word [ Mind of Minds] in any
other signification than that of an Absolute Being or Essence. And therefore
when he shall have proved, That Three Minds are not Three Absolute Beings or
Essences, or that three Absolute entire Beings can be Three Relative
Subsistences or Modifications of one and the same Infinite Mind or Being, then
I will grant that he has defended his Assertion against the Animadverter; and
not only so, but that he has full power also (by a Theological use of his own
making) to alter the sense and signification of all words, in spite of the
World; and, by virtue of the same, may (if he pleases) call the Deanery of
Paul's the Archbishopric of Canterbury, and behave himself accordingly. But it
is very pleasant to see him here twice in p. 87. proving his Three Infinite
Minds to be Three Personal Subsistences by that exploded Chimera of a man and
his living Image; which having been so fully baffled, and exposed, and rejected
for its Profaneness as well as its Nonsense, this Man surely must have a Degree
of Luck equal to his Confidence, if he thinks to make one gross Absurdity an
Argument to prove and make good another.

At length he concludes his lame self-contradicting Answer with these words,
Had the Dean (says he) made Three complete, Absolute, Eternal Minds he had been
justly chargeable with making Three Gods, p. 87. l. 32. And that, I assure him
is a concession large enough; For I do here affirm, That he has asserted every
one of the said Particulars, whether he will own it or no. For first, he has
asserted Three Infinite Minds; and it has been effectually proved against him
from the Signification, Definition, and constant use of the Term. That Three
Minds are formally Three Absolute Beings. And secondly, He has asserted these
Three Minds to be Three distinct Persons, and thereby has asserted also their
Completeness; since Personality is that, which gives the utmost completion to
the existence of an Intelligent Nature: And thirdly and lastly, By asserting
the said Minds Infinite, he asserts them also Eternal. For as much as nothing
can be Infinite but what is infinitely perfect, nor can any thnig be Infinitely
perfect without including the Perfection of Eternity in it. So that if this Man
would but once in his Life abide by his own words (which a Self-Contradictor,
when he is pinched, never will) we should need no other proof, but his
forecited Confession to convince him, That he stands justly charged with
asserting Three Gods. And whereas he asserts next, That one and the same
Infinite and Eternal Mind is [repeated] in Three Subsistences, p. 88. l. 1. I
must tell him again, That the Term [ repeated] is not to be admitted or endured
here; since the Repetition of a Thing is properly nothing else, but the
Production of another Individual Instance, one or more, of the same kind. And
whether this be applicable to, or affirmable of the Divine Nature or Godhead,
let every one, not abandoned by common sense, judge.

In fine, when this Man shall have proved these following Positions collected
from him, and held by him, viz. 1. That [ Infinite Mind] and [ Infinite
Intelligent Person] are Terms as equipollent, adequate, and convertible, as [
God] and [ Infinite Mind] are. 2. That though [ God] and [ Infinite Mind] are
Terms adequately convertible and equipollent, yet that Three Distinct Infinite
Minds are not Three distinct Gods: whereas one equipollent can never without a
contradiction be multiplied without a multiplication of the other. 3. That
Three Minds are not Three Absolute Natures or Essences; or that Three Absolute
Natures or Essences can be Three Relative Subsistences (and consequently
Modifications) of one and the same Infinite Mind. 4. That Three distinct
Essences, or Three essentially distinct Minds may be essentially one.


When, I say, he shall have proved all these with as much Evidence as he has
asserted them with Confidence, then will he have secured his Tritheism against
the Animadverter's first Argument, and not before. And so I pass on to consider
what he has to say to the

Arg. 2.
Second, Which is this. Three distinct Minds or Spirits are Three distinct
Substances; but the Three Persons in the Blessed Trinity are not Three distinct
Substances, and therefore they are not Three distinct Minds or Spirits. In
answer to which the Defender tells us, That the Dean does not pretend to know
any thing of the Substance of a Mind, and much less of God, who is an Infinite
Mind, p. 88. l. 11. But does not this very Man (who never contradicts himself,
but when he speaks, or writes) positively profess to give an Account of the
Nature of a Mind or Spirit, in p. 7. of this Defense, telling us, That is
consists in Internal vital Sensation? And is not the Nature of a Mind the
Substance of it, even according to this Author, who in the 15 th line of this
88 th page, uses the words [ Nature or Substance] as signifying the same Thing?
And now, will he disclaim all pretense of knowing any thing of the substance of
a Mind or Spirit, after he has undertook to give the World an Account what the
Nature or Substance of them is, and wherein it does consist? But I leave the
Reader to reconcile this Man as he finds him here in this 88 th page to himself
in the 7 th page of the same Defense, if he can. But he must not think to carry
off this fallacy of the consequent so. For though we understand not, by an
immediate inspection of things themselves, the Specific Nature, or Essence, of
this or that kind of Substance, yet surely the General Nature of Substance may
by discourse be known: and it would be a pleasant consequence, that because we
cannot tell what the Particular Nature of such or such a substance is, that
therefore we cannot know it to be a Substance. And therefore he asks, p. 89. l.
20. What a Substance is? Adding withal, That he hopes the Animadverter will not
affirm it to be that quod substat Accidentibus; since that would make God
himself, who is incapable of Accidents, to be no Substance. And it is shrewdly
argued, upon my word. But why then does he stop here, without giving us the
True Account what Substance positively is? Which the very Elements of Logic
and Philosophy might have taught him, viz. That substance is a Being existing
by it self, so as neither to inhere in, or be supported by another Being as a
Subject. This, Sir, is the true Account of what a Substance is: And such a
Substance I affirm a Mind or Spirit to be. But as for that which does Substare
Accidentibus, it imports not the General Nature, or Essence of Substance, but
only a property of one sort of Substance, viz. Such as are created. But he goes
on and tells us, That though understanding and Being, Nature or Substance may
be distinguished in Created finite Beings, yet that St. Austin had taught him,
that they are the same in God, p. 88. l. 15. And I grant, that according to the
Real Existence of the Thing they are so: but, for all that, I affirm, That they
differ formally, that is, according to the several conceptus objectivi, which
they afford to the Mind, and of which one conceptus objectivus can never be the
other, nor be applied to several Notions of one and the same Thing. So that,
although God be indeed one pure simple Act, yet if we do not conceive and
discourse of this simple Act, under some Distinction, such as is between a
Subject and its Attributes, a Principle and its Acts, together with the several
Respects it bears to several Objects, neither St. Austin, nor He, nor any Man
alive can discourse of God as of an Intelligent Being, or Agent at all. And
therefore, whereas he adds again, That if in the Unity of the Godhead there be
but Three such distinct Understandings, or Minds, or Intelligent Persons, who
are not each other, nor understand by each other, but distinctly by themselves,
he is not concerned about distinct Substances, p. 88. at the end. In answer to
that, I tell him first, That if he is concerned about Three distinct Minds in
the Godhead, the Reason of Things shall force him to be concerned about Three
distinct Substances in the same, whether he will or no. Secondly, That though I
grant Three Intelligent Persons to be in the Godhead, yet I deny Three distinct
Understandings or Minds to be in it; but that these Three Intelligent Persons
are such by one Numerical Infinite Intelligence, Understanding or Mind, common
to all Three; and that albeit one of the Persons neither is nor can be the
other, nor yet understands by the other, but each of them distinctly by
himself, yet that they understand by one and the same Understanding distinctly
belonging to each Person; and accordingly for his better Instruction, I must
tell him, that it is one Thing for each Person to have an Infinite
Understanding or Mind distinctly belonging to him, and quite another to have a
distinct Infinite Mind belonging to each of them. Which distinction being very
great ought always carefully to be attended to; but, that it will be ever able
to make its way into this Man's Understanding, I cannot undertake.

But he comes now to examine how the Animadverter proves, That Three distinct
Minds are Three distinct Substances. And because he draws his proof of it from
the Definition of a Mind or Spirit, viz. That it is Substantia Incorporea
Intelligens; This Man replies, should we now deny his Definition and say, that
a Mind is Res cogitans, he would be undone for want of his Substances, p. 89.
l. 7. No, Sir Ignorance, No. While the Animadverter can make good one substance
in the Godhead he will never be undone for want of more. But could any one
imagine this Man so very weak as he here makes himself, by thinking that a Res
cogitans can be any Thing else but Substantia Cogitans? For can an Accident
Cogitare? or be either the Principium or Subjectum Quod of any Thought? or does
Res signify any Thing properly but either a Substance or an Accident? or can
Substantia Cogitans be any other than Substantia Intelligens? Or lastly, can
there, in simple Beings, be a Substantia Intelligens, that is, not also
Incorporea? What gross, thick, abominable Ignorance does this Man in this very
one Expression betray? But he is now, as he tells us for capping Definitions
with the Animadverter, p. 89. l. 10. and to that purpose gives us this as the
Definition of a Person, viz. That it is Naturae Rationabilis Individua
Substantia. Though he has been told before, That this Definition (with all due
respect to Boethius be it spoke) was long since rejected by most Divines,
Schoolmen and others as defective; or explained by others in a very different
sense from what the Term [ Individua] now bears; for that (according to the
generally received sense of it) it would certainly infer two distinct Persons
in our Savior upon his Incarnation. It is true indeed, that every Person is
Naturae Rationalis Indidua Substantia, That is to say, true in the Nature of an
Essential Predicate, as affirming nothing of a Person but what necessarily
belongs to it: but, for all that, it is not a true definition, as not being
adequate to the Thing defined, nor containing all that is in it, and
consequently not convertible with it, as a definition ought to be: So that if
this be his capping Definitions (as he calls it) he would be much better
employed in capping Verses amongst the Boys, if he were able. Well, but though
(according to the received sense of the word) this be not a True, that is to
say, a perfect Definition of a Person, yet if it be an Essential Predicate of
one (as we have granted) so that every Person is truly said to be Rationalis
Naturae Individua Substantia, must not then Three Persons be Three Individual
Substances? I answer, no: because though each Person be such an Individual
substance, and distinctly too, yet each Person is not a distinct Individual
substance; For as much as one and the same Infinite Individual substance may
sustain Three distinct Personalities, by reason of three distinct Subsistences,
or distinct ways of subsisting belonging to it; from whence it is that in the
Divine Economy the multiplication of Persons, or Personal Subsistences, does
not multiply the Divine Substance. But, says he, let us see how the
Animadverter will bring off Three Persons from being Three distinct substances,
and I will undertake the Dean shall do as much, and do it as well for Three
Minds, p. 89. l. 15. That by his favor shall be Tried. And first the
Animadverter brings off the Three Persons from being Three Substances, by this
one Argument. That they are but Three Subsistences of one and the same Infinite
Substance included in all and each of them; and to make this out further, I
shall premise this Assertion, viz. That no Substance is properly a Subsistence,
nor any Subsistence properly a Substance; But differ from one another as much
as an entire Being and the mode of that Being; As a Subject, and as an
Affection qualifying or determining the said subject. And let this Author, with
his New Logic, and his No Metaphysics, prove the contrary, if he is able; For
I here Challenge him to do it: In the mean time I thus argue, Three distinct
Subsistences of one and the same Infinite Substance, included in all and each
of them, are not Three distinct Substances;

But the Three Divine Persons are Three distinct Subsistences of one and the
same Infinite Substance, included in all and each of them; And

Therefore the Three Divine Persons are not Three distinct Substances.



And this one Argument I rely upon as so fully conclusive of the Point to be
proved, that I judge it perfectly needless to add any more. Only as I have here
proved the Three Divine Persons not to be Three Substances, so on the other
side, I prove this Author's Three distinct Minds to be Three Substances, thus.

Three distinct Absolute Beings existing by themselves, so as not to exist in
or depend upon any other Being, as a Subject, are Three distinct Substances.

But Three distinct Minds are Three such Absolute Beings, and

Therefore Three distinct Minds are Three distinct Substances.

In which Syllogism, to show the disparity between [ Minds] and [ Persons] let
the Term [ Three Persons] be put into the Room of [ Three Minds] and then the
Minor which is true and must be granted of [ Minds] must be denied of [
Persons]: for they are not Three distinct Absolute Beings so existing, as was
expressed in the Major Proposition: and therefore that Argument which concludes
Three Minds to be Three Substances, can never conclude Three Persons to be so
too. And whereas the Defender affirms, p. 89. l. 27. That Three Eternal Minds
are but Three Eternal subsistences of one and the same Individual Eternal Mind.
I answer, That it is the height of Absurdity, and utterly impossible in Reason
and Philosophy, for a Mind, which is an Absolute entire Being existing by it
self, to be the Subsistence of another Absolute Being. For as much as
Subsistence is properly and formally a Mode of substance, and in the Divine
Substance or Nature a Relative Mode too, though still implying in it the said
Nature as modified or determined by it. So that we see here this Man's
Philosophy in making one Mind the Subsistence or Modification of another Mind;
and Three distinct Minds so many distinct Subsistences or Modifications of one
and the same Mind. Which I am sure all the Schools in Christendom will with
one voice explode. And so I leave this Defender, or rather this Dean in
Masquerade, to bring off his Three distinct Minds from being Three distinct
Substances at his leisure. But I fear it will cost him a new cast of his [
meaning] to do it: though let that be what it will, it is not any one Man's
meaning (especially founded upon his Ignorance) but the Universal Judgment and
consent of all Learned Men that must determine the proper and distinct senses
both of Substance and Subsistence in this Dispute.

But the Animadverter in proving an Absolute Unity, and disproving all
plurality of substance in the Godhead, had first strengthened his Assertion with
the Authorities of some of the most eminent Fathers positively asserting the
former, and not without indignation rejecting the other. And what does this
Defender answer to these? Why; he tells us, That the Fathers, by denying Three
Substances principally rejected Three diverse Natures of different Kinds or
Species in Opposition to Arianism, p. 90. l. 5. Very good; they principally
rejected a plurality of specifically distinct Substances; and will this Man
infer from hence that they did not reject also a Plurality of Individual
Substances in the Godhead? Why, yes, if he will invalidate the Authorities
alleged by the Animadverter, he does and must do so. And accordingly he tells
us, That the Fathers by Unity of Substance here understand only the (...), and
that the (...) signifies only a Specific Unity of Substance; the Fathers in
Opposition to Arianism, designing only to disprove a Specific plurality of
substance in the Godhead, not a plurality of numerical distinct Individuals. So
that it seems they resolved, though they fell foul upon the Arians, yet to do
it so, as to keep fair Quarter with the Heathens. In answer to which, since
(...) imports an Union of Persons in such a Nature, Essence, or Substance, as
is incapable of being numerically multiplied (as the Divine (...) essentially
is, and cannot but be) I affirm, that the (...) irrefragably proves a Numerical
Unity or Identity of substance in the Divine Persons, and withal that all
Specific Unity in the Divine Nature or Persons, is absurd and impossible: for
I must tell this puny Logician, That it is one thing to disprove a Specific
diversity of the Divine Nature in the Three Persons, and quite another to prove
a positive specific Unity of the same; which can never be done where there are
not several Individual Natures of the same kind, to collect it from. Secondly,
I answer, That though the Fathers in their disputes with the Arians, alleged
several Things for the Unity of the Divine Nature in the Three Persons, which
strictly reached no further than to Specific Unity, yet when they disputed this
matter more exactly with the Heathen Polytheists, they rested not in this but
still insisted upon, and contended for a Numerical Unity of the Divine Nature,
Essence or Substance, as the Cathol^ck Church has done ever since. And besides,
the Truth is, Those very Arguments (or rather Instances of Resemblance) brought
by the Fathers against the Arians, though taken from things having no more than
a Specific Unity of Nature, yet did not determinately prove either a Specific
or a Numerical Unity of Nature in the Divine Persons, but only an Unity or
Sameness of Nature indefinitely; which being laid as a foundation, the peculiar
Condition of the Divine Nature quickly determined the kind of its Unity, and by
virtue of its Infinity, proved that that Unity or Sameness could be no other
than Numerical. And thus having answered what he has said about the (...) and
the Testimonies of the Fathers, if he still persists in this Scandalous
Assertion, That the Fathers were only against several Kinds and Species of
Substance in the Godhead and Divine Persons, but not against several Individual
and Numerically distinct Substances in the same; I desire him to satisfy the
World in these Two Things. First, How the Fathers came to look upon the Divine
Nature or Essence in Three distinct Persons as such an amazing Incomprehensible
Mystery (as they still avowed it to be) if the said Nature were not more than
specifically one: for that one and the same specifical Nature should be in a
plurality of Individual Persons, is no wonder at all. Secondly, I desire him to
satisfy the World also, Why the Primitive Latin Church with so much Zeal, and
for so long a time, refused the word (...), declaring this for the only reason
of their refusal thereof, that they reckoned it to signify Three Substances,
for they could not reckon it to signify Three specifically distinct Substances;
For as much as they knew, that the Greek Church which used the word (...) and
contended for it, had constantly, zealously, and most expressly, opposed the
Arians in their asserting Three Species of Substance in the Trinity, and
therefore it is evident, even to a demonstration, that they were only jealous
of Three Individual Substances which they feared the (...) might introduce, and
so betray them into another sort of Arianism, or rather Gentilism, as bad as
the first. These Two Quaeries, I say, I challenge this Author to answer me in;
by making it appear, notwithstanding the foregoing Particulars, that while the
Fathers asserted (...) one Divine Essence or Substance, it was only a Specific
not an Individual Unity of the same, which they all along pleaded for. But
after the fore-alleged Testimonies of the Fathers, the Animadverter thought fit
to add the Modern Testimony of Bellarmine in those words, That to assert that
the Father and the Son differ in substance is Arianism. In reply to which he
first scoffingly excepts against Bellarmine's Orthodoxy (because forsooth he
was a Papist) like that profound Dotard who reproved a young Student for
reading Clavius upon Euclid, telling him, That he ought to read none but
Protestant Mathematics; for surely the Romish Writers are as orthodox about
the Article of the Trinity, as any Protestant Writers whatsoever. Accordingly
from these words of Bellarmine the Animadverter argued, That if in the Trinity
the Father and the Son were two distinct Substances, for them not to differ in
Substance would be impossible. To which this man replies in these words; As if
(says he) to be distinct and to differ in Substance were the same thing. No,
Trifler, no; for Accidents may be distinct, and Modes may be distinct, which
cannot differ in Substance; and the Animadverter speaks not here of any sort of
Distinction in general, but only of the distinction of Substances; and as to
that, he affirms, That for Substances to be distinct, must infer them to differ
in Substance too. But he asks us hereupon a very wise Question, Are not two Men
(says he) Unius Substantiae, of one and the same substance, because they are
two distinct Men, and each of them has a distinct Nature of his own? P. 90. l.
19. I answer, That a distinct Human Nature is a distinct Substance; and that
although two Men are notionally and specifically of the same substance or nature,
yet really and numerically they neither are, nor can be so. But he has not done
with his Questions yet, but asks us, Whether to differ in Number, and to differ
in Substance and Nature be the same thing? and, Whether difference in Number
prove a diversity of Nature too? Yes, Sir, a Numerical Diversity of Individual
Natures or Substances it does prove, though their Specific Nature (which is but
a Notion founded upon things) be the same. And here I must tell His Ignorance
what it was that betrayed him to these silly Questions, viz. his supposing,
That there is no Essential Difference or no Diversity of Nature, but a
Specific Difference or Diversity. Whereas an Essential Difference, as well as
an Essential Unity, is threefold, viz. a Generical, a Specifical, and a
Numerical; and this last is as much and as truly an Essential Difference as any
of the two former, or rather more so; for the two former are properly Notions
existing only in the Mind, though collected from things actually existing in
Nature; but the last has no dependence upon the conception of the Mind at all,
but is wholly in the thing itself, whereof it is the difference. And therefore
I do here tell this man, That three numerically distinct Substances are three
numerically distinct Essences or Natures; and consequently differ from one
another as three such Essences or Natures do. As for the Complement he passes
upon the Animadverter, at the end of this Paragraph, p. 90. as if he were to be
taught by this man to construe the Fathers: For that and sundry other of his
Scurrilities, I will not fail to reckon with him in due place.

But after the several Testimonies produced by the Animadverter against a
Plurality of Substances in the Godhead, he proceeded to argue against the same
from Reason; And what does the Defender reply upon this Topic? Why, says he,
Whereas the Animadverter would prove, That the Three Divine Persons cannot be
Three distinct Minds, because they are not Three distinct Substances, the Dean
may safely deny the Consequence, p. 90. at the latter end. And may He so? I
must tell him, That if the denial of the Genus does and must infer a denial of
the Species (as that which is not an Animal cannot possibly be a Man) then that
which proves the Three Persons not to be Three Substances, must prove them also
not to be Three Minds: for [ Substance] respects [ Mind] as a Genus does its
Species, and the consequence from the Genus to the Species negatively is
unavoidable. But what then would he have the Animadverter to prove? Why this,
That if Three Minds are Three Intelligent Persons, and a Mind is a Substance,
therefore three distinct Minds or Persons are Three distinct Substances, p. 91.
l. 1. But what illogical confused stuff is this? However, since it affords
Three Terms, I will cast it for him into a Syllogistical Form, and that will
quickly show what may be concluded in this matter, and what cannot. Thus.

Three distinct Minds are Three distinct Substances, but Three distinct Persons
are Three distinct Minds, therefore Three distinct Persons are Three distinct
Substances.

The Major of which Syllogism has been effectually proved from the Definition
of a Mind already: and the Minor being the Defender's avowed Principle and
Assertion, can any Thing conclude more plainly than this Syllogism does, That
according to this Man's Principles, The Three Divine Persons are Three distinct
Substances? Which is the Thing that the Defender here calls upon the
Animadverter to prove: and accordingly proved it is. But (says he) Three
distinct Minds may subsist distinctly and inseparably in one Eternal and
Infinite Substance, as Three Intelligent Persons do, ibid. To which I answer,
First, That let them exist never so inseparably in one Infinite Substance, they
are really Three Minds still, and can never be one Individual Substance or
Mind, but collectively. And that I am sure is neither naturally, properly, or
simply one. Secondly, That Three Minds may as well be in one Infinite Substance
as Three Persons are, This is perfectly gratis dictum, and (according to his
usual way) a gross downright presuming the thing in dispute. For it is and has
been all along absolutely denied him, and the contrary more than once proved
against him, viz. That Three distinct Minds being Three absolute entire Beings,
Essences, or Substances, can never subsist in one absolute Being, Essence, or
Substance, and that on the other side Three Intelligent Divine Persons being
Relative Subsistences, not absolute Beings, may subsist in one Absolute Being
or Substance. So that the disparity between Minds and Persons is manifest, and
as to the present Case irreconcilable. Nay, and I shall add one consideration
more to the same purpose, and that of no small moment, viz. That no Two or more
Substances (nor consequently Minds or Spirits) do or can subsist inseparably;
(which yet this Man takes for granted) but that, as they are in their own
Nature capable of existing by themselves, and for that Reason separable, so by
the Absolute Power of God they may be actually separated, provided his Decree
does not hinder: And this makes another vast disparity between Minds, Spirits,
and Substances on the one hand, and the Divine Persons on the other, viz. That
the Divine Persons, from the very nature of the Thing, are even by the Divine
Power it self inseparable both from the Essence which they belong to, as also
from one Another; which, distinct Minds can never be. But the Defender adds,
That the True and short answer to the Animadverter's Argument is, That the same
Substance, repeated in Three distinct Subsistences, is not Three Substances but
one, p. 90. ibid. In answer to which he has been sufficiently told already.
That the Term [ Repeating the Divine Substance or Nature] is New, Odd, and
Unjustifiable, and such as the Catholic Church never made use of, and for that
cause ought utterly to be condemned and thrown aside. But for a further answer
to it, I do first affirm in general, That for the same numerical Nature or
Substance to be repeated is impossible, and a contradiction; Repetition (as we
have shown) being nothing else but Another Production. In the second place, I
deny, in particular, that there is any such Thing as a Repetition of the Divine
Substance or Nature in Three Subsistences. The said Nature indeed [ is] and [
exists] in Three Subsistences, but I absolutely deny that it is repeated in
them; and it will concern this Bold Novellist to prove, as well as assert, that
it is so. In the mean time it is no small shame and calamity to the Church,
that he is not called to account for such horrible Innovations.

But the Animadverter had argued further against Three distinct Substances in
the Godhead, thus, That if the Three Persons are Three distinct Substances,
then Two distinct Substances will concur in and belong to each Person; to wit,
That Substance which is the Divine Essence, and so is communicable or common to
all the Persons, and that substance which constitutes each Person, and thereby
is so peculiar to him, as to distinguish him from the other, and consequently
to be incommunicable to any besides him to whom it belongs: since for one and
the same substance to be common to all Three Persons, and withal to belong
incommunicably to each of the Three, and thereby to distinguish them from one
Another is contradictious, and impossible. And what can this Man oppose to this
Argument with the least show or shadow of Reason? What part of it does he
deny? Or what Term of it does he distinguish? For the Argument proceeds upon
his own supposal at present, that the Three Persons are Three distinct
Substances, as the Animadverter had fully proved them to be before. Why, all
that he says, is, That he is heartily ashamed and sorry (good Man) to see such
stuff as must necessarily expose our Faith to the scorn of Atheists and
Infidels; and therefore that he may not contribute to it, he graciously
declares, that all this Nonsense shall escape the lash of his Pen, p. 91. l.
22. That is, according to his constant never failing way, he is then highest in
Noise and Vapor when he is brought most to a Nonplus. But I have some Answers
of another sort to make to this passage alleged out of him; As first, That
whatsoever his Sorrow in this Case may be, he will hardly convince the World
that he has any shame. Secondly, That to expose our Holy Faith to the scorn of
Atheists and Infidels, by one's Folly and Nonsense, is very bad; But that to
make Atheists and Infidels by one's Scandalous Writings, and more scandalous
Practices, is much worse. Thirdly, That nothing does, or can more expose our
Holy Faith to the scorn of Atheists and Infidels, than for any one, who wears
but the Name of a Christian, to assert Three Gods; which Three distinct
Infinite Minds, Spirits, or Substances, upon all the Principles of common
Reason and Philosophy, certainly and undeniably are; and withal, that there can
be no Nonsense comparable to the asserting Three distinct Absolute Infinites:
And fourthly and lastly, Whereas he says, That all the Nonsense of the
foregoing Argument (as he calls every thing which he cannot Answer) shall
escape the lash of his Pen; I would have this poor Whipster know, that the
Animadverter is far from dreading the lash of that Pen which never yet drew
blood of any one but of Priscian. And so having answered his compassionate
Preamble in behalf of our suffering Faith (forsooth) we will now see what he
has to say upon occasion of the Animadverter's Argument (for it can be no more
called an Answer to it, than to that Learned Reply made to his Hobbian
Vindication of his Case, etc.) And in order to this, I demand of him first,
Whether that one Infinite common Essence or Substance which formally unites the
Divine Persons together, does or can formally distinguish them also from one
another? Secondly, Whether (since he utterly denies all Modes as well as
Accidents in God) that which distinguishes each Person from the other can be
any thing else but a Substance? there being nothing in Nature conceievable by
the Mind of Man, but what is either a Substance, an Accident, or a Mode of
Being: and I defy this Man, or any one besides, to give Instance of a fourth
which is none of these: And Thirdly and lastly, Whether each Person hereupon
must not either have Two Substances belonging to him, viz. One uniting him to,
and the other distinguishing him from the rest; or be both united and
distinguished by one and the same substance common to them all? Both of which
are Impossible. This is the Argument, though after another and more particular
manner proposed, and I Challenge this Piece of a Disputant to overthrow any one
Part or Proposition of it by solid and clear Reason; for fooling and
flounceing, and throwing out the word Nonsense (from a plentiful stock within)
will not do it. But to show how woefully he is hampered, see what desperate
assertions he advances, p. 91, 92. for the disentangling himself. And first in
p. 91. l. 28. he roundly tells us, That the Dean knows not any distinction
between the Divine Essence and a Divine Person, but that the Essence makes the
Person. In which words there are Two as false and Heterodox Propositions as can
well be delivered by any one professing Divinity, viz. First, That there is no
distinction between the Divine Essence or Substance, and the Divine Persons.
And secondly, That the Divine Essence makes the Person. Both of which I will
distinctly examine: and first as to the first of them I affirm, That the Divine
Essence is and cannot but be vertually and fundamentally distinguished from the
Persons. That is to say, it affords a Reason and Foundation in the Thing it
self sufficient for the Mind to form thereupon a different Conception of the
Divine Essence, from the Conception of the Divine Persons, by proper and
Metaphysical abstraction: and that so distinct, that the Conceptus objectivus
of one neither is nor can be the Conceptus objectivus of the other. And if this
distinction (or rather distinguishableness) should not be admitted in the
Divine Nature and Persons, as founded upon some Reason in the Things so
distinguished, I desire this Man to tell me upon what account it is, that all
Divines (not excepting himself) discourse of the Divine Essence as
determinable, and of the Divine Persons as of those by whom it is determined;
and again of the Divine Essence as communicable, and of the Divine Persons (two
of them at least) as those to whom it is communicated: For can this be done
without a distinct Conception of that which is to be Communicated, and of Those
to whom the Communication is to be made? or can there be any distinction in the
conception, where there is not a proportionable Distinguishableness in the
Object? So that upon the whole matter it appears, that nothing could be more
contrary to all the Principles of Christian Philosophy and Theology, than this
Author's denial of all distinction (in the sense we have given of it) between
the Divine Essence and Persons: for without such distinction it is impossible
to conceive or discourse of the said Persons, as one in Essence and Three in
Subsistence. And so I pass to the Examination of his other Proposition, viz.
That the Essence makes the Person. Concerning which, I do with the greatest
assurance appeal to all the World, whether any Thing more absurd, strange, and
Paradoxical, was ever asserted in Divinity. For how can the Divine Essence be
conceived to make the Person? Since all [ making] must of Necessity be one of
these Two ways, First, Either by an efficient production. Or secondly, By a
formal Constitution of a Thing. For no third way besides these is assigneable.
But it cannot be by the first, because it is and ever was a received Maxim in
Theology, That the Divine Essence, considered absolutely in it self, neither
produces, nor is produced. So that if any Production or Operation be ascribed
to it, it must be only as it subsists in a Person (one or more), who is the
sole proper Agent, or Producer in every Divine Act or Effect; from whence it is
evident, that that which can produce nothing but as it is and operates in the
Person, cannot produce the Person it self, which it must presuppose, before it
can operate. Besides, that if the Essence should produce the Person, it would
follow that it must produce one Person, as well as another, and consequently
the Person of the Father, as well as that of the Son and of the Holy Ghost: But
if the Essence should produce the Person of the Father, how could the Father be
said to be the fountain of the Deity? (as the Ancient Writers Term him very
often) and to be without all Original, (which is the peculiar Character of his
Person.) For that the Deity or Divine Essence (which are but two words for the
same thing) should produce the fountain of the Deity, or a Self-originated
Person, no Mortal Man, I believe (this Author still excepted) can imagine.
Since therefore it is so insufferably Absurd, to affirm, that the Essence makes
the Person, by way of Production; let us see whether it can be said to make it
the other way, viz. by a formal constitution of it. But if this be admitted,
then the Essence must be that by which a Person is formally a Person: whereupon
the Essence and the Person being commensurate and convertible, it will follow,
That if there be but one Essence there can be but one Person, and that if there
be a Plurality of Persons, there must be a Plurality of Essences too. For the
multiplication of the formal Reason of any Thing must of Necessity multiply the
Thing it self of which it is so. And here I must tell this Author, that as much
as he disclaims the use of the Term [ Formal Reason] yet this very expression
of his, That the Essence makes the Person, truly and properly, neither does nor
can import any thing else, than that the Essence is the formal Reason thereof.
And if so, let him, upon this Assertion, keep off the forementioned
Consequence, viz. That either there are Three Essences, or but one Person, if
he can.

But after all, finding himself pinched still harder and harder, and not well
knowing which way to turn himself, at length he cries out, It is an amazing
thing to think what strange Conceits this man ( viz. the Animadverter) must
have of a Trinity of Persons, and Unity of Essence or Substance, p. 92. l. 7.
To relieve him from which Transport, if this Defender, instead of looking into
the Fathers, (which he so often mentions) will be pleased to read them, he
shall find this amazing Conceit or Notion of the Trinity (as he calls it) fully
and frequently expressed by the (...) and the (...) in the Greek Fathers, and
in the Latin Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, and other Divines Popish and
Protestant, by the Vna Essentia, and the Tres Subsistentiae, or Modi
Subsistendi. That is to say, by three distinct Modes of Subsisting, or three
Subsistences of one and the same Infinite Essence or Substance included in all
and each of them. This is the Animadverter's Notion of One Divine Essence, and
Three Divine Persons (as this man has been more than once told): and the
Authorities producible for it, and in a great measure produced already in the
Animadversions, might (one would think) have served to cure that Amazement, or
rather St^por, which this Author upon this account has been so deeply seized
with. On the contrary, such a Notion of the Trinity as makes the Divine Nature
or Essence a Person, and the three Divine Persons to be three distinct Minds or
Spirits, and consequently three distinct Essences, Natures, or Substances, is
Matter of much greater Amazement and Abhorrence too, to all that are concerned
for the Faith which they were baptized into; And moreover, for any one to
assert three Infinit^ Minds, and yet to pretend not to assert three Gods, is
yet more amazing than the former; And lastly, for such scandalous Assertions to
wear the Stamp of Public License and Authority, and the shameless Author of
them to be endured, and not only so, but to be also under such Circumstances in
the Church of England, is to all sober and pious Minds more amazing, monstrous,
and astonishing than all his detestable Heresies put together. But to draw to a
close of this Argument against his Three Infinite Minds, from a Necessity of
asserting Three Substances in the Godhead, as unavoidably consequent thereupon;
I find this Author utterly at a loss where to fix, and by no means consistent
with himself; as sometimes denying, and sometimes allowing his Three Minds to
be Three Substances. His denial of it appears in these words: Let the
Animadverter (says he) bring off Three Persons from being Three Substances, and
the D^^^ will undertake to bring off his Three Minds from being so as well; p.
89. l. 15. On the contrary, if this Author does not allow of Three Substances
in the Trinity; why does he interpret the places alleged by the Animadverte^
out of the Fathers for an Unity of Substance in the Divine Nature and Persons,
only of a Specific Unity of Substance? for that, all know, is fully consistent
with a plurality of Individual Substances, which a Numerical Unity of Substance
(would he stick to that) neither is nor can be. To which he adds, That no man
can have any Idea of Divine Persons, which are not Substances; p. 92. l. 13.
But foul and impudent Self-contradiction is his constant practice from first to
last; and therefore without pursuing him any further, I shall conclude all with
that Testimony of Faustinus, an eminent Divine in the Fourth Century, and one
of those who scrupled the use of the word (...), for fear of being brought
thereby to admit of Three Substances in the Godhead, and those not Specifically
but only Numerically distinct: as appears from the following Passage at the end
of the Confession of hi^ Faith, entitled, Faustini Presbyteri Fides, and
exhibited by him to the Emperor Theodosius. Miramur (says he) illos Catholicos
probari posse, qui Patris and Fili^ and Spiritus Sancti Tres substantias
confitentur; nam, etsi dicunt, non se credere Filium Dei aut Spiritum Sanctum
Creaturam, tamen contra fidem sentiunt cum dicunt Tres esse Substantias:
consequens est enim, ut Tres Deos consiteantur qui Tres Substantias
confitentur* Quam vocem Catholici semper execr^ti sunt. I know Faustinus wa^
mistaken in reckoning Hypostasis and Substantia ^o^ Terms of the same
signification; but his Argument founded thereupon is certainly so clear a Proof
of the Church's disowning Three Substances in the Blessed Trinity, that a
clearer cannot possibly be: And yet this audacious man, at this time of the
day, with his Three Infinite Minds or Spirits, (which are undeniably Three
Substances) is new dressing and setting up that Odious Tritheism, which the
Primitive Christians so highly abhorred, and so zealously declared against. Sad
therefore at this time must needs be the State, and woeful the Circumstances of
our poor Church of England (once so deservedly reputed the Noblest and Best
Reformed part of the Catholic) to have the Pest and Poison of such an Heresy
fretting in her very Bowels; and to be forced to endure what at the same time I
am sure she heartily does and cannot but deplore. And so I come to canvase his
Answer to the Animadverter's*

Third Argument, Arg. 3.
which proceeds thus: If it be truly said, That one and the same Infinite Mind
or Spirit is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (I mean all Three taken together) and
it cannot be truly said, That one and the same Infinite Mind or Spirit is three
distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits; then it follows, that Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost are not three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits.

"But it may be truly said, etc.

This is the Argument. In the Defender's Reply to which, these Two things are
to be considered: 1. The Representation he makes of the Argument; and, 2. The
Answer he gives to it. As to the first of which he tells us, That the whole of
the Argument is this, That One Infinite Mind cannot be Three Infinite Minds,
nor Three Infinite Minds One Infinite Mind; and that Three Infinite Persons,
who are One Infinite Mind, cannot be Three Infinite Minds: p. 93. l. 9. Now
supposing this to be the whole Argument (as confusedly and brokenly, according
to his known Talent in Logic, he repeats it) I demand of this man, which of
all these Propositions he can charge with Want of Sense? Nay, I confidently
appeal to all the Reason and Common Sense of Mankind, whether there can be in
Nature a clearer and more Self-evident Proposition than this; That one and the
same Infinite Mind is not three distinct Infinite Minds; or, (as even this
Defender has curtailed it) That one Infinite Mind cannot be three Infinite
Minds? And if so, let the Ingenuous Reader judge, whether this Huff's crying
out Want of Sense could proceed from any thing but extreme Want of Shame. But
if in repeating the Argument he strips it of its proper Sense, nay, and of its
principal Terms, and thereby makes it so far his own, surely the Animadverter
is not responsible for that. For he adds, That the whole force of his Argument
lies in the mere Opposition between Three and, One, which is Childish
Sophistry; p. 93. l. 17. But will this man say, That these two Propositions [
Three cannot be One] and [ Three Infinite Minds cannot be One Infinite Mind]
are the same? For, do not the very Words of the latter Proposition declare,
that the Animadverter founds not his Argument upon the bare Numeral diversity
or opposition, which is between One and Three, but upon the peculiar Nature and
Condition of the Subject to which this Numeral Difference is applied? For it is
not any Instance whatsoever, but only this particular Instance of [ Infinite
Mind and Minds] which the Animadverter here argues from. And certainly, there
is a vast difference (whether this man perceives it or no) between barely
saying [ That Three cannot be One] and [ That Three distinct Infinite Minds
cannot be One Infinite Mind]: For, suppose a man should say, [ That three Gods
cannot be one God, nor one God three Gods] (since whatsoever may be said or
denied of [ Infinite Mind] may be equally said or denied of [ God]) Will this
man now say, That the whole force of the said Propositions lies in a mere
opposition between the Terms [ Three and One]? And consequently, that all that
can be concluded from them, is but Childish Sophistry? But to relieve his
Ignorance, and to correct his Profaneness, I would have him take notice, that
the force of the Animadverter's Argument consists in this, That he argues from
an Infinite Absolute Being, which, as such, and in the very Nature or Essence
of it, is on the one side incapable of all multiplication of it self, and on
the other as incapable of any Essential Unity or Union upon supposal of such a
multiplication. This, I say, his Argument manifestly rests upon, and not upon
those thin, pitiful Terms of [ Three and One] and [ One and Three]. And
therefore None surely would have dared thus in the face of the World, and even
in spite of Self-Evidence, and common sense it self, to have called such
Propositions Childish Sophistry, but one who had a Brow of Brass, and a Face
never made to Blush. But to pass from his shameless representation of the
Argument to his senceless Answer to it, he tells us, That if this Proposition
or Rule, viz. That Three cannot be one nor one Three, be universally True, then
there is an end of the Trinity, p. 93. l. 13. To which I answer, That the
forementioned Proposition is neither Universally True, nor Universally* False
(nor ever affirmed so by the Animadverter) but True in some respects, and False
in many others, viz. according to the Different Nature of the Subjects, which
it is applied to. As for instance, it is everlastingly true where the Unity and
Plurality is in the same kind. And for that Reason three Infinite Minds can be
no more one Infinite Mind than the three Divine Persons can be one Person; for
in either of these Instances the Unity and Diversity is in eodem genere: viz.
in genere mentis in the former, in genere personae in the latter; and
consequently in both impossible. And therefore, as for that Inference, upon
which his whole answer relies, viz. That if it be no Contradiction for Three to
be one in several respects, then it is no contradiction for Three Infinite
Minds to be one Mind, p. 93. l. 18. I must tell this Anti-Logician, That he
concludes from a particular Proposition instead of an Universal; and not only
so, but from a particular Instance of one kind to a particular Instance of
another: His Argument amounting to no more than this, That because it is no
contradiction for Three to be one upon different Accounts in some Cases,
therefore neither is it so in the Case of Three Minds. But this, by his favor
will never follow. For though it be no contradiction in some Instances (as
particularly in that of three Subsistences in one Essence, or of three
Relations or respects so concurring in any one thing as to be all predicable of
it) yet This does not hold in all Instances, nor in any Indifferently, nor
particularly in this of three Minds; For as much as no respect whatsoever can
make Three Minds to be essentially One Mind, nor Three Spirits to be one
Spirit, nor Three Substances one Substance, and the like; and it would be a
contradiction for them so to be. But according to this Author's Hypothesis, We
have here a Trinity and Unity of Natures, that is to say, Three distinct
Natures one in Nature, Three distinct Substances one in Substance, and Three
distinct Spirits one Spirit; and all this only by virtue of several Respects;
whereas no bare diversity, either of Respects or Actions, can give or cause a
diversity of Nature or Essence in the substances they belong to, and issue
from; howsoever in some instances it may prove or infer the same. And
therefore, since it has been abundantly proved, That the Terms [ God] and [
Infinite Mind] are so perfectly equipollent, that whatsoever may be affirmed,
or denied of the one, must be equally affirmed or denied of the other, I
challenge this Author to give the World a solid Reason, Why in different
respects Three Gods may not be one God, as well as in the said respects, Three
Infinite Minds may be one Infinite Mind? and particularly why Mutual
Consciousness may not unite several Gods into one, as well as several Infinite
Minds into one, (were there several Gods to be so united)? and I will undertake
to prove (and have indeed more than sufficiently proved already) that there are
and must be as many Gods as there are Infinite Minds. But, as for his old
outworn implement mutual Consciousness, which is the only Vinculum he assigns,
to make his Three Infinite Minds essentially one; it has been shown, that
supposing it (as this Author does) to proceed from Three distinct Minds, it
cannot be one Act, but Three distinct Acts; which therefore can never make
Three Essences (as the Three Minds are, from which the said Acts must proceed)
to be essentially one. Besides, that if this mutual Consciousness were but one
single Act, yet being, as such, postnate to the Essence from which it flows, it
can never give Original Unity to it. I conclude therefore, That the Three
Divine Persons can in no respect whatsoever be Three Infinite Minds any more
than Three Gods. For This very Man affirms, in Terminis, That Infinite Mind or
Spirit is the Divine Nature or Essence it self (and that even in
contradistinction to any of the Divine Attributes) p. 94. l. 23. And if so,
then Three Infinite Minds are Three Divine Natures or Essences, and Three
Divine Natures are Three Godheads, and Three Godheads are Three Gods: only
under a different way of Expression. All which is so very plain, yea so
flagrantly, so self-evidently plain, that to dispute any longer with him upon
this subject, would be but like disputing with one, who denies that the Snow is
white, or that there is any such Thing as motion, even while he himself is
walking about the Room. And thus having shook in pieces his crazy Impertinent
Answer to the Animadverter's Third Argument; When I look back upon that shrewd
remark of his, with which he begins the said Answer, viz. That Logic is a very
troublesome Thing when Men want sense, p. 93. l. 7. I must confess, that he
here speaks like a Man who understands himself, and that having so often shown,
how troublesome a Thing Logic is to him, by his being so angry with it, he now
gives us a very satisfactory Reason why it is so; and therefore in requital of
it, I cannot but tell him, That, if Logic without sense be so troublesome,
Confidence without either Logi^k, or Sense, or Truth, or Shame, or so much as
Conscience of what one says or denies, is Intolerable. And so I am at length
come to the

Arg. 4.
Fourth and concluding Argument which is taken from the form of the Athanasian
Creed, and runs thus.

Whatsoever Attribute may be truly predicated of all and each of the Divine
Persons in the Athanasian Form, so belongs to them all in common, that it can
belong to none of them under any Term of Distinction from the rest.

But the Attribute [ Infinite Mind or Spirit] may be truly predicated of all
and each of the Divine Persons, in and according to the Athanasian Form.

And therefore it can belong to none of them under any Term of distinction from
the rest.

And what has our Defender now to oppose to this Argument? Why, first,
according to his usual way of giving a dull scoff, instead of a Rational
Answer, he calls it a wonderful Argument; and I confess it may well be so to
him, since Wonder generally springs from Ignorance. But let us hear what the
Oracle says; And here we have him telling us, That Infinite Mind or Spirit is
no [Attribute] but the Divine Nature or Essence it self, and that the
Metaphysical Animadverter uses to distinguish between Essence and Attributes in
God, Def. p. 94. l. 23. In answer to which, the Metaphysical Animadverter would
have the Illogical Defender know, That, what Metaphysically taken is properly
the Subject of the Divine Attributes, and upon that account stands
distinguished from them (as the Divine Essence or Nature so taken does) may
yet, Logically considered, be it self an Attribute, as it obtains the place of
a Predicate joined with a Subject in a Proposition. And therefore to that
Senceless Question of his, Is God an Attribute? I Answer, that in a Logical
Sense God may be so: for as much as God may be truly and properly predicated of
each of the Divine Persons. And I would have this poor Capechumen in Logic
take notice, that whatsoever stands predicate in any Proposition, so as to be
affirmed of another thing, as of a Subject, that is Logically an Attribute. And
therefore, though the Term [ God] Metaphysically taken (as we have shown) be
not an Attribute, (which imports only some particular perfection of the Divine
Nature) but the Subject of all such Attributes; yet in these Propositions, The
Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, it is a Logical
Attritube in every one of them; And let him champ upon this, till he breaks his
Teeth upon it, if he pleases. But as Men sometimes in a drunken fit cry out
Fire, Fire, not from what they see without them, but from what they feel
within: So this Man, out of an Internal plenitude of Ignorance, cries out here
in most Tragical manner, What will this Animadverter make of God at last, when
the Divine Essence is an Attribute, and a Divine Person a mere Mode? p. 94. l.
30. In answer to which, as it has been sufficiently explaiend, how the
Animadverter makes the Divine Essence concretely expressed by the Term [ God]
an Attribute, so if this Defender will say further, That he makes a Divine
Person a mere Mode; I do here Challenge him to point out that place in the
Animadversions where the Animadverter says so. He has indeed over and over
declared (and that without shuffling from his words to his meaning) That he
holds a Divine Person to be properly the Divine Nature under such a certain
mode of Subsistence; or in other Terms such a certain mode of Subsistence of
the Divine Nature still including the said Nature in it. This, I say, the
Animadverter all along holds and asserts; and if this Man calls this the making
a Divine Person a mere Mode (as it is a gross and direct falsehood, and utterly
disowned by his Adversary) so, should I take the Liberty of calling Things by
their own proper names, it might justly entitle him to a very coarse one.

Now the Proposition from first to last, asserted by this Author is this, That
the Three Divine Persons are Three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, which
the Animadverter affirmed to be contrary to the Athanasian Creed (as he showed
by casting it into the same Form) and consequently, that if the said Form were
a True way of Reasoning concerning the Divine Nature and Persons, This
Proposition ought to be rejected as utterly inconsistent with it. And how does
our Author counter-argue this? Why; why by running out into an Impertinent
proof, that [ Infinite Mind] belongs distinctly to the Three Divine Persons,
and consequently may be distinctly predicated of each of them. Both which are
as easily granted him, as they can be alleged by him. But by his favor, the
Question here is not, Whether each of the Divine Persons be distinctly an
Infinite Mind, but whether each of them be a distinct Infinite Mind, which this
Defender affirms, and that so positively, that he lays the whole stress of his
Hypothesis upon it in these remarkable words. That if every Person in the
Trinity, considered as a distinct Person, be not a distinct Infinite and
Eternal Mind, there is an end of the Dean's Notion, Def. p. 8. at the end. And
the Animadverter on the other side, as positively denies each of the Divine
Persons to be a distinct Infinite Mind; or that the Term [ Distinct Infinite
Mind] can be truly predicated of, or belong to any of the Persons of the
Blessed Trinity. And therefore for the clearing of this matter (and that even
to this Man's Understanding, if possible) we must always distinguish between
Attributing a Distinct Thing to each Distinct Person, and between Attributing a
Thing distinctly to the said Person. For there is a vast Difference between
these Two; and yet this Author perpetually confounds them, and still from the
latter infers the former: which is a manifest Paralogism a Dicto secundum Quid
ad dictum simpliciter, viz. to conclude absolutely a diverse or Distinct Thing
from a diverse or distinct mode of a Thing. As for instance, Omnipotence
belongs to each of the Divine Persons distinctly, but that does not prove, that
there is a distinct Omnipotence belonging to each of them, but only one and the
same Omnipotence belonging to the Three Persons, according to Three distinct
ways; and what I have said of Omnipotence holds equally in Omniscience, or
Infinite Intelligence, and in all the Essential Divine Attributes besides. For
a Thing's belonging distinctly to the Three Divine Persons, distinctly
considered, imports no more, but that it belongs, after a distinct manner, to
each of them so considered, which one and the same Infinite Being, may, without
any multiplication of it self, very well do. But, says our Author, The
Athanasian Form does not forbid us to attribute to each distinct Person what is
common to all Three, for it does it expressly, by affirming, that the Father is
Uncreate, the Son Uncreate, and the Holy Ghost Uncreate, p. 96. l. 10. In which
words, as by the Term [ Vncreate] I affirm ought to be understood an Uncreate
Being or Essence; So I readily grant, that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
distinctly considered, are each of them an Uncreate Being, but for all that
shall never grant each of them to be a distinct Uncreate Being; But utterly
deny, That the Father is a distinct Uncreate Being, the Son a distinct Uncreate
Being, and the Holy Ghost a distinct Uncreate Being; as being all of them
Propositions absolutely false, and founded upon this perpetual Blunder, That he
shifts the Term [ distinct] from the Subject to the Predicate; still arguing
thus, That because every distinct Person distinctly considered is an Infinite
Mind, therefore every such Person so considered is a distinct Infinite Mind.
Which no Logic, or Rule of Consequence, will or can infer. And therefore,
whereas he makes the Animadverter give this as the Reason of the Athanasian
Predication, That what is common to all Three Persons does not distinctly
belong to each, Def. p. 96. l. 22. I must tell him, That it is false. For the
Animadverter affirms the same Nature which is common to all the Persons, to
belong distinctly to each Person: but nevertheless denies, That, in the same
respect in which it is common to all, it does or can belong distinctly to any
one. For it belongs to all as an Essence or Being absolutely considered; but it
belongs distinctly to each Person, according to a distinct way, or mode of
subsisting, which the said Being or Essence has in each Person: and
consequently, since the same Divine Essence or Being has Three Distinct ways of
subsisting, it does, according to each of them, belong distinctly to each
Person; Yet still (as I said before) not as a distinct Being or Essence in any
Person. And whereas this Man states the Reason of the Athanasian Form upon
this, That the Divine Perfections distinctly existing in the Divine Persons,
are so inseparably united, as to be essentially one, p. 96. l. 26. That is
still Trumping the same old Petitio Principii upon the Reader, for it is still
positively denied him (and will be so for ever) That an Inseparable Union of
Three distinct Infinite Minds (were such an Union possible) can make the said
Minds essentially one. Since it is not so much as possible to conceive them to
be Three distinct Minds without conceiving them also to be Three particular
distinct Essences, and surely Three distinct Essences can never be essentially
one. Besides, That he has been told, That no Substances can be so United, as to
be Inseparable by God's absolute Power; And therefore as for that precarious
Conclusion, in which he says, That the Dean has not transgressed the Athanasian
Form, by asserting Three distinct Infinite Minds, if we understand by them
Three Infinite Intelligent Persons, p. 97. l. 8. I answer, That since it is
impossibble for Three Infinite Minds (which by their very Essence are Three
Absolute Beings) to be Three Relative Subsistences of one and the same Infinite
Mind included in all and each of them, (which the Three Divine Persons are) it
is evident, that he has transgressed, and (as much as in him lay) overthrown
the Athanasian Form, and that it is impossible for all the Wit of Man to
reconcile Three distinct Infinite Minds to the said Form. Besides, that it is
manifest, that notwithstanding, he says, That by Three Infinite Minds, he means
Three Infinite Intelligent Persons, he yet discourses of them all along so,
that Vice versa, it is evident, that by these Three Infinite Intelligent
Persons, he means no other than Three Infinite Minds: For if each of these
Infinite Intelligent Persons be a distinct Infinite Mind (as this Author has
positively affirmed) I leave it to the Judgment of any one who can tell Three,
whether Three distinct Infinite Intelligent Persons be not Three distinct
Infinite Minds; so that he is still but where he was, and all that he has said
is nothing but dodging and showing Tricks. In fine, it is extremely in vain to
dispute any longer wi^^ a Man who has not a clear or True Conception of any one
Thing or Term belonging to the subject here disputed upon; and therefore I
shall add no more upon this Argument, but shut up all with the following
passage out of the first of those two Latin Tracts inserted into the second
Tome of Athanasius's Works, and Entitled de unita Deitate Trinitatis ad
Theophilum, p. 551. Colon. Edit. Cur Pater Spiritus dicitur, and Filius
Spiritus nuncupatur, and Spiritus Sanctus Spiritus appellatur? Ad haec
respondetur, An Ignoras, quia Pater unus Deus est, Filius unus Deus, and
Spiritus Sanctus Vnus Deus est, dum unitum nomen sit in Natura (...); Sic and
Vnus Spiritus est, quia unita est Dei^as eorum? Nam si Tu per singula Nomina
Personarum Vnitum Nomen Spiritus ter designasti, nunquid Tres Spiritus dicere
oportebat? Absit. Which Testimony I think as plain and full against this
Author's Three Spirits or Minds, as words can well express a Thing. The Author
(whosoever he was) seems to have lived since the Eutychian Heresy, and may be
placed about the seventh Century.

And so I take my leave of the Dean's Three distinct Infinite Minds, Spirits,
or Substances, that is to say, of his Three Gods; and having done this,
methinks I see him go whimpering away, with his Finger in his Eye, and that
Complaint of Micah in his Mouth, Judge. 18.24. Ye have taken away my Gods which
I made, and what have I more? Though, I must confess, I cannot tell, why he
should be so fond of them, since I dare undertake, that he will never be able
to bring the Christian World either to believe in, or to Worship a Trinity of
Gods: nor do I see what use they are like to be of, even to himself, unless
peradventure to swear by.

And so I have examined and gone over all this Author's Exceptions against the
Animadverter's Arguments, and that with all the Particularity and Impartiality
that it was possible to examine any Writing with; and upon a survey of what has
been said on either side, I cannot perceive, but that the Animadverter's
Arguments stand just as they did before; unless possibly something firmer, for
this Author's attempts to shake them. For, upon the whole matter, I must
profess, that I never met with a weaker, and a lamer defense of any Hypothesis
whatsoever. But he threatens the Animadverter with an Answer to the Testimonies
alleged by him out of the Fathers, and others, Def. p. 97. l. 18. And I have
heard that learned Person mentioned, who is generally supposed to be employed
by this Author to do that for him, which he cannot do for himself; though I
reckon him to be one of too much Judgment, as well as Learning, to appear in
the World, both as Veterum Vindicator, and Novatorum Vindicator too.

In the mean time, as for those Blasphemous Passages extracted out of this
Author's Book of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and charged by the Animadverter
upon him in his Preface, the Animadverter continues and persists in the same
charge still; nor does he find, that this Author has at all cleared himself
from it, in the Defense of that Book here mentioned by him; p. 98. Nor are the
said lewd Passages (as he pretends) proposed there by him as Objections to be
answered, but as his own vile Descants upon the received Doctrine of the
Church, about some of the most important Points of Christianity. Besides, that
what is said, in the Preface, upon this subject, makes but a small part of the
said Preface* so that if he should attempt to answer it (which he has too much
Wit in his Anger, to do) it would be but like this pitiful little scrap of an
Answer published by him against the Animadversions themselves. But still, after
all, the Blasphemies there placed to his Account are so very foul and flagrant,
that none but he, who uttered them, can pretend to defend them: and the whole
Plea, which he or any of his Partisans, ever yet did or could pretend to make
for them, was that he uttered them in the Person of Dr. Owen, and as the
Results of his Opinion. But since he could never so much as pretend them to be
Dr. Owen's words, nor yet prove them to be the certain consequent of his
Assertions, the Blasphemy is, and must be his, who formed and uttered those
Diabolical Expressions. For suppose a Mahumetan should single out some passages
of St. Paul's Epistles, and descant upon them, and affix an impious and
Blasphemous sense to them, and being reproved for his Blasphemy and Impiety,
should allege in his Defense, That he spoke them in St. Paul's Person, and as
the genuine Result of St. Paul's Writings, I desire to know of this Man and his
absurd Favorers, whether the Charge of Blasphemy ought to lie against St.
Paul, or against the Mahumetan? The Case is exactly the same as to the Thing it
self; abating for the Disparity of the Persons, viz. of an Inspired Apostle,
and of any the most Learned Modern Doctor whatsoever. And therefore I do here
charge him afresh as guilty of all those Blasphemies set down in that Preface,
nor has he in the Defense of that wretched Book answered any one of them,
saving that at the latter end of it, viz. p. 529. l. 14. of his Defense of the
Discourse concerning the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, he seems to knock under
Board, and to own that there is an (...) due to the discoursing of Things
Sacred, be the Case what it will: Which Apology declares, that, even by his own
Confession, he had treated of these Things in a most scandalous unbecoming
manner; as in truth he did, and not only so, but (whosoever set him upon it) in
a most Profane, and Devilish way too: So that whereas he here says, That he
had by that answer silenced his Adversaries, so that he heard from them no
more, Def. p. 94. l. 24. I must tell him, that some silence their Adversaries,
because they cannot be answered by them, and some because they are not thought
worth the answering; which was this Author's Case here. For his Adversaries (as
inconsiderable as they were) having effectually baffled and overthrown his
whole Book, and broken the strength and sinews of it (if it had any), little
concerned themselves at any Insignificant Replies, he did or could afterward
make, though never so many; but were willing to let him have the last word;
considering, that, as Rector of Billingsgate at that time, he might claim it by
his place.

But the following Instruction to his Friend is certainly very diverting, Def.
p. 98. at the end, in these words, Where the Animadverter (says he) charges the
Dean with Absurdities and Contradictions, turn to the place, and read it with
it is context, and tell me what you cannot answer, and I will: to which he
should have done well to have added, If I can. But the whole Passage is just as
if he had said, Sir, If you find not Absurdities and Contradictions enough in
my Book to satisfy your Curiosity that way, pray come to the Fountain Head, and
consult me, and you shall be sure of a more plentiful supply. But he goes on.
If you or any Body else (says he) can be persuaded by the Animadverter, that
the Dean understands neither English, Latin or Greek, Logicks, Metaphysics,
etc. I need wish you no other punishment, than, when ever you write, to fall
into the hands of such an Adversary, p. 99. l. 1. In answer to which I am bid
only to tell him, that touching his Qualifications as to the forementioned
respects, the Animadverter is perfectly of the same mind which he was of, when
he wrote the ninth and tenth Chapters of the Animadversions; but thinks it not
worth his while to use many Arguments to persuade the Reader to be of the same
opinion, but only refers him to two Irrefragable ones, viz. his own two Eyes to
convince him. In the mean time it may be some diversion to him to observe how,
that because most Parts of Philosophy, viz. Physics, Metaphysics,
Mathematics, Ethics, Politics, etc. are always expressed plurally, therefore
this Author very wisely expresses Logic so too, calling it Logicks, Def. p.
99. l. 3. which I dare say no Scholar ever called so before; and in my poor
Judgment he might have forborne to speak of Logicks in the Plural, till he had
better understood one. But it is evident that he knew no better, and we must not
expect that any one should speak better than he knows. But since he is such a
grand Exemplar of Pride and Disdain toward all whom he ever wrote against;
that he may not however lie too open to them, when they turn upon him again
(as, in all likelihood, the way being now opened to them, they will) I would
advise him in time (though I confess it is something with the latest) to
procure himself some good honest Systems in all the forementioned sorts of
Learning (adding (to use his own Dialect) Grammaticks withal;) since I would
not direct him to Books too much above his reach at first. And when he has once
got them about him, I would have him ply them hard, assuring himself (which all
know, though scarce any one is so much his Friend as to tell him so) that he
has a great deal more need of studying, than the World has or can have of his
Writing. Nevertheless, if Writing be so absolutely Necessary to him, that his
health requires it, and that Nature cannot be at ease, nor enjoy it self,
unless the Scripturient humor has sometimes vent by throwing it self off into
Paper; let him, at least, make choice of proper Subjects, and forbearing all
Controversial Discourses about Christ's Satisfaction, God's punitive Justice,
and the Trinity (which he was never cut out for) let him rather jog on in the
old beaten Track of Church Communion, and of Death and Judgment, and upon these
and such like heads, (the Two last especially) he may continue on, Writing and
Printing, and Printing and Writing (and the World never the wiser for either)
even till his Subject overtakes him.

I have now gone through his whole Defense, and having done so, cannot but
think it very proper, and equally for the Reader's Satisfaction, to lay before
him a Brief Scheme or Analysis of it, together with those pitiful mean ways
and methods by which (with much ado) it has been patched up and put together;
that so he may see what a kind of Antagonist the Animadverter has had to deal
with, and that in these following Particulars. As

First, That (for the better salving of his Credit) he imposes his Book upon
the World, under the specious but false Title of an Answer to the
Animadversions; whereas it is but a very small Part of that Discourse which he
attempts to answer, passing over the main body of it, without answering,
examining, or so much as meddling with it at all.

Secondly, That he boldly and positively denies several Things in this Book,
which he had as positively affirmed before. For which, compare what he had said
of the Term [ Substance] in his Vindication, with what he says of it in this
his Defense. In the former he explodes it from all our Discourses of God; for
that, as he affirms, the Mind of Man cannot form any conception of Substance,
either without matter, or without a Beginning, (upon which score I am sure it
cannot be applicable to God) Vind. p. 69. l. 1. and 70. l. 7. and yet here in
this Book he allows of it in our Discourses of God as a Term not only very
Good, but Useful and Necessary, Def. p. 3. l. 27. which two let the Reason of
all Mankind reconcile, if it can. Likewise for [ Subsistence] compare what he
says for the utter rejection of this Term from all discourses about the
Trinity, Vind. p. 138. line the last, and 139. line the first, with what he
says in behalf of it in this Defense, p. 25. l. 13. affirming, that there could
not be a more proper word used to express an Unity in Trinity by: But all
Instances of this kind falling under the Head of Self-Contradiction, I pretend
not to Arithmetic enough to number them.

Thirdly, That when he finds himself overborn by an Argument, he flies off, and
quite alters the state of the Question, and in the Room of that Term which he
finds indefensible, he presently substitutes another. As instead of the Act of
Self-Consciousness, which he had so frequently, and so expressly made use of,
and insisted upon, he puts the principle of the said Act, Def. p. 39. l. 15.

Fourthly, That he takes shelter in several fallacious expressions, which being
once stripped of their Ambiguity by distinctions duly applied, leave the Thing,
they would prove, in the lurch, and vanish into Nothing; such as for instance,
amongst many others, is his insisting upon a substantial Trinity in opposition
to such a one, as admits of no greater than a Modal distinction between the
Divine Persons: by which, if he means, That the said Three Persons, are Three
distinct Substances, it is false, but if he means that they are Three
Substantial Persons, so called from one and the same Infinite Substance common
to them all, and subsisting differently in each of them, it is True, and every
one grants such a Substantial Trinity; but this makes nothing at all for his
Hypothesis: the Argument resting wholly upon the Ambiguity of the Term
Substantial.

Fifthly, That finding some of the chief Notions, which he built his whole
Hypothesis upon, quite baffled, and by none of his palliating Tricks to be
justified, he fairly quits and gives them up, and thereby (whether he will or
no) absolutely yields the Point in debate to his Adversary. See this grossly
exemplified in his Notion of Mutual Consciousness (which frequently comes in my
way) made by him at first the Reason of the Essential Unity of the Divine
Persons, and afterward allowed by him to be no more than the Result and
Consequent of the said Unity. Defense, p. 75. l. 20.

Sixthly, That when he is nonplus'd in any Proposition taken and understood
according to the universally received sense of the Words of it, he presently
strikes off from thence to his Meaning, and tells the Reader, That he, for his
part, means quite another thing by it. See his Def. p. 81. l. 28.

These, I say, are some of those Arts and Shifts with which he all-along
encounters the Animadverter; but Shifts, by his Favor, will neither pass for
Arguments, nor yet for Answers to them, any more than Shuffling the Cards can
be reckoned Winning the Game. But because his chief Engine of all, and which he
makes most use of, is his frequent allegation of his Meaning, in opposition to
his plain express Assertions, I think it not amiss to illustrate it by some
Examples.

Thus for instance.

1. When he says, That we know the Nature of a Body, Vind. p. 4. l. 25. his
Meaning is, that we know the Nature of Nothing in the World. Vindic. p. 7. l.
19.

2. When he says, That a Person and an Intelligent Substance are reciprocal
Terms, Vind. p. 69. l. 18. his Meaning is, That a Beast or Brute, which is not
an Intelligent Being, is and may be called a Person. Vindic. p. 262. l. 18.

3. When he says, That Susistence (and the like Terms reckoned up by him) serve
only to perplex and confound Men's Notions about the Trinity; Vindic. p. 138. l:
the last, and 139. l. 1. his Shameless Meaning (as we have shown) p. 25. l. 13.
of his Def. is, That there could not have been a more proper Word thought on to
represent the Trinity by, than Three Subsistences in One Individual Nature.

4. When he says, A Trinity in Unity is a Venerable Mystery, and that there may
be a great deal more in it, than we can Fathom, Vind. p. 86. l. 1, 2. his
Meaning is, That it is a plain, easy, and intelligible Notion, (as explained
by him) and such as gives a plain solution of all the Difficulties and seeming
Contradictions in the Doctrine of the said Article. Vind. p. 66. l. 2, 3.

5. When he professes to explain the Mysterious Union between the Eternal
Father and the Son by the Unity of a Spirit, as the best way of explaining it,
Def. p. 6. l. 22. his Meaning in the same Def. from p. 19. to p. 35. is, That
the said Mysterious Union is best explained by a Man, and his Living Image:
though neither of them is a Spirit. And I suppose that that which is not a
Spirit can neither have the Unity of a Spirit belonging to it.

6. When he makes Self-Consciousness the Reason of Personality, Personal Unity
and Distinction in each of the Divine Persons, and Mutual Consciousness the
Reason of their Essential Unity, (as we have shown he does) his Meaning is,
That Self-Consciousness and Mutual Consciousness do only suppose, result from,
Prove and infer the said Distinction upon the former account, and the said
Unity upon the latter. That is to say, When he speaks of a Cause or Antecedent,
he always means an Effect or Consequent. And I need not quote Page and Line for
this, having quoted them so often before.

7. When he speaks of an Infinite Mind, and of Three Infinite Minds, (as he
does very often) he tells us, That by Mind he means a Person, Def. p. 81. l.
32. though [ Mind] and [ Person] are Terms quite differing from one-another,
both in Signification and Definition, and accordingly are, and ever have been
so used.

8. When he says, That not to allow the Three Divine Persons to be Three
distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, is Heresy and Nonsense, (as he affirms in
words equally express and impudent) he tells us, his Meaning is, That it is
Heresy and Nonsense to assert Three Persons, who are not Three distinct
Intelligent Persons, Def. p. 81. l. 21. which, I dare say, no Man alive ever
asserted, or any Man of Sense ever imagined; any more, than any one ever
asserted Peter, and James, and John to be Three Men, and yet denied them to be
Three Rational Creatures. But an impudent Copy-monger will venture to say
something, though in defiance of Sense, and in spite of Nonsense too.

9. When he calls a Man a Person, (as he often does in his Writings) his
Meaning is, Not that the Man, but that the Soul is the Person, and the Body the
Vital Instrument of the Soul; and that neither Soul nor Body are Parts of the
Person.

Nor is this sovereign thing of use only in Matters of Argument and Dispute,
The wonderful Virtues of a skillfully managed [ meaning.]
but also in Matters of a very different nature. As for example.

1 st, When a known Writer published some Queries against the Commission and
Commissioners for making Alterations in our Liturgy, severely reflecting upon
both; his [ Meaning] was, only to inform the World what Excellent Persons (as
he styles them) they were, who so (zealously) designed and promoted the said
Alterations. See An Apology, etc. p. 5. l. 20.

2 dly, When a certain Divine told an Irish Bishop (as was hinted before in the
Animadversions, p. 358. l. 2. Edit. 2.) That he would be Crucified before he
would take the New Oath to K. W. and Q. M. his [ Meaning] was, That he resolved
to take it, and accordingly did so.

3 dly, And lastly, When one (very well acquainted with the former) said, That
those very Hands of his should restore King James, but that they were tied up
from Writing. His meaning was, That those hands should write Answers to King
James's Declaration.

By all which we see the strange and wonderful force of a skilful managed
meaning, as having certainly something of Enchantment or Spell in it. For it is
proof against all Impressions: and no Argument can pierce, or so much as reach
it, but it absolutely renders the Person, who carries it about him,
Invulnerable, and by Consequence Invincible. And therefore whereas this Author
in his Defense, p. 78. l. 10. prescribes some Rules to the Animadverter, in
case he should think fit to try his skill again upon this subject (which words
seem to ^ound very much like a Challenge.) I must tell him, That the
Animadverter ever yet took him for as easy a Combatant as heart could wish, and
bids me acquaint him further, that he shall be readier to engage in a
Controversial Duel with him, than with any Man alive, provided, That he does
not bring his Meaning for his Second.

But it is now time to discharge the Debt I brought my self under, and to
account with this Author (in some measure at least) for the scurrilities which
he had so freely bestowed upon the Animadverter. But before I enter upon so
just, and (as I think) so requisite a work, I cannot but solemnly declare, that
nothing seems to me so strange, Amazing and Unaccountable, as that there should
be so much as one mouth opened, either for this Man, or against the
Animadverter, by way of Complaint, as if too much sharpness had been used by
one against the other. For did the Animadverter appear against this Man as the
Aggressor, or rather as the Vindicator of so many excellent Persons whom he had
trampled upon with the utmost Insolence and Contempt? For I Challenge the most
Zealous and Partial of his Friends, to show me that Man, whom he ever wrote
against, and did not treat in this manner. Nor is his Conversation (by what I
can hear) at all less Provoking and Insulting than his Pen; so that very
slavish Animals certainly they must needs be, who can frame themselves to
endure either. But what would these Abject Creatures have? Would they have the
whole World lie down as often as this Man writes a Book? and all Mankind suffer
themselves to be aspersed as long as his Everlasting Diabetical Quill shall be
disposed to Drop Pamphlets? This is very hard upon my word: for his Pen scarce
ever lies still for four Months together, but that its old Laxe returns upon it
afresh, and then so much Paper is sure to be fouled, and many a worthy and good
Name besides. But perhaps these Men would have the Animadverter come cringing
to his Deanship, as the Socinian Considerer has done, whom I find with the most
unparallelled humility, or rather prostration of Carriage (that I ever met with
in a Man of Parts and Spirit) in lowly manner Kissing his Reverend Feet, for
having so scornfully kicked and trod upon him and his Party, and swallowing all
the foul stuff which he had with such Insufferable contumely spit upon them; as
if it had not been enough for him tamely to bear his base Reproaches, but that
he must also requite him with Panegyricks and Commendations. But I shall pay my
Devoirs to this Gentleman again presently. In the mean time I can assure him,
and the whole World, that the Animadverter is quite of another Temper, and
accordingly does here by me solemnly declare, That whatsoever he has born or
may bear from others, he is resolved not to take the least affront at this
Man's hands, but will be sure to repay him to his face. And this is all the
Apology that shall be made for any sharpness used either in the Animadversions
themselves, or in this Vindication of them. And so I proceed to animadvert upon
his Scurrilities, which I shall do in such order as I think fit, since the
Reader shall be sure to have the several places faithfully pointed out to him,
which I intend to remark upon. And here I shall direct him,

First, to that remarkable passage in this Defense, p. 43. at the end. The
Animadverter (says he) is a Notable man, if he can draw you into a
School-Question, for he can make a shift to read and transcribe, but he hates
an (...) and (...)-men at his heart, which is none of his Talent, for it
requires Thinking. Concerning which, I desire the impartial and ingenuous
Reader to judge, whether it be possible for the Tongue or Pen of man to utter
any thing more Opprobrious. And therefore if the biased and malicious part of
the World will not excuse me, they must give me leave to excuse my self, if I
answer this Libeller as he deserves. And here in the first place I require him
in the Animadverter's Name and Behalf to declare and assign that Writer from
whom the Animadverter even transcribed any Thing, unless by way of Quotation;
though, I must confess, that I cannot return upon him this Charge of
Transcribing from any Schoolman, or other ominent Greek or Latin Writer,
since, I dare swear, he never quoted any such, but from those who had first
quoted them to his hands. But must the Animadverter then pass for a
Transcriber? What will this man make of him? Will he make him write Cases of
Allegiance, and borrow his Arguments out of a Letter from a Dr. W.
Friend? which a certain Person in the World has been as good at, as he can be
at writing Letters to a Friend. But what is this his boasted of (...) after
all? Why, even this one poor Greek word, which having by much ado got by the
end, I would have him by all means make the best, he can, of. For I dare say
his (...) will never make him an Archimedes, or indeed so much as a Figure in
any Thing. And therefore whereas he says the Animadverter hates him, that is
his Mistake, and I wonder that he cannot distinguish between Hatred and Pity.
He owns himself indeed (as all good men ought to do) an Hater of the Character
of an (...) man in matters of Faith, which God has proposed to men as objects
to employ their Assent and Submission, but by no means to exercise their
Invention; and there was no sort of Men whatsoever, whom the Catholic Church
always looked upon as such Pests as these (...) Men, which is only another word
for Venturous, Meddlesome, Self-Opiniators and Self-Conscious Innovators, and
that in those Sacred Points, in which all Innovation ever was, and is, and
ought to be Intolerable. For Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutyches, were
all of them great (...)-Men in the several Ages they lived in. Nor were there
any whom the Primitive Church still kept so watchful an Eye, and so severe an
hand over, as these Novellists; and had this Author lived, not only under the
Discipline of the Church of those Ages, but even of that excellent Copy of it
the Church amongst our selves before the great Rebellion (which gave it such an
Incurable Wound) he would have found to his Cost, what it had been to play the
(...). Man upon the Trinity; for whatsoever else it might have done for him, it
would have been sure to have stopped him in his way to St. Paul's. But this is
not all his Civility to the Animadverter, for he allows him not only able to
Transcribe, but to make a shift to read too; (for this Author has convinced me,
that it is not impossible for one to Transcribe what he cannot Read.) In
requital of which Complement, I do here tell this Man, that if he could, and
should pay to the Crown a penny for every Greek word which he can neither Read
nor Spell, nor make any Thing of, I dare undertake that it might save the
Nation a Tax for one year at least. In fine, as much a Transcriber as his foul
mouth would make the Animadverter, let him but prove that he ever transcribed
any thing out of His Writings, and I will give him leave to prosecute him, not
only for a Thief, but for the very worst, the basest and meanest of Thieves,
viz. A Robber of the Spittle. But I assure him, that for what concerns his own
Writings, he is safe; for as to them, let any Man but first Read, and I dare
undertake he will never be tempted to transcribe.

Secondly, The next passage, I shall take notice of, is that in p. 38. at the
end, and 39. at the beginning, where (with the grossest Ignorance) pretending
to prove Risibility the formal Reason of Humanity, from an Assertion of the
Animadverter, which he understood not. This (says he) makes well for the
Animadverter to prove him to be a Man, though he is seldom in so good an Humor,
as to laugh without grinning, which belongs to another Species. Thus the
Courtier of Gravel-lane; By which words it is evident, that the poor man is
here offering at Wit, but cannot reach it. But as for the Risibility he is so
much concerned against, do not all the Schools of Philosophy make Risibility
the Property of a man? and withal deny the Form or Nature of any Thing to
consist in the Property of it, as well as the Animadverter? But let him set his
heart at rest; for whatsoever Risibility may be in others, yet so far as it
concerns himself, the Animadverter will hardly allow it for an Argument of
Rationality, as it is in him, but as it is employed upon him. But to cut off
the Unfortunate Animadverter from all Hopes of ever proving his Rationality by
his Risibility, with one terrible blow he strikes him down into the grinning
Species: the meaning of which word is very well known, and a word it is as fit
for this Man's Billingsgate mouth, as his mouth is peculiarly fitted for that.
Though by his Favor, he shall never make the Animadverter so far of the
grinning Species, as either to find him amongst the sneaking Spaniels, or the
Hybrid Mongrils: but rather of that genuine English kind, which having once
fastened (as the Animadverter has upon this Man) will not be made to quit their
Hold. But if he were desirous to learn that Canine Art of fetching and
carrying, (especially between Paul's and Lambeth) he knows where to find one
very well able to instruct him. In the mean time I humbly present the World
with this Specimen of Mr. Dean's refined Breeding, Civility, and Discretion,
that he has no other Answer to give his Adversary, but by calling him Grinning
Dog. Which yet, I confess, is very agreeable to the Rage I hear the
Animadversions have put him into; which is such, that in most Companies he
speaks of nothing but Daggers, Gibbets, and Furnaces; the very mention either
of the Animadverter or Animadversions, transporting him into such Fits and
Agonies, as render him extremely troublesome both to himself, and to all who are
so unhappy as to be with him: and much ado has he, in one of those Fits, to
forbear cursing Both of them by his Gods. But,

Thirdly, I pass on to present the Reader with another of his Flowers, gathered
out of p. 90. l. 25. of this Defense, where he closes a Paragraph with these
Magisterial Words pronounced (one would think) out of the Chair of Aristarchus
himself, or some such eminent Grammarian. It is (says he) a tedious thing to
dispute with Men who must be taught to construe the Fathers, and understand
Common Sense. But will this Abcedarian venture to reproach any one for that,
who, but a few Pages before this, construes that Expression of the Fathers,
(...), by Mutual Consciousness, p. 71. l. 6? And that in those remarkably
positive words; This (...) (says he) is that very Mutual Consciousness which
the Dean holds; that is to say, With the grossest Ignorance he construes (...)
or (...), which signifies an Act of the Will, by Mutual Consciousness, which is
an Act of Knowledge, or (as he whimsically calls it) of Sensation. And
therefore let me tell this See the meaning of these extraordinary words in
Chap. 10 of the Animadversions.
Anti-nicene, Quadrigesimal, Chrysom, Paraphrases-man, That the Animadverter
can construe the Fathers, and understand them too, at much another rate than
this comes to, provided that he reads them in their own Works; but he
confesses, that when he reads them quoted by him in his Writings, he cannot
construe them for Solecisms. In the mean time, I, for my part, am so far from
thinking this Author fit to set up for a Construer of the Fathers, and much
less for a Teacher of others to construe them, that I shrewdly suspect that it
has been for want of a Construing-Book, that he is no better acquainted with
his Grammar.

Fourthly, The next thing which I think fit to take notice of, is his frequent
reproaching the Animadverter with the Character of a Wit, though joined with
such ill-favored Epithets as his Witless Malice has thought fit to degrade it
with; as, p. 9. l. 19. That he is a Spightful Wit; and p. 66. i. 21. a
Wrangling Wit; and p. 1. l. 6. a Satirical Wit, and the witty, subtle,
good-natured Animadverter, p. 38. l. 26. etc. Though after all, I think, there
is but very little Wit shown in making such Charges. However, if Wit be a
Reproach, (be it of what sort it will) the Animadverter is too just to return
this Reproach upon the Defender; and withal, understands himself, and what
becomes him, too well, either to assume to himself, or so much as to admit the
Character of a Wit, as at all due to him; especially since he knows that Common
Sense (a thing much short of Wit) is enough to enable him to deal with such an
Adversary. Nevertheless, there are many in the World, who are both called and
accounted Wits, and really are so; which (one would think) should derive
something of Credit upon this Qualification, even in the esteem of this Author
himself, or at least rebate the edge of his Invectives against it, considering
that it might have pleased God to have made him a Wit too. But,

Fifthly, To come to another of his Reproaches, and that of a much blacker
import than the former; he tells the Animadverter, That he is by much an
Overmatch for any one who is a Christian, p. 90. l. 12. And again, That his
Example is too scandalous to be imitated, p. 99. at the end. Worse than which,
I am sure, can be said of no Man. But, in the mean time, what flat downright
Railing is this? And, what dull, dry, wooden Blows does he deal forth here, fit
only (one would think) to come from an Hand made rather to manage a Flayl, or a
Coulstaff, than a Scholastic Pen, and such as I defy him to find any thing
like to, in all the Animadversions? But is the Animadverter, in good earnest,
so enormously wicked, that his very Example is scandalous, and himself a
Reproach to his Christian Profession? What has he done, besides Animadverting
upon a Public Nuisance, who had affronted and abused the whole World besides?
Has he wrote a Plea for the Lawfulness of taking the New Oath to K. W. and Q.
M. asserting it upon the strictest Principles (as one calls them) of old Church
of England Loyalty: and after a few weeks wrote another Tract to prove the
utter Unlawfulness of the same? (Both which Pieces have flown abroad as far as
Manuscripts could well spread) Or did he upon the late Public Turn of Affairs,
not only most zealously own K. James's Cause himself, but also join with and
abett those who owned it too, and yet presently after, in a barbarous manner,
reflect upon and insult over those very Persons when they had lost all they had
for it? This Man indeed, for his part, had his Preferments all the time kept
void for him, (Thanks to his Honorable Diocesan, whom, I doubt not but, he has
since fairly requited for that supererogation of his Kindness to him) so that
his Stake in the Church was sufficiently secured, while his Refusal of the Oath
gave him opportunity to enter into the Bosoms of those who refused it too: and
to observe their behavior, and to scan all that was either said or done by
them; which I hope he did without turning it to their Prejudice; though the
known Case of Dr. Hn and Dr. Im (who complain of a scurvy Trick played them for
their confidence) shows, That in this man, hearing, and seeing, and saying
nothing do not always go together. Nor was this all, viz. That his Places were
kept undisposed of during his Suspension, but as soon as he took the Oath (the
time of which was fairly intimated by a Friend of his at a Public Table at
Oxon, about three months before he took it) as soon, I say, as he had taken it,
he was immediately and per saltum mounted up to one of the best Preferments in
the Church of England; which demonstrated that his Recusancy of the Oath so
long, was not accounted so criminal a Thing by those who knew him, as to need
any time of Probation, gradually to clear and set him right again in their
Opinions, but that he presently stepped forth All Worth, Merit, and pure
Allegiance, after the Turn was once served, and the Scene was over. In fine
therefore, since he has so reproachfully objected Scandal of Example to the
Animadverter, I would advise him to lay his Hand upon his Heart (if he can find
where it is) and consider how many worthy and sincere Persons have by the
fallacious Influence of his Example and Pretenses (still bleeding-fresh both in
Their minds, and the minds of many others) been brought, through their Refusal
of that Oath, to Misery and Want, and a piece of bread, when they can get it.
Which, let me tell him, is a very dreadful Consideration, and when he comes to
look Death in the face (which he will find a much harder work than to write
upon it) may chance to lie cold at his heart. In the mean time, I should be
glad to hear how much of the Revenue of his Deanery he lays aside for the Relief
of those poor men, who have been so unhappily trapanned into this Distress. But
not a tittle could I ever hear of this or any Thing like it. So that as ill a
Christian as he would represent the Animadverter, let him for me keep his
New-fashioned Christianity to himself; with this charitable Wish however, viz.
That it may do him more good in the other World, than it has done others in
this.

7. The last Instance of His Rancor, which I shall mention, and by which, I
doubt not, he designed a shrewder Blow to the Animadverter than by any of the
rest, is his calling the Socinians his Friends, and Admirers, Def. p. 97. l.
31. Though these words (to such as know what this Man was) show only how
desirous of late he is to throw off his old Friends, A Specimen of the
Friendship of the Socinians to the Animadverter objected to him by this
Defender, together with some remarks upon a Socinian. Tract, Entitled,
Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity, etc. So far
as they concern the Animadverter.
whomsoever he throws them upon; But that the Reader may see, whether the
Animadverter, or that disguised Dean, have the greater Interest in the
Friendship and esteem of the Socinians, I must refer him to a certain Socinian
Tract, published something above a year since, and Entitled, Considerations
upon the several Explications of the Trinity, etc. A Book wrote with such an
hearty Zeal and concern for Dr. Sherlock, and such a peculiar design to
reproach the Animadverter, that it is really a set and formed Defense of the
former against the latter, and can be called by no name so properly as a
Panegyric upon the one, and a Satyr against the other. This Piece the
Animadverter read soon after it was published; but finding so few Things said
in it with reference to the main Argument, and those so grossly (if not also
wilfully) misrepresenting the Doctrine which they were brought to impugn, he
could not think himself obliged to answer it. Nor should it have been at all
meddled with now, but that the bitter reflexive part of it (which I shall
chiefly remark upon) offers it self, as so apposite and full an Answer to the
Imputation, which the Defender has thought fit to load the Animadverter with,
that it could not have been more full and home, had it been contrived and wrote
for this very purpose. And here to enable the Reader the better to pass his
Judgment on both sides, I think it requisite first to premise after what manner
Dr. Sherlock, whom this Considerer so much magnifies, had on the one hand, and
the Animadverter, whom he so reviles, (having first assigned him a Name, or
rather a piece of a Name, accorning to his own Fancy) had on the other hand
treated the Socinians; of which number this Author professes himself to be one.
And for this, he will find Dr. Sherlock reproaching them in his Vindication for
having neither Greek nor Latin, and thereupon very magisterially sending them
to School again (I suppose in his own Room) Likewise charging them with
Nonsense, and calling their Opinion one of the most stupid senceless Heresies
that ever infested the Christian Church, Pref. to Vind. at the end. Vowing
withal, never to put up his Goose-quill in this Quarrel against them, Ibid.
and, in short, treating them with the utmost scorn, that it was possible for
words to express: whereas on the contrary, the Animadverter, though he could by
no means be of their Opinion, nor yet come up to the Lambeth-strain, in
declaring them the only Scholars and Disputants in the World, and in comparison
of whom, some of the most eminent, upon both accounts, that Christendom ever
had, were but mere Bunglers, yet with a due and just deference to Truth, See
the Animadv. p. 329, 330.
he frankly acknowledged their Parts and Learning, and asserted the Reputation
of both against their Beloved Dr. Sherlock, who had with the utmost contumely
and disdain, vilified them. All which considered, the whole conduct of this
spightful usage of the Animadverter, by Persons (even by their own Confession,
Consid. p. 12. 2 Col. l. 41.) wholly unprovoked by him, is to me (I must
confess) all Riddle, and I believe to all sober Persons besides: nor can I see
what tolerable account can be given of it, but that they did all this by
particular Orders, and then it is easy to judge from whom those Orders came;
which by such a mighty Act of restraining Grace, put a stop to all Socinian
Pens, from writing against such a Bosome-Favourite, and turned them against
that saucy Church of England-Animadverter, for daring to assert the old
Doctrine of the Trinity against the Sentiments of those New Dons, who may
perhaps for fashion-sake, own a Trinity, and some such other Articles of the
Church of England, See Sermon. on Ps. 39.9. p. 17. l. 11.
but (according to Mr. Dean's excellent, and never to be forgotten words) not
perfectly in her own way.

Now as to the Argument debated in the Animadversions, the Grand Charge this
Considerer brings against the Animadverter is, That he makes the Three Divine
Persons in the Blessed Trinity only Three different Postures of the Godhead,
Consid. p. 22. Col. 1. l. 4. repeating the same objection again and again, that
none may mistake him. But is this fair dealing in disputation, or a just and
true Representation of the Animadverter's Assertion? He asserted indeed* That
as Posture and Figure were Modes affecting the Body, without superadding any
new Entity (properly so called) to it: So a Spirit, whether Finite or Infinite,
might have its proper Modes also, affecting it sutably to its particular
Nature, without superadding to it any new Entity or Being distinct from it. For
since the General Nature of a Mode consisted only in this, viz. That it
determined a Being, in it self Absolute and undetermined, to some certain state
or condition, without superadding to it any such new distinct Entity, as we
have mentioned; I would gladly know, why there might not be an Agreement and
Analogy in this general Nature of a Mode between such particular Modes, as do
yet otherwise, upon their proper Accounts, vastly and infinitely differ from
one Another; (as the Modes of an Infinite Uncreate. Being and the Modes of all
finite Created Natures must needs do.) Why, I say, these (notwithstanding their
peculiar differences) may not agree as Analogous in the general Nature of a
Mode, as well as an Infinite and a finite substance do agree in the General
Nature of Substance; Let any one by some solid Reason prove. But besides this,
the Animadverter affirmed also, That the Personal Modes belonging to the Deity,
were of that peculiar kind as to affect it Eternally, Necessarily, and
Inseparably; though there are several Modes of another kind belonging to the
said Nature, which do not so. This, I say, and no more, was the Doctrine
delivered by the Animadverter concerning the Divine Modes; which is so utterly
incapable of the Representation made of it by this Considerer, that though he
is pleased to sport himself with a thing by no means fit to be sported with,
yet I am confident, in the present Case, his own judgment will not suffer him
to believe his own words.

But he is for putting the whole Dispute to a short issue (if he will say and
hold) by the decision of this one Question* To which (he says) if the
Animadverter will give a clear and Categorical Answer, it will appear to all
Men, That either he falls in with Dr. Sherlock, and the Tritheists, or with the
Socinians. And the Question is this, Whether there are in God Three distinct
all knowing Almighty understandings, wills and energies, as there are Three
distinct Persons? Or whether the Three Persons have but one only self-same
understanding will and energy, as there is but one self-same substance in
Number. Consider. p. 24. Col. 2. l. 25. To which I answer, and that as
Categorically as he can desire.

First, That there are not Three distinct Infinite Understandings, etc. in God
as there are three Persons: and that to assert, that there are, is as arrant
Tritheism as any that Dr. Sherlock is guilty of, and greater there cannot well
be.

Secondly, That there is but one Numerical infinite Understanding in God or in
the three Persons. But then I affirm withal, That this one Numerical infinite
Understanding has three distinct ways of subsisting, according to which it
subsists distinctly and differently in each of the Three Divine Persons. For
still Three distinct infinite Understandings and one infinite Understanding
subsisting after Three distinct ways or modes, are two vastly different
Hypotheses. And if by this latter the Animadverter falls in with the Socinians,
it is certain that the Socinians must also fall in with him. Which I should be
very glad to find* for I Am sure it is the received Doctrine of the Church, and
that which the Animadverter has all along contended for, and this very Man with
so much spite and personal Reflection (beyond all that I ever met with) has
opposed and reviled. However I have answered him civilly, which is a way of
answering, which he seems a stranger to.

But to pass to the main Business of his Paper, which is to expose and ridicule
the Animadverter as much as (in so small a compass) he can. The first Instance
of his Spleen against him (though I think very little savouring of the Spirit
of a Gentleman) is his expressing a Grudge at the very Support and Maintenance
which the Animadverter has from the Church, telling him, That he is full and
even overflows with the Blessings of his Holy Mother, Consid. p. 20. Col. 1. l.
36. And so much, I hope, I may say in the Animadverter's behalf; That if he
does indeed overflow, there are many about him who find themselves the better
for it: though yet I know several in the Church much fuller, who never
overflow. And for this I will instance in a certain Dean, who was applied to by
a poor Widow, about the renewing of a Lease; the Fine for which was to be 25 l.
And she, to obtain some Abatement thereof, pleaded her Husband's and her own
Kindness to him while they had been all formerly of the same Conventicle (that
is, during his Probationship for his future Church Preferments*) But a deaf For
(it seems being turned to all such Pleas, she at length in plain terms told
him, That her poor Children were in a starving condition. To which he presently
replied,
What if they do starve, what is that to me? Concerning which Christian and
compassionate Reply I shall only say thus much: That if this Author can ever
prove* that the Animadverter sends such an Ob^ect of Charity away with such an
Answer, he will not expect so much Charity from him, or from any man alive, as
to be accounted by them a Christian. But the Considerer goes on; and as if it
were not enough for him to expose the Animadverter to the Odium of the World,
as so much overladen with Church-Preferments, he taxes him also with Avarice or
Ambition, or both, by traducing him as one who thought that he had not yet
enough, Consid. p. 20. Col. 1. l. 30. But if the Animadverter really thought
so, let this Gentleman give some good Reason, why he never applies himself to
such as are able to give him more; and particularly let him ask that noted
Citiz^n of the same Persuasion with himself (who of late years saw the inside
of Lambeth as often, and knew i^ as well as any man) whether ever he saw the
Animadverter amongst the Seekers there? No; let me tell him, and the whole
World besides, upon this occasion, That from the very bottom of his heart, he
scorned it. But in the mean time, may I not calmly ask this Author, whether the
Animadverter ever rivall'd or defeated Him, or any of his Brethren in their
Suit for any Church-Preferment, that they thus envy and repine at his? Or
whether they are at all the poore^ for what he has^ No, nothing like this, I am
sure, can be so much as pretended. But the Truth is, the main Quarrel this man,
and others like him, have with the Animadverter is, that (thanks be to God) his
condition is such yet, as neither forces him to want, or sneak; and that he can
be much sooner brought to the former, than he can be made to do the latter. But
since it is hardly imaginable, upon Terms of common Humanity, that one man
should venture to charge another in so contumelious a manner, but for some very
great Reason; Let us see what Reason this Considerer brings for charging the
Animadverter at this rate; and it is in short this: Because the Animadverter
submitted his Explication of the Trinity to the Judgment of the Church of
England, Consid. p. 20. Col. 1. l. 20. Whereupon he not only brands him (as has
been shown) with Avarice and Ambition, but sets him out further, as one ready
at the first Nod of the Church to throw his Faith into the Kennel: and in a
word as a Person of neither Faith; Conscien^^ nor Religion. In Reply to which
odious Stuff, I would have this Man take notice, that the whole force of his
charge (if there be any force in it) must depend upon his Proof of these three
Things, viz. 1. That the Animadverter affirms his Explication of the Trinity to
be a Fundamental of the Christian Faith. Which I utterly deny to be any where
affirmed by him. 2. That a man may not quit his Explication of an Article of
the Faith without parting with the Article it self. Which Das positively affirm
he may: And, 3. (Which is much more) That a Man may not quit his Explication of
an Article of the Faith without so much as renouncing the said Explication as
false, but ^^ly by his forbearing to asser^, publish, or insist upon it.


Which, I (...) Man may very (...), that this Author (till he proves the
contrary) has most unworthily abused and defamed the Animadverter, as without
any provocation, so beyond all possibility of making him satisfaction: But
(Thanks be to God) the Charge is so very black and foul, that the Animadverter
dares trust the World with the belief of it, and thinks it extremely below him
so much as to offer to clear himself from it.

And so I pass to the next Instance of his Spleen against the Animadverter, and
that (if possible) more hostile than the former, as carrying in it all the
Symptoms of an extreme Malice, viz. his Endeavor to enrage an whole University
against him, by representing him as a great Undervalue^ of one of those two
Noble Seats of Learning, in comparison of the other: For, what else can he mean
by that dirty ironical Expression of [ Poor, Senceless, Illiterate,
Cantabrigian Ignoramus] on the one hand, and of [The Oxford Adep^i] Consid. p.
21. Col. 2. l. 30. on the other? For, has the Animadverter in his Book given
the least occasion for this? Did he speak one tittle in preference of Oxford
before Cambridge? Or, did he at all reflect upon his Advers^ry, for being of
that University, which he equally honors with the other? No; so far was he
from it, that I have often heard him say, that he could not perceive by his
Writings that he had been of either University. But let us see the next
Complement he passes upon the Animadverter, viz. his comparing him in a long
ridiculous Romance, with the Spanish Fool err^nt Don Qui^^t, p. 21. col. ^.
Tho^ I must tell him; that the Animadverter is not sensible (nor other^
neither) of my Resemblance that he bears to Don Qui^^^, (...) be (...) one whom
the World took for a Giant, but whom, by his turning round, he found to be but
a Windmill. These, I say, are some of the Instances of the Socinians Respect
and Friendship, which the Defender has upbra^ded the Animadverter with. To
which we may add the Change of Barbarity, p. 19. col. 1. l. ult. of more (...)
than Argument; p. 19. col. 1. l. 32. of Arrogance; p. 23. col. 1. l. 11. of
Nonsense; p. 13. col. 1. l. 6. and (which is of a much blacker import) of his
Vnfi^edness in his Religion, p. 20. col. ^. l. ^3. of a readiness to turn from
his Faith with every Wind, p. 20. ibid. l. 25. to set it afloat, ibid. l. 40.
and to throw it into the Kennel, p. 20. col. 2. l. 4. Which, I must tell him,
are not mere Scoptical Reflections, but High and Criminal Charges, and fitter
to be tried before the Judge, than to be debated with the P^^; at a^^aigning
the Animadverter in the face of the World for a Rogue, an Hypocrite, a
Renouncer of his Faith, and a man of no Religion. And all this (as has been
noted) ushered in by this Considerer himself with a free and full
acknowledgment, That the Animadverter had not concerned himself with the
Socinians, and that therefore the Socinians would not concern themselves with
him, p. 12. Col. 2. toward the end; and at last closed up by him with this
affirmation also, That he had given the Animadverter on disrespectful Language
at all, p. 25. Col. 2. l. 36. and consequently, that he ought not to take the
foregoing Reproaches ill, but to embrace and accept them all, as pure, perfect
Socinian Courtship and Civility. Though in the Judgment of all that I can meet
with, these things clash so irreconcileably both with themselves and some other
Passages in the same tract, and carry in them so much of Sherlocism and
Self-Contradiction, that they evidently show, how hard (if not impossible) it
is for any one to write for Dr. Sherlock without writing like him too. In fine,
I believe the whole World can hardly show another Instance of such Bitter,
Virulent, Reproachful Language given (and that even by the Confession of him
who gave it) without the least Provocation. Nevertheless I have thought fit to
treat this Considerer in a very different way from that, in which I treated Dr.
Sherlock, and much more from that, in which He himself has (to the Amazement of
all sober Persons) treated the Animadverter: not, but that I am sufficiently.
sensible of every one of his Reproaches; But since they are only Personal, and
designed against the Animadverter alone, and wrote (as I am well satisfied) by
Order too, he may easily Command me (as he (...) done) to slight and overlook
them. But Dr. Sherlock is to be looked upon as a common, or rather an Universal
Adversary, and deserves to be treated as such, and that in a due Vindication of
all those worthy suffering Reputations (those of the Fathers themselves
reckoned for the chief) which he has so rudely and illiterately, and in a word
(so like himself) made an invasion upon. And so having represented the
Invectives of this Socinian Writer against the Animadverter, without returning
them upon himself (howsoever I have turned them upon him for whose sake they
were written) I leave it to the Reader and all Mankind to judge from the
forementioned Passages, what a share the Animadverter has in the Socinians
Friendship and how much he is the object of their Admiration.

But the Animadverter has been attacked by Enemies from more Quartels than one,
A Remark or Two upon the Little Oxford-Excommunicate, who also has had a Fling
at the Animadverter.
and amongst the rest, by that Diminutive Oberon in Divinity the little
Oxford-Excommunicate. A Person little indeed in every thing but Spite and
Heresy. He in his poor Still-born Pamphlet published against the
Animadversions endeavors to set off his small Ware with the specious Title
(forsooth) of the Trinity placed in its due light. Though I must tell him, That
his Naked Gospel has much the Advantage of this Piece, as having been placed by
the Execution done upon it at Oxford, not only in its due light, but in its due
heat too. But has not this Man, think we, found out a very odd way of
explaining this high Mystery to us, viz. by first setting his College all in a
Flame, and then pretending to show us the Trinity by the Light of it? But how
in the name of all the Fairies (amongst whom he is no small Prince) comes he to
be so fierce and furious against the Animadverter? For the Animadverter never
deposed against him, nor does he know that he ever disobliged this pettit
Doctor either by word or deed. Nevertheless since there are some Tempers that
can be spightful purely for Spight's sake. This Man was resolved to vent his
Spleen, though I believe it would put him hand to it, to give a good Reason,
why, whether we respect the Person whom he wrote against, or whom he wrote for.
Accordingly, several sourvy Passages of no small Rancor occur in his Discourse;
which, I assure him, might easily be returned upon him, and that with shrewd
Advantage; But that I scorn to foul my Paper, (...) indeed my very Ink, upon
one of such a Character, by quitting Scores with him in his own way. Nor shall
I step so low, as to engage against a Book wrote in an entire Ignorance of the
Subject which it was wrote upon; or think that worth answering, which hardly
any Man of fence thinks worth Reading; as his Bookseller by woeful Experience
finds. However, in Case the Learned and Judicious shall at any time judge it
needful to have so slight a piece replied to, (which I could never yet find)
the way is so far already prepared for it, That the Author is more than
sufficiently known, how little soever he is taken notice of; we have his mark
and his measure; there being scarce any one but s^e^, and s^es through him too.
For since the World has been acquainted with his Naked Gospel (thanks be to his
good Stars for it) he may be distinguished by the stroke of his hand, as well
as by the mole on his foot. There are others also who have discharged their
Potg^ns at the Animadverter; but he does not think it worth his while to fight
with every one who can shoo^ Paper.

The Conclusion.
And thus, having at length brought the work intended by me to a Conclusion,
(after the Church's and the Reader's Pardon begged for all failures that shall
appear in it) I cannot but own and declare, that many wise and good Men, and
hearty Lovers of our Church (to my Knowledge) are of Opinion, That, this
Important and Fundamental Point, has been sufficiently argued, and the truth
effectually proved against this Innovator (whom I have been hitherto dealing
with) already; and that the properest way of proceeding against him for the
future, is not by Argame^^, but Authority. And that his Bishop would admonish
him of his Heresy once and again, and if he persists in it, resolutely
Excommunicate him; and that all sober Christians, (who make Conscience of their
Duty, and their Holy Christ^^n Profession) would thereupon shun and abandon,
and refuse all converse with him, according to the Rule of Scripture, and the
practice of the Primitive Church toward Persons obstinately persisting in any
Heresy, and Excommunicated thereupon. In the mean time, let him and his
Partisan^ put the best Face they can upon the matter, yet I know no true Sons
of the Church of England, who account of him otherwise in his present station
and condition, than as of a Flag of Defiance to our old established Religion.
Nor could I ever imagine from the very first, what his design could be in
writing that wretched Book, and of others in approving it, but to confound and
embroil that great Article of our Faith, in order to the laying in quite aside.
And most certainly, it cannot be for nothing, that even the Socinians
themselves (as great an opposition as they profess to Tritheism) are yet so
very fond of, and zealous for this Tritheist, that (as it has been shown) they
could almost tear the Animadverter in pieces, for having wrote against him.

He tells us at the latter end of the Preface to his former Book called his
Vindication, etc. That his New Hypothesis of the Trinity cost him many
thoughts, and that it must cost others many too, if they will understand it.
And I must confess, that it has cost me several Thoughts also. But since it is
certain that a Man may throw away his Thoughts, as well as his money upon that
which will never quit Costs, I must profess likewise, that I grudge every
Thought, which I have spent upon it. For to hear ones Brains upon such a dull,
senceless Hypothesis (having nothing to recommend it but it is Novelty) is but
just as if a Man should beat his head against a Post; which being a dry,
wooden, hard Thing (and upon that account a lively, though not living Image of
this Man's work) may break one's head indeed, but can never improve it: And
therefore, did not my duty to, and concern for our Excellent, and now suffering
Church, oblige me to serve her even in the lowest (if lawful) Offices, I would
never trouble my thoughts with his Heretical stuff more; especially since I can
truly say of this New Hypothesis, (what a certain Divine of a very voluble
Conscience (and known to this Man as well as he knows Himself) said of the New
Oath before he took it,) The more I think on it, the worse I like it.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
ANimadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book, Entitled A Vindication of the
Doctrine of the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity, etc. Together with a more
Necessary Vindication of that Sacred, and Prime Article of the Christian Faith,
from his New Notions and false Explications of it. Humbly offered to his
Admirers, and to Himself the Chief of them. By a Divine of the Church of
England. The Second Edition with Additions.


