Of Remembrance and Imitation Of Deceased Holy Rulers. A SERMON Preached at
ROTTERDAM, March the 15th 1695, New Style. The DAY of Her Majesty's FUNERAL.

By JOHN SPADEMAN, M. A. Minister of the English Church there.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chapel, 1695.

Advertisement.
NEither the seeming Unsuitableness of the Text, nor the real Defects of the
Sermon (the marks of a hasty Composure) have deterred Me from venturing it
abroad: For I hope my Design will be approved by all Good Men, who will grant
it to be a seasonable Office, to p^ the Duty of Imitating the Piety of our
Deceased QUEEN; whole Death is an unspeakable Loss to this Age: But 'twill be
much (...) dangerous, if SHE (who was Greater than the Queen of the Sou^ shall
rise up in the Judgment ^th this Generation, and condemn it; because Her
Christian Virtues were not followed.

Of Remembrance and Imitation of Deceased Holy Rulers.
HEB. xiii. 7. Remember them which have [had] the rule over you, [ who have
spoken to you the word of God,] whose faith follow, considering the end of
their conversation.


THE Death and Funeral of the meanest Person carry most useful Instruction in
'em Every House of Mourning, is a School which God does open, and where He
teaches most profitable Lessons, which all the Living are obliged to lay to
heart. For which reason the Royal Preacher has affirmed (against the common
Opinion) That it is better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of
feasting, Eccles. 7.2. But at this time, the Providence of God calls us to a
House of Mourning that has most Extraordinary Characters: All things
considered, it may truly be said, That in several Ages, there has not been
such a Funeral as that which is celebrated this Day. I speak this, not with
respect to the Ceremonies and Magnificence of it, (which are very
extraordinary,) but on the account of its Sorrowful and Sadning Circumstances:
For not only a Royal and Crowned Head is laid in the Dust, but a Religious and
Holy Ruler is removed out of the World: A Queen, whom the Grace and Spirit of
God adorned with a far richer and more glorious Crown than that of the finest
Gold. So that She was the Flower of Princes, the Glory of her Order, and the
great Ornament of her Age and Nation.

Such a Treasure, the Righteous offended God has taken away from this World,
which was not worthy of it; And if ever a Pompous and Magnificent Funeral was
due to any, it is to Her: And perhaps few deceased Princes have been attended
to their Sepulchers with such Marks of highest Honor, which is paid to Her,
not only throughout her own Kingdoms, but also in these Provinces, which did
enjoy her happy Influence, and therefore can understand how justly She deserves
the most Mournful and Magnificent Obsequies. But it will be granted, that the
most Pompous Funeral cannot do any Advantage unto Her, who Eccles. 9.6.
can have no more for ever a share in any enjoyments under the sun. And it can
bring as little Profit to the Living, even to the Spectators of so unusual an
Interment, which will be ended within the narrow bounds of one Day. But we must
conclude, That whenever God raises up so Eminent an Example of Holiness, it is
on design of procuring a lasting Benesit to the World, and of conveying such
Advantages as will outlive the Presence of that Exemplar. And it is our own
fault, if we do not share in these Advantages; which will more enrich us, than
the inheriting of a whole Kingdom would do.

The devouring Grave has swallowed up the Beauly, and all the Bodily
Excellencies of the Deceased Queen; but there are Two Immortal Things which
Death has no Power over, Her Memory and Example, which now seek Entertainment
in our Breasts, and are able to make Her more Honorable, and Us more Happy,
than Legacies, or even Children left by Her; which latter, God also pleased to
deny to Her and us.

By Cherishing her Memory, and Imitating her Example, we shall not only pay the
highest Honor to Her, but show the truest Kindness to our selves; as also
comply with the special Obligation which God himself has laid on us, both by
giving and taking away so Excellent a Queen.

I confess, the Text (which I have chosen to assist you on this Occasion)
speaks of deceased Teachers, and Ministers of the Gospel, whose Office consists
in guiding Men to the Heavenly Happiness, by speaking and declaring the Word of
God; and therefore their Character is different from that of the deceased
Queen: But it must be granted, that the Agreement and Resemblance, between
Civil Rulers, and Spiritual Guides, is sufficient to found an equal Obligation
unto the Duties enjoined in the Text: For the station of both, is so singular,
and eminent, as to make their Memory precious, and their Example useful to
those, who had the Opportunity of knowing their Holy Lives, and Happy Deaths.
To which I might add, that the Conversation of a Pious Magistrate, does really
speak and publish the Word of God, though not in the same manner with the
Sermons, and Discourses of Ministers of the Gospel: So that the Meditations
offered by the Words read to you, are very suitable to the Funeral of a Queen,
whose Life and Death have set a most Excellent Copy for our Imitation. Both
these I shall endeavor to represent to you, when I have first spoken to the
Words themselves. In which we are called to consider a Twofold Duty, to be
performed unto deceased Holy Rulers, and a proper Direction to assist the
Performance of the latter.

The Two Duties enjoined, with respect to deceased Holy Rulers, are I. The
Remembering of them after their Death. II. The Following, or Imitating of their
Faith.


The Direction which assists the Performance of the latter Duty, is laid down
in the last Clause of the Verse: Considering the end, or issue of their
conversation.

Concerning the Duty of Remembering deceased Holy Rulers, I shall lay down a few
Conclusions to explain the nature and grounds of it.

I. An honorable Rememerance after Death, is commonly and justly esteemed. The
common Desire of it, has been looked on as an Evidence of the Immortality of
human Souls. However that be, (which it is hot proper now to dispute) it is
certain, that there is a strong desire planted in our Souls, of perpetuating
our Names and Memories after we have left the World? vast expenses of Pains and
Treason have been laid out on this very thing. The Learned have been willing to
employ their Time and Labors, to leave behind 'em some written Monuments, to
preserve their Memories; and have judged it a sufficient Reward of their
learned Labors, that they might be able say, as the Roman Poet did, Horat.
Non omnis moriar -- postera crescam laud recens: I shall not totally dye and
be extinguished; but shall grow after Death, by the succeeding Praise that
shall be given me. Princes and Great Men have expended their Treasures on
Buildings, and other magnificent durable Works; as we read of Absalom's Pillar,
erected only to preserve his Name, 2 Samuel 18.18. And it is related by Moses,
that one chief design of those who built the Tower of Babel, was to make
themselves a Name; i. e. to procure for themselves an Honorable Remembrance
after Death. Genesis 11.4. Tacitus relates, How Tiberius signified to the Roman
Senate, that it was his chief Request, both to the Romans and their Allies,
That whenever He should dye, they would honor his Deeds and Name, with Praise
and a Good Remembrance. Annal. IV. Cap. 38. Where the Remark of that Author
expresses the common Sentimenss, Vnum insatiatiliter parandum, prosperam sui
memoriam.


II. All the Methods used by wicked Men, cannot procure 'em an honorable
Remembrance after death. While they live, their Power and Terror may gain some
Flattering Praises; but after death, their Name is condemned to Infamy and
Reproach. Prove. 10.7. The name of the wicked shall rot.
There is an Art of embalming dead Bodies, to prevent their Putrefaction, but
nothing can embalm the Name of the Wicked. Many times their Memory is quite
forgot, and buried under the dust of Time, notwithstanding all their Endeavors
to preserve and perpetuate it. The true Names of those who built the famous
Egyptian Pyramids, have long since been lost. Wo^n's Reflections on Ant.
Learn. Page 107.
But if they are remembered, it is with Infamy and Execration, as are Absalom,
Haman, Herod, Nero, and many more, who have left their Name for a Curse, as God
did once threaten the Idolatrous Jews, Isa. 65.15.

III. It Is the Will of God, that the Righteous should have an honorable
Remembrance after their death. This is one Reward, which the supreme Ruler has
adjudg'd to them that fear God. Psalm. 119.6. The righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance. And to such who want Children to perpetuate their
Memory, God did promise to give a Name better then of sons and daughters, Isa.
55.5. And this is laid down as an universal Maxim, that The Memory of the Just
is blessed, or honorable, Prove. 10.7. Many are the Instances of those who
lived obscure and unregarded, to whom after their death, God has given a Name
that has excelled the Honor of Princes. Mary (the Sister of Lazarus) who
poured the precious Ointment on the Head of Christ, has a lasting and
honorable Remembrance, wherever the Gospel is preached. Matthew. 26.13. Act.
18.3.
Aquila and Priscilla, who were but mean Tent-makers, yet have had their Praise
in all the Churches, and will have so, to the end of the World.

IV. The honorable Remembrance of Religious Rulers after their death, is very
useful to the World. For

1. The Consideration of this, is proper to excite Rulers unto Religion and
Piety while they live. Indeed this ought not to be the principal Motive, but it
may be regarded in its place, as a lower Reward, which the divine Bounty
bestows on them who have faithfully served him. Among other Marks of God's
Favor, by which David was encouraged unto the Service of God, this is
mentioned, that the Lord had given him a Name, like to the Name of the great
men that are in the Earth, 2 Samuel 7.9. Whatever does animate and excite a
Magistrate unto Religion and Virtue, (as the Honor that attends 'em is proper
to do) must highly promote the common Good. And

2. The honorable Remembrance of holy Rulers, gives a lasting Influence unto
their good Example after their death. It Is truly observed by the Psalmist, that
when the breath, or spirit of a Prince, goes forth, or departs out of the Body,
in that very day all his thoughts perish, Psalm. 146.4. But surely it is not the
Will of God, that the Example of a Good Ruler should perish also. No, this is
too precious a thing, to go down into the Grave, and be covered in darkness.
The E^cacy of a Pious Example, ought long to survive the Person who gave it.
Many Years after David's decease, his holy Example did influence the Young and
Excellent Prince Josias, of whom it is said, 2 Chronicles. 34.2. That he walked in
the ways of David his Father; i. e. He imitated the Piety and Righteousness of
David, which were carefully transmitted unto after Ages. The best Examples in
the World, can have no influence, unless they be kept alive by a due
remembrance of 'em. Hence it became a most common practice in the ancient
Church, to appoint an annual Commemoration of the Martyrs, whose Examples were
judged to have the greatest efficacy. It must therefore be an inexcusable
negligence, to forget the Faith and Holiness which alone we are obliged to
imitate: And this leads us to consider the

II. And principal Duty enjoined in the Text, and laid down in these Words,
Whose Faith follow, or imitate; where it must be premised, that the Word Faith,
in this place, must not be taken in the strict sense, (as it denotes an
internal Act of the Soul, by which a convinced Sinner receives Christ, as He
is offered to us in the Gospel) but in a larger signification, as it imports
Christian Piety, or Holiness (which is the constant Fruit of Faith, in the
former sense.) And it is not unusual, with the Apostle, to take this Word Faith
in the Metonymical Sense; as, where He mentions the unfeigned Faith, or Piety,
which was in Timothy, and had first dwelt in his Grandmother and Mother, 2 Timothy
1.5. Thus in the same Epistle, Chap. 4.6. speaking of Himself, he says, I have
fought the good fight of Faith; i. e. I have acted as a true Christian Soldier,
or Combatant. Again in this Epistle, Heb. 12.2. Christ is styled, The Author
and the Finisher of our Faith; i. e. The Leader, and Rewarder of Christian
Piety: And indeed, it is not possible to imitate the Faith of others; but as it
is discovered in a holy Conversation, by which a visible Copy, or Pattern is
propounded to our Imitation; the Nature of which is so well known, that I need
only mention the particular Ingredients of it: As

1. An esteeming Judgment, which is made concerning an Example set before us. I
cannot seriously imitate that, which I despise and disesteem. To which must be
added

2. An attentive regarding of this Example. A Limner must attentively view the
Original, which he intends to draw. We read when Gideon would have his Soldiers
imitate what himself did, he says, Look on me, and do likewise, Jud. 7.17. The

3. And principal Ingredient in Imitation, is the actual resembling of an
Example set before us. As when a writing Scholar imitates a Copy given by his
Master, he makes his Letters and Writing like unto the Copy: So that when the
Apostle requires us to follow or imitate the Faith of deceased Rulers, his
meaning is in other Words, It Is indeed your Duty, to remember them who have had
the rule over you, their Faith and Holiness must be preserved in your Memory;
but this is by no means enough, the great Duty to which you are most strongly
obliged, is to form and order your Profession and Practice, according to their
Good Example, that so you may be truly like unto them. The Reasons of this
important Duty, are as obvious, as they are obliging: For

1. When God does give Holy Rulers, it is on this design, that their Example
might be imitated. It Is found by experience, that Imitation is one of the
strongest Principles of Human Nature, which is more easily drawn by Example,
than by the wisest Reasons. And especially, the Practice of a Ruler or
Magistrate, is commonly more prevalent, than any Law. The true Observation of
the Poet is almost in every Bodies Mouth, Clau^.
Componitur Orbis Regis ad exemplum. Cicero in his last Book de Legib. has most
wisely observed that Vicious Rulers are most pernicious to a State, saying of
'em, Plus exemplo, quam peccato nocent; and adds, that a very few Eminent
Persons, Vel corrumpere mores civitatis, vel corrigere possunt.
How often is it charged on Jeroboam, (the first King of the Ten Tribes) that
He made Israel to Sin? His idolatrous practice did infect the whole Nation. But
when Righteous Rulers are given to a People, the Wisdom and Mercy of God
provide a Remedy against Vice, and a cogent Motive unto the practice of
Religion. For the Religious Example of a Prince or Ruler, does in a special
manner adorn the Doctrine of Christ, and is proper to convince the World, that
Piety is not a mean and dishonorable Character, as many do falsely imagine that
strict Religion is inconsistent with Honor and Greatness; and are prejudiced
against it, when they see it entertained by Persons of a lower Rank. In the
early Ages of the Christian Church, this was a common Objection made by the
Heathens, that the Christians were mostly of the meanest Rank and Condition, as
is related by Minut. F. Chrysostom. in 7 Hom. on the 1 Ep. Cor. and many others.
But this Objection is refuted by the Christian Example of those who have Power
and Authority, and therefore an Imitation of such is most reasonably urged: And
there want not Instances of the happy Effects which the Piety of Rulers has
produced in their Subjects; as it is related, That the People of Israel served
the Lord all the days of Joshua, (who did not only lead 'em in their Wars, but
went before them in the Path of Righteousness) Josh. 24.31. Hence 'twas, that
when God did promise to the Jewish Nation, that He would restore their Judges,
as at the first, and their Councillors, etc. immediately is added, as the
consequent of such a Blessing, Afterward thou shall be called the City of
Righteousness, Isa. 1.26. A

II. Reason which enforces this Duty is, That the imitation of Pious Rulers, is
the best way of honoring 'em after their death. All agree, that a good King or
Queen ought to be honored after their leaving of the World. Many ways have
been invented, and still are used to honor deceased Rulers, such as Poems and
Orations, public Mourning, and pompous Funerals, costly Monuments, and other
Memorials of the dead. The Gentiles were willing to build Altars and Temples,
and pay Divino Worship to their deceased Rulers; (not to mention the
extravagant and absurd Methods which some barbarous Nations used.) D. Siculus
in his ^ B. relates of the Aethiopians, that if any of their Kings were maimed,
his Friends would maim themselves; and when a King died. his Acquaintance
killed themselves to honor him.
But as the last are altogether unlawful, so the former are very doubtful and
inconsiderable, for they may proceed from another Principle, besides true
Esteem for the deceased: But when we imitate the Piety and Virtue of a Ruler
after his Death, this is an infallible Testimony of unfeigned Esteem. This does
erect the most lasting Monuments unto his Memory; for by this means, the Souls
of Men become so many Shrines and Temples, where he lives and inhabits, after
he is taken out of the World. In the

III. And last place, The Imitation of Holy Rulers, renders 'em publicly
useful after their death, and so does compensate the Damage that is caused by
their departure out of the World. If the deceased Queen, whose death we lament,
could be raised to life again, this would be justly counted a public and
exceeding Gain; but it will be a far greater Advantage, if her Holy Example
does live after Her. Her Life (abstractly considered) cannot do such Service
unto our Nation, or the Protestant Interest, as her Faith and Piety can do,
were they generally followed: for these would be a far better defense and
safeguard, then any Courage, or Conduct, then any Armies, or Navies can be.
God himself has assured us, That rigteousness exalts a Nation, Prove. 14.34. We
of this Age have had a convincing Experience of the Truth of what the Psalmist
has affirmed, Psalm. 33.16,17.
That no King is saved by the multitude of an Host, and a mighty Man is not
delivered by much strength: An Horse is a vain thing for safety. O that We, and
our Brethren, could be persuaded to try this unfailing Experiment! I mean the
Practice of True Holiness, to which God has promised deliverance and success,
Isa. 33.6. Wisdom, and righteousness, shall be the stability of thy times, and
strength of salvation. To the same purpose is the known Declaration, made by
the blessed God, Psalm. 81.13,14. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and
Israel had walked in my ways: I should soon have subdued their Enemies, etc.

But because the Imitation of Holy Examples is attended with some difficulty,
and the Absence of 'em (after the Death of the Persons) is apt to weaken their
Influence; the Apostle lays down a most proper Direction, to assist the
Performance of this Duty; Considering the end of their conversation. The
Original word (...).
, which is translated, consider, has a significancy, which our Language cannot
well express; for it imports, such an accurate contemplating, as is used about
the most sublime and worthy Objects, (accordingly a Greek Interpreter expounds
it, (...), i. e. very exactly reviewing; and illustrates it by the Instance of
a Limner, who accurately views the Original.) The Object of this Consideration;
viz. The End of their Conversation, is not (I conceive) to be restrained unto
the very last Moment of their Life; but takes in the Circumstances of their
Death, and the Manner how they acted their last Part, when they were leaving
the Stage of the World. And truly, there cannot be a more worthy Spectacle, than
a Christian ready to encounter the last Enemy. The Lights of the World never
shine so bright and glorious, as in their setting. And an attentive regard unto
the Exit of a Christian, and the finishing of his Course, will very much assist
the Imitation of his Faith and Piety. For,

I. The Concluding Part of a Christian's Life, does agree with his Preceding
Course and Conduct; and therefore is a confirming Testimony unto his former
Conversation. It Is taken for granted, That Dying Persons judge more wisely than
at other times, Whence it is that the Sayings and Counsels of such are
especially valued and regarded; because at such a time Men will not dissemble,
and are least biased by Common Opinion. When therefore the last Words and
Actions of a Christian agree with his former Life, they are an Authentic Seal,
by which he signs his Religious Choice and Conversation. It Is often seen, that
Wicked Men, when Death approaches, change their Note, and heartily condemn
their own Evil Life; yea, they will warn others against such a Course as
themselves lived in. By this, they blemish their former Course, and proclaim
the Folly of it. If a Dying Christian did re^ant at last, and confess his
Mistake, this would quite spoil all the Efficacy of his Example: But when He
seals the Doctrine which he professed and obeyed, with his last Breath; yea,
(when he is called) with his Blood; this gives a mighty force unto the holy
Example which he leaves behind him. When the Apostle would strongly excite
these Believing Hebrews to imitate the Holy Patriarchs, after a Description of
their Virtues, he says of them, These all died in Faith, Heb. 9.13. i. e. At
their Death, they acted the same Faith which had governed their Lives. There is
no just Pretense, to suspect that strict Religion is a Cheat, or
Counterfeitshew; for it is owned and stuck to, at a time when Men are the most
obliged to use the greatest Sincerity. And,

II. The Concluding Part of a Christian Life, demonstrates the singular
Advantage of Faith and Holiness. One of the most common Objections against a
Religious Life, is that which was made in the Days of the Prophet Malachi,
chap. 3.14. It is vain to serve God; and what profit is it, that we have kept
his Ordinance? The happy Conclusion of a Christian Life, does fully refute and
silence this Objection, and withal strongly enforces the Imitation of such an
Example. We are therefore expressly required, to Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright; for the end of that man is peace, or happiness, Psalm.
37.37. This might easily be proved by many Evidences, of which I shall only
mention Three that are most obvious.

1. The Fortitude and Courage of a Dying Christian, proves the excellent
Usefulness of Faith and Piety. It Is no contemptible Privilege, to overcome the
Fear of Death, as the Apostle and his Companions had done, who could say, We
are confident, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and present with
the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. All the helps of Wit and Learning, of Reason and
Education, cannot do this Service? It Is often seen, that the Wits, and Beaux
Esprits, the Bold and Valiant, are afraid to die; their Courage fails, when
they receive the sentence of Death; whereas a Real Christian, though of the
Timorous Sex, and of a Vulgar Education, is enabled to Triumph over Death and
the Grave; because to such, God has given the victory, through Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 15.55,57.

2. The supporting Hope in a Dying Christian, is another fruit of Faith and
Holiness: It will be granted, that We can never stand more in need of this
Cordial, than at the End of our Lives, when we are entering into the dark Valley
of the shadow of Death: But it is not Riches and Treasures, not Greatness and
Power, not a Crown or a Kingdom, that can furnish with this sustaining Hope.
Death will certainly overturn the Hopes of Wicked Men, who had nourished a
strong Confidence on the Mercy of God, and some lifeless Form of Religion: What
is the hope of the hypocrite, when God takes away his soul? Job 27.8. But, The
Righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14.32. A Faith that works a Gospel
Obedience, is the only Root which can bring forth the Hope which sustains a
Dying Christian. The Consideration of which, is a very forcible Motive unto the
Imitation of such an Example.

3. The Inward Peace and Joy which sweeten the Death of a Christian, evidence
the great Advantage of a Holy Conversation. The Peace and Gladness of a Wicked
Man, are like a House built on the Sand, that makes a fair show, as long as
nothing assaults it. How often is it known, that the approach of Death quite
spoils the Mirth of a secure Sinner, who then feels an Earthquake in his
Breast; and the Review of his past Life, changes his Joy into Sadness and
Terror. The Midnight Cry, that proclaims the Coming of the Bridegroom, must be
terrible to the foolish sleeping Virgins, who had not made themselves ready for
the Marriage-Supper. But the diligent Christian, who has employed his Time and
Opportunities in Pleasing and Honoring of God, has just reason of Rejoicing,
when he is near the End of his Race, and is going to receive the Glorious
Prize. No question but the Apostle felt a most reviving Gladness, when he used
the language which we read, 2 Timothy 4.7,8. I have finished my course: henceforth
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness; etc. It Is related, in the
Life of St. Ambrose, That when the Noblemen of Milan, (visiting him in his last
Sickness, requested Him that He should Pray for the lengthning of his own Life,
which they judged necessary for the Public Good,) He made this most excellent
Answer, I have not so lived among you, that I should be ashamed to live longer:
Nor am I afraid to die; for we have a Good Master: Non ita inter vos vixi, ut
pudeat me vivere; nec timeo mori, quoniam bonum Dominum habemus. If we reflect
on these Particulars, we shall discern how proper and suitable is the Direction
laid down in the Text, which requires, to consider the End or Concluding Part
of the Conversation of those who have lived and died in the Faith of Jesus, and
especially of those whose eminent Station had made their Example more obliging
and efficacious. And this Character certainly belongs unto the deceased QUEEN
MARY, of ever Happy Memory, whose Faith and Piety I come now to represent. None
must expect an accurate Delineation of such a Pattern from so rude a Hand as
mine; This Work either is or will be done by some Able Hand: I shall only
attempt (without Flattery) to relate such Instances of Her Unfeigned Piety, as
were manifest to All (who had Opportunity of observing Her Life,) and cannot be
denied even by her Enemies.

Her Parentage and Descent, Her Beauty and Wit, Her Moral, Conjugal and Royal
Virtues must be past over in Silence, as not necessary to my Design, which is
only to represent the Christian Virtues, which did shine in Her Carriage and
Conversation. Of which, the

I. First, and indeed the Foundation of all the rest, was, Her Spiritual
Knowledge, and thorough Acquaintance with Religion. Ignorance, or a consus'd
Knowledge of Religious Matters, in High or Low, does blast the Soul, and make
the Life unfruitful; of which there are too many Evidences every day set before
our Eyes. Sad it is to consider how Protestants, of all Ranks, content
themselves with a slight Knowledge of their Religion, and prefer any other
Skill before this: They are able to discourse pertinently of Business, and
News, and the Cases that occurr in War and Peace; but the Bible is a strange
Land to 'em, (as if they were no ways concerned in it:) But so it was not to
this Pious Queen, whose constant Diligence in Studying the Scriptures, and
Reading the Books that explain it, may shame some who are called Ministers, and
the most who bear the Protestant Name. This Exercise did employ a considerable
part of Her Time, and laid the Foundation of that Eminent Goodness, which
gained Her an Universal Esteem.

II. A Second Instance of Christian Plety, was, Her religions observing of the
Day, and Appointments of God: Most of the Great Ones make little account of
these; and therefore it is no wonder that few of them lead Holy and Exemplary
Lives. But tho the deceased Queen was educated in a Vicious Court, and lived
many Years in a Country where the Day of God is almost universally profaned,
yet She made Conscience of Sanctifying it according to the Institution of God,
and Practice of the best Christians in the World. She did not sacrilegiously
divide the Lord's Day between God and the World, between Religion and Vanity,
but employed it as a Portion of Sacred Time: And by holding on in this course,
she gained strength to resist and overcome the Temptations, by which those of
Her Order, (as also most others) are vanquished and enslaved. 'Twere heartily
to be wished, that those who are willing publicly to Commend Her, to make
Verses and Orations in Her Praise, would Imitate this Part of Her Example: And
that All would follow Her Diligence and Seriousness about all the Appointments
of God, and particularly the Lord's Supper, which she would not partake of,
without spending many retired Hours in making due Preparation for that
Solemnity. And this leads to

III. A Third Instance of Her Unfeigned Faith and Piety; viz. A Constant and
Diligent Performance of the Secret Duties of Religion. She did not confine her
Devotion to a Church, or the Public Solemnities of Worship, (as too many, both
High and Low, do;) but made Conscience of spending some part of every Day, and
especially her Morning Hours, in secret Attendance upon God, and minding the
Concerns of Her Soul. Like Moses, She often ascended alone into the Mount; and
her secret Converse with God, made Her Face to shine, and adorned Her Life with
rare Humility, and Meekness, and the Government of Her Passions. So that Her
Moderation was known to All, and scarce ever any angry and bitter Language was
heard from Her Mouth: Which was one happy fruit of her secret Religion: As we
read concerning Moses, That He was the Meekest Man in all the Earth; but
withal, He had more secret Communion with God, than any who lived in his Time.

IV. A Fourth Instance of Her Unfeigned Faith and Piety, was, Her Love to all
Good Men, though of a different Communion. Her Esteem and Affection were not
confined to one Party, or to the Church of which Her Self was a Member. This is
the Unchristian Character of many, That they hate and despise those who differ
from them in the Circumstantials of Religion: But the deceased Queen had a
larger Soul; She loved and valued the Image of God, wherever She found it.
It Is well known how frequently (I may say, constantly) She joined in the
Worship of God, with the Dutch and French Churches, though their Constitution
and Order are very different from those of the Church of England. I have been a
Witness of the Kindness and Respect with which She treated English Dissenting
Ministers, and was present when She Thankt One of that Quality, for a Practical
Book of Divinity, which He had published, and had been put into Her Hands. This
Consideration makes our Loss the greater, Because She is taken away, who was so
capable and willing to compose the unhappy Differences in Matters of Religion,
which She did lament, and earnestly wished the removal of 'em. What did hinder
Her Healing and Peacemaking Designs, I shall not stand to enquire.

V. The Fifth and last Instance of Her Faith and Piety (which I shall mention,)
was, Her Bounty and Liberality unto the Distressed. Those who never had
themselves Experience of Want and Distress, are tempted unto a Neglect and
Disregard of the Miserable: Most of the Great, and Rich, choose rather to lay
out their Treasures on any Vanity, than in Relieving the Destitute and
Distressed. But this Pious Queen was rich in this kind of Good Works; and did
as willingly seek out Objects of Her Charity, as others do avoid 'em. The
Character which Solomon gives of a Virtuous Woman, did most visibly belong to
the deceased Queen, Prove. 31.20. She stretches out her hand to the poor; yea,
She reaches forth (both) her hands to the needy. And it might truly have been
said of Her, what Job alleged as an Evidence of his Sincerity in the Service
of God, Job 29.13,15,16. The blessing of him that was ready to perish, came
upon me, and I caused the widows heart to sing for joy, etc. -- By such a
Christian Practice, this wise Queen laid up Treasure in Heaven, and therefore
was not unwilling to remove from this Earth. And this leads us to reflect on
the Happy End of Her Conversation, Her Triumphant Death, which crowned Her
Religious Life. For though few could find more Charms in Life, than She, on the
account of Her Age and High Station, together with the general Love of Subjects
and Strangers; (all which are wont to render an Untimely Death very unwelcom:)
yet She could receive the Sentence and Message of Death with an undaunted Mind,
and a cheerful Submission to the Divine Disposal. She needed not to beg longer
Time to prepare for Death, (which is the common Request of High and Low, who
first understand the Use of Life, when the End of it approaches:) This folly
she was not guilty of, but as a Wise Virgin had betimes Mat. 25.7.
trimmed her Lamp, and dressed her Soul to meet the Heavenly Bridegroom, who
has washed Her from Her Sins, in His own Blood, and bestowed on her a far more
glorious Crown then that which Death has taken from her Head. So that we have
no cause to mourn for Her, 1 These. 4.13.
as those who have no hope: The Heathen Romans were not ignorant of this
Conculsion: For on the Death of the Virtuous M. Antoninus, there was no
Lamentation made at his Funeral: Die regii Funeris nemo illum plangendum
censuerit, certis omntbus, quod a diis commodatus, ad Deos rediisset. Capitolin.
But we have the justest Cause to mourn for our selves, and our Nations, yea to
lament this forlorn Earth, which has lost so excellent an Inhabitant, and rare
Example of Christian Piety: We may justly suspect, that because she was so
little imitated, while she lived, therefore God has removed her from this
World; in which, it is to be feared, the Darkness will now increase, when so
great a Luminary is Eclipsed. And the darkness of Impiety, and Profaneness will
draw after it a black Tempest of Calamity and Desolation. The untimely Death of
a Religious Ruler, has often been a Presage, and Forerunner of National
Judgments. Thus it fell out to the Kingdom of Judah, after the death of Josiah,
2 Chronicles. last Chap. compared with the latter end of the preceding. And our
Nation had the same sad Experience, after the death of the Pious young King
Edward the VI. on which immediately followed the bloody and dismal Days of Q.
Mary.

To prevent such Calamities, no better Direction can be given, than that laid
down in the Text; viz. To Follow the Faith, and Imitate the Holiness of the
Deceased QUEEN. Could we, and those who were related to Her, be persuaded to
walk in the steps of her Faith and Piety, We should reap more Advantage after
Her Death, than We did in her Life. It Is a memorable Wonder that is related, 2
King. 12.21. how when a dead Man was cast into the Sepulcher of Elisha, as soon
as he touched the Bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet. We may
hope, That if the Holy Example of the deceased Queen, might touch our dead
Souls, they would be revived, and gain spiritual Life; yea, our Nation would
live, and be made a Praise in the Earth.

We are willing to express our Esteem and Respect to Her; many have been at
some Expense to wear the Tokens of Sorrow, which can bring no real Advantage
either to Her, or our own Souls: Why should we refuse to Imitate her good
Example, which will bring the greatest and most lasting Benefits? I question
not but many will endeavor to procure and keep some Memorial or Relic of the
deceased Queen, a Jewel, or Picture or Garment, or perhaps some of her Hair,
which are all useless and insignificant things: Whereas, would we be at the
pains to get and preserve the Likeness of her Piety, this would make us Happy
indeed. For this end, I shall add some Arguments and Motives which may persuade
us unto this Imitation. And,

1. First, None can with any reason judge this Imitation to be a Disparagement
to them. What, shall any count it below them to study the Scriptures, to
sanctify the Day of God, to serve God in secret, to love all good Men, to
relieve the Distressed; when they see how this glorious Queen did place her
highest Honor in such a Practice? Can any disdain to bear the Yoke of Christ,
which She did so cheerfully submit to? Is there any color or pretense to
object, That strict Religion does not agree with the Character of the Great and
Honorable, when she did esteem it her principal Ornament and Excellence? Oh,
amazing Folly! That the Vices of Rulers should soon grow into fashion, but
their Virtues should be slighted and undervalued!

2. Secondly, The Lowest and Meanest are capable of Imitating her Christian
Piety, as to the Substance of it. A resembling of Her Power and Regal Dignity
is impossible: Her Stature, Beauty, and Faculties of Mind, are not the Objects
of our Imitation: But surely, the Poorest, and most Despicable, may walk in the
steps of Her Faith and Holiness. There is but one common Path to Heaven, both
for Princes and Peasants.

3. Thirdly, We shall be Self-condemned, if we refuse to Imitate One whom we
our selves Praise and Commend. A Life that is not worthy to be Imitated, cannot
deserve Commendation. What shall we answer to our Judge, when this perplexing
Question is put to us; If you did Commend, why did you not Imitate Her? And, If
you would not Imitate, why did you Commend Her? I persuade my self, that few
Princes have found more to Commend 'em, than the Lamented QUEEN, both in her
Life, and after her Death: And yet I fear, few will heartily endeavor to
follow Her Example. But let us consider, That to be condemned out of our own
Mouths, is the saddest Case in the World, Luke 19.22. How can we escape, when
we are condemned by our selves?

4. Fourthly, We All have the same Essential Helps and Assistance which the
deceased Queen had. Indeed, Her High Station gave Her some accidental
Advantage; but We have the same Bible, the same Sabbaths, the same Ordinances,
the same Spirit to assist us, which She enjoyed. Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, shines alike to the lowest Shrub, and the tallest Cedar. Nay,

5. Fifthly, We have much fewer Hindrances in the Practice of Religion: The
Snares and Temptations of a Crown, and a Court, are most dangerous Obstacles in
the Way to Happiness. The Passage to Heaven is much easier from a Cottage, than
from a Palace.

6. In the last place, We shall All desire to have the Happy End that She has
had; to Die with such Hope and Joy as She found, when She was leaving this
World. Balaam's Wish, That he might Numb. 23.10.
die the death of the Righteous, is as vain, as it is common to those who will
not work Righteousness. The end of a Journey must have some resemblance unto
the quality of it. We must never expect to have the latter End of the
Religious, and to overcome the last Enemy, if We refuse to Imitate them who
have fought the good sight of Faith, and have flnish'd their Course with joy:
As this Pious Queen did, whom her Imitators shall see shining with a far
brighter Glory than any Throne can bestow. Till then, Farewell, Great and
Excellent QVEEN: Farewell, Happy and Glorious SAINT: May Thy Memory always live
in our Breasts, and Thy Example be efficacious in our Lives.

THE END.

