A TABLE of the Additions and Alterations made in the Second Edition of the
Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book of the Trinity.
PReface, Page 3. over against Line 22. this Passage is added in the Margin,
[Dr. Owen in his Vindication of Himself against this Author, gives him the
Character of a Scoffer, and a Censurer of other Men's Labors, Judgments, and
Expressions. Which Witness of his is True; and since it is so, Whether he, of
whom it is True, deserves a Rebuke, or no, is left to the World to judge. Owen'
s Vindic. against Sh. p. 129.]

Preface, p. 5. line 4. This Passage in the first Edition, which shows, That
Tender Consciences are such Things as may some time or other put the Church not
only to part with its Liturgy, Rites and Ceremonies, but its very Faith also
for their sake, is thus altered in the Second Edition; [which shows, That there
are some such Tender Consciences in the World, as (when opportunity serves) may
put the Church not only to part with its Liturgy, Rites and Ceremonies, but its
very Creed also for their sake.]

Preface, p. 12. l. 26. after the words paying the Scores of both, this
Discourse follows in the Second Edition.

[But now if either He himself, or any for him shall plead, That it was not
fairly done to charge him with those Blasphemies, which he may (and perhaps
does) pretend to have been uttered by Him in the Person of his Adversary, and
as the genuine Consequences of the Doctrine maintained by him.

To this I Answer. First, That he, who pretends to speak in the Person of
another, ought, according to all Justice and Decorum, to speak only such Things
as that other, whom he personates, uses to speak, and consonant to his known,
Avowed Sense. But did his Adversary, Dr. Owen, ever speak so? Or use the
Expressions here uttered by this Author? Whereas he declares himself concerning
the said Expressions thus, viz. That he cannot mention them without begging
Pardon for repeating such horrid and desperate Blasphemies. Owen' s Vindication
against Sherlock, p. 46. That they were fitter for a Jew, or a Mohammedan, for
Servetus, or Socinus, than a Son of this Church, p. 47. That he abhorred the
Rehearsal of such horrid Profaneness, p. 49. That they were odious Satanical
Exprobrations of the Truth of Christ's Satisfaction, ibid. And now can this Man
pretend to speak these Things in the Person of one who thus Abhors, Abominates,
and Detests them? The Truth is, his whole Book is such a lewd Misrepresentation
both of the Words and Sense of his Adversary, that if he has any Blood in his
Body, it must needs fly in his Face, and bid him Blush for such Unconscionable
Falsifications.

But Secondly, If he charges these Assertions as Consequences of the Doctrine
maintained by his Adversary, I must put him in mind of these two Things.

1. That to the just charging of any Man with the Consequences of his Doctrine,
or Opinion, the Things so charged, ought to be not only the Real, but also the
Plain, Direct, and Immediate Consequences of that Opinion. Forasmuch as no Man
ought in reason to be charged with the Remote far-fetched Consequences of any
Proposition held by him; since he may in all Equity (if he disclaims them) be
supposed ignorant of them, and that inculpably too.

2. This Author is to know, That to the just charging of even any Doctrine, or
Opinion, with such and such Consequences, though they follow never so really
and truly from it, yet if they also lie any thing remote, and at some distance
from the same, they ought first by clear undeniable Arguments to be proved to
follow from thence, before they can justly and fairly be charged to do so.

Which two Observations thus premised; that I may lay the whole Matter before
the Reader more particularly; he is to take Notice, That the Doctrine, which
this Author loads with these Blasphemous Consequences; is, That of the
Necessity of a Satisfaction to be paid to God's Justice in order to the Pardon
of Sin, and the Justification of Sinners. And this I affirm to have been the
received Doctrine of the Church, and the General Opinion of Divines in the
Case; all asserting the Necessity of such a Satisfaction; though not All, I
confess, upon the same ground.

For First, Some found this Necessity upon the Necessary Egress of God's
Vindictive Justice, naturally acting and exerting it self where it meets with a
Proper Object.

But Secondly, Others state this Necessity upon the Decree or Purpose of God,
resolving to take this course for the Pardon of Sin, and no other. Which Decree
and Purpose, though made freely, yet being actually passed and declared, it was
not free for God to baulk the execution of it. His Veracity, Wisdom and Honor,
as Supreme Governor of the World, not suffering him to let the Violation of
his Laws pass without a due satisfaction made to his Justice. And this has been
the Opinion of most Divines in this matter.

Nevertheless, (whether upon either of these grounds, or some other) it is
certain, that the Necessity of a Satisfaction was still held, and owned by the
Church: And yet upon supposal of this Necessity alone it is, (whatsoever ground
it be stated upon) that this Author sets God forth in a most Profane manner, as
an Impotent Man venting his Rage and Passion without any sufficient Ground or
Reason for it. For, I am sure, no other Consideration can Answer, or come up to
the Impiety of the forecited Expressions. And I freely appeal to the Learned,
and Unbyassed Reader, Whether the said Passages can be placed to any other
Account whatsoever.

And if they cannot, I ask with what Conscience could this Man, of his own
Head, invent such Hideous, Abominable Words, and then thrust them into his
Adversary's Mouth, whether he would, or no? Or charge them as the necessary
Consequences of his Doctrine, without proving, or by any formed Argument so
much as offering to prove them so? For surely he ought to have done this in the
first place, and (since he knew that the Learned Assertors of this Doctrine,
did and would deny these to be the Consequences of it to the very Death) he
should by clear and solid Ratiocination have proved against them, (in spite of
their Denial) that these were indeed the True and Natural Consequences of the
said Doctrine, before he reproached them as such. But, it seems he was for
doing execution first, and for proceeding to Trial afterward; though, as hasty
as he was in the former, he has not yet done the latter, nor, I believe, ever
will.

Upon the whole Matter it is manifest, That it was not so much any thing
Personal in Dr. Owen (how bitter soever he was against him) as the Doctrine of
Christ's Satisfaction asserted by the said Doctor, in common with the whole
Christian Church, which this Author so vilely reflected upon; and discharged
all those Blasphemous Scoffs at, in that Book of his; and consequently so far
as he was the Author both of the Book and the Scoffs in it, he was as fit a
Person to have joined in the Address to the Morocco Ambassador, as any Man in
England besides.

I do, I confess, charge this Author with Asserting Three Gods (though He does
not in Terminis express it) because of his Asserting Three distinct Infinite
Minds, or Spirits; but then the Case here on my part is quite different from
what it was on his. For in this, the Consequence of Three Gods from Three
distinct Infinite Spirits, is Direct, Manifest, and Immediate; or rather, in
Truth, is not so properly a Consequence, or one Assertion following from
another, as one and the very same thing expressed in other words, which is the
true account of this Matter: For the Words [Infinite Mind, or Spirit] are but a
Periphrasis of the Thing signified by the Term [God:] And their perfect
equivalence shall be fully demonstrated in my Fifth Chapter.

From all which I conclude, That since there are (beyond all pretense of
denial) several Horrid Blasphemous Expressions in this Author' s forementioned
Book, which must and ought to be charged somewhere; and since his Adversary
utterly disowns them all, both as to Words and Sense; and since the Doctrine it
self, maintained by him, infers no such Thing, nor has this Author proved that
it does so; but that the said Representations of it are peculiarly his own, and
occur no where but in his Book (except possibly in the Writings of some of his
old Friends the Socinians, and those such as the Transilvanian Ministers) it
follows, that according See a most Virulent and Blasphemous Book Wrote by these
Men, and entitled, Praemonitiones Christi and Apostolorum de abolendo vero
Christo per Antichristum.
to the strictest Laws of fair and just Quotation, all the black Dirt of those
Impious and foul Passages which I have Cited from him, and charged upon him,
ought to lie wholly at his Door, and let him (and his Porter) shovel it away
thence as they are able.

As to what concerns the Licensing this Book, so severely and so justly
reflected upon by Dr. Owen, it did (it must be confessed) meet with a Person
(as it were) framed for the very purpose, etc.]

In the Book, p. 24. between l. 12. and 27. of the First Edition, this Addition
and Alteration is made in the Second.

[I must here remind him of Two Things.

First, That he would be pleased to tell us how Men can Write plainer and
plainer of the Trinity every Day after his New Notion of it has solved all the
Difficulties about it, as in the forecited p. 85. l. 27. he positively tells
us, it does. For (as I take it) where there remains no Difficulty, there must
be the utmost degree of plainness; and withal, when Men are come to the utmost
of any Thing, they can then go no further.

Secondly, I must remind him also, That the word Plainer in the Comparative
Degree, does not couch under it the positive signification of Plain, etc. And
much less very plain and easy: [Nay, so very plain as to have all the
difficulties of it solved, as this Author has expressly affirmed]. So that if
this be a Scandalous Imputation, it is easy to see to whom the Scandal of it
must belong, etc.

P. 27. l. 25. after the word Contradicted, this Parenthesis is inserted in the
Second Edition (as nothing ought to be, which cannot be comprehended.)

P. 74. l. 30. after the word whatsoever, three Lines from the bottom in the
First Edition, this following Parenthesis is inserted in the Second. (For an
Hypostatick Union and an Hypostatick Composition, viz. Such an one as makes a
Compound Hypostasis, are quite different things: And this Author shall in due
time be taught so much, if he has any thing to object against it.) Or, etc.

Page 291. over against Line 12. of the First Edition, the following Latin
Quotation is added in the Margin of the Second. Qui personas in Deo modos
tantummodo existendi, sive (...) esse dicunt, ipsam Deitatem nequaquam
exc^^dum, in qua convenient; Sed nihil aliud esse volunt, quam Existendi modum,
in quo differunt. Quare Pater non est modus tantum existendi, sed Deus est,
quemadmodum and caeter ae Personae, verum Deus est cum certo modo existendi,
qui neque Filio convenit, neque Spiritui Sancto. Sic and Filius Deus est, non
modus tantum existendi, Sed Deus est cum certo modo Existendi, qualis neque
Patri convenit, neque Spiritui Sancto. Ad eundem modum discriminis, and
Spiritus Sanctus Deus est, non modus existendi tantum; Sed deus est cum certo
modo existendi, qualis nec Patri convenit neque Filio. Summa est, Personas in
Deo non differ essentia, quia sunt unus Deus, sed Proprietate and modo
Subsistendi. Twissus in Responsione ad Arminii Praefationem in extrema Page
Lin. 20. editionis Amstelodamensis apud Ianssonium anno 1632.

Page 342. after these words [ joined true Greek and English together] in the
4th Line, this following Discourse is to be inserted.

[But there is an extraordinary Passage in his Book of Judgment, Chap. 2. Sect.
1. p. 164. of the last Edition, (which should be the most correct) and I was
doubting, whether I should charge it upon his Ignorance, or his Insolence; but
both of them play their Parts very remarkably in it. For first he makes a most
false, illiterate, and absurd Translation of a Verse, or rather part of a Verse
in the New Testament, and then reproaches the received Translation as wrong,
and very faulty, for rendering it otherwise. The place is in 2 Pet. c. 2. v. 4.
(...). In which he considers only the words (...), dividing them from the rest
of the Sentence, viz. (...), and by that means from the Verb in this latter
part of it, which should govern the Noun in the former; thereby making (...) to
be governed not by (...) (as it ought to be) but most falsely and
Ungrammatically by (...), and so he renders (...), casting them, viz. the
Apostate Angels, down into Chains of darkness. And this interpretation he
builds partly upon the pretended Reason of the Thing here discoursed of, and
partly upon the signification of the word (...), but upon both of them very
absurdly. From the Reason of the Thing he argues, that if (...) should signify
the Apostate Angels being cast down into Hell, how could they be said upon
Sentence passed upon them at the last Judgment, to be then cast into Hell, if
they were there before? To which the Answer is very easy and obvious, That
immediately upon their sin they were cast down into, and kept in those lower
Regions called (...), or Hell locally, but not cast into Hell Torments, till
the last Judgment has passed upon them; so that with full accord both to
Scripture and Reason we are to distinguish the place of Hell, where they now
are, from the Judicial penal Torments of Hell, which they shall be adjudged to,
and endure in that place hereafter; as we distinguish the Prison wherein
Malefactors are kept, from the execution which they are there kept for; As
indeed this Text with great significance alludes to both: So that his Argument
from hence falls to nothing. His other Reason is from the signification of the
word (...), which he affirms to signify only to cast down. But on the
contrary, I must here tell him first, That (...) does not only import the Act
of casting down, but (being derived from (...)) signifies also the Term ad
quem, or the Place, into which this casting down is. And I refer him to all the
Greek Lexicographers (not one of them excepted) whether they do not render
(...) by in Tartarum detrudo, dejicio, or praecipito; and if so, how can (...)
possibly here agree with (...); for if (...) be the Term ad quem of the Act,
how can (...) be so too; since one single Act can have but one Ultimate Term ad
quem? And even this Man himself does not allow (...) and (...) to be one and
the same thing. And besides this, I must tell him further, That if (...)
imported the Term, Thing, or Place, into which God cast down the Apostate
Angels, it ought not to have been (...), but (...), forasmuch as the motion of
casting down, importing a Local descent to something, the Dative Case cannot in
true Grammar answer it.

And therefore the old Latin Version makes (...) to import, not the Term to
which, but the Instruments or means by which these Angels were thus brought
down, rendering the Text thus, Rudentibus Inferni detractos in Tartarum
tradidit, etc. which, as it is not strictly a Translation, but an arbitrary
Paraphrase, so it is a very forced and unnatural one too; as importing not a
casting but a drawing down these Angels into Hell. In which case, who must be
the Person drawing them? For since God (to whom (...) does and must here agree)
ought to be considered by us as in the Highest Heaven, how can this drawing
down be applied to him, which, in the Nature of it, supposes the Person drawing
to be in that lower place, to which he is drawing others? For all Traction is a
motion of the Agent forcibly bringing something to himself, but Trusion a
motion by which he removes or forces something from himself.

It is clear therefore, that according to all the Rules of Grammatical
Construction, and proper speaking, (...) cannot be governed by (...) and that,
therefore something else must be sought for to govern it, which can be nothing
besides (...). And then the whole Sentence will be properly and plainly
translated thus. (...) [God] having cast or thrust them [viz. the Apostate
Angels] down into Hell [or the Lower Regions] (...), delivered, or put them
into Chains of darkness, (...), kept, or reserved to [or for] Judgment. And
this is sense and propriety of Speech, agreeable both to the Natural
Signification, and the Grammatical Syntax of the Words. But the Translation so
imperiously and ignorantly given by this Man (in correction of that of the
Church) is agreeable to neither. For it both divides one part of the Sentence
from the other, from which it must not be divided, and then makes (...) to be
governed by (...), which cannot govern it, and quite cutts it off from (...),
which alone can.

And now, ought it not to be matter of Amazement to all Men of Sense and
Sobriety, to see a Puny, who is not able to master three words of Greek,
presume to control such great Masters of that Language, as the Translators of
the New Testament into English undoubtedly were? Nay, and thereby to reflect
upon the Church her self, which has received and owned this Translation, and to
whose Judgment and Authority (if he be so nearly related to her, as he
pretends) he ows so great and filial a Deference? Let him rather instead of
correcting the English Translation (a Work which he was never born for) thank
God, and the Translators for it; there being few Men living more beholden to it
than himself. And therefore leaving his forlorn Criticisme (as new every whit
as his Divinity) to shift for it self; I, for my part, like my English Bible,
for his dislike of any part of it, better than before. For I can by no means
see any force or consequence in this Argument, viz. That because this Author is
much better at quoting a Greek Sentence than at construing it; therefore the
English Translation of this Text in St. Peter is a very bad Translation: I say,
I cannot admit, or yield to this Consequence.]

Page 347. of the First Edition after this Sentence [ In such a Case some are
of Opinion, that where the words escape it, the Author himself ought to have
it] the following Discourse comes in P. 351. Lin. 8. of the Second Edition
beginning with these words.

[But because some perhaps will hardly be satisfied with so General a Charge
without an Allegation of more Particulars, I shall here give the Reader a
Catalogue of this Author's Greek Errata in the Second Edition of his
Vindication of the Trinity (which should in Reason be thought the most correct)
together with their Correction confronting them.

Greek Errata. Correction. (...) (...) Page 102. Quotat.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Punctum interrogationis post (...) pro
Semicol. (...) (...) (...) (...) Page 107. Quotat.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Punctum interrogationis post (...) pro Semicol. (...) (...) Page 107. l. 14.
(...) (...) (...) (...) Page 110. Quotat.
(...) (...) (...) bis (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Page 113. Quotat.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) 2d Quot. ibid.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Page 115. Quotat.
(...) (...) (...) (...) Page 116. Quotat.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Page 119. Quotat.
(...) (...) (...) (...) Page 119. l. 28.
(...) (...) Page 120. l. 26.
(...) l. 27.
(...) Page 121. l. 24, 25.
(...) (...) (...) (...) Page 122. l. 27.
(...) (...) ibid.
(...) (...) Page 123. Quotat.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Punctum interrogationis post (...) pro Semicol. (...) (...) Page 125. Quotat.
(...) (...) (...) (...) Page 128. l. 19. Quotat.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). 129.
(...) (...) (...). 166.
(...) (...) (...). 200.


Now all these Errata, one would think, make up a jolly Company to rendezvous
together in the compass of less than half a dozen Pages of an English Book; a
Company fit for our Author to march Triumphantly in the Head of.

Page 360. After [William Giles some time of Mark-Lane] in the First Edition in
the Margin, is added in the Margin of the Second [ who Wrote (forsooth) in
defense of our Author against the Papists.]

Page 374. Lines 12, 13, 14. That Passage [ It is much fitter to be Censured by
a Convocation, though even He Himself should be Prolocutor of it] is altered in
Page 377. Line 9. thus -- [ [Though even He Himself (since John Goodwin and
Hugh Peter's are gone off) should be Prolocutor of it.]

And now, upon the issue of the whole Matter, I hope all Ingenuous, and
Impartial Readers, all True Friends of our English, Church and Old Divinity
will allow, that I have treated an Insolent, Imposing Innovator, no otherwise
than he has deserved; or rather indeed much short of it; and that None will
Tax, or Censure me for what I have Wrote, but such as can think it reasonable
for one Man to Trample upon, and Insult over his whole Profession, and to be
Applauded, or at least endured in such a Presumption. For my own part, I can by
no means judge so; and as I abhor such Pride in others; so, I hope, I shall
never be guilty of the least degree of it my self. I thank God, I account not
the meanest of my own Profession my Inferior; and if I should be tempted to
think any one Below me, it should be only such an one as thinks himself Above
all the World besides.

FINIS.

