Evangelium Sydereum: OR, REVELATION Demonstrated.

In THREE PARTS.

The First being a Philosophical Discourse leading to the Second. The Second is
Holy Scripture, Astronomically handled from the Radix of a Nativity, and a
Direction of the Luminaries, etc. The Third is an Appendix touching the Scheme
of Sol's Ingress into Aries for the Year 1677. The whole being a Divine
Treatise recommended to the serious perusal of the unprejudiced Mathematician
and Astrologer, as also of all other Persons, to the intent they may behold
God's glorious Wonders revealed in the Heavens.
By John Southworth, an Experiencer of the Love of Jesus, and a Well-wisher to
the People in Scorn called QUAKERS.

Where there is no Vision the People perish,

Prove. 29.18. The Heavens declare the Glory of God,

Psalm 19.1. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and sold at the Sign of the Three
Bibles in Ludgate Street, 1680.

TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
THE Subject of this Treatise being a Divine Paraphrase upon the Position of
the Heavens at that Instant of Time wherein a particular Person was born, may
peradventure be less acceptable unto thee, (the Art of Astrology, whereupon
this depends) being so generally exploded by the strictest Professors of
Religion, of what kind soever) than if Divinity had been treated of after some
other manner. Yet, in regard Christianity it self in the days of Jesus was as
evilly esteemed of as is Astrology in these days, and that by Zealous
Professors too, viz. the Scribes and Pharisees: I hope it may in some measure
appear unto thee, that all things are not to be totally rejected which are
lightly esteemed of, nor to be neglected, which are evilly spoken of, since the
Spirit of the Lord may reveal something beneficial to Mankind out of such
things as are aforesaid.

Therefore I hope thy Candor will prevent a rashness in thy Judgment, as
touching the Subject Matter of this Treatise, more especially if thou
understandest it not; since it is an Act of Imprudence for any Person to
condemn such things as he does not understand.

That the Stars were set for Signs before the Fall of man, when all things were
in a state of Purity, the Holy Scriptures imply, Genesis 1. And if so, then they
must necessarily signify holy things; and, as they are for Signs in these
days, what are they more likely to signify than the Appearance of Jesus in
Spirit to his people? which is a matter of no less Concern than man's
everlasting Salvation.

I have little more to annex, only I think it requisite to intimate thus much,
viz. That in regard the word [Native] is frequently made Use of in the Second
part of this Book, the outward Person of the Party intended is not always
meant thereby, but for the most part, and in a more especial manner, the Spirit
of Jesus born in him.

Here the Spiritual Birth is treated of in the Astral Dialect, and the Wonders
thereof immediately revealed, according to the power of the Celestial Motions,
which I recommend to thy Impartial perusal.

Read without prejudice, and consider without an unjust Reflection upon him,
who recommends thee to the protection of Jesus, and is,

12th of the 5th Month called July. 1679. Thy Well-wisher in all things J. S.

THE CONTENTS Of the FIRST PART.
GOD the immediate Teacher of his People, Page 1. Christ Jesus, the Light
within, unfolds all Mysteries both Natural and Divine, Page 2. The Stars
converse with the Soul of Man, giving Divine Visions, ibid. The Heavens, a more
worthy part of the Creation, Page 3. Christ Jesus, etc. revealed by the
Heavens, and that effectually, Page 4. The Heavens declare the Glory of God to
the Soul, giving Visions, Page 5. The Stars Evangelize, ibid. Their Language
Universal, Page 6. A Vision of God is Divine Love, Page 7. Heavens gave the
Death of the Native's Mother, ibid. Growth of Vegetables and Minerals from
Heaven, ibid. Stars have power to cut off man's Life, yet no Causes of evil
Destiny to mankind, Page 8. Stars no more concerned in the evil Destiny of
Persons, than the Law. Page 9. Time of Violent and Natural Death of Persons,
predicted by the Stars, Page 9, 10. Some Natural Experiments for which Reasons
cannot be given, Page 10. The Righteous man guided by a Direction from Heaven,
Page 11. Wonderful things observed at the coming of Christ's Kingdom, Page 12.
Stars operate both upon the Soul and Body, Page 13. Rules of Astrology, and
Names of the Signs verified by Syllogisms, Page 13, 14. Rules vindicated by
Scripture, Page 15. An Appeal to the Impartial Artist, Page 16. Names of the
Signs Divinely mysterious, Page 17. How the Names of the Signs have been
misapplied by the Heathen, Page 18, 19. An impertinent Objection answered, Page
19, 20. Rules of Astrology may be a Demonstration of Holy Scripture, yet no
Cause of them, Page 20, 21, 22. Stars no Causes of men's evil Inclinations and
Sins, Page 22, 23, 24. Righteous sometimes suffer as Malefactors, Page 25. God,
by the Heavens, inflicts Judgments upon the Wicked, but administers Blessings
to the Righteous, Page 26. The Regenerate man sees that thing glorious, which
the Unregenerate sees obscure, Page 27, 28. Rules of Astrology differ from the
Answers of Oracles Page 29, 30, 31, 32. Sacred Mysteries of Arts and Sciences
revealed by God, Page 32. Names of the Planets, though admitted Heathenish, yet
lawfully used, Page 33. Heathenish Names of Planets as lawful to be used, as
Heathenish Names of Cities, Page 33, 34. Names of Men and Women may be as
lawfully excepted against, as the Names of the Planets, Page 35. Heathenish
Names of Planets lawfully used without Adoration, Page 36. Monuments of
Idolatry to be destroyed, ib. Name implies the Nature, Page 36, 37.
Supernatural Reasons for the Number of the Celestial Houses and Signs, Page
37, 38. Divine Reasons why Seven Planets only, Page 38. Astrological Terms of
Art lawful to be used, ibid. The incertainty of Astronomy no impeachment to
Astrology, Page 39. Death of Picus Mirandula Astrologically predicted, ibid.
Scripture- Objections, etc. against Astrology, their Answers referred to, ibid.
An Opponent, his unreasonable way of Arguing, Page 39, 40. Mirandula's Death a
firm Example to prove the truth of Astrology, Page 40, 41. Artist's Judgment
dilating it self beyond Art, and its confines, Page 41. An Objection against
the Eclipses treated of (in the Second Part) answered, ibid. Eclipses effected
by Transits, Page 42. The wonderful Power of Transits exemplified, Page 42, 43,
44. Astrologers, their Reflections upon this Treatise, or the Author, would be
no Impeachment upon either of them, Page 44, 45. Reasons why the Subject Matter
of the Second Part is founded upon a particular Nativity, Page 45, 46. Reasons
in Art for giving a General Judgment from a particular Nativity, Page 47. The
Seal of the Great King of Heaven produced, Page 48. The Author's seeming
Contradictions reconciled, Page 49. That Astrologers can receive no Spiritual
Disadvantage by reading this Treatise, Page 50. Zealous Persons, their evil
Opinion of Astrology, is no Reason why, as here treated of, it should be
withheld from Public View, Page 51, 52. The Unskilful not persuaded by this
Treatise to the study of Astrology, Page 52. And though thereby induced to the
Study thereof, yet vindicated, Page 53. Reasons why the Terms of Art are used
at large, and their Characters rejected, Page 53, 54. Terms of Art, though
obscure, yet not unlawful to be used, Page 54, 55. This Treatise vindicated
from Tautology, Page 55. An Exhibition of the Planets Names, with their
Derivations Page 55, 56. Erasmus his exploding these Derivations, not to be
regarded, Page 57. Tycho's or Selden's Reflections upon Astrology for Cardan's
Errors, not worthy to be noted, ibid.
The CONTENTS of the Second Part.
RAdical Scheme and Speculum, page 1, 2. Luminaries Arch of Direction, ibid.
Salmon's Via Dirigendi nova, page 2, 3, 4. Via Exemplificata, page 5.
Revolutional Scheme and Speculum, page 6, 7. Testimonies of the true Radix,
ibid. Observations upon the Solar Exortum, page 8, 9. Visions of God and
Angels, page 10, 12. Angelical Vision resembled page 13. Divine Visions given,
page 14. Invisible Honor from God, ibid. Native's Principles contemned, page
15. Art's and Religion's mysteries, ibid. Visions and Revelations, ibid.
Native's good Principle stifled, page 16. Principles altered for the better,
ibid. Reward from God, page 17. The strait way entered, ibid. Native's
Principles scandalized, page 17, 18. The Title [Quaker] honorable, page 18. A
Lowly Principle, ibid. Hid from pretended Divines, ibid. Lowly Principle
descended from on high, and Exalted, page 19. Native's Direction in the ways
of Love, his pleasant weeping and sweet tribulation, page 20. Fervor of Holy
Love from the Sun of Righteousness, page 21. Native's Delightful weeping, ibid.
God's winning Love, and Dove-like Innocence, page 22. Cause of the Native's
Sorrow, Light of Heaven revealing Sin, ibid. A Divine Marriage, page 23.
Native's pleasant Savours, ibid. Sweet Odours perfuming the low Valleys, ibid.
A mortifying of the Native's Evil ways, and his Strength made perfect in
weakness, page 24. Direction of the Luminaries powerful, page 25. The Grave
fallen, and the Lamb exalted, ibid. Principle of Light shining in a Dark place,
and dawning to the perfect day, page 26. Light increasing to a Fullness of
Glory, ib. Singing in the midst of Sorrow, page 27. Spica Virginis ascending
out of the Twelfth into the Eleventh, with Songs of Praise, page 27, 28.
Judah's Lion reigning and opening the Seals of the Book of Mysteries, page 27.
The Serpent chained down, casting floods of water after the Virgin, etc. page
28. Justice returns the Inundations, ibid. Serpent aims to bruise the Virgins
heel, ib. The Ear of Corn, or Seed of Life, caught up to the Throne of God,
ibid. Bulls of Bashan fixed down, page 29. Earing time and Harvest come, ibid.
Wilderness a fruitful field, ibid. Jesus the Reward of Holiness, page 30. Death
swallowed up in Victory, ibid. Grave fallen by the Lamb, ibid. Christ reigning,
the Dragon bound page 30, 31. All formal Worships falling, page 31. Lord
released out of Servitude, ibid. Baptism with the Holy Ghost and Fire, page 31.
Justice the Prison-keeper, page 32. Christ and his People exalted, ibid. Light
and Way of Life seen in Eclipses, ibid. A strange Direction into the paths of
Righteousness, page 32, 33, 34. A wonderful Eclipse, and its hidden things
discovered, page 34. Promises in Scripture fulfilled, ibid. Light of the Moon
become as the Sun's Light, the Sun's Light being sevenfold, etc. page 34, 35.
Glad Tidings of Salvation, page 35. A pleasant Voyage, ibid. Raging Seas
becalmed, and blustering Winds, rebuked, ibid. A pure Language turned to the
People, ibid. A Demonstration of wonderful Eclipses, page 36, 37, 38, 39.
Hidden Light shining in Darkness, page 38. Sun and Moon darkened; Stars
withdraw their shining, page 39. Moon turned into Blood, ibid. page 40. Light
shining in Darkness reveals Mysteries, page 40. Servants of God crowned with a
Diadem of Praises, etc. page 40, 41. Blind Worshippers groping in Darkness,
etc. page 41. Spiritual Chemistry or Christ Jesus the Philosopher's Elixir,
page 42. The Soul purified, sings Allelujahs unto God, ib. A Spiritual Hymn,
etc. page 43. Eclipses further paraphrased on, page 44, 45, 46. House of Life
bruising the Serpent's Head, page 46. Sun and Moon by Transit totally Eclipsed
in the World, ibid. Sun and Moon darkened, Stars withdraw their shining, page
47. Eclipses further explained from the Luminaries their Transits, ibid. The
Moon confounded, and the Sun ashamed, page 48. Sol immediately touching the
same point of the Ecliptic twice, ibid. Ecliptic line seems dilated, page 49.
Sun reeling in his Course, is ashamed, and the Moon confounded, ibid. Lord of
Hosts reigns in Mount Sion, etc. ib. Moons Nodes duplicated, page 49, 50.
Dragon's Kingdom at Enmity with it self, falls, page 50. Sun further ashamed
before the Almighty, ib. Sign of the Son of Man appearing in Heaven, page 51.
God enthroned, and attended with an Angel in the Sun, ibid. Christ Jesus
typified by the Ear of Corn in the Virgin's left hand, ibid. Moon confounded,
Sun ashamed, ibid. Luminaries thrice Eclipsed upon the Bodies of one another,
page 52. Sol eclipsed at the Full, Luna at the New Moon, page 52, 53. Light
shines in Darkness page 53. Luminaries Bodies dashed together, Lights of Heaven
destroyed, page 53, 54. Serpent dashed against his own forehead, page 54.
Offspring of the New Jerusalem, ibid. Eccentrick Orbs and Epicycles, ibid.
Moons Nodes duplicated, ibid. Power of the Heavens shaken, page 54, 55. The
Luminaries their Direction further handled, page 55. Seed of the Woman bruising
the Serpent's head, page 55, 56. Light a Heavenly Direction, page 56. Promises
of Mercy and Judgment fulfilled, ib. Serpent and Death their Kingdoms
demolished, ibid. Sun no Light by Day, Moon no Light; the Lord an everlasting
Light, page 57. Sun no more go down, Moon always present, the Lord an eternal
Light, etc. page 58. A Kingdom opposed by its King, falls; Deaths Kingdom
subverted, ibid. Righteous possess the Kingdoms of their Enemies, page 59.
Death fallen to the Righteous, ibid. Sun of Righteousness subverting Death's
Kingdom, page 59, 60. Serpent's Heart wounded, etc. page 60. Jesus walking on
the Sea, page 60, 61. A Rainbow round about the Throne, etc. page 61.
Thundrings, Lightnings, and Voices out of the Throne, page 62. Morning Star
given, ibid. Angel in the Sun, page 63. Seven Golden Candlesticks, etc. ibid.
Lord of the Virgin is Light, ibid. Angel flying through the midst of Heaven,
page 63, 64. Native rapt up, page 64. God overcomes his Servants with Love,
page 64, 65. Angels in bright Raiment, page 65, 66. Jesus arisen from the Dead,
page 66. Angels Testimony, ibid. Death conquered by his Resurrection, page 66,
67. Mary meets Jesus being arisen, with Spices, page 67. Mary being arisen with
Spices, meets Jesus with Spices, page 67, 68. Mary with Spices, meets Jesus
being arisen with Spices, ibid. Morning Stars sing together, Righteous as
Stars, ibid. Pretended Divines falling backwards, and groping in Darkness, page
68, 69. Jesus transfigured in the Mount, page 69, 70. Moses and Elias appear in
Glory, etc. ibid. God takes away the Reproach of his People, page 70. He wipes
away all Tears from their Eyes, and changes their Tribulation into Joy. page
71. The same things pure to the same Man being Regenerate, which were formerly
impure to him being Unregenerate, page 71, 72. Times of Rejoicing, page 73, 74.
Angel offers up Incense with the Prayers of the Saints upon an Altar of Gold,
ib. Incense ascends out of a Censer of Gold, etc. ib. Sea of Glass mingled with
Fire, etc. page 75, 76. Elias represented by Mars, Moses by Mercury, page 76,
77. Whirlwind carrying Elijah, page 77. A Sequel to the Second Part, page 77,
78. A Vindication thereof, page 78.
The CONTENTS of the Third Part.
SCheme of the Ingress, is the Seal of the Almighty, 1, 2. Serpent dashed
against his own Forehead, 2, 3. Serpent's Heart wounded, Dragon fallen, Bulls
of Bashan fixed down, 3. Comet in Heaven, ibid. Death upon the Enemies of God,
4. Serpent bound, ibid. Salvation by the Light, ibid. Christ Jesus the Light,
5, 6. His Promises performed, ibid. He no Respecter of Persons, ibid. A further
Judgment upon the Solar Ingress, 6. Death vanquished, ibid. God exalted in the
Lamb, 7. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah reigning, ib. God's wonderful Love,
ibid. His Condescension, Love and Sweetness, 8, 9. A persuasion to tenderness
of Spirit, 9, 10. An Exhortation to Mourning, 10, 11 Jesus and the Angels
appear to Mary, weeping, 11. Divine Encouragement for Spiritual Travelers, 11,
12. Sacred Zeal, its Effects, 12.
ERRATA.
IN the first Part, page 26. line 4. read, have recounted to them the most
eminent Accidents of their Lives already past, whether good or evil, as also
the time of their first appearance, etc. page 30. l. 7. read, Rules are
derived, yet from these arises a twofold construction. p. 32. l. 27. for of,
read at Princes Tables.

In the second Part, p. 11. l. 20. read, which is in the Ninth. p. 29. l. 7.
read, under the Earth. p. 36. l. 27. for, and 2 degrees. read, in 2 degrees.

Evangelium Sydereum, THE FIRST PART, BEING A Philosophical Discourse leading
to the Second.
GOD who is pure, in order to the fulfilling of his promise made of old to the
Sons of Men, has vouchsafed, of his infinite love, to become the immediate
Teacher of all those who are willing to accept of his Divine Doctrine; yea, his
Love is such, and so immense, that he has sowed the seed of Eternal Life in
every man's bosom, but (the more is the pity) it lies oppressed under the Tares
of Iniquity; for most men do disregard it, and choke it with the burden of Sin
and Transgression: This is the love of God unto ungrateful men, viz. he who is
Light, and in whom is no Darkness at all; he, I say, who is the King of kings,
and Lord of Lords, has vouchsafed to come down from Heaven to teach the Sons
of men, or rather to teach them in the place of his abode, which is in Heaven;
he being Light, as aforesaid, has put his Law into men's Hearts, and his Spirit
into their Inward parts, by yielding obedience unto which, he becomes their God
and they his People: This is he who gives his good Spirit to the Rebellious,
yea, to all men in general, for he is no Respecter of Persons: The Spirit of
God, which is Light, is put into the Inward parts; hence it appears, that there
is a holy light within man; the Law of the Spirit of Life is Light, and is put
into the Heart; and since the Heart is within man, it must of necessity follow,
that the Light of Life is seated within man: This is that Light within, which
unfolds all Mysteries both Natural and Divine, unto which I recommend all those
that are willing to become the Sons of Wisdom, as to an holy and immediate
Instructor in all things whatsoever.

Thesis. The Stars, as Coagents with God their Creator, converse with, and have
their Influences and Effects upon the Soul of man, and that in order to its
Salvation; they give Divine Visions and Revelations.

For the proof of this Position, I shall elect two or three portions of Sacred
Scripture, making them Bases whereupon to raise my Arguments:

Basis. The Invisible things of God from the Creation of the World are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead; so that men are left without Excuse, Romans 1.20.

Argument. The visible Heavens are a most glorious part of the Creation, and
Synonoma's to the Invisible, which are the Throne of God, whereas he calls the
Earth his Footstool; moreover, the Heavens had their Priority in the Order of
the Creation, for we read, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the Heaven
and the Earth; observe the Order, viz. He first created the Heaven, and then
the Earth, as a Dependent upon the Heaven, to the end it might subsist: but the
Earth was without Form, and void, Genesis 1.2. We do not read that the Heaven was
so. Hence it appears, that the Heavens are a more worthy part of the Creation,
and such a part has God made choice of, whereby to declare his holy Wonders,
and to explain the Invisible things of his Kingdom; the Heavens are a principal
part of that Book by which we read their Omnipotent Creator; Now the invisible
things of God (who is a Spirit and Immortal) cannot be seen but by the
Spiritual, Immortal, and Invisible part of man, which is the Soul; for his
Earthly part, which is his Body, cannot stand before the Rays of such
resplendent Glory.

If the Heavens never have an Effect upon the Soul, by giving a Sight or Vision
of the Eternal Power and Godhead, then I affirm, that they give it to no
purpose; which to conclude were Erroneous; but they have an Effect by giving a
Vision of Gods Glory, for his Eternal Power and Godhead is clearly seen, etc.
as says the Apostle; which seeing is a Vision; Now to say that Visions of God
are given to no purpose, is blasphemous. If the Invisible and Eternal Power and
Godhead are seen by the means aforesaid, then the Everlasting Father and the
Son Christ Jesus are seen, to see whom is Life Eternal; here is a fight of the
Worlds Savior, given by that part of the visible Creation, which was appointed
to declare his Glory, viz. the Heavens; and the sight of this Savior has an
Effect upon the Soul, for it gives Life Everlasting by working its Conversion.

If Jesus, the Power of God be seen, and revealed by the visible Heavens, then
they preach the Gospel, for the Revelation of Jesus is the Preaching of the
Gospel, or glad tidings of Salvation unto the Sons and Daughters of men.

Now if this Doctrine of the Heavens never have an Effect, then is it vain;
which to affirm were blasphemous; from thence would arise this absurd
Conclusion, viz. That the Heavens, as part of the Creation, were ordained to
show forth the Invisible things of God, and that in order to man's Salvation, by
declaring Jesus the Eternal Power of the Father; but this Ordinance is void,
having no Effect, for it is evident, that whatsoever is without Effect, is void:
Therefore, since it is absurd and blasphemous to make the aforesaid Conclusion,
it will on the contrary be regular and pious to conclude, that the Heavens have
an Effect upon the Soul, by declaring and giving a clear Sight or Vision of the
Invisible things of God, and of his Glory, which is intended for man's
Salvation. Hence it appears, that the Stars of Heaven converse with, and have
Effects upon the Soul of man, etc. according to the intent of the foregoing
Thesis, which was to be proved.

Basis 2. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, etc. Psalm 19.1.

Argument. If the Heavens declare the Glory of God, (which Glory is Spiritual
and Invisible) then they must of necessity declare it to the Soul of man, which
is also Spiritual and Invisible, it being the only fit receptacle in man of
that Glory; for the Body, which is mortal, cannot make its appearance before so
Divine a Principle, and retain its Being, neither is there any Unity or
Commerce betwixt Carnal and Spiritual things.

If the Heavens declare the Glory of God, then they declare Jesus the Eternal
Son of God; for the Son is the Glory of the Father, and the Son and Father are
united.

If they declare Jesus, then they preach the Gospel; for the Declaration of
Jesus is the preaching of the Gospel.

If the Heavens declare the Glory of God (which is Spiritual,) then they give
Visions of that Glory; but the Heavens declare the Glory of God (which is
Spiritual,) ergo they give Visions of that Glory; for a Declaration in this
case, is a making manifest, clear, and apparent to the eye of the Soul; Now the
Spiritual Glory, or glorious Spirit of God, being thus made manifest, is a
Sight or Vision of God, and of his Glory.

If the Heavens declare the Glory of God, then they make manifest the Glory of
God, which manifestation is a Vision; but the Heavens declare the Glory of God,
ergo, they make manifest the Glory of God, which Manifestation is a Vision.
Hence it appears, that the Heavens being created by God to declare his Glory,
they, by that Declaration, have an Effect upon the Soul, in giving Visions of
his Glory: and since a Vision of God is a Revelation of Jesus, it is evident
also, that the Heavens do Evangelize, or Preach the Gospel, and that
universally; for, there is no Speech nor Language where the voice of the Stars
is not heard; their line is gone out through all the Earth, and their words to
the end of the World: Psalm 19. verse. 3, 4.

Now since the Heavens so largely extend their Virtue toward mankind, and that
in order to its Salvation, it is evident, that the Blacks of Africa have not
such cause to curse their Stars, as some have said, but rather to bless them.

Also, since it is made apparent, that the Heavens give Visions of Gods Glory,
it is not improperly by me affirmed in some part of this Treatise, that the
Positions, Dignities, Aspects, and Transits of the Planets, in the Radical and
Revolutional Figures, gave Divine Visions and Revelations.

A Vision of God is a symptom of his Love, therefore when a Vision is given,
the fervor of holy Love is also given. Hence appears the truth of the
following Paraphrase, as it is in some part of this Book, viz. Sol directed to
the Body of Luna, Lady of the Ninth, gave the resplendent fervor of holy Love,
etc.

Now, if the Celestial Inhabitants, viz. the Radiant Stars, administer such
gifts unto the Soul, much more might they give or effect the death of the
Natives Mother, by removing her Soul from its earthly Tabernacle, into a state
of everlasting Bliss and Glory; and this according to the Power, Order, and
Divine appointment of their mighty Creator.

I believe few will deny, that the Heavens, as Mediums, produce upon, and in
the Earth, the growth of Vegetables and Minerals; Now, if some veneniferous
Vegetable or Mineral being taken into the Body of man, has power to destroy
Life, by separating the Soul from the Body, or some other, endued with a
Cordial property, has power to restore decayed Nature by the preservation of
Life; much more then may the Influence of the Stars, which gave such Vegetables
or Minerals their Nature and Being, effect the Death, or preserve the Life of
Mankind; for Nihil dat quod non habet.

But the Scripture it self does evidently manifest, that the Stars have power
to cut off man's Life: and (to show that they have eminent Power given them, the
Scripture frequently calls them the Host of Heaven) the ending of Life after
which method, is also accomplished to Gods Honor and Glory, and that in the
destruction of his Enemies; for we read, Judges 5.20. that the Stars in their
courses fought against Sisera; thus sung Deborah and Barak, who had delivered
Israel out of the hands of Jabin and Sisera: Now, since the Stars fought
against Sisera, it is evident that they slew him in the Conflict by Jael, an
Instrument in Gods hand, who drove a nail through his temples.

Now the precedent Paragraph seems to give way to this Objection, viz.

Obj. The Stars, by their Effects, are the Causes of evil Destiny to mortal
men, and bring them to untimely ends.

Answ. The Circumstances of the death of Sisera, before hinted at, if read at
large, as they present themselves in the holy Scripture, Judges the fourth
chapter; and seriously considered, will sufficiently answer this Objection; for
Sisera the Captain of Jabin King of Canaan, who had oppressed the Israel of God
twenty years, went against Barak the friend of Israel: with intention to subdue
him, that so the Israelites might still remain under the same Oppression; but
God being his Aversary, executed his Divine Justice upon him, and that by the
Stars of Heaven, which fought against him, and got the Victory; thus was Israel
miraculously delivered out of the hands of its Oppressors. Hence it appears,
that the Stars are as Instruments in Gods hand, whereby to inflict Judgments
upon the wicked, and to execute Justice upon his Adversaries; they also show
forth the wonderful Deliverances which he can accomplish by their means: Hereby
it is also evident, that they are no more concerned in the evil Destiny of
Persons, than the Law is, which brings Malefactors to the place of Execution
for evil doing: but the no less merciful than just God, many times takes pity
upon such Offenders, by giving them Repentance, and showing them the evil
Accidents which attend those that offend him, all which is done in love toward
them; so that coming to a shameful end, as before men, yet their condescending
Lord does compassionately receive them, not despising them in that reproachful
state of Death, though men may despise them, but receiving them into the Arms
of everlasting Glory.

Other Malefactors being also summoned by the Heavens to the place of
Execution, (for I averr that these things have been found true by Experience,
and been truly predicted from the Position of Heaven at the Birth, as also the
time prenoted by directions) may have sinned out their day, and so given up by
God (being forsaken of him) to a state of everlasting misery: I say, that the
time of the violent Death of Malefactors has been prenoted by the Art of
Directions, and that from the Birth; as also the violent Death of others (and
the time thereof) who never were executed as Delinquents, or breakers of any
Law, either Military or Civil, but have received their Death by Accident; yea,
the time of the Natural Death of many has been predicted from the Birth by
Directions and Transits in the Nativity, and may again be predicted without
impeachment of Divine Justice, or a detraction from his Mercy; for his Wonders
in Heaven are thus declared, and he acts many times in such sort as that Humane
Reason cannot dive into the Mystery of such Wonders, yea, some of his Wonders
in Nature we cannot give reasons for, though found true by Experience;
therefore Experiences are not to be rejected, because unbelieving Opponents
cannot be convinced of them, for want of Rational Arguments whereby to
vindicate them; neither does it always seem good unto God, to show unto his
righteous People the mystery of his Proceedings, whether in things Natural or
Divine.

It is a hard matter to show a reason why the Glo-worm shines by night, or why
the Magnetic Needle respects the Arctick Pole; as also, why the little Remora
stops a ship upon full sail, by hanging upon the Keel; yet the two first of
these have been obvious to the eyes of most men, and the last sometimes
experienced by Navigators, to their great admiration.

I my self do affirm, (and that in the presence of Almighty God, who knows the
secret thoughts and intents of my heart, and before whose Allseeing eye every
thing lies open and bare) that I have witnessed the truth of the Rules of
Astrology, and of the measure of Time by Directions in the Heavens, and this in
reference both to things Spiritual and Temporal: as to things Spiritual, surely
no one will deny, that the course of a Righteous man's Life is steered by a
Direction from Heaven, for the just man's path cannot be walked in without
heavenly Institutions or Directions.

Object. Times and Seasons are in the hands of the Lord, Acts 1.7.

Answ. Yet the wise man's heart knows time. Eccles. 8.5.

Obj. The secret things belong unto God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

Answ. Yet the Secrets of the Almighty are with those that fear him, Psalm.
25.14.

Obj. The Kingdom of Heaven comes not with Observation, Luke 17.20.

Answ. Yet it follows not, but that at the coming of the Kingdom we may observe
wonderful things, and that in the visible Heavens too, yea, and according to
the time suiting with the Arch of Direction: this I am a living witness of, and
dare do no less than affirm the truth of my own experience. And as to what I
have written in this Book, the Contents thereof are Celestial Demonstrations
of my Spiritual Experiences, at the Coming of Christ's Kingdom unto me, for I
can testify, that at the glorious appearance of the holy Dove, the Heavens
were moved, and showed the time unto my Soul. Now, that there shall be
wonderful things seen in the Heavens, may be made apparent from several
portions of Scripture, whereof I shall only give in one for instance, viz.

There shall be Signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, Luke
21.25. and these are the Signs of the Times which the Hypocrites heart could
not discern, yet the Signs themselves show their Times.

But, having made this ample Digression, it is now time to return to my former
purpose, which was, to prove, that the Stars have Effects upon the Soul of man,
and that from the second Basis aforegoing, viz. Basis 2. The Heavens declare
the Glory of God, Psalm. 19.1.

Argument. If the Heavens declare the Glory of God, then that Declaration must
have Effect; for otherwise it is vain, and to no purpose: Now to say that God
created the Heavens to declare his Glory in vain, is the production of an
Absurdity, to avoid which, we must of necessity acknowledge that their
Declaration has an Effect, and such a one as David himself experienced; for he
was thereby excited to glorify God, in saying, The Heaveas declare the Glory
of God. Hence it is apparent, that by the Heavens their Declaration of the
Glory of God, the last mentioned Scripture was given forth; and the Heavens
declaring the Glory of God, thereby declare Jesus the Son of God, for the Son
is the Glory of the Father, as is aforesaid, and in declaring Jesus, they
declare that holy Spirit by which the other Scriptures were given forth.

If the Stars have no Effect, then were they created in vain; but since they
were set for Signs, they have Effect, for they work an effect upon the
Intellect, in showing what they signify.

If the Stars operate upon the Soul and Spirit, and not upon the Body, or upon
the Body, and not upon the Soul and Spirit, then the Harmony in man's Creation
is destroyed, and the Sympathy betwixt the Soul and Body in this Life
annihilated; but that there is this Sympathy is evident to all men, for when
the Soul is separated from the Body, then the Body dies: Now to abandon these
Enormities, it will be prudence to conclude, that the Stars do effectually
operate both upon the Soul and Body.

Obj. The Rules of Astrology, and names of the Signs made Use of in this
Treatise, are false, and were invented by the Heathens, therefore no truth can
arise from them.

Reply. Having before lately proved how the Scriptures were given forth by God
in the Heavens, I shall introduce my Answer to this Objection with these
following Syllogisms, viz.

Syl. 1. If the Rules of Astrology, and names of the Signs be lively
demonstrations, or apparent and intelligible manifestations of the Words and
Circumstances of the Holy Scriptures, (whose Pillar and Foundation is Truth it
self, viz. the Creator of all things) then the said Rules and Names are true;
But the Rules of Astrology and Names of the Signs are lively Demonstrations,
etc. ergo, the said Rules and Names are true.

Syl. 2. If the Rules of Astrology, and Names of the Signs do accurately show
forth the Words and Circumstances of the Sacred Scriptures, which had their
original from the Creator of all things, then they show forth such things as
are of greater Antiquity than the Heathen or their Fictions; But the Rules of
Astrology and Names of the Signs, do accurately show forth the Words and
Circumstances, etc. ergo, they show forth such things as are of greater
Antiquity than the Heathen, or their Fictions.

Syl. 3. If the Rules of Astrology, and Names of the Signs show forth such
things as are of greater Antiquity than the Heathen or their Fictions, then the
Heathen never invented them; but the Rules of Astrology and Names of the Signs
show forth, as aforesaid, ergo, the Heathen never invented them.

It is very improbable that the Heathen should invent Rules and Names to show
forth things which they either never knew, or never believed, viz. the truth of
the Holy Scriptures, which were given forth by that Spirit of Life which is
more ancient than themselves.

But admit the Heathen did give them forth, since they manifest the Truths
aforesaid, it must needs be confessed, that God revealed them unto them,
thereby to declare his Omnipotency, and therefore not to be rejected: If so
(which is not impossible) what cause have the Sons of men to praise his holy
name, who by such improbable means can declare his Wonders unto them?

The Book it self sufficiently proves the verity of the foregoing Syllogisms,
to the perusal whereof, I shall refer the Astrologer, as my most competent
Judge in this case; yet I shall here give in an instance or two out of the
Book, whereby to prove the Verity of the foresaid Rules and Names, which
Instances the Astrologer may compare (because exempted therefrom) with the
Figure of the Radix inserted hereafter, at the beginning of the Second Part.

First Instance, to prove the Rules true.
In the Scheme of the Nativity, Mercury Lord of the 8th House, being near
Cazimi, and Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, being aspected of all the Planets; I
say, Mercury Lord of the 8th being immerg'd in the over-powering Beams of Sol,
Lord of the Medium Coeli, etc. shows Death to be swallowed up in Victory,
Isaiah 25.8. 1 Cor. 15.55.

Second Instance, to verify the Rules.
Saturn, Lord of the 4th House, is Retrograde, and posited in the 6th, an Evil
and Cadent House in Aries, the Sign of his Fall, which intimate, that the Grave
is subdued, and fallen by the Lamb, in whom the Lord of Glory is exalted; for
Sol Lord of the Meridian, has his Dignity of Exaltation in Aries, 1 Cor.
15.55. Observe, that the signification of Aries is a Ram, signifying the Ram
caught in a thicket by his horns, which Abraham offered up instead of Isaac his
Son, his hand being stayed at the Command of the Angel, Genes. 22, 13. This Ram
was a Type of Jesus, the mercy of God, who is also the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World.

Now let the Impartial Artist judge, whether or no there be a wonderful Harmony
betwixt the Rules followed in the foregoing Instances, and the quoted
Scriptures, he cannot but acknowledge that there is such an Harmony or Consent
betwixt them, as may sufficiently evince, that the same Spirit gave forth the
Rules, which gave forth the Scriptures; and likewise proves, that Saturn is
Lord of the Sign Aquarius, Sol of Leo, and Mercury of Gemini, which are the
Rules, the truth whereof was to be proved.

Whoever shall object, that Ptolomy, or any other Astrological Author, (whose
Works are extant) was the first Inventer of the Rules of Astrology, I put such
an Objector upon the proof of his Assertion; if he urge their Invention of
them, because inserted in their Works, I say, such proof is invalid; he is to
produce an Author, who in his Books acknowledges himself to be the first
Composer of them; for my part, I never saw any Author yet, who pretended
further, as to the Rules of Art, than merely to paraphrase upon them,
endeavoring to explain their mysterious signification; but let my Opponent
know, that it is one thing to invent a Rule, and another thing to show the Use
of a Rule already constituted.

First Instance, to prove the Names of the Signs Divinely mysterious.
In the Radix at the beginning of the Book, the Sign Leo and Cor Leonis fixed
upon the Cusp of the Medium Coeli, show the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
enthroned in the midst of Heaven for ever, Revel. 5. verse. 5, 6. This is also
the Sign of the Son of man appearing in Heaven, Matthew 24.30.

Second Instance, to prove the names of the Signs of Divine importance.
In the Theme of Heaven for the time of Birth aforesaid, the Sign Virgo placed
upon the Cusp of the 11th, show, the Virgin Mary seated in Heaven in the House
of Praise, for the 11th is the House of Praise, Luke 1. from the 46, to the 56
verse.

Hence I hope the Astrologer cannot but confess on my behalf, and in the
defense of the former Syllogisms, that the aforesaid Rules, and Names of the
Signs, are Demonstrations and manifestations of Sacred matter contained in the
Scriptures, which were given forth by the Spirit of God, who is of greater
Antiquity than either the Heathen, or their fictitious Inventions, But in my
opinion it seems contrary to the Law of Humane Reason, yea, of common Sense it
self, that the wicked Heathen (for I suppose my Opponent means the worst sort
of them) should be conceived by any man to be the Inventors of such Rules and
Names of Constellations, as demonstrate the Prophecies of the Servants of God,
so as they are recommended to us in Holy Writ; more especially considering that
the Scriptures of Truth are as a sealed Book unto them.

Now for the satisfaction of some who may be in doubt as touching this matter,
I shall endeavor to explain the manner how these names of the Signs have been
misapplied by the Heathen; which I shall do according to the measure of that
Understanding which God has given me.

These Names coming into their hands (peradventure when the Temple of Solomon
was ransacked, who undoubtedly was acquainted with the Divine, no less than the
Natural Mysteries of the Creation) they might so far be given to understand, as
to know that the said Names were ennobled with some Divine property or
signification of Future things, whereupon they endeavored, by a strict
observation of such Contingencies as fell out amongst them, as also of such
Accidents, which by any means they might come to be informed of, to make these
Names presignificant of the said Contingencies: As for instance, the Heathen
having the name of the Sign Leo, they still expected to have the result of the
prophetical signification of that name accomplished amongst them, or at
leastwise to hear of its accomplishment elsewhere; whereupon, in process of
time, observing some valiant man (as for instance, Hercules) to slay a Lion in
the Wood Nemaea, as they say: Hence they judged, that the mysterious meaning of
that Name was then fulfilled, and that (as peradventure they would pretend) by
their foreknowledge, then led on with vainglory, they would needs have the
Actors which were concerned in the fulfilling of this Prophecy ( viz. Hercules,
and his slain Nemaean Lion) to be stellified in Heaven, as Monuments (not
indeed of the truth of their Prophecy, as they would have it, but) of their
erroneous Idolatry; thus was the Name of the Sign Leo by the Heathen
misapplied, and Hercules by them fictitiously stellified; but the Spirit of God
has unfolded the true meaning of this Name unto me, intimating that it shows
forth the Lion of the Tribe of Judah in Heaven, who is from everlasting to
everlasting, though Hercules and the Nemaean Lion (if any such Creatures there
were, for if not, 'twas only a Fiction) be vanished for evermore.

Obj. The Rules of Astrology used in this Tract, are false, which is apparent
from the manifold Errors of Astrologers in their Predictions, by following the
same Rules.

Reply. This Objection is weak, and not suitable in this place, for though I
follow the same Rules, yet I use them not to the same intent and purpose, they
predict such things only as may probably fall out according to the course of
Nature, which are temporal, I use them in the demonstration of things
spiritual; so that how far Demonstration and Prediction do differ, as also how
far things Temporal and Visible do differ from things Spiritual and Invisible,
so far is this Objection impertinent to the purpose: but admit the Rules were
false, in predicting things temporal, yet it does not therefore follow, that
they are unfit to demonstrate things Spiritual; for the same Rules may serve
truly for one intent and purpose which may not serve for another. Yet this I
affirm, that the Rules may be true for the Astrologers intent in predicting
outward Contingencies, notwithstanding his Errors, which ought rather to be
imputed to his misapprehension of the Rules (wherein is couched a Mystery) than
to any falsehood in them; Ars enim vera est, sed pauei Artifices reperiuntur.

Obj. If the Rules of Astrology be lively Demonstrations of the Holy Scripture,
then they are a Cause of them; for a Demonstration in a Syllogism is of the
highest nature, and is a Cause of the thing demonstrated; therefore, if the
Rules be not proved to be a Cause of the Scriptures, the Syllogisms will not
hold truly Logical.

Answ. If my Antagonist carp at the word [lively] this I must tell him, that
since he is a Scholar, and, I believe, a Rhetorician, surely he cannot but
know, that words are not always taken in the strictest sense, and the word
[lively] (if Logic do not altogether exclude Rhetoric) may be taken for
[intelligible] per (...), and so Demonstration for Representation (or such
like) by the same Trope: but that I may not seek thus to evade him, I shall
endeavor to prove the Validity of my Syllogisms, though the words thereof be
taken in the strictest sense that may be, and that in such manner and form as
Astronomy (being the subject of this Treatise) will admit of.

A Demonstration in Astronomy is that which represents to the view of the Eye,
or rather of the Intellect, the several varieties of the Celestial motions,
and that by right and circular Lines protracted in plano, or by circular Lines
only circumscribed on a Globe. Now I question not but that Astronomers may have
the privilege of arguing syllogistically as well as men of other Functions in
Learning, in order to vindicate the truths of their Science, and may likewise
use the word [Demonstration] in a Syllogism, according to the sense above
described, without making any breach upon the Rules of Logic; if so, my
Argument is firm and Logical still, since I pretend to no other than an
Astronomical Demonstration of Divine Revelation, and that from the Position of
the Heavens at the precise time of Birth, which Position was found by
Calculation Trigonometrical, or a mutual proportion of Sinical, Tangent, and
Secant Lines amongst one another, and from the Thesis of Heaven thus found, as
upon a Ba sis, the Judgment (presenting it self in this Book) was raised. Hence
it appears, that my Opponent fell short in not distinguishing upon the word
[Demonstration] since it is apparent that a Delmonstration is not always a
Cause (as he would have it) of the thing demonstrated, but the thing
demonstrated sometimes a cause of the Demonstration; for it is evident, that the
Motions of the Heavens may be shown forth by Lines, as aforesaid, yet it were
absurd to conclude that lineal Demonstration to be the cause of those Motions,
but rather those Motions the Original of that Demonstration: Hence also it
appears, that the Heavens may demonstrate the Circumstances and Words of the
Holy Scriptures, without being a Cause of them: Yet I doubt not but that I
could (if I thought it expedient so to do) prove in some measure, that the
Rules of Astrology, considered in their most sublime Sense, are a cause of the
Scriptures; yea, and that such proof is possible, the Judicious Reader may
casily discern by my foregoing Arguments; but I shall refrain therefrom, lest
I should give offense to many honest minded People.

Now, lest some should suppose that I judge the whole course of man' Life to
have an absolute Dependence upon the Position of the Heavens at Birth, in such
sort as to make the Stars guilty of their Evil Inclinations, and so
consequently of their Sins, which frequently bring them to an untimely End, I
think it requisite to discourse a little upon that Subject, although I have in
part done it before; and first I shall lay down this Position in order
thereunto, viz.

Positio. The Righteous and Penitent man suffers patiently under God's
Judgments, and under all manner of such inevitable Tribulations and Exercises
both External and Internal, as God in his Justice shall see good, to inflict
upon him for the trial of his Faith; but on the contrary, the impenitent Sinner
rejects the Mercies of God, frequently tendered unto him, neither submits
himself to bear patiently the aforesaid Exercises, that so thereby his Soul may
be purified; I say, he rejects them, until such time as the day of his
Visitation be over.

God the Creator of all things, by the Position of the Heavens at Birth, shows
the good and evil Inclinations which Mankind shall be prone or subject unto; as
also all good and evil Accidents likely to befall him during the whole term of
Life, the truth whereof I my self have experienced, and do still daily
experience, to my great admiration and astonishment; and though I could give no
reasons for these things, yet I dare not but confess to the certainty of them;
yet this I know (which may stand for some reason, though dangerous to be too
deeply dived into) that there has been, is, and will be a secret hand of
Divine Providence in all men's transactions under the Sun, of what kind soever,
whether good or evil, and that in order to the preservation of his Saints in
Glory.

The Judgments of the Lord are the Discovery of Wickedness in its most horrid
appearance, and the Lord by the Heavens is willing to discover unto every man
the manner how the spiritual Enemy of his Soul will make intrusions upon him,
in order that he may patiently bear them, waiting for Deliverance from his
Maker, who is only able to rescue him out of the thraldom brought upon him by
the Prince of the power of the Air, working in the hearts of the children of
disobedience, as they are in the Fall. So that though this Enemy of Mankind
may, by the Almighty's permission, sometimes inflict grievances upon the
Righteous (such as are prenoted by the Heavens at Birth) for the exercise of
their Faith and Patience; yet, as their Eye is unto God, they shall see such
Evils work for their everlasting welfare, the Eye of Heaven sweetly reflecting
the Rays of Love upon them, when the Sentence shall be pronounced, viz. These
are they which have come through great tribulation, having washed their robes
white in the Blood of the Lamb, Revel. 7.14. Then shall the visible Heavens
give in their testimony, thereby to justify their Patience, in such Exercises;
But, on the contrary, the Wicked ones are either voluntarily acted by the power
of the Enemy, and with a seeming pleasure through his Wiles, betrayed into
everlasting perdition, being swallowed up into the Abyss of Darkness, because
they have contemned the Sacred Light, in mercy bestowed upon them; or otherwise
have through cowardice fallen under the temptation of the Enemy, and fled from
Judgment, wilfully opposing the Reproofs of the Holy One, not submitting
themselves under the yoke of Patience, but have continued in Rebellion so long,
as that the merciful Spirit of Jesus has departed from them, who says, that
his Spirit shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6.3. And if the Heavens fill
the Ungodly with outward Blessings at any time, (for we read, that the wicked
sometimes flourish as a green Bay Tree) the same Heavens and those Blessings
shall testify against their Unrighteousness to their greater condemnation, but
when the Stars seem to frown upon the Righteous, by bringing Crosses and
Adversity upon them, it is only for the trial of their Patience: Now the
Righteous themselves have sometimes been delivered up into the hands of wicked
men, to suffer as Malefactors, a (seemingly Ignominious, though) really
Honorable Death, by Martyrdom; the time of whose Death (yet I will not say
the Cause) may possibly be predicted from their Birth, by the Thesis of the
Heavens thereupon, and the Art of Directions; Neither shall I affirm, that the
Cause of a Wicked man's Violent Death may be predicted; yet, that there is a
possibility of predicting the Time of both their Deaths, whether Natural or
Violent, as also of all other remarkable Transactions, during the term of Life,
I do absolutely affirm, and that by the Art of Astrology too; but they that are
endued with the Spirit of God can best perform these Predictions by the
aforesaid Science; for the Judgment of all others is too much obscured with
Darkness, neither are the Secrets of the Almighty truly revealed to any other
Persons but such as fear him.

They that shall scruple at the Truth of these things (which I believe some may
do, and those truly honest and righteous Persons too) might, I am assured,
receive ample satisfaction, would they but trust the time of their Genesis or
Nativity into some honest Person's hand, who has skill in the Astral Language;
for they should not only have recounted to them the time of their first
Appearance, but also the time when all other Accidents, yet to come, shall
unveil themselves before them; and all these things may be discovered,
according to the order of Time wherein they will happen; when they have
experienced these things, they can do no less than glorify God for revealing
his Wonders so mighty in Heaven.

The Scriptures themselves testify, that the Heavens are ordained by God, to
inflict his Judgments upon the sinful, but to dispense his Mercies amongst the
Righteous; for, says he, threatening the Wicked, Thy Heaven that is over thy
head shall be Brass, and the Earth that is under thee shall be Iron, Deuteronomy.
28.23. But, on the contrary, promises the Righteous, that he will hear the
Heavens, and the Heavens shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the
Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and that the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil
shall hear them, Hosea 2. verse. 21, 22. These Scriptures I have witnessed to be
fulfilled in a Spiritual sense, and therefore can set my Seal to the truth of
them; for, since I became obedient unto God, I have felt the Divine Influences
of the visible Heavens sweetly shed abroad within my Soul, (and that according
to the Order of their Motions) giving pleasant savours, and most fragrant
odours; yea, the whole Creation has been presented before the Eyes of my Soul,
most concinnate, beautiful, and glorious, whereas, whilst I rebelled against my
Creator, (merciful in Love and Condescension) my Heaven was to me as Brass, and
my Earth as Iron: for the Virtue operating is altered by the Fountain of
Wisdom, according to the nature of the Subject receiving; The Sun makes the
Clay hard, but the Wax soft, by the same fervor of his Rays: The Heavens
sterilize the Land of the Wicked, but make the Land of the Righteous fertile, as
is before proved: Yet any Position of the Heavens whatever, retains its
glorious Excellency; since they never swerved from that Divine Order, (except
by the immediate Command of God) wherein they were first created.

Thesis. The self-same things look with an amiable and glorious Aspect to the
regenerate man, which look with a quite contrary Aspect to the Unregenerate;
for, to the pure all things are pure, but to the defiled and unbelieving is
nothing pure, their mind and conscience being polluted, Titus 1, 15.

I shall prove the verity of this Thesis and Scripture Astronomically, by an
Example deduced from the Radix inserted at the beginning of the second Part, as
follows, viz.

Mars Lord of the Ascendant, is combust of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, being
both fiery Planets, in Sagittary a fiery Sign, and posited in the second:

The signification of these to the Unregenerate, are,

The significations of the same to the Regenerate are, etc. is burnt up, so
that from these Enemies the Native gets freedom by the Sun of Glory, showing
the Native to be clothed with his Beams, and thereby defended from approaching
Danger: In this state Mars, though naturally and Infortune, is now become a
Fortune, for he is refined, by being combust of the Sun, so that he shines in
his purity as at the beginning, viz. as in the years of the Native's Infancy or
Innocence, and signifies him to have in his possession the Riches and Jewels of
the Sun of Glory.

The foregoing Thesis thus proved, has given occasion to a religiously
zealous and Learned Antagonist, to compare the Rules of Astrology to the
Amphibology of Oracles; he sticks not to compare them to a Latin Verse, which
(as some say) was composed by the Devil, and given to a Scholar) being so
framed, that read backward or forward, it was still the same; and if the same,
then of the same signification: yet herein are they diametrically opposite; for
the Rules of Astrology in the precedent Example, are read the same way, and
retain the same Form, being derived from one and the same Position of Heaven,
without the least alteration; yet produce Matter of different signification.

Now let me see how the Thesis aforesaid will make the Rules correspond with
Answers from Heathenish Oracles. First, it is to be known, that these Answers
are dubious, either because their words admit of transposition, or of a twofold
manner of distinction, whereby their meaning is rendered alterable: But, that
the Reader may more plainly apprehend the nature of them, I shall here give an
Instance or two of such Replies as were made to the Consulters of the said
Oracles.

Instance 1. Achilles going against the Romans, consulted the Oracle of Apollo,
concerning his Success therein, whereupon he received this promiscuous Answer
in Latin, viz. Aio te, Aeacide, Romanos vincere posse.

From this Answer, Achilles, looking upon himself as Victor, went against the
Romans, but was defeated; for he expounded the Verse aforesaid contrary to the
Event, by taking the Accusative Case [te] as precedent to the Infinitive Mood
[vineere] whereas he should (or at least wise might as well) have taken
[Romanos;] thus was Achilles deceived: Yet still this Method differs from my
Thesis, and the Rules concerned therein; for the words in this Verse must be
transposed, to infer from it a double meaning; whereas the Order of the Thesis
still retains the Rules in a direct Form, as also the Position of the Heavens
the same, from whence the Rules are derived.

Instance 2. To the like concern this Answer was given by an Oracle, viz. Ibis
redibis nunquam per bella peribis.

This Answer may be diversely distinguished; for, admitting the first comma, or
note of distinction, to be made at the word [Ibis,] the second at [redibis,]
and the period at [peribis.] a favorable Interpretation may be made thereof
toward the Consulter: but if the first note of distinction be made at [Ibis,]
the second at [nunquam,] and the third at [peribis.] as aforesaid; then will
the Exposition be quite otherwise; prenoting the Inquirer's overthrow; thus did
the Devil deceive his Servants by doubtful Answers: But herein lies a vast
difference betwixt my Thesis and this Reply; First, the Rules of Astrology
cannot be diversely distinguished, whereby to produce from them a double sense:
Secondly, they are not used with an intention to deceive, but to undeceive
People, and to prove the truth of this Scripture, whereunto the Heathen were
strangers, viz. to the pure all things are pure, but to the impure all things
are impure, etc. Titus 1.15. Observe, the Apostle does not say, some things,
but all things, are either pure or impure, according to the different states
and qualifications of all Persons; now, if a state of Regeneration or freedom
from Sin, (which is a state of purity) be attainable in this Life, (which I am
sure is possible, if the words of Jesus be true, and if we make him no
respecter of Persons, who says, Be ye perfect, as your Heavenly Father is
perfect) then it must of necessity follow, that the same things (secluding Sin)
must be Pure to one and the same Person, in a state of Regeneration or Purity,
which were formerly Impure unto him, whilst he was Unregenerate, or Impure, so
that the same Position of the Heavens (after what manner soever it be) is pure
to the same Native, being Regenerate, which was formerly impure to him being
Unregenerate: this is to be understood as a general Axiom, relating to every
Position of the Heavens, and Native born under it whatsoever.

But to return to my present purpose, which was to prove a disproportion
betwixt the nature of the Rules of Astrology and the convertible Answers from
Oracles.

Some may object, and say, that the Rules used in manner aforesaid, do exactly
concur with the Answer of the Oracle last mentioned, in this respect, viz. in
that the interpretation of both is twofold, as also, that the Oracles words
and said Rules of Art, are retained in the same form without need of
Transposition; yet (notwithstanding this) can they be no sooner reconciled
together, than the Spirit of Enmity can to the state of the Holy Prophets of
God, though he may appear so Angel-like, and seemingly come so near the Truth,
as to quote their words out of the Scriptures. But herein still lies a vast
difference; for the words of the Oracle were an Answer to Proposals Temporal,
whereas my Thesis, and the Rules, have relation to Matters Spiritual; The
Oracle made a Reply to a Question; but these Rules are by me used to
demonstrate a Thesis. I might annex other disagreements, but let these suffice;
so that still it is evident enough, that the Similitude will not hold, there
being little probability of a reconciliation betwixt the Rules of Astrology
here used, and the ambiguous Answer of the Oracle.

Obj. Arts and Sciences cannot reveal the Mystery of Holiness.

Answ. Yet the humble Spirit of the Almighty has revealed the Sacred Mysteries
of a Science; this was done at my request unto him, as is already hinted in the
foregoing Epistle; and I felt his Garments fending forth a Smell sweeter than
Perfumes made of the choicest Spices, yea, I felt the pleasant relish of
Celestial Manna temperately administered unto me, far transcending the Delicate
Varieties of Princes Tables; I say, I had a true and lively sense of these
things, when Jesus revealed the matter in this Book unto me.

Obj. Supernatural things (which this Book pretends to) are contrary to Art and
Nature, whereas the Rules of Astrology are artificial, and therefore cannot
demonstrate them.

Answ. It has been before proved, that the Rules of Astrology (though,
admitted Artificial) do arise from a Principle no less than Divine: Hence it
appears, that there are Supernatural Mysteries included in them, (which this
Treatise will prove to be revealed) and that therefore they are not only
Artificial (if so admitted) but Divine; for God is the God both of Art and
Nature, every ingenious and lawful Discovery in Art proceeding from him, whom
all the Inhabitants of England, and many other Nations (except such as are
palpably apparent Atheists) will acknowledge to be a Spiritual, and not a
Natural Being.

Obj. The Names of the Planets are Heathenish, and therefore not lawful to be
used amongst Christians.

Answ. So are the Names of Cities too; and if the Use of Names be so
religiously scrupled at, and censured as unlawful; why may not the Names of
Cities also? more especially considering that they have their Original from
Heathenish Gods and Goddesses; yet these Names we cannot avoid the Use of in
our mutual conversation with one another, nor in the reading of the Holy
Scriptures. Neither did the Apostle Paul himsel scruple to use such Heathenish
Names of Cities, as are Rome and Athens, which may appear by his Epistle to the
Romans, and also by his Preaching against the Superstition of the Athenians,
Acts 17.22. to whom he directs his Speech, after this manner, viz. Ye men of
Athens, etc. Here it is evident, that the Name [Athens] though proceeding from
the Heathen, was not looked upon by him as Superstitious, for if so, he would
not have used it in reproving them of Superstition, lest he should appear to be
condemning such Evils in them, as himself was guilty of by his own Expressions;
But, that what I say may not be taken upon trust, I will here give an Instance
whereby to prove, that the Name [Athens] is descended of Heathenish Parentage.

Athenae, a Minerva dicitur, quam Graeci (...) appellant: ferunt enim Neptunum
cum Minerva de Vrbis hujus nomine contendisse, tandemque inter eos ita
convenisse, ut Vrbi nomen imponeret, qui utilius humano generi manus edidisset;
cumque Neptunus equum, Pallas oleam produxisset, victum suffragio uno Neptunum
Minervae concessisse, quae Vrbem recens conditam de nomine suo Athenas
appellavit. In English thus; (the Parentheses excluded) viz.

Athenae, or Athens, is derived from [Minerva] (the Goddess of Wisdom) whom the
Greeks call Athenae, for they report that Neptune contended with Minerva
concerning the name of this City, and at length so covenanted with one another,
that which soever of them had published their Handiwork after the most
beneficial manner toward Mankind, should give the City its Name; And when
Neptune (the Sea-god) had produced his Horse (whom the Heathen feign to have
first invented the riding of Horses,) and Pallas (being synonomous to Minerva)
her Olive Branch, (who was feigned to have first invented the Use of Oil)
Minerva won it of Neptune by one Vote, who therefore called the new-built City
[Athens] after her own Name.

Hence it appears, that if the Heathenish Names of Cities may be used without
offense to God, then by consequence the Names of the Planets may be as lawfully
used, and that in matter of Divine importance too; for Paul preaching the
Gospel, used the aforesaid Heathenish name [Athens] as is already proved, and
therefore may the Heathenish names of the Planets (no Divine mystery being
attributed to their Names, but only used in this Treatise to distinguish them
one from another) be as inoffensively made Use of in the Demonstration of
Divine Revelation.

Moreover, the names of Men and Women (considering the manner how they are
given in these days, viz. not without observation of Religious Ceremonies in
the way of false worship) might as justly be excepted against, as the Names of
the Planets; more especially considering, that they are frequently given them
by most profane Parents and Relations, which, if so, our mutual conversation
with one another in this World would be destroyed.

My Opponent, before he had urged any thing against the Names of the Planets,
or Stars, as Idolatrous, should first have considered, that Idolatry has its
residence in the Heart, proceeding thence to the Mouth; for it is out of the
abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.34. This Scripture seems
(though it do not so really, as is made apparent by the former reasons) rather
to withstand than vindicate my Cause; yet I can make it evident, that it much
befriends me, if compared with other Scriptures; because an idolatrous
mentioning of the Heathen names of gods, viz. a naming them in the way of
Reverence, or actual Worship, is forbidden in the Scriptures, and not a calling
the Planets, or any thing else, by the Names, under which, as gods, the Heathen
did worship them, if done for no other end, than merely to distinguish them one
from another: It Is true that David says, Psalm 16. I Will not take their names
into my lips. Why? because he did not harbor their Worship in his heart; for
the Worship is the Original of the Name, and not the Name of the Worship;
whence it is Eminent, that the Name may be used without the Adoration, but not
the Adoration without the Name; and if the Name may be used without the
Worship, then it may be lawfully used.

It Is true also, that the Monuments of Idolatry (which is False Worship, and
not a calling by Names only) were to be destroyed, Deuteronomy. 12.1. viz. out of the
Heart, in a Spiritual sense, which may be done without taking away the
privilege of using Names, if used for no other end than merely the cause of
distinction.

Now they that are acquainted with the phrase of the Holy Spirit, know, that
the word [name] in the Scripture does not always imply the outward naming of a
thing, but in a Spiritual sense it signifies the Nature; For instance, The Name
of the Lord is a strong Tower, Prove. 18.10. Here it is evident, that the Nature
or Power of the Lord is spoken of, and not any external Name of him, as
Jehovah, Adonai, or such like; so in like manner it is the Nature of the
Heathen that David speaks of, as if he should say, I will not entertain their
Natures in my heart, nor will I take their Names into my mouth, their Names
being defcended from their Natures, and therefore not to be used by way of
Adoration.

If the foregoing Arguments be well considered, it cannot but be perspicuous
enough, that they sufficiently warrant the Use of the Planets Names in this
Treatise to be lawful.

Here follow some Divine Reasons why there are only 12 Houses, 12 Signs, 7
Planets, and neither more nor less.

Reasons. There is a Sacred Mystery in these Numbers thus explained, viz.

The 12 Houses of Heaven show the 12 Foundations of the Wall of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, which are immovable.

The Names of the twelve Houses, in their purity, show, the Names of the 12
Apostles of the Lamb, in the Foundations.

Again, the twelve Houses represent the twelve Gates of the aforesaid Holy
City, the twelve Signs the twelve Angels at the Gates; the Names of the twelve
Signs show the Names of the twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel, written
upon the Gates, etc. Revel. chap. 21. from the 9th verse to the end of the
Chapter.

The seven Planets are the seven Stars in the right hand of him that stood in
the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, who was like unto the Son of man;
these seven Stars being the Angels of the seven Churches, and the seven
Candlesticks being the seven Churches, Revel. 1 Chap. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
verses. These, I hope, are Reasons authentic enough for the number of the
Houses and Signs, etc.

Concerning the terms of Art.
The terms of Art here used cannot rationally be objected against, they being
either derived of some significant Latin, Greek, and Arabic words, or being
the words themselves; and it is no more unlawful for an Artist to use them,
than it is for a Tradesman to use some terms in his own Employment, which seem
strange and obscure to others, not skilful therein; nor is it any more unlawful
for me to speak of Divine Revelation in the Dialect of Astrologers, whose terms
have their Original from the Languages aforesaid, than it is for a Servant of
God to preach the Gospel in such frequent English words, as are derived of the
Greek and Latin; their own terms being alike understood by either of them.

Obj. The incertainty of Astronomy (being the Basis upon which Astrology is
builded) must of necessity prove that Astrology is uncertain also.

Answ. My Opponent brings in for instance (whereby to confirm his former
Objection) the difference of time in Calculation by the Alphonsine, Prutenique,
and Tychonian Tables: but this is little impeachment to Astronomy now, because
it is much improved by more modern Authors: neither have I raised my
Calculation from any of these aforesaid, but from the Caroline Tables,
accounted inferior to none this day extant.

As to Scripture-objections against Astrology, for the Refutation of them, I
refer the Reader to the perusal of the 2d Chap. of Sir Christopher Heydon's
Defense of Astrology: also I refer him to some other Chapters in the same Book,
for the refelling of Critical Arguments relating to the incertainty of
Astronomy, of the Birth-hour, or when Twins born, etc. whereby the Astral
Science seems to be invalidated; for, to treat of them in this place, would
render the Book too voluminous.

The Death of Picus Mirandula (the time whereof was truly foretold by the
Doctrine of Astronomical Directions) being exemplarily produced, in order to
prove the verity of the Sydereal Learning, was thus unworthily reflected on,
and that by one not meanly Learned, and no less transported with Zeal, viz.
That the Predictor of his Death might possibly Effect his Death by Witchcraft
or Sorcery, saying, that many an honest man is hurt by a Witch.

Now do but observe this unreasonable way of Arguing; what Truth can stand, or
be defended against such a Disputant? For first, he says, that the Astrologers
Predictions are Erroneous, then, because verified by Example, alleges, that
the truth of their Predictions is effected by Sorcery: This runs parallel with
the manner of the Scribes and Pharisees, who first required a Miracle of Jesus,
whereby to convince them that he was the Son of God, the Savior of the World;
and then, when they saw his Miracles, said notwithstanding, that he effected
them by Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils. Yet I might defend the aforesaid
Prediction from his Calumnies, by his own way of Arguing, (if such a Defense
were not too feeble, and indeed too ridiculous) whereby he endeavors to render
the Effects of the Stars void, as to matter of Divine concernment; he reasons
(if it may be called reasoning) after this manner; viz.

Although there may be an Eclipse of the Sun, and I walking in some particular
Place at that time, it does not therefore follow, that the Eclipse is the Cause
of my walking, nor my walking, of it: So in like manner, the Sorcery (if the
Predictor used any) was not the Cause of Mirandula 's Death, nor Mirandula 's
Death the Cause of that Sorcery. By this method of Disputation, all manner of
good or evil Operations may be made ineffectual, yea, all the Miracles of Jesus
might be annihilated: Therefore, since my Opponent's way of Reflection is
proved so Irrational, it is still manifest, that the Example of Mirandula's
Death (who for his Antipathy and Arguments against Astrology was called
Astrologorum Flagellum) remains firm enough to prove the verity of Sydereal
Predictions.

Obj. The Rules of Astrology admit of such a Latitude, that a man may make of
them quidlibet ex quolibet, every thing of any thing, and so consequently
nothing certain.

Answ. These Rules are already sufficiently verified from their correspondence
with Holy Scripture; yet if any such Latitude be, it is not in the Rules, but in
the Artist's Judgment, dilating it self beyond the Confines of Art, and thereby
running into Errors: yet, let my Adversary consider, that the Mysteries of the
Divine Being admit of great Latitude also, arising from the incomprehensible
Fountain of Wisdom, the Creator of all things, who is Omnipotent, and can
therefore reveal an Unity in such things as seem in themselves to be discrepant
or contradictory, and can limit things that have the greatest Latitude,
according to his Divine Order and Appointment.

Obj. Eclipses Supernatural are contrary to Art and Nature both, therefore the
Eclipses handled in this Treatise, are either merely Natural, because found out
by Art, or else Imaginary, because not visible to the external Eye of others.

Answ. They that are experienced Astrologers are not unacquainted with the
admirable Effects of Planetary Transits over the Bodies and Aspects of one
another; Now, to the intent that Vulgar Capacities may be reached unto, I shall
define what a Transit is.

A Transit is the passing of any Planet (by his Motion in the Heavens) over the
place where the Body of another Planet was at a particular moment of time, or
over that part of the Ecliptic whereunto another Planet did project his
Aspect, or dart forth his Rays at a particular time, as aforesaid.

Now the Eclipses here objected against, were effected by Mutual Transits of
the Luminaries over the Bodies of one another in the Radix, the Nocturnal
Luminary having at that time either little Latitude, or none at all: and if
what appertains to true Religion, or Spiritual Matter be Supernatural, then,
since Luna in the Celebration of these Eclipses is Lady of the Ninth House in
the Radix, Caput Draconis being therein, and Luna in the Third, applying to the
Conjunction of Venus, it is evident they were Supernatural; and, as they were
Invisible, so were they the more significant of Spiritual and Invisible things;
the manner how they are demonstrated to be Supernatural, may be seen in the
second Part.

But, to return to mean Capacities, I shall here insert what has been proved
by Experience, touching the Power of Transits.

It has been frequently observed, that when the Moon has transited, or passed
over the place where the Planet Mars was in the Scheme, or Position of Heaven,
set for the time wherein a Person first fell sick of a burning Fever, which
time is called the Decumbiture; I say, it has been observed, that at the time
when this Transit was made, the sick Person has been violently afflicted, the
Disease being more intense; yea, although the real Body of Mars has been alibi
in the Heavens, then the Moon then was, peradventure, many Signs distant, and
out of all Aspect with her, yet has the burning Heat been strangely augmented:
and if Mars at the Decumbiture was Lord of the House of Death, (no benevolent
Rays of good Planets intervening to cut off the Transit's malignant Influence)
then has the Patient yielded up his Spirit into the hands of his Creator.

I my self, by such like Observations as aforesaid, have predicted the Death of
a sick Person (a Week beforehand) to an hour, and of such a Person as I never
had any thing to do withal by way of Physical Administration. These words I am
constrained to annex, lest some envious Person should dare to say, that I might
administer Poison to the aforesaid Party, near the time foretold, thereby to
verify my Prediction.

The reason of the said Effects of Luna's Transits over Mars his Body, is,
because the Seal and impression of his virtue is left there where he was at the
Ingress of the Disease.

On the contrary, Luna transiting the Body of Venus, being Governess of good
Houses, and free from Affliction, the Disease at that time has been more
remiss, and the Patient's Body cooled, and that without the administration of
refrigerant Medicines.

From the foregoing Circumstances it may appear, that the Eclipses by Transit
treated of in the second Part of this Book, are not Imaginary but Real, and
really Effectual as well as Artificial; and since the Moon is Lady of the House
of Religion, etc. in the Radix, they are also Effectual, as to matter of Divine
signification.

Obj. Astrologers themselves will account this Book but a whimsey, and
therefore its publication can be of little benefit to them.

Answ. This is one of my Opponent's Arguments, whereby he would have dissuaded
me from exposing this Treatise to public view; but surely had he considered,
that the Truth of God it self, and his holy Worship, is accounted whimsical, by
the profane Persons of this our Age, he would have sought to convince me by
more solid Reason. What is more scoffed, flouted, derided, and jeered at, than
true Religion it self? yet the Truth is not therefore to be evilly thought of
by any one, or less esteemed of by those who have experienced the goodness of
it, by receiving it in the love thereof; neither is the preaching and
publication thereof to be neglected. And if the experienced Truths of Astrology
be accounted whimsical by Astrologers themselves (though grounded upon the
Principles of their own Art) or by any other Persons, I shall not therefore in
the least decline from affirming the truth of such Experiences, nor from the
publication of them; more especially considering, that there lies upon my
Spirit no restraint from God, as to the contrary; but that the benefit of
Astrologers is intended thereby, it being a salutation of Love and Mercy unto
their Souls, granted me (upon my earnest Supplication unto God) to deliver
forth unto them, whereby they may be satisfied that Divine Revelation is not
ceased, here being a Demonstration of the same, according to the Precepts of
their own Science, and those without the least alteration.

These things will stand in Authority over the hireling Priests of our time,
who possess the Nations with a belief, that God reveals not himself in these
days, as he has done in former Ages.

As to the Vindication of this Demonstration, if objected against by
Astrologers, because founded upon a particular Geniture, being the time when
the Native was a newborn Babe, I recommend to their serious Consideration
these following Scriptures, viz. Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings have
thou perfected praise, Matthew. 21, 16. -- I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven
and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and
have revealed them unto Babes, etc. Matthew. 11, 25. These portions of Scripture
being seriously weighed (more especially after the perusal of the second Part
of this Book) may come to work an Effect upon such an Objector, both of great
Wonder and Satisfaction.

But if any Astrologer shall reflect upon so general a Judgment, extending it
self to the Estates of of others, from a particular Geniture and Direction, I
shall endeavor to satisfy him of the possibility thereof, not only by
Artificial Reasons, grounded upon the Principles of his own Science, but also
by Scriptural.

The experienced Verity of Directions, few Astrologers (I suppose) will deny.

The Course of a Righteous man's Life is steered by a Direction from Heaven:
But to proceed.

I shall first begin with Reasons from Scripture, by repeating again one of the
former quotations, as it is in Psalm 8.2. viz. Out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings have thou ordained Strength, says the holy Prophet David, who was
guided by the Spirit of Jesus. If from the mouths of Babes, etc. Strength be
ordained, for whom is it ordained, but unto others? As if the Prophet had said,
Thou, O Lord, wilt administer strength unto others out of the mouths of
Sucklings, etc. From a due consideration of what is before said, I may hope that
this small Treatise will tend to the Benefit of Astrologers; and when I speak
of the Righteous, or Wicked in general, by inferring a signification of good or
evil unto them, from such Positions, Aspects, etc. as present themselves to
view in the particular Geniture; in so doing I may thus vindicate my self; viz.
There is an Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, amongst those that are
born of God, and they have power given them to discern the state of the Enemies
of the Great Jehovah. Moreover, the Lord is not tied unto men's ways and
manners, or obliged to satisifie their corrupt humors, he will choose what
Position of Heaven pleases him to show forth generals and particulars too, for
the Heavens are his, and who can restrain him? But that Noble Creature Man has
all Mysteries in himself; he has the Spirit of the Divine Being, which unfolds
all Mysteries in his Soul: God can show forth the general state of Kingdoms to
a particular man by Divine Inspiration, and from his particular Radix at Birth,
he can choose what Position of the Heavens he pleases to glorify himself
withal, either in a general or particular way.

Now to come to Astrological Reasons whereby to prove, that a General Judgment
may be given from a particular Geniture, and from the presignified Effects of a
particular Direction.

Let us suppose from the Nativity of a King, that upon some Celestial
Direction he is likely to become the Vanquisher of his Enemies, this Direction
does not only manifest its Power in respect of the King, as a Conqueror, but
also in respect of the overthrow of his Enemies, as being conquered. Here it is
apparent, that a general Judgment relating to the state of the King's Enemies
(which possibly may consist of several Nations) is deduced from a Celestial
Direction in the particular Genesis of the King: Or let it be supposed, that
upon a Direction operating, his Subjects shall be loving and loyal unto him,
this Direction does not only display its Effects in respect of the King, as
being a Governor but also of his Subjects Qualifications and suitable
Demeanor, in showing forth their Loyalty unto him. The like may be judged from
the Genesis of a meaner Person, as concerning his Servants, their Love and
Fidelity, etc.

Hence, I hope, it is made apparent enough, and that from the Astral Science it
self, that a general Judgment may be given as touching the Affairs of others,
from a particular Nativity.

Yet I shall make it undeniably manifest, (by producing the Seal of the Great
King of Heaven to warrant my Assertion) that the Judgment in this Book given,
is of general Concern to the Nation of England, etc. this shall be done near
the beginning of the third Part, where I have placed the Scheme of Sol's
Ingress into Aries for the year 1677, to be compared with the Radical Figure at
Birth, that so the wonderful Unity of those two Celestial Themes may be
observed; which time of the Ingress is intercepted betwixt the two extreme
Limits of that year, wherein the Direction of Sol to Luna's Body (she being
Lady of the House of Religion) did begin to operate, whose Effects are the
Subject Matter of this Treatise; for the said Direction began to manifest its
effectual Splendor (in summoning the Native to appear at the Court of Heaven)
about the 30th of the 5th Month called July, in the year 1676, as may appear by
the Calculation; and the Figure of Sol's Ingress harmonizing, is that of the
year 1677, as aforesaid, which is seven Months and somewhat more distant from
the time wherein the said Direction of the Luminaries began to issue forth its
Divine Operation.

Obj. My Opponent takes an occasion against me, as being guilty of
Contradiction, because he finds the Planet Saturn in one part of this Treatise
termed a Significator in Religion; in another part thereof, the Enemy of
Mankind; and therefore Queries how these things will be reconciled?

Answ. This Objection is weak and frivolous, as will appear, if the second
Instance before-going, used to prove the Verity of Astrological Rules, be but
well observed; for in that Instance, although Saturn, as he is Lord of the 4th,
signifying the Grave, or mortality of Man, is the Enemy of Mankind; yet in
respect of his Situation in the Sign Aries, being the place of his Fall, and of
his Position in the 6th, a Cadent House, where he is Retrograde; I say, in this
respect, he is a good Significator in Religion, forasmuch as he portends the
Grave to be fallen by the Lamb, 1 Corinthians. 15.55.

So from the first Instance, Mercury, though Lord of Death, is a good
Significator in Religion, because by his immersion in the Solar Rays ( Sol
being Lord of the Medium Coeli) he shows Death to be swallowed up in Victory,
Isaiah 25.8.

These Reasons (I presume) do apparently refell the foregoing Objection, and
bring the aforesaid seeming Differences to a perfect Reconciliation, as was
required.

Some Reasons why this Treatise is no inducement to Astrologers to set too
great an Esteem upon their own Art, nor to engage their minds in the further
study thereof, in such sort as to forget those things which concern their Souls
everlasting welfare, as has been objected.
In regard this Book is principally intended for skilful Astrologers, in order
to their Satisfaction in this Point, viz. that Divine Revelation is not ceased,
as also considering, that what is here written, I do truly testify to be given
forth by Divine Revelation; I cannot see wherein this Treatise will tend to
their hurt, but rather to their Advantage and Information, and rather cause
them to have a less Esteem for their Rules of Art, than too highly to promote
them; and that for this reason, because by them alone, without Revelation from
God, they were never made capable to give a Divine Judgment from any Position
of the Heavens whatever, neither have they ever pretended thereunto; but,
hereby they may be satisfied, that there is a Divine Mystery in their Rules,
which nothing but the Spirit of God can unfold, whereby they may be induced to
wait upon God, the Fountain of all Wisdom, to see if he will open their
Understandings in their Art, and if not, yet to be contented. Moreover,
considering the wicked course of Life which many Astrologers (the more is the
pity) do lead, I cannot see wherein they may be deteriorated, but rather
embettered by this Book: I am sure, for my own part, that I bear no evil Will
unto them, but wish their everlasting Felicity, and that they may come to enjoy
the sweet Presence of Him in this World, and in that which is to come, Whom to
know is Life Everlasting.

Some Reasons why this Art, though evilly esteemed of by many
honestly-intending, and zealous Persons, yet, (as treated of in this Book) is
not to be withheld from Public view, as has been objected.
First; it is to be considered, That all things are not Evil which are evilly
thought of, nor all things to be esteemed Evil, which are evilly spoken of,
though by such as mean well, and are zealous in their way; for many of the
Scribes and Pharisees (who undoubtedly had a Zeal for God, but not according to
Truth) spoke evil of the Name and Power of Jesus, who, had they known what they
did, would never have crucified the Lord of Glory; yea, many in these days are
not zealous for, but against the Truth, yet still hoping that their Principles
are holy; now, if for these Reasons, the publication of the Name of Jesus, and
of the Truth, should be neglected, then would the Commands of God be violated,
who taught his Disciples to preach to the ends of the Earth, amongst the Sons
of Men, the glad tidings of Salvation, and that through the Power of the name
of Jesus, the Prince of Glory. In like manner, the Benefits which may arise
from the Science of Astrology (according as the Spirit of God reveals the
mystery thereof) are not to be withheld from Publication, because that Art is
of evil report amongst such Persons as are zealously inclined, and generally
looked upon to be the better sort of People; more especially considering, that
the Subject of this Book is not Astrology, as it is commonly practiced, but as
the Mystery thereof is revealed from Heaven.

Some Reasons whereby to prove that this Treatise is no inducement to those
that are wholly unskilful in this Art, to initiate themselves in the study
thereof, whereby their Affections may be inordinately drawn out to the
forgetting of God, as has been objected.
If this Treatise were an Introduction to the Art of Astrology, showing forth
the Precepts thereof from the very Beginning, there would be better grounds for
this Objection; but since it is not so much intended for the Unskilful, as for
those that are well read in that Science, I cannot see so much reason for it;
more especially considering that I do not persuade any Person to pry into that
sort of Learning, but rather to retract their thoughts inwardly to wait upon
the Spirit of God, which can unfold Mysteries unto them of another nature, with
such Joy of Soul, as the Tongue of the Learned, and most acute (though they
were sensible of the same) is not able to express. Moreover, this Book is in
some measure purposed to persuade all sorts of People (so far forth as they are
capable of understanding it) that Divine Revelation is not ceased, and not to
persuade them to the study of Astrology; that so they may hearken to the Voice
of Jesus in them, who reveals Wonders, and that many times according to men's
particular Capacities. But suppose this Book (whose Second Part is, An
Astrological Demonstration of Divine Revelation) should excite any Person to
the study of Astrology, I might thus argue, both in defense of the Student, and
of my Book, viz. If the proof of Divine Revelation be the Original Cause of any
Undertaking, surely the Success thereof cannot be Evil.

Obj. Why are the Names of the Signs, Planets, Aspects, and other terms of Art,
set down literally in this Book, and not the Characters of them, according to
the custom of Astrologers, considering that the sound of the Letter in such
obscure words can no more satisfy the Understanding of the Ignorant, than the
sight of the Character?

Answ. Thus does my truly Learned Opponent still create more Exercise for me,
to whom I return this Answer, (as I have hitherto done all others) with great
respect toward him, viz.

That although the terms of Art, etc. as they are delivered in Letters at
large, are still sufficiently obscure, yet, the sense in reading will be
somewhat more perfect, and rather the more intelligible to a mean Capacity;
yea, the terms writ down at large are so near of affinity to the words from
whence they are derived, that one meanly Learned, who knows but the Use of a
Dictionary, may find thereby the Interpretation of them, whereas, if the
Characters had been used, the Dictionary could have administered no light in
order to the understanding of them; and indeed, since most Persons, both
Professors and Profane, lay out their Moneys upon, and bestow their Time in
the perusal or reading of Almanacks; I think their Moneys may be fully as well
bestowed upon this Book, and their Time as well spent in the reading of it,
without the least prejudice to their Souls.

Obj. These terms, etc. are obscure, whereas the Spirit of God loves plainness.

Answ. Yet it follows not, that all things which are obscure are not of God,
for Godliness it self is a great Mystery, as says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.16.
and that which is mysterious is not plain, but obscure; therefore Piety is
obscure because it is mysterious, and mysterious terms in the Exposition of a
holy Mystery may legally be used. It Is true, the Spirit of God loves plainness,
that is, it loves to make things plain, which are abstruse or hidden; for we
read, Prove. 15.19. that the way of the Righteous is made plain: Observe, it is
not said, is plain, but is made plain; and when it is made plain by the
Almighty, it is then so plain, that the wayfaring man, though a Stranger, cannot
err therein. But what says the Voice of Wisdom, Prove. chap. 8.8, 9, verses?
All the words of my mouth are in righteousness, there is nothing froward or
perverse in them; They are all plain to him that understands, and right to
them that find knowledge; as if Solomon (the wisest of men) had said also, that
the words of Wisdom are obscure to such as understand not, which must follow
the other words of that Text by a necessary Consequence. Hence (I presume) it
is apparent enough, that Godliness, or Divine Revelation, being a Mystery, may
lawfully be treated of in the obscure and mysterious terms of Astrology.

Some may reflect upon this Book, as full of Tautology; to whom I answer, that
if Tautology be Repetitio Vocis, then I may bring in the Learned Cardan for my
Defendent, thus expressing himself, Segm. 4. Apho. 85. Repetitio in hac
Scientia est necessaria, meaning Astrology, which was the Subject he was then
concerned in: And indeed Repetition herein could not be avoided, where the same
Celestial Position and Direction do demonstrate such variety of Divine matter
(which may appear by the Second Part) as could not otherwise be rendered
intelligible to the unprejudiced Mathematician and Astrologer.

Of the Names of the Planets, being the Contents of their Natures, (as has
been frequently verified by Experience) with their Derivations.
Saturnus, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercurius, Luna.
Saturnus, quasi saturans, vel Vrna sati, as it were filling with Plenty; for
he governs standing Corn, and Fruits of the Earth, Tillage, Husbandry, and such
like.

Jupiter, quasi Juris Pater. He signifies Justice, Temperance; and governs
Laws, Ordinances, and the setters forth of them.

Mars, quasi Mors vel Mavors, id est magna vertens; signifies Death and
Destruction, with Violence and Oppression, and overturns great Enterprises by
his malefick Influence.

Sol, the Sun, the name is good, dicitur Sol quasi solus, quia solus ex omnibus
Planetis in Ecliptica vagatur, vel quasi solus apparens, quia caeterae Stellae
radiis suis obscurantur.

Venus, a veniendo, quasi forma ad omnes veniat; She is the significatrix of
Comeliness, Decency, and and Beauty in all things.

Mercurius, a curando merces, he signifies all manner of Merchandise,
Traffic, Buying and Selling.

Luna, the Moon, quasi Lux aliena, quia luce Solis mutuata resplendet.

As to the Nature and Names of the Signs, the mystery of them may be read in
the ensuing Treatise.

My Opponent sticks not to affirm, that what I say as to the Planets Names
aforesaid, (containing their Natures) is false; yet proves nothing of what he
affirms, except his saying that they are Heathenish Names, be a proof of his
Assertion; but I trow not; and therefore shall believe my own Experience (which
I am confident many Astrologers can truly second me in) before I will give
credit to his Affirmation without a proof. And, as to what Erasmus says of
such Derivations, as are here given, I shall not look upon his Sayings in this
case as Evangelical, nor upon his Opinion as Authentic and undeniable, but
shall rather attribute it to a conceitedness in him, whereby he would seem
wiser than other Learned Persons, who admit of such Derivations, for he may
from as good grounds explode all Derivations whatever as these beforementioned.

Neither do Tycho's or Selden's Reflections upon Astrology for Cardan's Errors
touching the Nativity of Jesus Christ, in the least impeach that Science, if
considered as it is practiced in its Purity; for Abusus Artis non tollit Vsum.

But to conclude, since my Adversary in Disputation has been so candid, as to
desire me to take what he had written objectively, not as Determination, but as
Argument only, I can in reason do no less than acknowledge his Discretion
herein, because he has not disputed as one fixed and unalterable in his
Judgment, but as one willing by sound reasons to be convinced.

Having thus far proceeded by way of Introduction, and in order to the
refelling of the fore going Objections, I now come to the Second Part, which
is, a Demonstration of Divine Revelation, according to the known and ccommonly
received Rules and Principles of Astrology.

FINIS PARTIS PRIMAE.
Evangelium Sydereum, OR, Revelation DEMONSTRATED.

THE SECOND PART.

Wherein Holy Scripture is Astronomically handled, from the Radix of a
Nativity, and a Direction of the Luminaries, etc. Being intended as a Proof
that Divine Revelation is not ceased in these days, and that according to the
known and commonly received Rules and Principles of Astrology.

By JOHN SOVTHWORTH, a Lover of Righteousness.

For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World, are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and
Godhead, so that they are left without excuse.

Romans 1.20. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.

TO THE SERIOUS PERUSAL AND CONSIDERATION OF THE More Learned and Ingenious, J.
S. Recommendeth these his Astronomical Revelations; Hoping that they may serve
as so many SIGNS from HEAVEN Of that which is the TRUE RELIGION.

The Preamble.
Thesis.
IF the Stars have signification (which is experimentally found true) in
Natural things, which are of less concern, and momentary; much more doubtless
in Spiritual things, which are of the greatest Weight, and Eternal.

God being a Pure and Holy Spirit, and the Creation ordained for his Service,
according to his Divine Appointment and Wisdom; it must of necessity follow,
that the things created do in their Places, according to their Specific
Properties received from him, serve him as he is, viz. a Spirit. But the Divine
Secrets in Natural things included (whereof they are a type) are out of the
reach of any other Person, except such a one whose Understanding God shall
enlighten by a Supernatural Revelation: To such a one he shows his mysterious
Workings by his Spirit, upon Secondary Causes, and how they signify his
appearance in Spirit to his People, who, though now contemptible in the eyes of
the World, yet are endued with a portion of his Power and Glory, and are made
experimental Witnesses of the sweet and precious workings of his Heavenly
Spirit in the Inward Parts, and of the fulfilling of the Law in their hearts,
according to the gracious extent of the new Covenant, Jer. chap. 31. 33, 34,
verses. Psalm. 40.8. I say, to such as are of an humble and contrite Spirit, and
tremble at his Word (which is nigh in the heart, and in the mouth, and is God)
he reveals his Secrets, enlightening their Apprehension after an astonishing
manner, in the more occult Mysteries of the Creation, still opening the
Treasures of Wisdom, after a more plentiful manner continually, and discovering
Sacred things, beyond the power of Utterance, so that the Tongue is silenced;
yea, beyond the power of Conception, the Senses being overcome, and the Soul
delightfully ravished with the sweetness of their Contemplation: the love of
the holy and gracious Lord God (which is Love indeed) powerfully subduing them
by its gentle, delicate, and tender dealings with them, accosting them mildly,
and with his comfortable Embraces wonderfully refreshing them. He draws them
with his fragrant Odours, and over-shadows them with the wings of his
pleasures, and his Fruit is sweet to their Taste. He does even more than oblige
them, giving them cause to praise him, because he does so plentifully shower
down his sweet, intellectual, and invisible Blessings upon them; and then for
those Praises (he being the Subject of their Praise, yea even the Praise it
self) he causes their cups to overflow with his undeclarable Love more than
before; so that they are constrained to say with David, being made willing to
part with all for him: The Zeal of thine House, O Lord, has eaten us up, Psalm.
69.9. For the more they praise him, the more abundant cause to praise him is
given them; there being a mutual provocation in Love betwixt their Praises and
his Glory, so that zealous for one another, they are even more than United by
these invisible and most sweet Espousals. Their Souls are emparadis'd in the
Arms of their Savior, and are exalted to the lowest degree of Humility, which
is indeed the truest Exaltation. And though they may for a time be surrounded
with Terrors, whilst under the Judgments of the Almighty, which indeed are
more precious than fine Gold, purifying the Soul (for Sion is redeemed through
Judgment, and her Converts with righteousness; and when the Judgments of the
Lord are set up in the Earth, then the Inhabitants thereof will learn
Righteousness) yet the Lord, according to his promise, viz. to lead gently on
those that are with young, lays no more upon them than they are able to bear,
but arises mercifully in the midst of Judgment, immediately, yea, in a moment
of time, quicker than Lightning, and beautifies those Terrors, causing them to
be made for food unto them, by his wonderful Mercy and Omnipotency, and
converting them all into ravishing Joys. See Isa. 1.18. Isa. 1.27.

These things are premised to signify, that the Secrets of the Almighty are
with those that fear him, and that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom, Prove. 1.7. Prove. 9.10.

Characteres Signorum.
Aries,. Taurus,. Gemini,, Cancer,. Leo,. Virgo,. Libra,. Scorpio,.
Sagittarius,. Capricornus,. Aquarius,. Pisces..
Characteres Planetarum.
Saturnus,. Jupiter,. Mars,. Sol,. Venus,. Mercurius,. Luna,.
Characteres Aspectuum.
Conjunctio,. Sextilis,. Quartilis,. Trinus,. Oppositio,.
Characteres Nodorum.
Caput Draconis,. Cauda Draconis,. Sors,.
The Longitude of each Planet is inserted in the Scheme of Birth, calculated
from the CAROLINE TABLES.

The Latitude of the Planets at the Genethliacal time, is, as follows,
according to the said Tables, viz. 2. 35 Lat. Australis. 0. 10. Australis. 0.
37 Australis. 1. 59 Australis. 1. 39 Australis. 0. 43 Borealis.

Planetarum Antiscia and Contrantiscia.
Ant. 2. 18, Contr.. Ant. 29. 01, Contr.. Ant. 6. 05, Contr.. Ant. 0. 13,
Contr.. Ant. 20. 11, Contr.. Ant. 29. 28, Contr.. Ant. 27. 39, Contr..

Here follows the Radical Scheme, and its Speculum, whereby the Artist may
discern the General Fate of the Native, as to its External state and condition,
as also his particular Fate, from the Effects of Directions and Transits; his
Spiritual state being handled in the ensuing Treatise.

RADIX 2645.
, 22. Decembr.s die Natus 3 hor: 52 mi: 32 Sec: mane, sub Latitud: 53 gr: 27 m:
a ad and. Almuten Figurae, Particeps.

astrological diagram Speculum Radicis.
Long. Latit. 00:32 38:20 00:59 38:46 02:22 20:26 03:28 D8 D2 49:26 04:47 AId
00:00 04:48 Ant 00:00 09:34 D7 Asc 53:27 09:49 23:22 20:25 D9 D3 34:00 20:39
00:00 22:08 46:35 28:32 Spi 00:00 20:07 D6 D12 49:26 23:55 42:39 24:52 Reg
00:00 25:37 MC IC 00:00 27:42 52:38 28:22 Fr: 00:00 28:23 D11 D5 34:00 29:47
39:27 Long. Poli.

place 1. and 2. part 2. page 1.

Evangelium Sydereum.
PART II.
THE Direction whose Effects are here handled, is of Sol, Lord of the Medium
Coeli, to the Body of Luna, Governess of the Ninth, viz. the House of Religion
in the Radix.

The Arch of Direction found out according to the Argolian Method of
Calculation, is as follows, viz.

D. M. S. the Significator's Longitude is 29. 46. 42. South Declination under
the Earth 23. 30. 00. Right Ascension 269. 45. 00. Distantia ab Imo Coeli 58.
08. 00. Pole of Position 39. 17. 00. Difference of Ascension 20. 50. 00.
Oblique Ascension 290. 35. 00. the Promissor's Longitude is 2. 21 North
Latitude 0. 43 Declination South 18. 57 Right Ascension 304. 28 Different.
Ascensional. sub Polo 16. 19 Ascensio Obliqua sub eodem Polo 320. 47

Substract 290. 35. the Oblique Ascension of Sol, from 320. 47. the Oblique
Ascension of Luna under the Sun's Pole, and there remains 30. 12. the Arch of
Direction; to which adding 26 min. the Equation, the Sum is 30. 38. the Arch
equated. These 30 degrees point out 30 years of the Natives Age complete and
ended, and 38 minutes show 38 parts of 60 of the 31st year, falling upon the
30th day of the fifth Month called July, Anno 1676; near which time the Lights
of Heaven, gave a Direction to the Native in the ways of Righteousness.

The foregoing numbers of Calculation were found according to the Precepts of
Spherical Trigonometry, exhibited in the third part of Clavis Astrologiae
Elimata, pages 384, 385, 386, 387, 388, etc. Only this of Sol the Significator,
and Luna the Promissor, being sufficient for the present purpose, the rest of
the Hylegians are here omitted as needless.

There is another Method of Direction, first published to the view of the World
by Dr. Salmon, in his Horae Mathematicae, lib. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 16, 17. as also
Chap. 18. Book 4. of the same Treatise; which indeed I cannot but acknowledge
to be no less ingenious and rational, than facil: and has been frequently
verified by my own and others Experience to Admiration, never failing of Truth,
being wholly grounded upon the infallible Axioms of Art, and backed by several
passages in the Holy Scriptures.

The Measure of Time, according to this Method, is the allowance of a day for a
year; for as all the Points of the Ecliptic pass through the 12 Mansions in
the space of 24 hours, or a Natural Day, so the Sun makes his Circuit through
all the said Points of the Ecliptic in a year; which is a rational Proof in
Art, that a day must stand for a year.

Moreover, This Measure of Time is countenanced in several passages of Holy
Scripture, where we may read, that a Day is the measure of Time for a Year, as
to the accomplishment of Ezekiel's Prophecies, with other circumstances of
Sacred Writ which are here omitted; Now, since a Day for a Year is the measure
of Time allowed for the fulfilling of Divine Prophecies, why not the same
allowance of Time for the accomplishment of Celestial Mysteries, or such
mysterious Transactions as are made by the Stars in Heaven; more especially
considering, that the most Divine and Supreme Being is the Mover of the
Heavens, administering unto them their powerful Influences? Now, since the
Heavens never swerved from the Command of their Maker, (whose Works are all
Divine) they being Synonoma's to the invisible Throne of his Glory, whereon he
swayes the Scepter of his Divine Power, must of necessity be privileged above
any other part of the Creation (man excepted) to speak forth Sacred and
Mysterious Predictions; for, the Heavens declare the Glory of God, from whose
Spirit the effluvia of all Divine prenarrations are exhaled. But to proceed.

The Moon passing through all the Signs of the Zodiac in a Month, and these
Signs passing through the twelve Houses in a Natural Day, are a rational ground
in Art, that a Day shall stand for a Month as well as for a Year, in this way
of Direction.

Here it is evident, that this measure of time depends upon the two great
Luminaries of Heaven, to whose resplendent Influences it seems rational to
judge, (if their radiant Luster may testify for them) that the Influences of
the other Planets and fixed Stars are subordinate.

In commending this, I do not go about to explode Argol's way, far be it from
me, since I have found much Verity therein, but shall rather conclude, that
there is truth to be found out by both these ways.

I shall here give a brief Specimen of the Directions operating (according to
Doctor Salmon's new way) the one and thirtieth year of the Native's Age
current, as follows; being found out by Inspection only, viz.

Sinister Directions Annual.
Sol to Cornu Capricorni Australe, near the Radical Body of Luna Lady of the
Ninth, just changing his Sign. See Horae Mathematicae, page 274. Book 3. Chap.
19. Sect. ult.

to the of the Cusp of the Ascendent, and of the Ninth.

Dexter Directions Annual.
Luna to the Conjunction of Venus, and Sextile of Mars Lord of the Ascendent,
she Lady of the Ninth.

Sinister Directions Mensurnal.
Venus to Cornu Capricorni Australe changing the same Sign that the Sun did the
Annual way, viz. out of Capricorn into Aquarius, and so approaching the Radical
Body of Luna.

Mars Lord of the Ascendent to the Conjunction of Jupiter, having the Dignity
of Exaltation in the Ninth.

Dexter Directions Mensurnal.
Luna to the Trine of Mercury, Trine of Venus, Sextile of Mars, Sextile of
Jupiter, Trine of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli.

In the next place follows the Revolutional Figure preceding the Direction of
the Luminaries, together with its Speculum, whereby the Concordance betwixt the
Transits of the Planets in the Radix, at the time of the Exortum, etc. and the
Aspects and Transits of the Revolution, with the Effects of the Direction, may
be more easily discerned.

I have throughout all the following Pages, abstained from the Use of
Astrological Characters, that all Persons which are ignorant of those
Characters may read the Book, though it might have been somewhat more
compendious, if those Characters had been used, which then could have been read
but by an Astrologer only.

Certain testimonies that the Radical Figure is truly taken, etc.
The Direction it self was of Sol Lord of the Tenth in the Radix, to the Body
of Luna Lady of the Ninth House therein: The Radical Figure and Speculum
thereof are prefixed at the beginning, together with the Figure of the
Revolution preceding the Direction, and its Speculum. I have not used very much
exactness in drawing the Revolutional Scheme and Speculum, the matter in hand
not altogether requiring it; but however they may serve to show what Directions
and Transits were to happen therein that year. The Nativity was rectified
EXORTUM:
1675.. 22:0 December. die, 1 h: 14 m: ante meridiem a et ad et.

astrological diagram

Speculum Exortivum.
Signa Zodiaci et asp.tus.
Long. 00:30 00:50 02:21 05:43 07:23 10:07 12:35 13:00 IC MC 13:01 D. 6. D. 12
19:18 D. 7. A. sc 20:21 23:23 D. 2. D. 8. 26:03 D. 5. D. 11. 26:44 D. 3. D. 9.
29:47 30:00 by the Ascendents Direction to Frons Scorpii, a fixed Star of the
second Magnitude, in 28 degrees. 11 min. of Scorpio, in the Ascendent, near the
Ecliptic, of the nature of Saturn and Mars, upon which Direction, happening
about the 22d of the 12th Month, called February, in the Year 167, the Native
was invaded with a violent Distemper, viz. Melancholic and Choleric, of the
Nature of Saturn and Mars, as aforesaid, which was aggravated by the
Ascendent's Direction to the Terms of Saturn near the same time, Saturn being
posited in his Fall, in the sixth House of the Radix, and Retrograde; (his
Place, and of the other Planets, being calculated de Novo from the Caroline
Tables for the time of Birth) the Planet Mars being Lord of the Sixth, and
Ascendent in the said Radical Figure; the Revolutional Figure preceding the
said Direction, confirmed the truth of the operation of the said Direction,
concurring therewith in signification, both as to the Malady, as also in other
things relating to the Native's Concerns in this World. Another eminent token
of the Radical Figure truly taken, is this, viz. Sol Lord of the Tenth,
changing his Sign in the Second, being the Fifth from the Tenth, near the Body
of Mercury, Lord of the Eighth in the Figure, over whose Body he makes his
first Transit, as also immediately after applying to an Opposition of Jupiter,
Lord of the Fifth, the House of Children, the Fifth being the Eighth from the
Tenth, and Jupiter aforesaid posited in the Eighth of the Figure Retrograde,
gave the Death of the Native's Mother on Childbed when the Native was born.
Luna, a general significatrix of Mothers, posited in the Third, viz. the Sixth
from the Tenth applying unto Venus in Conjunction with Cauda Draconis in the
Sanguin Sign Aquarius, gave her a Surfeit by drinking inconvenient Liquors,
which corrupted the Blood and Humors. Jupiter in Opposition to Sol, the Liver
or Mass of Blood, was corrupted, etc. Other Circumstances might be instanced,
to prove the truth of the Radix rectified, as the correspondence of Accidents
past, with Directions near the time by them pointed out; as also Marks, Moles,
and Scars of the Native, Description of the Body, Conditions, Qualities, etc.
but let these suffice.

Observations upon the Figure of the Solar Exortum preceding the DIRECTION.
By comparing the Revolutional Scheme with the Radical Scheme and Speculum, and
adjoining their Significations to their proper Consequences, it will evidently
appear how the Heavens (whose Mover is God) did harmonize with the then present
condition of the Native, and likewise with his Condition ensuing upon the
Direction, which began to operate about the time prenoted thereby, viz. the
30th of the fifth Month called July, Anno 1676, being the thirty first year of
the Native's Age, current.

The Arch of Direction was by Trigonometrical Calculation (a Synopsis whereof
is given at the beginning of the second Part) 30 degrees. 38 min. But to proceed.

Jupiter, a general significator of Religion, and a Holy Life and Conversation,
having Dignities in the Ninth House of the Radix, ( viz. his Exaltation and
Terms) is Retrograde, and near changing his Sign in the Radix; Mercury a
general Significator of Mutations (by the convertibility of his Nature) having
lately changed his Sign in the Radix, is in the beginning of Capricorn, a
moveable Sign, opposing Jupiter in the Radix, situated, as aforesaid, in the
beginning of Cancer, a Sign moveable: Mercury is likewise in Conjunction of
Sol, Sol being in the last Degree of Sagittary, ready to change his Sign also:
Jupiter (I say) disposed as aforesaid in the Radix, is Lord of Pisces,
intercepted in the Ascendent, as also of the Tenth and Eleventh Houses of the
Revolution, the Tenth House, or Medium Coeli, representing the Deity of Heaven;
and the Eleventh is the Bonus Genius, or good Angel: Jupiter being Lord of the
aforesaid Houses, transits the Bodies of Mercury and Sol in the Radix: Mercury
is placed in the Ninth House of the Revolution in Sagittary, disposed of by
Jupiter, and being Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius in the Radix applies
in the Revolution to the Conjunction of Mars, Lord of the Ascendent in the
Radix, and of the Ninth in the Revolution, for the Ascendent of the Radix is
upon the Ninth of the Exortum.

It is to be noted likewise, that Sol the Significator in the Direction to
ensue, is near the Conjunction of Jupiter, in the Eleventh House of the
Revolution, Sol applying to Jupiter Lord of the Eleventh, or Bonus Genius, to
make him in Cazimi, Jupiter having lately changed his Sign, and Sol about to
change his Sign.

All these gave an alteration in Principles of Religion, for the better, as
also Sacred Visions of God and Angels, which is the more confirmed by what
ensues, viz.

Jupiter Lord of the Sign Pisces, intercepted in the Ascendent, as also of the
Tenth and Eleventh Houses in the Revolution, is placed in the Eleventh House of
the same Revolution; Sol applies to his Conjunction, (as also to the
Conjunction of Caput Draconis) so that Jupiter is near Cazimi, and also applies
to the Conjunction of the Dragon's Head, in the Revolutional Eleventh House
(that Node being placed in the Ninth of the Radix) Jupiter, as aforesaid, being
Lord of Pisces, intercepted in the Ascendent, as also of the Tenth and Eleventh
Houses of the Revolution.

Luna, Governess of the Ninth in the Radix, and Promittor in the Radical
Direction, anon to be treated of, having lately changed her Sign in the
Revolution (as also in the Radix) transits the Sextile of Mercury in the Radix;
he being Lord of the eleventh the bonus genius thereof, and near Cazimi, is
placed in the ninth house of the Revolution in Sagittary (disposed of by
Jupiter) and applies to the Conjunction of Mars Lord of the Ascendent in the
Radix, and of the ninth in the Revolution, as aforesaid.

Luna likewise being Lady of the ninth in the Radix etc. transits the Trine of
Jupiter in the Radix with mutual Reception by House, for Luna is in Pisces, the
House of Jupiter, at the time of the Revolution, and Jupiter in Cancer, the
House of Luna in the Radix, he being Lord of the tenth and eleventh Houses of
the Exortum, going to Cazimi or Cor Solis, and Conjunction of Luna's North Node
( viz.) in the eleventh House of the Revolution.

It is to be remembered in these Considerations of Luna, that she is Governess
of the House of Religion in the Radix.

Luna being Promittor in the Direction hereafter to be treated of, etc.
separates from the Sextile of Sol, the Significator in the aforesaid Direction,
and from the Sextile of Jupiter, ( Sol and Jupiter applying to a Conjunction,
and near the Aspect) in the Revolution, as also both of them applying to the
Conjunction of Caput Drac. (which is the Ninth of the Radix) in the eleventh
House of the Revolution.

Luna separating as aforesaid, applies to the Sextile of Saturn and Venus,
Saturn being Lord of the Ascendent in the Revolution, and proved in the first
Part of this Volume, to be a good Significator in Religion: Jupiter afterward
applies to a Trine Sinister of Saturn Lord of the Ascendent, with reception in
the Exortum.

Jupiter is situate in Capricorn, the House of Saturn Lord of the Ascendent,
and Saturn in Taurus, the House of Venus, she being Almuten of the Radical
Figure, which makes this Trine Aspect betwixt the two Superiors Saturn and
Jupiter more forcible.

Venus (to whose Conjunction Luna applied in the Radix) is posited in the
eleventh House of the Revolution, viz. the House of Hope or Faith, in Trine of
Saturn Lord of the Ascendent, with mutual reception, by House, and Saturn is
posited in the second House of the said Revolution, etc.

These Positions, Dignities, Aspects, and Transits of the Planets aforesaid,
did not only effect a notable Change in the Native's course of Life, for the
better, but gave stupendous Visions, and Divine Revelations of God and of his
Angels, beyond the Limits of Expression, to the fulfilling of that Scripture,
viz. Your young men shall see Visions, Joel 2.28. Acts 2.17. together with an
admirable opening of the Mysteries of the Scriptures, even to the ravishing and
astonishing of his Soul with extreme Pleasure and unutterable Joy, yea, even to
the amazement of his External Senses, being unable to bear the weight or rather
Divine Excellency of such Delight and Glory, so that the Native's Body was cast
to the ground, he lying in a Trance for a considerable space of time, not well
knowing whether he was in the Body or no, for in a Saul-like-state he met with
Jesus in the Spirit coming in the Clouds of Heaven with Power and great Glory,
signifying to him, that his Redemption drew nigh, Luke 21.47, 28. whose coming
was preceded with signs of pleasant and delightful weeping and mourning,
proceeding from Divine Love, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, viz. They
shall mourn over him whom they have pierced, as one mourns for his only Son,
etc. Zech. 12.10. But in another Portion of Scripture, Your mourning shall be
turned into Joy, John 16.20.

A faint Resemblance of an Angelical Vision exemplified from the Celestial
Radix and Revolution before specified, viz.
Jupiter in the Revolution Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius, being prope
Cor Solis, as also Mercury Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius in the Radix
being near Cazimi, shows an Angel standing in the Sun. The disposition of
these, and of the other Planets in the Radical and Revolutional Themes, gives
the accomplishment of the Angels words in the Heavens, Revelat. 19.17, 18, 19,
20, 21.

Now I come to treat of the Effects of the Direction, viz. of Sol to the Body
of Luna in the Radix. The Arch of Direction by Trigonometrical Calculation,
came forth 30 degrees. 38 m. which was the Arch of the Equator, intercepted
betwixt the Significator Sol, and the Promittor Luna. These 30 degrees point
out 30 years from the Native's Birth, complete and ended, and 38 minutes point
out 38 parts of sixty of the year next ensuing, viz. the 30th day of the 5th
Month called July, Anno 1676, which was the 31st year of the Native's Age
current, at which time the Direction had begun to manifest its Vigor.

The same things may be understood here concerning the Direction and its
Effects, which were of the Revolution; only the Native at the time of the
Direction, or near it, witnessed the former Effects after a more firm and
powerful manner, having strange Raptures and over-powering Visions of Divine
Joy and Wonder.

But to come to the more particular Effects, viz.

Sol the Significator subterranean, and in Conjunction of Mercury in the Radix,
in the second House, Sol and Mercury being both in Opposition of Jupiter in the
eighth House, Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, yearly, from the time of Birth,
renewing his Transit over the Antiscion and Body of Mercury, and Opposition of
Jupiter, and his own Antiscion, the Nativity likewise Nocturnal, Sol in Trine
of Saturn in the Radix subterranean, and in Conjunction of Mars Lord of the
Ascendent in the Radix; I say, Sol radically thus disposed, and Lord of the
Medium Coeli, carrying the aforesaid Influences to the Promittor Luna, Lady of
the ninth House, applying to the Conjunction of Venus, Almuten of the Radical
Figure, and all the Planets subterranean, except Jupiter; gave to the Native
Intellectual, Invisible, and Religious Honor from God, 1 Samuel chap. 2. verse.
30. John 12.26. and the Treasures of an Holy Life and Conversation, because the
Medium Coeli is the second from the ninth, as also an insight into Arts and
Sciences, and Divine Mysteries, 1 Timothy 3.16.

All the Planets subterranean, except Jupiter, and he Retrograde in the Eighth,
near changing his Sign, and entering into Gemim, the last Degrees, where he is
Detrimented, signify, that the Native's alteration of Religion is noted and
observed, but with an eye of Contempt and Prejudice, especially amongst the
pretended Divines, shut up in the House of Death, except they repent.

Jupiter in Opposition of Mercury in the Radix, moderated Mercury's Instability
and Changeableness, Mercury rules the Apprehension, Jupiter the Judgment;
Mercury swift in Motion, Jupiter Retrograde in Opposition to him, as aforesaid,
Mercury likewise being near Cazimi, and Luna Lady of the Ninth, applying to the
Conjunction of Venus, Almuten of the Radix, must therefore give a sound
Judgment, and an understanding of mysterious and hidden things relating to Art
and Religion; especially Sol, the Significator in this Direction, carrying the
virtue of Mercury and Jupiter thus disposed in the Radix, to the Body of Luna
the Promissor.

Sol carrying Mercury's Antiscion annually to Mercury's Body, Jupiter's
Opposition, and his own Antiscion; Mercury in Opposition of Jupiter, associated
with Sol's Body and Sol's Antiscion, etc. must of necessity give a penetrative
intellectual Faculty to the Native, the opening of Mysteries, Visions, and
Supernatural Revelations, at that time when he so disposed, and his Virtue was
administered by Sol's Direction, Lord of the Medium Coeli, to the Body of Luna
Lady of the Ninth in the Radix, she applying to the Conjunction of Venus, a
Fortune, and beholding the Degree of her own Exaltation in Taurus, the House of
Venus, with a Quartile, she being Almuten of Taurus upon the Cusp of the
Seventh, the Fortune Venus, Almuten of the Figure, likewise beholding the Cusp
of the Seventh, her own House, with a Quartile, she placed in the Third, the
House of Luna's delight.

Luna Lady of the Ninth, in the Third, the House of her delight, and applying
to the Conjunction of Venus therein, Venus being near Cauda Draconis, the
Moon's South Node, Luna applying to her Node, where she has no Latitude, but
to the even way of the Sun in the Ecliptic; Caput Draconis in Leo in the Ninth
House, etc. all these gave a good Principle from the Birth: I say, Luna
Governess of the Ninth, so disposed as aforesaid, gave the Native a good
Principle of Religion from the Birth; but she being subterranean, it was hid
and stifled, Luke chap. 9. verse. 44.45. Luke 18.31, 32, 33, 34 verses. It is a
significant Testimony (if there were no more) that the Native upon this
Direction would change his Formal Principles and Evil course of Life, for a
better and true Principle, because Luna Lady of the Ninth in the Radix,
separates from a Quartile of Saturn, an Infortune, and applies to the
Conjunction of Venus, a Fortune, so disposed as before rehearsed, in the House
of Luna's delight, viz. the Third.

Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, posited in the Second, disposed as aforesaid
(the Medium Coeli being the Second from the Ninth) Directed to the Body of Luna
Lady of the Ninth, gave not the Native External Riches, but an entrance into
the Treasury of Religion, and the Profits of a Holy Life and Conversation,
receiving his Reward from the Giver of Holiness, to the fulfilling of these
Scriptures, viz. He is come, and his Reward is with him, etc. Isaiah 40.10.
Isa. 62.11. Rev. 22.12.

The Nature of the Principles of the Native, and the manner of his Conviction,
must be collected from the Promittor Luna, and her Disposal at the Birth, etc.

Luna applying to the Conjunction of Venus, a Fortune, and Almuten of the Radix
near the Ecliptic, and also applying to her Node, viz, Cauda Draconis, in the
fixed Sign Aquarius, where she comes to the even way of Sol the Significator,
not having any Latitude, viz. the Ecliptic; Sol representing the Deity, or Sun
of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. I say, he being Significator, as also Lord of the
Medium Coeli in the Radix, argues an entrance into the pure and even way of
Life, viz. the strait way, where there is no deviating to the right hand nor to
the left, but a perfect and strait way of Holiness, Math. 7.13, 14.

Luna and Venus being so near Cauda Draconis, but in the constant Sign
Aquarius, gave a Principle that lies under a Scandalous, Reproachful, and
malicious Title, given in Scorn and Contempt, viz. Quakerism, and that it is
wicked, and of the Devil; but 'twas said of old, that Christ had a Devil, and
was mad, John 10.20. and it is evident, that the Apostles bore the reproach of
Jesus, (besides, Cauda in a fixed Sign gives Slanders, and not tales of Truth.)
But this Title of Derision and Slander by Cauda's being so near Luna and Venus,
is the fulfilling of these Scriptural Prophecies, where we find the Prophet
Jeremiah complaining thus, viz. The word of the Lord is to them a reproach,
they have no delight in it, etc. Jerem. 6.10. Jer. 20.8. Lament. 5.1. Observe
the words of Jesus and the Apostles in the ensuing Scriptures, Luke 6.22. 1 Timothy 4.10. Heb 11.26. Hebr. 13.13. To which annex the words of the Prophet
Joel, chap. 2. verse 17. and it will not be strange that the People of God
should receive of the World a disdainful Title. But the word Quaker in it self
is honorable, because Quaking or Trembling (for the words are Synonoma's) is a
Divine Quality, and a Symptom of a Servant of God, whose word by the Prophet
David is, Psalm 2.11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling: and
by the Apostle Paul, Philip. 2.12. Work out your own Salvation with fear and
trembling.

As the Direction's place was subterranean, it gave a hidden and mysterious
principle in lowliness, but more especially hidden from the exalted and
pretended Divines, that are ready to retreat from, and change their Notions
(traditionally received) in the time of Trial; for Jupiter is in the Sign of
his Exaltation and Retrograde above the Earth, ready to change his Sign, the
Direction under the Earth, its place being in no Aspect at all with Jupiter's.
It gave also a Principle leading to Meekness and Humility, to the fulfilling of
these Scriptures, viz. I have chosen the weak and foolish things of this world,
to confound the wise, etc. Matthew. 11.25. Luke 10, 21. 1 Cor. 1.17.

Luna applying to Venus Lady of Libra, a Sign of Equity, and both of them
posited in Aquarius, a fixed and good Sign, gave a lasting and just Principle.

Sol Lord of the Tenth, directed to Luna Lady of the Ninth, both Significator
and Promittor being Subterranean, gave an holy and honorable Principle,
descended from on high. And as Sol and Luna (the Luminaries or Lights of this
Direction) are in the ascending part of Heaven, yet Subterranean, signifies,
that it is such a Principle of Life and Light, as from a state of Humility,
Lowliness, and Meekness, will arise over all other Principles, to the highest
degree of Exaltation, according to these Scriptures, viz. He will exalt that
which is of low degree, Luke 1.52. Blessed are the humble, for they shall be
exalted, etc. Ezekiel. 21.26. James 1.9. Luke 14.11. Luke 18.14. Prove. 29.23.
Isaiah 57.15. James 4.6. Matthew. 18.4. Matthew. 23.12. 1 Pet. chap. 5. verse. 5, 6.
Which is confirmed, because Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli ( viz. the Second from
the Ninth) beholds the Sign upon the Cusp of the Tenth (which is his own House)
the Angle of Honor, with a Trine, Cor Leouis near the Cusp, and Sol generally
signifying Renown; as also Luna the Promittent Planet beholding the degree of
her Exaltation by Quartile; and in Conjunction of Venus Almuten of the Figure,
beholding her own House the Cusp of the Seventh, with a Quartile, the Degree of
the Moon's Exaltation being situate in the descending part of Heaven, Sol,
Luna, and Venus, as aforesaid, being Subterranean and ascending; all which
Testimonies do infallibly promise the Exaltation of this lowly Principle.

The Promittor Luna Lady of the Ninth, applying to the Conjunction of Venus in
the Radix, both being watery and tender Planets, as also located in the Third
House in Aquarius, a courteous Sign, Venus Lady of the Seventh and Twelfth
Houses in the Radix, but having Dignities in the Fifth, viz. her Exaltation,
near the Cusp thereof, and being a general Significatrix of pleasantness, they
being both Subterranean, Sol directed to Luna's Body thus qualified, did
signify to the Native a direction in the ways of holy Love, and gave him a
sweet, humble, meek and gentle frame of Spirit, with a most pleasant and
delightful weeping and mourning, for Venus is Lady of the Twelfth, signifying
Anguish and Tribulation; but it was such Sorrow, because sweetened with Love, as
the Native could wish always to remain with him. The greatest Delights that
the World can afford are not worthy to come in competition with the sweetness
and pleasure of that Sorrow, having its Original from Divine Love, in Meekness,
and breaking the Stony Heart with its living tenderness. Behold the following
Scriptures, viz. Zech. 12.10. Isaiah 61.3. Jer. 31.13, 16. Matt. 5, 4. Isaiah
31.14. Isa. 61.2. Isa. 66.10. Lam. 1.4.

It is observed by Meteorologers, that the Sun coming to the Body of watery
Planets, dissolves them by his Heat, causing them to distill their liquid
Influences in dropping Showers of Rain, to refresh the parched Earth, that
thereby it may become more fertile; Even so, Sol the Significator in the
Native's Geniture, representing the Sun of Righteousness, ( Mal. 4.2. Psalm.
84.11. Psalm. 89.36.) directed to the Body of Luna, applying to the Conjunction
of Venus, being both watery Planets, as aforesaid, gave the resplendent fervor
of holy Love shining hot upon the Native's Spirit, and causing him to melt into
Tears, (observe here that Sol and Luna do govern the Eyes, which are the Organs
of weeping;) which delightful and sweet trouble of mind was occasioned upon a
due consideration of his own unworthiness to be so kindly treated and dealt
with by that Holy Spirit of Life and Truth, to which he had so long before
lived in Rebellion: I say, the Original of that Heart-rejoycing-tribulation and
Soul-refreshing-mourning was Divine Love, after a winning and precious manner
accosting that Soul which had most barbarously used it, and with cruel dealings
evilly entreated it, without upbraiding the Soul in the least for such
unkindnesses, but, after a wonderful, meek, and innocent manner, Lamb-like
overcoming it with Love, Lowliness, and Humility: See Zech. 12.10. Isaiah 61.2,
3. Jer. 31.13, 16. Matthew. 5.4. Isai 38, 14. Isa. 66.10. Lam. 1.4. Then the
undeserving Soul being so lovingly conquered, (yea, with a more than Dovelike
Innocence) ( Cant. 2.14. Cant. 8.6.) and with such miraculous, sweet, and
render Love and Power subdued, became exceeding Zealous for that Love, Cant.
8.6, 7. and willing to give up all for it, to the fulfilling of these
Scriptures, viz. My People shall be a willing People in the day of my Power:
and they shall mourn over him whom they have pierced, as one mourns for his
only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for
his Firstborn, Psalm 110.3. Zech. 12.10. Mal. 4.2.

The cause of the Sorrow is evidently discerned in the Radix, by the Moon's
application to the Conjunction of Venus in the Third House, which is the
Seventh from the Ninth, viz. opposite thereto; Venus being Lady of the Twelfth
and Seventh, which intimates, that the Cause of the Native's Sorrow was for
living so long in Rebellion against so gracious a Principle of holy Light and
Tenderness; Light it may well be called, because both Significator and
Promittor were Luminaries, and because it shows unto a man the Evil of his
ways, and reproves him for them secretly, when no eye sees him; which is also
evident by these following Scriptures, Psalm. 27.1. Psalm. 36.9. Psalm. 37.6.
Psalm. 43.3. Psalm. 56.13. Psalm. 97.11. Prove. 4.18, 19. Prove. 6.23. Prove. 13.9.
Isaiah 2.5. Micah 7.8, 9. Luke 1.79. Luke 2.32. John 1.4, 5. John 3.19. with
many others that might have been instanced, but let these suffice.

The last-mentioned Considerations of Sol, Luna, and Venus, might portend unto
the Native a Spiritual and invisible Marriage, that mourning and holy weeping
being the celebration of the Nuptials, and a signal token of Reconciliation
betwixt the Soul and its Divine Being; for Luna and Venus were posited in the
Third, which is, as aforesaid, the Seventh from the Ninth, and gives unto the
Native a marriage in righteousness.

Consider the Sun's position (as is before rehearsed) in the Radix, and his
Aspects and Transits to Mercury and Mars, etc. and it will not be strange that
the Native should be affected and accompanied upon the Direction of him to the
Body of Luna (applying to the Conjunction of Venus, having her Exaltation in
the Fifth) with most fragrant and odoriferous smells and delightful tastes,
which, after a Supernatural manner, attended his Person and intellectual
Senses, the gentle breathings thereof like precious Air or Ointment poured
forth, perfuming the delightful Valleys, to the fulfilling of these Scriptures,
viz. Thy Name is as Ointment poured forth; Draw me, we will follow after thee,
by the savor of thy good Ointments: Because of the savor of thy good
Ointments, therefore do the Virgins love thee: I sat under his shadow with
great delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my taste, etc. Cant. 1.3. Cant. 4.10.
Matthew. 26.12. John 12.3. Cant. 1.12, 13. Cant. 2.3. Cant. 5.13. Cant. 5.5.
Cant. 4.11. Here it is observable, that the Native is destitute of the natural
Sense of Smelling.

Sol transferring the Virtue of Mercury Lord of the Eighth house Subterranean,
and in Opposition of Jupiter posited in the eighth, to the Body of Luna Lady of
the ninth by Direction; signifies a religious mortifying of the Evil of the
Natives ways by the living Spirit of Love and Holiness; Love, because Luna
applies to the Conjunction of Venus. Romans 8.13. Col. 3.5. Although the Radical
Figure seem to promise no great store of external Wealth or Honor to the
Native that will be of Continuance, but rather Trouble, and a wasting of the
Substance; yet he has learned to be in all States and Conditions satisfied,
accounting the Fruition of a Savior, whose Kingdom is not of this World,
sufficient Gain unto him; and as to Honor, he is satisfied, that heavenly
Honor is beyond that which is Transitory. And if it shall please the Lord to
bring him into a low and mean Condition, he has learned to know, that the
Grace of God is sufficient to support him in the midst of Anguish, Tribulation,
and Sorrow; yea to reprieve him out of the Jaws of Death it self, and that his
Strength in God is wonderfully made perfect in Weakness. 2 Cor. 12.9.

As Luna applied to the Conjunction of Venus Lady of the Seventh, Luna being
Almuten of the Seventh, having the Degree of her Exaltation in the Sign of the
Seventh, and her Triplicity there, in Regard the Nativity is nocturnal, as also
Venus beholding the Cusp of the Seventh, viz. her own House, with a Quartile;
so it may signify (they being both Subterranean) upon this Direction an
Invisible, Spiritual, and Religious Marriage to the Native, according to what
was before spoken.

Let the Strength of Sol the Significator be observed, who is impregnated with
the Rays of all the Planets in the Radix, viz. Trine of Saturn, Opposition of
Jupiter, Conjunction of Mars Lord of the Ascendent, Conjunction of his own
Antiscion, Conjunction of Mercury and Mercury's Antiscion, Semisextile of Luna
and Venus, and coming by Direction to Luna's Body; Luna the Promittor likewise
applying to the Conjunction of Venus a Fortune in the Third, and Almuten of the
Figure, the Direction falling near a fixed Star of the third Magnitude of the
Nature of Venus, having small Latitude from the Ecliptic, viz. Cornu
Capricorni Australe, to which adjoyn the Fortitude of both Sol and Luna in the
precedent Revolution: and upon these Considerations it will not be strange,
that the Direction should be good and powerful unto the Native, which indeed it
was in Spiritual and Religious Love and Mercy, for thereby he was directed into
the lovely ways of Righteousness; because God was the chief Mover in this
Direction. Isaiah. 45.13.

Saturn the old Enemy of Mankind, Lord of the Fourth, the House of the Grave or
End, is posited in the Sixth, the House of Servitude, being retrograde in Aries
his Fall; Sol the Lord of Life having the Degree of his Exaltation in the Ram
or Lamb, the House of Saturn's Fall. Genesis 22.13. Revelat. 17.14. Rev. 15.3.

Because the Luminaries or Lights (being the Planets concerned in this powerful
Direction, for Light is to direct the Footsteps of the Righteous) are
subterranean, Luna the Promittor being the Light of time for the Nativity, was
nocturnal, and she Lady of the Ninth, being of her self an opacous Body; but
enlightened by the Sun; therefore it signified (as to the Native) a Principle
of Light shining in a dark place; as they were ascending toward the Horizon
and Meridian, ( Sol being Lord of the Meridian) Luza likewise increasing in
Light, it signified such a Light as would dawn to the Day, and become a perfect
Day of Righteousness, according to these Scriptures, viz. We have also a more
sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take Heed, as unto a Light
that shines in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in
your Hearts. Pet. 2. Epistle Chapt. 1. verse 19. see likewise these following
Scriptures, John 1.5. Pro. 4.19. Micah 7.8, 9. Rev. 2.28. Rev. 22.16.

As Luna Lady of the Ninth, and Promittor, (being one of the Luminaries) was
increasing in Light and Motion, and Subterranean, receiving its splendour from
Sol the Significator, the other Luminary, and Sol representing the Deity, (Mal.
4.2. Ps. 84.11.) signified such a Religious and lowly principle of Light, as
would increase and grow to a fullness of Glory, receiving its Luster from the
King of Righteousness, Luke 13.18, 19. Ephesians. 1.23. Ephesians. 3.19. Ephesians. 4.13. 2
Pet. 3, 28. Mal. 4.2. Hosea 14.5, 7. Acts 12.24. Acts 19.20. Matthew. 13.32.
Revel. 21.23.

Sol the Significator, Lord of the Medium, Coeli, directed to Luna the
Promittor, Lady of the Ninth, applying to a Conjunction of Venus, a Joyful
Planet, having Dignities near the Cusp of the Fifth, the House of Joys and
Pleasures, the Application being made in the Third the House of Luna's Delight,
both being tender Planets, and Venus Lady of the Twelfth, gave Singing in the
midst of Sorrow and Imprisonment, the Virgins Spike adorning the Cusp of the
Twelfth with Triumphant Atlelujahs and Songs of Deliverance, Jerem. 31.11, 12,
13. Psalm. 32.6, 7. according to the motion of the Primus Motor, which is God.
Jer. 31.13.

The Sign Leo, according to the Order of the First Mover, is predominant upon
the Cusp of the Tenth, or Medium Coeli, Cor Leonis that Regal fixed Star placed
upon the aforesaid Cusp, Sol Lord thereof directed to the Body of Luna applying
to a Conjunction of Venus, etc. intimates, that the Native discerns that the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah reigns in the Heart of his People with Meekness and
Tenderness, according to the Order and motion of God, and is the Lamb opening
the Seals of the Book of mysteries, for Luna governs the Ninth, and Sol the
greater Luminary Subterranean, etc. discovers dark, hidden, and secret things,
Rev. 5.5. etc. to the end of the Chapter. Jerem. 31.33. Psalm. 40.8.

Scorpio upon the Cusp of the Ascendent, the first 8 Degrees of him being in
the Twelfth, and the other part Subterranean, Scorpio likewise being a fixed
Sign, signifies that the Native sees the chaining or fixing down of the
Scorpion or Serpent in the East, or in his Rising, ( Luke 10.19, 20. Mark
16.18. Rev. 20.2. Rev. 12.16. Rev. 12. throughout) he being imprisoned with his
first 8 Degrees, representing his Head in the Twelfth, casting floods of water
after the Virgin with the Ear of Corn, but she escaped into the Eleventh and
Tenth, being the Houses of Renown and Praise, where she sings, because of her
Deliverance into the House of Faith, triumphant Songs, and glorious Praises,
the Virgins spike adorning the prison-door, or door of tribulation and anguish,
with Songs of Victory, Jerem. 31.11, 12, 13.

Observe that Libra is upon the Cusp of the Twelfth, preserving the Virgin from
the waterfloods; for Libra is Justice, returning the Inundations upon the
Dragons own Head in the Twelfth, there imprisoned and chained down for ever.

The Scorpion's Head, or first 8 Degrees, is imprisoned in the Twelfth, aiming
to bruise the Virgins Heel, and to swallow up her Seed or Child, viz. the Ear
of Corn, so soon as it was sprung up and born, ( Genesis 3.15. Read Revel. chap.
12. throughout:) but she is over him in the Houses of Faith and Honor,
delivered with Songs of Joy received from God, and by the force of Libra or
Justice, she bruises his head in the dark Dungeon of Misery: and the Virgins
Ear of Corn, Child, or Seed, is caught up unto God, and to his Throne, in the
state of Praise and Glory. Genesis 3.15. Rev. 12. throughout.

Taurus, a fixed Sign upon the West Angle, signifies, that the strong and
roaring Bulls of Bashan opposing the House of Life, are chained and fixed down
in the West, in the House of Enmity and Contention, and as he is seen with his
first 8 Degrees or Head above the Earth, the Sign Leo being upon the Cusp of
the South Angle, or Meridian, so they are discerned in the Lamb's light (this
Lamb being the reigning Light of the Saints) to be limited, chained and fixed
down, Psalm. 22.12, 13.

The Virgin with the Ear of Corn in her hand delivered out of Prison and
Anguish into the Houses of Hope, Faith and Renown, sings and proclaims, that
the Earing time and Harvest is come, wherein the Wheat is gathered into the
Garner, and the Chaff blown away by the Fury and Indignation of the Almighty,
and that the Virgin is delivered, which has the Bread of Life; through Faith
having escaped the Floods of the Dragon, chained down in the dark Dungeon in
the Wilderness. Luke 10, 19. Mark 16.18. Rev. 20.2. Revel. 12.16. and so
forward to the end of that Chapter.

As the Virgin's Spike is delivered out of the Prison of Trouble and Misery
into the Eleventh, the House of Faith and Praise, being the Second from the
Tenth; I say, the Ear of Corn being fituate in the eleventh, it signifies, the
Wilderness to become a Fruitful Field. Isaiah 29, 17. Isai. 32.15. viz.
Fruitful with Praises and Songs of Triumph in the Virgin-State of Purity, which
is the Riches of the most high. John. 12.24.

As Sol the Significator is directed to the Body of Luna aforesaid, Sol being
Lord of the Tenth; viz. the Angle of Renown, but the Second from the Ninth, the
Sign Leo and Cor Leonis being upon the Cusp of the Med. Coeli, and Luna Lady of
the Ninth, the House of Holiness, signify that the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
by appearing in the Heart of his People, is become the Honor, Reputation, and
great Reward of Righteousness. Isai. 40.10, 11. Isa. 62, 11. Revel. 22.12.

Mercury Lord of the eighth (the house of Death) in Conjunction of the Regent,
overpowering and most glorious Planet Sol Lord of the Med. Coeli and
Significator; Mercury Lord of the Eighth being thus seated as aforesaid, and
near Cazimi, signifies Death to be swallowed up in Victory. Isaiah 25.8. Matt.
12.20. 1 Cor. 15. chap. 54, 55 Verses.

Saturn Lord of the Fourth in the Sixth, in his Fall in Aries, intimates that
the Grave and End of all things is subdued and fallen by the Lamb. Observe that
the sixth is a House cadent. 1 Cor. 15. chap. 54. and 55. Verses.

As Caput Draconis is in the Ninth, viz. the Twelfth from the Tenth, in the
fixed Sign Leo, his Tail with his Head passing through the Diameter of Heaven,
his Tail (having drawn the third part of the Stars of Heaven along with it)
being placed in the Third, the House opposite to the Ninth, the Dragon's Head
being gone off the Angle of Honor, and the Sign Leo and Cor Leonis come on,
intimates that the Lion of the Tribe of Judah has captivated and bound the
great red Dragon, seen by Saint John in the midst of Heaven, and reigns
victoriously in his stead, he now coming to reign whose Right it is; and as he
is posited in the Ninth, it signifies that all Formal ways of Worship, that
are out of the true Worship (of which false Worship he is the Author, and
whereby he has so long deluded the Nations) are bound down with him in the
descending part of Heaven, and falling eternally, Revel. chap. 12. throughout.
It is observable, that where the Dragons Tail is situated in the Radix, there
Sol the Lord of Life, and Luna Lady of the House of Righteousness, were both
Eclipsed as to the Native, by Sol's transiting its place and Luna's by Body and
Opposition: but more of these Eclipses anon.

As the 19th Degree of Aries is entered out of the Sixth into the Fifth House,
being the Degree of the Sun's Exaltation, in a state of Descension and
Lowliness; so it signifies the degree of the Lords Exaltation in the Ram or
Lamb, passing out of Servitude into the House of Pleasures, Isa. 43.24.

As Sol combures the Malevolent Mars Lord of the Ascendent, Scorpio being
likewise fixed down upon the Cusp of the Orient: Sol the Significator
separating from Mars and Saturn, the two Malevolents, and applying to the Body
of Mercury by Transit, etc. signifies that Self is brought down, the corrupt
and contentious Spirit burnt up, ( Luke Chap. 3. and the latter end of the 16th
verse) and that a good Understanding is given to the Native.

As Libra is upon the Cusp of the 12th, so Justice keeps the Prison-door, that
the Scorpion cannot enter into the Eleventh, the House of Hope, in pursuit of
the pure Virgin by Justice delivered from him, envying the Ear of Corn in her
hand, sprung up in the Desert or Wilderness, whereby the Nations, through Faith
(eating it worthily) shall acquire Eternal life.

Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, directed to the Body of Luna applying to the
Conjunction of Venus in the Third House, viz. the Sixth from the Tenth, being
Subterranean and ascending, signifies that the honorable Sun of Righteousness
(Mal. 4.2.) the Spirit of the mighty King of Glory is descended upon his
Servants in a state of Meekness, Love, and Tenderness, dissolving them into
Tears of Pity and Compassion, and that they are arising with him to the highest
pitch of Invisible Exaltation, Ephesians. 4.9, 10. Rev. 5.10. Rev. 11.15. Rev. 22.5.

Sol directed to Luna, as aforesaid, in the Third House, (signifying the way)
and applying to the Ecliptic by descending Latitude, intimates that the Native
beheld the way of life in the Line of Eclipses: or I might have said the Light
of life, for Sol is the Lord of Light and Life to the Creation.

It is observable, that Sol, according to the Motion of the Zodiac, or Girdle
of Life, came to the Body of Luna in the Radix by Transit, and not Luna to Sol;
so likewise by Direction; viz. considering Sol nearer to Luna than Luna is to
Sol, according to the Ecliptic Motion, for there is but one Sign betwixt Sol
and Luna in the Radix, viz. Capricorn, but eleven betwixt Luna and Sol,
according to her Motion in the Zodiac, as aforesaid; so that Sol rather seemed
voluntarily to Eclipse himself (as I may say) yet really retaining his Splendour
in Darkness, upon his Transit over Luna's Radical place, she near her South
Node, and thereto applying, and rather to overspread Luna with Glory, than she
either to Eclipse him, or lose any of her own Luster by that Coition and
Direction; but contrariwise, Luna coming to the Body of Sol, she then having
small Latitude, according to the Order of Nature, eclipses the Sun; but in such
a case Luna representing the Creature is the swiftest Mover, which ought to be
stationary, as she is in the Radix of this Native, considering her there
determined as a Significator or Promittor to the said Native; but in this
Direction, Sol, the Lord of Life is situate nearest Luna, and is the Moving
Cause and Significator, according to the motion of the Zodiac, respect being
had to the Axis of his Motion and Pole of Position, as Significator in the
solution of the Spherical Triangles, requisite to the Calculation of this Arch
of Direction, and not to Luna's, her Ascensional difference and Oblique
Ascension found, having a Dependence upon his circle of Position, etc. which,
together with the aforesaid Testimonies, frequently rehearsed, does palpably
denote (and is experimentally witnessed by the Native to be undeniably true)
that the Sun of Righteousness, the Spirit of the Divine Being was the Basis, or
only chief Mover in this Direction, by which Direction he entered into the Paths
of Righteousness. Isaiah 45.13.

Sol transiting the Body of Luna in the Radix, she applying to her Node, and he
following her by Transit, as also coming now to her Body by Direction, gave
indeed the Sun's total Eclipse as to the Native, yet it was such, as that the
Darkness thereof illuminated the Natives Understanding; for Mercury is near
Cazimi in the Radix; so that he carries Mercury's Influence along with him to
the Eclipse, Sol, Luna, and Mercury, as also the Place of the Natives Eclipse,
being all Subterranean etc. which must of Necessity illuminate the
Understanding in Darkness, and discover unto him, the things which were hidden
in the Eclipse.

The Promittor Luna increasing in Light, etc. gave the fulfilling of Scriptural
Promises, both as to Mercy and Judgment.

Luna Lady of the Ninth as aforesaid, increasing in Light, and receiving her
splendid Beams from Sol the Significator, Sol being beheld by the Rays of all
the Planets in the Radix; viz. Conjunction of Mars, Lord of the Ascendent,
Trine of Saturn, he shining full upon Jupiter with an Opposition, Conjunction
of his own Antiscion, Semisextile of Venus, Semisextile of Luna, Conjunction of
Mercury and Mercury's Antiscion; also Luna the Promittor in Conjunction of
Venus, and Sol directed to her Body; and these seven Planets governing or
representing the seven days, signify that the Light of the Moon is become as
the Light of the Sun, and the Light of the Sun as the Light of seven days.
Isaiah the 30 Chapt. 26 Verse.

Sol directed to the Body of Luna, Lady of the Ninth, applying to a Conjunction
of Venus in the Third, the House of Luna's Delight; the Third being the House
of News or Intelligence, and the Directions place there also; brought unto the
Native the glad Tidings of Salvation, Luke 8.1. etc. It also signified a
spiritual Voyage into the Land of Pleasures, Luna being Lady of the Ninth, and
in Conjunction of Venus in the Third, the House of short Journeys, Mercury also
opposing Jupiter in the Eighth; but Mercury being near the Heart of the Sun,
Sol the Significator separating from Mars and Saturn, and coming to Mercury's
Body by Transit in the Radix; becalmed the raging Seas, and rebuked the
blustering Winds, Matt. 8.26. rendering the Voyage short by Reason of its
pleasant Passages.

Mercury in Conjunction of Sol, viz. associated with Sol's Body, Sol's
Antiscion, and his own Antiscion, and beheld by Jupiter's Opposition etc. his
influential Virtue thus carried by Sol the Significator to the Body of Luna
Lady of the Ninth, applying to a Conjunction of Venus, and to the Ecliptic;
signified such a Principle, as would turn to the People a pure Language. Zeph.
3.9. viz. Such a Principle as teaches to use the Word [Thou] to a single
Person, and [You] to a plurality of Persons, according to the Grammatical
Orthoepy in all Languages: for Mercury governs the Tongue or Speech, and the
fiery Planet Sol with his Glory refines it.

Observe what strange Effects the following Considerations did produce to the
Native.

Luna transiting Sol's opposite Place at Birth, as also coming to her next
natural or general Opposition of Sol in the World after the Birth, loses none
of her Luster, but is fully glorified by Sol, and therefore signifies an
Increase of this lowly Principle of Light to a perfect Repletion.

But Sol coming to the Body of Luna at this time by Direction, and as I may say
(because he is the more ponderous Planet) contrary to the Course of Nature,
transiting Luna's Body according to the Ecliptic Motion; she having but small
Latitude in her radical place, applying to Cauda Draconis, where she cuts the
solar line, intimates, that as to the Native, the Sun seemed to be eclipsed
contrary to the Course of Nature; as also Sol transiting Luna's opposite Place
in the Radix gave the Moons Eclipse after the same manner, invisible to the
Eyes of others, but of forcible Effect to the Native; for Luna as she is
located in the Radix is Luna to the Native in perpetuum: or considering the
Sun, that celestial Body, as being Central and Stationary; the Earth or earthly
part being predominant in the Ninth, and 2 degrees. 21 m. of Leo, then Sol as to
the Native was eclipsed, because (opposite to Terra) in 2 degrees. 21 min. of
Aquarius, the Radical Place of Luna: but when Terra overshadowed the Radical
Body of Luna by Transit, she near the Ecliptic; then as to the Native the Moon
was Eclipsed, but the Earth is in the Eighth, the house of Death in the Birth.

Observe that a Natural Eclipse (as aforesaid) is by Luna's applying to the
Conjunction or Opposition of Sol, she then having small Latitude, whether Sol
be observed as Central or moving in the Ecliptic; or at least by Luna's
Application (as I may so say) to a Conjunction of Terra in the Ecliptic, which
makes her own Eclipse, or to the Conjunction of Sol in Opposition to Terra,
which makes Sol's Eclipse. And if in a Nativity Luna had, according to her
Natural custom, transited by (or been directed to) the Body of Sol in the
Radix, she at that Transit, or in her Radical place, as Significator, having
small Latitude, it had been strange, yet not altogether so strange as that in
this Nativity, Terra and Sol (being both more ponderous than Luna) should
spontaneously promote themselves by their Motion (either of them being
accounted moveable) or otherwise Sol by his Station and Terra's Motion to his
own Eclipse, as also to Luna's; whereby these Eclipses, as to the Native,
annually from the Birth, by Transit happened, and now forcibly manifested
themselves by Direction in their Vigor, after a supernatural and mysterious
manner, being hidden from the Eyes of many, but seen by the Native to the
fulfilling of some Scriptures anon following, intimating that the Native
beholds the wonderful accomplishment of the Prophecies therein mentioned.
Observe, that as to the Native the Luminaries being yearly both Eclipsed,
according to the Position of Luna Lady of the Ninth, subterranean in the Radix,
signified the Discovery of Wonders unto the Native in the hidden light which
shines in darkness: (Psalm. 112.4. John 1.5.) for the Birth was Nocturnal, the
Luminaries Subterranean and ascending, and the place of Sol's Eclipse
subterranean, of Luna's Eclipse subterranean also, she suffering her Eclipse,
as to the Native, about two or three days after her general Change, or
Conjunction of Sol in the World, Sol also suffering his Eclipse with her in the
same state, as aforesaid, which is no less than miraculous or Divine,
considering that every Natural Eclipse is at the New and Full Moon, from which
Natural Course these Radical Eclipses do so strangely differ. Now Sol at Luna's
Eclipse is in the Ninth supraterranean, entering into Leo, his own House, Luna
Lady of the Ninth applying radically to a Conjunction of Venus: Now, I say,
considering the small quantity of Light that Luna had at the Birth, upon Sol's
opposition to her radical Place, she having small Latitude there, may be said
quite to have lost it, her Eclipse being total, which is vindicated by her
Application still nearer to the Ecliptic line after the Birth, till she come
to the radical place of Cauda Draconis, where (as to the Native) she has no
Latitude, as also applying to the general place of Cauda Draconis in the world,
where she also has no Latitude at all; for Cauda had some retrograde Motion
(though but little) before Luna, after the Birth, touched its general Place in
the World, so that when Sol by Transit opposed her in these Points (she, as
aforesaid, according to Nature, being past the Change) which has been done
yearly from the Birth, her Eclipses were absolutely total and supernatural: As
also when Sol transited her Body in those parts of the Defective line
aforesaid, where she was void of Latitude, and having past her Natural Change
in the World, his Eclipses were also total and miraculous.

Now observe, that Sol and Luna, as also all the Planets except Jupiter, being
subterranean in the Radix, the Nativity Obscure and Nocturnal, and the Native's
Eclipses all subterranean; the Stars consequently withdrew their shining: for
they receive their Light from Sol by Reflection.

These are the Wonders that are shown at the New Birth.

Behold the promised Scriptures, which the Native in the
Light-illustrating-darkness ( Psalm. 112.4. John 1.5.) discerns fulfilled, viz.
Joel 2.31. Joel 3.15. Isaiah 13.10. Rev. 6.12. Ezekiel. 32.7, 8. Amos 5.8. Isa.
13.13.

As Luna was totally deprived of her Light in Aquarius a fixed and sanguine
Sign, so she seemed infallibly to be turned into Blood. Joel. 2.31. which is
confirmed by Luna's Application by Congress to Venus in Aquarius, she Lady of
Libra a Sanguine Sign; to the third Degree whereof Luna likewise casts her
Trine, as also to the fourth Degree of Gemini, which is seated near the Cusp of
the eighth, Gemini being a Sanguine Sign also, and the fiery fixed Star the
Bull's Eye placed upon the Cusp of the Eighth, in which Degrees of the Cusp,
the Dragons Head has his Exaltation: to which annex Mercury Lord of Gemint,
his being with the Sun, and that these Aspects of Luna were by Trine and
Conjunction to all the Sanguine Signs, which signified an Inclination in her
thus to be transmuted out of her own shining into a Sanguine Essence, in
Obedience to and to the Honor of her great Creator, Joel 2.31.

It is observable, that from the Birth, these wonderful Eclipses are to
continue according to the Motion of the line of Eclipses, wherein Sol
continually remains, revealing wonderful Mysteries by his shining in Darkness.
Psalm. 112.4. John 1.5.

Sol entering Leo in the Ninth at the Natives Lunar Eclipses, Luna Lady of the
Ninth, and Sol Lord of the Meridian both Subterranean, and Jupiter of all the
Planets only Supraterranean in the Radix, signify a Discovery of the Light of
Religion in a State of Darkness.

Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli near partil Conjunction of Mercury in the Radix,
( Mercury being Lord of the Eleventh, the House of Praise) directed to Luna
Lady of the Ninth, in a state of Ascension, and posited in the Third, viz. the
Sixth from the Tenth in Conjunction of Venus, Luna receiving her Glory from
Sol, and her Light increasing, etc. intimates, that the Lord of Glory crowns
his Servants with a Royal Diadem of lovely Praises, and that those Praises
reflect unto himself his own Resplendency, according to the Geometrical Axiom
in the Optics, viz. that Beams of Light are reflected at equal Angles; (the
Angles of Incidence and Reflection being equal) and corresponding to that
Principle of Philosophy, viz. That every more subtle created Being, by an
innate or natural Sympathy, quickly returns unto the Fountain from whence it
sprung.

As the Nativity was Nocturnal, and all the Planets subterranean, except
Jupiter, and he Retrograde in the Eighth, changing his Sign, and going to his
Detriment, the Luminaries subterranean and ascending, Jupiter by a retrograde
Motion applying to a Sextile of Saturn, and Sol in Opposition to Jupiter,
Saturn being also retrograde, and in his Fall in the Sixth in Aries, intimates,
that the blind Worshippers, or Pretenders to Religion, are groping in Darkness
and the shadow of Death, and enslaving themselves to the evil of their own
Actions, yea, to Sin and Satan, the Light of Life being hid from their Eyes,
and none being able to reprieve them but the Sun of Righteousness, to whom they
continually live in resistance.

Observe the situation of Mars Lord of the Ascendent radical, and Mercury with
Sol the Significator in this Direction in Sagittary, a fiery Sign, Mars and Sol
being both fiery Planets, and Mars combust of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli in
Sagittary; for upon his direction to the Body of Luna in Conjunction of Venus,
both being watery Planets, implying a washing, or cleansing and beautifying, it
signified an insight into Spiritual Chemistry given to the Native, and a
Discovery of Jesus, the true Philosopher's stone, ( Rev. 2.17. Isaiah 28.16.
Rev. 21.11. 1 Pet. chap. 2. verse. 4, 5.) and infallible Elixir, which performs
Wonders, by the Spirit of Judgment and Burning, purifying the Soul from all its
pollutions, Isa. 4.4. Isa. 48.10. Zech. 13.9. and rendering it more excellent
than much refined Gold, operating in the Heart, as a Refiner's Fire, and as
Fuller's Soap, Mal. 3.2, 3. and by his admirable Works making the Soul in him
more resplendent than the sparkling reflections of pellucid Diamonds, yea,
cleansing it with his precious Blood, transcending far the searlet luster of
perspicuous Rubies, so that nothing is left but the precious and durable Saline
Essence, Matthew. 5.13. and that which excells the Snow in purity and whiteness:
Then glorious Hosanna's undefiled living Praises, and unstained Allelujahs,
with joyful Songs of Restoration and Deliverance, can, by the thus regenerated
and beautified Soul, be given to the Highest King of Kings, he being the
Subject in his Creatures of his own Eternal Honor and Renown, and his own
Works alone extolling him in the Riches of his Glory.

A Spiritual Hymn to the Lord.
O My Dove, my undefiled one, be not far from me; but let the pleasant Warmth
of thy Trembling and Sovereign Wings, gently overspread me. Let the glorious
Rays of thy Innocence in their full Splendour, shine upon me; The excellent
Sweetnesses of thy Kingdom, O Holy Father, are far too mighty for me: the
unutterable Loveliness of thy Countenance has sweetly overcome me: The
Delicaeies of thy Kingdom, O Lord, have irresistably subdued me, and my Soul
languisheth if thou withdraw thy desirable Presence from me. I am at a Loss, O
my God, because I cannot express the Comeliness of thy winning Features, the
overpowering mild Glances of thy Eyes, which express Love in the Fullness of
its Pleasures: O my King and my well-beloved Spouse, In thy Absence I am
surrounded with ten thousand furious Adversaries, but at thy heavenly Presence
they all flee away, in which is Life everlasting. Amen.

De Eclipsibus Tractatus Continuatio.
A Total Eclipse of Sol naturally accomplished to the eye of the World, is, by
Luna's being in Conjunction with Sol partilly, and that without Latitude, so
that they being centrally joined, the opacous Body of the Moon, or of Luna
interposes diametrically betwixt our Eye, and the Sun's most glorious Body;
which kind of Eclipse (though naturally performed) very rarely happens to the
Inhabitants of any one particular part of the Earth's Superficies, and when it
so falls out, it is usually the forerunner of some outward prodigious Event in
the World: But, in the Radical Fabric of this Nativity, Sol suffers a total
Eclipse (notwithstanding his being the more ponderous Planet) by his coming to
the Radical place of Cauda Draconis, where the Moon had gone before him,
considered as having there no Latitude, as also to the general place of Cauda
in the World, over which she likewise had transited, leaving her Radical Virtue
in both those places behind her, she being the lighter Planet, and the Eclipse
happening after her Change in the World, contrary to her common Course, in
fulfilling a Solar Eclipse as aforesaid, which is always at her Change, or
general visible Conjunction with Sol in the World.

Luna is likewise eclipsed in the Radix totally by Sol, the more ponderous
Planet, his transiting the Radical place of Caput Draconis opposite to Luna in
her transit over the Radical place of Cauda, as also by his transiting the
place of Caput Draconis in the World, opposite to Luna in her transit over the
general place of Cauda Draconis in the World, as aforesaid, and that done after
she had come to her Full in the World; whereas a Natural visible Eclipse of
Luna in the World is total, by being in partil Opposition (and the lighter
Planet) to the resplendent Planet Sol, she then having no Latitude.

Here note, that Luna comes by her direct Motion to the place of Cauda in the
World, before she comes to its Radical place; for Cauda is Retrograde in motion
at the Birth, and moves by that motion a little, though slowly; therefore
observe, that Luna, Lady of the Ninth, being 8 degrees. 18 min. distant from its
place in the Radix, or at the Birth, and she by a direct Motion applying to its
Radical Conjunction, in regard of the distance of time required before she can
arrive at its partil Conjunction aforesaid in the Radix, (which is somewhat
more than 16 hours, if we allow one Degree for her two hours motion) I say, in
the interim of time aforesaid, Cauda moves Retrograde, and makes its place of
the Moon's first Conjunction with it in the World, fewer Minutes or Seconds
than its place in the Radix, for they mutually apply, the one by direct, the
other by retrograde Motion; then after her meeting with it in the World, she
approaches it in the Radix; which is the proof of what was before asserted, and
will be of Use to demonstrate what ensues: viz. Sol transiting Luna's Body in
that place of the Ecliptic diametrically, where she transits Cauda's place in
the World, he suffers a total Eclipse in the World; which truly intimates, that
the Sun was totally deprived of Light in the World, not long after the
Spiritual Native was witnessed to be inwardly and invisibly born, ( viz. Christ
Jesus, the new Birth, or the Birth of God) for Luna is Lady of the Ninth House;
inwardly born, because Scorpio the Sign ascending is directed to Frons Scorpii
in the Ascendent, by which Direction the Nativity was rectified, viz. by the
House of Life bruising the Serpents Head, to the fulfilling of Gods promise in
Paradise to the crooked Serpent, for the Direction was Oblique, viz. its Arch
was found by taking the difference of Oblique Ascensions of the Ascendent, the
Significator, and Frons Scorpii the Promissor, which signifies the Effect of
this Spiritual Birth to be wrought Internally: Invisibly born, because the
Nativity is Nocturnal, as also because the Eclipse was accomplished by Transit,
and not by visible Conjunction. The aforesaid Considerations, as also of Sol
his transiting the opposite place of Luna, where she is in Conjunction of Cauda
in the World, viz. where the Center of Sol's Body touches the Moons Northern
Node, she situate as aforesaid, gives the Moon's Eclipse total in the World:
Now the Nativity being Nocturnal, and the place of both these Eclipses
subterranean, the Stars consequently withdrew their shining; for they receive
their Glory from Sol. By what has been before spoken it evidently appears,
that the Sun and Moon were darkened, and the Stars withdrew their shining in
the world, not long after the aforesaid Spiritual Native was born, Joel 2.10.
Joel 3.15.

Now, for some Reasons not long since rehearsed, the Luminaries were totally
eclipsed, as well at, as after the Birth, as to the Native; for if we have the
like consideration to Sol's transiting the places of Luna's Nodes in the Radix,
both as to Conjunction and Opposition, as we have already had of his Transits,
opposite and conjunct, over her Nodes in the world, we may discern that the Sun
and Moon were eclipsed in the Radix, or at Birth, after the same manner as they
were in the World, viz. totally.

The same Eclipses also happen by the Moons Transits over Sol's Body, being
situate upon her Nodes, as aforesaid, and that after a more swift manner; for
Luna is naturally swifter in motion than Sol; He moves slowly, making the
Eclipses by his Transits of very long continuance: Hence arise eight different
total Eclipses of the Luminaries upon the Bodies of one another, into our
present view and consideration; the first, by Sol's transiting Luna's Body,
seated with her center upon the place of her Southern Node in the World, which
gives his total Eclipse in the World, as aforesaid; the second, by his Transit
over Luna's Body, situate upon her Southern Node in the Radix, which gave his
total Eclipse, as to the Native; the third and fourth, by his transiting the
opposite places to those two aforesaid, viz. by passing over Caput in the
World, and also in the Radix, which gave the Moons total Eclipses, as to the
World, and likewise to the Native; The other four are by the Transits of Luna
over Sol, as these of Sol over Luna aforesaid.

Consider that both the Luminarie's Eclipses in the Radix happen in the
self-same particle of the Ecliptic, viz. in 10 degrees. 39 min. of the fixed and
true Sign Aquarius, as also in the same precise portion of the Ecliptic in the
World; so that they are totally eclipsed upon the Bodies of one another, and so
consequently Luna is totally eclipsed at the Change, which is always,
according to Nature, at the Full: and likewise Sol totally eclipsed at the Full
Moon, which is always, according to Nature, celebrated at the Change: These
intimate that the Moon is confounded, and the Sun ashamed, showing himself to
be ashamed, by his total Eclipses, in resemblance of one hiding his face for
shame, Isaiah 24.23.

It is observable, that Sol touches the Ecliptic Line thrice, and the same
Point thereof twice, and all this in a little space of time, for he first
transits the place of Cauda in the world, (where Luna met with it before she
came to its place in the Radix, which is before demonstrated) and afterward
passes over its place in the Radix, at which time Cauda being Retrograde,
translates his Tincture back again to its place in the World, which is
equivalent to his touching the same point of the Ecliptic twice, by means of
his twofold Application aforesaid to Cauda in a state of Retrogradation at
Birth, for Cauda never swerves from the Ecliptic Line. These intimate, that
the Ecliptic Line seems to be dilated, as also, that the Sun staggers in his
Course, which is a shame unto him, Isaiah 24.23. By imputing the same state to
Luna, (yet with consideration of her small Latitude at Birth) in her
application to her South Node, which has even now been imputed to Sol, it may
appear that she is confounded; the reason whereof is, because Sol Lord of the
Medium Coeli in the Radix, as a Significator, is aspected of all the Planets,
and directed to her Body, she being Lady of the Ninth House, and posited in the
Third, which is the Sixth from the Tenth, applying to the Conjunction of Venus,
etc. which intimates, that the Lord of Hosts reigns in Mount Sion, ( Sol
passing into Capricorn, a mountainous Sign) and in Jerusalem, and before his
ancients gloriously, whereat the Moon is confounded and the Sun ashamed, as was
before demonstrated. See Isa. 24.23.

Now observe, that the Moons Nodes by the Demonstration of their Retrograde
Motion before given, will each of them appear to be twofold, which in the
mystery of their Names are called Capita and Caudae Draconis, representing the
Terrors and Judgments of the Almighty. The two North Nodes of the Moon, called
Capita Draconis, as aforesaid (being the Ideas of Terror) are seated in the
Ninth, which is the Twelfth from the Tenth House, and there imprisoned, as to
the Native, in the Regal fixed Sign Leo, representing Judah's Lion enthroned
upon the Mid-heaven for ever: But her two Southern Nodes, called Caudae
Draconis (being the Essences of Fury) are posited in the Third, in opposition
to Capita in the Ninth, as aforesaid, which plainly intimates, that the Dragons
Kingdom, Reign, and Power, is at enmity and variance with it self, for the
beginning and end of his Dominion are at difference one with another, so that
his Power cannot stand; for Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to
desolation; and every King opposing himself, or his own Kingdom, is brought to
ruin.

But to return to former proceedings.

The Planet Sol in his Transits having met with, and passed over that
reproach-giving Node Cauda in the World, is immediately besieged betwixt Cauda
in the World, and Cauda in the Radix, the Center of his Body being intercepted
betwixt them, whereat he is ashamed, plainly manifesting his shame by his total
Eclipses, not knowing how to steer his Course according to his usual Custom, so
as that his shame may be avoided; this considered, it further appears, that the
Sun is ashamed, Isa. 24.23.

Now, together with the aforesaid Testimonies, observe what follows:

The Regal Sign Leo, being the Sign of the Son of man appearing in Heaven,
Matthew. 24.30.) and Princely fixed Star Cor Leonis, are both seated, fixed, and
enthroned upon the honorable Meridian Circle; as also Mercury Lord of the
Eleventh, the good Angel, and House of Praise, Faith, and Hope, is placed and
seated in the Body of the Sun; and that lovely, beautiful, and most glorious
fixed Star, the Virgin's Spike, or Ear of Corn, is brightly springing out of
the Twelfth, the House of mysterious and hidden Secrets, as also the House of
Imprisonment and Bondage, into the Eleventh, the House of Praise, where she
purely flourishes and rejoices with Songs of Deliverance, Psalm 32.7.
Observe, that the Ear of Corn born in the left hand of the Virgin, exactly
typifies or emblematizes Christ Jesus, the Bread of Life, born of a Virgin.

The Ear of Corn born in the left hand of the Virgin, typifies a Mother bearing
her Infant upon her left arm.

Now, I say, by considering all these aforesaid Testimonies, (which are a
concatenation of Proofs) it is evident, that the Moon is confounded, and the
Sun ashamed, because of the Lord of Hosts reigning in Mount Sion and in
Jerusalem, and before his Ancients, gloriously, Isaiah 24.23. Behold also these
Scriptures following, viz. Matthew. 24.29, 30, 31. Mark 13.24. Luke 21.11, 25,
26, 27, 28. Rev. 9.2, 3, 10, 11.

There is a mystery in the number Three, it being a number of Perfection, and
the fulfilling or accomplishing of all things; upon this consideration observe
what follows, viz.

There is a threefold total Eclipse of the two Luminaries (by reason of their
aforesaid Motions) upon the Bodies of one another, in Aquarius, a fixed and
durable Sign; the first of them on Cauda's place in the World, the next on
Cauda's place in the Radix, both these being accomplished by Direct Motion, the
last on Cauda's place in the World, by Retrograde translation; for the Tincture
of the twice totally eclipsed Luminaries aforesaid, is forcibly translated back
by Cauda's being Retrograde in the Radix, to the place of their aforesaid total
Eclipses, on its place in the World; so that this third and last Eclipse being
tinged with the virtue of the second, and now falling upon the first. makes a
threefold total Eclipse of the Lights, near the same moment of Time, and near
the same place of the Ecliptic, to the eye of the invisible world. It Is
observable, that this compulsive Retrograde motion of the Luminaries, is quite
contrary to their usual Direct course in the Heavens.

This is also worthy observation, which follows, viz.

Sol transiting Luna's Body, as situate when in perfect congress with her
Radical Austral Node, suffers a total Eclipse, as to the Native; under which
Conflict he remaining, (for where an Eclipse or Transit happens, that part of
the Heavens is sealed with its Tincture) and Luna passing on according to her
Natural motion, through the Signs, she at length meets with the opposite place
of the Sun's Contest with her in his aforesaid Defect: which considered, it may
appear, that Sol was torally eclipsed at the Radical Full of Luna, whereas,
according to Nature, all his Eclipses are accomplished, or celebrated at her
Change. The like Defects happen by Sol's Transits over Luna, as by hers over
him in manner and Form aforesaid.

In like manner, such Transits over Luna's Meridional Nodes in the World, give
the like Eclipses in the World.

The Sun in his Transits over the Radical place of Luna's Septentrional Node,
which is posited in the Ninth House, becomes Supraterranean in the Nocturnal
Nativity: which gives us to understand, That the Light of Religion shines
brightly in a state of Darkness, John 1.5.

Note the irregular Form of all the aforesaid portentuous Eclipses, and it will
evidently appear, that by voluntary Direct, and compulsive Retrograde Motion,
Sol is dashed against Luna's Body, his own and her Eclipses: Luna is in like
manner dashed against Sol's Body, his and her own Eclipses; so that continually
there is a mutual Illision by Body and Eclipses betwixt Sol and Luna in the
twofold curved Tail of the Dragon, until, by this contention with one another
in a state of Darkness, they both become extinct, and, as it were annihilated,
and so consequently the Light of the whole Host of Heaven destroyed; to which
annex, that these astonishing Prodigies, as also those which do, or may ensue
hereafter, are the necessary, and unavoidable consesequent Effects of the
Scorpion's being dashed against his own forehead, by the admirable force of an
Oblique Direction (which was the Nativities Rectification, as has been already
explained) whereby this Royal Offspring of the New Jerusalem was born to the
blessed Inheritance of Eternal Glory, Psalm 2.9. Isa. 13.12, 13. Jer. 13.14.
Nahum. 2.1.

In the next place, I recommend to the serious consideration of the Ingenuous
and honest Astronomer, the Eccentricity of the Planets, as also their Motions
in their Eccentrick Orbs and Epicycles; together with this let him observe,
that Mars Lord of the Ascendent is combust of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli,
which being duly considered, let him compare his Considerations with the
following Scriptures, and then he possibly will find some cause of
astonishment, if he likewise observe, that the Almighty God and most humble
Lord acts from all Eternity, yet without respect of Persons, his Love being
Universal.

These are the Scriptures, Isa. 13.12, 13. Joel 2.10. Joel 3.16. Haggai 2.6,
21. Matthew. 24.29, 30, 31. Isa. 24.23.

Note, The Nativity was rectified by the Direction of Seorpio to Frons Scorpii,
whereby the Nodes of Luna Lady of the Ninth are Duplicated, (which has before
been copiously paraphrased on) whereas, according to Demonstration upon the
Celestial Globe, she has no more than two, viz. one Septentrional, another
Austral: Now I say, she and Sol being wracked upon these doubled Nodes, with
such strange Eclipses, which Nodes, in the Mystery of them (as before hinted)
are called Capita and Caudae Draconis, and are Emblems, or Ideas of Fury and
Indignation. These, together with the aforesaid company of Testimonies, do, by
a concatenation of Proofs, further confirm, and apparently show, That the Frame
and Power of the Heavens are shaken, and consequently, the Earth removed out of
her place in the Fury of the Lord, and in the day of his fierce Anger: As also,
that the Moon is confounded, and the Sun ashamed, because of the Lord of Hosts
reigning in Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients, gloriously.
See the last-mentioned Scriptures.

Prioris Tractatus de Luminarium Directione and ejus Effectis continuatio.
THE Nativity was rectified by the Ascendents Direction to Frons Scorpii, a
fixed Star of the Second Magnitude, etc. intimating, that the true Birth was
found and distinguished from the estimate or false, by the Direction of the
House of Life to the Scorpion's forehead, to the fulfilling of the Word of God
in Paradise to the Serpent, viz. I will put enmity betwixt thee and the woman,
and betwixt thy seed and her seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel, Genes. 3.14, 15.

It is observable, that Luna, the Promissor, Lady of the Ninth, the House of
Holiness, applying to the Conjunction of Venus, projects the Degree of her
Antiscion to the Scorpion's forehead, signifying a bruising of the Serpent's
head with the forcible rays of God being Love, bruises the Serpents head being
Envy.
holy Love; and is a further Confirmation of the fulfilling of the aforesaid
Promise made in the Garden of Eden by the great Jehovah.

As the Luminaries, or Lights of Heaven, are the Planets concerned in this
powerful Direction, and Lords of the House of Holiness; so the Direction is
Light, and the Light of the Direction does lead into Righteousness.

As the Heavens are concerned in the Direction, so the Direction is Heavenly.

As Luna the Promissor was increasing in Light, and Lady of the House of
Religion, so it signified the fulfilling of the Divine Promises in Scripture,
both as to Mercy and Judgment.

Scorpio the Sign Ascending, directed to Frons Scorpii in the Ascendent, shows
the House or Kingdom of the Serpent to be broken down. Mercury, Lord of the
Eighth, near partil opposition of Jupiter in the 8th, Jupiter being Lord of the
Fifth, which is the Tenth from the Eighth, and he by a Retrograde Motion going
from his Exaltation to his Detriment, in the descending part of Heaven, shows
the Kingdom of Death to be broken down, for, if a Kingdom or House be divided
against it self, it cannot stand, Mar. 3.24, 25, 26. Mat. 12.25. Luke 11.17, 18.

Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, and Significator, as also Luna, Lady of the
Ninth, the Promissor, being both subterranean in the Radix, and Luna in
Aquarius a fixed Sign, she being the Light of Time, so that the Nativity is
Nocturnal unto the Native; but the fixed Sign Leo upon the Medium Coeli, and
Cor Leonis there; the Sign Leo and Cor Leonis representing Judah's Lion; and
Mars Lord of the Ascendent in the potent glory of the Sun; Luna also
representing the Native, receiving her Light from Sol, and not Sol from Luna:
These signify, that as to the Native the Sun shall be no more a light by day,
neither for brightness shall the Moon give light unto him; but the Lord shall
be unto him an everlasting Light, and his God (the Sun of Righteousness) his
Glory, Isaiah 60.19. Lux micat in tenebris, etc. John 1.5. Deus est Columna
ignis per noctem, Exodus 13.21.

Mars, Lord of the Ascendent, being subterranean, and in the enlightened
Hemisphere, yea, in that Quadrant of the Heavens, wherein both the Luminaries
are seated, as to the Native, for ever, viz. Jerem. 16.15. Jerem. 23.8.
the Septentrional Quarter, in which the Direction of Sol to Luna's Body
happens, and Mars glorified with the Luster of the Sun, he Lord of the Medium
Coeli, and directed to the Body of Luna, and she in Aquarius, a fixed Sign,
applying to the Conjunction of Venus, etc. Sol and Luna past the Descending,
and, as to the Native, always determined to be in the Ascending part of Heaven.

These Testimonies signify, that, as to the Native, The Sun shall no more go
down, neither shall the Moon withdraw it self, but the Lord shall be his
everlasting light, and the days of his mourning shall beended, Isa. 60.20.

Mercury, Lord of the Eighth, applying near partil Opposition of Jupiter in the
Eighth, Jupiter being Lord of the Fifth, viz. the Tenth from the Eighth, and
applying by a Retrograde motion from his Exaltation to his Detriment in the
Descending part of Heaven, shows the Kingdom of Death to be broken down, as
aforesaid; for where there is Division in a Kingdom, that Kingdom is brought to
Desolation and utter ruin; and if a King rise up in opposition to his own
Kingdom, that Kingdom cannot stand, but has an end, Mark 3.24, 25, 26. for the
confirmation hereof, annex, that Jupiter is located in the Eighth, and Mercury
in the second, which is the Seventh from the Eighth, he being also Lord of the
Eleventh, which is the Seventh from the Fifth, the Fifth as aforesaid, being
the Tenth from the Eighth, etc. These argue the subversion of Death and his
Kingdom, as aforesaid: And herein are accomplished the Hopes of the Native; for
Mercury is Lord of the Eleventh from the Ascendent, ( viz. the House of Hope
and Praise) and placed in the Body of the Sun, to whom Sol transfers the virtue
of Mars Lord of the Ascendent, by his first Radical Transit; Mars by Transit
applying to the Radical Cazimi of Sol; to which annex Luna's application to the
Conjunction of Venus, Venus being Lady of the Twelfth, which is the Second from
the Eleventh, which gives unto the Native the fruition of the substance of his
Hopes, as also to the Righteous the enjoyment of theirs, and that their Hopes
are come to a good end; for Luna is Lady of the Ninth, and Venus of the
Seventh, which is the Eleventh from the Ninth, as also of the Twelfth, which is
the 4th from the 9th; It also signifies them to be possessors of the Houses and
Kingdoms of their Enemies; for Luna and Venus are in the Third, which is the
Seventh from the Ninth, Venus being Lady of the Twelfth, which is the Tenth
from the Third, the Third, as aforesaid being the 7th from the 9th.

Saturn, Lord of the 4th, (which is the 8th from the 9th) is in the 6th, a
Cadent house, and Retrograde in Aries his Fall, signifying, that, as to the
Righteous, Death is subdued and fallen by the Lamb.

Luna, Lady of the 9th, etc. projects the Degree of her Contrantiscion to that
part of the Heavens, (viz. the House of Enmity) from which it reglances with an
Opposition against the Scorpion's forehead.

Consider the aforesaid state of Mercury Lord of the 8th, and of Jupiter in the
8th, etc. according to what was lately spoken, to which annex Mercury his being
near Cazimi, or in Conjunction with the over-powering Planet Sol, Lord of the
Medium Coeli; Sol and Mercury both unanimously or jointly projecting the
degrees of their Contrantiscions against the Body of Jupiter: Sol and Mercury
being in mutual Reception by Antiscion, and Sol directed to the Body of Luna
Lady of the Ninth etc. And from these Considerations it may appear, that Death
and its Kingdom, are subverted and Babylon significat Confusionem.
confounded by the Power of the Sun of Righteousness. Jeremiah 9. chap. 19.21.
Verses. Jerem. 10.14. Jerem. 46.24. Jerem. 50.2. Micah. 7.16. Revelat. 18.
Chap. 1, 2.10. Verses.

That eminent fixed Star Cor Scorpii being placed upon the Cusp of the second
House in Sagittary, shows that the Serpents Heart is wounded with the Arrows of
the Almighty, wherein consists the everlasting Riches of the Kingdom of Glory:
for the Confirmation of which Enjoyment of everlasting Riches it may be
annexed, that Sol Lord of the Medium Caeli (upon whose Cusp Leo a fixed Sign
Culminates) is posited in the Second, etc.

Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, coming by Direction to the Body of Luna
Governess of the Ninth, or rather Luna ascending to the Circle of Position of
Sol, secundum Aequatoris motum, and she applying to the Conjunction of Venus,
Shows Jesus the Lord of Glory, walking upon the Waves of the Sea, for the
Spirit of God moved upon the Face of the Waters. Geness. 1, 2. John 6 Chap.
19.20, 21. Verses.

Here is is worthy Observation, that Luna ascends to the Circle of Position of
Sol the Significator, as aforesaid; which implies a Willingness in the raging
Seas (by ascending higher than their present State) to come and kiss the Feet
of their gracious Creator, submitting themselves to be trampled upon by so
Divine a Being: The Celestial Globe plainly discovers the things
last-mentioned to the eye, when fitted to the Latitude of the place of Birth,
and time of the Radix rectified.

For the further confirmation of what is aforesaid, it may be annexed, that
upon the Cusp of the Ninth, Cancer, a watery Sign, descends, Luna and Venus
being both Planets of the Aquatick Region, and posited in Aquarius, a fixed
Sign, and of watery signification, in the Third, the House of Land-Journeys,
plainly implying a walking upon the Sea as upon the Land; Luna is Governess of
the Ninth, the House of Religion, and Spiritual Sea-Voyages, and Venus the
Significatrix of Pleasures. These aforesaid occurrences do farther confirm the
truth of what was last before demonstrated. They also show the Mighty Creator
of the World walking upon the Waters above the Firmament, which by his
admirable and astonishing Power, are divided from the Waters under it, Genesis 1.7.

The Arch of Direction from Sol to Luna's Body, delineates the Rainbow, whose
Color is displayed by the reflection of the Rays of the Sun (received by the
Moon) from the Moon to the Sun's Body, he being beheld by all the Planets in
the Genesis, and she Governess of the House of Religion making her addresses
unto Venus, Rev. 4.3.

This aforesaid is an undeniable pourtraiture of Divine Mercy in the Heavens.

The Sign Leo upon the Meridian Circle, being a Sign having Voice, Cor Leonis
there, Sol Lord thereof beholding the Medium Coeli with a Trine, Sol the
Significator in Conjunction of Mars in Sagittary a fiery Sign, and of Mercury a
Planet of Voice, Mars and Sol being in a state of Separation, and both fiery
Planets, as also Sol in Conjunction of his own, and Mercury's antiscion (
Mercury in Conjunction of his own and Sol's Antiscion) directed to the Body of
Luna the Promissor, Lady of the Ninth, applying to the Conjunction of Venus and
Cauda Draconis, the Birth being also Nocturnal, and six of the Planets
Subterranean; gave thunderings, lightnings, and voices in the Heavens,
proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, according to the
invisible operation of the Spirit of the Almighty, Rev. 4.5. And those
Thundrings resounded, Lightnings reflected, and Voices sung, unto his Glory.

Mars, Lord of the Ascendent, Oriental of Sol in the Radix, Sol separating from
him, and being in the Second, etc. shows a gift unto the Native of the
invisible morning Star, Rev. 2.28. for the Nativity is Nocturnal, and Mars is
invisible by being arrayed with the glorious Solar Beams, and although
naturally an Infortune, is now become a Fortune, for he is refined by being
combust of the Sun, so that he shines in his purity as at the beginning.

The Degrees of Via combusta fixed upon the Oriental Angle, and Mars Lord of
the Ascendent combust of Sol in the Radix in Sagittary, a fiery Sign, as also
the Direction of Sol to Luna's Body operating, etc. signify that the Native
dwells with everlasting burnings, in a state of Righteousness, Isaiah 33.14,
14, 15.

Mercury Lord of the Eleventh, the House of Praise, upon whose Cusp Virgo
ascends, is in Conjunction of Sol, and covered with his Beams; showing that the
Lord of the Virgin is adorned with Light. John 8.12. John 10.30. Luke 1.48.
Matthew 25 Chapter, from the 1st to the 14 Verse.

Sol the Significator Lord of the Medium Coeli is aspected of all the Planets
in the Radix, and in Conjunction of Mercury's and his own Antiscion, Mercury in
Conjunction of his own and Sol's Antiscion; together with these, consider the
Operation of Sol's Direction to Luna's Body etc. And with these Considerations
let the following Scriptures be compared. viz. Revel. 1, 2, 3. Chapters.

Mercury Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius, and house of Praise near
Cazimi, shows an Angel standing in the Sun; The Disposition of Sol, Mercury,
Luna, and the other Planets and fixed Stars in the Radical Firmament, gives the
Accomplishment of the Angels words in the Heavens. Revel. 19.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

Domus undecima dicitur Bonus Genius vel Angelus. Mercurius, Angelus, Nuncius.
Mercury Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius, and House of Praise, is near
Cazimi of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, and is swift in Motion, the Direction
of Sol to Luna's Body, in a fixed Sign is likewise in Vigor, which shows an
Angel flying through the Midst of Heaven, preaching the everlasting Gospel, on
the Earth, to the eternal Honor of the King of Glory. Revel. 14.6.

Sol the Significator, Lord of the Medium Coeli, translating the Light of Mars
Lord of the Ascendent, to the Body of Mercury by a conjunctional Transit,
Mercury being Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius and house of Praise is
near Cazimi, in Conjunction of Sol's, and his own Antiscion; Sol being aspected
of all the Planets, and the Direction of him to Luna's Body operating, also
these things being effected in the Firmament of the Radix, intimate that the
Lord of Glory has rapt the Native up into the Caelitories of the Angels Revel.
19 Chapter 10 Verse.

The Privilege which was granted to the Apostle John, viz. In having the
Mysteries of the everlasting Kingdom revealed, is not witholden from the
despised Servants of the Lord in these days, viz. the Quakers, who (as John
did) do now also witness the fulfilling of these stupendous Mysteries
inwardly; for the sure Mercies of the Lord are not decreased, neither is the
arm of his mighty Salvation shortened, but being unchangeable he is as free now
in the Dispensations of his spiritual and invisible Love as ever.

The overpowering and most glorious Planet Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, viz.
The Second from the Ninth, is posited in the Second of the Radix, and as a
Significator he effects a Direction by Luna's Arrival to his Circle of Position
in the ascending part of Heaven, she applying to a Congress with Venus, the
part of Fortune also posited in the Second, whose Dispositor has his Dignity
of Exaltation in the Sign of the Ninth, of which Ninth House Luna the Promissor
being Governess, and Venus Lady of the Seventh, are both located in the Third,
which is the Sixth from the Tenth; Luna increasing in Splendour, and receiving
it from Sol. These intimate, That the King of Glory overcomes his Servants with
the Riches of his Spiritual Love; and who would but be a Loyal Subject to so
gracious a Sovereign?

Mercury Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius, and House of Praise, as also
of the Eighth, the House of Death (being in Capricorn in Trine of Saturn Lord
of the Fourth, signifying the Grave) is arrayed with the Sunbeams, being near
partil Conjunction with him; Mars Lord of the Ascendent, which is the Fourth
from the Tenth, signifying the Grave of the Lord, is also apparelled with the
solar Rays, being refined by Combustion, the Ascendent likewise being the
Eleventh from the Third, viz. the Bonus Genius of the Tidings: Sol Lord of the
Medium Coeli being in Opposition of Jupiter Lord of the Fifth, viz. the Eighth
from the Tenth, is situate betwixt the Bodies of Mars and Mercury, Lords of the
aforesaid Houses, and adorned with the Brightness of the solar Rays, as
aforesaid. These represent the Angels in bright and shining Raiment seen by
Mary, (when she was weeping) and by the other Disciples at the Head and Foot of
the Sepulcher of Jesus the Prince of Life and Glory, the Angels and Apostles
receiving their Glory from him, who by his Death was glorified. Luke 24 Chapt.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Verses. John 20 Chap. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 Verses.

Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli oriental of Mercury Lord of the Eighth, the House
of Death, and of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius and House of Praise, being in
the ascending part of Heaven and Subterranean; I say, Mercury Lord of the
aforesaid Houses being near Cazimi, and Sol arising immediately before him,
intimate, That the Lord of Glory is arisen from the Dead, according to the
Testimony of the Angels. Luke 24 Chap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Verses.

Sol in Opposition of Jupiter Lord of the Fifth, in the Radix, which is the
Eighth from the Tenth, and Jupiter posited in the Eighth of the Figure: Sol
Governor of the Midheaven accompanied with Mercury Lord of the Eighth in the
Figure, and Lord of the Eleventh the House of Praise: Sol being aspected of all
the Planets, and associated with Mercury's Body, his own and Mercury's
Antiscion, Mercury being likewise conjunct with Sol's Body, his own, and Sol's
Antiscion, which makes a mutual Reception by Antiscion betwixt Sol and Mercury:
These Positions together with the Disposition of the fixed Stars in the Radical
Firmament, and the Operation of the Direction of Sol to Luna's Body, etc.
signify the Conquest of Death at his Resurrection, and represent those Persons
to whom he has made, and now makes his spiritual Appearance in the Heavens, to
the Praise and Glory of his everlasting Being.

The morning Stars sing together, and the Sons of God clap their hands for joy.

The Righteous shall shine as Stars in the Firmament of Gods Power. See the
Scriptures.

Mars, Lord of the Ascendent, in Conjunction of Sol the Significator, and Sol
in Conjunction of Mercury; to which annex the operation of the Direction of Sol
to the Body of Luna applying to a Congress with Venus. These aforesaid gave
pleasant smells and grateful savours.

How was the Native encompassed with Sweets in so sweet an Exercise, wherein he
was accosted with the ensuing Sacred Experiences. viz. Mary having before the
crucifying of the Lord Jesus anointed his Head and Feet with precious Ointment,
the House being filled with the odor thereof, and he testifying that it was
done against the day of his Funeral, being arisen from the dead, met Mary with
the Spices and Ointments wherewith she intended to embalm his Body, but he was
arisen before, speaking unto her in a state of weeping, to whom, stooping down
and looking into the Sepulcher, the Angels in white raiment had appeared: What
joyful meeting was here of the Lord of Life and Glory with his well-beloved
Spouse, there being betwixt them a mutual fruition of one another Odours:
Mary's Spices intended for him were made his and her own, for he met her,
himself being possessed of those Spices which she intended to embalm him
withal; she was pleasantly saluted with the fragrancy of the Ointment formerly
bestowed upon his Head and Feet, and was trebly recompensed with joyful
Raptures into the Heavenly Inheritance of everlasting Bliss and Glory, the
Odor of their Ointments and Spices as a sweet savor going along with them in
these Raptures. I say, what sweet smelling and amiable Society was the Native
in, when he witnessed the Spiritual fulfilling of these wonders, Mark 14.3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9. John 12.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Luke 23.55, 56. Luke 24. John 19.39,
40, 41, 42. John 20.

These are the delightful Mysteries of the Eternal Kingdom, which are revealed
unto Babes, (as may appear by these Judgments raised from a Phenomenon of the
Heavens at the time of Birth, or when the Native was a Babe) but are hid from
the Exalted, Wise, and Prudent ones in these days, as may appear by what
follows, viz.

The Planets Mars and Mercury are placed or set Heliacally in the shining
Luster of the Sun, being beautified with his Brightness, and as to the Native
in a State of Rising, but never setting Cosmically, being always in the
enlightened Hemisphere: But Jupiter Lord of the Fifth etc. and posited in the
Eighth as aforesaid, is in the Hemisphere of Darkness, being Retrograde and
near his Detriment, going thereto out of the Sign of his Exaltation, and
applying by a Retrograde Motion, to the Sextile of Saturn, who is Lord of the
Third and Fourth, being the Houses opposite to the Ninth and Tenth; viz. The
Houses of Religion and Judgment; Saturn being likewise Retrograde, and posited
in the Sixth, an evil and cadent House, in Aries the Sign of his Fall: This
Jupiter in the Radix is in a State of setting Cosmically, and arising (...), i.
e. Per summam noctem ambulat vel vagatur, ubicunque enim est dum in hoc statu,
si pertingat meridianum vel sit incolis verticalis, illic est nox suprema.
Achronycally, his Culmination being at Midnight, for he is in Opposition of
Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli etc. (which Position of Jupiter does palpably
denote the Egyptian Darkness, and Sodomitish Blindness of the Pharisaical
Crew; viz. the pretended Divines of Nations, who are the more especial
Crucifiers of the Lord of Glory, neither entering the Kingdom of Heaven
themselves, nor suffering those that would to enter; but they are falling
backwards to utter Ruin, and God is come to sweep them away with the Besome of
Destruction, that so his innocent Seed may be exalted to the Praise of his Holy
Name, to whom all Honor and Glory is due for ever and for evermore.

Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, changing his Sign, and applying to the Radical
Conjunction of Mercury by Transit in the ascending part of Heaven, Mercury
being Lord of the Eleventh, the House of Praise, and situate in Capricorn a
montainous Sign, Mars applying to the Radical Body of Sol, and being purified
by Combustion, Mars and Mercury being both glorified with the Sun Beams; Sol
moving as aforesaid, being directed to the Body of Luna applying to the
Conjunction of Venus, Luna and Venus being posited in the Third, which is the
Sixth from the Tenth, shows Jesus the King of Splendour, going with his Apostles
into a Mountain to pray, the Fashion of his Countenance in his Prayer being
altered, and his Raiment being white and glittering: Mars and Mercury being
brightned with the Glory of the solar Rays represent Moses and Elias,
appearing in Glory, which they receive from him, and talking with him
concerning his Decease, for Mercury is Lord of the 8th, and near partil
Opposition of Jupiter, posited in the Eighth, who is Lord of the Fifth, viz.
the Eighth from the Tenth. Luke 29 Chap. 28, 29, 30, 31, Verses. Mat. 17 Chap.
1, 2, 3, Verses. Mark 9 Chap. 2, 3, 4. Verses.

Luna the Promissor increasing in Light, and receiving it from Sol the
Significator, Lord of the Medium Coeli, Luna applying to the Conjunction of
Venus and Cauda Draconis; Luna and Venus both applying to the Conjunction of
Cauda Draconis in the Radix, as also to its Conjunction in the World, shows
that the Lord Almighty is fulfilling his Promise, in taking away, or
beautifying the Reproach of his People, for Venus is a Planet of Comeliness and
in Conjunction of Cauda Drac. in the Radix, which signifies an adorning of
their Calumnies with Decency and Beauty. Joel. 2.19. and from thence to the end
of the Chapter.

The aforesaid Testimonies, as also Venus her being Lady or Governess of the
Twelfth, the House of Anguish, Sorrow, Tribulation and Mourning, and in
Aquarius a fixed Sign, but being by Nature a Planet of Joy, and having her
Exaltation in the Sign of the Fifth, the House of Pleasures, as also the
Virgins Spike, that glorious Star of the first Magnitude, of the Nature of
Venus, being near the Cusp of the Twelfth, and according to the motion of the
Equator going into the Eleventh, the House of Praise, plainly shows, that God
is wiping away all tears from their eyes, and changing their tribulation into
everlasting joy, Rev. 7.14, 15, 16, 17. or from the ninth Verse to the end of
the Chapter. Revel. 21.4.

Positio.
The self-same things look with an amiable and and glorious countenance to the
Regenerate man, which look with a quite contrary Aspect to the Unregenerate,
for to the pure all things are pure, etc. Titus 1.15.

An explanatory Example proving the truth of this Position.
In a Nativity, Mars Lord of the Ascendent is posited in the Second, and
combust of Sol in Sagittary a fiery Sign; Mars and Sol are both fiery Planets:
Mars is in 23 degrees. 55. minutes of Sagittary, and Sol in 29 degrees. 46 minutes of
the same Sign, determined to be in that Position, as to the Native, for ever,
both Sol and Mars being in the Second, and Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli.

The Significations of these to the Unregenerate are as follows, viz.
The Native is Violent, Furious, and Passionate, Imperious, Prodigal, scorning
and hating Reproof, profuse in his Expenses, and thereby consuming his
Substance, kept, notwithstanding his Insolence, in slavery or fear of some
greater Person over-awing him, etc.

The Significations of the same to the Regenerate are as follows, viz.
The aforesaid Eurious, Violent, Imperious, Passionate, and Depraved Spirit,
etc. is burnt up, so that from these Enemies the Native gets freedom by the Sun
of Glory, who shows the Native to be clothed with his Beams, and thereby
defended from approaching danger. In this state Mars, though naturally an
Infortune, is now become a Fortune, for he is refined by being combust of the
Sun, so that he shines in his purity, as at the beginning; I may say, as in the
years of the Native's Infancy or Innocence, though the words in themselves are
of a far larger extent, viz. as at the beginning, in the Creation of the World;
they signify the Native, as aforesaid to have in his possession the Riches and
Jewels of the Sun of Glory. And herein are witnessed in part the New Heavens,
and the New Earth, in a Spiritual sense 2 Peter 3.13.

Times of the Native's rejoicing to be observed by the Radical Figure at the
beginning of the Book: Tempus est gaudendi, ait Solomon.
One time, amongst many others, wherein the Native more especially rejoices in
Spirit, is, when the Light of Religion applies to the Virgins Ear of Corn in
the House of Praise, viz. Luna rectrice nonae domus applicante ad Spicam in
sinistra manu Virginis positam in undecima, viz. domo laudis, spei, and Fidei.

Christ Jesus is the Bread of Life, born of a Virgin.

The Ear of Corn carried in the left hand of the Virgin, because Mothers bear,
carry, or support their Infants upon or by their left arm.

Another time of his Spiritual Melody is, when the Light in the House of Lux
micat in tenebris, tenebrae autem non comprehendunt, Luna enim radios benevolos
emittit a domo mortis ad spicam Virginis in domo laudis and fidei.

Luna in octava projicit ternarium aspectum ad Spicam Virginis in undecima
positam.


Death beholds with an aspect of Love, the Virgins Ear of Corn in the House of
Praise.

The Religious seek for fresh sustenance in the time of need, from the Bread of
Life which preserves from Death.

Another time of the Native's inward Mirth is, when the Light in the House of
Joyful Tidings, (viz. Tidings of Salvation) beholds with an Aspect of Love the
Virgins Ear of Corn in the House of Praise.

Luna in tertia domo (qua applicat ad Conjunctionem Veneris) projiciente
ternarium aspectum ad spic. Virgin. in undecima, ut antea.

The Virgin's Spike is a glorious fixed Star of the first Magnitude, in the
Sign Libra, signifying the sure Bread of Life seated in the House of Justice,
but Luna moves, implying a seeking thereunto for Sustenance and refreshment.

Many other times of the like nature might here be instanced, yet the
expectation of such times ought not to bring in Neglect, or a careless living,
lest the old Nature come on, and so the pure Food of Life be not sensibly felt;
but let the Spiritual watch be continually moving, so will the Effects of the
Heavenly motions appear more lovely, beautiful, and splendorous.

Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, signifies the Lord of Glory, Sol is in
Conjunction of Mars Lord of the Ascendent, which is the Third from the
Eleventh, the Bonus Genius and House of Praise; so that, Mars is combust of
Sol, Sol is in Conjunction of Mercury and of Mercury's Antiscion, Sol, Mercury,
and Mars, being posited in the Second; Sol is immediately Oriental of Mercury;
for Mercury in the Radix arises next and immediately after the Sun, being in
the ascending part of Heaven; Mercury is Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus
Genius, and House of Praise, as also Lord of Gemini; Sol thus disposed, is
directed to the Conjunction of Luna, who applies to the Body of Venus; Luna is
Lady of the Ninth, the House of Holiness; and Mercury in Conjunction of Sol in
the ascending part of Heaven projects the Degree of his Antiscion to the Body
of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli. The aforesaid Positions and Direction at the
time prenoted by its Arch, gave pleasant Savours and sweet smelling Odours,
showing plainly, That the sweet Odours are the smoke of the Incense offered up
by the Angel, with the Prayers of the Saints upon the golden Altar, the Prayers
of the Saints ascending up before God, with the Incense out of the golden
Censer in the Angel's Hand. Revel. 8 Chap. 3, 4. Verses.

Consider seriously the Arch of Direction as it presents it self to the View
upon the Celestial Globe, viz. the Arch of the equinoctial intercepted betwixt
Sol the Significator, Lord of the Medium Caeli, and Luna Lady of the Ninth, the
Promissor; which may be done by erecting a Scheme of the Heavens for the
Latitude and Time of Birth, according to the Precepts of using the Globe; and
then circumvolving the Globe Westward, until the Body of Luna by Ascension
arrive unto the Semicircle of Position fitted before to the Place of Sol etc.
The Ninth is the House of Holiness and Sea-voyages, whose Cusp Cancer
possesses, Luna being Governess thereof, is located in the Third, and applies
to the Conjunction of Venus, both of them being in the fixed and aerie Sign
Aquarius: together with these the Dispositions of Sol, Mars, and Mercury in the
Radix (according as in the last Paragraph they are defined) being diligently
observed and seriously weighed in the Balance of an ingenuous Intellect, will
give a true Portraiture of the Sea of Glass mingled with Fire, upon which they
that have gotten the Victory over the Beast and over his Image etc. do stand
having the Harps of God, singing the Song of Moses and the Lamb, and saying;
Great and Mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty; Just and true are thy
Ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorify thy
Name? For thou only art holy, for all Nations shall come and worship before
thee, for thy Judgments are made Manifest. Revelat. 15 Chap. 2, 3, and 4.
Verses.

The Transfiguration of Jesus upon the Mount, with the Appearance of Moses and
Elias to him in Glory, represented by Mars and Mercury arrayed with the
Sunbeams, has been already paraphrased on, and demonstrated; now some
(excited thereto either by Curiosity or Envy) may demand, which of the two
Planets aforesaid signifies Moses and which Elias; To which curious or envious
Enquirer (lest he should judge me as incapable of answering him) I return this
Reply, according as God Almighty has opened the Door of my Understanding. viz.
Moses was skillful in all the Learning of the Egyptians, and was mighty in
Words and in Deeds. Thus Stephen, as may be read in the Acts of the Apostles:
These aforesaid Accomplishments of Moses are well signified by the State of
Mercury in the Radix, who is in Conjunction of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli,
and to whom Sol projects his Antiscion: Mercury is likewise aspected of all the
Planets in the Radix, which gave him immense Wisdom and Understanding: Moreover
Mercury is arrayed with the Sunbeams and placed in Capricorn a montainous
Sign, over whose Body Sol makes his first Transit by Application, and to whose
Radical Place he projects his Antiscion: These represent God's glorious
Appearance unto him on Mount Sinai, so that his Face shined in the Presence of
the Children of Israel. Hence it evidently appears, that Mercury represents
Moses.

Mars represents Elias, which I prove thus. viz.

Mars a fiery Planet Combust of Sol a fiery Planet in Sagittary a fiery Sign,
Mars and Sol, both beholding the Medium Coeli with a Trine, whereof Sol is
Lord, and whose Cusp is possessed by Leo a fiery Sign, and by Cor Leonis a
fiery fixed Star of the first Magnitude. These aforesaid show the Chariot of
Fire and Horses of Fire wherein Elijah was carried unto Heaven: The Whirlwind
is well represented by Mercury's being swift in Motion, and in Opposition of
Jupiter, who is retrograde in the Descending, but himself being in the
Ascending Part of Heaven.

A Sequel to this Second Part.
Considering the Nativity calculated by invisible Lines, viz. by Sines or right
Lines (being Semichords) subtending circular Arches, as also by Tangent Lines,
externally respecting the degrees of circumferences of Circles, to which annex
the Secant Lines, limiting the Tangents; but more especially weighing from the
Radical Position of the Heavens thus found, the glorious Judgment raised, and
from such Considerations it will evidently appear to the Intelligent Reader,
that, as to the Native, the lines are fallen in pure and pleasant places, Psalm
16.6.

A Vindication of this Second Part.
An impregnable Fortress for this Fabric of Celestial Mysteries, erected upon
the Nativity, as a most sure Basis, are these words of Spirit and Life
following, viz.

Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings have thou perfected Praise, Matthew
21.16.

I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these
things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes; even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

FINIS PARTIS SECVNDAE.
Evangelium Sydereum, OR, Revelation DEMONSTRATED.

THE THIRD PART.

Being an APPENDIX touching the Celestial Scheme of the Sun's Ingress into the
Vernal Sign Aries, for the Year 1677. Wherein it is clearly evinced, from the
aforesaid Figure of the World, that the Heavens do Evangelize, or Preach the
Gospel, and glad tidings of Salvation to the Universality of Mankind (without
respect of Persons) to the Eternal Fame of the Lord our God, and his
incomprehensible Love and Mercy.

By J. S. an Experiencer of the Loving Kindness of the Almighty; and a Lover of
the People reproachfully called QVAKERS.

There is no Speech or Language where their Voice is not heard.

Their line is gone out through all the Earth, and their words to the end of
the World; in them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, etc.

Psalm 19.3, 4. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.

TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
THE tender Mercies of the Almighty are revealed unto the Sons of men by the
Visible Heavens, and that impartially; as may appear by the following Appendix,
or Exposition upon the state of the Celestial Bodies, at the Entrance of the
Sun into Aries for the Year 1677.

If what the Prophet David says be true, then there is no Speech nor Language
where their Voice is not heard, for their line is gone out through all the
Earth, and their words to the end of the World, Ps. 19.3, 4.

Hence it may appear, that not Astrologers only, but all men in general, do
hear the Admonition of the Stars, and the Language of the Heavens, expressing
Divine Mysteries in declaring the Glory of God, which is Jesus the Eternal Son
of the Father, but their ears have been too long shut against such Sacred
Counselors.

This is the wonderful Love of God which is Universal, and not to be rejected,
who makes the Heavenly Bodies the Declarers of his Holy and Heavenly purposes
toward mankind, in order to his Salvation, and has made his Only begotten Son
Jesus the Exponent of their Declaration, and the Interpreter of their Holy and
Mysterious Language, and that in the Inward Parts of every particular Person.

Arts and Sciences are known unto many of the Sons of men, but the Sacred
Mysteries of them can never be known until the Lord of Glory do reveal them.

I advise all men to wait upon Jesus, the Light within them, who leads into the
pleasant paths of Wisdom and Perfection; into whose powerful Tuition, friendly
Reader, I recommend thee.

J.S.

REVOLUTIO MUNDI
2677. in Men's: DieHo: Me. Mart: 9.9: 49. Post Meridiem. dom: diei. a ad. in
part 3. page first.

astrological diagram

Evangelium Sydereum.
PART III.
THE Figure of the Sun's Ingress into the first scruple of Aries, according to
Argol's time, is nearly as before presented, it being the Great Seal of the
King of Heaven, whereby he has privileged me to publish the matter contained
in the Second Part of this Treatise; yea, hereby he proves that it is given
forth by his Holy Spirit, as also that it is of general Concern to the Kingdom
of England, etc.

Here it is worthy Observation, and great Admiration also, that this Figure of
the World, or of Sol's Ingress into the Vernal Aequinox, (falling within the
terms of that Year wherein the Radical Direction of the Lights of Heaven did
operate upon the Native) is very nearly the same (the Places of the Planets
excepted) with the Radical Figure inserted near the beginning of the Second
Part of this Treatise: for the fixed Stars and twelve Signs are so circumvolved
at the time of the Ingress aforesaid, as that the same Signs, yea, nearly the
same Degrees and Minutes possess the Cusps of the same Houses in both Figures,
and so consequently the same Planets Lords of the same Houses; and in such
sort, that if the Planets according to their Position in the Radical Figure be
placed in the same Signs, Degrees, and Minutes of the Vernal Figure, the Vernal
Figure becomes by that means the Figure of the Radix nearly complete.

Hereby God is showing himself to be no Respecter of Persons, but that in every
Nation and Kingdom they that believe in him and fear his Name are accepted of
him, and shall inherit Eternal Life.

This Doctrine of the Heavens is true, and Heavenly Doctrine, and far
transcends that confused Doctrine of the Gain-seeking Priests of the Nations: I
say, this ensuing Divine Doctrine of the Heavens will stand for ever, for the
Angles of the precedent Figure are fixed, as also Jupiter, who has his Dignity
of Exaltation in the Sign of the Ninth, is posited in the Third, in Aquarius, a
fixed Sign, etc. And if the Heavens preach the Gospel without money and without
price, and Jesus the Son of God, and Light within, vouchsafe to be the
Explainer of their Doctrine, what need have we of hirelings? They must leave
off their Trade, for the Hand of the Almighty is set against them.

In the precedent Figure of the World, Scorpio, the Sign Ascending, directed to
Frons Scorpii in the Ascendent by Oblique Ascension, shows to the World, that
the Serpent is dashed against his own Forehead by the admirable force of an
Oblique Direction, for the crooked Leviathan must be crookedly dealt withal,
Isa. 27.1. Genes. 3.15.

To this annex, that Caput and Cauda Draconis are both in their Falls,
eminently showing the Fall of the Dragon.

Cor Scorpii in Sagittary in the Second, shows the Heart of the Serpent to be
thoroughly wounded by the Arrows of the Almighty, wherein consists the enjoyment
of everlasting riches.

For the Confirmation hereof, annex, that Caput Draconis is in his Fall in the
Second, as was aforesaid.

The Planet Saturn Lord of the Third, being posited in Taurus, a fixed Sign,
upon the Cusp of the Seventh, and he situate in the Seventh, gives woeful
Intelligence to the strong Bulls of Bashan, that they are fixed down in the
House of Enmity and Contention in the Occidental Angle of Heaven.

Which is confirmed by the Appearance of a Comet near unto the Cusp of the
Seventh House, and his Transit over the same Cusp. This Comet was seen about
the 18th of the Second Month called April, in the 8th Degree of Taurus, (the
Sun being then about the 9th Degree thereof) in the Year 1677. and had about
seventeen Degrees of North Latitude, making him Oriental of the Sun.

These are the strong Bulls of Bashan, which stand in opposition after a fixed
and resolute manner, against the House of Life and Salvation, for the 7th House
is opposite to the Ascendent.

Saturn Lord of the 4th in Taurus in the 7th, intimates, that the Grave and
Death is come upon them from the hand of the Almighty.

Scorpio, a fixed Sign, upon the Oriental Angle, certainly manifests, that the
Scorpion or Serpent is fixed down in the East, or at his Rising.

Luna, Lady of the 9th, being posited in the 11th, viz. the third from the 9th,
applies to the Trine of Jupiter, he being located in the Third of the Figure,
(and Direct in motion) so that there is a mutual reception betwixt them by
Houses of Delight, for Luna is in the 11th House, the Joy of Jupiter; and
Jupiter in the Third, the Joy of Luna: Jupiter has the Dignity of Exaltation
in the Sign of the 9th, being Lord of the 5th, and the aforesaid amicable
Aspect betwixt him and Luna, is celebrated in courteous Signs: Jupiter projects
his Trine Aspect to the Virgins Spike, in Courteous Signs also: Luna, when she
separates from the Trine of Jupiter, next and immediately applies to the
Conjunction of Spica Virginis in Libra, a Sign of Justice, and in the 11th, the
House of Hope and Praise.

These aforesaid Occurrences in the Heavens bring unto the Generality of
mankind the joyful tidings of Salvation by the Light; for Luna Lady of the
Ninth, the House of Holiness, was lately impregnated in the Sign of the Virgin
(seated in the House of Praise) with the Glory and Light of Sol, Lord of the
Medium Coeli, who is going to his Exaltation in Aries, the last Full of Luna
Lady of the Ninth being accomplished in the Sign Virgo, as aforesaid.

These intimate, that the Righteous are filled with Divine Life and Light
received from the Lord of Glory, who is Exalting himself in the Lamb; as also,
that this Light is Jesus, the King of holy splendor, born of a Virgin,
overshadowed and impregnated with the Luster of the Divine Being, and placed in
the Heavenly House of Praise, Luke 1. from the 46th to the 56th verse.

It Is observable, that Luna, the Dispositrix of Mars Lord of the Ascendent, (he
being virtually in the 9th) separates from the Quartile of Mars, and applies to
the Trine of Jupiter, having Dignities in the 9th, being Lord of the 5th, and
placed in the Third, as aforesaid, whereby the virtue of Mars is translated to
Jupiter by Luna, Luna and Jupiter being both seated in the Ascending part of
Heaven.

God, who is Light, and whose Promises are undeniable Axioms, who gives of his
good Spirit to the Rebellious; yea, to all men in general, a Talent of Grace,
or measure of his good Spirit is given; for he is no respecter of Persons: I
say, God whose Promises are absolute Performances, and are Yea and Amen for
ever, has said, That he will put his Law, which is Light, into men's hearts,
and his Spirit, which is also Light (for God is Light, and in him is no
Darkness at all) into their inward Parts; and that he would be their God, and
they should be his People. Hence it may appear, that there is a Sacred Light
within men, in order to conduct them out of the ways of Darkness.

The Word, which is Christ Jesus, the hope of Glory within, is nigh in the
Heart, and in the Mouth; therefore still it is apparent, that there is a Sacred
Light within men; for Christ himself said, (at whose words the Powers of the
Heavens are shaken) that he is the Light of the World, as also, that the
Kingdom of Heaven (which is the New Jerusalem, whereof the Lamb is the Light)
was within the wicked Scribes and Pharisees (much more then, in those that are
holy) but it was in them their Condemnation, and in the Saints their
Justification in everlasting Bliss and Glory.

Now God is become the Teacher of his People according to his Promise, and is
graciously calling the wicked to Repentance, gently accosting them, according
to his compassionate Nature; yea, he is handing forth Immortal Blessings unto
them, and capacitates them with an Understanding how, and a Power whereby to
receive them; if they make no Use of this Understanding and Power, but refuse
the Tenders of Mercy toward them, their Condemnation is of themselves, and
they have the neverdying Worm testifying against them for their Disobedience to
the Heavenly Call. God will be justified in their Condemnation, who will not
that he be glorified in their Salvation.

But to proceed in Judgment upon the Solar Ingress aforesaid.

Mercury, Lord of the 8th and 11th Houses, being Retrograde in Motion, is in
the 4th in Pisces, his Detriment and Fall, in the descending part of Heaven;
which signifies Death to be totally overthrown and vanquished, whereupon the
hope of Salvation is grounded.

Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, is entering Aries, his Exaltation, and is placed
in the House of Pleasures, intimating, that the Sun of Righteousness and Lord
of Glory is exalting himself in the Lamb, in the Spiritual Spring-season, and
the time of Pleasures.

The Regal Sign and Star Leo, and Cor Leonis are fixed upon the Meridian
Circle, showing the Sign of the Son of man appearing in Heaven, Matthew. 24.30.
and that the Lion of the Tribe of Judah is there reigning for ever, and for
evermore. Amen.

I might proceed further, but that it were actum agere; for what is written in
the Second Part of this Treatise, relating to the fixed Stars and twelve Signs,
upon the Cusps of the Houses in the Radical Figure, may be made applicable to
the Judgment upon this Figure, because the Signs, and nearly the Degrees upon
the Cusps of the Houses are the same, as also all the fixed Stars nearly in the
same Position in both Figures.

Behold herein the wonderful Love of a Gracious God, who shows himself to be no
respecter of Persons, but vouchsafes to preach the glad tidings of Salvation to
the universality of Mankind, by this remarkable way, viz. by the visible
Heavens, or his glorious Agents the Stars, as is before explained.

The Great God (whose Appearance to them that have sinned out their day, is in
flames of Fire to render Vengeance, or in Judgment, without Mercy: but to the
Penitent and Righteous man, in Judgment with Mercy) has thus vouchsafed to
preach the Gospel.

Behold, I say, and admire at this wonderful and humble Condescension of a Holy
Father, rich in Mercy and goodness to those that will embrace his Love,
enlarging the Joys of the Just, and recompencing the Righteous with a glorious
reward into their own Bosoms, and by the sweetness of his Conversation with
them, ravishing their Souls, and enriching their Minds with the delightful
Contemplations, and pleasant fruition of everlasting Glory.

Therefore, O ye Sons of men, receive Divine Encouragement, and ye Daughters of
men lift up your selves with Joy and holy Humility; Consider inwardly, the
immense Love of your Mighty yet meek Creator; Consider that he is near unto
you, and is willing clearly to communicate unto your Apprehensions the glorious
Mysteries of his Heavenly Kingdom; I say, He is by the sweetness of his
Presence revealing even to you (that have been the Crucifiers of his Innocent
Dove-like Spirit) his most Sublime Mysteries.

O! Who can be so barbarously Refractory as to refuse to obey so lovely and
glorious a Commander, whose Garments are more fragrant than the flowery smell of
a Garden; His Breath is sweeter than Incense, and his Presence is more pleasant
both to the Smell and Taste than a Confection made by the united power of all
the Spices of Arabia, perfuming the places of his Abode with the smell of
Lebanon, and the Soul-solacing Odours of the Heavenly Jerusalem: He entertains
his chosen ones with the Roses, Lillies, and Violets of his Love, who is the
Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys: This Gracious Prince of Life wins
the Hearts of his greatest Adversaries with the innocent Administration of his
Spiritual Solaces to them undeserving, even to them, who by their wicked course
of Life have been his Persecutors, making them Zealous for him, because of his
tender dealings toward them, who demeaned themselves after so cruel a manner
toward him: This, Jesus the King of Glory is manifesting to the Eye of the
World by that stately Fabric, the Heavens, that he has still the same Mercies
in store (and to as high a degree) for his Servants now, and all those that
through Obedience shall become his Servants, by a Refrenation from the Evil of
their ways, as he had for his Servants formerly: Therefore, to this King of
Love, let all Honor, Glory, and Renown, with sweet Praises, humble Obedience
and Thanksgiving, be rendered (as is by Justice due unto him) both now and for
evermore. Amen.

O hard-hearted Sons and Daughters of men! Can you yet afford no better a place
for the Babe of Glory than a Manger? Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and you
perish in the way; be fond, be sick of Love; weep and lament, upon a due
consideration of the crucified state of this innocent Lamb, of this Dove-like
Spirit: Be not guilty of that Ingratitude, as to execute Death and Cruelty upon
that Essence of pure Love which is nigh unto you to save your distressed Souls,
who accounts you so dear and near unto him, that in destroying your own Souls
you crucify him, and grieve the Holy Angels: Therefore, I say, be
tenderhearted, and you shall find that the God of Love and Pity will not
quench the smoking Flax, nor break the bruised Reed, but will lead gently on
those that are with young, until Judgment be brought forth unto Life and
Victory. Be broken in Spirit, for, with the humble and contrite heart the King
of Salem dwells: He will give you a large recompense of Heavenly Peace and Love
for your Tears, which being so many Crystalline drops, or tokens of your
fervent Zeal, shine forth as Pearls in the Kingdom of Glory: Continue in your
mournful state, which is attended with Pleasantness; Lament and weep over him
whom your sins have pierced.

True mourning mixed with mirth, gives Sorrow to the Heart that fills it with
Joy.
Your Peace shall gloriously abound, yea, it shall flow as a River; Shilo's
streams shall run softly, and water the whole City of God; where every
righteous Soul partakes of the Wine of the Kingdom, yea, Wine from the lees
well refined, and feeds upon Celestial Manna, with other Delicacies at the
King's Table.

Your Prayers shall be converted into Praises, and you shall rejoice in the
King of Sion, who is become your Deliverer for ever, and for evermore.

O! throw your selves into the Arms and Tuition of your Heavenly Dove, for, so
sweet a Guardian you cannot choose but be well-pleased withal.

O weep and mourn, and be tenderhearted, that your Joy may be full; Remember,
that to Mary in a state of weeping, first, the Holy Angels, and then the Lord
of Glory, the merciful Savior of the World, spoke and appeared; so that in a
state of weeping, (as aforesaid) she received the Joyful Testimony of the
Resurrection, the Angels, and the Lord himself sweetly saluting her with that
gracious expression of, Woman, Why weepest thou? whereby it appears, that the
Joys of Heaven are chiefly revealed to a Principle of Tenderness, for the
Great Jehovah looks with an Eye of Pity and Compassion upon the
Broken-spirited, and fills them with the Oil of Joy and Gladness, to the
everlasting Praise and Honor of his Holy Name, to whom all Honor is really
due for ever and for evermore. Amen.

Divine Encouragement for all those that are traveling toward Sion.
THat you may not be dismayed by reason of Weariness, Judgment, and Terrors,
but may persevere in the meekness and patience of Jesus, receive this for your
Solace, that you are coming under the Genesis 3. last verse.
Flaming Sword, by entering into The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by force, Matt. 11.12. Co-athletae, Fellow-wrestlers with
Jacob, Genesis 32. from verse 24. to 30. Contestes, viz. Fellow-witnesses with the
Angels, or
Contest with the Cherubims, John 20.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Revel. 19.10. Luke
24.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Rev. 5.11, 12, 13, 14.
Cherubims, and what are Cherubims but Angels? and where are the Angels but in
Heaven, singing Praises to the King of Glory for evermore? Amen.

Spiritual Zeal in its fervor offered up unto God.
So Zealous for thee, O Lord, are thy Servants, because of thy compelling Love,
that they could even be content to part with thy Glory for thy Glory, Rev.
4.10, 11.

FINIS.
THE Author of this Treatise intends to teach these Mathematical Arts
following, viz. Arithmetic Vulgar, Decimal, and Tabular; Geometry, Astronomy,
Trigonometry, Navigation, Dialling, Surveying, Gaging, Astrology; and may be
spoken with, or heard of at the House of Richard Ditchfield, a Graver, living
in Popins Alley in Fleet Street.


