A Candle lighted At a Coal from the ALTAR, Whereby the KING and RULERS of this
Nation with the People of this present Age may see the STONE on which many have
stumbled, and the ROCK which has broken to pieces unfaithful men once in
Authority, who instead of protecting, did persecute the People of God, when
they had the High Places of the Earth in possession. And that these present
Rulers may take warning betimes, least they stumble at the same Rock, and while
they have opportunity they may rather become as Nursing-Fathers to the Flock of
God within these Dominions, by giving due encouragement to tender Consciences,
and men fearing God as in matters of Religion.

And this is directed unto you by a subject of the King of Righteousness, THO.
SALTHOUSE.

Zeph. 1.12. And it shall come to pass that I will search Jerusalem with
Candles, and punish the men that are settled upon their Lees, that say in their
hearts, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1660.

THE Vision of all has been as the words of a Book sealed, which could neither
be read by the learned nor unlearned, for no man in Heaven nor in Earth was
found worthy to open the Book and to loose the Seals and to read thereon but
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that root and offspring of David who has
prevailed to open it; and darkness has covered all the Kingdoms of the world,
and all the Kindreds of the Earth for many ages and generations, and the Great
Whore arrayed in Purple and Scarlet color, and decked with gold and silver and
precious stones, has had her seat upon the waters which is multitudes and
peoples and tongues and languages, having in her hand a golden Cup filled with
abominations and with the filthiness of her fornication, and with her the Kings
and Inhabitants of the Earth have committed spiritual fornication, and have
drunk of the Wine of her fornication, and they have given their power unto the
Beast and the false prophet who makes War against the Lamb and his followers;
and they have drunk the blood of the Martyrs and Saints, and have by their
Laws compelled all, both free and bond, high and low, rich and poor to receive
that mark of the Beast, and to bow down and worship his Image; but the faithful
witnesses that had the Testimony of Jesus and the Word of God, who could not
for Conscience sake bow to the Image of the Beast, nor receive his mark, have
they slain in the streets of that great City spiritually called Sodom and
Egypt, where our Lord Jesus Christ also was crucified by the Princes of the
Gentiles who did not know him, and by force and violence in these last days
and perilous times since there has been a departing from the Faith once
delivered unto the Saints, have the Princes of this world exercised Lordship
over the heritage of God, by compelling and forcing people ignorantly to
worship the unknown God in the Idols Tempels under pains and penalties of
banishment, burning, stigmatizing, stoning to death, imprisonment and the like;
and all the penalties inflicted upon and sustained by the Servants of God and
Saints of the Most High, has been by virtue of Authority derived from the
higher Power, or from men in holy Order as they have been styled; so that all
the persecution of tender Consciences, and of the Prophets and Saints about
Religion, and Religious exercises have been and may justly be charged upon the
higher Power and holy Church so called; and all that have been cast into Prison
for the Testimony of Jesus and the Word of God has been in the name of the
higher Power, and all that have suffered the spoiling of their goods, and the
loss of liberty and estates, for not putting into the hireling Priests mouths,
has been by the higher Powers as in the behalf of God and holy Church, and
many have suffered for these things as it has been said in his Highness his
name in this last time of Apostasy, in which the day has been dark over the
Prophets, that they have not had any Vision or Answer of God nor Revelation
from him, but have denied Revelation and immediate Inspiration, and have been
in darkness and blindness as in the land of the shadow and death, by whose
instigation cruel yokes of bondage have been imposed upon the Israel of God in
this long night of darkness and confusion, but in patience have we waited for
him whose coming was prepared as the morning, and in answer to our earnest
expectation in an acceptable time, when there was none to help, the Arm of the
Lord was made bare to bring Salvation.

And now the Everlasting Day Star has appeared, and the God of all the
Families of the Earth is bringing a remnant of Righteous Souls out of that
Egyptian darkness which has covered the whole earth in the time of Antichrists
Reign, and from under that thick vail which has been spread (over this) and
all Nations, has the Lord delivered a People that sometimes were walking in
darkness, and wandering from Mountain to Mountain in the night of Apostasy, as
old Israel did in the cloudy and dark day, like sheep without a shepherd, and
as Israel after the flesh was delivered from their great bondage and hard
servitude in outward Egypt and Babylon, even so has the Lord called, and by
his own Arm gathered his People out of spiritual Egypt and Babylon, where they
long mourned in desolation under the power of a strange King and cruel
Taskmasters; and this people are fully persuaded in their minds not to return
back into Egypt again, but to travel on through the Kingdoms of Edom, and the
borders of Moab, until they come to the promised Land which is purchased to be
a possession and peaceable habitation for them and their offsping from
generation to generation.

And this people whom the Lord has called out of darkness into his mavelous
light, are a despised people, misrepresented to men in Authority, as diverse
in their Laws and Customs from all other people, and they are reproached with
that name of distinction which is the Object of their adversaries indignation,
being reproachfully called Quakers, because they tremble at the Word of the
Lord and walks humbly before him; and since the time that the Lord has
appeared for our Salvation and Deliverance out of darkness, bondage and
captivity, and since we set our faces toward Zion the City of Truth, we have
been tried with cruel mockings, bonds and imprisonments, and we have born the
reproaches of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon, yea both Gabel
Ammon and Ameleck have set themselves in opposition against Gods peculiar
treasure, and the uncircumcised in heart and ears Ashur and the Philistians
has joined with them to help the incestuous children of Lot in their cruelty,
persecution and opposition against the Lords Servants, those weak things of the
world whom he has chosen to place his Name among, and these poor of the world
whom he has made rich in Faith.

But he that reproved Kings for the sake of his people, saying, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, has smitten some of our Adversaries and
opposers with a deadly wound, and with Equity will he plead the Cause of the
oppressed that have no helper in the Earth.

Therefore hearken unto this Word ye Heads and Rulers of the people, and give
ear O House of the King, and all you in Authority, whether in Church or State,
or of matters spiritual or temporal, this is the Word of the Lord God unto you
in this your day of Trial, touch not the Lords anointed, nor offend not any of
those little ones who are coming up out Egypt and Babylon, neither seek to set
up your selves as Lords over Gods Heritage, by making Laws or prescribing ways
of worship to impose upon those tender Consciences and those Righteous Souls
contrary to the spiritual Law of God (according to his promise) written in
their hearts; for behold the day is come in which the Lord is putting his
Spirit in the inward parts, and writing his Law in the hearts and in the minds
of his people, so that we cannot submit to the Laws of the Medes and the
Persians, nor bow down to worship Nebuchadnezzars Image at the sound of the
Music, whether Bell, Organs, Drum or Trumpet, neither can we conform to the
old Antichristian Traditions which in the time of ignorance was taught for
Doctrines and Church Ordinances, and imposed upon our Forefathers to be
observed by them under pains, penalties and corporal punishments, neither can
we worship or bow down to the resemblance or likeness of any thing either in
Heaven above or in the Earth beneath, nor in the waters under the Earth, least
we should provoke the Lord to jealousy, who will not give his glory to
another, nor we cannot have men's persons in admiration, because of advantage,
or for fear of persecution, knowing that he who respects persons does commit
sin, and is convinced of the Law as a transgressor.

Wherefore all you that are in Authority set up to Rule amongst men as
Magistrates, whether spiritual, Military or Civil, remember what the Rock of
Israel has said, He that Rules amongst men must be Just, ruling in the Fear
and Wisdom of God, that he may be a terror to the evildoers, and a praise to
them that do well; and if you thus rule for God in his fear, then will your
light go forth as a morning without clouds, and those under your Government
will revive as the Corn, and spring up as the tender grass out of the earth, by
clear shining after the rain, and you must fear God and work Righteousness, and
hate oppression and covetousness, else you cannot please God nor Rule for him
amongst men, neither can your Government be blessed, nor of long continuance,
except you be Wise and Learned, Just and Righteous, Holy and Humble, Gentle and
easy to be entreated; therefore be instructed O King and all ye Rulers of the
earth, and serve the Lord with fear, and walk humbly before him, for humility
goes before true honor, and except you be Humble, Holy and Upright you cannot
be owned or accounted as the honorable of the earth, although (for a season)
you have the high Places thereof in possession to prove and try you as others
have bin that were before you, whom the Lord has cast out and rejected from
bearing Rule amongst men (not alone for your sakes) but because of their
unfaithfulness to the Lord in their day, and the heavy yoaks which they laid
upon the necks of those over whom they bore Rule, and by reason of their envy,
violence and unkindness unto those sons of Jacob the Israel of God, who are
passing through your borders out of the house of bondage, who did desire nothing
of them nor now of you, but to pass peaceably by the high way which is cast up
and prepared for the Redeemed of the Lord out of Egypt and Assyria, to that
holy City whose Builder and Maker is God, where they may worship God in the
Spirit and Truth, in the beauty of holiness; and now let it enter into your
Consideration, that the Lord has had a remnant of Righteous Servants in this
Nation, that have not defiled their garments with the detestible things, nor
with the abominations that have been committed in the land, and that have not
bowed their knee unto Baal; and these are they that trembles at the Word of the
Lord, and they have been always grieved and oppressed by reason of the great
evils and abominations that have been committed in the land, not only open
profaneness, pride and wantonness among the baser sort, but also in things
relating to Religion and the Worship of God, and Church Ordinances (so called)
and the Spirit of Grace and Truth which is poured forth from on high, and which
rests upon them, has strove from time to time with the Rulers of this Nation
for Freedom and Liberty of Conscience in matters of such weighty concernment as
the Work and Worship of God, and sometimes the Cry thereof has entered into the
ears of King, Parliaments and others in Authority, and then they would promise
or at least pretend a Reformation in Church and State, and much action has
been in this Nation in a few years last past, and the Lord has overturned one
Government after another without either Bow, Battel-Ax or outward Weapon, but
not without giving them warning by his Watchmen, either in word or writing,
for they have had precept upon precept, and line upon line, and the Lord has
pleaded with them by his Judgments, and when his hand has been upon them,
then they would humble themselves for a season, and set upon doing something in
answer to the expectation of that Spirit that did strive with them; but it may
and always has been observed, that the people in whom this oppressed Spirit
did strive and operate most of all, and who were most zealous for a Reformation
they have always been accounted as Heretics and Sectaries, and reproached
with the names of Puritans, Roundheads, and Quakers, and such like brands of
reproach as might render them odious to men in Authority, or as a discontented
people not fit to live upon the Earth, yet nevertheless the witness of God in
the Consciences of Men in places of trust has sometimes answered to the cry of
the oppressed, so that they began to remove some Antichristian Yoaks of Bondage
out of the way, which was the greatest burden to tender Consciences; as for
instance several Monuments of Idolatry and Superstition was abolished, all
representations of the persons of the Trinity, Angels or Saints in or about the
Cathedral, Collegiate or Parish Church or Chapel (so called) and the High
Altars taken down, and all Superstitious Vestments, as Copes, Surplices, Roods,
Holy Water, Funts, Crosses, Crucifixes, and Pictures defaced, and no more to be
used in or about the Worship of God.

Likewise several Clauses and Articles of Ordinances and Acts of Parliament
repealed which did impose Penalties upon people for not coming to Parish
Churches, for not keeping Holy Days, and for not hearing the Common Prayer,
with Penalties enjoined to be imposed upon such as should use or read the
Common Prayer in any Church, or Chapel, or private Family, as may appear by
several Ordinances and Acts of Parliament about that Year (44) and many Carnal
invented Ordinances of the Church of Rome, as sprinkling infants at the Funt,
finging before the dead, bowing to the high Altar, rails about the Communion
Tables, and abundance of such like things relating to the Worship and Service
of God which was known to be but mere scraps and Rags of Popery, were denied,
as beggarly Elements and rudiments of the world, and no Ordinances of Jesus
Christ to be practiced among the Protestants.

Now these were good beginnings in order toward a Reformation, in spiritual
things, and in relation to Church Worship, but alas, we have seen many good
appearances, and such fair promises come to little or nothing, that we are
jealous with a Godly Jealousy lest the old Serpent should deceive these
Rulers, and draw them back into bondage again in things of this Nature as he
has done them that formerly had the ordering and disposing of the great
Affairs of this Kingdom, who promised a Reformation both in Church and State,
and yet after these old corrupted Popish Ceremonies and Laws, relating to
spiritual Cognizance so called was abolished by the King, Parliament, Protector
and his Council, they soon fell from those good beginnings, and sought to set
up themselves and their own Interests, and then Religion was little regarded,
but as a Cloak for them to carry their own designs under, and when they were
settled in the high places, then Magistrates and the Priests of the high Places
consulted and took Council together against the Lord and against his Anointed,
and instead of the old superstitious Laws and Ordinances they began to make new
Laws to limit the Spirit to their Directions and Prescriptions, and
Observations, by which the Servants and Handmaids of the Lord, whose
Consciences were tender, and could not deny one Form to take up another instead
thereof, was haled before their Judgment Seats, and sometimes whipped,
persecuted, fined, and imprisoned for reproving sin in the Gates, for not
swearing, for meeting together in the fear of the Lord, and such like things,
until the Lord pleaded with the Rulers and visited for those things, and made
that Rock against which they strove and could not prevail, a stone of
stumbling, and a Rock of offense on which they are fallen and broken to pieces.

Likewise King Charles the first, and his Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, took away the High Commission Court when they saw the many harms
and inconveniences that were in it, and that it was a great snare and a bondage
to tender Consciences, and abolished several Acts and Ordinances, that did bind
people in an uniformity thereunto, as may at large appear by an Act of the
Parliament begun and held at Westminster the third of the ninth month called
November in the year (1649.) In which Act it is expressed that no Arch Bishop,
Bishop, nor Vicar General, nor no Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge exercising
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority shall by any grant, license, or
Commission of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors from and after the
first of August, 1^41. inflict any pain, penalty, or fine, amercement,
imprisonment, or other Corporal punishment upon any of the Kings Subjects for
any matter or thing whatsoever belonging to Spiritual Cognizance or
Jurisdiction, and that they shall not administer any Corporal Oath whereby any
may be forced to confess or accuse themselves in any offense, whereby they are
liable or exposed to any censure, pain, penalty or punishment, on a spiritual
account, upon pain that every person who shall offend contrary to the Act above
mentioned, shall forfeit and pay treble damage to every person thereby
grieved, and the sum of 100 pound to him or them, who shall first demand or sue
for the same: Now this was a Legal Authority, and this Act remains in as full
force and virtue, as if there had been no interruption of that power, or as if
it had been made by the King and Parliament now in being, and therefore it may
be expected that the Kings Subjects shall not suffer any penalty for not
swearing, or upon any spiritual account whatsoever, for the King has
discharged all Judges and Ministers of Justice in the name of himself, his
Heirs, and Successors not to impose any Oath, pain, penalty or punishment upon
any person or persons, male or female, as upon a spiritual account; and if the
Kings Successors shall put this Law in execution, it will be some ease to
tender Consciences, and will give the good people of these Nations hopes, that
a Reformation may yet be wrought and completed in this Nation after all these
strange alterations and overturnings, though it is contrary to the expectation
of many from any thing that appears visible.

Consider in time what the Lord God requires at your hands, who are now
entrusted with the Government, and bring not upon the Nation the old
Antichristian yoke of bondage, which neither we nor our Fathers were able to
bear, let Christ Jesus the Everlasting high Priest who is the souls Bishop,
have the whole power in the Church as the head of it, and let him order all
things therein according to his Heavenly Wisdom and wonderful Council, both as
to the Calling, Ordination, and sending forth Ministers, to preach the
Everlasting Gospel, and Pastors according to his own heart and mind, that the
people may be fed with knowledge and understanding, and let these Ministers sent
forth by Christ who have the mind of Christ, and do abide in his Doctrine, have
free Liberty without persecution to preach the Gospel in all the Provinces of
these Dominions, and suffer no Judge nor Minister of Justice to inflict any
Penalty or Corporal punishment upon them on this spiritual account, nor to cast
them into prison for the Testimony which they hold, and which is agreeable to
the Testimony of Jesus, the Word of God, and Scripture of Truth, for it is both
against the Law of God, and also against the good Laws of this Nation that any
man should suffer punishment, persecution or imprisonment on any Religious or
Spiritual account whatsoever.

Therefore let the world know, even your adversaries themselves, that you are
of the Christian Religion, by giving due encouragement to tender Consciences,
and to Christ's Ministers to preach the Word in season and out of season without
molestation or interruption, by any color or pretense of Authority derived
from that higher Power.

For he who ascended up on high, who led Captivity captive, has given gifts
unto men for the work of that Ministry, that there may not be a famine of
hearing the Word in this Nation; and forasmuch as the Lord has spoken, we
cannot but Prophecy and Declare of the things which we have seen and heard,
and that which we have tasted and handled of the Word of life, that people may
be turned from the darkness to the light, and from the power of Satan unto God;
and it is the Command of Christ unto his Ministers, that as they have freely
received they must freely give, that the Gospel may be made without charge, and
it must be freely preached, not for filthy lucre sake, but of a ready mind; and
a necessity has laid upon the Ministers of Christ in these last days and
perilous times (though the more they love the less they are beloved again) to
reprove sin in the Gates, and to give warning to Magistrates and men in
Authority both in word and writing by way of admonition, exortation, wholesome
advice and counsel, that in the fight of the Lord they may be clear of the
blood of all men, and that all might be left without excuse in that day when
God shall Judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to the Gospel; and
because Judgment has been turned backward, and good Council rejected by
Protector, Parliaments and others once in Authority, and the Servants of the
Lord cruelly persecuted by whom it was directed to them; therefore has the
Lord rejected them from bearing the Sword of justice; and now you are set as at
the stearn of Government, and this is your day of Trial, and the Lord God will
prove you and try you whether you will be a terror to the evildoers, and a
praise to them that do well, or limit his Spirit as others have done before
you; and if you expect subjection to your power, you must Rule for God in love
and fear and humility, and not as Lords over Gods heritage, and then you will
engage all the honest and upright hearted in these Nations to submit to your
Government, not for wrath or fear of punishment, but for Couscience sake; and
this will be more honor to you and your Government, then if you could force
every individual person both professors and profane in the Nation to own you
for fear of your wrath, for the wrath of man works not the righteousness of
God, and the best effects of it will but make hypocrites for fear of punishment
and persecution, if God do not persuade the hearts of people by his Word and
Spirit, and submit their spirits by his Power to very Ordinance of man both
spiritual and temporal for the Lords sake; they that were before you promised
and pretended much as in matter of Reformation, and removing of oppression both
in Church and State; but we may and do expect better things from you that have
promised less, and not made so much show of holiness as they did, which if it
so come to pass the Lord shall have the glory, by whom you are permitted to
bear Rule in the Nation, and you shall not loose your reward, if you be found
faithful in what he requires of you according to what you know; but if you walk
in the steps of Tyrants and Oppressors, and smite with the fist of wickedness,
and persecute tender Consciences for and concerning the Law, and Worship of
their God; Then What can you expect? But the same reward from him that is no
respector of persons, which they already have received that hated the reproofs
of instruction, and the good and wholesome Advice and Council from time to time
directed unto them by these suffering servants of the Lord, that have all the
day long been accounted as sheep for the slaughter, who are coming up out of
Egypt, and traveling toward the Promised Land.

Now if it be matter of Conscience to one sort of people in this Nation, or if
it be supposed by them that the Book of Common Prayer or Divine Service so
called, is the best way of Worship, and that they suppose it is well pleasing
and acceptable to the Lord, and from such a persuasion they do determine to
practice it in their Families, and in places of public worship, then let them
that are so persuaded give liberty to others that are of another persuasion for
the exercise of their Consciences according to their perswafion and Principles,
and let there be no fighting nor fining, persecution nor imprisonment, nor no
corporal Oath or punishment be inflicted on the bodies and estates of the good
people of this Nation, upon any Ecclesiastical or spiritual account, according
to the true intent and meaning of the Act abovementioned, and as the Law of
God requires of every man to do unto others as he would have others to do unto
him, and this will satisfy all the sober-minded and reasonable men in the
Nation, and make way for a happy settlement of pure Religion, everlasting
Righteousness, and perfect peace among people in matters relating to the
Worship and Service of God, and in all things appertaining to the spiritual
Kingdom and Government of Christ Jesus, the chief shepherd and Bishop of our
Souls, whose right it is to reigns Supreme head of the Church, who is the
Author, Finisher and Defender of our Faith, and who is so to be owned
especially in this Nation by them who are of the the Protestant Religion, and
who have denied and protested against the Popes Supremacy and usurpt Authority;
and as his Supremacy and Authority is denied, so let his Laws and Institutions
and impositions be denied also, that it may manifestly be declared that lesus
Christ is the head of the Church, who is the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles.

And they that are established upon him have no need of the Turks Alcoran for a
Rule to walk by, nor the Popes Mass to teach them the knowledge of God and
Christ; for God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined
in their hearts to teach them the knowledge of God and his Ways, and they that
have received the Spirit of God, and can pray with the Spirit, and with the
understanding have no need of the Bishops Book of composed or Common-payer,
which is a set Form of words that every profane person can repeat, for the
Spirit it self will help their infirmities that have received it, and make
intercession unto God for the Saints and for Kings and all that are in
Authority, and they that have this Spirit of God for a Rule to walk by, which
is agreeable to the Scripture of the Prophets and Apostles, they need not the
Presbyters directory as a Rule for public Worship, Church Ordinances and
Administrations, for the God of Order teaches them how to walk and worship,
and when to speak and pray as they are moved by his Spirit, and in the Church
of God they may all Prophecy one by one, and if any thing be revealed unto him
that sits by, the first is to hold his peace, for the Spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets, and there is no lording one over another,
neither is the Spirit limited or confined to him that has the highest place in
the Assembly, for such have taken away the Key of knowledge, and have forsaken
the right Way, and are out of the Doctrine of Christ, who are called of men
Master, and have the chiefest seats in the Synagogues; and this is not the
Order of the Churches of the Saints, but by them in this Order the Saints are
persecuted, and haled out of their Assemblies and before Magistrates; and the
time of this ignorance has been long in which the pretended Leaders of the
people in this Nation have caused them to err, and they that were led by them
have been destroyed for want of the good knowledge of the Lord, for since the
time that the right Way was forsaken, and the way of Baalam followed, the
Priests have preached for hire, and they have taught fear toward God by the
precepts of men; so that the unknown God has been ignorantly worshipped in the
Old Mass-houses commonly called Churches, which is the invention and work of
men's hands, and in which is the very seat of the Image of jealousy spoken of
by the Prophet Ezekiel, and even all manner of graven Images, Pictures and
abominable Beasts, and the similitude of creeping things, and all the Idols of
the house of Isreal's, portraied or painted round about upon the Walls, and in
the highest places of these Idols Tempels have the Hirelings by Authority and
Commission from the higher Power made merchandise of the Scriptures, of the
Prophets and Apostles, which were spoken forth freely by the holy men of God in
their day, and written aforetime not to be sold for money; but for our learning
and admonition upon whom the ends of the World is come; and because we have
declared against such practices, we have been accused for denying the
Scriptures and the Ministers of the Gospel, and because we cannot own those
Mass-houses for Churches which were set up in the time of Popery, as the Idols
Temples were set up when Israel had forgotten their Maker, and forsaken the
fountain of living water, as its written in the Prophets, When Israel had
forgotten her Maker she builded Temples, and Judah multiplied fenced Cities;
therefore we have been accused by the profane and ignorant people, that we
deny the Churches, because we cannot contribute to the repairing of these
painted houses, in which are all these Pictures and Images portraied upon the
Walls round about, and because of these things by an usurped Authority we have
suffered the spoiling of our goods from time to time, and have been made as a
prey to the teeth of merciless men, and because for Conscience sake we could
not come to these houses to hear the Priests preach for hire, and so put into
the mouth of the false prophet and Idol shepherds, we have been summoned by Law
suites to London from all parts of this Nation, and have had our goods spoiled
and our bodies imprisoned, some until death by a cruel hard-hearted generation
of hireling Presbyterian Priests and Impropriators; so that we may truly say,
Satan's power has been great, and the time has been long in which he that
could persecute the People of God called Quakers by virtue of Authority derived
from the higher Power, did think he did God good service; but the Lord has
visited and will vilit for these things, and with equity will he plead for the
meek of the earth, and we have given our power and committed our cause unto
him, so that our dependence is not upon the Arm of flesh, or men of might, but
in the Lord in whom there is Everlasting strength; Nevertheless, that you who
are set up and entrusted amongst men as the chief Authority in the Nation, may
have precept upon precept, and line upon line as others had in their day, a
necessity is laid on the Lords Servants and Handmaids, who loves not their
lives unto the death, to speak and write unto you of the things which they have
seen and heard concerning you, as they are commanded of God, that to Gods
witness in the sight of the Lord they may be made manifest, and that you may
have warning in this your day not to touch the Lords anointed, nor to do any
harm unto his Prophets, whether they be Sons or Daughters, Servants or
Handmaids upon whom God has poured forth of his Spirit from on high in these
latter days; And if it be in the hearts of you who are the present Rulers of
this Nation, to settle and establish Religion as others have attempted to do,
and so have limited the Spirit of God by their Ordinances and Traditions, let
it be wisely considered whether God require such a thing at your hands, yea or
nay; for many who were supposed to be Wise and Learned men, have been mistaken
in this very particular, and instead of Reformation they have brought in
oppression and persecution, and instead of a happy settlement they have caused
great strife, heart-burnings, disputations and open contention about Church
Ordinances, Worship, Doctrine and Discipline, and one sort have cried lo here
is Christ, and others have said here is the place where men ought to Worship,
and others they cry this is the Good Old Way, let all be compelled to conform
to this Way, and to our Order and Ordinances and Discipline, and let all be
made subject to that Worship which our Forefathers owned, and to that Church
Government which they lived under; and so would have all limited to their
Worship, and compelled to their way by corporal punishments, if for Conscience
sake they cannot be conformable; so that there is need of much wisdom in this
thing, and the best way to preserve peace in the Nation is to protect all
people of all perswafions alike in their Civil and Religious Rights, and not to
compel any by force or violence to any worship contrary to a full persuasion in
their minds; for in this very Particular Jacobs Family has suffered by all
sorts of people and governments of late in this Nation, both Parliaments,
Protector, and professors and profane, and the Lords peculiar treasure has
been trampled upon, as people not fit to be protected nor to live upon the
earth; and even like as the high-minded Counselors or Courtiers of the King of
Babylon did in their day envy Israel, and incense the King against that people
who were dispersed in all the Provinces of his Kingdoms, as being diverse in
their Laws from all other people, and that they did not observe the Kings Laws;
even so have the proud and high-minded men in high Places in these days
labored to incense the Supreme Magistrates against a dispersed remnant of the
Seed of Jacob, whose captivity the Lord is returning out of the Land of the
North Country, and out of all places where they have been scattered, and we
have been misrepresented both to Parliaments and others by the Priests of the
high Places, as Amos was unto the King by Amaziah the Priest of Bethel, who
sent unto Jeroboam King of Israel, saying, Amos has conspired against thee in
the midst of the House of Israel, the land is not able to bear his words, when
he declared unto them that which the Lord had showed unto him concerning them;
and without all Controversy some of our old Adversaries by whom we have been
persecuted ever since we were a people, may yet go about to persuade these
present Rulers that it is not for the Kings profit to suffer us to enjoy our
Liberty and Religion within his Dominions; and so wait for a Law from him to
limit the Holy One of Israel, as the uncircumcised in all ages and generations
have done, and as the Rulers of this last age have labored and endeavored to
do, until the Lord has made the House of Jacob as a fire, and the House of
Joseph as a flame, and the House of Esau like stubble fully dry, and has
consumed their briars and thorns as in one day; for the same spirit of envy
remains yet unsatisfied in the Priests of the high Places, who prayed against
the King and for the Protector, and cried out for assistance, liek as the
unbelieving Jews cried, Men of Israel help, these are they that will turn the
world upside down: help Protector and Parliament, Council, Committee and Army;
make your Law both Military and Civil, a defense of our Faith and Religion,
Church Ministry and Ordinances, else these men that pretends the Motion of the
Spirit, and immediate Revelation from Heaven, those Quakers (that trembles at
the Word of God) will prevail against us and undermine the foundation of all
our great Truths, and then not only our Craft is in danger, by which we have
got a livel, hood for our selves and Families, but also our Traditional
Ordinances (and those old Masshouses our Churches) in which are all these
pleasant pictures painted upon the Walls, and the glory of their magnificence
will come into disesteem, and so by a corrupt new invented Law has iniquity
been established, and the Saints of the most high persecuted, and imprisoned
for the Testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God; and their Righteous Souls have
cried, How long Lord? How long Holy and True? Wilt not thou Judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell upon the Earth? And because Judgment was not
speedily executed upon the usurpers of Authority and workers of iniquity, and
oppressors of the Just, all the false Prophets and bireling Priests promised
peace and safety to themselves and to the men in Authority, and they were
persuaded that their Mountain was so invincible that it could never have been
moved. Nay, all the chief ones of the Nation would not have believed that an
enemy to their imperfect peace should have entered into this Nation, to take all
the ancient high Places thereof again in possession; But what shall we say to
these things, the purpose of the Lord must come to pass, That the oppressed may
go free, and that the sins of the false Prophets, and the imquity of the
hireling Priests, and the corruption of Rulers may be punished, which is the
Cause of all the Judgments of the Lord upon the Nation; for all the judgments
which came upon Jerusalem, who had neglected the day of their visitation, and
mocked Gods Messengers, and stoned them that were sent unto them, was for the
sins of the Prophets, and the iniquity of her priests that shed the blood of
the just in the midst of her, that wandered as blind men in the streets, and
were polluted with blood, so that they would not touch their garments, Lam.
4.13. And this is the Cause of all these alterations and overturnings, which is
so strange and mavelous to the beholders, that such strong men should wax
feeble and leave their glory to others, not by might nor by power, but by the
Spirit of the Lord God, and according to his Word by his Servants the Prophets,
whom they have mocked, despised, persecuted and shameful entreated in the day
of their prosperity and exaltation.

But they would not receive instruction, and therefore must they receive
correction; they would not be gathered, when the Lord would have gathered them
as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and therefore are they
scattered and broken to pieces; and that Stone which the Builders resused, is
become a Some of stumbling, and a rock of offense unto them, on which they are
fallen and broken, and snared and taken; and whosoever shall strive with their
Maker, and fight against the Lord shall not prosper nor prevail, for the Lord
will thunder out of heaven upon his adversaries, and will break them to pieces;
but this is the portion and heritage of his suffering Servants, whose Faith
stands in his Power, and whose Righteousness is of him; every tongue that
rises in Judgment against them shall be condemned, and this is the honor of
all the Saints, to bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles with fetters of Iron, and
to execute upon the Heathen the Judgments written, Psalm. 149.8. For the Lord
will not cast off his People, neither will he forsake his Inheritance, who are
unto him as the Apple of his Eye, and whosoever shall offend any of those
little ones, whose Faith stands in the Power of God, and who trembles at the
Word of his Holiness, It were better for him that a Millstone were hanged
about his neck, and he drowned in the midst of the Sea; and though the wicked
be highly exalted, and join hand and hand against the Seed which God has
blessed, yet must not they go unpunished, though the Servants of the Lord be
far from oppression, or rendering unto them evil for evil; for although we were
all the day long accounted as sheep for the slaughter, and have been smitten
with the tongue of the uncircumcised, and with the sist of wickedness, and
every Horn of the Beasts head has pushed at us from time to time, yet have we
not desired fire from Heaven to consume our adversaries, neither have we sought
to be avenged on them, or desired their overthrow, God is witness for us; but
we have loved them that hated us without a Cause, and we have prayed for them
that persecuted us, and to this day we desire not their death, or that they
should be dealt with as they have dealt with others, and that their trespastes
may be forgiven them, more then they have forgiven others; and that the Lord
would humble them in their afflictions, that they might return to him and know
that the Most High Rules in the Kingdoms of men, who desires not the death of
sinners, but rather that all men every where should repent and come to the
knowledge of his truth, for he waits to be gracious, because he delights in the
exercise of loving kindness, and there is mercy with him that he may be feared.

And as for the strange Act of the Lord which he has brought to pass so far,
contrary to the expectation of many, who has swept away the resuge of lies and
the unrighteous covering, under which many were hid until the Lord appeared,
who is bringing down the loftiness of men that had set their nests on high, and
who were ready to say within themselves every one in his own heart, I sit as a
Queen and shall see no more sorrow, I Will ascend into Heaven, and I will exalt
my Throne above the stars of God, I will sit also upon the Mount of the
Congregation in the sides of the North, whom God has brought down into
contempt, and near unto the sides of the pit, and upon whom he has brought
these two things in one day, even desolation, widow-hood and loss of Children;
let none rejoice over them, nor seek to be avenged on them by killing their
bodies or destroying their substance, nor be lifted up by their fall, for all
these things have happened unto them for examples unto such as after all these
things shall live ungodly, and lift up themselves as Lords over Gods heritage;
for all things that have happened unto them, and all things written aforetime
is for the admonition of these present Rolers and this generation, that they
may not sit down to eat and drink and rise up to play as in the days of Noah
and Lot, for he that spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to
Hell, and delivered them into Chains of darkness to be reserved unto Judgment;
nor the old world that sinned, who had corrupted their ways upon the earth,
but brought in the flood upon the world of the ungodly, and turned the Cities
of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemning them with an overthrow for their
ungodly deeds, 2. P^t. and he that cut off from Israel, both head and tail,
branch and rush in one day, the ancient and the honorable, he is the Head, and
the Prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail, Esaias 9.14. and who has
reproved Kings for the sake of his People, saying, Touch not my anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm, he is the same both in Justice and Power at this day,
and his hand is not shortened, neither is he slack as some men count slackness,
but will render a Just recompense of reward unto every man according to his
works, whether they be good or evil, and the sin of Sodom must not go
unpunished, for pride goes before destruction, and a high mind before a fall;
therefore fear the Lord and tremble at the Word of his holiness all ye Rulers
and People upon the earth, and meet the Judge by the way, kiss the Son, least
he be angry, if once his wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are all they
that puts their trust in him.

Oh, who would not fear the King of Nations, whom God has determined (by a
perpetual Decree) to set upon the holy Hill of Zion; by whom Kings reign, and
Princes Decree Justice, and who will Rule the Nations with a rod of Iron, and
break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel, And unto whom God will give the
Heathen for an Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for a
Possession; That the Government may be upon His Shoulder from generation to
generation; of the increase of whose righteous Government and Peace there shall
be no End: And unto him who has been despised and rejected amongst men, and
whose Visage has been more marred, than any man, against whom the Kings of the
Earth have shut their mouths, and said, We will not have this man to Reign over
us, Even unto this man of Sorrows, who is acquainted with grief, must all the
ends of the earth look for salvation, And unto him must all the Kings of the
Earth, and the Mighty men, and the chief Captains bring their glory, and their
honor, and cast their Crowns at his Feet; that He (whose Right it is) may have
the Crown, and sway the Scepter in the Kingdoms of men; and he must reign till
All his Enemies be made his Footstool, and all Thrones and Dominions,
Principalities, and Pow^rs must be made subject unto him; and they that will
not have him to reign, must be be broken to pieces; And this is the Foundation
which God has laid in Zion, and Other Foundation can no man lay, then that
which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, and whosoever believes and builds on him, shall never be ashamed
nor confounded; But they that believe not on him, shall stumble, and fall, and
be broken, and snared, and taken; And this is the Rock, and Cornerstone, which
the Builders have refused, which to us is elect and precious, and is become the
Head-Stone of the Corner, and the Top-Stone of that spiritual Building, which
is fitly framed together, and is growing unto an holy Temple in the Lord; and
that house which is builded on this Foundation, shall stand as Mount Zion,
which cannot be moved; for it is not divided against it self, neither can the
Gates of Hell prevail against it; For whosoever are established in
Righteousness upon this Rock, are not soon shaken in mind, nor tossed to and
fro with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of men, whereby they lie in
wait by (...), Policy,, and cunning devised Fables to draw people from the hope
of the Gospel, and from the simplicity that is in Christ. Neither does these
people (who are as Living stones or the spiritual house) cry to the Magistrates
and outward Powers to have Religion settled by outward force, imposing penalties
upon Non-Conformists unto, and Disturbers of their Way, and Worship, and
Ordinances; For they are already settled, and satisfied, and established in the
true Religion, and in Righteousness, and it is the Double-minded, who are
unstable like the Waters, and are tossed to and fro like the troubled Sea, that
are unsettled, and the best way to settle such in the true Religion, or to leave
them without excuse, is to suffer the Ministers of Gods Word to preach the
Gospel in the Power and Demonstration of the Spirit, that the witness of God
may be raised in them, and the sober Principle brought forth to rule men in
matters both Religious and Civil; and this meek spirit and Principle is
according to the will of God, and mind of Christ; And as this comes to be
raised up by a powerful free Ministry, to rule in men, or in Families,
Congregations, and Nations, so they come to be settled, and stayed, and builded
up a spiritual house, that the Lord may dwell in them, as he has said, To this
man will I look that's humble, and of a broken heart, and trembles at my word,
and I Will walk in them, and dwell in them (says the Lord,) and they shall be my
sons and daughters.

And that which is required of you, is to keep the peace, and to be a Tertor to
the Evildoers, and not to suffer wicked men to fight, and persecute, and hale
out of Assemblies, and smite with the fist of wickedness, nor to assault the
people of God in their peaceable Meetings, and to suffer no fighting, nor
striking, nor imprisonment, nor killing men about Religion, and Worship, and
Ordinances; For they that will fight and strike about Religion, will never be
settled in nor satisfied with any way of worship, until-their minds be changed,
and their hands cleansed and their hearts purified; neither will such adorn the
Gospel by a good conversation, under what name, pretense, or profession soever;
for that spirit is against every appearance of Truth in purity, and an enemy
unto the Lord by wicked works

Therefore all you who are in the High places of the earth, wait for counsel
and direction from the Lord, how to be ordered in this particular; and be not
hasty to give consent or encouragement to one sort more then another, or to the
people of one persuasion and judgment, to be as Lords over all others; for
this has proved the ruin and destruction of them whom the Lord has cast out
before you: If you will be followers of Christ, and rule for God, you must be
meek and lowly in heart, and take up the Cross to your own wills, that you may
be found among the Lambs faithful followers, and numbered among the dust of
Jacob, whose Tents cannot be prevailed against by any Enchantment whatsoever.

And now all people to whom this is directed, While the Candle of the Lord
shines upon your heads, and gives Light unto you walk in the light thereof,
and be not high-minded, nor self-willed, nor soon angry, but fear the Lord, and
follow after Righteousness and Truth, Peace and Union, that strife (and
contention, wars, and fightings, killing, and imprisoning about Religion, and
Worship, and Ministers maintenance) may cease and come to an end; and let God
in all things (relating to his Worship) have the pre-eminence, and the ordering
and disposing of his People, that trembles at his word, and regards the
opperation of his hand.

And read this, and whatever else is directed unto you by the Lords faithful
servants and Handmaids, whom he moves as Instruments to make known his mind
unto you; and neglect not the great salvation now begun to be spoken of; The
door of Hope is open, and a price is put into your hands; sleep not away your
time, like the foolish Virgins, until the Door be shut against you; Buy Oil
without money, that your Lamps may be trimmed and kept burning, that you may
not stumble and fall upon the Rock of Israel; They that are fallen had a Day,
and the Lord gave them warning, both by word and writing in their day, and this
is your day in which the Lord waits to be gracious unto you, and his Patience
and long-suffering calls you to Repentance. Oh! that you did but know in this
your day, the desire and breathings of the Lords servants for your Eternal
good, and the things which does belong unto your peace, and what it is that the
Lord requires of you, yet a little while and the light is with you, whilst you
have it walk in it least your candle be put out, and your Sun go down, and the
shadows of the evening overtake you, whilst you have an opertunity exercise
your selves as the servants of the Lord in doing good, and following after
righteousness, for this is that which God requires of you all, from the least
unto the greatest, to do justly, to love mercy, work Righteousness and walk
humbly before him all the days of your appointed time, that he may be
glorified by you in your life time, and you may have peace in your end.

Kingstone upon Thames, 14. of the ^th month. 1660. T. S.

THE END

