A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE COURT AT Christchurch Chapel IN OXFORD. BY
ROBERT SOUTH, D. D. ^^^lick Orator to the University of Oxford, and Chaplain to
the Lord High Chancellor of ENGLAND.

OXFORD, Printed by W. H. for William Not, and are to be sold by Richard
Davis, 1665.

IMPRIMATUR ROBERTUS SAY, Vice-Cancellarius Oxon.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of CLARENDON, Lord High Chancellor of
England, and Chancellor of the University of Oxon. and one of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Couucil.
My Lord,

THough to prefix so great a Name to so mean a Piece, seems like enlarging the
Entrance of an house, that affords no Reception: yet, since there is nothing
can warrant the Publication of it, but what can also Command it; the Work must
think of no other Patronage, then the same that adorns, and protects its
Author. Some inde^d vouch great Names, because they think they deserve, but I,
because I need such: and had I not more occasion then many others, to see and
converse with, your Lordships Candor and proness to pardon, there is none had
greater cause to dread your Judgment; and thereby in some part I venture to
commend my own. For all know, who know your Lordship, that in a Nobler respect,
than either that of Government, or Patronage, you represent and Head the best
of Universities: and have Traveled over too many Nations, and Authors, to
encourage any one that understands himself, to appear an Author in your Hands:
who seldom read any Books to inform your self, but only to countenance and
credit them. But, my Lord, what is here Published, pretends no Instruction, but
only Homage; while it teaches many of the World, it only describes your
Lordship; Who have made the ways of Labor and Virtue, of doing, and doing
Good, your Business and your Recreation, your Meat and your Drink, and, I may
add also, your Sleep. My Lord, the Subject here treated of, is of that Nature,
that it would seem but a Chimaera, and a bold Paradox, did it not in the very
Front carry an Instance to exemplify it; and so by the Dedication convince the
World, that the Discourse it self was not impracticable. For such ever was, and
is, and will be the Temper of the generality of mankind, that, while I send men
for Pleasure, to Religion, I cannot but expect, that they will look upon me, as
only having a mind to be pleasant with them my self: nor are men to be Worded
into new Tempers, or Constitutions: and he that thinks, that any one can
persuade, but He that made the World, will find that he does not well
understand it.

My Lord, I have obeyed your Command, for such must I account your Desire; and
thereby Design, not so much the Publication of my Sermon, as of my Obedience:
for, next to the Supreme Pleasure described in the ensuing Discourse, I enjoy
none greater, then in having any opportunity to declare my self,

Your Lordships very Humble Servant, and Obliged Chaplain, Robert South.

A SERMON PREACHED AT COURT, etc.
PRO-VERBS 3. 17. Her Ways are Ways of Pleasantness.
THe Text relating to something going before, must carry our Eye back to the 13
verse, where we shall find, that the thing, of which these words are affirmed,
is Wisdom: A Name by which the Spirit of God was here pleased to express to us
Religion, and thereby to tell the world, what before it was not aware of, and
perhaps will not yet believe, that those two great things that so engross the
desires and designs of both the Nobler and Ignobler sort of mankind, are to be
found in Religion; namely, Wisdom and Pleasure; and that the former is the
direct way to the latter, as Religion is to Both.

That Pleasure is man's chiefest good, (because indeed it is the perception of
Good that is properly pleasure) is an assertion most certainly true, though
under the common acceptance of it, not only false, but odious: for according to
this, pleasure and sensuality pass for terms equivalent; and therefore, he that
takes it in this sense, alters the Subject of the discourse. Sensuality is
indeed a part, or rather one kind of pleasure, such an one as it is. For
Pleasure in general, is the consequent apprehension of a suitable Object,
sutably applied to a rightly disposed faculty; and so must be conversant, both
about the faculties of the Body, and of the Soul respectively; as being the
result of the fruitions belonging to Both.

Now amongst those many Arguments, used to press upon men the exercise of
Religion, I know none that are like to be so successful, as those that answer,
and remove the prejudices that generally possess, and bar up the Hearts of men
against it: amongst which, there is none so prevalent in Truth, though so
little owned in Pretense, as that it is an Enemy to men's pleasures, that it
bereaves them of all the sweets of Converse, dooms them to an absurd and
perpetual Melancholy, designing to make the world nothing else but a great
Monastery. With which notion of Religion, Nature and Reason seems to have great
cause to be dissatisfied. For since God never Created any faculty, either in
Soul or Body, but withal prepared for it a suitable object, and that in order to
its gratification; can we think that Religion was designed only for a
Contradiction to Nature? and with the greatest and most irrational Tyranny in
the World to tantalize, and tie men up from enjoyment, in the midst of all the
opportunities of enjoyment? to place men with the furious affections of hunger,
and thirst in the very bottom of Plenty; and then to tell them that the envy
of Providence has sealed up every thing that is suitable under the Character of
Unlawful? For certainly, first to frame appetites fit to receive pleasure, and
then to interdict them with a Touch not, taste not, can be nothing else, then
only to give them occasion to devour, and prey upon themselves; and so to keep
men under the perpetual Torment of an unsatisfied Desire: a thing hugely
contrary to the natural felicity of the Creature, and consequently to the
wisdom, and goodness of the great Creator.

He therefore that would persuade men to Religion, both with Art and efficacy,
must found the persuasion of it upon this, that it interferes not with any
rational pleasure, that it bids no body quit the enjoiment of any one thing
that his Reason can prove to him, ought to be enjoyed. It Is confessed, when
through the cross circumstances of a man's temper or condition, the Enjoyment of
a pleasure would certainly expose him to a greater inconvenience, then Religion
bids him quit it; that is, it bids him prefer the endurance of a lesser evil
before a greater, and Nature it self does no less. Religion therefore
intrenches upon none of our Privileges, invades none of our Pleasures; it may
indeed sometimes command us to change, but never totally to abjure them.

But it is easily foreseen, that this Discourse will in the very beginning of
it be encountered by an Argument from Experience, and therefore not more obvious
than strong; namely, that it cannot but be the greatest trouble in the world
for a man thus (as it were) even to shake off himself, and to defy his Nature,
by a perpetual thwarting of his innate Appetites and Desires; which yet is
absolutely necessary to a severe and impartial prosecution of a Course of
Piety: nay, and we have this asserted also, by the Verdict of Christ himself,
who still makes the Disciplines of self-denial and the Cross, those terrible
blows to flesh and blood, the indispensable requisites to the being of his
Disciples. All which being so, would not he that should be so hardy as to
attempt to persuade men to Piety from the pleasures of it, be liable to that
invective taunt from all mankind, that the Israelites gave to Moses; Will thou
put out the eyes of this People? Will thou persuade us out os our first
Notions? Will thou demonstrate, that there is any delight in a Cross, any
Comfort in Violent abridgments, and which is the greatest Paradox of all, that
the highest Pleasure is to abstain from it?

For answer to which, it must be confessed, that all Arguments whatsoever against
Experience are fallacious; and therefore in order to the Clearing of the
Assertion laid down, I shall premise these two Considerations.

1. That Pleasure is in the Nature of it a Relative thing, and so imports a
peculiar Relation and Correspondence to the ^tate and condition of the Person
to whom it is a Pleasure. For as those who Disco^rse of Atoms affirm that there
are Atoms of all forms, some round, some triangular, some square, and the like;
all which are continually in motion, and never settle till they fall into a fit
circumscription or place of the same figure: So there are the like great
diversities of Minds and Objects; whence it is, that this Object striking upon
a mind thus or thus disposed, flies off, and rebounds without making any
impression; but ^he same luckily happening upon another of a Disposition as it
were framed for it, is presently caught at, and greedily clasped into the
nearest Unions and Embraces.

2. The other thing to be considered, is this, That the Estate of all men by
Nature is more or less different from that estate, into which, the same persons
do, or may pass by the exercise of that which the Philosophers called Virtue,
and into which men are much more effectually and sublimely translated by that
which we call Grace; that is, by the supernatural overpowring operation of Gods
Spirit. The difference of which two estates consists in this; that in the
former the sensitive appetites rule and domineer; in the latter the Supreme
faculty of the Soul, called Reason, sways the Scepter, and acts the whole man
above the irregular demands of Appetite and Affection.

That the distinction between these two is not a mere figment, framed only to
serve an Hypothesis in Divinity; and that there is no man b^t is really under
one, before he is under the other, I shall prove, by showing a Reason why it is
so, or rather indeed why it cannot but be so. And it is this: Because every man
in the beginning of his life, for several years is capable only of exercising
his sensitive faculties and desires, the use of Reason not showing it self till
about the Seventh Year of his Age, and then at length but (as it were) dawning
in very imperfect Essays and Discoveries. Now it being most undeniably evident
that every Faculty and Power grows stronger and stronger by exercise; is it any
wonder at all, when a man for the space of his first six years, and those the
years of ductility and impression, has been wholly ruled by the propensions of
sense, at that age very eager and impetuous; that then after all, his Reason
beginning to exert and put forth it self, finds the man prepossessed and under
another power: so that it has much ado by many little steps, and gradual
conquests, to recover its prerogative from the usurpations of appetite, and so
to subject the whole man to its Dictates: the difficulty of which is not
conquered by some men all their Days. And this is one true ground of the
Difference between a state of Nature, and a state of Grace, which some are
pleased to scoff at in Divinity, who think that they confute all that they
laugh at, not knowing that it may be solidly evinced by mere Reason and
Philosophy.

These two considerations being premised, namely, That Pleasure implies a
proportion and agreement to the respective States and Conditions of men; and
that the state of men by Nature is vastly different from that estate into which
Grace or Virtue transplants them; all that Objection levelled against the
foregoing Assertion is very easily resolveable.

For there is no doubt, but a man, while he resignes himself up to the Brutish
guidance of sense and appetite, has no relish at all for the Spiritual, refined
delights of a Soul Clarifyed by Grace and Virtue. The pleasures of an Angel can
never be the pleasures of a Hogg. But this is the thing that we contend for;
that a man having once advanced himself to a state of Superiority over the
Control of his inferior Appetites, finds an infinitely more solid and sublime
pleasure in the Delights proper to his Reason, then the same person, had ever
conveyed to him by the bare ministry of his Senses. His taste is absolutely
changed, and therefore that which pleased him formerly, becomes flat and
insipid, to his Appetite now grown more Masculine and severe. For as age and
maturity passes a real and a mavelous Change upon the Diet and recreations of
the same person; so that no man at the Years and Vigor of Thirty, is either
fond of Sugerplums or Rattles: In like manner, when Reason, by the assistance
of Grace, has prevailed over, and outgrown the encroachments of Sense, the
delights of Sensuality are to such an one but as an Hobbyhorse would be to a
Counselor of State; or as tastless, as a bundle of Hay to an Hungry Lion.
Every alteration of a man's Condition infallibly inferrs an alteration of his
Pleasures.

The Athenians laughed the Physiognomist to Scorn, who pretending to read men's
minds in their foreheads, described Socrates for a crabbed, lustful, proud,
ill-natured Person; they knowing how directly contrary he was to that Dirty
Character, But Socrates bid them forbear laughing at the man; for that he had
given them a most exact acconnt of his nature; but what they saw in him so
contrary at the present, was from the conquest that he had got over his Natural
disposition by Philosophy. And now let any one consider, whether that Anger,
that Revenge, that Wantonness and Ambition, that were the proper pleasures of
Socrates, under his Natural temper of crabbed, lustful, and Proud, could have
at all affected or enamored the mind of the same Socrates, made gentle, chaste
and humble by Philosophy.

Aristotle says, that were it Possible to put a Young man's eye into an Old man's
head, he would see as plainly and clearly as the other; so could we infuse the
inclinations and principles of a Virtuous person into him that prosecutes his
debauches with the greatest Keeness of desire, and sense of Delight, he would
loath and reject them as heartily, as he now pursues them. Diogenes being asked
at a Feast, why he did not continue eating as the rest did, answered him that
asked him with another question, Pray why do you eat? Why says he, for my
pleasure; why so, says Diogenes, do I abstain for my Pleasure; and therefore
the vain, the Vicious and Luxurious person argues at an high rate of
inconsequence, when he makes his particular desires, the general measure of
other men's delights. But the case is so plain, that I shall not upbraid any
man's understanding by endeavoring to give it any farther Illustration.

But still, after all, I must not deny that the change and passage from a state
of Nature, to a state of Virtue, is laborious, and consequently irksome and
unpleasant: and to this it is, that all the forementioned expressions of our
Savior do allude. But surely the baseness of one condition, and the generous
excellency of the other is a sufficient Argument to induce any one to a change.
For as no man would think it a desirable thing, to preserve the Itch upon
himself, only for the Pleasure of Scratching, that attends that loathsome
distemper; so neither can any man, that would be faithful to his Reason, yield
his Ear to be bored through by his domineering appetites, and so choose to
serve them for ever, only for those poor, thin gratifications of sensuality
that they are able to reward him with. The ascent up the hill is hard and
tedious, but the serenity and fair prospect at the Top, is sufficient to incite
the Labourer of undertaking it, and to reward it being undertook. But the
difference of these two conditions of men, as the foundation of their different
pleasures, being thus made out; to press men with arguments to pass from one to
the other, is not directly in the way, or design of this Discourse.

Yet before I come to declare positively the pleasures that are to be found in
the ways of Religion: one of the grand duties of which is stated upon
Repentance; a thing expressed to us by the grim names of Mortification,
Crucifixion, and the like: and that I may not proceed only upon absolute
Negations, without some Concessions; we will see, whether this so harsh,
dismal, and affrighting duty of Repentance is so entirely Gall, as to admit of
no mixture, no allay of sweetness, to reconcile it to the Apprehensions of
Reason and Nature.

Now Repentance consists properly of two things,

1. Sorrow for Sin. 2. Change of Life.
A word briefly of them both.

1. And first for Sorrow for Sin: Usually, the sting of Sorrow is this, that it
neither removes nor alters the thing we sorrow for; and so is but a kind of
reproach to our Reason, which will be sure to accost us with this Dilemma.
Either the thing, we sorrow for, is to be remedied, or it is not: If it is, why
then do we spend the time in mourning, which should be spent in an active
applying of Remedies? but if it is not; then is our Sorrow Vain and
Superfluous, as tending to no real Effect. For no man can weep his Father or
his Friend out of the Grave, or mourn himself out of a Bankrapt condition. But
this Spiritual Sorrow is effectual to one of the greatest and highest Purposes,
that mankind can be Concerned in. It is a means to avert an impendent wrath; to
disarme an offended Omnipotence; and even to fetch a Soul out of the very jaws
of Hell. So that the End and Consequence of this sorrow, sweetens the sorrow it
self: and as Solomon says, In the midst of laughter, the heart is sorrowful;
so in the midst of sorrow here, the heart may rejoice: for while it mourns, it
reads, That those that mourn shall be comforted; and so while the Penitent
weeps with one Eye, he views his Deliverance with the other. But then for the
External Expressions, and vent of Sorrow; we know that there is a certain
pleasure in weeping; it is the Discharge of a big and a swelling grief, of a
full and a strangling discontent: and therefore he that never had such a burden
upon his heart, as to give him opportunity thus to ease it, has one pleasure in
this World, yet to Come.

2. As for the other part of Repentance, which is change of life; this indeed
may be troublesome in the Entrance; but it is but the first bold onset, the
first resolute Violence and invasion upon a vicious habit, that is so sharp and
afflicting. Every impression of the Lancet Cuts, but it is the first only that
Smarts. Besides, it is an Argument hugely unreasonable, to plead the Pain of
passing from a Vicious Estate, unless it were proved, that there was none in
the continuance under it: But surely, when we read of the Service, the Bondage,
and the Captivity of Sinners, we are not entertained only with the Air of
Words, and Metaphors; and instead of Truth, put off with Similitudes. Let him
that says it is a trouble to refrain from a Debauch, convince us, that it is
not a greater to undergo one: and that the Confessor did not impose a shrewd
Penance upon the Drunken man, by bidding him go and be drunk again: and that
lisping, raging, redness of Eyes, and what is not fit to be named in such an
Audience, is not more toilsome, then to be clean, and quiet, and discreet, and
respect. ed for being so. All the trouble that is in it, is the trouble of
being sound, being cured, and being recovered. But if there be great arguments
for Health, then certainly, there are the same for the obtaining of it: and so
keeping a due proportion between Spirituals and Temporals, we neither have, nor
pretend to greater Arguments for Repentance.

Having thus now, cleared off all, that by way of Objection c anlie against the
Truth asserted, by showing the proper Qualifications of the Subject, to whom
only the ways of Wisdom, can be ways of Pleasantness; for the further
prosecution of the matter in hand, I shall show what are those properties that
so peculiarly set off, and enhance the Excellency of this Pleasure.

1. The first is, That it is the proper pleasure of that part of man, which is
the largest and most comprehensive of Pleasure, and that is his mind: a
substance of a boundless comprehension. The mind of man is an Image, not only
of Gods Spirituality, but of his Infinity. It is not like any of the Senses,
limited to this or that kind of object: as the sight intermedles not with that
which affects the smell; but with an universal superintendence, it arbitrates
upon, and takes them in, all. It is (as I may so say) an Ocean, into which all
the little Rivolets of Sensation, both External and Internal, discharge
themselves. It is framed by God to receive all and more then Nature can afford
it; and so to be its own motive to seek forsomething above Nature, Now this is
that part of man, to which the Pleasures of Religion properly belong: and that
in a double respect.

1. In reference to Speculation, as it susteins the name of Understanding. 2.
In reference to Practice, as it susteins the name of Conscience.
1. And first for Speculation: the pleasures of which have been sometimes so
great, so intense, so engrossing of all the Powers of the Soul, that there has
been no room left for any other Pleasure. It has so called together all the
Spirits to that one Work, that there has bin no supply to carry on the Inferior
operations of Nature. Contemplation feels no Hunger, nor is sensible of any
Thirst, but of that after knowledge. How frequent and exalted a Pleasure did
David find from his Meditation in the Divine Law! all the day long it was the
Theme of his Thoughts. The affairs of State, the government of his Kingdom,
might indeed employ, but it was this only that refreshed his mind.

How short of this are the delights of the Epicure! how vastly disproportionate
are the Pleasures of the Eating, and of the Thinking man! indeed as different,
as the silence of an Archimedes in the study of a Problem, and the stillness of
a Sow at her wash. Nothing is comparable to the pleasure of an Active, and a
prevailing thought: a thought prevailing over the difficulty and obscurity of
the Object, and refreshing the Soul with new discoveries, and images of things;
and thereby extending the Bounds of Apprehension, and (as it were) enlarging
the Territories of Reason.

Now this pleasure of the Speculation of Divine things, is advanced upon a
double Account.

1. The Greatness. 2. The newness of the Object.
1. And first for the greatness of it. It is no less then the great God
himself, and that both in his Nature, and his Works. For the Eye of Reason,
like that of the Eagle, directs it self chiefly to the Sun, to a glory that
neither admits of a Superior, nor an Equal. Religion carries the Soul to the
study of every Divi^e Attribute.

It poses it with the amazing thoughts of Omnipotence; of a Power able to fetch
up such a Glorious Fabric, as this of the world, out of the Abyss of Vanity
and Nothing, and able to through it back into the same Origiral Nothing again.
It drowns us in the speculation of the Divine Omniscience; that can maintain a
steady infallible comprehension of all Events in themselves Contingent and
Accidental; and certainly know that, which does not certainly exist. It
confounds the greatest subtilties of Speculation, with the Riddles of Gods
Omnipresence; that can spread a single Individual substance through all spaces;
and yet without any commensuration of parts to any, or circumscription within
any, though totally in every one. And then for his Eternity; which nonplusses
the Strongest and the Clearest Conception, to comprehend how one single Act of
Duration, should measure all Periods and Portions of time without any of the
distinguishing parts of Succession. Likewise for his Justice; which shall prey
upon the sinner for ever, satisfying it self by a perpetual Miracle, rendering
the Creature immortal in the midst of the flames; always consuming, but never
consumed. With the like wonders we may entertain our Speculations from his
Mercy; his Beloved, his Triumphant Attribute; an Attribute, if it were
possible, something more then Infinite; for even his Justice is so, and his
Mercy transcends, that, Lastly, we may contemplate upon his supernatural,
astonishing works; particularly in the Resurrection, and reparation of the same
numerical Body, by a reunion of all the scattered Parts, to be at length
disposed of into an estate of Eternal woe or Bliss; as also the greatness and
strangeness of the Beatifick Vision; how a created Eye should be so fortifyed,
as to bear all those Gloryes that stream from the fountain of uncreated Light;
the meanest expression of which Light, is, that it is unexpressible. Now what
great and high Objects are these for a Rational Contemplation to busy it self
upon! Heights that scorn the reach of our Prospect; and Depths in which the
tallest Reason will never touch the Bottom: yet surely the pleasure arising
from thence is Great and Noble; for as much, as they afford perpetual matter
and employment to the inquisitiveness of Humane Reason; and so are large
enough, for it to take its full scope and range in. Which when it has sucked
and dreined the utmost of any Object, naturally lays it aside, and neglects it
as a dry and an Empty thing.

2. As the things belonging to Religion entertain our Speculation with great
Objects, so they entertain it also with new. And novelty we know is the great
parent of pleasure; upon which account it is, that men are so much pleased with
Variety, and Variety is nothing else but a continued Novelty. The Athenians,
who were the professed and most diligent Improvers of their Reason, made it their
whole b^siness to hear or to tell some new thing: For the truth is, Newness
especially in great matters, was a worthy entertainment for a searching mind;
it was (as I may so say) an High Taste fit for the relish of an Athenian
Reason. And thereupon the mere unheard of strangeness of Jesus and the
Resurrection, made them desirous to hear it discoursed of to them again, 17.
Acts 23. But how would it have employed their searching Faculties, had the
Mystery of the Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, and the whole
Economy of man's Redemption, been explained to them! For how could it ever
enter into the tho^ghts of Reason, that a satisfaction could be paid to an
Infinite Justice? Or, that two Natures so unconceivably different, as the
Humane and Divine, could unite into one person? The knowledge of these things
could derive from nothing else but pure Revelation, and consequently must be
purely New to the highest discourses of mere Nature. Now that the Newness of an
Object so exceedingly pleases and strikes the mind; appears from this one
consideration; that every thing pleases more in expectation then fruition: and
expectation supposes a thing as yet new, the hoped for discovery of which is
the Pl^asure that entertains the expecting, and enquiring mind: Whereas Actual
discovery (as it were) rifles and deflours the Newness and Freshness of the
object, and so for the most part makes it Cheap, Familiar and Contemptible.

It is clear therefore, that, if there be any pleasure to the mind from
speculation; and if this pleasure of speculation be advanced by the greatness
and newness of the things contemplated upon; all this is to be found in the
ways of Religion.

2. In the next place, Religion is a pleasure to the mind, as it respects
Practice, and so susteins ^he Name of Conscience. And Conscience undoubtedly is
the great Repository and Magazine of all those pleasures that can afford any
solid refreshment to the Soul. For when this is calm, and serene, and
absolving, then properly a man enjoys all things, and what is more, Himself,
for that he must do, before he can enjoy any thing else. But it is only a Pious
life, lead exactly by the rules of a severe Religion, that can authorize a man's
Conscience to speak comfortably to him: It is this that must word the sentence,
before the Conscience can pronounce it; and then it will do it with Majesty and
Authority; It will not whisper, but proclaim a Jubilee to the mind. It will not
drop, but pour in oil upon the wounded heart. And is there any pleasure
comparable to that which springs from hence! The Pleasure of Conscience is not
only greater then all other Pleasures, but may also serve instead of them: for
they only please and affect the mind in Transitu, in the pitiful narrow
compass of actual fruition; whereas that of Conscience entertains and feeds it
a long time after with durable, lasting reflections.

And thus much for the first ennobling property of the Pleasure belonging to
Religion, namely, that it is the pleasure of the mind, and that both, as it
relates to Speculation, and is called the Understanding; and as it relates to
Practice, and is called the Conscience.

2. The second ennobling property of it is, that it is such a pleasure as never
satiates, or wearies: for it properly affects the Spirit, and a Spirit feels no
weariness, as being privileged from the causes of it. But can the Epicure say
so of any of the pleasures that he so much dotes upon? Do they not expire,
while they satisfy? and after a few minutes refreshment, determine in loathing
and unquietness? How short is the Interval between a pleasure and a Burden! how
undiscernable the Transition from one to the other! Pleasure dwells no longer
upon the Appetite, then the necessities of Nature, which are quickly, and
easily provided for; and then all that follows, is a load and an oppression.
Every morsel to a satisfied Hunger, is only a new Labor to a tired Digestion.
Every draught to him that has quenched his Thirst, is but a further quenching of
Nature; a provision for Rheums and Diseases; a drowning of the quickness, and
activity of the Spirits.

He that prolongs his meals, and sacrifices his Time, as well as his other
Conveniences, to his Luxury, how quickly does he out-sit his Pleasure? and then
how is all the following time bestowed upon Ceremony and Surfeit! till at length
after a long fatigue of Eating, and Drinking, and Babbling, he concludes the
great work of Dineing Gentilely, and so makes a shift to rise from Table, that
he may lie down upon his Bed: Where, after he has slept himself into some ufe
of Himself, by much ado he staggers to his Table again, and there acts over
the same Brutish Scene: so that he passes his whole life in a dozed Condition
between sleeping, and waking, with a kind of drowsiness, and confusion upon his
Senses; which, what pleasure it can be, is hard to conceive; all that is of it,
dwells upon the tipp of his Tongue, and within the compass of his Palate; a
worthy prize for a man to purchase with the loss of his Time, his Reason, and
Himself.

Nor is that man less deceived, that thinks to maintain a constant tenure of
Pleasure, by a continual pursuit of Sports and Recreations: For it is most
certainly True of all these things, that as they refresh a man when he is
weary, so they weary him when he is refreshed; Which is an evident
Demonstration that God never designed the use of them to be continual; by
putting such an emptiness in them, as should so quickly fail and lurch the
expectation.

The most Voluptuous, and loose person breathing, were he but tied to follow
his Hawks, and his Hounds, his Dice, and his Courtships every day, would find
it the greatest Torment, and Calamity that could befall him; he would fly to
the Mines and the Gallyes for his Recreation, and to the Spade and the Mattock
for a Diversion from the misery of a Continual un-intermitted Pleasure.

But on the contrary, the Providence of God has so ordered the Course of
things, that there is no Action, whose usefulness has made it the matter of
Duty, and of a Profession, but a man may bear the continual pursuit of it,
without Loathing or Satiety. The same Shop and Trade, that employes a man in
his Youth, employes him also in his Age. Every morning he rises fresh to his
Hammer and his Anvil; he passes the Day singing: Custom has naturalized his
Labor to him: His Shop is his Element, and he cannot with any enjoyment of
himself live out of it. Whereas, no custom can make the painfulness of a
Debauch easy, or pleasing to a man; since nothing can be pleasant that is
Unnatural. But now, if God has interwoven such a pleasure with the works of our
ordinary Calling; how much superior and more refined must that be, that arises
from the survey of a Pious and well governed Life! Surely, as much as
Christianity is nobler then a Trade.

And then, for the Constant freshness of it; it is such a pleasure as can never
cloy or overwork the mind: for, surely no man was ever weary of thinking, much
less of thinking that he had done well or virtuously, that he had conquered
such and such a Temptation, or offered Violence to any of his Exorbitant
Desires. This is a delight that grows and improves under thought and reflection:
and while it exercises, does also endear it self to the mind; at the same time
employing and inflaming the Meditations. All pleasures that affect the Body,
must needs weary, because they transport, and all Transportation is a Violence;
and no Violence can be lasting, but determines upon the falling of the Spirits,
which are not able to keep up that height of motion, that the Pleasure of the
Senses raises them to. And therefore how inevitably does an immoderate laughter
end in a sigh? which is only Natures recovering it self after a force done to
it. But the Religious Pleasure of a well disposed mind, moves gently, and
therefore constantly; it does not affect by Rapture and Ecstasy; but is like
the pleasure of Health, which is Still and Sober, yet Greater and Stronger,
then those that call up the Senses, with grosser and more affecting
impressions. God has given no man a Body as strong as his Appetiets; but has
corrected the Boundlessness of his Voluptuous desires, by stinting his
strengths, and contracting his Capacities.

But to look upon those pleasures also, that have an higher object than the
Body; as those that spring from honor and grandeur of Condition; yet we shall
find, that even these are not so fresh and constant, but the Mind can nauseate
them, and quickly feel the thinness of a popular Breath. Those that are so fond
of Applause, while they pursue it, how little do they taste it when they have
it! Like lightning, it only flashes upon the face and is gone, and it is well
if it does not hurt the man. But for greatness of Place; though it is fit and
necessary, that some persons in the world should be in love with a splendid
servitude, yet certainly they must be much beholding to their own fancy, that
they can be pleased at it. For he that rises up early, and goes to bed late,
only to receive Addresses, to read and answer Petitions, is really as much tied
and abridged in his freedom, as he that waits all that time to present one. And
what pleasure can it be to be encumbred with Dependances, thronged and
surrounded with Petitioners? and those perhaps sometimes all Suitors for the
same thing: whereupon all but one will be sure to depart grumbling, because
they miss of what they think their due: and even that one scarce thankful,
because he thinks he has no more than his due. In a word, if it is a pleasure
to be envied and shot at, to be maligned standing, and to be despised falling,
to endeavor that which is impossible, which is to please all, and to suffer
for not doing it; then is it a pleasure to be great, and to be able to dispose
of men's fortunes and preferments.

But further to proceed from hence, to yet an higher degree of Pleasure, indeed
the highest on this side that of Religion; which is the pleasure of Friendship
and Conversation. Friendship must confessedly be allowed, the Top, the Flower,
and Crown of all Temporal enjoyments. Yet has not this also its flaws, and its
dark side? For is not my Friend a man, and is not Friendship subject to the
same Mortality and Change that men are? And in case a man loves, and is not
loved again, does he not think that he has cause to hate as heartily, and ten
times more eagerly then ever he loved? and then to be an Enemy, and once to
have bin a Friend, does it not embitter the Rupture, and aggravate the
Calamity? But admitting that my Friend continues so to the end; yet in the
mean time, is he all Perfection, all Virtue, and Discretion? Has he not humors
to be endured, as well as kindnesses to be enjoyed? And am I sure to smell the
Rose, without sometimes feeling the Thorn?

And then lastly for Company; though it may Reprieve a man from his Melancholy,
yet it cannot secure him from his Conscience, nor from sometimes being alone!
And what is all that a man enjoyes, from a weeks, a months, or a years
converse, comparable to what he feels for one hour, when his Conscience shall
take him aside, and rate him by himself!

In short, run over the whole Circle of all Earthly Pleasures, and I dare
affirm, that had not God secured a man a solid pleasure from his own Actions,
after he had rolled from one to another, and enjoyed them all, he would be
forced to complain, that either they were not indeed Pleasures, or that
Pleasure was not Satisfaction.

3. The third ennobling Property of the Pleasure that accrews to a man from
Religion, is, that it is such an one as is in no bodies power, but only in his
that has it; so that he that has the Propriety, may be also sure of the
Perpetuity. And tell me so of any outward enjoyment, that Mortality is capable
of. We are generally at the mercy of men's Rapine, Avarice, and Violence,
whether we shall be happy or no. For if I build my felicity upon my Estate or
Reputation, I am happy as long as the Tyrant, or the Railer will give me leave
to be so. But when my concernments take up no more room or compass, then my
self; then so long as I know where to breath, and to exist, I know also where
to be happy: for I know I may be so in my own Breast, in the Court of my own
Conscience, where, if I can but prevail with my self to be Innocent, I need
bribe neither Judge nor Officer to be pronounced so. The pleasure of the
Religious man, is an easy and a portable pleasure, such an one as he carries
about in his bosom, without alarming either the Eye or Envy of the world. A
man's putting all his pleasures into this one, is like a Travelers putting all
his goods into one Jewel: the Value is the same, and the Convenience greater.

There is nothing that can raise a man to that generous absoluteness of
condition, as neither to cringe, to sawn, or to depend meanly; but that which
gives him that happiness within himself, for which men depend upon others. For
surely I need salute no great man's Threshold, sneak to none of his Friends or
Servants, to speak a good word for me to my Conscience. It is a noble, and a
sure Defiance of a great Malice, backed with a great Interest; which, vet can
have no advantage of a man, but from his own Expectations of something that is
without himself. But if I can make my Duty my delight; if I can feast, and
please, and caresse my mind with the pleasures of worthy Speculations, or
virtuous practices, let Greatness and Malice vex and abridge me if they can: my
Pleasures are as free as my Will; no more to be controlled then my Choice, or
the unlimited range of my Thoughts and my Desires.

Nor is this kind of Pleasure only out of the reach of any outward Violence;
b^t even those things also, that make a much closer impression upon us, which
are the irresistible decays of Nature, have yet no influence at all upon this.
For when Age it self, which of all things in the world, will not be baffled or
defied, shall begin to Arrest, Seize, and remind us of our Mortality, by
Pains, Aches, deadness of Limbs, and dullness of Senses; yet then the pleasure
of the mind, shall be in its full Youth, Vigor, and Freshness. A Palsy may
as well shake an Oak, or a Fever dry up a Fountain, as either of them shake,
dry up, or impair the delight of Conscience. For it lies within, it Centers in
the heart, it grows into the very substance of the Soul; so that it accompanies
a man to his Grave; he never out-lives it, and that for this cause only,
because he cannot outlive himself.

And thus I have endeavored to describe the Excellency of that Pleasure that
is to be found in the ways of a Religious Wisdom, by those excellent
properties that do attend it; which, whether they reach the Description that
has been given them, or no, every man may convince himself, by the best of
Demonstrations, which is his own trial.

Now, from all this Discourse, this I am sure, is a most natural and direct
consequence, that if the ways of Religion, are ways of Pleasantness; then
those that are not ways of Pleasantness, are not truly and properly ways of
Religion. Upon which ground, it is easy to see what judgment is to be passed
upon all those affected, uncommanded, absurd Austerities, so much prized, and
exercised by some of the Romish Profession. Pilgrimages, going barefoot,
Hair-shirts, and Whips, with other such Gospel-Artillery, are their only helps
to Devotion: Things never enjoined, either by the Prophets under the Jewish, or
by the Apostles under the Christian Economy; who, yet surely, understood the
proper, and the most efficacious Instruments of Piety, as well as any
Confessor, or Friar of all the Order of St. Francis, or any Casuist whatsoever.

It seems, that with them, a man sometimes cannot be a Penitent, unless he also
turns Vagabond, and foots it to Jerusalem; or wanders over this or that part
of the world to visit the Shrine of such or such a pretended Saint; though
perhaps in his life, ten times more ridiculous then themselves: thus, that
which was Cains Curse, is become their Religion. He that thinks to expiate a
Sin, by going barefoot, does the Penance of a Goose; and only makes one
Folly, the Atonement of another. Paul indeed was Scourged and Beaten by the
Jews, but we never read that he Beat or Scourged himself: and if they think
that his keeping under of his Body imports so much; they must first prove, that
the Body cannot be kept under by a Virtuous mind, and that the mind cannot be
made Virtuous but by a Scourge; and consequently that Thongs and Whipcord are
means of Grace, and things necessary to Salvation. Tne Truth is, if men's
Religion lies no deeper then their Skin, it is possible that they may Scourge
themselves into very great Improvements.

But they will find that Bodily exercise touches not the Soul; and that neither
Pride, nor Lust, nor Covetousness, nor any other Vice was ever Mortifyed by
Corporal Disciplines: it is not the Back, but the Heart that must Bleed for sin:
and consequently, that in this whole Course they are like men out of their way;
let them Slash on never so fast, they are not at all the nearer to their
Journyes end: and howsoever they deceive themselves and others, they may as
well expect to bring a Cart, as a Soul to Heaven by such means. What Arguments
they have to beguile poor Simple, unstable Souls with, I know not; but surely
the Practical Casuistical, that is, the Principal, Vital part of their Religion
savours very little of Spirituality.

And now upon the result of all, I suppose that to exhort men to be Religious,
is only in other words to exhort them to take their Pleasure. A Pleasure High,
Rational, and Angelical; a Pleasure, embased with no appendant sting, no
consequent Loathings, no Remorses, or bitter farewels. But such an one, as
being Honey in the Mouth, never turns to Gall or Gravel in the Belly. A
Pleasure made for the Soul, and the Soul for that; suitable to its
Spirituality, and equal to all its Capacities. Such an one as grows fresher
upon Enjoyment, and though continually Fed upon, yet is never Devoured. A
Pleasure that a Man may call as properly his own, as his Soul and his
Conscience; neither liable to Accident, nor exposed to Injury. It is the
fore-taste of Heaven, and the Earnest of Eternity. In a word, it is such an
one, as being begun in Grace, passes into Glory, Blessedness and Immortality,
and those Pleasures that neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entered
into the Heart of Man to Conceive.

To which God of his Mercy vouchsafe to bring us all: to whom be rendered and
ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now
and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

