At the General Sessions of the Peace holden for the Town and Borough of
Southwark, on Monday the 16th. day of May, 1681. before the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor of the City of London, the Recorder of the same City, and other his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said Town and Borough.

We the Grand Jury Summoned and Sworn for this present Sessions of the Peace,
holden for this Town and Borough of Southwark, do Humbly Beseech the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor of the City of London, and the rest of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the said Town and Borough, that his Lordship, or some
other of his Majesty's said Justices of the Peace will be pleased in the behalf
of us and of the rest of the Inhabitants of the said Town and Borough, to
Present to his most Sacred Majesty the HUMBLE ADDRESS Hereunto Annexed.

TO THE Kings most Excellent Majesty,
DREAD SIR,
WE Your Majesty's truly Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Grand Jury of this
your Ancient Borough, having first Humbly begged Your Majesty to Believe that
our Apprehensions of the Happiness we enjoy through Your Majesty's Princely
Care and Paternal Affection toward us, have always been such as become the
Best Subjects to entertain under the Benign Influences of the most Propitious
and Indulgent Monarch; do further Implore Your Majesty to accept of our most
prostrate Acknowledgments of the Royal Grace and Favor of Your Majesty's late
Declaration, and to permit us to express how sensible we are of our Living
under the most Desirable Government in the World.

The Protestant Religion, as Established by Law, is so Dear to us, and our
Condition, by the Provision of the Stated Laws of the Kingdom, is rendered so
easy, that, though we have ever hitherto in all Duty rested silently satisfied
in Your Majesty's Zeal for both; yet now, if it may please Your Majesty, we can
no longer forbear to declare to Your Majesty, and publish to all the World, our
grateful sense of Your Majesty's so Solemn, so Condescending, and so Gracious a
Publication of Your Resolutions to Maintain the one, and Rule by the other;
thereby removing all the just Fears and Jealousies that might arise from the
Practices of Undermining Papists and Factious Republicans.

Your Majesty's Gracious promise of calling Frequent Parliaments, is so
transcendent an Obligation upon Us who are resolved to be the same Loyal
Subjects in the Intervals of Parliaments as during their Session, that whenever
Your Majesty's Wisdom and Providence shall Appoint an Election, we shall take
all possible care to choose such Representatives as shall comply with Your
Majesty's Designs of Extirpating Popery, and Maintaining the Established
Religion of the Church of England, and who shall likewise be ready to present
your Majesty with such Supplies as the Dignity of the Crown, and the
Necessities of the Government shall require.

Your Majesty is pleased to remind us of the late Rebellion in a Manner so
obliging, and for an End so good, as gives a most undeniable Testimony of Your
Majesty's generous Oblivion of the Injustice therein done to Your self, and
that Your Royal Memory retains only a compassionate Impression of the Miseries
thereby brought upon Your Subjects; so that should we not now yield our selves
up as the Conquest of Your Majesty's Goodness, and sit down contented with our
own Happiness, but contrary to all Your Majesty's Desires and Counsels fall
into the like Guilt and Mischief again, we should be not only the most
Ungrateful, but the most. Unpitied people in the world: And therefore, as we
Your Majesty's ever Loyal Subjects do for our parts with shame and sorrow
reflect upon the former Miscarriages and Calamities, and with the utmost
Detestation and Horror tremble at the thoughts of ever seeing the like a second
time; so we doubt not but that multitudes of deluded and misled men have, upon
the occasion of Your Majesty's Declaration, so effectually considered and
recollected the several steps and advances by which they were betrayed into
those Confusions, as to be by this time fully convinced that true and steady
Loyalty is the surest Foundation of the Kingdoms Felicity.

To this Maxim we declare that we do at present firmly stand, and that by it we
will always act; beseeching Your Majesty to be assured that our Lives and
Fortunes lie at Your Royal Feet, and that we will upon all occasions be ready
to Sacrifice them both in defense of Your Majesty's Sacred Person, and the
Established Government of Church and State.

Which ADDRESS being Subscribed by every one of the Grand Jury, was according
to their Request Humbly Presented to His Majesty in Council at Hampton Court by
Sir George Treby, Knight, Recorder of the City of London, and had a most
Gracious Acceptance.

London, Printed for Benj. Took, 1681.


