THE LAST SPEECH AND CONFESSION OF Mr. JOHN SOVTHWORTH A POPISH PRIEST, At his
Execution at TYBURN JUNE 28. 1654.

Fully discovering the Papists Design to obtain Toleration and Liberty of
Conscience; and to that end the late Rebellion was begun and carried on.

Printed from the true Copy found among other Papers at the search of a Papists
House.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of S. Paul's. 1679.

To the READER.
WHosoever shall read the following Speech made by a Popish Priest at his
death, will have an opportunity (from the Diviner part) to discover the
weakness of their Arguments, and how willing they are to blind themselves, by
neglecting to read and consider the Scriptures, which, whoever does, it is
impossible for him to be a Papist. From the Politic part arises a proof of
the Papists pretended Loyalty to their King, and a demonstration of what they
intended and aimed at. I would not be mistaken, and be thought to involve those
(though few) noble and worthy Gentlemen of that persuasion, who faithfully
served our late King of blessed Memory, during all the War, and who have been
as Loyal to our present Sovereign (whose life God in mercy long continue) in
the scandal and wickedness of their designing Jesuits, Priests, and other the
Chief amongst them, who certainly were cause of, and stirred up the late
Rebellion, contrived and brought to pass the horrid Murder of our late King,
as well as they have endeavored, and still aim at the Assassination of his
Royal Majesty: not to name their rejoicings abroad, and arrogating to
themselves the Glory (as they termed it) of so horrid a Fact; and the known
Putney Consultation. There is yet living a worthy Gentleman who was present
with the Usurper, when the then Lord Brudenel brought a Petition, which was
delivered to Thurloe his Secretary, signed by the most, if not all the
considerable Papists then in England, desiring a Toleration and free Exercise
of their Religion, and they would root out the Family of the Stuarts (as they
termed our gracious Sovereign and his Royal Family.) I have but one observation
more, that whereas the blood of the Christian Martyrs has ever been the
Increase of the true Church in what place soever it was spilt. It cannot be
proved that hanging any Popish Priest has formerly contributed to the
Conversion of numbers to that Church; and I am certain the late executing of
those worthily condemned Traitors, and the discovery of this Plot (for being
Actors therein they have justly suffered) has opened the eyes of many, to see
and understand the truth, and powerfully brought them from longer continuing in
that wicked Communion. And doubtless when the rest of those that are guilty of
this damnable and hellishly designed Plot, shall receive due punishment
according to their deserts, there will not be left any ground or pretense for a
Papist to arrogate to himself the title of being a faithful Subject to the King
of England, much less to remain in Communion with the Romish Church.

UPon Saturday being the twenty fourth day of June, 1654. Mr. John Southworth
was called to the Bar at the Old Bailey, where he confessed himself a Priest,
and a Condemned man for many years.

On Monday the 26, he was brought to the Bar again, where he was condemned to
die. After Sentence given him, he desired leave to speak to the Bench, which
was granted; and he desired to come nearer, which he did, and falling upon his
Knees, said, O Lord I humbly thank thee, who have made me worthy to suffer for
thy sake.

Then standing up said, I thank you for all what you have done, and your
Civilities unto me. And I pray God to give you his grace, that you, and all
this Nation may be converted to the true Roman Catholic and Apostolic Faith,
and to remain in Heaven for ever with Jesus Christ in glory.

The Recorder answered, We thank you, and we join with you in the latter part,
but not in the first.

Upon Wednesday the 28. he was drawn upon a Hurdle between two Malefactors
condemned to die for High Treason, from the Prison to the place of Execution,
where immediately before his Execution he spoke as follows.

I Am come hither to die, and would willingly speak something, if I thought the
weakness of my voice would give me leave to be heard. I am a Lancashire man,
and am brought hither to die, not for any Crime I have committed against the
Laws, but for being a Priest, and obeying the Commandments of my Savior Jesus
Christ, and for professing the true Roman Catholic and Apostolic Faith, in
which I willingly die, and have earnestly desired the same. My study from my
Infancy was to find out the true and only way to serve God; and having found
it, my study was to serve him. And I have suffered much, and many years
imprisonment, to obtain that which I hope ere long I shall enjoy. Almighty God
sent his only Son my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ into this World for the
Redemption of Mankind: and although the least of his sufferings was a
superabundant satisfaction, yet he rested not so contented, but himself both by
word and example, gave us a rule by which we should be guided: he told S.
Peter, Thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; which is the true Roman Catholic
and Apostolic Church. He gave a Commandment to his Disciples, saying, Go you
forth, preach and teach to all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: they gave the same to their Disciples and
Successors; and by that successive depending Authority was I sent to preach and
teach in this my Nation, this was my Mission. And deeply resenting my Saviors
words, qui vult venire post me, He that will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow me; by which he meant the present
persecutions of this World, I took up this Cross, and practiced how to suffer,
and as near as I could, learned the way to perfection, and am now brought
hither to put it in execution; never to my knowledge, as a dying man, either
speaking, writing, or persuading any thing against the Laws of this Nation, but
performing my duty, and submitting my self to my Superiors, as I would have
you all to do, both as to Spiritual and Temporal. I have been many years in
learning this Lesson of suffering for my Saviors sake, which I am now to
perform. My Savior showed me the way, for he died upon the Cross for my sake,
and for his sake I die (looking up) upon this, which is my Cross, and willingly
I embrace it.

The Lord Protector fought long for the Liberty of the Subject, and having
obtained it, the people of this Nation were made to believe there should be a
general Liberty of Conscience, and that no man's life should be taken away for
matter of Religion, for which only I now suffer. It has pleased God to put
the Sword of Justice into the Lord Protectors hand, and to take it out of the
Kings, that he should rule this Nation well; and he ought to do justice to all
in equal balance, and that Catholics being freeborn Natives should enjoy
that Liberty as others do, so long as they live obedient Subjects to him, and
to the Laws of this Nation. I plead not for my self (for I come hither to die)
but for the poor distressed Catholics I leave behind me. Almighty God has
been pleased the Lord Protector should do Justice in blood and not in mercy,
contrary both to his promise and duty, in submission to whose power, and
obedience to my Superiors of the Roman Catholic Church, I am brought hither,
and willing to obey. All other Opinions have Liberty of Conscience, but even
now we see the poor Catholics are denied that privilege, I am now to suffer
for it. I see no reason why my life should be taken away, for the Law should be
grounded upon Reason and Gods Word; this Law, which is man's Law, is repugnant
to the Law of God.

For my Savior said, Go preach and teach to all Nations, Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, but the Innocent should not be
punished for the offenders. The Angels in Heaven did rebel against God through
pride, but how were they punished? Not all the whole Hierarchy of Angels
destroyed, but they only who offended; the other Angels remained still in
glory. So I say, if any Catholics shall offend the Law, and not show
themselves true obedient Subjects, let those who offend be severely punished,
and not for one man's particular offense punish all. So let the Lord Protector
do to the Catholics of this Nation, who are Natives of this Land, and I am
very confidently assured they are as true Subjects to his Highness and this
present Government as it stands now established, as any people of this Nation
of what degree soever. And that they should be the only people aimed at for
destruction! Truly it is a very hard case, and contrary to the Government in
any place in the whole World. I therefore desire the Lord Protector would grant
them that Liberty of Conscience equal with their Fellow Subjects, and that he
may so govern as may be for the honor of God, and good of all people.

And being then interrupted ceased, speaking any more aloud.

FINIS.

