A Brief DISCOVERY OF THE Cause for which this LAND Mourns, and is AFFLICTED.

With Several REMEDIES TO BE Applied in ORDER to the Removal Of the Present
VISITATION.

Given forth the 2d of the 6th Month called August, 1665. being the last
General FAST Day, appointed to PRAY for Preventing the Spreading, and Increase
of the INFECTION of the PLAGUE.

By a Servant of the Lord, Thomas Salthouse.

Printed in the Year, 1665.

A brief discovery of the cause for which this Land mourns, and is afflicted.
With several Remedies to be applied in order to the removal of the present
Visitation.
OH! ENGLAND renouned among the Records of ancient days, beautiful for
Situation, and famous among the Nations, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; an
Island in which the Light of the Glorious Gospel has shined, and upon which
the Lord has lifted up the light of his Countenance in these latter days. The
day of thy Visitation is come according to Gods determination declared, by his
faithful servants the Prophets, who has been esteemed in thee as earthen
Pitchers, and persecuted from City to City, and who have been set as signs and
wonders in the Land of their Nativity, for giving thee good counsel, and
showing thee the path of Life, and the way of Holiness, in which thou have
refused to walk, and now is the hand of the Lord lifted up to correct and
chastise thy Inhabitants, for their envy against the innocent, and their
oppressing of the poor and needy, and the Lord is turning a fruitful Land into
barrenness, and your mirth into mourning, for your iniquities and
transgressions which has provoked him days without number.

Oh! therefore lift up your eyes and look unto him whom you have pierced, and
let every Family mourn apart, and let every particular person be humbled for
his own transgression. Let the wicked forsake his evil ways, and the
unrighteous man his vain thoughts, and turn to the Lord for he is gracious, and
to our God for he will abundantly pardon. Wash you and make you clean, put away
the evil of your doings; cease to do evil, learn to do well; seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and plead for the Widow; let all
the oppressors and persecutors of Gods people be ashamed, because of their envy
against the innocent, now when the hand of the Lord is lifted up, and when he
has undertaken to plead, with equity, for the meek of the Earth that have long
mourned in desolation.

For this I am moved of the Lord to give forth in the day of your fast, that it
may be read in the fear of the Lord, with the Spirit and understanding, and I
declare unto you, that Persecution is the crying sin for which the Land mourns;
and in the great City where Persecution and Banishment for worshipping God did
begin, and where judgment was first turned backward, and equity perverted, has
the Lord begun to execute his Righteous Judgment, and the cry of the Lords
Prisoners, together with the supplication of the righteous Souls that lies
under the Altar, has entered into the ears of the Almighty, who has taken
cognisence of their cause, and will with equity plead it on their behalf, and
every tongue that rises up in judgment against them shall be condemned, and
all that gather together against the Lord and his chosen people, shall be
broken to pieces, like a Potters vessel; for this is the portion and heritage
of the Lords servants, (who are established in Righteousness) no weapon formed
can prosper, nor no enchantment can prevail, against Gods peculiar treasure.

Wherefore now in the day of your fasting and praying unto which you are
enjoined by authority, be not like unto the Pharisees and Hypocrites of old,
who fasted often, and did all their works to be seen of men; you that profess
Christianity should not fast as they did, by afflicting your bodies, and bowing
down your heads in outward appearance for a day, by drawing near to the Lord
with your mouths, and lifting up your voices on high; for verily except your
Righteousness exceed the righteousness of the strictest sect of the Scribes and
Pharisees you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; neither will the Lord
accept an offering at your hands, whilst you are building up Sion with blood,
and Jerusalem with iniquity; and whilst you are exercised in oppressing the
poor and needy. For this is the fast that the Lord has chosen, and which he
now requires of you, who have enjoined others to abstain from their ordinary
food, that you fast from sin, envy, oppression and persecution, that you lose
the bands of wickedness, undo the heavy burdens, and set the oppressed free,
that you deal your bread to the hungry, that you visit the fatherless and
widows, and bring forth the Lords Prisoners out of the Prison houses, from
among transgressors and malefactors, where they lie languishing in nasty holes,
dismal dens, and contagious cottages, unto which they are confined for good
conscience sake, and for worshipping God in the Spirit, whilst the proud are
accounted happy, and they that do wickedly are at liberty, living in pleasures
upon the earth.

Oh! therefore you that now bear rule amongst men, take council at the ancient
of days, and remember what the Rock of Israel has said, do justly, love
mercy, and walk humbly with the Lord, rule in love and in the fear of God, that
your light may shine as a morning without Clouds; and that you may be as the
tender grass springing up out of the earth by clear shining after the rain,
then will your health spring up speedily; and the Lord will make you as a
watered Garden, and as a spring of waters, whose waters does not fail; for
upon them that fears the Lord, and thinks on his name, and tremble at the words
of his holiness, will the sun of righteousness arise with healing in his Wings.

Cease smiting with the fist of wickedness, and if you expect an answer of your
Prayers and fasting, which you pretend is for removing this dreadful
Visitation, and to prevent the spreading and increase of the infection now
begun in your Metropolitant City, where you first began to persecute, imprison,
and transport the people of God out of the Land of their Nativity, for their
Religion and Righteousness sake: Oh then remove those grievous yoaks of bondage
which is unjustly laid upon that innocent people, who are persecuted and
imprisoned, under the reproachful denomination of Quakers, and let a general
Goal delivery be proclaimed, (as well as a public fast) and let the Prison
doors be set open to all who are in bonds for worshipping God in the spirit,
and for their obedience to the commands of Christ Jesus, and for their
Nonconformity to the customs and traditions of men which does not make the
comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, and do not sell the
Saints and servants of the most high, as bondmen and bondwomen, for their
obedience to the Lord, and keeping their consciences void of offense, both
toward God and man.

Is this a time to banish the Husband from his Wife, and Children from their
affectionate Fathers and Mothers, to make Women as Widows, Children
Fatherless, and tender hearted Fathers and Mothers Childless, for meeting
together in the name of the Lord, to the number of five or more to pray to God
for all Men, for Kings, and all that are in Authority, That under them the
Saints may live a godly and peaceable life, and to pray for the removing of
this dreadful Visitation. Is this a time to transport them for this Cause out
of your Coasts, when you know not how soon the Lord in his justice may make
your Wifes Widows, you Childless, or your Children Fatherless, and reduce you
to the number of five or under in your high places appointed for public
worship; do you not pretend to use means, and give forth Directions to prevent
the spreading of this great Contagion, and is not this the way to spread and
increase Sickness and Infectious Distempers, and incurable Diseases, when
People are thrust together in great numbers in Goals and in stinking
Prison-houses, in the cold of Winter, and heat of Summer, where they are
deprived of the benefit of open air, and other competent accommodation for
their refreshment, and the preservation of their health in such a season as
this? Is this doing unto others as you would they should do unto you, do you
not desire the Lord to forgive your trespasses, as you forgive them that
trespass against you? what transgression has the innocent People of God called
Quakers committed, that you punish them so severely, or what is their trespass
against you? would you have the Lord do unto you, as you have dealt with them
that never did you hurt in thought, word nor action, nor never designed evil
against the present Government? How long shall the Spirit of the Lord strive
with you? the patience and long-suffering of the Almighty has been exercised,
as in the Days of Noah, when all Flesh had corrupted his way upon the Earth,
when the thoughts and imaginations of Men's hearts was evil, only evil, and
that continually, and he has been provoked with this Generation as in the
days of Lot, for pride, fullness of bread, wantonness, and abundance of
idleness has been acted and practiced of late days, in this Nation, and
because of swearing this Land mourns: And the People of God that trembles at
his word, and cannot swear at all, are trampled upon, persecuted, fined and
imprisoned, and accounted as Men not fit to live upon the Earth, nor to have a
habitation in the Land of their Nativity. Oh! that the Heads and Rulers of this
ancient Nation would consider the Cause of this common Calamity, which is come
upon the Inhabitants of the chief City, and other places of the Land, and that
instead of persecuting and imprisoning People of tender Consciences, they would
punish Profaneness, and lay the Law upon the unrighteous, and that all People
who are now called to Fasting and Praying, did know the things that belongs to
their peace before their houses be left desolate, for the Lord who delights in
mercy, and in the exercise of loving kindeness does yet wait to be Gracious,
and is willing to gather you, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings,
and to heal your backslidings, if you will return unto him, and this
Generation has had as sufficient warning, as Jerusalem had before her
destruction and desolation, and more messengers, has the Lord sent forth
amongst them, then was sent unto Sodom or Ninevy, to call them to repentance;
Therefore shall the Men of Ninevy rise up in judgment with this Generation,
and shall be a witness against it, because they repented at the Preaching of
Jonas, and behold a greater then Jonas is here, and if the mighty works, and
sound Declarations had been done and declared in Sodom and Gomorah that has
been declared in England, they would have repented in Sac^cloth and Ashes, for
the Lord has sent forth his faithful Servants and Handmaids, to Preach
repentance in the dominion and demonstration of the Spirit of Life, in the
Streets and Public Places, of the Chief Cities, Towns and Villages of this
Nation; So that the Inhabitants thereof cannot plead ignorance, nor say they
are surprised at unawars, or that the day of their visitation is come as a
thief in the night, for the Lord has made known his Power and Coming, and it
has been declared by Divine Authority, and confirmed by verbal Testimony out
of the mouths of many faithful witnesses, and there has been Precept upon
Precept, and Line upon Line, Here a Little, and there a little, in word
wrighting and in Print, published in plaineness of speech, in your own
Language, in the ears, and unto the view of the whole Nation, that you might
make preparation to meet the Lord, by speedy repentance, before he speak unto
you in his wrath, and vex you in his sore displeasure; but you have mocked Gods
messengers, and persecuted his Servants and handmaids, and seized upon their
Papers and Printed Books, put forth and published in love to your Souls, to
inform you of this Visitation which is come, and of the desolation which is
coming; and you must confess and acknowledge that the Lord is just in giving
warning before he gives correction. And that Prophets and wise men have been
sent unto you, though otherwise esteemed by you, and shamefully entreated among
you, yet their testimony lives, and remains upon record in the role of a Book,
where he that runs may read it, and it shall stand as a witness for God against
all persecutors and their cruel practices, and unchristian like actions, when
some of those whom you banish for their Religion and Righteousness are
Preaching the everlasting Gospel in the Power and Demonstration of the Spirit,
unto the Indians and Infidels in the Isles a far off, unto which you banish
them out of their own Land, for worshipping God in the Spirit and in the
truth, and for the Testimony of Jesus and the word of God.

Mine eye affects my heart to see the distress, desolation and calamity, that
comes like a thunder out of heaven upon the inhabitants of the Land of my
Nativity; how have thou provoked a patient and long suffering God who has
watched over thee for good, and has given thee the rain in it is season, the
former and the latter, and has blessed thee with many spiritual blessings in
heavenly things, and has so loved thee, that he says; How shall I give thee
up, Oh England? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim.

How shall I punish thee as Sodom, and afflict thee like the inhabitants of
Gomorrah: who under pretense of Authority derived from the higher Power and
holy Church (so called) and by the Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, have
persecuted, imprisoned and imposed penalties, and corporal punishment upon my
people, the sheep of my Pasture; the Lot of mine inheritance, whose righteous
Souls have been vexed with the Sins and Transgressions, and evil Conversations
of this Generation. The precious Sons and Daughters of Sion comparable to fine
Gould, how have they been esteemed in England as Earthen pitchers? The
inhabitants of the dark places of the earth are become cruel, like the
Oystridges in the Wilderness. My Servants and Hand-maides says the Lord, have
you given as a sacrifice to fools, and as a pray to the rude multitude, to be
reproached for the Name of Christ in their own Land, and to be sold as Slaves,
Vassels and Captives among the Heathen, in the Isles a far off.

Oh! England, thy leaders have caused thee to err, and those that undertakes to
instruct thee, has a high hand in this trespass of transporting an innocent
people into a strange Land, whom they cannot convince of evil, nor legally
convict as transgressors of any Law, either Spiritual or Temporal: Be awakned
therefore unto Righteousness and meet the Lord by speedy Repentance. Kiss the
Son least he be angry, if once his wrath be kindled but a little; blessed are
all they that puts their trust in him; and let the people of all persuasions
have liberty in a peaceable way, at all times and in all places to meet
together in the name of the Lord, to lift up holy hands unto Him, and to pray
without ceasing; it may be the Lord will yet be entreated, to command the
destroying Angel to stay his hand, and to remove this dreadful Visitation,
which as a just punishment is inflicted upon the Nation for the land crying sin
of cruel and inhumane Persecution.

Barking in Essex the 2d. of the 6th Mon. 1665. This was given forth on the
public Fast day appointed for preventing the spreading of the Plague by a
mourner in Sion under restraint, for worshipping God in the Spirit, who is a
friend and wishes health both to the Souls and bodies of all people upon the
earth.


T. S.

THE END.

