TWELVE SERMONS Preached upon Several Occasions.

By ROBERT SOUTH, D. D.

The Second Volume.

Never before Printed.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1694.

TO THE University of Oxford.
Reverend and Learned Sirs,
THESE Discourses (most of them at least) having by the favor of your Patience
had the Honor of your Audience, and being now Published in another and more
lasting way, do here humbly cast themselves at your Feet, imploring the yet
greater Favor and Honor of your Patronage, or at least the Benevolence of
your Pardon.

Amongst which, the Chief Design of some of them is to Assert the Rights and
Constitutions of our Excellently Reformed Church, which of late we so often
hear Reproached (in the modish Dialect of the Present Times) by the Name of
Little Things; and that in order to their being laid aside, not only as
Little, but Superfluous. But for my own part, I can account nothing Little in
any Church, which has the stamp of undoubted Authority, and the Practice of
Primitive Antiquity, as well as the Reason and Decency of the Thing it self, to
warrant and support it. Though, if the supposed Littleness of these matters
should be a sufficient Reason for the laying them aside, I fear, our Church
will be found to have more Little Men to spare, than Little Things.

But I have observed all along, that while this Innovating Spirit has been
striking at the Constitutions of our Church, the same has bin giving several
Bold, and Scurvy strokes at some of Her Articles too: An Evident Demonstration
to me, that whenever Her Discipline shall be destroyed, Her Doctrine will not
long survive it: And I doubt not but it is for the sake of This, that the
former is so much maligned and shot at. Pelagianism and Socinianism, with
several other Heterodoxies Cognate to, and Dependent upon them, which of late
with so much Confidence and Scandalous Countenance, walk about daring the
World, are certainly no Doctrines of the Church of England. And none are abler
and fitter to make them appear what they are, and whither they tend, than our
Excellent, and so well stocked Universities; and if these will but bestirr
themselves against all Innovators whatsoever, it will quickly be seen, that our
Church needs none either to fill Her Places, or to defend Her Doctrines, but
the Sons whom she Her self has brought forth and bred up. Her Charity is indeed
Great to Others, and the Greater, for that she is so well provided of all that
can Contribute either to Her Strength or Ornament without them. The Altar
receives, and protects such as fly to it, but needs them not.

We are not so Dull, but we perceive who are the Prime Designers, as well as
the Professed Actors against our Church, and from what Quarter the Blow chiefly
threatens us. We know the Spring as well as we observe the Motion, and Scent
the Foot which pursues, as well as see the Hand which is lifted up against us.
The Pope is an Experienced Workman; He knows his Tools, and knows them to be
but Tools, and knows withal how to use them, and that so, that they shall
neither know who it is that uses them, or what he uses them for; and we cannot
in reason presume his Skill now in Ninety-three, to be at all less than it was
in Forty-one. But God, who has even to a Miracle, protected the Church of
England hitherto, against all the Power and Spite both of her open and
concealed Enemies, will, we hope, continue to protect so Pure and Rational, so
Innocent, and Self-denying a Constitution still. And next, under God, we must
rely upon the Old Church of England-Clergy, together with the Two Universities,
both to Support and Recover Her declining state. For so long as the
Universities are Sound, and Orthodox, the Church has both Her Eyes open; and
while she has so, it is to be hoped, that she will look about Her; and consider
again and again, what she is to change from, and what she must change to, and
where she shall make an End of Changing, before she quits her Present
Constitution.

Innovations about Religion are certainly the most Efficacious, as well as the
most Plausible way of compassing a Total Abolition of it. One of the best and
strongest Arguments, we have against Popery, is, That it is an Innovation upon
the Christian Church; and if so, I cannot see why that, which we explode in the
Popish Church, should pass for such a piece of Perfection in a Reformed One.
The Papists, I am sure, (our shrewdest and most designing Enemies) desire and
push on This to their utmost; and for that very Reason, one would think, that
we (if we are not besotted) should oppose it to our Utmost too. However, let us
but have our Liturgy continued to us, as it is, till the Persons are born, who
shall be able to mend it, or make a Better, and we desire no greater security
against either the altering This, or introducing Another.

The Truth is, such as would new model the Church of England, ought not only
to have a New Religion (which some have been so long driving at) but a New
Reason likewise, to proceed by: Since Experience (which was ever yet accounted
one of the surest and best Improvements of Reason) has been always for
acquiescing in Things settled with sober, and mature Advice, (and, in the
present case also, with the very Blood and Martyrdom of the Advisers
themselves) without running the Risque of New Experiments; which, though in
Philosophy they may be commendable, yet in Religion and Religious Matters are
generally fatal and pernicious. The Church is a Royal Society for settling Old
Things, and not for finding out New. In a word, we serve a Wise, and
Unchangeable God, and we desire to do it, by a Religion, and in a Church (as
like Him, as may be) without Changes, or Alterations.

And now, as in so Important a matter, I would Interest both Universities, so I
do it with the same Honor and Deference to Both; as abhorring from my Heart
the Pedantick Partiality of preferring one before the other: Since (if my
Relation to One should never so much incline me so to do) I must sincerely
declare, that I cannot see how to place a Preference, where I can find no
Pre-eminence. And therefore, as they are both Equal in Fame, and Learning, and
all that is Great and Excellent, so I hope to see them always one in Judgment
and Design, Heart and Affection; without any Strife, Emulation, or Contest
between them, except this One (which I wish may be perpetual,) viz. Which of
the Two Best Universities in the World, shall be most serviceable to the Best
Church in the World, by their Learning, Constancy, and Integrity.

But to Conclude, There remains no more for me to do, but to beg Pardon of
that August Body, to which I belong, if I have offended in assuming to my self
the Honor of mentioning my Relation to a Society, which I could never reflect
the least Honor upon, nor contribute the least Advantage to.

All that I can add, is, That as it was my Fortune to serve this Noble Seat of
Learning for many years, as Her Public, though Unworthy Orator; so upon that,
and innumerable other Accounts, I ought for ever to be, and to acknowledge my
self,

Her most Faithful, Obedient, and Devoted Servant, Robert South.
Westminster Abbey, November. 17. 1693.
THE Contents of the Sermons.
SERMON I.
Prove. X. 9. He that walks uprightly, walks surely. Page 1
SERMON II.
JOhn XV. 15. Henceforth I call you not Servants; for the Servant knows not
what his Lord does: But I have called you Friends; for all things that I have
heard of my father, have I made known unto you. p. 59
SERMON III, IV.
Eccles. V. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth;
therefore let thy words be few. p. 111
SERMON V, VI.
Romans I. 32. Who knowing the judgment of God, (that they which commit such
things are worthy of Death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them,
that do them. p. 223
SERMON VII.
Romans I. 20. latter Part. -- So that they are without excuse. p. 323
SERMON VIII.
Matthew. XXII. 12. And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not
having a Wedding Garment? p. 373
SERMON IX.
Isa. V. 20. Woe unto them that call Evil good, and Good evil, etc. p. 427
SERMON X.
1. Sam. XXV. 32, 33. And David said to Abigail; Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, who sent thee this Day to meet me. And blessed be thy Advice, and
blessed be thou, who have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from
avenging my self with my own Hand. p. 485
SERMON XI, XII.
1 John III. 21. Beloved, if our Heart condemn us not, then we have Confidence
toward God. p. 531
Some of the Chief Errors of the Press are thus to be Corrected.
PAge 9. line 15. for right aiming, read the right aiming. P. 116. l. 2. After
the word therefore, a Break. P. 153. line the last, for Inventions, read
Invention. P. 157. l. 6. for Designs, read Design. P. 183. l. 9. for receives,
read receive. P. 267. l. 20 for outrageously, read outragiously. P. 283. l. 19.
for of a Presumption, read of Presumption. P. 284. line after World; dele the
Semicolon. P. 342. l. 18. for those, read these. P. 348. l. 20. for Artist,
read Artists. P. 349. l. 18. for came, read come. P. 350. l. 4. for Vice, read
Vices. P. 414. l. 11. for the Table, read their Table. P. 493. l. 9. for
objects, read object. P. 508. l. 5. for preferrible, read preferible. P. 613.
l. 21. for second next, read second and next.

THE Practice of Religion Enforced by REASON: IN A SERMON PREACHED Upon PROVE.
X. 9. AT Westminster-Abbey, 1667.
PROVE. X. 9. He that walks uprightly, walks surely.
AS it were easy to Evince, both from Reason and Experience, that there is a
strange, restless Activity in the Soul of Man, continually disposing it to
Operate, and Exert its Faculties; so the Phrase of Scripture still expresses
the Life of Man by Walking; that is, it represents an Active Principle in an
Active Posture. And, because the Nature of Man carries him thus out to Action,
it is no wonder if the same Nature equally renders him sollicitous about the
^^ue and Event of his Actions: For every one, by reflecting upon the Way, and
Method of his own Workings, will find that he is still determined in them by a
respect to the Consequence of what he does; always proceeding upon this
Argumentation; If I do such a thing, such an Advantage will follow from it, and
therefore I will do it. And if I do this, such a Mischief will ensue thereupon,
and therefore I will forbear. Every one, I say, is Concluded by this Practical
discourse; and for a man to bring his Actions to the Event proposed, and
designed by him, is to walk surely. But since the Event of an Action usually
follows the Nature or Quality of it, and the Quality follows the Rule directing
it, it concerns a Man, by all means, in the framing of his Actions, not to be
deceived in the Rule which He proposes for the measure of them; which, without
great and exact Caution, he may be these Two ways.

1. By laying false and deceitful Principles.

2. In case he lays right Principles, yet by mistaking in the Consequences
which he draws from them.

An Error in either of which, is equally dangerous; for if a Man is to draw a
Line, it is all one whether he does it by a crooked Rule, or by a straight One
misapplied. He who fixes upon false Principles, treads upon Infirm ground, and
so sinks; and He who fails in his Deductions from right Principles, stumbles
upon Firm ground, and so falls; the disaster is not of the same Kind, but of
the same Mischief in both.

It must be confessed, that it is sometimes very hard to judge of the Truth or
Goodness of Principles, considered barely in themselves, and abstracted from
their Consequences. But certainly he acts upon the surest and most Prudential
grounds in the World, who, whether the Principles which he acts upon, prove
true or false, yet secures an happy Issue to his Actions.

Now, He who guides his Actions by the Rules of Piety and Religion, lays these
Two Principles as the great Ground of all that He does.

1. That there is an Infinite, Eternal, All-wise Mind governing the Affairs of
the World, and taking such an Account of the Actions of men, as, according to
the Quality of them, to punish or reward them.

2 ly. That there is an Estate of Happiness or Misery after this Life, allotted
to Every man, according to the Quality of his Actions here. These, I say, are
the Principles which every Religious man proposes to Himself; And the Deduction
which He makes from them, is This: That it is his Grand Interest, and Concern,
so to act and behave Himself in This World, as to secure Himself from an Estate
of Misery in the Other. And thus to act, is, in the Phrase of Scripture, to
walk uprightly; and it is my business to prove, That He who acts in the
strength of this Conclusion, drawn from the Two forementioned Principles,
walks surely, or secures an happy Event to his Actions, against all
Contingencies whatsoever.

And to demonstrate this, I shall Consider the said Principles under a
Threefold Supposition, 1. As Certainly True; 2 ly. As Probable; And, 3 ly. As
False.


And if the Pious man brings his Actions to an happy End, which soever of these
Suppositions his Principles fall under, then certainly, there is none who walks
so surely, and upon such Irrefragable grounds of Prudence, as He who is
Religious.

1. First of all therefore we will take these Principles (as we may very well
do) under the Hypothesis of Certainly true: Where, though the method of the
Ratiocination which I have cast the present discourse into, does not naturally
engage me to prove them so, but only to show what directly and necessarily
follows upon a supposal that they are so; yet to give the greater Perspicuity
and Clearness to the Prosecution of the subject in hand, I shall briefly
demonstrate them thus.

It is necessary, That there should be some First Mover; and, if so, a first
Being; And the First Being must infer an Infinite, unlimited Perfection in the
said Being: For as much as if it were Finite or Limited, that Limitation must
have been either from it self, or from something else. But not from it self,
since it is contrary to Reason and Nature, that any Being should Limit its own
Perfection; nor yet from something else, since then it should not have been the
First, as supposing some Other Thing Coevous to it; which is against the
present Supposition. So that it being clear, That there must be a First Being,
and that infinitely Perfect, it will follow, that all other Perfection that is,
must be derived from it; and so we infer the Creation of the World: And then
supposing the World created by God, (since it is no ways reconcilable to God's
Wisdom, that He should not also govern it) Creation must need infer
Providence: And then, it being granted, that God governs the World; it will
follow also, that He does it by means suitable to the Natures of the Things He
Governs, and to the Attainment of the proper Ends of Government: And moreover,
Man being by Nature a free, moral Agent, and so, capable of deviating from his
Duty, as well as performing it, it is necessary that He should be governed by
Laws: And since Laws require that they be enforced with the Sanction of Rewards
and Punishments, sufficient to sway and work upon the Minds of such as are to
be governed by them, and lastly, since Experience shows that Rewards and
Punishments, terminated only within this Life, are not sufficient for that
Purpose, it fairly and rationally follows, That the Rewards and Punishments,
which God governs Mankind by, do, and must, look beyond it.

And thus I have given a brief Proof of the Certainty of these Principles;
namely, That there is a supreme Governor of the World; and that there is a
future estate of happiness or misery for Men after this Life: Which Principles,
while a man steers his Course by, if He acts piously, soberly, and temperately,
I suppose there needs no further Arguments to Evince, that He acts prudentially
and safely. For he acts as under the eye of his just and severe Judge, who
reaches to his Creature a Command with One Hand, and a Reward with the Other.
He spends as a Person, who knows that He must come to a Reckoning. He sees an
Eternal Happiness or Misery, suspended upon a few days behavior; and therefore
He lives every hour as for Eternity. His future condition has such a powerful
Influence upon his present Practice, because he entertains a continual
Apprehension, and a firm Persuasion of it. If a man walks over a narrow Bridge,
when he is drunk, it is no wonder that he forgets his Caution, while he
over-looks his Danger. But He who is sober, and views that nice Separation
between Himself and the Devouring Deep, so that if he should slip, he sees his
Grave gaping under Him, surely must needs take every step with Horror, and the
utmost Caution and Solicitude.

But, for a man to believe it as the most undoubted Certainty in the World,
that He shall be judged according to the Quality of his Actions here, and after
Judgment receive an Eternal Recompense, and yet to take his full swing in all
the Pleasures of Sin, is it not a greater Phrenzy, than, for a man to take a
Purse at Tyburn, while he is actually seeing another Hanged for the same Fact?
It is really to dare and defy the Justice of Heaven, to laugh at right-aiming
Thunderbolts, to puff at Damnation; and, in a word, to bid Omnipotence do its
worst. He indeed, who thus walks, walks surely; but it is, because he is sure
to be damned.

I confess it is hard to reconcile such a stupid Course to the natural way of
the Soul's acting; according to which, the Will moves according to the
Proposals of Good and Evil, made by the Understanding: And therefore for a man
to run headlong into the Bottomless Pit, while the Eye of a Seeing Conscience
assures him, that it is Bottomless and Open, and all Return from it Desperate
and Impossible; while His Ruin stares him in the Face, and the Sword of
Vengeance points directly at his Heart, still to press on to the Embraces of
His Sin, is a Problem unresolvable upon any other Ground, but that Sin
infatuates before it destroys. For Judas, to receive and swallow the Sop, when
His Master gave it him seasoned with those terrible words, It had been good for
that man that He had never been born. Surely this Argued a furious Appetite,
and a strong Stomach, that could thus catch at a Morsel, with the Fire and
Brimstone all flaming about it, and (as it were) digest Death it self, and make
a meal upon Perdition.

I could wish that every bold Sinner, when he is about to engage in the
Commission of any known Sin, would arrest his Confidence, and for a while stop
the Execution of his Purpose, with this short Question; Do I believe that it
is really true, that God has denounced Death to such a Practice, or do I not?
If he does not; let him renounce his Christianity, and surrender back his
Baptism, the Water of which might better serve Him to cool his Tongue in Hell,
than only to Consign Him over to the Capacities of so black an Apostasy. But
if he does believe it, how will he acquit Himself upon the Accounts of bare
Reason? For, does he think, that if he pursues the means of Death, they will
not bring Him to that Fatal End? Or does He think that He can grapple with
Divine Vengeance, and endure the Everlasting Burnings, or arm himself against
the Bites of the Never-dying Worm? No surely, these are things not to be
Imagined; and therefore I cannot conceive what security the presuming Sinner
can promise Himself, but upon these Two following Accounts.

1. That God is merciful, and will not be so severe as his word; and that his
Threatenings of Eternal Torments are not so Decretory and Absolute, but that
there is a very Comfortable latitude left in them for Men of Skill to creep out
at. And, here it must indeed be confessed, that Origin, and some others, not
long since, who have been so officious as to furbish up, and re-print his old
Errors, hold, That the Sufferings of the Damned are not to be, in a strict
sense, Eternal; but that, after a Certain Revolution, and Period of Time, there
shall be a General Jail-deliver of the Souls in Prison, and that not for a
farther Execution, but a final Release. And it must be further acknowledged,
that some of the Ancients, like kind-hearted Men, have talked much of Annual
Refrigeriums, Respites, or Intervals of Punishment to the Damned, as
particularly on the Great Festivals of the Resurrection, Ascension, Pentecost,
and the like. In which, as these good Men are more to be commended for their
Kindness and Compassion, than to be followed in their Opinion; (which may be
much better Argued by Wishes than Demonstrations;) so, admitting that it were
true, yet what a pitiful, slender Comfort would this amount to? Much like the
Jews abating the Punishment of Malefactors from forty stripes, to forty save
one. A great Indulgence indeded, even as great as the difference between Forty
and Thirty-nine; and yet much less considerable would that Indulgence be, of a
few Holy Days in the measures of Eternity, of some Hours Ease, compared with
Infinite Ages of Torment.

Supposing therefore, that few Sinners relieve themselves with such groundless,
trifling Considerations as these, yet may they not however fasten a Rational
Hope upon the Boundless Mercy of God, that this may induce him to spare his
poor Creature, though by Sin become obnoxious to His Wrath? To this I answer,
That the Divine Mercy is indeed large, and far surpassing all Created measures,
yet nevertheless it has its proper time; and after this Life it is the time of
Justice; and to hope for the Favors of Mercy then, is to expect an Harvest in
the Dead of Winter. God has cast all his Works into a certain, inviolable
Order; according to which, there is a Time to Pardon, and a Time to Punish; and
the Time of One, is not the Time of the Other. When Corn once felt the Sickle,
it has no more Benefit from the Sunshine. But,

2 ly. If the Conscience be too apprehensive (as for the most part it is) to
venture the Final issue of Things, upon a Fond persuasion, that the Great Judge
of the World will relent, and not execute the Sentence pronounced by him; As if
he had threatened Men with Hell, rather to fright them from Sin, than with an
Intent to punish them for it; I say, if the Conscience cannot find any
Satisfaction or Support from such Reasonings as these, yet may it not, at
least, relieve it self with the Purposes of a future Repentance,
notwithstanding its present, actual Violations of the Law? I answer, That this
certainly is a Confidence of all others, the most ungrounded and irrational.
For upon what Ground can a man promise Himself a Future Repentance, who cannot
promise Himself a Futurity? Whose Life depends upon His Breath, and is so
restrained to the present, that it cannot secure to it self the Reversion of
the very next Minute. Have not many died with the guilt of Impenitence, and the
designs of Repentance together? If a man dies to day, by the prevalence of some
ill humors, will it avail Him that he intended to have bled and purged to
morrow?

But how dares sinful Dust and Ashes invade the Prerogative of Providence, and
Carve out to Himself the Seasons and Issues of Life and Death, which the Father
keeps wholly within his own Power? How does that man, who thinks he sins
securely, under the shelter of some Remote purposes of Amendment, know, but
that the Decree above may be already passed against Him, and his Allowance of
Mercy spent; so that the Bow in the Clouds is now drawn, and the Arrow levelled
at his Head; and not many Days like to pass, but perhaps an Apoplex, or an
Impostome, or some sudden Disaster may stop his Breath, and reap him down as a
Sinner ripe for Destruction?

I conclude therefore, That, upon Supposition of the Certain Truth of the
Principles of Religion; He, who walks not uprightly, has neither from the
Presumption of God's Mercy Reversing the Decree of his Justice, nor from his
own Purposes of a Future Repentance, any sure ground to set his Foot upon; but
in this whole Course Acts as directly in Contradiction to Nature, as he does in
defiance of Grace. In a word, He is besotted, and has lost his Reason; and what
then can there be for Religion to take hold of Him by? Come we now to the

2d. Supposition; under which, we show, That the Principles of Religion, laid
down by us, might be Considered; and that is, as only Probable. Where we must
observe, That Probability does not properly make any Alteration, either in the
Truth or Falsity of Things; but only Imports a different Degree of their
Clearness, or Appearance to the Understanding. So that that is to be accounted
Probable, which has more and better Arguments producible for it, than can be
brought against it; and surely such a thing, at least, is Religion. For certain
it is, that Religion is Universal, I mean the first Rudiments and General
Notions of Religion, called Natural Religion, and consisting in the
acknowledgment of a Deity, and of the common Principles of Morality, and a
future Estate of Souls after Death, (in which also we have all that some
Reformers and Refiners amongst us, would reduce Christianity it self to.) This
Notion of Religion, I say, has diffused it self in some degree or other,
greater or less, as far as human Nature extends. So that there is no Nation in
the World, though plunged into never such gross and absurd Idolatry; but has
some awful Sense of a Deity, and a persuasion of a State of Retribution to Men
after this Life.

But now, if there are really no such Things, but all is a mere Lie, and a
Fable, contrived only to chain up the Liberty of Man's Nature from a freer
Enjoyment of those things, which otherwise it would have as full a right to
Enjoy, as to Breath, I demand whence this persuasion could thus come to be
Universal? For was it ever known, in any other Instance, that the whole World
was brought to Conspire in the belief of a Lie? Nay, and of such a Lie, as
should lay upon Men such unpleasing Abridgments, tying them up from a full
Gratification of those Lusts and Appetites, which they so impatiently desire to
satisfy, and consequently, by all means, to remove those Impediments that
might any way obstruct their satisfaction? Since therefore it cannot be made
out, upon any Principle of Reason, how all the Nations in the World, otherwise
so distant in Situation, Manners, Interests, and Inclinations, should by Design
or Combination, meet in one persuasion; and withal, that Men, who so mortally
hate to be deceived, and imposed upon, should yet suffer themselves to be
deceived by such a persuasion as is false; and not only false, but also cross,
and contrary to their strongest Desires; so that if it were false, they would
set the utmost force of their Reason on work to discover that Falsity, and
thereby disenthrall themselves; And further, since there is nothing false, but
what may be proved to be so: And yet, Lastly, since all the Power and Industry
of Man's mind has not been hitherto able to prove a Falsity in the Principles
of Religion, it Irrefragably follows (and that, I suppose, without gathering
any more into the Conclusion, than has been made good in the Premises) that
Religion is, at least, a very high Probability.

And this is that which I here contend for, That it is not necessary to the
obliging Men to believe Religion to be true, that this Truth be made out to
their Reason, by Arguments demonstratively certain; but that it is sufficient
to render their Unbelief unexcusable, even upon the account of bare Reason, if
so be the Truth of Religion carry in it a much greater Probability, than any of
those Ratiocinations that pretend the Contrary: And this I prove in the
strength of these two Considerations.

1st. That no man, in matters of this Life, requires an Assurance either of the
Good, which He designs, or of the Evil, which He avoids, from Arguments
demonstratively certain; but judges Himself to have sufficient ground to act
upon, from a probable persuasion of the Event of things. No man who first
Trafficks into a Foreign Country, has any Scientifick Evidence, that there is
such a Country, but by Report, which can produce no more than a moral
Certainty; that is, a very high probability, and such as there can be no Reason
to except against. He who has a probable Belief, that He shall meet with
Thieves in such a Road, thinks himself to have Reason enough to decline it,
albeit he is sure to sustain some less (though yet considerable) Inconvenience
by his so doing. But perhaps it may be replied, (and it is all that can be
replied) That a greater Assurance and Evidence is required of the Things and
Concerns of the other World, than of the Interests of this. To which I Answer,
That Assurance and Evidence (Terms, by the way, Extremely different; the first,
respecting properly the Ground of our Assenting to a Thing; and the other, the
Clearness of the Thing, or Object assented to) have no place at all here, as
being contrary to our present Supposition; according to which, we are now
treating of the Practical Principles of Religion only as Probable, and falling
under a Probable Persuasion. And for this, I affirm, That where the Case is
about the Hazarding an Eternal, or a Temporal Concern, there a less degree of
Probability ought to engage our Caution against the loss of the Former, than is
necessary to engage it about preventing the loss of the Latter. Forasmuch, as
where Things are least to be put to the venture, as the Eternal Interests of
the other World ought to be; there every, even the least, Probability, or
likelihood of Danger, should be provided against; but where the loss can be but
Temporal, every small Probability of it, need not put us so Anxiously to
prevent it, since, though it should happen, the loss might be repaired again;
or, if not, could not however destroy us, by reaching us in our greatest and
highest Concern; which no Temporal Thing whatsoever is, or can be. And this
directly introduces the

2d. Consideration or Argument, viz. That bare Reason, discoursing upon a
Principle of Self-preservation (which surely is the Fundamental Principle which
Nature proceeds by) will oblige a man Voluntarily, and by Choice, to undergo
any less Evil to secure Himself but from the Probability of an Evil
incomparably greater, and that also, such an one, as, if that Probability
passes into a certain Event, admits of no Reparation by any After-remedy that
can be applied to it.

Now, that Religion teaching a future Estate of Souls, is a Probability; and
that its Contrary cannot with Equal Probability be proved, we have already
Evinced. This therefore being supposed, we will suppose yet further, That for a
man to Abridge Himself in the full satisfaction of His Appetites, and
Inclinations, is an Evil, because a present Pain and Trouble: But then it must
likewise be granted, that Nature must needs abhor a State of Eternal Pain and
Misery much more; and that if a man does not undergo the former less Evil, it
is highly probable that such an Eternal estate of Misery will be his Portion;
And if so, I would fain know whether that man takes a Rational Course to
preserve Himself, who Refuses the Endurance of these Lesser Troubles, to secure
Himself from a Condition infinitely and inconceivably more Miserable.

But since Probability, in the Nature of it, supposes that a Thing may, or may
not be so, for any thing that yet appears, or is certainly determined on either
side, we will here consider both sides of this Probability: As,

1st. That, it is one way possible, That there may be no such Thing as a future
estate of happiness, or misery, for those who have lived well or ill here; And
then he, who upon the strength of a Contrary belief, abridged himself in the
gratification of his Appetites, sustains only this Evil; viz. That he did not
please his Senses, and unbounded Desires, so much as otherwise he might, and
would have done, had he not lived under the Captivity and Check of such a
Belief. This is the Utmost which he suffers: But whether this be a Real Evil or
no (whatsoever Vulgar minds may commonly think it) shall be discoursed of
afterward.

2. But then again, on the other side, it is Probable that there will be such a
future estate; and then, how miserably is the voluptuous, sensual Unbeliever,
left in the Lurch? For there can be no Retreat for him then, no mending of his
Choice in the other World, no After-game to be played in Hell. It fares with
Men, in reference to their future Estate, and the Condition upon which they
must pass to it, much as it does with a Merchant, having a Vessel richly
fraught at Sea in a Storm: the Storm grows higher and higher, and threatens the
utter loss of the Ship: But there is one, and but one Certain way to save it,
which is, by throwing its Rich Lading overboard; Yet still, for all this, the
man knows not but possibly the Storm may cease, and so all be preserved.
However, in the mean time, there is little or no Probability that it will do
(...) in case it should not, he is then (...), that he must lay his Life, as
well a^ his Rich Commodities in the Cruel Deep. Now, in this Case, would this
man, think we, act rationally, should he, upon the slender Possibility of
Escaping otherwise, neglect the sure, infallible Preservation of his Life, by
casting away his Rich Goods? No certainly, it would be so far from it, that
should the Storm, by a strange hap, cease immediately after he had thus thrown
away his Riches; yet the Throwing them away, was infinitely more Rational and
Eligible, than the Retaining or Keeping them could have been.

For a man, while He lives here in the World, to doubt whether there be any
Hell or no; and thereupon to Live so, as if absolutely there were none; but
when he dies, to find himself Confuted in the Flames, This, surely, must be the
height of Woe and Disappointment, and a bitter Conviction of an irrational
Venture, and an absurd Choice. In doubtful Cases, Reason still determines for
the safer side; Especially if the Case be not only Doubtful, but also highly
Concerning, and the Venture be of a Soul, and an Eternity.

He who sat at a Table, richly and deliciously furnished, but with a Sword
hanging over his Head by one single Thread or Hair, surely had enough to check
his Appetite, even against all the Ragings of Hunger, and Temptations of
Sensuality. The only Argument that could any way encourage his Appetite, was,
That possibly the Sword might not fall, but when his Reason should encounter it
with another Question, What if it should fall? And moreover, that pitiful Stay
by which it hung, should oppose the likelihood that it would, to a mere
possibility that it might not; what could the man enjoy or taste of his rich
Banquet, with all this doubt and horror working in his Mind?

Though a Man's condition should be really in it self never so safe, yet an
apprehension and surmise that it is not safe, is enough to make a quick and a
tender Reason sufficiently miserable. Let the most Acute, and Learned
Unbeliever, demonstrate that there is no Hell: And if he can, he Sins so much
the more rationally; otherwise, if he cannot, the Case remains doubtful at
least: But he who Sins obstinately, does not act as if it were so much as
doubtful; for if it were Certain and Evident to Sense, he could do no more;
but for a man to found a confident Practice upon a disputable Principle, is
brutishly to outrun his Reason, and to build ten times wider than his
Foundation. In a word, I look upon this one short Consideration (were there no
more) as a sufficient Ground for any Rational Man to take up his Religion upon,
and which I defy the subtlest Atheist in the World solidly to answer, or
confute; Namely, That it is good to be sure. And so I proceed to the

Third and Last Supposition; Under which, the Principles of Religion may (for
Argument sake) be considered; and that is, as False; which surely must reach
the utmost Thoughts of any Atheist whatsoever. Nevertheless, even upon this
account also, I doubt not but to Evince, That he who walks uprightly, walks
much more surely, than the wicked and profane Liver; and that with reference to
the most Valued Temporal Enjoyments, such as are, Reputation, Quietness,
Health, and the like, which are the greatest which this Life affords, or is
desirable for. And,

1st. For Reputation or Credit. Is any one had in greater Esteem than the Just
Person; who has given the World an Assurance, by the constant tenor of his
Practice, That he makes a Conscience of his ways; That he scorns to do an
unworthy, or a base Thing; to lie, to defraud, to undermine another's Interest,
by any sinister and inferior Arts? And is there any thing, which reflects a
greater Luster upon a Man's Person, than a severe Temperance, and a Restraint
of Himself, from vicious and unlawful Pleasures? Does any thing shine so
bright as Virtue, and that even in the Eyes of those who are void of it? For
hardly shall you find any one so bad, but he desires the Credit of being
Thought, what his Vice will not let him be; so great a Pleasure, and
Convenience is it, to live with Honor, and a fair Acceptance, amongst those
whom we converse with; And a Being without it, is not Life, but rather the
Skeleton or Caput mortuum of Life; like Time without Day, or Day it self
without the shining of the Sun to enliven it.

On the other side, Is there any thing that more embitters all the Enjoyments
of this Life, than Shame and Reproach? Yet this is generally the Lot and
Portion of the Impious and Irreligious; and of some of them more especially.

For how Infamous, in the first place, is the false, fraudulent and
unconscionable Person? and how quickly is his Character known? For hardly ever
did any man of no Conscience continue a man of any Credit long. Likewise, how
Odious, as well as Infamous, is such an One? Especially, if he be arrived at
that Consummate, and Robust degree of Falsehood, as to play in and out, and show
Tricks with Oaths, the sacredest Bonds which the Conscience of Man can be bound
with; how is such an One shunned and dreaded, like a walking Pest? What Volleys
of Scoffs, Curses, and Satyrs, are discharged at Him? So that let never so much
Honor be placed upon Him, it cleaves not to Him, but forthwith ceases to be
Honor, by being so placed; No Preferment can sweeten Him, but the higher he
stands, the farther and wider he stinks.

In like manner, for the Drinker, and debauched Person: Is any thing more the
object of Scorn and Contempt, than such an One? His Company is justly looked
upon as a disgrace; and no Body can own a Friendship for him, without being an
Enemy to himself. A Drunkard is (as it were) Out-lawed from all worthy and
creditable Converse. Men abhor, loath, and despise him, and would even spit at
him as they meet him, were it not for fear that a stomach so charged, should
something more than spit at them.

But not to go over all the several Kinds of Vice and Wickedness, should we set
aside the Consideration of the Glories of a better World, and allow this Life
for the Only Place and Scene of Man's happiness; yet surely Cato will be
always more Honorable than Clodius, and Cicero than Catiline. Fidelity,
Justice, and Temperance, will always draw their own Reward after them, or
rather carry it with them, in those marks of Honor which they fix upon the
Persons who practice and pursue them. It is said of David, in 1 Chronicles. 29. 28.
That he died full of Days, Riches, and Honor; and there was no need of an
Heaven, to render him in all respects a much happier man than Saul. But in the

2d. Place, The Virtuous and Religious Person walks upon surer Grounds, than
the Vicious and Irreligious, in respect of the Ease, Peace, and Quietness,
which he enjoys in this World; and which certainly make no small part of Human
felicity. For Anxiety and Labor are great Ingredients of that Curse, which Sin
has entailed upon Fallen man. Care and Toil came into the World with Sin, and
remain ever since inseparable from it, both as to its Punishment, and Effect.

The service of Sin is perfect slavery; and he who will pay Obedience to the
Commands of it, shall find it an Unreasonable Task-master, and an Unmeasurable
Exactor.

And to represent the Case in some Particulars. The Ambitious Person must rise
early, and sit up late, and pursue his Design with a constant, indefatigable
Attendance; he must be infinitely patient and servile, and obnoxious to all the
cross Humors of those whom he expects to rise by; he must endure and digest
all sorts of Affronts; Adore the Foot that Kicks him, and Kiss the Hand that
strikes him: While, in the mean time, the Humble and Contented Man is virtuous
at a much easier rate: His Virtue bids him sleep, and take his rest, while the
others restless Sin bids him sit up and watch. He pleases himself innocently
and easily, while the Ambitious man attempts to please others sinfully, and
difficultly, and perhaps, in the Issue, unsuccessfully* to.

The Robber, and Man of Rapine, must run, and ride, and use all the dangerous,
and even desperate Ways of escape; and probably, after all, his Sin betrays him
to a Gaol, and from thence advances him to the Gibbet: But let him carry off
his Booty with as much safety and success as he can wish, yet the Innocent
Person, with never so little of his own, envies him not, and, if he has
nothing, fears him not.

Likewise the cheat, and fradulent Person, is put to a Thousand shifts to
palliate his Fraud, and to be thought an honest Man: But surely there can be no
greater Labor, than to be always dissembling, and forced to maintain a
constant disguise, there being so many ways by which a smothered Truth is apt
to blaze, and break out; the very Nature of Things, making it not more Natural
for them to be, than to appear as they be. But he, who will be really honest,
just, and sincere in his Dealings, needs take no pains to be thought so; no
more than the Sun needs take any pains to shine, or, when he is up, to convince
the World that it is Day.

And here again, to bring in the Man of Luxury and Intemperance for his share
in the Pain and Trouble, as well as in the forementioned Shame and Infamy of
his Vice. Can any Toil, or Day-labour, equal the Fatigue, or Drudgery, which
such an one undergoes, while he is continually pouring in Draught after
Draught, and cramming in Morsel after Morsel, and that in spite of Appetite
and Nature, till he becomes a Burden to the very Earth that bears him; See the
First Vol. p. 29, and 30.
though not so great an One to That, but that (if possible) he is yet a greater
to Himself?

And now, in the last place, to mention one Sinner more, and him a notable,
leading Sinner indeed, to wit, the Rebel. Can any thing have more of Trouble,
Hazard, and Anxiety in it, than the Course which he takes? For, in the first
place, all the Evils of War must unavoidably be endured, as the necessary Means
and Instruments to compass, and give success to his Traitorous designs. In
which, if it is his Lot to be Conquered, he must expect that Vengeance that
justly attends a conquered, disarmed Villain; for when such an one is
vanquished, his Sins are always upon him. But if, on the contrary, he proves
Victorious, he will yet find Misery enough in the distracting Cares of settling
an ungrounded, odious, detestable Interest, so heartily, and so justly
maligned, abhorred, and oftentimes plotted against; So that, in effect, he is
still in War, though he has quitted the Field. The Torment of his suspicion is
great, and the Courses he must take to quiet his jealous, suspicious Mind,
infinitely troublesome and vexatious.

But, in the mean time, the Labor of Obedience, Loyalty, and Subjection, is no
more, but for a man honestly and discreetly to sit still, and to enjoy what he
has, under the Protection of the Laws. And when such an one is in his lowest
condition, he is yet high and happy enough to despise and pity the most
prosperous Rebel in the World: Even those famous Ones of Forty-one (with all
due Respect to their flourishing Relations be it spoke) not excepted. In the

Third and Last place, The Religious Person walks upon surer grounds than the
Irreligious, in respect of the very Health of his Body. Virtue is a Friend, and
an Help to Nature, but it is Vice and Luxury that destroys it, and the Diseases
of Intemperance are the natural product of the Sins of Intemperance. Whereas,
on the other side, a temperate, innocent use of the Creature, never casts any
one into a Fever, or a Surfeit.

Chastity makes no work for a Surgeon, nor ever ends in rottenness of Bones.
Sin is the fruitful Parent of Distempers, and Ill Lives occasion Good
Physicians. Seldom shall one see in Cities, Courts, and Rich Families (where
Men live plentifully, and eat and drink freely) that perfect Health, that
Athletick soundness and vigor of Constitution, which is commonly seen in the
Country, in poor Houses, and Cottages, where Nature is their cook, and
Necessity their Caterer, and where they have no other Doctor, but the Sun and
the fresh Air, and that such an One, as never sends them to the Apothecary. It
has been observed in the earlier Ages of the Church, that none lived such
healthful, and long Lives, as Monks and Hermits, who had sequestered themselves
from the Pleasures and Plenties of the World, to a constant Ascetick Course, of
the severest Abstinence and Devotion.

Nor is Excess the only Thing by which Sin mauls and breaks Men in their
Health, and the comfortable Enjoyment of themselves thereby, but many are also
brought to a very ill and languishing Habit of Body, by mere Idleness; and
Idleness is both it self a great Sin, and the Cause of many more. The
Husbandman returns from the Field, and from Manuring his Ground strong and
healthy, because innocent and laborious; You will find no Diet-drinks, no Boxes
of Pills, nor Galley-pots, amongst his Provisions; no, he neither speaks nor
lives French, he is not so much a Gentleman (forsooth.) His Meals are course
and short, his Employment warrantable, his Sleep certain and refreshing,
neither interrupted with the Lashes of a guilty Mind, nor the Aches of a crazy
Body. And when Old Age comes upon him, it comes alone, bringing no other Evil
with it but it self: But when it comes to wait upon a great and worshipful
Sinner (who for many years together has had the Reputation of Eating well, and
Doing ill) it comes (as it ought to do, to a Person of such Quality) attended
with a long Train and Retinue of Rheums, Coughs, Catarrhs, and Dropsies,
together with many painful Girds and Achings, which are at least called the
Gout. How does such an one go about, or is carried rather, with his Body
bending inward, his Head shaking, and his Eyes always watering (instead of
weeping) for the Sins of his Illspent Youth. In a word, Old Age Seizes upon
such a Person, like Fire upon a rotten House; it was rotten before, and must
have fallen of it self; so that it is no more but one Ruin preventing another.

And thus I have shown the Fruits and Effects of Sin upon Men in this World.
But peradventure it will be replied, That there are many Sinners who escape all
these Calamities, and neither labor under any shame or disrepute, any
unquietness of Condition, or more than ordinary distemper of Body, but pass
their Days with as great a Portion of Honor, Ease, and Health, as any other
Men whatsoever. But to this I Answer,

First, That those Sinners who are in such a temporally happy Condition, owe it
not to their Sins, but wholly to their Luck, and a benign Chance that they are
so. Providence often disposes of Things by a Method beside, and above the
discourses of Man's Reason.

Secondly, That the Number of those Sinners, who by their Sins have been
directly plunged into all the forementioned Evils, is incomparably greater
than the Number of those, who, by the singular favor of Providence, have
escaped them. And,

Thirdly, and Lastly, That, notwithstanding all this, Sin has yet in it self a
natural Tendency to bring Men under all these Evils; and, if persisted in, will
infallibly end in them, unless hindered by some unusual Accident or other, which
no man, acting Rationally, can steadily build upon. It is not impossible, but a
man may practice a Sin secretly, to his Dying-day; but it is Ten thousand to
One, if the Practice be constant, but that some time or other it will be
discovered; and then the Effect of Sin discovered, must be Shame and Confusion
to the Sinner. It is possible also, that a man may be an old Healthful
Epicure; but I affirm also, that it is next to a Miracle, if he be so; and the
like is to be said of the several Instances of Sin, hitherto produced by us. In
short, nothing can step between them and Misery in this World, but a very
great, strange, and unusual Chance, which none will presume of, who walks
surely.

And so, I suppose, That Religion cannot possibly be enforced (even in the
judgment of its best Friends, and most professed Enemies) by any further
Arguments, than what have been produced, (how much better soever the said
Arguments may be managed by abler hands.) For I have shown and proved, That
whether the Principles of it be Certain, or but Probable, nay, though supposed
absolutely False; yet a man is sure of that happiness in the Practice, which he
cannot be in the Neglect of it; And consequently, that though he were really a
Speculative Atheist, (which there is great reason to believe, that none
perfectly are,) yet if he would but proceed rationally, that is, if (according
to his own measures of Reason) he would but Love himself, he could not however
be a Practical Atheist; nor live without God in this World, whether or no he
expected to be rewardded by him in another.

And now, to make some Application of the foregoing Discourse, we may, by an
easy, but sure Deduction, conclude and gather from it these Two things:

First, That that Profane, Atheistical, Epicurean Rabble, whom the whole Nation
so rings of, and who have lived so much to the defiance of God, the dishonor
of Mankind, and the disgrace of the Age which they are cast upon, are not
indeed (what they are pleased to think and vote themselves) the wisest Men in
the World; for in matters of Choice, no man can be wise in any Course or
Practice, in which he is not safe too. But can these high Assumers, and
Pretenders to Reason, prove themselves so, amidst all those Liberties and
Latitudes of Practice which they take? Can they make it out against the common
Sense and Opinion of all Mankind, that there is no such Thing as a future
estate of misery for such as have lived ill here? Or, can they persuade
themselves that their own particular Reason denying, or doubting of it, ought
to be relied upon, as a surer Argument of Truth, than the Universal, united
Reason of all the World besides affirming it? Every Fool may believe, and
pronounce confidently; but wise men will, in matters of Discourse, conclude
firmly, and, in matters of Practice, act surely: And, if these will do so too
in the Case now before us, they must prove it, not only probable (which yet
they can never do,) but also certain, and past all doubt, that there is no
Hell, nor place of Torment for the wicked; or at least, that they themselves,
notwithstanding all their villainous and licentious Practices, are not to be
reckoned of that Number and Character; but, that with a non obstante to all
their Revels, their Profaneness, and scandalous Debaucheries of all sorts,
they continue virtuoso's still; and are that in Truth, which the world in
Favor and Fashion (or rather by an Antiphrasis) is pleased to call them.

In the mean time, it cannot but be matter of just Indignation to all knowing
and good men, to see a Company of Lewd, Shallow-brain'd Huffs, making Atheism
and Contempt of Religion, the sole Badge and Character of Wit, Gallantry, and
true Discretion; and then, over their Pots, and Pipes, claiming and engrossing
all these wholly to themselves; magisterially censuring the Wisdom of all
Antiquity, scoffing at all Piety, and (as it were) new modelling the whole
World. When yet, such as have had opportunity to sound these Braggers
thoroughly, by having sometimes endured the Penance of their sottish Company,
have found them in Converse so Empty and Insipid; in Discourse so Trifling and
Contemptible, that it is impossible but that they should give a Credit and an
Honor, to whatsoever and whomsoever they speak against: They are, indeed, such
as seem wholly incapable of entertaining any Design above the present
gratification of their Palates, and whose very Souls and Thoughts rise no
higher than their Throats; but yet withal, of such a clamorous and provoking
Impiety, that they are enough to make the Nation like Sodom and Gomorrha in
their Punishment, as they have already made it too like them in their Sins.
Certain it is, that Blasphemy and Irreligion have grown to that daring height
here of late years, that had men in any sober, civilized Heathen Nation, spoke
or done half so much in Contempt of their false Gods and Religion, as some in
our Days and Nation, wearing the name of Christians, have spoke and done
against God and Christ, they would have been infallibly burnt at a Stake, as
monsters and public Enemies of society.

The truth is, the Persons here reflected upon, are of such a peculiar stamp of
Impiety, that they seem to be a set of fellows got together, and formed in to a
kind of Diabolical society, for the finding out new experiments in Vice; and
therefore they laugh at the dull, unexperienced, obsolete Sinners of former
Times; and scorning to keep themselves within the common, beaten, broad way to
Hell, by being vicious only at the low rate of Example and Imitation, they are
for searching out other ways and latitudes, and obliging Posterity with unheard
of Inventions and Discoveries in Sin; resolving herein to admit of no other
measure of good and evil, but the Judgment of Sensuality, as those who prepare
matters to their hands, allow no other measure of the Philosophy and Truth of
things, but the sole Judgment of sense. And these (forsooth) are our great
Sages, and those who must pass for the only shrewd, thinking and inquisitive
men of the Age; and such as by a long, severe, and profound Speculation of
Nature, have redeemed themselves from the Pedantry of being Conscientious, and
living virtuously, and from such old fashioned Principles and Creeds, as tie up
the minds of some narrow-spirited, Uncomprehensive Zealots, who know not the
world, nor understand, that he only is the truly wise man, who, per fas and
nefas, gets as much as He can.

But, for all this, let Atheists and Sensualists satisfy themselves as they
are able. The former of which will find, that as long as Reason keeps Her
ground, Religion neither can, nor will lose Hers. And for the Sensual Epicure,
he also will find, That there is a certain living spark within him, which all
the Drink he can pour in, will never be able to quench or put out; nor will his
rotten abused Body, have it in it is power to convey any putrefying, consuming,
rotting Quality to the Soul: No, there is no Drinking, or Swearing, or Ranting,
or Fluxing a Soul out of its Immortality. But that must and will survive and
abide, in spite of Death and the Grave; and live for ever to convince such
wretches to their eternal Woe, That the so much repeated ornament and flourish
of their former speeches; ( God damn 'em) was commonly the truest word they
spoke, though least believed by them, while they spoke it.

2dly, The other thing deducible from the foregoing particulars, shall be to
inform us of the way of attaining to that excellent Privilege, so justly valued
by those who have it, and so much talked of by those who have it not; which is
Assurance. Assurance is properly that persuasion or Confidence, which a man
takes up of the pardon of his sins, and his interest in God's favor, upon such
Grounds and Terms, as the Scripture lays down. But now, since the Scripture
promises eternal Happiness and Pardon of sin, upon the sole condition of Faith,
and sincere Obedience, it is evident, that he only can plead a Title to such a
Pardon, whose conscience impartially tells him, that he has performed the
required Condition. And this is the only rational Assurance, which a man can
with any safety rely, or rest himself upon.

He who in this Case would believe surely, must first walk surely; and to do
so, is to walk uprightly. And what that is, we have sufficiently marked out to
us, in those plain and legible lines of Duty requiring us to Demean our selves
to God, humbly and devoutly; to our Governors obediently; and to our
Neighbors justly; and to our selves soberly and temperately. All other
Pretenses being infinitely vain in themselves, and fatal in their Consequences.

It was indeed the way of many in the late times, to bolster up their Crazy,
doting Consciences, with (I know not what) odd Confidences, founded upon
inward whispers of the Spirit, stories of something which they called
conversion, and marks of Predestination: All of them (as they understood them)
mere delusions, Trifles, and Fig leaves; and such as would be sure to fall off
and leave them naked, before that fiery Tribunal, which knows no other way of
Judging men, but according to their works.

Obedience and Upright Walking are such Substantial, Vital parts of Religion,
as, if they be wanting, can never be made up, or commuted for by any
formalities of Fantastic looks, or language. And the great Question when we
come hereafter to be judged, will not be, How demurely have you looked? or, How
boldly have you believed? With what length have you prayed? and, With what
loudness and vehemence have you preached? But, How holily have you lived? and,
How uprightly have you walked? For this, and this only, (with the Merits of
Christ's Righteousness) will come into Account, before that great Judge, who
will pass Sentence upon every man according to what he has done here in the
Flesh, whether it be good, or whether it be evil; and there is no respect of
Persons with Him.

To whom therefore be rendered and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might,
Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the University, AT Christ-Church, Oxon. 1664.
JOHN XV. 15. Henceforth I call you not Servants; for the Servant knows not
what his Lord does: But I have called you Friends; for all things that I have
heard of my father, have I made known unto you.
WE have here an Account of Christ's friendship to his Disciples; that is, we
have the best of things represented, in the greatest of Examples. In other men
we see the Excellency, but in Christ the Divinity of Friendship. By our Baptism
and Church Communion, we are made one Body with Christ; but by This we become
one soul.

Love is the greatest of Humane Affections, and Friendship is the Noblest and
most Refined Improvement of Love; a quality of the largest Compass. And it is
here admirable to observe the ascending gradation of the Love, which Christ
bore to his Disciples. The strange and superlative greatness of which will
appear from those several degrees of kindness, that it has manifested to man,
in the several Periods of His Condition. As,

1st. If we consider him antecedently to his Creation; while he yet lay in the
barren Womb of Nothing, and only in the Number of Possibilities: and
consequently, could have nothing to recommend him to Christ's affection, nor
show any thing lovely, but what he should afterward receive from the stamp of
a preventing Love. Yet even then did the Love of Christ begin to work, and to
commence in the first Emanations, and purposes of goodness toward Man;
designing to provide matter for it self to work upon, to create its own object,
and like the Sun, in the production of some Animals; first to give a being, and
then to shine upon it.

2dly, Let us take the Love of Christ as directing it self to Man actually
Created, and brought into the World; and so all those glorious Endowments of
Humane Nature, in its Original State and Innocence, were so many Demonstrations
of the munificent goodness of Him, by whom God first made, as well as
afterward redeemed the world. There was a Consult of the whole Trinity, for
the making of Man, that so He might shine as a Masterpiece, not only of the
Art, but also of the kindness of his Creator; with a noble, and a clear
understanding, a rightly disposed Will, and a Train of Affections regular, and
obsequious, and perfectly conformable to the Dictates, of that high, and divine
Principle, Right Reason. So that, upon the whole matter, he stepped forth, not
only the work of God's hands, but also the Copy of his perfections; a kind of
Image, or representation of the Deity in small. Infinity contracted into flesh
and blood; and (as I may so speak) the Preludium, and first Essay toward the
Incarnation of the Divine Nature. But,

3dly and Lastly, Let us look upon man, not only as created, and brought into
the World, with all these great Advantages superadded to his Being; but also,
as depraved, and fallen from them; as an Outlaw, and a Rebel, and one that could
plead a Title to nothing, but to the highest Severities of a Sin-revenging
Justice. Yet even in this estate also, the Boundless Love of Christ began to
have warm thoughts, and actings toward so wretched a Creature; at this time
not only not Amiable, but highly Odious.

While indeed man was yet uncreated and unborn, though he had no positive
Perfection to present, and set him off to Christ's view; yet he was at least
negatively clear: And, like unwritten paper, though it has no Draughts to
entertain, yet neither has it any Blots to offend the Eye; but is white, and
innocent, and fair for an after-Inscription. But man, once fallen, was nothing,
but a great Blur; nothing, but a total universal Pollution, and not to be
reformed by any thing under a New Creation.

Yet, see here the Ascent, and progress of Christ's Love. For first, if we
consider man, in such a loathsome, and provoking condition; was it not Love
enough, that he was spared and permitted to enjoy a Being? since, not to put a
Traitor to Death, is a singular mercy. But then, not only to continue his
Being, but to adorn it with Privilege, and from the Number of Subjects to take
him into the Retinue of Servants, this was yet a greater Love. For every one
that may be fit to be tolerated in a Prince's Dominions, is not therefore fit
to be admitted into his Family: nor is any Princes Court to be commensurate to
his Kingdom. But then farther, to advance him from a Servant, to a Friend; from
only living in his House, to lying in his Bosom; this is an Instance of Favor
above the Rate of a created goodness, an Act for none, but the Son of God, who
came to do every thing in Miracle, to love supernaturally, and to pardon
infinitely, and even to lay down the Sovereign, while he assumed the Savior.

The Text speaks the winning Behavior, and gracious Condescension of Christ to
his Disciples, in owning them for his Friends, who were more than sufficiently
honored by being his Servants. For still these words of his must be
understood, not according to the bare Rigor of the Letter, but according to the
Arts and Allowances of Expression: not as if the Relation of Friends had
actually discharged them from that of Servants; but that of the two Relations,
Christ was pleased to overlook the meaner, and without any mention of that, to
entitle and denominate them solely from the more Honorable.

For the further illustration of which, we must premise this, as a certain and
fundamental Truth, That so far as Service imports Duty and Subjection, all
created Beings, whether Men or Angels, bear the necessary and essential
Relation of Servants to God, and consequently to Christ, who is God Blessed for
ever: and this Relation is so necessary, that God himself cannot dispense with
it, nor discharge a Rational Creature from it: for although consequentially
indeed he may do so, by the Annihilation of such a Creature, and the taking
away his Being, yet supposing the continuance of his Being, God cannot effect,
that a Creature which has his Being from, and his Dependence upon him, should
not stand obliged to do him the utmost service that his nature enables Him to
do. For, to suppose the contrary, would be irregular and opposite to the Law of
Nature, which, consisting in a fixed unalterable Relation of one Nature to
another, is, upon that account, even by God himself, Indispensable. Forasmuch
as having once made a Creature, he cannot cause that that Creature should not
owe a Natural Relation to his Maker, both of Subjection, and Dependence, (the
very Essence of a Creature importing so much) to which Relation if he behaves
himself unsutably, he goes contrary to his Nature, and the Laws of it; which
God, the Author of Nature, cannot warrant without being contrary to Himself.
From all which it follows, that even in our highest estate of Sanctity and
Privilege, we yet retain the unavoidable obligation of Christ's Servants;
though still with an Advantage as great as the Obligation, where the service is
perfect freedom: so that with reference to such a Lord, to serve, and to be
free, are Terms not Consistent only, but absolutely Equivalent.

Nevertheless, since the Name of Servants has of old been reckoned to imply a
certain meanness of Mind, as well as lowness of Condition, and the ill
qualities of many who served, have rendered the condition it self not very
creditable; especially in those Ages, and places of the World, in which the
Condition of Servants was extremely different from what it is now amongst us;
they being generally Slaves, and such as were bought and sold for Money, and
consequently reckoned but amongst the other Goods and Chattels of their Lord,
or Master: It was for this Reason, that Christ thought fit to Wave the
Appellation of Servant here, as, according to the common use of it amongst the
Jews (and, at that time most Nations besides) importing these three
Qualifications, which, being directly contrary to the Spirit of Christianity,
were by no means to be allowed in any of Christ's Disciples.

1. The First whereof is that here mentioned in the Text; viz. An utter
unacquaintance with his Master's Designs, in these words; The Servant knows not
what his Lord does. For seldom does any man of sense make his Servant his
Counselor, for fear of making him his Governor too. A Master for the most
part keeps his choicest Goods locked up from his Servant, but much more his
Mind. A Servant is to know nothing, but his Master's Commands; and in these
also, not to know the reason of them.

Neither is he to stand aloof off from his Counsels only, but sometimes from
his Presence also; and so far as decency is duty, it is sometimes his duty to
avoid him. But the Voice of Christ in his Gospel is, Come to me all ye that are
heavy laden. The Condition of a Servant staves him off to a distance; but the
Gospel speaks nothing but Allurement, Attractives, and Invitation. The
Magisterial Law bids the Person under it, Go, and he must go: But the Gospel
says to every Believer, Come, and he comes. A Servant dwells remote from all
Knowledge of his Lord's Purposes. He lives as a kind of Foreigner under the
same Roof; a Domestic, and yet a Stranger too.

2dly, The Name of Servant, imports a slavish and degenerous Awe of Mind: As it
is in Romans 8. 5. God has not given us the spirit of Bondage again to fear. He
who serves, has still the low and ignoble restraints of Dread upon his Spirit;
which, in Business, and even in the midst of Action, cramps and ties up his
Activity. He fears his Master's anger, but designs not his favor. Quicken me
(says David) with thy free Spirit. It is the freedom of the Spirit, that gives
worth and life to the performance. But a Servant commonly is less free in Mind
than in Condition; his very Will seems to be in bonds and shackles, and Desire
it self under a kind of Durance and Captivity. In all that a Servant does he is
scarce a Voluntary Agent, but when he serves himself: All his Services
otherwise, not flowing naturally from Propensity and Inclination, but being
drawn and forced from him by Terror and Coaction. In any work he is put to, let
the Master withdraw his Eye, and he will quickly take off his hand.

3d. The appellation of Servant, imports a mercenary Temper and Disposition;
and denotes such an one as makes his Reward, both the sole motive, and measure
of his Obedience. He neither Loves the thing commanded, nor the Person who
commands it, but is wholly and only intent upon his own Emolument. All
kindnesses done Him, and all that is given Him, over and above what is strictly
just and his due, makes Him rather worse than better. And this is an
observation that never fails, where any one has so much bounty, and so little
wit, as to make the Experiment. For a Servant rarely or never ascribes what he
receives, to the mere Liberality and Generosity of the Donor, but to his own
Worth and Merit, and to the need which he supposes there is of him; which
opinion alone will be sure to make any one of a mean, servile Spirit, insolent
and intolerable.

And thus I have shown what the Qualities of a Servant usually are (or, at
least were in that Country, where our Savior lived and conversed, when he
spoke these words) which, no doubt, were the Cause why he would not treat his
Disciples (whom he designed to be of a quite contrary Disposition) with this
Appellation.

Come we therefore now in the next place, to show what is included in that
great Character, and Privilege which he was pleased to vouchsafe both to them,
and to all Believers, in calling, and accounting them his Friends. It includes
in it (I conceive) these following Things.

1. Freedom of Access. House and Heart, and all are open for the Reception of a
friend. The Entrance is not beset with solemn Excuses, and lingering Delays; but
the Passage is easy, and free from all Obstruction, and not only admits, but
even invites the Comer. How different, for the most part, is the same Man from
himself as he sustains the Person of a Magistrate, and as he sustains that of a
Friend As a magistrate or great Officer he locks himself up from all Approaches
by the multiplied Formalities of Attendance, by the Distance of Ceremony, and
Grandeur; So many hungry Officers to be passed through, so many Thresholds to
be saluted, so many Days to be spent in waiting for an Opportunity of, perhaps,
but half an hour's Converse.

But when He is to be entertained, whose Friendship, not whose Business demands
an Entrance; those Formalities presently disappear, all Impediments vanish, and
the Rigours of the Magistrate, submit to the Endearments of a Friend. He opens
and yields himself to the Man of Business with difficulty and reluctance, but
offers himself to the visits of a Friend with facility, and all the meeting
Readiness of Appetite and Desire. The Reception of one is as different from the
Admission of the other, as when the Earth falls open under the Incisions of the
Plough, and when it gapes and greedily opens it self to drink in the Dew of
Heaven, or the Refreshments of a Shower: or there is as much difference between
them, as when a Man reaches out his Arms to take up a Burden, and when he
reaches them out to embrace.

It Is confessed, that the vast Distance, that Sin had put between the offending
Creature, and the offended Creator, required the help of some great Umpire,
and Intercessour, to open him a new way of access to God; and this Christ did
for us as Mediator. But we read of no Mediator to bring us to Christ; For
though, being God by Nature, he dwells in the height of Majesty, and the
inaccessible Glories of a Deity; yet to keep off all strangeness between
himself, and the Sons of Men, he has condescended to a Cognation and
Consanguinity with us, he has clothed himself with Flesh and Blood, that so he
might subdue his Glories to a Possibility of humane Converse. And therefore, he
that denies himself an immediate Access to Christ, affronts him in the great
Relation of a Friend; and as opening himself both to our Persons, and to our
Wants, with the greatest Tenderness, and the freest Invitation. There is none
who acts a Friend by a Deputy, or can be familiar by Proxy.

2. The second Privilege of Friendship is a favorable Construction of all
Passages between Friends, that are not of so high, and so malign a Nature, as
to dissolve the Relation. Love covers a multitude of Sins, says the Apostle, 1
Pet. 4. 8. When a scar cannot be taken away, the next kind Office is to hide
it. Love is never so blind, as when it is to spy faults. It is like the
Painter, who being to draw the Picture of a Friend having a Blemish in one Eye,
would picture only the other side of his Face. It is a Noble, and a great thing
to cover the Blemishes, and to excuse the failings of a Friend; to draw a
Curtain before his stains, and to display his Perfections; to bury his
Weaknesses in silence, but to proclaim his virtues upon the Housetop. It is an
Imitation of the charities of Heaven, which, when the Creature lies prostrate
in the weakness of sleep, and weariness, spreads the Covering of Night, and
Darkness over it, to conceal it in that Condition; But as soon as our Spirits
are refreshed, and Nature returns to its morning Vigor, God then bids the Sun
rise, and the Day shine upon us, both to advance and to show that Activity.

It is the ennobling Office of the Understanding, to correct the fallacious and
mistaken Reports of Sense, and to assure us that the Staff in the Water is
straight, though our Eye would tell us it is crooked. So it is the Excellency
of Friendship to rectify, or at least to qualify the Malignity of those
Surmises, that would mis-represent a Friend, and traduce him in our Thoughts.
Am I told that my Friend has done me an Injury, or that he has committed any
undecent Action? why, the first Debt that I both owe to his Friendship, and
that he may challenge from mine, is rather to question the Truth of the Report,
than presently to believe my Friend unworthy. Or if Matter of Fact breaks out
and blazes with too great an Evidence to be denied, or so much as doubted of;
why, still there are other Lenitives, that Friendship will apply, before it
will be brought to the Decretory Rigours of a Condemning Sentence. A Friend
will be sure to act the Part of an Advocate, before he will assume that of a
Judge. And there are few Actions so ill, (unless they are of a very deep and
black Tincture indeed) but will admit of some Extenuation at least from those
Common Topics of Humane Frailty; such as are Ignorance or Inadvertency,
Passion or Surprise, Company or Solicitation; with many other such things,
which may go a great Way toward an Excusing of the Agent, though they cannot
absolutely justify the Action All which Apologies for, and Alleviations of
Faults, though they are the Heights of Humanity, yet they are not the Favors,
but the Duties of Friendship. Charity it self commands us, where we know no
Ill, to think well of all. But Friendship, that always goes a Pitch higher,
gives a Man a peculiar Right, and Claim to the good Opinion of his Friend. And,
if we justly look upon a Proneness to find faults, as a very ill and a mean
thing, we are to remember, that a Proneness to believe them is next to it.

We have seen here the Demeanor of Friendship between Man and Man: but how is
it, think we now, between Christ, and the Soul that depends upon him? Is he any
ways short in these Offices of Tenderness and Mitigation? no assuredly; but by
infinite Degrees Superior. For where our Heart does but Relent, his Melts;
where our Eye pities, his Bowels yearn. How many Frowardnesses of ours does he
smother, how many Indignities does he pass by, and how many Affronts does he
put up at our hands, because his Love is invincible, and his Friendship
unchangeable? He rates every Action, every sinful Infirmity with the Allowances
of Mercy; and never weighs the Sin, but together with it He weighs the force of
the Inducement; how much of it is to be attributed to Choice, how much to the
Violence of the Temptation, to the Stratagem of the Occasion, and the yielding
Frailties of weak Nature.

Should we try Men, at that rate, that we try Christ, we should quickly find,
that the largest Stock of Humane friendship would be too little for us to spend
long upon. But his Compassion follows us with an infinite Supply. He is God in
his Friendship, as well as in his Nature, and therefore we sinful Creatures
are not took upon Advantages, nor consumed in our Provocations.

See this exemplified in his Behavior to his Disciples, while he was yet upon
Earth: How ready was he to excuse and cover their Infirmities! At the last and
bitterest Scene of his Life, when he was so full of Agony and Horror upon the
Approach of a dismal Death, and so had most need of the Refreshments of
Society, and the friendly Assistances of his Disciples; and when also he
desired no more of them, but only for a while to sit up and pray with Him. Yet
they, like Persons wholly untouched with his Agonies, and unmoved with his
Passionate Entreaties, forget both his, and their own Cares, and securely sleep
away all Concern for him, or themselves either. Now, what a fierce, and
sarcastick Reprehension may we imagine this would have drawn from the
Friendships of the World, that act but to an Humane Pitch! and yet what a
gentle one did it receive from Christ! In Matt. 26. 40? No more than, What
could you not watch with me for one hour? And when from this Admonition they
took only occasion to redouble their Fault, and to sleep again, so that upon a
second, and third Admonition they had nothing to plead for their unseasonable
Drowsiness, yet then Christ, who was the only Person concerned to have
resented, and aggravated this their Unkindness, finds an Extenuation for it,
when they themselves could not. The Spirit indeed is willing (says he) but the
Flesh is weak. As if he had said, I know your Hearts, and am satisfied of your
Affection, and therefore accept your Will, and compassionate your Weakness. So
benign, so gracious is the Friendship of Christ, so answerable to our Wants, so
suitable to our Frailties. Happy that Man, who has a Friend to point out to him
the Perfection of Duty, and yet to pardon him in the Lapses of his Infirmity.

3. The third Privilege of Friendship is a Sympathy in Joy and Grief. When a
Man shall have diffused his Life, his self, and his whole Concernments so far,
that he can weep his Sorrows with another Eyes; when he has another Heart
besides his own, both to share, and to support his Griefs, and when, if his
Joys overflow, he can treasure up the Overplus and Redundancy of them in
another Breast; so that he can (as it were) shake off the Solitude of a single
Nature, by dwelling in two Bodies at once, and living by another Breath, this
surely is the Height, the very Spirit and Perfection of all humane Felicities.

It is a true and happy Observation of that great Philosopher the Lord Verulam,
that this is the Benefit of Communication of our Minds to others, That Sorrows
by being Communicated grow less, and Ioys greater. And indeed, Sorrow, like a
Stream, loses it self in many Channels; and Joy, like a Ray of the Sun,
reflects with a greater Ardour, and Quickness, when it rebounds upon a Man from
the Breast of his Friend.

Now Friendship is the only Scene, upon which the Glorious Truth of this great
Proposition, can be fully acted and drawn forth. Which indeed is a Summary
Description of the Sweets of Friendship: and the whole Life of a Friend, in the
several Parts and Instances of it, is only a more diffuse Comment upon, and a
plainer Explication of this Divine Aphorism. Friendship never restrains a
Pleasure to a single Fruition. But such is the Royal Nature of this Quality,
that it still expresses it self in the Style of Kings, as We do this, or That;
and This is our happiness; and such or such a thing belongs to us; when the
immediate Possession of it is vested only in one. Nothing certainly in Nature,
can so peculiarly gratify the Noble Dispositions of Humanity, as for one man
to see another so much himself, as to sigh his Griefs, and groan his Pains, to
sing his Joys, and (as it were) to do and feel every thing by Sympathy, and
secret inexpressible Communications. Thus it is upon an humane Account.

Let us now see, how Christ sustains and makes good this generous Quality of a
Friend. And this we shall find fully set forth to us, in Heb. 4. 15. Where he
is said to be a merciful High Priest, touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities; and that in all our Afflictions he is afflicted, Isa. 63. 9. And
no doubt, with the same Bowels and Meltings of Affection, with which any tender
Mother hears and bemoans the Groanings of her sick Child, does Christ hear and
sympathize with the spiritual Agonies of a Soul under Desertion, or the
Pressures of some stinging Affliction. It is enough that he understands the
Exact Measures of our Strengths, and Weaknesses; that he knows our Frame* as it
is in Psalm 03. 14. And that he does not only know, but Emphatically, that he
remembers also that we are but Dust: Observe that signal Passage of his loving
Commiseration; As soon as he had risen from the Dead, and met Mary Magdalen, in
Mark 16. 7. he sends this Message of his Resurrection by her. Go Tell my
Disciples and Peter, that I am risen. What? was not Peter one of his Disciples?
Why then is he mentioned particularly and by himself, as if he were exempted
out of their Number? Why, we know into what a plunge he had newly cast himself
by denying his Master: upon occasion of which he was now struggling with all the
Perplexities and Horrors of Mind imaginable, least Christ might in like manner
deny and disown him before his Father, and so repay one Denial with another.
Hereupon Christ particularly applies the Comforts of his Resurrection to him,
as if he had said. Tell all my Disciples, but be sure especially to tell poor
Peter, that I am risen from the Dead; and that, notwithstanding his Denial of
me, the Benefits of my Resurrection belong to him, as much as to any of the
rest. This is the Privilege of the Saints, to have a Companion and a Supporter
in all their Miseries, in all the doubtful Turnings and doleful Passages of
their Lives. In sum, this Happiness does Christ vouchsafe to all his, that as
a Savior he once suffered for them, and that as a Friend he always suffers
with them.

4. The fourth Privilege of Friendship is that which is here specified in the
Text, a Communication of Secrets. A Bosom secret and a Bosom friend are usually
put together. And this from Christ to the Soul, is not only Kindness, but also
Honor and Advancement; it is for him to vouch it one of his Privy Council.
Nothing under a Jewel is taken into the Cabinet. A secret is the Apple of our
Eye; it will bear no Touch, nor Approach, we use to cover nothing, but what we
account a Rarity. And therefore to communicate a Secret to any one, is to exalt
him to one of the Royalties of Heaven. For none knows the Secrets of a Man's
Mind, but his God, his Conscience, and his Friend. Neither would any prudent
Man let such a thing go out of his own Heart, had he not another Heart besides
his own to receive it.

Now it was of old a Privilege, with which God was pleased to honor such as
served him at the Rate of an Extraordinary Obedience, thus to admit them to a
Knowledge of many of his great Counsels locked up from the rest of the World.
When God had designed the Destruction of Sodom, the Scripture represents him as
unable to conceal that great Purpose from Abraham, whom he always treated as
his Friend, and Acquaintance; that is, not only with Love, but also with
Intimacy and Familiarity, in Genes. 18. v. 17. And the Lord said, shall I hide
from Abraham the thing that I go about to do? He thought it a Violation of the
Rights of Friendship to reserve his Design wholly to himself. And St. James
tells us, in Iam. 2. 23. That Abraham was called the Friend of God: and
therefore had a Kind of Claim to the Knowledge of his Secrets, and the
Participation of his Counsels. Also in Exodus 33. v. 11. It is said of God,
that he spoke to Moses as a Man speaks to his Friend. And that, not only for
the Familiarity and Facility of Address, but also for the peculiar
Communications of his Mind. Moses was with him in the Retirements of the Mount,
received there his Dictates, and his private Instructions, as his Deputy and
Viceroy; and when the Multitude and Congregation of Israel were thundered away,
and kept off from any approach to it, he was honored with an intimate and
immediate admission. The Priests indeed were taken into a near attendance upon
God; but still there was a degree of a nearer Converse, and the Interest of a
Friend was above the Privileges of the highest Servant. In Exodus 19. 24. Thou
shall come up (says God) thou and Aaron with thee, but let not the Priests and
the People break through to come up unto the Lord, lest the Lord break forth
upon them. And if we proceed further, we shall still find a continuation of the
same Privilege: Psalm 25. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear
him. Nothing is to be concealed from the other self. To be a Friend, and to be
Conscious are terms equivalent.

Now if God maintained such Intimacies with those, whom he loved, under the
Law, (which was a Dispensation of greater Distance,) we may be sure that under
the Gospel, (the very Nature of which imports Condescension, and Compliance)
there must needs be the same, with much greater Advantage. And therefore when
God had manifested himself in the Flesh, how sacredly did he preserve this
Privilege? how freely did Christ unbosom himself to his Disciples? in Luke 8.
10. Unto you (says he) it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God:
but unto others in Parables; that seeing they might not see: Such shall be
permitted to cast an Eye into the Ark, and to look into the very Holy of
holies. And again in Matthew. 13. 17. Many Prophets and righteous men have
desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear
those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. Neither did he treat them
with these peculiarities of favor in the extraordinary discoveries of the
Gospel only, but also of those incommunicable Revelations of the Divine Love,
in reference to their own personal interest in it. In Rev. 2. 17. To him that
overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white
stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows, saving he
that receives it. Assurance is a Rarity covered from the Inspection of the
world. A secret that none can know, but God, and the person that is blessed
with it. It is writ in a private Character, not to be read, nor understood but
by the Conscience, to which the Spirit of God has vouchsafed to decypher it.
Every Believer lives upon an inward provision of Comfort, that the world is a
stranger to.

5. The fifth advantage of Friendship is Counsel and Advice. A man will
sometimes need not only another Heart, but also another head besides his own.
In solitude there is not only discomfort; but weakness also. And that saying of
the wise man Eccles. 4. 10. Woe to him that is alone, is verified upon none so
much, as upon the Friendless person: When a man shall be perplexed with Knots
and Problems of business and contrary affairs; where the determination is
dubious, and both parts of the Contrariety seem equally weighty, so that which
way soever the Choice determines, a man is sure to venture a great Concern. How
happy then is it to fetch in aid from another person, whose judgment may be
greater than my own, and whose Concernment is sure not to be less! There are
some passages of a man's affairs that would quite break a single understanding.
So many intricacies, so many Labyrinths, are there in them, that the Succors
of reason fail, the very force and spirit of it being lost in an actual
Intention scattered upon several clashing objects at once; in which case the
Interposal of a Friend is like the supply of a fresh party to a besieged,
yielding City.

Now Christ is not failing in this office of a friend also. For in that
illustrious prediction of Esaias 9. 6. amongst the rest of his great Titles, he
is called mightty Counselor. And his Counsel is not only sure, but also free.
It is not under the Gospel of Christ, as under some Laws of Men, where you must
be forced to buy your Counsel, and oftentimes pay dear for bad advice. No, He
is a light to those that sit in darkness. And no man fees the Sun, no man
purchases the Light, nor errs, if he walks by it. The only price, that Christ
sets upon his Counsel, is, that we follow it; and that we do that, which is
best for us to do. He is not only Light for us to see by, but also Light for
us to see with. He is understanding to the ignorant, and Eyes to the Blind: And
whosoever has both a faithful and a discreet friend, to guide him in the dark,
slippery, and dangerous passages of his Life, may carry his Eyes in another
man's head, and yet see never the worse. In 1 Cor. 1. 30. the Apostle tells us,
that Christ is made to us, not only Sanctification and Redemtion, but Wisdom
too: We are his Members, and it is but Natural, that all the Members, of the
Body, should be guided by the wisdom of the Head.

And therefore let every Believer comfort himself in this high Privilege, That
in the great things, that concern his eternal Peace, he is not left to stand or
fall by the uncertain directions of his own judgment. No, sad were his
condition if he should be so; when he is to encounter an Enemy made up of Wiles
and Stratagems, an old serpent, and a long experienced Deceiver, and
successful at the Trade for some thousands of years.

The Inequality of the match, between such an one, and the subtillest of us
would quickly appear by a fatal Circumvention: There must be a wisdom from
above to overreach and master this Hellish wisdom from beneath. And this every
sanctified Person is sure of in his great Friend, in whom all the treasures of
wisdom dwell. Treasures that flow out, and are imparted freely both in
direction, and assistance to all that belong to him. He never leaves any of
His, perplexed, amazed, or bewildred, where the welfare of their Souls requires
a better judgment than their own, either to guide them in their Duty, or to
disentangle them from a Temptation. Whosoever has Christ for his Friend, shall
be sure of Counsel, and whosoever is his own Friend, will be sure to obey it.

6. The last and crowning Privilege, or rather property of Friendship is
Constancy. He only is a Friend, whose Friendship lives as long as himself; and
who ceases to Love, and to Breath at the same instant. Not that I yet state
Constancy in such an absurd, senceless, and irrational Continuance in
Friendship, as no Injuries, or Provocations whatsoever, can break off. For
there are some Injuries that extinguish the very Relation between Friends. In
which case, a man ceases to be a Friend, not from any Inconstancy in his
Friendship, but from Defect of an Object for his Friendship to exert it self
upon. It is one thing for a Father to cease to be a Father, by casting off his
Son; and another for him to cease to be so, by the Death of his Son. In this
the Relation is at an end for want of a Correlate: So in Friendship, there are
some passages of that high and hostile Nature, that they really and properly
constitute and denominate the Person guilty of them, an Enemy; and if so, how
can the other Person possibly continue a friend, since Friendship essentially
requires that it be between Two at least; and there can be no Friendship, where
there are not Two friends?

No body is bound to look upon his Back-biter, or his Underminer; his Betrayer,
or his Oppressor, as his friend. Nor indeed, is it possible that he should do
so, unless he could alter the Constitution and Order of Things; and establish a
new Nature, and a new Morality in the World. For to remain unsensible of such
Provocations, is not Constancy, but Apathy. And therefore they discharge the
Person, so treated, from the proper Obligations of a Friend; though
Christianity, I confess, binds him to the Duties of a Neighbor.

But to give you the true Nature, and Measures of Constancy; It is such a
stability, and firmness of Friendship, as overlooks, and passes by all those
lesser failures of Kindness and Respect, that partly through Passion, partly
through Indiscretion, and such other frailties incident to Humane Nature, a man
may be sometimes guilty of, and yet still retain the same habitual Good Will,
and prevailing Propensity of Mind, to his friend, that he had before. And whose
Friendship soever is of that strength, and duration, as to stand its ground
against, and remain unshaken by such assaults; (which yet are strong enough to
shake down and annihilate the Friendship of little puny Minds;) such an one (I
say) has reached all the true measures of Constancy: His Friendship is of a
noble Make, and a lasting Consistency; it resembles Marble, and deserves to be
wrote upon it.

But how few Tempers in the World, are of that magnanimous Frame, as to reach
the heights of so great a Virtue: Many offer at the Effects of Friendship, but
they do not last; they are promising in the Beginning, but they fail, and
jade, and tire in the Prosecution. For most people in the World are acted by
Levity, and Humor, by strange and irrational Changes. And how often may we
meet with those, who are one while courteous, civil, and obliging, (at least to
their proportion;) but within a small time after, are so supercilious, sharp,
troublesome, fierce, and exceptious, that they are not only short of the true
Character of Friendship, but become the very Sores and Burdens of Society?
Such low, such worthless Dispositions, how easily are they discovered, how
justly are they despised? But now that we may pass from one Contrary to
another; Christ, who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, in his Being,
is so also in his Affection. He is not of the Number, or Nature, of those
pitiful, mean pretenders to Friendship, who perhaps will love and smile upon
you one day, and not so much as know you the next: Many of which sort there are
in the World, who are not so much courted outwardly, but that inwardly they are
detested much more.

Friendship is a kind of Covenant; and most Covenants run upon mutual Terms and
Conditions. And therefore so long as we are Exact in fulfilling the Condition
on our parts, I mean, Exact according to the measures of Sincerity, though not
of Perfection, we may be sure, that Christ will not fail in the least Iota to
fulfill every thing on his. The favor of Relations, Patrons and Princes, is
uncertain, ticklish and variable; and the Friendship which they take up, upon
the Accounts of Judgment, and Merit, they most times lay down out of Humor.
But the Friendship of Christ has none of these weaknesses, no such hollowness
or unsoundness in it. For neither Principalities nor Powers, things present,
nor things to come; no, nor all the rage and malice of Hell shall be able to
pluck the meanest of Christ's friends out of his Bosom. For, whom he loves, he
loves to the End.

Now from the Particulars hitherto discoursed of, we may infer and learn these
two things: 1. The Excellency, and Value of Friendship, Christ the Son of the
most High God, the second Person in the glorious Trinity, took upon him our
Nature, that he might give a great Instance and Example of this Virtue; and
condescended to be a Man, only that he might be a Friend. Our Creator, our,
Lord and King he was before; but he would needs come down from all this, and in
a sort become our Equal, that he might partake of that Noble Quality that is
properly between Equals. Christ took not upon him Flesh and Blood, that he
might conquer and rule Nations, lead Armies, or possess Palaces; but that he
might have the Relenting, the Tenderness, and the Compassions of Humane Nature,
which render it properly capable of Friendship; and, in a word, that he might
have our Heart and we have His. God himself sets Friendship above all
Considerations of Kindred or Consanguinity, as the greatest Ground and Argument
of mutual Endearment, in Deuteronomy. 15. 6. If thy Brother, the Son of thy Mother, or
thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy Friend, which is as
thine own Soul, entice thee to go and serve other Gods, thou shall not consent
unto him. The Emphasis of the Expression is very remarkable, it being a
Gradation, or Ascent, by several degrees of Dearness, to that which is the
Highest of all. Neither Wife, nor Brother, Son nor Daughter, though the nearest
in Cognation, are allowed to stand in Competion with a friend; who, if he fully
answers the Duties of that great Relation, is indeed better, and more valuable,
than all of them put together, and may serve instead of them; so that he, who
has a firm, a worthy, and sincere friend, may want all the rest, without
missing them. That which lies in a man's Bosom, should be dear to him; but that
which lies within his Heart, ought to be much dearer. 2. In the next place, we
learn from hence the high Advantage of being truly Pious and Religious. When we
have said, and done all; it is only the true Christian, and the Religious
Person, who is, or can be, sure of a friend; sure of obtaining, sure of keeping
him. But as for the friendship of the World; when a man shall have done all
that he can to make one his friend, employed the utmost of his Wit and Labor,
beaten his Brains, and emptied his Purse, to create an Endearment between him
and the Person, whose friendship he desires, he may, in the end, upon all these
Endeavors, and Attempts, be forced to write Vanity and Frustration* For, by
them all, he may at last be no more able to get into the other's Heart, than he
is to thrust his hand into a Pillar of Brass. The man's Affection, amidst all
these Kindnesses done him, remaining wholly unconcerned, and impregnable; just
like a Rock, which being plied continually by the Waves, still throws them back
again into the Bosom of the Sea that sent them, but is not at all moved by any
of them.

People at first, while they are young and raw, and soft natured, are apt to
think it an easy thing to gain Love, and reckon their own friendship a sure
price of another man's. But when Experience shall have once opened their Eyes,
and shown them the hardness of most Hearts, the hollowness of others, and the
Baseness and Ingratitude of almost all, they will then find, that a friend is
the gift of God; and that He only, who made Hearts, can unite them. For it is
He, who creates those Sympathies, and sutablenesses of Nature, that are the
foundation of all true friendship, and then by his Providence brings Persons so
affected together.

It is an Expression frequent in Scripture, but infinitely more insignificant,
than at first it is usually observed to be: Namely, That God gave such or such
a person grace, or favor in another's Eyes. As for instance; in Genes. 39. 21.
it is said of Joseph, That the Lord was with him, and gave him favor in the
sight of the Keeper of the Prison. Still it is an invisible Hand from Heaven,
that ties this Knot, and mingles Hearts, and Souls, by strange, secret, and
unaccountable Conjunctions.

That Heart shall surrender it self, and its friendship, to one man, at first
view, which another has, in vain, been laying Siege to for many years, by all
the repeated Acts of Kindness imaginable.

Nay, so far is Friendship from being of any humane Production, that, unless
Nature be pre-disposed to it, by its own Propensity or Inclination, no Arts of
Obligation shall be able to abate the secret Hatreds, and Hostilities of some
Persons toward others. No friendly Offices, no Addresses, no Benefits
whatsoever, shall ever alter or allay that Diabolical Rancour, that frets and
ferments in some hellish Breasts, but that upon all occasions it will foam out
at its foul mouth in Slander and Invective, and sometimes bite too in a shrewd
Turn or a secret Blow. This is true and undeniable upon frequent Experience;
and happy those who can learn it at the Cost of other men's.

But now, on the contrary, he who will give up his Name to Christ in Faith
unfeigned, and a sincere Obedience to all his Righteous Laws, shall be sure to
find Love for Love, and Friendship for Friendship. The Success is certain and
infallible; and none ever yet miscarried in the Attempt. For Christ freely
offers his Friendship to all; and sets no other rate upon so vast a purchase,
but only that we would suffer him to be our Friend. Thou perhaps spendest thy
precious time in waiting upon such a great One, and thy Estate in presenting
him; and, probably, after all, have no other reward, but sometimes to be smiled
upon, and always to be smiled at; and when thy greatest and most pressing
Occasions shall call for succor, and relief, then to be deserted and cast off,
and not known.

Now, I say, turn the stream of thy Endeavors another way, and bestow but half
that hearty, sedulous attendance upon thy Savior, in the Duties of Prayer and
Mortification; and be at half that Expense in Charitable Works, by relieving
Christ in his poor Members; and, in a word, study as much to please him who
died for thee, and thou do to court and humor thy great Patron, who cares
not for thee, and thou shall make him thy friend for ever; A friend, who shall
own thee in thy lowest Condition, speak Comfort to thee in all thy Sorrows,
Counsel thee in all thy Doubts, answer all thy Wants, and, in a word, never
leave thee, nor forsake thee. But when all the hopes, that thou have raised
upon the promises, or supposed kindnesses of the fastidious, and fallacious
great Ones of the World, shall fail, and upbraid thee to thy face, he shall
then take thee into his Bosom, embrace, cherish, and support thee; and, as the
Psalmist expresses it, He shall guide thee with his Counsel here, and
afterward receive thee into Glory.

To which God of his Mercy vouchsafe to bring us all; To whom be rendered and
ascribed, etc. Amen.

A DISCOURSE AGAINST Long Extemporary PRAYERS: IN A SERMON ON ECCLESIASTES V. 2.
ECCLES. V. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth;
therefore let thy words be few.
WE have here the Wisest of Men instructing us how to behave our selves before
God in his own House; and particularly when we address to him in the most
important of all Duties, which is Prayer. Solomon had the honor to be spoken
to by God himself, and therefore, in all likelihood, none more fit to teach us
how to speak to God. A great Privilege certainly for Dust and Ashes to be
admitted to; and therefore it will concern us to manage it so, that in these
our Approaches to the King of Heaven, his Goodness may not cause us to forget
his Greatness, nor (as it is but too usual for Subjects to use Privilege
against Prerogative) his Honor suffer by his Condescension.

In the Words we have these three Things observable.

1. That whosoever appears in the House of God, and particularly in the Way of
Prayer, ought to reckon himself, in a more especial manner, placed in the sight
and presence of God.

2. That the vast and infinite distance between God and Him, ought to create in
him all imaginable Awe, and Reverence in such his Addresses to God.

3 ly. and Lastly; That this Reverence required of him, is to consist in a
serious preparation of his Thoughts, and a sober government of his Expressions:
Neither is his Mouth to be rash, nor his Heart to be hastly, in uttering any
thing before God.

These things are evidently contained in the Words, and do as evidently
contain the whole sense of them. But I shall gather them all into this one
Proposition; Namely,

That Premeditation of Thought, and Brevity of Expression, are the great
Ingredients of that Reverence, that is required to a pious, acceptable, and
devout Prayer.

For the better handling of which, we will, in the first place, consider how,
and by what way it is, that Prayer works upon, or prevails with God, for the
obtaining of the things, we pray for. Concerning which, I shall lay down this
General Rule, That the Way, by which Prayer prevails with God, is wholly
different from that, by which it prevails with Men. And to give you this more
particularly.

1. First of all, It prevails not with God by way of Information or
Notification of the Thing to Him, which we desire of Him. With Men, indeed,
this is the common, and with Wise men the chief, and should be the only way of
obtaining what we ask of them. We represent, and lay before them our Wants and
Indigences, and the misery of our Condition; Which being made known to them,
the Quality and Condition of the Thing asked for, and of the Persons, who ask
it, induces them to give that to us, and to do that for us, which we desire,
and petition for: But it is not so in our Addresses to God; for he knows our
Wants, and our Condition better than we our selves: He is beforehand with all
our Prayers, Matthew. 6. 8. Your Father knows what things ye have need of
before ye ask him: And in Psalm. 139. 2. Thou understandest my thought afar off.
God knows our Thoughts before the very Heart that conceives them. And how then
can he, who is but of yesterday, suggest any thing new to that Eternal mind!
how can Ignorance inform Omniscience! 2 ly. Neither does Prayer prevail with
God by way of persuasion, or working upon the Affections, so, as thereby to
move him to pity or compassion. This indeed is the most usual, and most
effectual way to prevail with Men; who, for the generality are, one part
Reason, and nine parts Affection. So that one of a voluble Tongue, and a
dextrous Insinuation, may do what he will with vulgar Minds, and with Wise men
too, at their weak times. But God, who is as void of Passion, or Affection, as
he is of Quantity, or Corporeity, is not to be dealt with this way. He values
not our Rhetoric, nor our pathetical Harangues. He who applies to God, applies
to an Infinite Almighty Reason, a pure Act, all Intellect, The first Mover, and
therefore not to be moved, or wrought upon Himself. In all Passion, the Mind
suffers (as the very signification of the Word imports,) but absolute, entire
perfection cannot suffer; it is and must be Immovable, and by consequence
Impassible. And therefore, in the Third and Last place, much less is God to be
prevailed upon by Importunity, and (as it were) wearying him into a Concession
of what we beg of him. Though with Men, we know, this also is not unusual. A
Notable Instance of which we have in Luke 18. v. 4, 5. where the unjust Judge
being with a restless Vehemence sued to for Justice, says thus within himself:
Though I fear not God, nor regard Man, yet because this Widow troubles me I
will avenge her, lest by her continual Coming she weary me.

In like manner, how often are Beggars relieved only for their eager and rude
Importunity; not that the person who relieves them, is thereby informed or
satisfied of their real Want, nor yet moved to pity them by all their Cry and
Cant, but to rid himself from their vexatious Noise and Din; so that to
purchase his Quiet by a little Alms, he gratifies the Beggar; but indeed
relieves himself. But now, this way is further from prevailing with God, than
either of the former. For as Omniscience is not to be informed, so neither is
Omnipotence to be wearied. We may much more easily think to clamor the Sun and
Stars out of their Courses, than to word the great Creator of them out of the
steady purposes of his own Will, by all the vehemence and loudness of our
Petitions. Men may tire themselves with their own Prayers, but God is not to be
tired. The rapid motion, and whirl of things here below, interrupts not the
inviolable Rest and Calmness of the Nobler Beings above. While the Winds roar
and bluster here in the First and Second Regions of the Air, there is a perfect
serenity in the Third. Men's Desires cannot control God's Decrees.

And thus I have shown, that the Three ways by which Men prevail with Men, in
their Prayers and Applications to them, have no place at all, in giving any
efficacy to their Addresses to God.

But you will ask then, Upon what account is it, that Prayer becomes prevalent
and efficacious with God, so as to procure us the good things we pray for? I
answer upon this; That it is the fulfilling of that Condition, upon which God
has freely promised to convey his Blessings to Men. God, of his own absolute,
unaccountable good will and pleasure, has thought fit to appoint and fix upon
this, as the means by which he will supply and answer the Wants of Mankind. As
for instance; Suppose a Prince should declare to any one of his Subjects, that
if he shall appear before him every morning in his Bedchamber, shall receive
of him a thousand Talents. We must not here imagine, that the Subject, by
making this appearance, does either move or persuade his Prince to give him
such a Sum of Money: No, he only performs the Condition of the promise, and
thereby acquires a Right to the thing promised. He does indeed hereby engage
his Prince to give him this Sum, though he does by no means persuade him: Or
rather, to speak more strictly and properly, the Prince's own Justice, and
Veracity, is an Engagement upon the Prince himself, to make good his promise to
him, who fulfills the Conditions of it.

But you will say, That, upon this Ground it will follow, that when we obtain
any thing of God by Prayer, we have it upon Claim of Justice, and not by Way of
Gift, as a free Result of his Bounty.

I answer; that both these are very well consistent; for though he, who makes a
Promise upon a certain Condition, is bound in Justice, upon the fulfilling of
that Condition, to perform his promise; yet it was perfectly Grace and
Goodness: Bounty and free Mercy, that first induced him to make the Promise,
and particularly to state the Tenor of it, upon such a Condition. If we
confess our Sins, says the Apostle, I John 1. 9. God is faithful and just to
forgive us our Sins. Can any thing be freer, and more the Effect of mere Grace,
than the Forgiveness of Sins? And yet it is certain from this Scripture and
many more, that it is firmly promised us upon Condition of a penitent hearty
Confession of them; and consequently, as certain it is, that God stands obliged
here even by his Faithfulness and Justice, to make good this his Promise of
Forgiveness to those who come up to the Terms of it by such a Confession.

In like manner, for Prayer, in reference to the good Things prayed for. He who
prays for a thing, as God has appointed him, gets thereby a right to the thing
prayed for: But it is a Right, not springing from any Merit or Condignity,
either in the Prayer it self, or the Person who makes it, to the Blessing,
which he prays for; but from God's Veracity, Truth, and Justice, who having
appointed Prayer as the Condition of that Blessing, cannot but stand to what he
himself had appointed; Though that he did appoint it, was the free Result and
Determination of his own Will.

We have a full Account of this whole Matter from God's own Mouth, in Psalm 50.
Call upon me (says God) in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. These
are evidently the Terms, upon which God answers Prayers: In which Case, there
is no doubt, but the Deliverance is still of more Worth than the Prayer; and
there is as little doubt also, that without such a previous declaration made on
God's part, a person so in Trouble or Distress might pray his Heart out, and
yet God not be in the least obliged by all his Prayers, either in Justice or
Honor, or indeed so much as in Mercy to deliver him; for Mercy is free, and
Misery cannot oblige it. In a word, Prayer procures deliverance from Trouble,
just as Naaman's dipping himself seven times in Jordan procured him a
Deliverance from his Leprosy; not by any Virtue in it self adequate to so
great an Effect, you may be sure; but from this, That it was appointed by God
as the Condition of his Recovery; and so obliged the Power of him, who
appointed it, to give force and virtue to his own Institution, beyond what the
Nature of the Thing it self could otherwise have raised it to.

Let this therefore be fixed upon, as the Groundwork of what we are to say
upon this Subject: That Prayer prevails with God for the Blessing that we pray
for, neither by Way of Information, nor yet of Persuasion, and much less by the
Importunity of him who prays, and least of all by any Worth in the Prayer it
self, equal to the Thing prayed for; but it prevails solely, and entirely upon
this Account, that it is freely appointed by God, as the stated, allowed
Condition, upon which he will dispense his Blessings to Mankind.

But before I dismiss this Consideration, it may be enquired; Whence it is that
Prayer, rather than any other thing, comes to be appointed by God for this
Condition. In answer to which, Though God's Sovereign Will be a sufficient Reason
of its own Counsels and Determinations, and consequently a more than sufficient
Answer to all our Enquiries; yet since God in his Infinite Wisdom still adapts
means to Ends, and never appoints a Thing to any use, but what it has a
particular, and a natural Fitness for; I shall therefore presume to assign a
Reason, why Prayer, before all other things, should be appointed to this Noble
use, of being the Condition and glorious Conduit whereby to derive the Bounties
of Heaven upon the Sons of Men. And it is this; because Prayer, of all other
Acts of a Rational Nature, does most peculiarly qualify a Man to be a fit
Object of the Divine Favor, by being most eminently and properly an Act of
Dependence upon God: Since to pray, or beg a thing of another, in the very
Nature and Notion of it, imports these two Things: 1. That the Person praying
stands in need of some Good, which he is not able by any Power of his own to
procure for himself: And, 2. That he acknowledges it in the power, and pleasure
of the Person, whom he prays to, to conferr it upon him. And this is properly
that which Men call to depend.

But some may reply; There is an Universal Dependence of all things upon God;
for as much as, He being the great Fountain, and Source of Being first Created,
and since supports them by the word of his Power; and consequently that this
Dependence belongs indifferently to the Wicked as well as to the Just, whose
Prayer nevertheless is declared an Abomination to God.

But to this the Answer is obvious, That the Dependence here spoken of is
meant, not of a Natural, but of a Moral Dependence. The first is Necessary, the
other Voluntary. The first Common to all, the other proper to the Pious. The
first respects God barely as a Creator, the other addresses to him also as a
Father. Now such a Dependence upon God it is, that is properly seen in Prayer.
And being so, if we should in all humble Reverence set our selves to examine
the Wisdom of the Divine proceeding in this Matter, even by the Measures of our
own Reason, what could be more Rationally thought of for the properest
Instrument, to bring down God's Blessings upon the World, than such a Temper of
Mind, as makes a Man disown all Ability in himself to supply his own Wants, and
at the same time own a Transcendent Fullness and sufficiency in God to do it for
him? And what can be more agreeable to all Principles both of Reason and
Religion, than that a Creature endued with Understanding and Will, should
acknowledge that Dependence upon his Maker, by a free act of Choice, which
other Creatures have upon him, only by Necessity of Nature?

But still, there is one Objection more against our foregoing Assertion, viz.
That Prayer obtains the things prayed for, only as a Condition, and not by way
of Importunity or Persuasion; For is not Prayer said to prevail by frequency,
Luke 18. 7. and by Fervency, or Earnestness, in James 5. v. 16. and is not this
a fair proof that God is importuned and persuaded into a Grant of our petitions?

To this I answer two Things: 1. That wheresoever God is said to answer
Prayers, either for their Frequency or Fervency, it is spoken of him only
(...), according to the manner of Men; and, consequently, ought to be
understood only of the effect or issue of such Prayers, in the success
certainly attending them, and not of the manner of their efficiency, that it is
by persuading, or working upon the Passions: As if we should say, frequent,
fervent, and importunate Prayers, are as certainly followed with God's grant of
the Thing prayed for, as Men use to grant that, which being overcome by
excessive Importunity, and Persuasion, they cannot find in their hearts to
deny. 2 ly. I answer further; That frequency and fervency of Prayer prove
effectual, to procure of God the Things prayed for, upon no other account, but
as they are Acts of Dependence upon God: which Dependence we have already
proved to be that Thing essentially included in Prayer, for which God has been
pleased to make Prayer the Condition, upon which he determines to grant Men
such things as they need, and duly apply to him for. So that still there is
nothing of Persuasion in the case.

And thus having shown (and I hope fully and clearly) how Prayer operates
toward the obtaining of the Divine Blessings; namely, as a Condition appointed
by God for that purpose, and no otherwise: And withal, for what Reason it is
singled out of all other Acts of a Rational Nature, to be this Condition;
namely, because it is the grand Instance of such a Nature's dependence upon
God. We shall now from the same principle infer also, Upon what account the
highest Reverence of God is so indispensably required of us in Prayer, and all
sort of Irreverence so diametrically opposite to, and destructive of, the very
Nature of it. And it will appear, to be upon this, Tha^ in what degree any one
lays aside his Reverence of God, in the same he also quits his Dependence upon
Him: Forasmuch as in every Irreverent Act, a Man treats God, as if he had
indeed no need of Him, and behaves himself, as if he stood upon his own bottom,
Absolute and Self-sufficient. This is the natural Language, the true
Signification and Import of all Irreverence.

Now in all Addresses, either to God or Man, by Speech, our Reverence to them
must consist of, and show it self in, these Two things.

First, A careful Regulation of our Thoughts, that are to dictate, and to
govern our Words; which is done by Premeditation: And, Secondly, a due ordering
of our Words, that are to proceed from, and to express our Thoughts; which is
done by pertinence, and brevity of Expression.

David directing his Prayer to God, joins these two together, as the two great,
integral parts of it; in Psalm 19. 14. Let the Words of my Mouth, and the
Meditations of my Heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord. So that, it seems,
his Prayer adequately and entirely consisted of those Two things, Meditation
and Expression, as it were, the Matter and Form of that noble Composure. There
being no mention at all of Distortion of Face, sanctified Grimace, solemn Wink,
or foaming at the Mouth, and the like; all which are Circumstances of Prayer of
a later date, and brought into request by those fantastic Zealots, who had a
way of praying, as astonishing to the Eyes, as to the Ears of those that heard
them. Well then; the first Ingredient of a pious, and reverential Prayer, is a
previous regulation of the Thoughts, as the Text expresses it most
emphatically; Let not thy Heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; that
is, in other words. Let it not venture to throw out its crude, extemporary,
sudden and misshapen Conceptions in the face of Infinite Perfection. Let not
thy Heart conceive, and bring forth together. This is monstrous, and unnatural.
All Abortion is from Infirmity and Defect. And time is required to form the
Issue of the Mind, as well as that of the Body. The fitness, or unfitness of
the first Thoughts, cannot be judged of, but by reflection of the second: And be
the Invention never so fruitful, yet in the Mind, as in the Earth, that which
is cast into it, must lie hid and covered for a while, before it can be fit to
shoot forth. These are the Methods of Nature, and it is seldom but the Acts of
Religion conform to them.

He who is to pray, would he seriously judge of the Work that is before him,
has more to consider of, than, either his Heart can hold, or his Head well turn
it self to. Prayer is one of the greatest, and the hardest Works, that a man
has to do in this World; and was ever any thing difficult, or glorious,
achieved by a sudden Cast of a Thought? a flying Stricture of the
Imagination? Presence of Mind is indeed good, but Have is not so. And
therefore, let this be concluded upon, That in the Business of Prayer, to
pretend to Reverence, when there is no Premeditation, is both Impudence and
Contradiction.

Now this Premeditation ought to respect these three Things: 1. The Person,
whom we pray to. 2. The Matter of our Prayers; And, 3 ly. The Order and
Disposition of them.

1. And first, for the Person whom we pray to. The same is to employ, who must
needs also nonplus and astonish thy Meditations, and be made the Object of thy
Thoughts, who infinitely transcends them. For all the knowing and reasoning
Faculties of the Soul, are utterly baffled, and at a loss, when they offer at
any Idea of the great God. Nevertheless, since it is hard, if not impossible,
to imprint an Awe upon the Affections, without suitable Notions first formed in
the Apprehensions. We must in our Prayers, endeavor at least, to bring these
as near to God, as we can, by considering such of his Divine perfections, as
have, by their Effects, in a great measure, manifested themselves to our
Senses, and, in a much greater, to the Discourses of our Reason.

As first; Consider with thy self, how great and glorious a Being that must
needs be, that raised so vast and beautiful a Fabric, as this of the World,
out of Nothing, with the breath of his Mouth, and can and will, with the same,
reduce it to Nothing again; and then consider, that this is that high, amazing,
incomprehensible Being, whom thou addressest thy pitiful Self to in Prayer.

Consider next, his Infinite, All-searching Knowledge, which looks through and
through the most secret of our Thoughts, ransacks every corner of the Heart,
ponders the most inward designs and ends of the Soul in all a man's Actions.
And then consider, That this is the God, whom thou have to deal with in Prayer;
the God, who observes the postures, the frame and motion of thy Mind, in all
thy Approaches to Him; and whose piercing Eye it is impossible to elude, or
escape, by all the tricks, and arts, of the subtillest, and most refined
Hypocrisy. And lastly, Consider the great, the fiery, and the implacable
Jealousy, that he has for his Honor; and that he has no other use of the whole
Creation, but to serve the Ends of it: And above all, that he will, in a most
peculiar manner, be honored of those who draw near to him; and will by no
means suffer himself to be mocked and affronted, under a pretense of being
worshipped; nor endure, that a wretched, contemptible, sinful Creature, who is
but a piece of living Dirt at best, should at the same time bend the Knee to
him, and spit in his face. And now consider, that this is the God, whom thou
prayest to; and whom thou usest with such intolerable Indignity, in every
unworthy Prayer, thou put up to Him; every bold, saucy, and familiar Word,
that (upon confidence of being one of God's Elect) thou presumest to debase so
great a Majesty with: And for an Instance of the dreadful Curse, that attends
such a daring Irreverence, consider how God used Nadab and Abihu for venturing
to offer strange Fire before him; and then know, that every unhallowed,
unfitting Prayer, is a strange Fire: A Fire, that will be sure to destroy the
Offering, though Mercy should spare the Offerer. Consider these things
seriously, deeply, and severely, till the Consideration of them affects thy
Heart, and humbles thy Spirit, with such awefull Apprehensions of thy Maker,
and such abject Reflections upon thy self, as may lay thee in the Dust before
Him: And know, that the lower thou fallest, the higher will thy Prayer rebound:
And that thou art never so fit to pray to God, as when a sense of thy own
unworthiness makes thee ashamed even to speak to Him.

2 ly. The second Object of our Premeditation, is the Matter of our Prayers.
For, as we are to consider, whom we are to pray to; so are we to consider also,
what we are to pray for; and this requires no ordinary Application of Thought,
to distinguish, or judge of. Men's prayers are generally dictated by their
Desires, and their Desires are the Issues of their Affections; and their
Affections are, for the most part, influenced by their Corruptions. The first
constituent principle of a well-conceived Prayer, is to know, What not to pray
for: which the Scripture assures us, that some do not, while they pray for
what they may spend upon their Lusts, James 4. 3. Asking such things, as it is
a Contumely to God to hear, and Damnation to themselves to receive. No Man is
to pray for any thing, either sinful, or directly tending to Sin. No Man is to
pray for a Temptation, and much less to desire God to be his Tempter; which he
would certainly be, should he, at the instance of any Man's prayer, administer
fuel to his sinful or absurd Appetites. Nor is any one to ask of God things
mean and trivial, and beneath the Majesty of Heaven, to be concerned about, or
solemnly addressed to for. Nor, lastly, is any one to admit into his Petitions
things superfluous, or extravagant; such as Wealth, Greatness, and Honor.
Which we are so far from being warranted to beg of God, that we are to beg his
Grace to despise and undervalue them; and it were much, if the same things
should be the proper Objects both of our Self-denial, and of our Prayers too;
and that we should be allowed to solicit the satisfaction, and enjoined to
endeavor the mortification of the same Desires.

The Things that we are to pray for, are either, 1 st. Things of absolute
Necessity; or, 2 ly. Things of unquestionable Charity. Of the first sort, are
all spiritual Graces required in us, as the indispensable Conditions of our
Salvation: Such as are, Repentance, Faith, Hope, Charity, Temperance, and all
other Virtues, that are either the parts, or principles, of a pious Life. These
are to be the prime subject matter of our Prayers; and we shall find, that
nothing comes this way so easily from Heaven, as those things that will
assuredly bring us to it. The Spirit dictates all such Petitions, and God
himself is first the Author, and then the Fulfiller of them; owning and
accepting them, both as our Duty, and his own Production. The other sort of
things, that may allowably be prayed for, are things of manifest,
unquestionable Charity: Such as are a competent measure of the innocent
Comforts of Life, as Health, Peace, Maintenance, and a Success of our honest
Labors: And yet, even these but Conditionally, and with perfect Resignation to
the Will and Wisdom of the Sovereign Disposer of all that belongs to us; Who
(if he finds it more for his Honor, to have us serve him with sick, crazy,
languishing Bodies, with poverty, and extreme want of all things; and lastly,
with our Country all in a Flame about our Ears) ought in all this, and much
more, to overruled our Prayers, and Desires, into an absolute Acquiescence in
his All-wise disposal of things; and to convince us, that our Prayers are
sometimes best answered, when our Desires are most opposed.

In fine, to state the whole matter of our Prayers in one word. Nothing can be
fit for us to pray for, but what is fit and honorable for our great Mediator
and Master of Requests, Jesus Christ himself, to intercede for. This is to be
the unchangeable Rule and Measure of all our Petitions. And then, if Christ is
to convey these our Petitions to his Father, can any one dare to make him who
was Holiness and Purity it self, and Advocate and Solicitor for his Lusts? Him
who was nothing but Meekness, Lowliness, and Humility, his Providetore for such
things as can only feed his Pride, and flush his Ambition? No certainly; when
we come as Suppliants to the Throne of Grace, where Christ sits as Intercessor
at God's right hand, nothing can be fit to proceed out of our Mouth, but what
is fit to pass through His.

3 ly. The Third and Last Thinng, that calls for a previous Meditation to our
Prayers, is the Order and Disposition of them. For though God does not command
us to set off our Prayers with Dress, and Artifice, to flourish it in Trope and
Metaphor, to beg our daily Bread in blank Verse, or to show any thing of the
Poet in our Devotions, but Indigence and Want; I say, though God is far from
requiring such things of us in our Prayers, yet he requires that we should
manage them with Sense and Reason. Fineness is not expected, but Decency is;
and though we cannot declaim, as Orators, yet he will have us speak like Men,
and tender him the Results of that Understanding and Judgment, that essentially
constitute a Rational Nature.

But I shall briefly cast what I have to say upon this particular, into these
following Assertions.

1. That nothing can express our Reverence to God in Prayer, that would pass
for Irreverence toward a Great Man. Let any Subject tender his Prince a
Petition, fraught with Nonsense and Incoherence, Confusion and Impertinence;
and can he expect that Majesty should answer it with any thing but a deaf Ear,
a frowning Eye, (or, at best) vouchsafe it in any other Reward, but by a
gracious Oblivion to forgive the person, and to forget the petition?

2 ly. Nothing Absurd and Irrational, and such as a Wise man would despise, can
be acceptable to God in Prayer. Solomon expressly tells us in Ecclesiastes 5.
v. 4. that God has no pleasure in Fools; nor is it possible that an Infinite
Wisdom should. The Scripture all along expresses Sin and Wickedness by the Name
of Folly: And therefore, certainly Folly is too near of kin to it, to find any
Approbation from God in so great a Duty: it is the simplicity of the Heart, and
not of the Head, that is the best Enditer of our Petitions. That which proceeds
from the latter, is undoubtedly the sacrifice of fools; and God is never more
weary of Sacrifice, than when a Fool is the Priest, and Folly the Oblation.

3 ly. and Lastly, Nothing rude, slight, and careless; or, indeed, less than
the very best that a man can offer, can be acceptable, or pleasing, to God in
Prayer. If ye offer the Blind for sacrifice, is it not Evil? If ye offer the
Lame, and the Sick, is it not Evil? Offer it now to thy Governor, and see
whether he will be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person, says the Lord of
Hosts? Malachi 1. 8. God rigidly expects a Return of his own Gifts; and where
he has given ability, will be served by Acts proportionable to it. And he who
has parts to raise, and propagate his own Honor by, but none to employ in the
Worship of him, that gave them, does (as I may so express it) refuse to wear
God's Livery in his own Service, adds Sacrilege to Profaneness, strips and
starves his Devotions, and (in a word) falls directly under the Dint of that
Curse, denounced in the last Verse of the 1 st. of Malachi, Cursed be the
Deceiver, that has in his Flock a Male, and voweth, and sacrifices to the
Lord a corrupt thing. The same is here, both the Deceiver, and the Deceived
too; for God very well knows what he gives Men, and why; And where he has
bestwoed Judgment, Learning, and Utterance, will not endure that Men should be
accurate in their Discourse, and loose in their Devotions; or think, that the
great Author of every good and perfect Gift, will be put off with Ramble, and
confused Talk, Babble, and Tautology.

And thus much for the Order and Disposition of our Prayers, which certainly
requires precedent Thought and Meditation. God has declared himself the God of
Order in all things; and will have it observed, in what he commands others, as
well as in what he does himself. Order is the great Rule, or Art, by which God
made the World, and by which he still governs it: Nay, the World it self is
nothing else; and all this glorious System of things, is but the Chaos put into
order: And how then can God, who has so eminently owned himself concerned for
this excellent thing, brook such Absurdity and Confusion, as the slovenly and
profane Negligence of some treats him with, in their most solemn Addresses to
him? All which is the natural, unavoidable Consequent of Unpreparedness, and
want of Premeditation; without which, whosoever presumes to pray, cannot be so
properly said to approach to, as to break in upon God. And surely, he who is so
hardy, as to do so, has no reason in the Earth to expect that the success,
which follows his prayers, should be greater than the preparation, that goes
before them.

Now from what has been hitherto discoursed of this first and grand
Qualification of a pious and devout Prayer, to wit, Premeditation of Thought,
what can be so naturally, and so usefully inferred, as the high Expediency, or
rather the absolute Necessity of a Set-form of Prayer, to guide our Devotions
by? We have lived in an Age that has despised, contradicted, and counter-acted
all the principles and practices of the Primitive Christians, in taking the
measures of their Duty both to God and Man, and of their Behavior both in
matters Civil and Religious; but in nothing more scandalously, than in their
vile abuse of the great Duty of Prayer; concerning which, though it may with
the clearest truth be affirmed, That there has been no Church yet of any
account in the Christian World, but what has governed its public Worship of
God by a Liturgy, or Set-form of Prayer; yet these enthusiastic Innovators,
the bold and blind Reformers of all Antiquity, and wiser than the whole
Catholic Church besides, introduced into the room of it, a saucy, senceless,
Extemporary way of speaking to God; affirming, that this was a Praying by the
Spirit; and that the Use of all Set-forms was stinting of the Spirit. A
pretense, I confess, popular, and plausible enough, with such Idiots, as take
the Sound of Words, for the Sense of them. But, for the full Confutation of it,
(which, I hope, shall be done both easily and briefly too) I shall advance this
one Assertion in direct Contradiction to that; Namely,

That the Praying by a Set-form, is not a stinting of the Spirit; and the
Praying extempore truly and properly is so.

For the proving and making out of which, we will first consider, What it is to
Pray by the Spirit. A thing much talked of, but not so convenient for the
talkers of it, and pretenders to it, to have it rightly stated and understood.
In short, it includes in it these two Things:

1 st. A praying with the Heart, which is sometimes called the Spirit, or
Inward man; and so it is properly opposed to Hypocritical Lip-devotions, in
which the Heart or Spirit does not go along with a man's Words.

2 ly. It includes in it also a praying according to the Rules prescribed by
God's Holy Spirit, and held forth to us in his Revealed Word, which Word was
both Dictated and Confirmed by this Spirit: And so it is opposed to the praying
unlawfully, or unwarrantably; and that, either in respect of the Matter, or
Manner of our Prayers. As, when we desire of God such things, or in such a way,
as the Spirit of God, speaking in his Holy Word, does by no means warrant or
approve of. So that to Pray by the Spirit, signifies neither more nor less, but
to pray knowingly, heartily, and affectionately, for such things, and in such a
manner, as the Holy Ghost, in Scripture, either commands or allows of. As for
any other kind of Praying by the Spirit, upon the best enquiry that I can make
into these matters, I can find none. And if some say as (I know they both
impudently and blasphemously do) that, to pray by the Spirit, is to have the
Spirit immediately inspiring them, and by such Inspiration speaking within
them, and so dictating their prayers to them, let them either produce plain
Scripture, or do a Miracle to prove this by. But till then, he who shall
consider, what kind of prayers these pretenders to the Spirit have been notable
for, will find, that they have as little Cause to father their Prayers, as
their Practices, upon the Spirit of God.

These Two things are certain, and I do particularly recommend them to your
Observation. One, that this way of Praying by the Spirit (as they call it) was
begun, and first brought into use here in England, in Queen Elizabeth's days,
by a Popish Priest and Dominican Friar, one Faithful Commin by Name; who
counterfeiting himself a Protestant, and a Zealot of the highest form, set up
this new Spiritual way of Praying, with a design to bring the People first to a
Contempt, and from thence to an utter Hatred and Disuse of our Common Prayer;
which he still reviled as only a Translation of the Mass; thereby to distract
men's Minds, and to divide our Church. And this he did with such success, that
we have lived to see the Effects of his Labors in the utter subversion of
Church and State. Which hellish Negotiation, when this malicious Hypocrite came
to Rome to give the Pope an account of, he received of him (as so notable a
service well deserved) besides a thousand Thanks, two thousand Ducats for his
pains. So that now you see here the Original of this Extempore-way of praying
by the Spirit. The other thing that I would observe to you, is, That in the
neighbor Nation of Scotland, one of the greatest Major John Weyer: see
Ravillac Rediviv.
Monsters of Men, that, I believe, ever lived, and actually in league with the
Devil; was yet, by the confession of all that heard him, the most Excellent at
this Extempore-way of Praying by the Spirit, of any Man in his time; none was
able to come near him, or to compare with him. But surely now, he who shall
venture to ascribe the Prayers of such a Wretch, made up of Adulteries, Incest,
Witchcraft, and other Villainies, not to be named, to the Spirit of God, may as
well strike in with the Pharisees, and ascribe the Miracles of Christ to the
Devil. And thus having shown, both what ought to be meant by Praying by the
Spirit, and what ought not, cannot be meant by it; let us now see whether a
Set-form, or this Extemporary-way, be the greater hinderer, and stinter of it:
In order to which, I shall lay down these three Assertions.

1. That the Soul, or Mind of Man, is but of a limited Nature in all its
Workings, and consequently, cannot supply two distinct Faculties, at the same
time, to the same height of Operation.

2 ly. That the finding Words and Expressions for Prayer, is the proper
business of the Brain and the Invention; and, that the finding Devotion and
Affection to accompany, and go along with those Expressions, is properly the
Work, and Business of the Heart.

3 ly. That this Devotion, and Affection, is indispensably required in Prayer,
as the principal and most Essential part of it, and that in which the
Spirituality of it does most properly consist.

Now from these three Things put together, this must naturally and necessarily
follow; That as, Spiritual Prayer, or Praying by the Spirit, taken in the right
sense of the word, consists properly in that Affection, and Devotion, that the
Heart exercises and imploys in the Work of Prayer; so, whatsoever gives the
Soul scope and liberty to exercise and employ this Affection and Devotion, that
does most effectually help and enlarge the Spirit of Prayer; and, whatsoever
diverts the Soul from employing such Affection and Devotion, that does most
directly stint and hinder it. Accordingly let this now be our Rule, whereby to
judge of the Efficacy of a Set-form, and of the Extempore-way, in the present
Business. As for a Set-form, in which the Words are ready prepared to our
hands, the Soul has nothing to do, but to attend to the work of raising the
Affections and Devotions, to go along with those words; So that all the Powers
of the Soul are took up in applying the Heart to this great Duty; and it is the
Exercise of the Heart (as has been already shown) that is truly and properly a
Praying by the Spirit. On the contrary, in all Extempore-prayer, the Powers and
Faculties of the Soul are called off from dealing with the Heart, and the
Affections; and that both in the Speaker, and in the Hearer; both in him who
makes, and in him who is to join in such Prayers.

And first for the Minister, who makes and utters such Extempore-prayers. He is
wholly employing his Inventions, both to conceive Matter, and to find Words and
Expressions to cloth it in: This is certainly the work, which takes up his
Mind, in this Exercise: And since the Nature of man's Mind is such, that it
cannot with the same vigor, at the same time, attend the work of Invention,
and that of raising the Affections also; nor measure out the same supply of
Spirits and Intention for the carrying on the Operations of the Head, and those
of the Heart too; it is certain, that while the Head is so much employed, the
Heart must be idle, and very little employed; and perhaps not at all: And
consequently, if, to pray by the Spirit, be to pray with the Heart, and the
Affections; it is also as certain, that while a Man prays Extempore, he does
not pray by the Spirit: Nay, the very truth of it is, that while he is so
doing, he is not praying at all, but he is studying; He is beating his Brain,
while he should be drawing out his Affections.

And then for the People, that are to hear, and join with him in such Prayers;
it is manifest, that they not knowing beforehand, what the Minister will say,
must, as soon as they do hear him, presently busy and bestirr their Minds, both
to apprehend and understand the meaning of what they hear; and withal, to
judge, whether it be of such a Nature, as to be fit for them, to join and
concur with him in. So that the People also, are, by this Course, put to study,
and to employ their apprehending, and judging Faculties, while they should be
exerting their Affections, and Devotions; and consequently, by this means, the
Spirit of Prayer is stinted, as well in the Congregation, that follows, as in
the Minister, who first conceives a Prayer after their Extempore-way. Which is
a Truth so clear, and indeed self-evident, that it is impossible, that it
should need any further Arguments to demonstrate, or make it out.

The Sum of all is this; That since a Set-form of Prayer leaves the Soul wholly
free, to employ its Affections and Devotions, in which the Spirit of Prayer
does most properly consist; it follows, that the Spirit of Prayer is thereby,
in a singular manner, helped, promoted, and enlarged: And since, on the other
hand, the Extempore-way withdraws and takes off the Soul from employing its
Affections, and engages it chiefly, if not wholly, about the use of its
Invention; it as plainly follows, that the Spirit of Prayer is, by this means,
unavoidably cramped and hindered, and (to use their own word) stinted: Which was
the Proposition that I undertook to prove. But there are two Things, I confess,
that are extremely hindered and stinted by a Set-form of Prayer, and equally
furthered and enlarged by the Extempore-way; which, without all doubt, is the
true Cause, why the former is so much decried, and the latter so much extolled
by the Men, whom we are now pleading with. The first of which is Pride and
Ostentation; the other Faction and Sedition.

1. And first for Pride. I do not in the least question, but the chief Designs
of such as use the Extempore-way, is to amuse the unthinking Rabble with an
Admiration of their Gifts; their whole Devotion proceeding from no other
principle, but only a Love to hear themselves talk. And, I believe, it would
put Lucifer himself hard to it, to out-vye the Pride of one of those fellows
pouring out his Extempore-stuff amongst his ignorant, whining, factious
Followers, listening to, and applauding his copious Flow and Cant, with the
ridiculous Accents of their impertinent Groans. And, the truth is,
Extempore-prayer, even when best and most dexterously performed, is nothing
else, but a business of Invention and Wit (such as it is) and requires no more
to it, but a teeming Imagination, a bold Front, and a ready Expression; and
deserves much the same Commendation (were it not in a matter too serious, to be
sudden upon) which is due to Extempore Verses: only with this difference, That
there is necessary to these latter a competent measure of Wit and Learning;
whereas the former may be done with very little Wit, and no Learning at all.

And now, can any sober person think it reasonable, that the public Devotions
of a whole Congregation, should be under the Conduct, and at the Mercy of a
pert, empty, conceited Holderforth, whose chief (if not sole) intent is to
Vaunt his spiritual Clack, and (as I may so speak) to pray Prizes; whereas
Prayer is a Duty, that recommends it self to the Acceptance of Almighty God, by
no other Qualification so much, as by the profoundest Humility, and the lowest
Esteem that a man can possibly have of himself?

Certainly the Extemporizing faculty is never more out of its Element, than in
the Pulpit: Though even here, it is much more excusable in a Sermon, than in a
Prayer; For as much as in that, a Man addresses himself but to Men; Men like
himself, whom he may therefore make bold with; as, no doubt, for so doing they
will also make bold with him. Besides, the peculiar advantage attending all
such sudden Conceptions, that, as they are quickly Born, so they quickly Die:
It being seldom known, where the Speaker has so very fluent an Invention, but
the Hearer also has the Gift of as fluent a Memory.

2 ly. The other thing that has been hitherto so little befriended by a Setform
of Prayer, and so very much by the Extempore-way, is Faction and Sedition. It
has been always found an Excellent way of girding at the Government in
Scripture Phrase. And we all know the Common Dialect, in which the great
Masters of this Art used to pray for the King, and which may justly pass for
only a cleanlier and more refined kind of Libelling him in the Lord. As that
God would turn his Heart, and open his Eyes: As if he were a Pagan, yet to be
converted to Christianity; with many other sly, virulent, and malicious
Insinuations, which we may every day hear of from (those Mints of Treason and
Rebellion) their Conventicles; and for which, and a great deal less, some
Princes and Governments would make them not only eat their Words, but the
Tongue that spoke them too. In fine, let all their Extempore Harangues be
considered, and duly weighed, and you shall find a Spirit of Pride, Faction,
and Sedition, predominant in them all: The only Spirit, which those Impostors
do really, and indeed, pray by.

I have been so much the longer, and the earnester, against this intoxicating,
bewitching Cheat of Extempore-prayer, being fully satisfied in my Conscience,
that it has been all along the Devil's Masterpiece and prime Engine to
overthrow our Church by. For I look upon this as a most unanswerable Truth,
That whatsoever renders the public Worship of God contemptible amongst us,
must, in the same degree, weaken and discredit our whole Religion. And, I hope,
I have also proved it to be a Truth altogether as clear, That this
Extemporeway, naturally brings all the Contempt upon the Worship of God, that
both the Folly and Faction of Men can possibly expose it to: And, therefore, as
a thing neither subservient to the true Purposes of Religion, nor grounded upon
Principles of Reason, nor, lastly, suitable to the Practice of Antiquity, ought,
by all means, to be exploded and cast out of every sober and well-ordered
Church; or that will be sure to throw the Church it self out of Doors.

And thus I have at length finished what I had to say of the first Ingredient
of a Pious and Reverential Prayer, which was Premeditation of Thought,
prescribed to us in these words, Let not thy mouth be rash, nor thy heart be
hasty to utter any thing before God. Which excellent Words, and most wise
Advice of Solomon, whosoever can reconcile to the Expediency, Decency, or
Usefulness of Extemporeprayer, I shall acknowledge him a Man of greater Ability
and Parts of Mind, than Solomon Himself.

The other Ingredient of a Reverential and duly qualified Prayer, is a
pertinent Brevity of Expression, mentioned and recommended in that part of the
Text; Therefore let thy Words be few. But this I cannot dispatch now, and
therefore shall not enter upon at this time.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and
One God, be rendered and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty
and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.

A DISCOURSE AGAINST Long and Extempore-Prayers, In Behalf of the LITURGY OF
THE Church of ENGLAND, Upon the same Text.
ECCLES. V. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth;
therefore let thy words be few.
I Formerly began a Discourse upon these Words, and observed in them these
three Things:

1. That whosoever appears in the House of God, and particularly in the way of
Prayer, ought to reckon himself, in a more especial manner, placed in the sight
and presence of God: And,

2 ly. That the vast and infinite Distance between God and Him, ought to create
in him all imaginable Awe and Reverence in such his Addresses to God.

3 ly. and Lastly; That this Reverence required of him, is to consist in a
serious preparation of his Thoughts, and a sober government of his Expressions:
Neither is his mouth to be rash, nor his heart to be hasty in uttering any
thing before God.

These three Things I show, were evidently contained in the Words, and did as
evidently contain the whole Sense of them. But I gathered them all into this
one Proposition; Namely,

That Premeditation of Thought, and Brevity of Expression, are the great
Ingredients of that Reverence, that is required to a pious, acceptable, and
devout Prayer.

The first of these, which is Premeditation of Thought, I then fully treated
of, and dispatched; and shall now proceed to the other, which is a pertinent
Brevity of Expression; Therefore let thy words be few.

Concerning which, we shall observe, first in General, That to be able to
express our Minds briefly, and fully too, is absolutely the greatest Perfection
and Commendation that Speech is capable of; such a mutual Communication of our
Thoughts, being (as I may so speak) the next approach to Intuition; and the
nearest Imitation of the Converse of blessed Spirits made perfect, that our
Condition in this World can possibly raise us to. Certainly the greatest and
the wisest Conceptions, that ever issued from the Mind of Man, have been
couched under, and delivered in a few, close, home, and significant Words.

But to derive the Credit of this way of speaking much higher, and from an
Example infinitely greater, than the greatest humane Wisdom, was it not
authorized, and ennobled by God himself in his making of the World? Was not the
Work, of all the six days, transacted in so many Words? There was no
Circumlocution, or Amplification, in the Case; which makes the Rhetorician
Longinus, in his Book of the Loftiness of Speech, so much admire the Height and
Grandeur of Moses's Style in his first Chapter of Genesis, (...). The Lawgiver
of the Jews (says he, meaning Moses) was no ordinary Man, (...), because (says
he) he set forth the Divine Power sutably to the Majesty and Greatness of it.
But how did he this? Why, (...), etc. For that ( says he) in the very Entrance
of his Laws, he gives us this short and present Account of the whole Creation:
God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light; Let there be an Earth, a
Sea, and a Firmament, and there was so. So that all this high Elogy and
Encomium, given by this Heathen of Moses, sprang only from the Majestic
Brevity of this one Expression; an Expression so suited to the Greatness of a
Creator, and so Expressive of his boundless, creative Power, as a Power
infinitely above all Control, or possibility of finding the least obstacle or
delay, in atchieving its mightiest, and most stupendous Works. Heaven, and
Earth, and all the Host of both (as it were) dropped from his Mouth; and Nature
it self was but the product of a Word; a Word, not designed to Express, but to
Constitute and give a Being; and not so much the Representation, as the Cause
of what it signified.

This was God's way of speaking in his first forming of the Universe: And was
it not so, in the next grand Instance of his Power, his Governing of it too?
For are not the great Instruments of Government, his Laws, drawn up and
digested into a few Sentences? the whole Body of them containing but Ten
Commandments, and some of those Commandments, not so many words? Nay, and have
we not these also brought into yet a narrower Compass by him, who best
understood them? Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with
all thy Soul, and thy Neighbor as thy self. Precepts, nothing like the
Tedious, Endless, Confused Trash of Humane Laws; Laws so numerous, that they
not only exceed men's Practice, but also surpass their Arithmetic; and so
voluminous, that no mortal Head, nor Shoulders neither, must ever pretend
themselves able to bear them. In God's Laws the Words are few, the Sense vast,
and infinite. In Humane Laws, you shall be sure to have Words enough; but, for
the most part, to discern the Sense and Reason of them, you had need read them
with a Microscope.

And thus having shown, how the Almighty utters himself, when he speaks, and
that upon the greatest Occasions; let us now descend from Heaven to Earth, from
God to Man, and show, That it is no presumption for us to Conform our Words, as
well as our Actions, to the supreme Pattern, and according to our poor measures
to imitate the Wisdom that we adore. And for this, has it not been noted by the
best Observers, and the ablest Judges, both of Things and Persons, that the
Wisdom of any People or Nation has been most seen in the Proverbs and short
Sayings commonly received amongst them? And what is a Proverb, but the
Experience and Observation of several Ages, gathered and summed up into one
Expression? The Scripture vouches Solomon for the wisest of Men, and they are
his Proverbs that prove him so. The Seven Wife men of Greece, so famous for
their Wisdom all the World over, acquired all that Fame each of them, by a
single Sentence, consisting of two or three Words. And (...) still lives and
flourishes in the Mouths of all, while many vast Volumes are extinct, and sunk
into Dust, and utter Oblivion. And then, for Books; we shall generally find,
that the most Excellent, in any Art or Science, have been still the smallest,
and most compendious: And this not without ground; for it is an Argument that
the Author was a Master of what he wrote; and had a clear Notion, and a full
Comprehension of the Subject before him. For the Reason of Things lies in a
little compass, if the Mind could at any time, be so happy as to light upon it.
Most of the Writings and Discourses in the World, are but Illustration, and
Rhetoric, which signifies as much as nothing to a Mind eager in pursuit after
the Causes and Philosophical Truth of Things. It is the work of Fancy to
enlarge, but of Judgment to shorten and contract; and therefore this must needs
be as far above the other, as Judgment is a greater and a nobler Faculty than
Fancy or Imagination. All Philosophy is reduced to a few Principles, and those
Principles comprised in a few Propositions. And as the whole Structure of
Speculation rests upon three or four Axioms, or Maxims; so that of Practice
also bears upon a very small number of Rules. And surely, there was never yet
any Rule or Maxim that filled a Volume, or took up a Week's time to be got by
Heart. No; these are the Apices Rerum, the Tops and Sums, the very Spirit and
Life of Things extracted and abridged; just as all the Lines drawn from the
vastest Circumference, do at length meet and unite in the smallest of things,
a Point; and it is but a very little piece of Wood, with which a true Artist
will measure all the Timber in the World. The Truth is, there could be no such
thing as Art or Science, could not the Mind of Man gather the General Natures
of Things out of the numberless heap of Particulars, and then bind them up into
such short Aphorisms or Propositions; that so they may be made portable to the
Memory, and thereby become ready and at hand, for the Judgment to apply, and
make use of, as there shall be occasion.

In fine, Brevity, and Succinctness of Speech, is that, which in Philosophy or
Speculation we call Maxim, and First Principle; in the Counsels and Resolves of
Practical Wisdom, and the deep Mysteries of Religion, Oracle; and lastly, in
matters of Wit, and the finenesses of Imagination, Epigram. All of them
severally, and in their kinds the greatest, and the noblest things that the
Mind of Man can show the force and dexterity of its Faculties in.

And now, if this be the highest Excellency, and perfection of Speech, in all
other things, can we assign any true, solid Reason, why it should not be so
likewise in Prayer? Nay, is there not rather the clearest Reason imaginable,
why it should be much more so? Since most of the forementioned things are but
Addresses to an Humane Understanding, which may need as many Words as may fill
a Volume, to make it understand the Truth of one Line. Whereas Prayer is an
Address to that Eternal Mind, which (as we have shown before) such as
rationally Invocate, pretend not to Inform. Nevertheless, since the Nature of
Man is such, that while we are yet in the Body, our Reverence and Worship of
God must of Necessity proceed in some Analogy to the Reverence, that we show to
the Grandees of this World, we will here see, what the judgment of all Wise men
is, concerning fewness of Words, when we appear as Suppliants before our
Earthly Superiors; and we shall find, that they generally allow it to import
these three Things: 1. Modesty. 2. Discretion; And 3 ly. Height of Respect to
the Person addressed to. And first, for Modesty. Modesty is a kind of shame, or
bashfulness, proceeding from the sense a Man has of his own defects, compared
with the Perfections of Him whom he comes before. And that which is Modesty
toward Men, is Worship and Devotion toward God. It is a Virtue, that makes a
Man unwilling to be seen, and fearful to be heard; and yet for that very
Cause, never fails to make him, both seen with Favor, and heard with
Attention. It loves not many words, nor indeed needs them. For Modesty
addressing to any one of a generous Worth and Honor, is sure to have that
man's Honor for its Advocate, and his Generosity for its Intercessor. And how
then is it possible for such a Virtue to run out into Words! Loquacity storms
the Ear, but Modesty takes the Heart; that is Troublesome, this Gentle, but
Irresistible. Much Speaking is always the Effect of Confidence; and Confidence
still pre-supposes, and springs from the Persuasion that a Man has of his own
Worth: both of them, certainly, very unfit Qualifications for a Petitioner.

2 ly. The second Thing that naturally shows it self in Paucity of Words, is
Discretion; and particularly, that prime and eminent part of it, that consists
in a Care of offending: Which Solomon assures us, That in much Speaking, it is
hardly possible for us to avoid: in Prove. 10. 19. In the multitude of Words
(says He) there wants not sin. It requiring no ordinary Skill for a Man to
make his Tongue run by Rule; and, at the same time, to give it both its Lesson,
and its Liberty too. For seldom, or never, is there much spoke, but something
or other had better been not spoke; there being nothing that the Mind of Man is
so apt to kindle, and take distaste at, as at Words: And therefore, whenever
any one comes to prefer a Suit to another, no doubt, the fewer of them the
better; since, where so very little is said, it is sure to be either Heartily
accepted, or, which is next, Easily excused: But, at the same time, to
Petition, and to Provoke too, is certainly very preposterous.

3 ly. The third Thing, that Brevity of Speech commends it self by, in all
Petitionary Addresses, is a peculiar respect to the Person addressed to: For,
whosoever Petitions his Superior, in such a manner, does, by his very so doing,
confess him better able to understand, than he himself can be to express his
own Case. He owns him, as a Patron, of a preventing Judgment and Goodness, and,
upon that account, able, not only to Answer, but also to Anticipate his
Requests. For, according to the most Natural Interpretation of Things, this is
to ascribe to him a Sagacity so quick* and piercing, that it were Presumption
to inform; and a Benignit so great, that it were needless to importune him. And
can there be a greater, and more winning Deference to a Superior, than to treat
him under such a Character? Or, can any thing be imagined, so naturally fit and
efficacious, both to enforce the Petition, and to endear the Petitioner? A
short Petition to a Great Man, is not only a Suit to him for his Favor, but
also a Panegyric upon his Parts.

And thus I have given you the Three Commendatory Qualifications of Brevity of
Speech, in our Applications to the Great Ones of the World. Concerning which,
as I showed before, That it was Impossible for us to form our Addresses, even
to God himself, but with some Proportion and Resemblance to those that we make
to our fellow Mortals, in a Condition much above us; so it is certain, That
whatsoever the general Judgment and Consent of Mankind allows to be Expressive
and Declarative of our Honor to those, must (only with due allowance of the
Difference of the Object) as really and properly declare and signify that
Honor and Adoration that is due from us to the Great God. And consequently,
what we have said for Brevity of Speech, with Respect to the former, ought
equally to conclude for it, with Relation to him too.

But to argue more immediately, and directly to the Point before us. I shall
now produce five Arguments, enforcing Brevity, and cashiering all Prolixity of
Speech, with peculiar Reference to our Addresses to God.

1. And the first Argument shall be taken from this Consideration: That there
is no Reason alledgable for the Use of Length, or Prolixity of Speech, that is
at all Applicable to Prayer. For, whosoever uses Multiplicity of Words, or
Length of Discourse, must of necessity do it for one of these three Purposes;
Either to inform, or persuade; or, lastly, to weary and overcome the person,
whom he directs his Discourse to. But the very first foundation, of what I had
to say upon this Subject, was laid by me, in demonstrating, That Prayer could
not possibly prevail with God, any of these three ways. For as much as being
Omniscient, he could not be Informed; and, being void of Passion, or
Affections, he could not be persuaded; and, lastly, being Omnipotent, and
infinitely Great, he could not, by any Importunity, be wearied, or overcome.
And, if so, what use then can there be of Rhetoric, Harangue, or Multitude of
Words in Prayer? For, if they should be designed for Information, must it not
be infinitely sottish, and unreasonable, to go about to inform him, who can be
ignorant of Nothing? Or, to persuade him, whose unchangeable Nature makes it
Impossible for him to be moved, or wrought upon? Or, lastly, by long and much
speaking, to think to weary him out, whose Infinite Power, all the strength of
Men and Angels, and the whole World put together, is not able to encounter, or
stand before? So that the truth is, by Loquacity and Prolixity of Prayer, a Man
does really and indeed (whether he thinks so or no) rob God of the Honor of
those three great Attributes, and neither treats Him as a person Omniscient, or
Unchangeable, or Omnipotent. For, on the other side, all the usefulness of long
Speech, in Humane Converse, is founded only upon the Defects and Imperfections
of Humane Nature. For he, whose Knowledge is at best but limited, and whose
Intellect, both in apprehending and judging, proceeds by a small diminutive
Light, cannot but receive an additional Light, by the Conceptions of another
Man, clearly and plainly expressed, and by such Expression conveyed to his
Apprehension. And He again, whose Nature subjects him to Want and Weakness, and
consequently to Hopes and Fears, cannot but be moved this way, or that way,
according as Objects suitable to those Passions, shall be dexterously
represented, and set before his Imagination, by the Arts of Speaking; which is
that, that we call Persuasion. And lastly, He, whose Soul and Body receives
their Activity from, and perform all their Functions by, the Mediation of the
Spirits, which ebb and flow, consume, and are renewed again, cannot but find
himself very uneasy upon any tedious, verbose Application made to him: and that
sometimes to such a degree, that through mere Fatigue, and even against
Judgment and Interest both, a man shall surrender himself as a conquered
person, to the over-bearing Vehemence of such Solicitations: For when they ply
him so fast, and pour in upon him so thick, they cannot but wear, and wast the
Spirits, as unequal to so pertinacious a Charge; and this is properly to weary
a man. But now all Weariness, we know, pre-supposes Weakness; and consequently,
every long, importune, wearisome Petition, is truly and properly a force upon
him, that is pursued with it, it is a following Blow after Blow upon the Mind
and Affections, and may, for the time, pass for a real, though short,
Persecution.

This is the State and Condition of Humane Nature; and Prolixity, or
Importunity of Speech, is still the great Engine to attack it by, either in its
blind or weak side: And I think I may venture to affirm, That it is seldom,
that any man is prevailed upon by Words, but upon a True and Philosophical
estimate of the whole matter, he is either deceived, or wearied, before he is
so; and parts with the thing desired of him upon the very same terms, that
either a Child parts with a Jewel for an Apple, or a Man parts with his Sword,
when it is forceably wrested, or took from him. And that he who obtains, what
he has been Rhetorically, or Importunately begging for, goes away really a
Conqueror, and Triumphantly carrying off the Spoils of his Neighbor's
Understanding, or his Will; baffling the former, or wearying the latter into a
grant of his restless Petitions.

And now, if this be the Case; when any one comes with a tedious, longwinded
Harangue to God, may not God properly answer him with those words, in Psalm. 50.
21. Surely thou think, I am altogether such an one as thy self? And perhaps,
upon a due, and rational Examination of all the Follies, and Indecencies, that
Men are apt to be guilty of in Prayer, they will be all found resolvable into
this one Thing, as the true and sole Cause of them; namely, That Men, when they
pray, take God to be such an one as themselves; and so treat him accordingly.
The malignity and mischief of which gross mistake, may reach farther, than
possibly at first they can well be aware of. For if it be Idolatry to pray to
God the Father, represented under the shape of a Man, can it be at all better,
to pray to him as represented under the weakness of a Man? Nay, if the
misrepresentation of the Object makes the Idolatry; certainly, by how much the
worse, and more scandalous the Misrepresentation is, by so much the grosser,
and more intolerable, must be the Idolatry. To confirm which, we may add this
Consideration, That Christ himself, even now in his glorified Estate in Heaven,
wears the Body, and consequently the Shape of a Man, though he is far from any
of his Infirmities, or Imperfections: And therefore, no doubt, to represent God
to our selves under these latter, must needs be more Absurd, and Irreligious,
than to represent him under the former. But to one Particular of the preceding
Discourse, some may reply and object; That if God's Omniscience, by rendering it
impossible for him to be Informed, be a sufficient Reason against Prolixity, or
length of Prayer; it will follow, That it is equally a Reason against the using
any Words at all in Prayer; since the proper use of Words is to inform the
person whom we speak to; and consequently, where Information is impossible,
Words must needs be useless and superfluous.

To which I answer, First by Concession, That if the sole use of Words, or
Speech, were to inform the Person, whom we speak to, the Consequence would be
firm and good, and equally conclude against the use of any Words at all in
Prayer. But therefore, in the second place, I deny Information to be the sole
and adequate use of Words, or Speech, or indeed any use of them at all, when
either the person spoken to, needs not to be informed, and withal, is known
not to need it, as sometimes it falls out with Men, or, when he is incapable of
being informed, as it is always with God. But the proper use of Words,
whenever we speak to God in Prayer, is thereby to pay Him Honor and
Obedience. God having, by an express Precept, enjoined us the use of Words in
Prayer, Commanding us in Psalm. 50. 15. and many other Scriptures, to call upon
him: and in Luke 11. 21. When we pray, to say, Our Father, etc. But no where
has he Commanded us to do this with Prolixity, or Multiplicity of Words. And
though, it must be confessed, that we may sometimes answer this Command, of
calling upon God, and saying, Our Father, etc. by mental or inward Prayer; yet
since these Words, in their first and most proper signification, import a vocal
Address, there is no doubt, but the direct design of the Command is to enjoin
this also, wheresoever there is ability and power to perform it. So that we see
here the Necessity of vocal Prayer, founded upon the Authority of a Divine
Precept; whereas, for long Prolix Prayer, no such Precept can be produced; and
consequently, the Divine Omniscience may be a sufficient Reason against
Multiplicity of Words in Prayer, and yet conclude nothing simply or absolutely
against the bare use of them. Nevertheless, that we may not seem to allege
bare Command, unseconded by Reason, (which yet, in the Divine Commands, it is
impossible to do,) there is this great Reason for, and use of Words in Prayer,
without the least pretense of Informing the person whom we pray to; and that
is, to acknowledge and own those wants before God, that we supplicate for a
Relief of. It being very proper and rational, to own and acknowledge a thing
even to him, who knew it before: For as much as this is so far from offering to
communicate, or make known to him the thing so acknowledged, that it rather
pre-supposes in him an Antecedent knowledge of it, and comes in only as a
subsequent Assent, and subscription to the Reality and Truth of such a
Knowledge. For to acknowledge a thing in the first sense of the word, does by
no means signify a design of Notifying that thing to another, but is truly and
properly a man's passing Sentence upon himself, and his own Condition: There
being no reason in the World, for a Man to expect that God should relieve, and
supply those Wants, that he himself will not own, nor take notice of; any more,
than for a Man to hope for a pardon of those Sins, that he cannot find in his
heart to confess. And yet (I suppose) no Man in his right Senses, does, or can
imagine, that God is informed, or brought to the knowledge of those Sins, by
any such Confession.

And so much for the clearing of this Objection; And, in the whole, for the
first Argument produced by us, for Brevity, and against Prolixity of Prayer;
namely, That all the Reasons that can be assigned for Prolixity of Speech in
our Converse with Men, cease, and become no Reasons for it at all, when we are
to speak or pray to God.

2 ly. The second Argument for Paucity of Words in Prayer, shall be taken from
the Paucity of those things that are Necessary to be prayed for. And surely,
where few Things are necessary, few Words should be sufficient. For where the
Matter is not Commensurate to the Words, all Speaking is but Tautology; that
being truly and really Tautology, where the same thing is repeated, though
under never so much variety of Expression; As it is but the same Man still,
though he appears every day, or every hour, in a new and different Suit of
Clothes.

The adequate Subject of our Prayers (I showed at first) comprehended in it
Things of Necessity, and Things of Charity. As to the first of which, I know
nothing absolutely necessary, but Grace here, and Glory hereafter. And for the
other, we know what the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. 8. Having food and raiment, let
us be therewith content. Nature is satisfied with a little, and Grace with
less. And now, if the Matter of our Prayers lies within so narrow a compass,
why should the Dress and Outside of them spread and diffuse it self into so
wide and disproportioned a largeness? By reason of which, our Words will be
forced to hang loose and light, without any Matter to support them; much after
the same rate, that it is said to be in Transubstantiation; where Accidents are
left in the lurch by their proper Subject, that gives them the slip, and so
leaves those poor slender Beings to uphold and shift for themselves.

In Brevity of Speech, a Man does not so much speak Words, as Things; Things in
their precise and naked Truth; and stripped of their Rhetorical Mask, and their
Fallacious Gloss: And therefore, in Athens, they circumscribed the Pleadings of
their Orators by a strict Law, cutting off Prologues and Epilogues, and
Commanding them to an immediate Representation of the Case, by an impartial and
succinct Declaration of mere Matter of Fact. And this was, indeed, to speak
Things fit for a Judge to hear* because it argued the Pleader also a Judge of
what was fit for him to speak.

And now, why should not this be both Decency and Devotion too, when we come to
plead for our poor Souls before the great Tribunal of Heaven? It was the Saying
of Solomon, A Word to the Wise; and if so, certainly there can be no necessity
of many Words to Him, who is Wisdom it self. For, can any man think, that God
delights to hear him make Speeches, and to show his Parts, (as the word is) or
to jumble a multitude of misapplied Scripture-sentences together, interlarded
with a frequent, nauseous Repetition of Ah Lord! which some call exercising
their Gifts, but with a greater exercise of their Hearers patience? Nay, does
not he present his Maker, not only with a more decent, but also a more free and
liberal Oblation, who tenders him much in a little, and brings him his whole
Heart and Soul wrapped up in three or four words, than he who with full Mouth,
and loud Lungs, sends up whole Vollies of Articulate Breath to the Throne of
Grace? For neither in the esteem of God, or Man, ought multitude of Words to
pass for any more: In the present Case, no doubt, God accounts and accepts of
the former, as infinitely a more valuable Offering than the latter. As that
Subject pays his Prince a much nobler and more acceptable Tribute, who tenders
him a Purse of Gold, than he who brings him a whole Cart-load of Farthings; in
which, there is Weight without Worth, and Number without Account.

3 ly. The third Argument for Brevity, or Contractedness of Speech in Prayer,
shall be taken from the very Nature and Condition of the person who prays;
which makes it impossible for him to keep up the same fervor and attention in
a long Prayer, that he may in a short. For as I first observed that the Mind of
Man cannot with the same force and vigor attend two several Objects at the
same time; so neither can it with the same force and earnestness exert it self
upon one and the same Object for any long time. Great Intention of Mind
spending the Spirits too fast, to continue its first freshness and agility
long. For while the Soul is a Retainer to the Elements, and a Sojourner in the
Body, it must be content to submit its own quickness and spirituality to the
dullness of its Vehicle, and to comply with the pace of its inferior
Companion. Just like a Man shut up in a Coach; who, while he is so, must be
willing to go no faster than the Motion of the Coach will carry him. He who
does all by the help of those subtle, refined parts of Matter, called Spirits,
must not think to persevere at the same pitch of acting, while those Principles
of Activity flag. No man begins and ends a long Journey with the same pace.

But now, when Prayer has lost its due fervor, and attention, (which indeed
are the very Vitals of it,) it is but the Carkase of a Prayer; and
consequently, must needs be loathsome and offensive to God: Nay, though the
greatest part of it should be enlivened, and carried on with an actual
Attention; yet if that Attention fails to enliven any one part of it, the whole
is but a joining of the Living and the Dead together; for which Conjunction,
the Dead is not at all the better, but the Living very much the worse. It is
not length, nor copiousness of Language, that is Devotion, any more than Bulk
and Bigness is Valor, or Flesh the measure of the Spirit. A short Sentence may
be oftentimes a large and a mighty Prayer. Devotion so managed, being like
Water in a Well; where you have fullness in a little compass; which surely is
much nobler, than the same carried out into many petit, creeping Rivulets, with
length and shallowness together. Let him who prays, bestow all that strength,
fervor, and attention, upon Shortness and Significance, that would otherwise
run out, and lose it self in Length and Luxuriancy of Speech to no purpose. Let
not his Tongue outstrip his Heart; nor presume to carry a Message to the
Throne of Grace, while that stays behind. Let him not think to support so hard,
and weighty a Duty, with a tired, languishing, and be-jaded Devotion: To avoid
which, let a Man contract his Expression, where he cannot enlarge his
Affection; still remembering, that nothing can be more absurd in it self, nor
more unacceptable to God, than for one engaged in the great Work of Prayer, to
hold on speaking, after he has left off praying; and to keep the lips at work,
when the spirit can do no more.

4 ly. The fourth Argument for shortness, or conciseness of Speech in Prayer,
shall be drawn from this, That it is the most natural and lively way of
expressing the utmost Agonies and Outcries of the Soul to God upon a quick,
pungent sense, either of a pressing Necessity, or an approaching Calamity;
which, we know, are generally the chief Occasions of Prayer, and the most
effectual Motives to bring Men upon their Knees, in a vigorous Application of
themselves, to this great Duty. A person ready to sink under his Wants, has
neither time, nor heart, to Rhetoricate, or make Flourishes. No Man begins a
long Grace, when he is ready to starve: Such an one's Prayers are like the
Relief he needs, quick and sudden, short and immediate: He is like a Man in
Torture upon the Rack; whose Pains are too acute to let his Words be many; and
whose Desires of Deliverance too impatient, to delay the things he begs for, by
the manner of his begging it.

It is a Common Saying; If a Man does not know how to Pray, let him go to Sea,
and that will teach him. And we have a notable Instance of what kind of prayers
Men are taught in that School, even in the Disciples themselves, when a Storm
arose, and the Sea raged, and the Ship was ready to be cast away, in the 8 th.
of Matthew. In which Case, we do not find that they fell presently to harangue
it about Seas and Winds, and that dismal face of things, that must needs appear
all over the devouring Element at such a time: All which, and the like, might,
no doubt, have been very plentiful Topics of Eloquence to a Man, who should
have looked upon these things from the Shore; or discoursed of Wrecks and
Tempests safe and warm in his Parlour. But these poor Wretches, who were now
entering (as they thought) into the very Jaws of Death, and struggling with the
last Efforts of Nature, upon the Sense of a departing Life; and consequently,
could neither speak, nor think, any thing low or ordinary in such a Condition,
presently rallied up, and discharged the whole Concern of their desponding
Souls, in that short Prayer, of but three words, though much fuller, and more
forcible, than one of three thousand, in the 25th. Verse of the forementioned
Chapter; Save us, Lord, or we perish. Death makes short work when it comes, and
will teach him, who would prevent it, to make shorter. For surely no Man, who
thinks himself just a perishing, can be at leisure to be Eloquent; or judge it
either Sense, or Devotion, to begin a long Prayer, when, in all likelihood, he
shall conclude his Life before it.

5 ly. The fifth and last Argument that I shall produce for Brevity of Speech,
or Fewness of Words in Prayer, shall be taken from the Examples which we find
in Scripture, of such as have been remarkable for Brevity, and of such as have
been noted for Prolixity of Speech, in the discharge of this Duty.

1. And first for Brevity. To omit all those notable Examples, which the Old
Testament affords us of it; and to confine our selves only to the New, in which
we are undoubtedly most concerned; Was not this way of Praying, not only
Warranted, but Sanctified, and set above all that the Will of Man could
possibly except against it, by that infinitely exact Form of Prayer, prescribed
by the Greatest, the Holiest, and the Wisest Man, that ever lived, even Christ
himself, the Son of God, and Savior of the World? Was it not an instance both
of the truest Devotion, and the fullest and most comprehensive Reason, that
ever proceeded from the Mouth of Man? And yet withal, the shortest, and most
succinct Model, that ever grasped all the Needs and Occasions of Mankind, both
Spiritual and Temporal, into so small a compass? Doubtless, had our Savior
thought fit to amplify, or be prolix, He, in whom were hid all the Treasures
of Wisdom, could not want Matter; nor he who was himself the Word, want Variety
of the fittest to have expressed his Mind by. But He chose rather to contract
the whole Concern of both Worlds into a few Lines, and to unite both Heaven and
Earth in his Prayer, as he had done before in his Person. And indeed one was a
kind of Copy, or Representation, of the other.

So then, we see here Brevity in the Rule or Pattern, let us see it next in the
Practice, and after that, in the Success of Prayer. And first; we have the
Practice, as well as the Pattern of it, in our Savior himself; and that, in
the most signal passage of his whole Life, even his Preparation for his
approaching Death. In which dolorous Scene, when his whole Soul was nothing but
Sorrow, (that great moving Spring of Invention and Elocution,) and when Nature
was put to its last and utmost stretch, and so had no refuge, or relief, but in
Prayer; yet even then, all this Horror, Agony, and Distress of Spirit, delivers
it self but in two very short Sentences, in Matthew. 26. 39. O my Father, if it
be possible, let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as
thou will. And again, the second time, with the like Brevity, and the like
Words. O my Father, if this Cup may not pass from me, except I drink it, thy
Will be done. And lastly, the third time also, he used the same short form
again; and yet in all this, he was (as we may say without a Metaphor) even
praying for Life; so far as the great business, he was then about, to wit, the
Redemption of the World, would suffer him to pray for it. All which Prayers of
our Savior, and others of like Brevity, are properly such, as we call
Ejaculations; an elegant Similitude from a Dart, or Arrow, shot, or thrown out;
and such an one (we know) of a Yard long, will fly farther, and strike deeper,
than one of Twenty.

And then, in the last place, for the Success of such brief Prayers; I shall
give you but three Instances of this, but they shall be of Persons praying
under the Pressure of as great Miseries, as humane Nature could well be
afflicted with. And the first shall be of the Leper, Matthew. 8. 2. or, as St.
Luke describes him, a Man full of Leprosy, who came to our Savior and
Worshipped him; and, as St. Luke again has it more particularly, fell on his
face before him, (which is the lowest, and most devout of all Postures of
Worship,) saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. This was all
his Prayer: And the Answer to it was, That he was immediately cleansed. The
next Instance shall be of the poor blind Man, in Luke 18. 28. following our
Savior with this earnest Prayer: Jesus, thou Son of David, have Mercy upon me.
His whole Prayer was no more: For it is said in the next verse, that he went
on, repeating it again and again: Jesus, thou Son of David, have Mercy upon me.
And the Answer he received was, That his Eyes were opened, and his Sight
restored.

The third and last Instance shall be of the Publican, in the same Chapter of
St. Luke; praying under a lively sense of as great a Leprosy, and Blindness of
Soul, as the other two could have of Body: in the 13th. Verse, He smote upon
his Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. He spoke no more; though
it is said in the 10th. Verse, that he went solemnly and purposely up to the
Temple to pray: The issue and success of which Prayer, was, That he went home
justified, before one of those, whom all the Jewish Church revered as
absolutely the highest and most heroic Examples of Piety, and most beloved
Favorites of Heaven, in the whole World. And now, if the force and virtue of
these short Prayers could rise so high, as to cleanse a Leper, to give sight to
the Blind, and to justify a Publican; and, if the Worth of a Prayer may at all
be measured by the Success of it, I suppose, no Prayers whatsoever can do more;
and, I never yet heard or read of any long Prayer, that did so much. Which
brings on the other part of this our fifth and last Argument, which was to be
drawn from the Examples of such, as have been noted in Scripture for Prolixity,
or Length of Prayer. And of this, there are only two mentioned; The Heathens,
and the Pharisees. The first, the grand Instance of Idolatry; the other, of
Hypocrisy: But Christ forbids us the Imitation of both; When ye pray, says our
Savior in the 6th. of Matthew, be ye not like the Heathens: But in what? Why,
in this, That they think they shall be heard for their much speaking; in the
7th. Verse. It is not the Multitude, that prevails in Armies, and much less in
Words. And then for the Pharisees, whom our Savior represents, as the very
vilest of Men, and the greatest of Cheats. We have them amusing the World with
pretenses of a more refined Devotion, while their Heart was all that time in
their Neighbor's Coffers. For, does not our Savior expressly tell us, in Luke
20. and the two last Verses, That the great Tools, the Hooks or Engines by
which they compassed their worst, their wickedest, and most rapacious Designs,
were Long Prayers? Prayers made only for a show or color; and that* to the
basest and most degenerous sort of Villainy, even the robbing the Spittle, and
devouring the Houses of poor, helpless, forlorn Widows. Their Devotion served
all along but as an Instrument to their Avarice, as a Factor or Under-Agent to
their Extortion. A Practice, which duly seen into, and stripped of its
Hypocritical Blinds, could not but look very odiously, and ill-favouredly; and
therefore, in come their long Robes, and their long Prayers together, and cover
all. And, the truth is, neither the Length of one, nor of the other, is ever
found so useful, as when there is something more than ordinary that would not
be seen. This was the gainful Godliness of the Pharisees; and, I believe, upon
good Observation, you will hardly find, any like the Pharisees for their long
Prayers, who are not also extremely like them for something else. And thus
having given you five Arguments for Brevity, and against Prolixity of Prayer;
let us now make this our other great Rule, whereby to judge of the Prayers of
our Church, and the Prayers of those who Dissent and Divide from it. And,

First, For that excellent Body of Prayers contained in our Liturgy, and both
compiled and enjoined by Public Authority. Have we not here, a great Instance
of Brevity and Fullness together, cast into several, short, significant
Collects, each containing a distinct, entire, and well-managed Petition? The
whole Set of them being like a string of Pearls, exceeding rich in
Conjunction; and therefore of no small price, or value, even single, and by
themselves. Nothing could have been composed with greater Judgment; Every
Prayer being so short, that it is impossible it should weary; and withal, so
pertinent, that it is impossible it should cloy the Devotion. And indeed, so
admirably fitted are they all to the common Concerns of a Christian Society,
that when the Rubric enjoins but the use of some of them, our Worship is not
imperfect; and when we use them all, there is none of them superfluous.

And the Reason assigned by some learned Men for the Preference of many short
Prayers, before a continued long one, is unanswerable; Namely, That by the
former there is a more frequently repeated mention made of the Name, and some
great Attribute of God, as the encouraging Ground of our praying to Him; and
withal, of the Merits and Mediation of Christ, as the only thing, that can
promise us success, in what we pray for: Every distinct Petition beginning with
the former, and ending with the latter: By thus annexing of which to each
particular thing, that we ask for, we do manifestly confess, and declare, That
we cannot expect to obtain any one thing at the hands of God, but with a
particular renewed respect to the Merits of a Mediator; and withal, re-mind
the Congregation of the same, by making it their part to renew a distinct Amen
to every distinct Petition.

Add to this, the Excellent contrivance of a great part of our Liturgy, into
Alternate Responses; by which means, the People are put to bear a considerable
share in the whole Service: which makes it almost impossible for them, to be
only idle Hearers, or, which is worse, mere Lookers on: As they are very often,
and may be always (if they can but keep their Eyes open) at the long, tedious
Prayers of the Nonconformists. And this indeed is that, which makes and
denominates our Liturgy truly and properly a Book of Common Prayer. For, I
think, I may truly avouch (how strange soever it may seem at first) that there
is no such thing as Common, or Ioint-prayer, any-where amongst the principal
Dissenters from the Church of England: For, in the Romish Communion, the Priest
says over the appointed Prayers only to himself, and the rest of the People not
hearing a word of what he says, repeat also their own particular Prayers to
themselves; and when they have done, go their way: Not all at once, as neither
do they come at once, but scatteringly, one after another, according as they
have finished their Devotions. And then, for the Nonconformists; their Prayers
being all extempore, it is (as we have shown before) hardly possible for any,
and utterly impossible for all, to join in them: For, surely, People cannot
join in a Prayer before they understand it; nor can it be imagined, that all
Capacities should presently and immediately understand what they hear, when,
possibly, Holder-forth himself understands not what he says. From all which we
may venture to conclude, That, that excellent thing, Common Prayer, which is
the joint Address of an whole Congregation, with united Voice, as well as
Heart, sending up their Devotions to Almighty God, is nowhere to be found in
these Kingdoms, but in that best and nearest Copy of Primitive, Christian
Worship, the Divine Service, as it is performed according to the Orders of our
Church.

As for those long Prayers, so frequently used by some before their Sermons;
the Constitution and Canons of our Church are not at all responsible for them,
having provided us better things, and with great Wisdom appointed a Form of
Prayer, to be used by all before their Sermons. But as for this way of Praying,
now generally in use, as it was first took up upon an humor of Novelty, and
Popularity, and by the same carried on, till it had passed into a Custom, and
so put the Rule of the Church first out of Use, and then out of Countenance
also; so, if it be rightly considered, it will, in the very nature of the thing
it self, be found a very senceless and absurd practice. For, can there be any
Sense or Propriety in beginning a new, tedious Prayer in the Pulpit, just after
the Church has, for near an hour together, with great variety of Offices,
suitable to all the Needs of the Congregation, been praying for all, that can
possibly be fit for Christians to pray for? Nothing certainly can be more
irrational. For which Cause, amongst many more, that old sober Form of Bidding
Prayer, which, both against Law and Reason, has been justled out of the Church
by this Upstart, Puritanical Encroachment, ought, with great Reason, to be
restored by Authority; and both the use and Users of it, by a strict and solemn
Reinforcement of the Canon upon all, without exception, be rescued from that
unjust Scorn of the Factious and Ignorant, which the Tyranny of the contrary,
usurping Custom, will otherwise expose them to. For surely, it can neither be
Decency nor Order for our Clergy to Conform to the Fanatics, as many in their
Prayers before Sermon nowadays do.

And thus having accounted for the Prayers of our Church, according to the
great Rule prescribed in the Text, Let thy Words be few: Let us now, according
to the same, consider also the way of Praying, so much used, and applauded by
such, as have renounced the Communion, and Liturgy of our Church; and it is but
reason, that they should bring us something better in the room of what they
have so disdainfully cast off. But, on the contrary, are not all their Prayers
exactly after the Heathenish and Pharisaical Copy? always notable for those two
Things, Length and Tautology? Two whole Hours for one Prayer, at a Fast, used
to be reckoned but a moderate Dose; and that, for the most part, fraught with
such irreverent, blasphemous Expressions, that, to repeat them, would profane
the place I am speaking in; and indeed, they seldom carried on the work of such
a Day (as their Phrase was,) but they left the Church in need of a new
Consecration. Add to this, the Incoherence and Confusion, the endless
Repetitions, and the unsufferable Nonsense, that never failed to hold out, even
with their utmost Prolixity; so that in all their long Fasts, from first to
last, from seven in the Morning, to seven in the Evening, (which was their
measure) the Pulpit was always the emptiest Thing in the Church: And I never
knew such a Fast kept by them, but their Hearers had Cause to begin a
Thanksgiving, as soon as they had done. And, the truth is, when I consider the
Matter of their Prayers; so full of Ramble, and Inconsequence, and in every
respect, so very like the language of a Dream; and compare it with their
Carriage of themselves in Prayer, with their Eyes, for the most part, shut, and
their Arms stretched out, in Yawning posture, a Man that should hear any of
them pray, might, by a very pardonable Error, be induced to think, that he was
all the time hearing one talking in his sleep: besides the strange Virtue,
which their Prayers had to procure sleep in others too. So that he who should
be present at all their long Cant, would show a greater Ability in Watching,
than ever they could pretend to in Praying, if he could forbear sleeping,
having so strong a Provocation to it, and so fair an Excuse for it. In a word,
such were their Prayers, both for Matter and Expression, that could any one
truly and exactly write them out, it would be the shrewdest, and most effectual
way of Writing against them, that could possibly be thought of.

I should not have thus troubled either you, or my self, by raking into the
Dirt and Dunghill of these men's Devotions, upon the account of any thing,
either done or said by them in the late times of Confusion; for as they have
the King's, so I wish them God's pardon also, for both, whom, I am sure, they
have offended much more, than they have both Kings put together. But that which
has provoked me thus to rip up, and expose to you their nauseous, and
ridiculous way of addressing to God, even upon the most solemn Occasions, is
that intolerably rude and unprovoked Insolence and Scurrility, with which they
are every day reproaching and scoffing at our Liturgy, and the Users of it, and
thereby alienating the Minds of the People from it, to such a degree, that many
Thousands are drawn by them into a fatal Schism; A Schism that, unrepented of,
and continued in, will as infallibly ruin their Souls, as Theft, Whoredom,
Murder, or any other of the most crying, damning Sins whatsoever. But leaving
this to the Justice of the Government, to which it belongs, to protect us in
our Spiritual, as well as in our Temporal Concerns, I shall only say this, That
nothing can be more for the Honor of our Liturgy, than to find it despised
only by those who have made themselves remarkable to the World for despising
the Lord's Prayer as much.

In the mean time, for our selves of the Church of England, who, without
pretending to any New Lights, think it equally a Duty and Commendation to be
Wise, and to be Devout only to Sobriety, and who judge it no dishonor to God
himself, to be Worshipped according to Law and Rule. If the Directions of
Solomon, the Precept and Example of our Savior, and lastly, the Piety and
Experience of those Excellent Men, and Martyrs, who first composed, and
afterward owned our Liturgy with their dearest Blood, may be looked upon as
safe, and sufficient Guides to us in our public Worship of God; then, upon the
joint Authority of all these, we may pronounce our Liturgy the greatest
Treasure of Rational Devotion in the Christian World. And I know no Prayer
necessary, that is not in the Liturgy, but one; which is this: That God would
vouchsafe to continue the Liturgy it self in Use, Honor, and Veneration in
this Church for ever. And I doubt not, but all wise, sober, and good
Christians, will with equal Judgment and Affection give it their Amen.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and
One God, be rendered and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty
and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.

The First SERMON PREACHED Upon Romans I. 32.
ROMANS I. 32. Who knowing the judgment of God, (that they which commit such
things are worthy of Death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them,
that do them.
FRom the beginning of the 18th. Verse, to the end of the 31st. (the Verse
immediately going before the Text) we have a Catalogue of the blackest Sins,
that humane Nature, in its highest Depravation, is capable of committing; and
this so perfect, that there seems to be no Sin imaginable, but what may be
reduced to, and comprised under, some of the Sins here specified. In a word, we
have an Abridgment of the Lives and Practices of the whole Heathen World; that
is, of all the Baseness and Villainy, that both the Corruption of Nature, and
the Instigation of the Devil, could for so many Ages, by all the Arts and
Opportunities, all the Motives and Incentives of Sinning bring the Sons of Men
to. And yet, as full and comprehensive as this Catalogue of Sin seems to be, it
is but of Sin under a Limitation. An Universality of Sin under a Certain Kind;
that is, of all Sins of direct and personal Commission. And, you will say, is
not this a sufficient Comprehension of All? For, is not a Man's Person the
Compass of his Actions? Or, can he Operate further, than he does Exist? Why,
yes, in some sense he may: He may not only commit such and such Sins himself,
but also take pleasure in others, that do commit them. Which Expression implies
these two things: First, That thus to take pleasure in other men's Sins, is a
distinct Sin from all the former; And, secondly, that it is much greater than
the former. For as much, as these terms, not only do the same, but also take
pleasure, etc. import Aggravation, as well as Distinction; and are properly an
Advance a minore ad majus, a progress to a further degree. And this, indeed, is
the farthest that humane Pravity can reach, the highest point of Villainy, that
the debauched Powers of Man's Mind can ascend unto. For, surely, that Sin, that
exceeds Idolatry, monstrous, unnatural Lusts, Covetousness, Maliciousness,
Envy, Murder, Deceit, Backbiting, Hatred of God, Spightfulness, Pride,
Disobedience to Parents, Covenant Breaking, Want of Natural Affection,
Implacableness, Unmercifulness, and the like: I say, that Sin, that is a Pitch
beyond all these, must needs be such an one, as must nonplus the Devil
himself, to proceed further: It is the very Extremity, the Fullness, and the
concluding Period of Sin, the last Line, and finishing Stroke of the Devil's
Image drawn upon the Soul of Man.

Now the sense of the Words may be fully and naturally cast into this one
Proposition, which shall be the Subject of the following Discourse: Viz.

That the guilt arising from a Man's delighting, or taking pleasure in other
Men's Sins, or (which is all one) in other Men for their Sins, is greater than
he can possibly contract by a Commission of the same Sins in his own Person.

For the handling of which, I cannot but think it superfluous, to offer at any
Explication of what it is, to take pleasure in other Men's Sins; it being
impossible for any Man to be so far unacquainted with the Motions and
Operations of his own Mind, as not to know, how it is affected and disposed,
when any thing pleases, or delights him. And therefore I shall state the
prosecution of the Proposition upon these Three following Things.

I. I shall show what it is that brings a Man to such a disposition of Mind, as
to take pleasure in other men's Sins.

II. I shall show the Reasons, Why a Man's being disposed to do so, comes to
be attended with such an extraordinary Guilt: And,

III. and Lastly, I shall declare what kind of Persons are to be reckoned under
this Character.

Of each of which in their Order. And first for the

I. Of these, What it is that brings a man, etc.

In order to which, I shall premise these Four Considerations.

1. That every Man naturally has a distinguishing Sense of Turpe and Honestum;
of what is honest, and what is dishonest; of what it fit, and what is not fit
to be done. There are those Practical Principles, and Rules of Action,
treasured up in that part of Man's Mind, called by the Schools (...), that,
like the Candle of the Lord, set up by God himself in the Heart of every Man,
discovers to him, both what he is to do, and what to avoid: They are a Light,
lighting every Man that comes into the World.

And in respect of which principally it is, that God is said not to have left
himself without witness in the World; there being something fixed in the Nature
of Man, that will be sure to testify and declare for him.

2. The second Thing to be considered, is, That there is consequently upon this
distinguishing Principle an inward satisfaction, or dissatisfaction, arising in
the Heart of every Man, after he has done a good, or an evil Action. An Action
agreeable to, or deviating from this great Rule. And this, no doubt, proceeds
not only from the real Unsutableness, that every thing sinful, or dishonest,
bears to the Nature of Man, but also from a secret, inward, fore-boding Fear,
that some Evil or other will follow the doing of that, which a Man's own
Conscience disallows him in. For, no Man naturally is, or can be, cheerful,
immediately upon the doing of a wicked Action. There being something within
him, that presently gives Sentence against him for it: Which, no question, is
the Voice of God himself, speaking in the Hearts of Men, whether they
understand it or no; and by secret Intimations giving the Sinner a fore-tast of
that direful Cup, which he is like to drink more deeply of hereafter.

3. The third Thing to be considered, is, That this distinguishing Sense of
good and evil, and this satisfaction, or dissatisfaction, of Mind, consequent
upon a Man's acting sutably, or unsutably to it, is a Principle neither
presently, nor easily, to be worn out, or extinguished. For, besides, that it
is founded in Nature (which kind of things are always most durable, and
lasting) the great important End that God designs it for, (which is no less
than the Government of the Noblest part of the World, Mankind) sufficiently
shows the Necessity of its being rooted deep in the Heart, and put beyond the
Danger of being torn up by any ordinary Violence done to it.

4. The fourth and last Thing to be considered, is, That, that which weakens,
and directly tends to extinguish this Principle, (so far as it is capable of
being extinguished) is an inferior, sensitive Principle, which receives its
Gratifications from Objects clean contrary to the former; and, which affect a
Man, in the state of this present life, much more warmly and vividly than
those, which affect only his Nobler part, his Mind. So that there being a
Contrariety between those things, that Conscience enclines to, and those that
entertain the Senses; and since the more quick and affecting pleasure still
arises from these latter, it follows, that the Gratifications of these are more
powerful to Command the Principles of Action, than the other, and consequently
is, for the most part, too hard for, and victorious over, the Dictates of Right
Reason.

Now from these Four Considerations, thus premised, we naturally infer these
Two things:

First, That no man is quickly, or easily, brought to take a full pleasure and
delight in his own Sins. For, though Sin offers it self in never so pleasing
and alluring a Dress, at first, yet the Remorse, and inward Regrets of the
Soul, upon the Commission of it, infinitely over-balance those faint and
transient Gratifications it affords the Senses. So that, upon the whole matter,
the Sinner, even at his highest pitch of Enjoyment, is not pleased with it so
much, but he is afflicted more. And, as long as these inward rejolts and
recoilings of the Mind continue, (which they will certainly do for a
considerable part of a Man's life) the Sinner will find his Accounts of
Pleasure very poor and short; being so mixed, and indeed overdone with the
contrary Impressions of Trouble upon his Mind, that it is but a bitter-sweet at
best; and the fine Colors of the Serpent do by no means make amends for the
smart, and poison of his Sting.

Secondly, The other thing to be inferred, is, That, as no Man is quickly, or
easily brought to take a full pleasure or delight in his own Sins, so much less
easily can he be brought to take pleasure in those of other Men. The Reason is,
Because the chief Motive (as we have observed) that induces a Man to Sin, which
is the Gratification of his sensitive Part, by a sinful Act, cannot be had
from the Sins of another Man; since naturally, and directly, they affect only
the Agent that commits them. For, certainly another man's Intemperance cannot
affect my Sensuality, any more, than the Meat and Drink, that I take into my
Mouth, can please his Palate: But of this more fully in some of the following
Particulars.

In the mean time, it is evident from Reason, that there is a considerable
Difficulty in a Man's arriving to such a disposition of Mind, as shall make him
take pleasure in other men's Sins; and yet, it is also as evident from the
Text, and from Experience too, that some Men are brought to do so. And
therefore, since there is no Effect, of what kind soever, but is resolvable
into some Cause: We will enquire into the Cause of this vile and preter-natural
Temper of Mind, that should make a Man please himself with that, which can no
ways reach or affect those Faculties, and Principles, which Nature has made the
proper Seat, and Subject of Pleasure. Now the Causes (or at least some of the
Causes) that debauch and corrupt the Mind of Man to such a degree, as to take
pleasure in other men's Sins, are these Five.

1. A Commission of the same Sins in a Man's own Person. This is imported in
the very Words of the Text; where it is said of such persons, that they not
only do the same things; which must therefore imply, that they do them. It is
Conversation, and Acquaintance, that must give delight in Things and Actions,
as well as in Persons. And it is Trial that must begin the Acquaintance. It
being hardly imaginable, that one should be delighted with a Sin at second
hand, till he has known it at the first. Delight is the Natural Result of
Practice, and Experiment; and when it flows from any thing else, so far it
recedes from Nature. None look with so much pleasure upon the Works of Art, as
those who are Artists themselves. They are therefore their delight, because
they were heretofore their Employment; and they love to see such things,
because they onec loved to do them. In like manner, a Man must Sin himself
into a Love of other men's Sins; for a bare Notion or Speculation of this black
Art will not carry him so far. No sober, temperate Person in the World
(whatsoever other Sins he may be inclinable to, and guilty of,) can look with
any Complacency upon the Drunkenness and Sottishness of his Neighbor: Nor can
any Chaste person (be his other failings what they will) reflect with any
pleasure or delight, upon the filthy, unclean Conversation of another, though
never so much in fashion, and vouched not by common Use only, but Applause. No;
he must be first an Exercised, thorough-paced Practitioner of these Vices
himself; and they must have endeared themselves to him by those personal
Gratifications, he had received from them, before he can come to like them so
far, as to be pleased, and enamored with them, wheresoever he sees them. It is
possible indeed, that a sober, or a chaste Person, upon the Stock of Ill Will,
Envy, or Spiritual Pride, (which is all the Religion that some have) may be
glad to see the Intemperance, and Debauchery of some about them: but it is
impossible, that such Persons should take any delight in the Men themselves for
being so. The truth is, in such a case, they do not properly delight in the
Vice it self, though they inwardly rejoice (and after a godly sort, no doubt)
to see another guilty of it; but they delight in the mischief and disaster,
which, they know, it will assuredly bring upon him, whom they hate, and wish
ill to: They rejoice not in it, as in a delightful Object, but as in a Cause
and Means of their Neighbor's Ruin. So grateful, nay, so delicious are even
the horridest Villainies committed by others to the Pharisaical Piety of some;
who, in the mean time, can be wholly unconcerned for the Reproach brought
thereby upon the Name of God, and the Honor of Religion, so long as by the
same their Sanctified Spleen is gratified in their Brother's Infamy, and
Destruction.

This therefore we may reckon upon, that scarce any Man passes to a liking of
Sin in others, but by first practicing it himself; and consequently, may take
it for a shrewd Indication, and Sign, whereby to judge of the Manners of those,
who have sinned with too much Art and Caution, to suffer the Eye of the World
to charge some Sins directly upon their Conversation. For, though such kind of
Men have lived never so much upon the Reserve, as to their Personal Behavior,
yet if they be observed to have a particular delight in, and fondness for
Persons noted for any sort of Sin, it is ten to one, but there was a
Communication in the Sin, before there was so in Affection. The Man has, by
this, directed us to a Copy of Himself; and, though we cannot always come to a
sight of the Original, yet by a true Copy we may know all that is in it.

2 ly. A second Cause, that brings a Man to take pleasure in other men's Sins,
is not only a Commission of those Sins in his own Person, but also a Commission
of them against the full Light and Conviction of his Conscience. For this also
is expressed in the Text; where the Persons charged with this wretched
Disposition of Mind are said to have been such as knew the judgment of God,
that they, who committed such things, were worthy of Death. They knew that
there was a righteous, and a searching Law, directly forbidding such Practices;
and they knew that it carried with it the Divine Stamp, that it was the Law of
God; they knew also, that the Sanction of it was under the greatest, and
dreadfullest of all Penalties, Death. And this surely (one would think) was
Knowledge enough to have opened both a man's Eyes, and his Heart too; his Eyes
to see, and his Heart to consider the intolerable mischief that the Commission
of the Sin set before him must infallibly plunge him into. Nevertheless, the
Persons here mentioned were resolved to venture, and to commit the Sin, even
while Conscience stood protesting against it. They were such, as broke through
all Mounds of Law, such as laughed at the Sword of Vengeance, which Divine
Justice brandished in their faces. For, we must know, that God has set a
flaming Sword not only before Paradise, but before Hell it self also; to keep
Men out of this, as well as out of the other. And Conscience is the Angel, into
whose hand this Sword is put. But if now, the Sinner shall not only wrestle
with this Angel, but throw him too; and win so complete a Victory over his
Conscience, that all these Considerations shall be able to strike no Terror
into his Mind, lay no Restraint upon his Lusts, no Control upon his Appetites;
he is certainly too strong for the Means of Grace; and his Heart lies open,
like a broad and high Road for all the Sin and Villainy in the World freely to
pass through.

The Truth is, if we impartially consider the Nature of these Sins against
Conscience, we shall find them such strange Paradoxes, that a man must baulk
all Common Principles, and act contrary to the Natural way and motive of all
Humane Actions, in the Commission of them. For that, which naturally moves a
man to do any thing, must be the Apprehension and Expectation of some good
from the thing, which he is about to do: And that which naturally keeps a man
from doing of a thing, must be the Apprehension and Fear of some mischief
likely to ensue from that Thing, or Action, that he is ready to engage in. But
now, for a man to do a thing, while his Conscience, the best Light that he has
to judge by, assures him, that he shall be infinitely, unsupportably miserable,
if he does it; this is certainly unnatural, and (one would imagine) impossible.

And therefore, so far as one may judge, while a man acts against his
Conscience, he acts by a Principle of direct Infidelity, and does not really
believe that those things, that God has thus threatened, shall ever come to
pass. For, though he may yield a general, faint Assent to the Truth of those
Propositions, as they stand recorded in Scripture; yet, for a through,
Practical belief, that those general Propositions shall be particularly made
good upon his Person, no doubt, for the time that he is sinning against
Conscience, such a belief has no place in his Mind. Which being so, it is easy
to conceive, how ready and disposed this must needs leave the Soul, to admit of
any, even the most horrid, unnatural Proposals, that the Devil himself can
suggest: For Conscience being once extinct, and the Spirit of God withdrawn,
(which never stays with a Man, when Conscience has once left him) the Soul,
like the first Matter to all Forms, has an Universal Propensity to all
Lewdness. For every Violation of Conscience proportionably wears off something
of its Native Tenderness, which Tenderness being the Cause of that Anguish and
Remorse that it feels, upon the Commission of Sin; it follows, that when, by
degrees, it comes to have worn off all this Tenderness, the Sinner will find no
Trouble of Mind upon his doing the very wickedest, and worst of Actions; and
consequently, that this is the most direct and effectual Introduction to all
sorts and degrees of Sin.

For which Reason it was, that I alleged Sinning against Conscience for one of
the Causes of this vile Temper, and Habit of Mind, which we are now discoursing
of: Not that it has any special productive Efficiency of this particular sort
of Sinning, more than of any other, but that it is a general Cause of this, as
of all other great Vices; and that it is impossible, but a Man must have first
passed this notable Stage, and got his Conscience thoroughly debauched, and
hardened, before he can arrive to the height of Sin; which I account the
delighting in other men's Sins to be.

3 ly. A third Cause of this Villainous disposition of Mind, besides a man's
personal Commission of such and such Sins, and his Commission of them against
Conscience, must be also his Continuance in them. For, God forbid, that every
single Commission of a Sin, though great for its Kind, and withal, acted
against Conscience, for its Aggravation, should so far deprave the Soul, and
bring it to such a Reprobate Sense, and Condition, as to take pleasure in other
men's Sins. For, we know what a foul Sin David committed, and what a Crime St.
Peter himself fell into; both of them, no doubt, fully and clearly against the
Dictates of their Conscience yet we do not find, that either of them was
thereby brought to such an impious frame of Heart, as to delight in their own
Sins, and much less in other men's. And therefore, it is not every sinful
Violation of Conscience that can quench the Spirit, to such a degree, as we
have been speaking of; but it must be a long, inveterate Course and Custom of
Sinning after this manner, that, at length, produces and ends in such a cursed
Effect. For, this is so great a Masterpiece in Sin, that no Man begins with
it: He must have passed his Tyrocinium, or Novitiate, in Sinning, before he can
come to this, be he never so quick a Proficient. No man can mount so fast, as
to set his Foot upon the highest step of the Ladder at first. Before a man can
come to be pleased with a Sin, because he sees his Neighbor commit it, he must
have had such a long Acquaintance with it himself, as to create a kind of
Intimacy, or Friendship, between him and That; and then, we know, a Man is
Naturally glad to see his Old friend, not only at his own House, but
wheresoever he meets him. It is generally the Property of an Old Sinner to find
a delight in re-viewing his own Villainies in the Practice of other Men; to see
his Sin, and himself (as it were) in Reversion; and to find a greater
satisfaction in beholding him, who succeeds him in his Vice, than him, who is
to succeed him in his Estate. In the matter of Sin, Age makes a greater Change
upon the Soul, than it does, or can, upon the Body. And as in this, if we
compare the Picture of a Man, drawn at the Years of Seventeen, or Eighteen,
with the Picture of the same person at Threescore and Ten, hardly the least
Trace or Similitude of one Face can be found in the other. So for the Soul, the
Difference of the Dispositions, and Qualities of the Inner Man, will be found
much greater. Compare the Harmlesness, the Credulity, the Tenderness, the
Modesty, and the Ingenuous pliableness to virtuous Counsels, which is in Youth,
as it comes fresh and untainted out of the hands of Nature, with the
Mischievousness, the Slyness, the Craft, the Impudence, the Falsehood, and the
confirmed Obstinacy in most sorts of Sin, that is to be found in an aged,
long-practised Sinner, and you will confess the Complexion and Hue of his Soul,
to be altered more than that of his Face. Age has given him another Body, and
Custom another Mind. All those Seeds of Virtue, and good Morality, that were
the Natural Endowments of our first Years, are lost, and dead for ever. And in
respect of the Native Innocence of Childhood, no man, through Old Age, becomes
twice a Child. The Vices of Old Age have in them the stiffness of it too. And
as it is the unfittest Time to learn in, so the unfitness of it to unlearn will
be found much greater.

Which Considerations, joined with that of its Imbecility, make it the proper
Season for a super-annuated Sinner to enjoy the Delights of Sin in the Rebound;
and to supply the Impotence of Practice by the airy, fantastic Pleasure of
Memory and Reflection. For all that can be allowed him now, is to refresh his
decrepit, effete Sensuality, with the Transcript and History of his former
Life, recognized, and read over by him, in the vicious Rants of the vigorous,
youthful Debauchees of the present time, whom (with an odd kind of Passion,
mixed of Pleasure, and Envy too) he sees flourishing in all the bravery and
prime of their Age and Vice. An old Wrestler loves to look on, and to be near
the Lists, though Feebleness will not let him offer at the Prize. An old
Huntsman finds a Music in the Noise of Hounds, though he cannot follow the
Chase. An old Drunkard loves a Tavern, though he cannot go to it, but as he is
supported, and led by another, just as some are observed to come from thence.
And an old Wanton, will be doting upon Women, when he can scarce see them
without Spectacles. And to show the true Love and faithful Allegiance that the
Old Servants and Subjects of Vice ever after bear to it, nothing is more usual,
and frequent, than to hear, that such, as have been Strumpets in their Youth,
turn Procurers in their Age. Their great Concern is, that the Vice may still go
on.

4 ly. A fourth Cause of men's taking pleasure in the Sins of others, is, from
that meanness, and poor-spiritedness, that naturally and inseparably
accompanies all Guilt. Whosoever is conscious to himself of Sin, feels in
himself (whether he will own it or no) a proportionable Shame, and a secret
Depression of Spirit thereupon. And this is so irksome, and uneasy to Man's
mind, that he is restless to relieve, and rid himself from it: For which, he
finds no way so effectual, as to get Company in the same Sin. For Company, in
any Action, gives both Credit to that, and Countenance to the Agent; and so
much as the Sinner gets of this, so much he casts off of Shame. Singularity in
Sin puts it out of fashion; since to be alone in any Practice, seems to make
the Judgment of the World against it; but the Concurrence of others is a Tacit
Approbation of that, in which they concur. Solitude is a kind of Nakedness,
and the Result of that, we know, is Shame. It Is Company only that can bear a
Man out in an ill Thing; and he who is to encounter and fight the Law, will be
sure to need a Second. No wonder therefore, if some take delight in the
Immoralities, and Baseness of others; for nothing can support their Minds
drooping, and sneaking, and inwardly reproaching them, from a sense of their
own guilt, but to see others as bad as themselves.

To be Vicious amongst the Virtuous, is a double disgrace and misery; but where
the whole Company is vicious, and debauched, they presently like, or at least
easily pardon one another. And, as it is observed by some, that there is none
so homely, but loves a Looking-glass; so it is certain, that there is no man so
vicious, but delights to see the Image of his Vice reflected upon him, from one
who exceeds, or at least equals him in the same.

Sin in it self, is not only shameful, but also weak; and it seeks a Remedy
for both in Society: For it is this, that must give it both Color and Support.
But, on the contrary, how great and (as I may so speak) how Self-sufficient a
thing is Virtue! It needs no Credit from Abroad, no Countenance from the
Multitude. Were there but one virtuous man in the World, he would hold up his
Head with Confidence, and Honor: He would shame the World, and not the World
him. For, according to that excellent and great Saying, Prove. 14. 14. A good
Man shall be satisfied from himself. He needs look no further. But if he
desires to see the same Virtue propagated, and diffused to those about him; it
is for their sakes, not his own. It is his Charity that wishes, and not his
Necessity that requires it. For Solitude and Singularity can neither daunt, nor
disgrace him; unless we could suppose it a disgrace for a man to be singularly
good.

But a vicious Person, like the basest sort of Beasts, never enjoys himself,
but in the Herd. Company, he thinks, lessens the shame of Vice, by sharing it;
and abates the Torrent of a common Odium, by deriving it into many Channels;
And therefore, if he cannot wholly avoid the Eye of the Observer, he hopes to
distract it at least by a multiplicity of the Object. These, I confess, are
poor Shifts, and miserable Shelters, for a Sick and a Self-upbraiding
Conscience to fly to; and yet they are some of the best, that the Debauchee has
to cheer up his Spirits with in this World. For, if after all, he must needs be
seen, and took notice of, with all his Filth and Noisomeness about him, he
promises himself however, that it will be some allay to his Reproach, to be but
one of many, to march in a Troop, and by a preposterous kind of Ambition, to be
seen in bad Company.

5. The fifth and last Cause (that I shall mention) inducing Men to take
pleasure in the Sins of others, is a certain, peculiar, unaccountable
Malignity, that is in some Natures and Dispositions. I know no other Name, or
Word, to express it by. But the thing it self is frequently seen in the
Temporal Concerns of this World. For, are there not some who find an inward,
secret Rejoicing in themselves, when they see, or hear, of the loss, or
calamity of their Neighbor, though no imaginable Interest, or Advantage of
their own, is, or can be, served thereby? But (it seems) there is a base,
Wolvish Principle within, that is fed, and gratified with another's Misery; and
no other Account or Reason in the World can be given of its being so, but that
it is the Nature of the Beast to delight in such things.

And as this occurrs frequently in Temporals, so there is, no doubt, but that
with some few persons, it acts the same way also in Spirituals. I say, with
some few persons; for, thanks be to God, the common, known Corruption of humane
Nature, upon the bare stock of its Original Depravation, does not usually
proceed so far. Such an one, for instance, was that Wretch, who made a poor
Captive renounce his Religion, in order to the saving of his Life; and, when he
had so done, presently run him through, glorying, that he had thereby destroyed
his Enemy, both Body and Soul. But more remarkably such, was that Monster of
Diabolical Baseness here in England, who, some years since, in the Reign of
King Charles the First, suffered Death for Crimes scarce ever heard of before;
having frequently boasted, that as several Men had their several Pleasures and
Recreations, so his peculiar Pleasure and Recreation was to destroy Souls, and
accordingly to put men upon such Practices as he knew would assuredly do it.
But above all, the late Saying of some of the Dissenting Brotherhood ought to
be proclaimed and celebrated to their Eternal Honor: who, while there was
another New Oath preparing, which they both supposed and hoped most of the
Clergy would not take, in a most insulting manner gave out thereupon; That they
were resolved either to have our Livings, or to Damn our Souls. An Expression,
so fraught with all the Spite and Poison which the Devil himself could infuse
into Words, that it ought to remain as a Monument of the Humanity, Charity and
Christianity of this sort of men for ever.

Now such a Temper or Principle, as these, and the like Passages do import, I
call a peculiar Malignity of Nature; since it is evident, that neither the
inveterate Love of Vice, nor yet the long Practice of it, and that even against
the Reluctancies, and Light of Conscience, can of it self have this devilish
effect upon the Mind, but as it falls in with such a villainous, preter-natural
Disposition, as I have mentioned. For to instance in the Particular Case of
Parents and Children, let a Father be never so Vicious, yet, generally
speaking, he would not have his Child so. Nay, it is certain, that some, who
have been as corrupt in their Morals, as Vice could make them, have yet been
infinitely solicitous, to have their Children soberly, virtuously, and piously
brought up: So that, although they have begot Sons after their own likeness,
yet they are not willing to breed them so too.

Which, by the way, is the most pregnant demonstration in the World, of that
Self-condemning Sentence, that is perpetually sounding in every great Sinner's
Breast; and of that inward, grating dislike of the very thing he practices,
that he should abhor to see the same in any one, whose Good he nearly tenders,
and whose Person he wishes well to. But if now, on the other side, we should
chance to find a Father corrupting his Son, or a Mother debauching her
Daughter, as (God knows such Monsters have been seen within the four Seas) we
must not charge this barely upon an high Predominance of Vice in these persons,
but much more upon a peculiar Anomaly, and Baseness of Nature: If the Name of
Nature may be allowed to that which seems to be an utter cashiering of it; a
Deviation from, and a Contradiction to the common Principles of Humanity. For
this is such a Disposition, as strips the Father of the Man; as makes him
Sacrifice his Children to Molech; and as much outdo the cruelty of a Cannibal,
or a Saturn, as it is more barbarous, and unhumane to damn a Child than to
devour him. We sometimes read and hear of Monstrous Births, but we may often
see a greater Monstrosity in Educations; thus, when a Father has begot a Man,
he trains him up into a Beast. Making even his own House a Stews, a Bordell,
and a School of Lewdness, to instill the Rudiments of Vice into the unwary,
flexible years of his poor Children, poisoning their tender minds with the
irresistible, authentic Venom of his base Example; so that all the Instruction
they find within their Father's Walls, shall be only to be disciplined to an
earlier Practice of Sin, to be catechized into all the Mysteries of Iniquity,
and, at length, confirmed in a mature, grown up, incorrigible state of
Debauchery. And this some Parents call a teaching their Children to know the
World, and to study Men: Thus leading them (as it were) by the hand, through
all the Forms and Classes, all the Varieties and Modes of Villainy, till at
length they make them ten times more the Children of the Devil, than of
themselves. Now, I say, if the unparalleled Wickedness of the Age should at
any time cast us upon such blemishes of Mankind as these, who, while they thus
treat their Children, should abuse, and usurp the Name of Parents, by assuming
it to themselves; let us not call them by the low, diminutive Term or Title of
Sinful, Wicked, or Ungodly Men; but let us look upon them as so many
prodigious Exceptions from our Common Nature, as so many portentous Animals,
like the strange, unnatural Productions of Africa, and fit to be publicly
shown, were they not unfit to be seen. For certainly, where a Child finds his
own Parents, his Perverters, he cannot be so properly said to be Born, as to be
Damned into the World; and better were it for him by far to have been unborn,
and unbegot, than to come to ask blessing of those whose Conversation breaths
nothing but Contagion and a Curse. So impossible, and so much a Paradox is it,
for any Parent to impart to his Child his Blessing, and his Vice too.

And thus I have dispatched the first general thing proposed for the handling
of the Words, and shown in five several Particulars, What it is, that brings a
man to such a disposition of Mind, as to take pleasure in other men's Sins. I
proceed now to the

IId. Which is, To show the Reasons, why a man's being disposed to do so,
comes to be attended with such an extraordinary Guilt. And the First shall be
taken from this, That naturally there is no Motive to induce or tempt a man to
this way of Sinning. And this is a most certain Truth, That the lesser the
Temptation is, the greater is the Sin. For, in every Sin, by how much the more
free the Will is in its Choice, by so much is the Act the more Sinful. And,
where there is nothing to importune, urge, or provoke it to any Act, there is
so much an higher, and perfecter degree of Freedom, about that Act. For albeit,
the Will is not capable of being compelled to any of its Actings, yet it is
capable of being made to Act with more or less Difficulty, according to the
different Impressions it receives from Motives, or Objects. If the Object be
extremely pleasing, and apt to gratify it; there, though the Will has still a
power of Refusing it, yet it is not without some Difficulty. Upon which account
it is, that Men are so strongly carried out to, and so hardly took off from the
Practice of Vice; namely, because the sensual pleasure arising from it, is
still importuning and drawing them to it.

But now, from whence springs this pleasure? Is it not from the gratification
of some Desire founded in Nature? An irregular gratification it is indeed very
often; yet still the foundation of it is, and must be, something Natural: So
that the Sum of all is this, That the Naturalness of a Desire, is the Cause
that the Satisfaction of it is Pleasure, and Pleasure importunes the Will; and
that which importunes the Will, puts a Difficulty in the Will's refusing or
forbearing it. Thus Drunkenness is an irregular satisfaction of the Appetite of
Thirst; Uncleanness an unlawful Gratification of the Appetite of Procreation;
and Covetousness a boundless, unreasonable pursuit of the Principle of
Self-preservation. So that all these are founded in some Natural desire, and
are therefore pleasurable, and upon that account tempt, solicit and entice the
Will. In a word; there is hardly any one Vice or Sin of direct and personal
Commission, but what is the Irregularity and Abuse of one of those two grand
Natural Principles; namely, Either that which inclines a Man to preserve
himself, or that which inclines him to please himself.

But now, what Principle, Faculty or Desire, by which Nature projects either
its own pleasure, or preservation, is, or can be gratified by another man's
personal pursuit of his own Vice? It is evident, that all the pleasure, that
naturally can be received from a vicious Action, can immediately, and
personally affect none but him who does it; for it is an Application of the
pleasing Object only to his own Sense; and no man feels by another man's
Senses. And therefore the delight, that a man takes from another's Sin, can be
nothing else but a fantastical, preter-natural Complacency arising from that,
which he has really no sense or feeling of. It is properly a love of Vice, as
such; a delighting in Sin for its own sake; and is a direct Imitation, or
rather an Exemplification of the Malice of the Devil; who delights in seeing
those Sins committed, which the very Condition of his Nature renders him
incapable of committing himself. For the Devil can neither Drink, nor Whore,
nor play the Epicure, though he enjoys the Pleasures of all these at a second
hand, and by malicious Approbation. If a man plays the Thief (says Solomon) and
steals to satisfy his Hunger, Prove. 6. 30. Though it cannot wholly excuse the
Fact, yet it sometimes extenuates the Guilt. And, we know, there are some
corrupt Affections in the Soul of Man, that urge, and push him on, to their
satisfaction, with such an impetuous fury, that, when we see a man overborn
and run down by them, considering the frailty of humane Nature, we cannot but
pity the Person, while we abhor the Crime. It being like one ready to drink
Poison, rather than to die with Thirst.

But when a man shall with a sober, sedate, diabolical Rancour, look upon and
enjoy himself in the sight of his Neighbor's Sin and Shame, and secretly hug
himself upon the Ruins of his Brother's Virtue, and the Dishonours of his
Reason, can he plead the Instigation of any Appetite in Nature enclining him to
this? And that would otherwise render him uneasy to himself, should he not
thus triumph in another's folly and confusion? No, certainly; this cannot be so
much as pretended. For he may as well carry his Eyes in another man's Head, and
run Races with another man's Feet, as directly and naturally taste the
Pleasures, that spring from the Gratification of another man's Appetites.

Nor can that Person, whosoever he is, who accounts it his Recreation and
Diversion, to see one man wallowing in his filthy Revels, and another made
infamous and noisome by his Sensuality, be so impudent, as to allege for a
reason of his so doing, That either all the enormous Draughts of the one, do
or can leave the least Relish upon the Tip of his Tongue; or, that all the
Fornications and Whoredoms of the other, do or can quench, or cool the
boilings of his own Lust. No; this is impossible. And if so, what can we then
assign for the Cause of this monstrous Disposition? Why, all that can be said
in this case, is, that Nature proceeds by quite another method; having given
Men such and such Appetites, and allotted to each of them their respective
Pleasures; the Appetite, and the Pleasure, still co-habiting in the same
Subject; But the Devil and long Custom of Sinning have superinduced upon the
Soul, new, unnatural, and absurd Desires; Desires, that have no real Object;
Desires, that relish things not at all desirable; but, like the sickness and
distemper of the Soul, feeding only upon Filth and Corruption, Fire and
Brimstone, and giving a Man the Devil's Nature, and the Devil's Delight; who
has no other Joy or Happiness, but to dishonor his Maker, and to destroy his
Fellow Creature; to Corrupt him here, and to Torment him hereafter. In fine,
there is as much difference between the pleasure a Man takes in his own Sins,
and that which he takes in other men's, as there is between the Wickedness of a
Man, and the Wickedness of a Devil.

2. A second Reason why a man's taking pleasure in the Sins of others, comes to
be attended with such an extraordinary Guilt, is from the boundless, unlimited
Nature of this way of Sinning. For by this a man contracts a kind of an
Universal Guilt, and (as it were) Sins over the Sins of all other Men; so that
while the Act is theirs, the Guilt of it is equally his: Consider any man as to
his personal Powers, and Opportunities of Sinning, and comparatively, they are
not great; for at greatest they must still be limited by the measure of Man's
Actings, and the term of his Duration. And a Man's active Powers are but weak,
and his Continuance in the World but short. So that Nature is not sufficient to
keep pace with his Corruptions, by answering Desire with proportionable
Practice.

For to instance in those two grand Extravagances of Lust and Drunkenness:
Surely no man is of so general and diffusive a Lust, as to prosecute his Amors
all the World over; and let it burn never so out-rageously for the present, yet
Age will in time chill those Heats; and the impure Flame will either die of it
self, or consume the Body that harbors it. And so for Intemperance in
Drinking; no man can be so much a Swine, as to be always pouring in, but in the
compass of some years he will drown his Health and his Strength in his own
Belly; and after all his Drunken Trophies, at length Drink down himself too;
and that certainly will, and must, put an end to the Debauch.

But now, for the way of Sinning, which we have been speaking of, it is neither
confined by Place, nor weakened by Age; But the Bedridden, the Gouty, and the
Lethargick, may, upon this account, equal the Activity of the strongest, and
most vegete Sinner. Such an one may take his Brother by the Throat, and act the
Murderer, even while he can neither stir an hand, nor a foot; and he may
invade his Neighbor's Bed, while Weakness has tied him down to his own. He may
sin over all the Adulteries and Debauches, all the Frauds and Oppressions of
the whole Neighborhood, and (as I may so speak) he may break every Command of
God's Law by Proxy, and it were well for him, if he could be damned by Proxy
too. A man, by Delight and Fancy, may grasp in the Sins of all Countries, and
Ages, and by an inward liking of them communicate in their Guilt. He may take a
Range all the World over, and draw in all that wide Circumference of Sin and
Vice, and center it in his own Breast. For, whatsoever Sin a man extremely
loves, and would commit, if he had opportunity, and, in the mean time, pleases
himself with the Speculation of the same, whether ever he commits it, or no, it
leaves a stain and a guilt upon his Conscience; and, according to the
Spiritual, and severe Accounts of the Law, is made, in a great Respect, his
own. So that by this means there is a kind of Transmigration of Sins, much like
that, which Pythagoras held of Souls. Such an one, to be sure, it is, as makes
a man not only (according to the Apostle's phrase) a Partaker of other men's
Sins, but also a Deriver of the whole, entire Guilt of them to himself; and yet
so, as to leave the Committer of them, as full of Guilt, as he was before.

From whence we see the infinitely fruitful, and productive Power of this way
of Sinning; how it can increase and multiply beyond all Bounds and Measures of
Actual Commission, and how vastly it swells the Sinner's Account in an instant.
So that a man shall out of all the various, and even numberless kinds of
Villainy, acted by all the People and Nations round about him (as it were)
extract one mighty, Comprehensive guilt, and adopt it to himself; and so become
chargeable with, and accountable for a World of Sin without a Figure.

3. The third and last Reason that I shall assign, of the extraordinary Guilt,
attending a man's being disposed to take pleasure in other men's Sins, shall be
taken from the Soul's preparation, and passage to such a disposition. For, that
it pre-supposes and includes in it the Guilt of many preceding Sins. For (as it
has been shown) a man must have passed many Periods of Sin, before he can
arrive to it; and have served a long Apprenticeship to the Devil, before he can
come to such a perfection, and maturity in Vice, as this imports. It is a
Collection of the Guilt of a long and numerous Train of Villainies, the
Compendium and Summ-Total of several particular Impieties, all united and cast
up into one. It is (as it were) the very Quintessence, and Sublimation of Vice,
by which (as in the Spirit of Liquors) the Malignity of many Actions is
contracted into a little compass, but with a greater advantage of strength and
force, by such a Contraction.

In a word, it is the Wickedness of a whole Life, discharging all its filth and
foulness into this one Quality, as into a great Sink, or Common Shore. So that
nothing is, or can be, so properly and significantly called the very Sinfulness
of Sin, as this. And therefore no wonder, if containing so many years guilt in
the Bowels of it, it stands here stigmatized by the Apostle, as a Temper of
Mind, rendering Men so detestably bad, that the Great Enemy of Mankind, the
Devil himself neither can, nor desires to make them worse. I cannot, I need not
say any more of it. It is indeed a Condition, not to be thought of (by Persons
serious enough to think and consider) without the utmost Horror. But such as
truly fear God, shall both be kept from it, and from those Sins that lead to it.

To which God, infinitely Wise, Holy and Just, be rendered and ascribed, as is
most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore.
Amen.

The Second SERMON PREACHED Upon Romans I. 32.
ROMANS I. 32. Who knowing the judgment of God, (that they which commit such
things are worthy of Death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them,
that do them.
THE Sense of these Words I show, in the preceding Discourse, fell Naturally
into this one Proposition: Viz.

That the Guilt arising from a Man's delighting, or taking pleasure in other
men's Sins, or, (which is all one) in other men for their Sins, is greater than
he can possibly contract by a Commission of the same Sins in his own Person.

The Prosecution of which, I stated upon these Three things.

First, To show what it is that brings a man to such a Disposition of Mind, as
to take pleasure in other men's Sins. Secondly, To show the Reasons why a man's
being disposed to do so, comes to be attended with such an extraordinary Guilt.

Thirdly, and Lastly, To declare what kind of Persons are to be reckoned under
this Character.

The Two first of which being dispatched already, I proceed now to the Third
and Last. Concerning which, I shall lay down this general Assertion; That
whosoever draws others to Sin, ought to be looked upon, as one delighting in
those Sins, that he draws them to. For as much, as no man is brought to do any
thing, especially if it be ill, or wicked, but in order to the pleasing of
himself by it: It being absurd and incredible, that any one should venture to
damn himself hereafter, for that, which does not some way or other gratify and
please him here. But to draw forth this General into Particulars.

1. First of all: Those are to be accounted to take pleasure in other men's
Sins, who teach Doctrines, directly tending to engage such, as believe them in
a sinful Course. For, there is none so compendious and efficacious a way to
prepare a man for all Sin, as this: This being properly to put out the Eyes of
that which is to be his Guide, by perverting his Judgment; and when that is
once done, you may carry him whither you will. Chance must be his Rule, and
present Appetite his Director. A man's Judgment, or Conscience, is the great
Spring of all his Actions; and consequently, to corrupt or pervert this, is to
derive a Contagion upon all that he does. And therefore, we see, how high a
Guilt our Savior charges upon this; in Matthew. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one
of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven: That is, in Truth shall never come thither. And we
find, the great Sin of the Pharisees was, that they promoted and abetted the
Sins of other Men, taught the Devil's Doctrine out of Moses's Chair, and by
false Descants upon the Divine Precepts, cut asunder the binding force of them.
So that, according to their wretched Comments, Men might break the Law, and yet
never sin against it. For, in Matthew. 15. 5, 6. they had taught Men how to
dishonor their Parents, without any Violation of the Fifth Commandment. Thus
they preached: And what design can any one imagine the Authors of such
Doctrines could have, but the Depravation of men's Manners! For, if some Men
teach wicked Things, it must be, that others should practice them. And, if one
Man sets another a Copy, it is, no doubt, with a purpose, that he should write
after it.

Now these Doctrines are of Two sorts.

1. Such as represent Actions, that are in themselves really wicked, and
sinful, as not so.

2. Such as represent them much less sinful as to their kind or degrees, than
indeed they are.

For the first of which; To instance in one very gross one, instead of many,
take the Doctrine of those, commonly called Antinomians, who assert positively,
That Believers, or Persons regenerate, and within the Covenant of Grace, cannot
Sin. Upon which account, no wonder, if some very liberally assume to themselves
the Condition and Character of Believers; for then they know, that other mighty
Privilege belongs to them of course. But what? may not these Believers Cheat
and Lie, commit Adultery, Steal, Murder, and Rebel? Why, yes: they may; and
nothing is more common, than to see such Believers do such things. But how
then, can they escape the Charge of all that Guilt, that Naturally follows from
such Enormities? Why, thus; you must in this case with great Care and Accuracy
distinguish between the Act of Lying, and the Sin of Lying; the Act of
Stealing, and the Sin of Stealing; and the Act of Rebellion, and the Sin of
Rebellion. Now, though all these Acts are frequent and usual with such persons,
yet they are sure (as they order the matter) never to be guilty of the Sin. And
the Reason is, because it is not the Quality of the Action that derives a
Qualification upon the Person, so as to render him such or such, good or bad;
but it is the Antecedent Quality or Condition of the Person that denominates
his Actions, and stamps them Good or Evil. So that they are those only who are
first wicked, that do wicked Actions. But Believers, and the Godly, though
they do the very same things, yet they so much out-wit the Devil, in the doing
of them, that they never commit the same Sins. But, you will say, how came they
by such a great, and strange Privilege? Why; they will tell you, it is, because
they are not under the obliging Power of the Law. And if you ask further; How
they come to get from under that common Obligation that lies so hard and heavy
upon all the rest of the World? They will tell you, it is from this, That
Believers, instead of the Law, have the Spirit actually dwelling in them, and
by an admirable kind of invisible Clock-work moving them, just as a Spring does
a Watch; and that immediately by himself alone, without the Mediation of any
written Law, or Rule, to guide, or direct, and much less to command, or oblige
them. So that the Spirit, we see, is to be their sole Director without, and
very often contrary to the written Law. An excellent Contrivance, doubtless, to
authorize and sanctify the blackest, and most flagitious Actions, that can
proceed from Man. For, since the Motions of the Spirit (which they so
confidently suppose themselves to have) cannot so much as in things Good and
Lawful, by any certain Diagnostick, be distinguished from the Motions of a
Man's own Heart, they very easily make a step further, and even in things
unlawful, conclude the Motions of their own Hearts to be the Impulse of the
Spirit; and this presently alters the whole Complexion of an Action, that would
otherwise look but very scurvily; and makes it absolutely pure, and
unblameable, or rather perfect and meritorious. So that, let a Man have but
Impudence, and Wickedness enough to Libel his Maker, and to entitle the Spirit
of God to all that he does, or desires, Sur-naming his own Inclinations and
Appetites (though never so irregular and impure) the Holy Ghost; and you may,
upon very sure grounds, turn him loose, and bid him Sin if he can. And thus
much for the first sort of Doctrines, which once believed, like the Floud-gates
of Hell pulled up, lets in a Deluge and Inundation of all Sin and Vice upon the
Lives of Men. And if this be the Natural effect of the Doctrines themselves, we
cannot, in all reason, but infer, that the Interest of the Teachers of them
must needs be agreeable.

2. The other sort of Doctrines, tending to engage such as believe them in a
sinful Course, are such as represent many Sins, much less as to their Kind or
Degree, than indeed they are. Of which Number is that Doctrine, that asserts
all Sins committed by Believers, or Persons in a state of Grace, to be but
Infirmities. That there are such things as Sins of Infirmity, in
Contra-distinction to those of a Presumption, is a Truth not to be questioned;
but in Hypothesi, to state exactly which are Sins of Infirmity, and which are
not, is not so easy a work. This is certain, that there is a vast difference
between them; indeed, as vast as between Inadvertency, and Deliberation,
between Surprise and Set-purpose: And that Persons truly regenerate have sinned
this latter way, and consequently may sin so again, is as evident as the Story
(already referred to by us) of David's Murder and Adultery. Sins acted not
only with deliberation, but with artifice, study, and deep contrivance. And,
can Sins, that carry such dismal Marks, and black Symptoms upon them, pass for
Infirmities? For Sins of daily Incursion, and such as humane Frailty, and the
very Condition of our Nature in this World; is so unavoidably liable to, (for
so are Sins of Infirmity) that a Righteous Man may fall into them seven times
in a day; and yet, according to the merciful Tenor of the Covenant of Grace,
stand accepted before God as a Righteous Man still? No, certainly, if such are
Infirmities, it will be hard to assign what are Presumptions. And what a
Sin-encouraging Doctrine that is, that avouches them for such, is sufficiently
manifest from hence, That, although every Sin of Infirmity, in its own Nature,
and according to the strict Rigor of the Law, merits Eternal Death; yet it is
certain from the Gospel, that no man shall actually suffer Eternal Death barely
for Sins of Infirmity. Which being so, persuade but a man that a Regenerate
person may Cheat and Lie, Steal, Murder and Rebel, by way of Infirmity, and at
the same time, you persuade him also, that he may do all this without any
danger of Damnation. And then, since these are oftentimes such desirable
Privileges to Flesh and Blood; and since withal, every Man by Nature is so
very prone to think the best of himself, and of his own Condition; it is odds,
but he will find a shrewd Temptation to believe himself Regenerate, rather than
forbear a pleasurable, or a profitable Sin, by thinking that he shall go to
Hell for committing it. Now this being such a direct Manuduction to all kind of
Sin, by abusing the Conscience with under-valuing Persuasions, concerning the
Malignity and Guilt even of the foulest; it is evident, that such as teach and
promote the belief of such Doctrines, are to be looked upon as the Devil's
Prophets and Apostles; and there is no doubt, but the guilt of every Sin, that
either from Pulpit, or from Press, they influence Men to the Commission of,
does as certainly rest upon them, and will one day be as severely exacted of
them, as if they had actually and personally committed it themselves.

And thus I have instanced in two notable Doctrines, that may justly be looked
upon as the General In-letts, or Two great Gates, through which all Vice and
Villainy rush in upon the Manners of Men professing Religion. But the
Particulars, into which these Generals diffuse themselves, you may look for,
and find in those well-furnished Magazines and Storehouses of all Immorality
and Baseness, the Books and Writings of some Modern Casuists; who, like the
Devil's Amanuenses, and Secretaries to the Prince of Darkness, have published
to the World, such Notions and Intrigues of Sin, out of his Cabinet, as neither
the Wit, or Wickedness of Man, upon the bare natural Stock either of Invention
or Corruption, could ever have found out.

The Writings, both of the Old and New Testament, make it very difficult for a
Man to be saved; but the Writings of these Men make it more difficult, if not
impossible, for any one to be Damned: For, where there is no Sin, there can be
no Damnation. And, as these Men have obscured and confounded the Natures and
Properties of things by their false Principles, and wretched Sophistry, though
an Act be never so sinful, they will be sure to strip it of its Guilt; and to
make the very Law and Rule of Action so pliable and bending, that it shall be
impossible to be broke. So that he, who goes to Hell, must pass through a
narrower Gate than that, which the Gospel says, leads to Heaven. For that, we
are told, is only strait, but this is absolutely shut; and so shut, that Sin
cannot pass it, and therefore it is much if a Sinner should.

So insufferably have these Impostors poisoned the Fountains of Morality,
perverted and embased the very Standard and distinguishing Rule of Good and
Evil. So that all their Books and Writings are but Debauchery upon Record, and
Impiety registered and consigned over to Posterity.

In every Volumn there is a Nursery and Plantation of Vice, where it is sure to
thrive, and from thence to be transplanted into men's Practice. For, here it is
manured with Art and Argument, sheltred with Fallacy and Distinction, and
thereby enabled both to annoy others, and to defend it self.

And to show how far the Malignity of this way of Sinning reaches; He, who has
vented a pernicious Doctrine, or published an ill Book, must know, that his
Guilt, and his Life, determine not together: No, such an one (as the Apostle
says) being dead, yet speaks; He sins in his very Grave, corrupts others,
while he is rotting himself, and has a growing Account in the other World,
after he has paid Nature's last Debt in this; And, in a word, quits this Life
like a Man carried off by the Plague; who, though he dies himself, yet does
Execution upon others by a surviving Infection.

2. Such also are to be reckoned to take pleasure in other men's Sins, as
endeavor, by all means, to allure Men to Sin; And that either by formal
Persuasion, Importunity, or Desire, as we find the Harlot described, enticing
the Young man, in Prove. 7. from ver. 13. to 22. Or else by administering Objects
and Occasions fit to inflame and draw forth a man's corrupt Affections; such as
are the Drinking of a choleric, or revengefull Person into a fit of Rage and
Violence against the Person of his Neighbor; thus heating one man's Blood, in
order to the shedding of another's. Such also, as the provoking of a lustful,
incontinent Person, by filthy Discourse, wanton Books, and Pictures, and, that
which equals, and exceeds them all, the Incentives of the Stage; till a man's
Vice and Folly works over all Bounds, and grows at length too mad, and
out-ragious, to be either governed or concealed.

Now, with great variety of such kind of T^^ders for Hell, as these, has the
Nati^^ of late years abounded. Wretches who live upon the Shark, and other
men's Sins, the common Poysoners of Youth, equally desperate in their Fortunes,
and their Manners, and getting their very Bread by the Damnation of Souls. So
that if any inexperienced, young Novice, happens into the fatal Neighborhood
of such Pests, presently they are upon him, plying his full Purse and his empty
Pate with Addresses suitable to his Vanity; telling him, What pity it is, that
one so accomplished for Parts and Person, should smother himself in the
Country, where he can learn nothing of Gallantry, or Behavior; as, how to make
his Court, to hector a Drawer, to cog the Dye, or storm a Whore-house; but must
of Necessity live and dye ignorant of what it is to Trapan, or be Trapann'd, to
Sup, or rather Dine at Midnight in a Tavern, with the Noise of Oaths,
Blasphemies, and Fiddlers about his Ears, and to fight every Watch and Constable
at his return from thence, and to be beaten by them: But must at length, poor
Man! dye dully of Old age at home; when here he might so fashionably and
gentilely, long before that time, have been Duell'd, or Flux'd into another
World.

If this be not the guise and practice of the Times, especially as to the
Principal Cities of the Kingdom, let any one judge; and whether for such a
poor, deluded Wretch, instead of growing Rusty in the Country, (as some call
it) to be thus brought by a Company of Indigent, Debauched,
Soul-and-Body-destroying Harpies, to lose his Estate, Family, and Virtue,
amongst them in the City, be not a much greater Violation of the public Weal
and Justice of any Government, than most of those Crimes, that bring the
Committers of them to the Gallows, we may at present easily see, and one day
perhaps sadly feel.

Nor is this Trade of Corrupting the young Gentry, and Nobility, and seasoning
them with the Vices of the Great Town, as soon as they set foot into it,
carried on secretly, and in a corner, but openly, and in the face of the Sun;
by persons, who have formed themselves into Companies, or rather Corporations.
So that a Man may as easily know where to find one, to teach him to Debauch,
Whore, Game, and Blaspheme, as to teach him to Write, or Cast Account: It Is
their Support, and Business; nay, their very Profession, and Livelihood;
getting their Living by those Practices, for which they deserve to forfeit
their Lives.

Now these are another sort of Men, who are justly charged with the Guilt and
Character of delighting in other men's Sins: Men, who are the Devil's Setters;
who contrive, study, and beat their Brains how to draw in some poor, innocent,
unguarded Heir into their Hellish Net, learning his Humor, prying into his
Circumstances, and observing his Weak side; and all this to plant the Snare,
and apply the Temptation effectually, and successfully; and when by such
Insinuations they have once got with^^ him, and are able to drill him on from
one Lewdness to another, by the same Arts corrupting, and squeezing him as they
please; no wonder, if they rejoice to see him guilty of all sorts of Villainy,
and take pleasure in those Sins, in which they find their profit too.

3. Such as affect the Company of Infamous, and Vicious Persons, are also to be
reckoned in the Number of those who take pleasure in such men's Vices. For
otherwise, what is there in such Men, which they can pretend to be pleased
with! For generally such Sots have neither Parts, nor Wit, Ingenuity of
Discourse, nor Fineness of Conversation, to entertain, or delight any one, that
coming into their Company, brings but his Reason along with him. But, on the
contrary, their rude, impertinent Loudness, their Quarrels, their Nastiness,
their dull, obscene Talk, and Ribauldry, (which from them you must take for
Wit, or go without it,) cannot but be very nauseous, and offensive to any one,
who does not baulk his own Reason, out of love to their Vice; and, for the sake
of the Sin it self, pardon the Ugliness of its Circumstances: As a Father will
hug and embrace his beloved Son for all the dirt and foulness of his Clothes;
the dearness of the Person easily apologizing for the disagreeableness of the
Habit.

One would think it should be no easy matter to bring any Man of Sense to love
an Alehouse; indeed of so much sense, as seeing and smelling amounts to; there
being such strong Encounters of both, as would quickly send him packing, did
not the love of Good-fellowship reconcile him to these Nusances, and the Deity
he adored compound for the Homeliness of its Shrine.

It is clear therefore, that where a Man can like and love the Conversation of
lewd, debauched Persons, amidst all the Natural Grounds and Motives of Loathing
and Dislike; it can proceed from nothing but the inward Affection he bears to
their lewd, debauched Humor. It is this that he enjoys, and, for the sake of
this, the rest he endures.

4 ly. and Lastly, Such as encourage, countenance, and support Men in their
Sins, are to be reckoned in the Number of those, who take pleasure in other
men's Sins. Now this may be done Two ways.

First, By Commendation. Concerning which, we may take this for granted; That
no Man commends another any further than he likes him: For indeed to commend
any one, is to vouch him to the World, to undertake for his Worth, and, in a
word, to own the Thing which he is chiefly remarkable for. He who writes an
Encomium Neronis, if he does it heartily, is Himself but a Transcript of Nero
in his Mind; And would (no doubt) gladly enough see such Pranks, as he was
famous for, acted again, though he dares not be the Actor of them himself.

From whence we see the Reason of some men's giving such Honorable Names and
Appellations to the worst of Men and Actions, and base, reproachful Titles to
the best: Such as are calling Faction, and a spitting in their Prince's face,
Petitioning; Fanaticism, and Schism, True Protestantism; Sacrilege and Rapine,
Thorough Reformation, and the like. As, on the contrary, branding Conformity to
the Rules, and Rites of the best Church in the World, with the false and odious
Name of Formality; and traducing all Religious, Conscientious Observers of
them, as Mungrel Protestants, and Papists in Masquerade. And indeed, many are,
and have been, called Papists of late years, whom those very persons, who call
them so, know to be far from being so. But what then do they mean, by fixing
such false Characters upon men, even against their own Consciences? Why, they
mean and design this: They would set such a Mark upon those, whom they hate, as
may cause their Throats to be cut, and their Estates to be seized upon, when
the Rabble shall be let loose upon the Government once again; which such
beggarly, malicious Fellows impatiently hope, and long for.

Though, I doubt not, (how much soever Knaves may abuse Fools with Words for a
Time,) but there will come a Day, in which the most Active Papists will be
found under the Puritan Mask; and in which it will appear, that the Conventicle
has been the Jesuits safest Kennel, and the Papists themselves, as well as the
Fanatics, have been Managers of all those monstrous Outcries against Popery,
to the Ruin of those Protestants whom they most hate, and whom alone they
fear. It being no unheard of Trick for a Thief, when he is closely pursued, to
cry out, Stop the Thief, and thereby diverting the suspicion from himself, to
get clear away. It is also worth our while to consider with what Terms of
Respect and Commendation Knaves, and Sots will speak of their own Fraternity.
As, What an honest, what a worthy Man is such an one! And, What a Good-natured
Person is another! According to which Terms, such as are Factious, by worthy
Men, mean only such as are of the same Faction, and united in the same Designs
against the Government with themselves. And such as are Brothers of the Pot, by
a Good-natured Person, mean only a true, trusty Debauchee, who never stands out
at a Merry-meeting, so long as he is able to stand at all; nor ever refuses an
Health, while he has enough of his own to pledge it with; and, in a word, is as
honest, as Drunkenness and Debauchery, want of Sense and Reason, Virtue and
Sobriety, can possibly make Him.

2 ly. The other way by which some Men encourage others in their Sins, is by
Preferment. As, when Men shall be advanced to Places of Trust and Honor for
those Qualities, that render them unworthy of so much as sober, and civil
Company. When a Lord, or Master shall cast his Favors and Rewards upon such
Beasts and Blemishes of Society, as live only to the Dishonor of him who made
them, and the Reproach of him who maintains them. None certainly can love to
see Vice in Power, but such as love to see it also in Practice. Place and
Honor do of all things most mis-become it; and a Goat, or a Swine, in a Chair
of State, cannot be more odious, than ridiculous.

It is reported of Caesar, that passing through a certain Town, and seeing all
the Women of it standing at their Doors with Monkeys in their Arms, he asked,
whether the Women of that Country used to have any Children or no? thereby
wittily and sarcastically reproaching them, for misplacing that Affection upon
Brutes, which could only become a Mother to her Child. So, when we come into a
great Family, or Government, and see this Place of Honor allotted to a
Murderer, another filled with an Atheist, or Blasphemer, and a third with a
filthy Parasite, may we not as appositely, and properly ask the Question,
Whether there be any such thing as Virtue, Sobriety, or Religion amongst such a
People, with whom Vice wears those Rewards, Honors, and Privileges, which in
other Nations, the Common Judgment of Reason awards only to the Virtuous, the
Sober, and Religious? And certainly it is too flagrant a Demonstration, how
much Vice is the Darling of any People, when many amongst them are preferred
for those Practices, for which, in other places, they can scarce be pardoned.

And thus I have finished the Third and Last General thing proposed, for the
handling of the Words, which was, To show the several Sorts, or Kinds of Men,
which fall under the Charge and Character of taking pleasure in other Men's
Sins.

Now the Inferences from the foregoing Particulars shall be Twofold.

1. Such as concern particular Persons; And,

2. Such as concern Communities or Bodies of Men.

And first for the Malignity of such a disposition of Mind, as induces a Man to
delight in other men's Sins, with reference to the Effects of it upon
particular Persons. As,

1. It quite alters, and depraves the Natural Frame of a man's Heart. For,
there is that Naturally in the Heart of Man, which abhorrs Sin, as Sin; and
consequently, would make him detest it both in himself, and in others too. The
first, and most genuine Principles of Reason are certainly averse to it, and
find a secret Grief and Remorse from every invasion, that Sin makes upon a
man's Innocence; and that must needs render the first Entrance and Admission of
Sin uneasy, because disagreeable. Yet Time (we see) and Custom of Sinning can
bring a man to such a pass, that it shall be more difficult and grievous to
him, to part with his Sin, than ever it was to him, to admit it. It shall get
so far into, and lodge it self so deep within his Heart, that it shall be his
Business, and his Recreation, his Companion, and his other Self; and the very
dividing between his Flesh, and his Bones; or rather, between his Body and his
Soul, shall be less terrible and afflictive to him, than to be took off from
his Vice.

Nevertheless, as Unnatural as this Effect of Sin is, there is one yet more so:
For, that innate Principle of Self-love, that very easily, and often blinds a
Man, as to any impartial Reflection upon himself; yet, for the most part,
leaves his Eyes open enough, to judge truly of the same thing in his Neighbor,
and to hate that in others, which he allows and cherishes in himself. And
therefore, when it shall come to this, that he also approves, embraces, and
delights in Sin, as he observes it, even in the Person and Practice of other
Men: this shows, that the Man is wholly transformed from the Creature, that God
first made him; nay, that he has consumed those poor Remainders of Good that
the Sin of Adam left him; that he has worn off the very remote Dispositions,
and Possibilities to Virtue, and, in a word, turned Grace first, and afterward
Nature it self out of Doors. No man knows, at his first Entrance upon any Sin,
how far it may carry him, and where it will stop; the Commission of Sin being
generally like the pouring out of Water, which, when once poured out, knows no
other Bounds, but to run as far as it can.

2 ly. A second Effect of this Disposition of Mind, is, that it peculiarly
indisposes a man to repent and recover himself from it. For the first step to
Repentance is a man's dislike of his Sin* And how can we expect that a man
should conceive any through dislike of that, which has took such an absolute
possession of his Heart and Affections, that he likes and loves it, not only in
his own Practice, but also in other men's? Nay, that he is pleased with it,
though he is past the Practice of it. Such a Temper of Mind, is a downright
Contradiction to Repentance; as being founded in the Destruction of those
Qualities, which are the only Dispositions and Preparatives to it. For, that
Natural Tenderness of Conscience, which must first create in the Soul a Sense
of Sin, and from thence produce a Sorrow for it, and at length cause a
Relinquishment of it, That, I say, (we have already shown) is took away by a
customary, repeated Course of Sinning against Conscience: So that the very
first Foundation of Virtue, which is the Natural Power of distinguishing
between the Moral Good and Evil of any Action, is, in effect, plucked up and
destroyed, And, the Spirit of God finds nothing in the Heart of such an one, to
apply the Means of Grace to. All Taste, Relish, and Discernment of the
Sutableness of Virtue, and the Unsutableness of Vice, being utterly gone from
it.

And, as this is a direct Bar to that part of Repentance, which looks back
with Sorrow and Indignation upon what is past; so is it equally such, to that
greater part of Repentance, which is to look forward, and to prevent Sin for
the future. For, this properly delivers a man up to Sin; for as much as it
leaves his Heart destitute of all those Principles, which should resist it. So
that such an one must be as bad, as the Devil will have him, and can be no
better, than the Devil will let him. In both he must submit to his Measures.
And what is this but a kind of Entrance into, or rather an Anticipation of
Hell? What is it, but Judgment and Damnation already begun? For a man in such a
case, is as sure of it, as if he were actually in the Flames.

3 ly. A third Effect of this Disposition of Mind, (which also naturally
follows from the former) is, that the longer a man lives, the wickeder he
grows, and his last days are certainly his worst. It has been observed, that to
delight in other men's Sins, was most properly the Vice of Old Age; and we
shall also find, that it may be as truly and properly called the Old Age of
Vice. For, as first, Old Age necessarily implies a man's having lived so many
years, before it comes upon him; and withal, this sort of Viciousness supposes
the precedent Commission of many Sins, by which a man arrives to it; so it has
this further property of Old Age: That, as when a man comes once to be Old, he
never retreats, but still goes on, and grows every day older and older; So when
a man comes once to such a degree of Wickedness, as to delight in the
Wickedness of other men, it is more than ten thousand to one odds, if he ever
returns to a better mind, but grows every day worse and worse. For, he has
nothing else to take up his Thoughts, and nothing to entertain his Desires
with; which, by a long Estrangement from better things, come at length
perfectly to loath, and fly off from them.

A notable instance of which we have in Tiberius Caesar, who was bad enough in
his Youth, but superlatively and monstrously so in his Old Age: And the Reason
of this was, Because he took a particular pleasure in seeing other Men do vile
and odious things. So that all his Diversion at his Beloved Capreae, was to be
a Spectator of the Devil's Actors, representing the worst of Vices upon that
Infamous Stage.

And therefore let not Men flatter themselves, (as, no doubt, some do,) that
though they find it difficult at present to combat and stand out against an ill
Practice, and upon that account give way to a Continuance in it; yet that Old
Age shall do that for them, which they in their Youth could never find in
their heart to do for themselves; I say, let not such persons mock and abuse
themselves with such false and absurd Presumptions. For, they must know, that
an Habit may continue, when it is no longer able to Act; or rather the Elicit,
Internal Acts of it may be quick and vigorous, when the External, Imperate Acts
of the same Habit utterly cease: And let Men but reflect upon their own
Observation, and consider impartially with themselves, how few in the World
they have known made better by Age. Generally they will see, that such leave
not their Vice, but their Vice leaves them; or rather retreats from their
Practices, and retires into their Fancy; and that, we know, is boundless and
infinire: And when Vice has once settled it self there, it finds a vaster and a
wider Compass to Act in, than ever it had before. I scarce know any thing that
calls for a more serious Consideration from us, than this: For still Men are
apt to persuade themselves, that they shall find it an easy matter to grow
Virtuous, as they grow Old. But it is a way of Arguing highly irrational, and
fallacious. For this is a Maxim of Eternal Truth; That nothing grows weak with
Age, but that which will at length die with Age; which Sin never does. The
longer a Blot continues, the deeper it sinks. And it will be found a Work of no
small difficulty to dispossess and throw out a Vice from that Heart, where long
Possession begins to plead Prescription. It is Naturally impossible for an Old
Man to grow Young again; and, it is next to Impossible, for a decrepit, aged
Sinner to become a new Creature, and be born again.

4 ly. and Lastly, We need no other Argument of the Malign Effects of this
Disposition of Mind, than this one Consideration; That many perish Eternally,
who never arrived to such a pitch of Wickedness, as to take any pleasure in, or
indeed to be at all concerned about the Sins of other Men. But they perish in
the pursuit of their own Lusts, and the Obedience they personally yield to
their own sinful Appetites: And that, questionless, very often not without a
considerable mixture of inward dislike of themselves for what they do: Yet for
all that, their Sin (we see) proving too hard for them, the over-powering
Stream carries them away, and down they sink into the Bottomless Pit, though
under the Weight of a guilt, by vast degrees inferior to that which we have
been discoursing of. For, doubtless many Men are finally lost, who yet have no
men's Sins to answer for, but their own: Who never enticed, nor perverted
others to Sin, and much less applauded, or encouraged them in their Sin: but
only being Slaves to their own corrupt Affections, have lived and died under
the killing Power of them; and so passed to a sad Eternity.

But that other devilish way of Sinning, hitherto spoken of, is so far beyond
this, that this is a kind of Innocence, or rather a kind of Charity, compared
to it. For this is a solitary, single, that a complicated, multiplied Guilt.
And indeed, if we consider, at what a rate some Men sin nowadays; that Man
sins charitably, who Damns no body but himself. But the other sort of Sinners,
who may properly enough be said to people Hell, and, in a very ill sense, to
bear the Sins of many; as they have a Guilt made up of many Guilts, so what can
they reasonably expect, but a Damnation equivalent to many Damnations?

And thus much for the first General Inference, from the foregoing Discourse,
showing the Malignity of such a Disposition of Mind, as induces a Man to
delight in other men's Sins, with reference to particular Persons.

2 ly. The Other Inference shall be with ference to Communities, or Bodies of
Men; and so such a Disposition has a most direct and efficacious Influence to
propagate, multiply, and spread the Practice of any Sin, till it becomes
General, and National. For this is most certain, that some men's taking
pleasure in other men's Sins, will cause many Men to sin, to do them a
pleasure; and this will appear upon these three Accounts. 1. That it is seldom
or never that any Man comes to such a Degree of Impiety, as to take pleasure in
other men's Sins, but he also shows the World by his Actions, and Behavior,
that he does so. 2. That there are few Men in the World so inconsiderable, but
there are some, or other, who have an Interest to serve by them. And, 3 ly.
That the Natural Course that one Man takes to serve his Interest by another,
is, by applying himself to him in such a way, as may most gratify and delight
him.

Now from these Three things put together, it is not only easy, but necessary
to infer, That since the Generality of Men are wholly acted by their present
Interest, if they find those, who can best serve them in this their Interest,
most likely also to be gained over so to do by the sinful and vile Practices
of those who address to them; no doubt, such Practices shall be pursued by such
Persons, in order to the Compassing their desired Ends. Where Greatness takes
no delight in Goodness, we may be sure, there shall be but little Goodness seen
in the Lives of those, who have an Interest to serve by such an one's
Greatness. For, take any Illustrious, potent Sinner, whose Power is wholly
employed to serve his Pleasure, and whose chief Pleasure is to see others as
bad and wicked as himself; and there is no question, but in a little time, he
will also make them so; and his Dependants shall quickly become his Proselytes.
They shall Sacrifice their Virtue to his Humor, spend their Credit and Good
name, nay, and their very Souls too, to serve him; and that by the worst, and
basest of Services, which is, by making themselves like Him. It is but too
notorious, how long Vice has reigned, or rather raged amongst us; and with what
a bare face, and a brazen forehead, it walks about the Nation (as it were)
Elato Capite, and looking down with Scorn upon Virtue, as a contemptible and a
mean thing. Vice could not come to this pitch by chance. But we have sinned a
pace; and at an higher strain of Villainy, than the Fopps our Ancestors (as
some are pleased to call them) could ever arrive to. So that we daily see
Maturity and Age in Vice joined with Youth, and Greenness of Years. A manifest
Argument, no doubt, of the great Docility and Pregnancy of Parts, that is, in
the present Age, above all the former.

For, in respect of Vice, nothing is more usual nowadays, than for Boys
illico nasci Senes. They see their Betters delight in ill things; they observe
Reputation, and Countenance to attend the Practice of them; and this carries
them on furiously to that, which, of themselves, they are but too much inclined
to; and which Laws were purposely made by Wise men to keep them from. They are
glad, you may be sure, to please and prefer themselves at once, and to serve
their Interest and their Sensuality together.

And, as they are come to this Height and Rampancy of Vice, in a great measure,
from the Countenance of their Betters and Superiors; so they have took some
steps higher in the same from this, That the Follies and Extravagances of the
Young, too frequently carry with them the Suffrage and Approbation of the Old.
For Age, which naturally and unavoidably is but one Remove from Death, and
consequently should have nothing about it, but what looks like a decent
Preparation for it, scarce ever appears of late days, but in the high Mode, the
flaunting Garb, and utmost Gaudery of Youth; with Clothes as ridiculously, and
as much in the fashion, as the person that wears them is usually grown out of
it. The Eldest equal the Youngest in the Vanity of their Dress, and no other
Reason can be given of it, but that they equal, if not surpass them in the
Vanity of their Desires. So that those who by the Majesty and (as I may so say)
the Prerogative of their Age, should even frown Youth into Sobriety, and better
Manners, are now striving all they can, to imitate and strike in with them, and
to be really vicious, that they may be thought to be young.

The sad and apparent Truth of which, makes it very superfluous to enquire
after any further Cause of that monstrous Increase of Vice, that, like a
Torrent, or rather a breaking in of the Sea upon us, has of late years
over-flowed, and victoriously carried all before it. Both the Honorable, and
the Aged, have contributed all they could to the promotion of it; and, so far
as they are able, to give the best Color to the worst of things. This they
have endeavored, and thus much they have effected, That Men now see, that Vice
makes them acceptable to those, who are able to make them considerable. It is
the Key that lets them into their very Heart, and enables them to command all
that is there. And if this be the Price of Favor, and the Market of Honor, no
doubt, where the Trade is so quick, and withal so certain, Multitudes will be
sure to follow it.

This is too manifestly our present Case. All Men see it; and wise and good Men
lament it: And, where Vice pushed on with such mighty Advantages, will stop its
progress, it is hard to judge: It is certainly above all humane Remedies to
control the prevailing Course of it; unless the great Governor of the World,
who quells the Rage and Swelling of the Sea, and sets Bars and Doors to it,
beyond which the proudest of its Waves cannot pass, shall, in his infinite
Compassion to us, do the same to that Ocean of Vice, which now swells, and
roars, and lifts up it self above all Banks and Bounds of humane Laws; and so,
by his Omnipotent Word, reducing its Power, and abasing its Pride, shall at
length say to it, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further. Which God in his
good time effect.

To whom be rendered and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty,
and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.

Natural Religion, WITHOUT REVELATION, SHOWN Only sufficient to render a Sinner
inexcusable. IN A SERMON PREACHED On ROMANS I. 20. Before the UNIVERSITY AT
Christ-Church, Oxon, On November. 2. 1690.
ROMANS I. 20. latter Part. -- So that they are without excuse.
THis excellent Epistle, though, in the Front of it, it bears a Particular
Inscription, yet, in the Drift and Purpose of it, is Universal; as designing to
convince all Mankind (whom it supposes in pursuit of True Happiness) of the
Necessity of seeking for it in the Gospel, and the Impossibility of finding it
elsewhere. All, without the Church, at that time, were comprehended under the
Division of Jews and Gentiles, called here by the Apostle Greeks; the Nobler,
and more Noted part being used for the whole. Accordingly, from the 2d.
Chapter, down along, he Addresses himself to the Jews, showing the
Insufficiency of their Law to justify, or make them happy, how much soever
they doated upon it. But here, in this first Chapter, he deals with the Greeks,
or Gentiles, who sought for, and promised themselves the same Happiness from
the Dictates of Right Reason, which the Jews did from the Mosaic Law. Where,
after he had took an account of what their bare Reason had taught them in the
Things of God, and compared the Super-structure with the Foundation, their
Practice with their Knowledge, he finds them so far from arriving at the
Happiness, which they aspired to by this means, that upon a full survey of the
whole matter, the Result of all comes to this sad, and deplorable Issue, That
they were sinful, and miserable, and that without excuse. In the Words, taken
with the Coherence of the precedent, and subsequent Verses, we have these Four
Things considerable.

I. The Sin here followed upon a certain sort of Men, with this so severe a
Judgment; namely, That knowing God, they did not glorify him as God, ver. 21.

II. The Persons guilty of this Sin; They were such as professed themselves
Wise, ver. 22.

III. The Cause, or Reason of their falling into this Sin; which was their
holding the Truth in Unrighteousness, ver. 18. And,

IV. and Lastly, The Judgment, or rather the State, and Condition penally
consequent upon these Sinners; namely, That they were without excuse, ver. 20.

Of each of which in their Order: And first, for the first of them.

The Sin here followed with so severe a Judgment, and so highly aggravated, and
condemned by the Apostle, is, by the united Testimony of most Divines upon this
place, the Sin of Idolatry: Which the Apostle affirms to consist in this; That
the Gentiles glorified not God, as God. Which General Charge he also draws
forth into Particulars; As, That they changed his Glory into the Similitude and
Images of Men, and Beasts, and Birds; where, by Glory, he means God's Worship,
to wit, that, by which Men glorify him, and not the Essential Glory of his
Nature; it being such a Glory, as was in Men's power to change, and to debase;
and therefore must needs consist, either in those Actions, or those Means,
which they performed the Divine Worship by. I know no place, from which we may
more clearly gather, what the Scripture accounts Idolatry, than from this
Chapter. From whence, that I may represent to you, what Idolatry is, and
wherein one sort of it (at least) does consist, you may observe, that the
Persons, who are here charged with it, are positively affirmed to have known,
and acknowledged the True God. For, it is said of them, that they knew his
Eternal Power, and Godhead, in this 20th. Verse; nay, and they worshipped him
too. From whence this undeniably, and invincibly follows, That they did not
look upon those Images, which they addressed to, as Gods, nor as Things, in
which the Divine Nature did, or could enclose it self; nor, consequently, to
which they gave, or ultimately designed their Religious Worship. This
Conclusion therefore I infer, and assert; That Idolatry is not only an
Accounting, or Worshipping that for God, which is not God, but it is also a
Worshipping the True God, in a way wholly unsuitable to his Nature; and
particularly, by the Mediation of Images, and Corporeal Resemblances of Him.
This is Idolatry: For the Persons here spoken of, pretended to glorify the
true God, but they did not glorify him, as God, and upon that account stand
arraigned for Idolaters. Common Sense, and Experience, will, and must evince
the Truth of this. For, can any one imagine, that Men of Reason, who had their
Senses quick, and their Wits and Discourse entire, could take that Image, or
Statue, which they fell down before, to be a God? Could they think that to be
Infinite and Immense, the Ubiquity of which they could thrust into a corner of
their Closet? Or, could they conceive that to be Eternal, which, a few days
before, they had seen a Log, or a Rude Trunk, and perhaps the other piece of it
a Joyntstool in the Workman's Shop?

The Ground, and Reason of all Worship, is an Opinion of Power, and Will in the
Person worshipped, to answer and supply our Desires; which he cannot possibly
do, unless he first apprehend them. But, can any Man, who is Master of Sense
himself, believe the Rational Heathens so void of it, as to think, that those
Images could fulfill the Petitions, which they could not hear, pity the Wants
they could not see, do all Things, when they could not stir an hand, or a
foot? It Is impossible they should; but it is also certain, that they were
Idolaters.

And, therefore it is clear, that their Idolatry consisted in something else,
and the History of it would demonstrate so much, were it proper to turn a
Sermon into an History. So that we see here, that the Sin condemned in the
Text, was the Worshipping of the True God by Images. For the Defense of which,
there is no doubt, but they might have pleaded, and did plead for those Images,
that they used them not as Objects, but only as Means, and Instruments of
Divine Worship, not as what they worshipped, but as that, by which they
directed their Worship to God. Though still, methinks, it is something hard to
conceive, that none of the Worship should fall upon the Image, by the way, or
that the Water can be conveyed into the Sea, without so much as wetting the
Channel through which it passes. But however you see, it requires a very
distinguishing Head, and an even Hand, and no small Skill in directing the
Intention, to carry a Prayer quite through to its Journey's end: Though, after
all, the Mischief of it is, that the Distinction, which looks so fine in the
Theory, generally miscarries in the Practice; especially where the Ignorant
Vulgar are the Practicers, who are the worst in the World at distinguishing,
but yet make far the greatest part of Mankind, and are as much concerned, and
obliged to pray, as the wisest, and the best; but withal, infinitely unhappy,
if they cannot perform a Necessary Duty, without School-distinctions, nor beg
their daily Bread without Metaphysics. And thus much for the first Thing
proposed; namely, the Sin here spoken against by the Apostle in the Text; which
was Idolatry.

2. The second is the Persons charged with this Sin. And they were not the
Gnostics, as some whimsically imagine, who can never meet with the Words
(...), or (...), but presently the Gnostics must be drawn in by Head and
Shoulders; But the Persons here meant, were plainly and manifestly the Old
Heathen Philosophers; such as not only in the Apostles, but also in their own
phrase, professed themselves to be wise. Their great Title was (...), and the
word of Applause still given to their Lectures, was (...). And Pythagoras was
the first, who abated of the Invidiousness of the Name, and from (...), brought
it down to (...), from a Master, to a Lover of Wisdom, from a Professor, to a
Candidate.

These were the Men here intended by St. Paul; Men famous in their respective
Ages; the great Favorites of Nature, and the Top, and Masterpiece of Art;
Men, whose aspiring Intellectuals had raised them above the Common Level, and
made them higher by the Head than the World round about them. Men of a Polite
Reason, and a Notion refined, and enlarged by Meditation. Such, as with all
these Advantages of Parts and Study, had been toiling, and plodding many years,
to out-wit and deceive themselves; sat up many Nights, and spent many Days to
impose a Fallacy upon their Reason; and, in a word, ran the Round of all the
Arts and Sciences to arrive at length at a glorious and elaborate Folly; even
these, I say, these Grandees, and Giants in Knowledge, who thus looked down (as
it were) upon the rest of Mankind, and laughed at all besides themselves, as
Barbarous and Insignificant, (as quick and sagacious, as they were, to look
into the little Intrigues of Matter and Motion, which a Man might Salva
Suentia, or at least, Salva anima ignorare,) yet blunder'd, and stumbl'd about
their grand and principal Concern, the knowledge of their Duty to God, sinking
into the meanest and most ridiculous Instances of Idolatry; even so far, as to
Worship the great God under the form of Beasts, and creeping things; to adore
Eternity, and Immensity in a Brute, or a Plant, or some viler thing; bowing
down, in their Adoration, to such Things, as they would scarce otherwise have
bowed down to take up. Nay, and to rear Temples, and make Altars to Fear, Lust,
and Revenge; there being scarce a corrupt Passion of the Mind, or a Distemper
of the Body, but what they Worshipped. So that it could not be expected, that
they should ever repent of those Sins, which they thought fit to Deifie, nor
Mortify those corrupt Affections, to which they ascribed a kind of Divinity,
and Immortality. By all which, they fell into a greater Absurdity in Matter of
Practice, than ever any one of them did, in Point of Opinion, (which yet
certainly was very hard,) namely, That having confessed a God, and allowed him
the Perfections of a God, to wit, an Infinite Power, and an Eternal Godhead,
they yet denied him the Worship of God: Thus reversing the Great Truths, they
had subscribed to in Speculation, by a brutish, senseless Devotion, managed with
a greater Prostration of Reason, than of Body.

Had the poor, vulgar Rout only, who were held under the Prejudices, and
Prepossessions of Education, been abused, into such Idolatrous Superstitions,
as to adore a Marble, or a Golden Deity, it might have been detested indeed, or
pitied, but not so much to be wondered at: But for the Stoa, the Academy, or
the Peripaton to own such a Paradox; for an Aristotle, or a Plato to think
their (...), their Eternal Mind, or Universal Spirit, to be found in, or served
by the Images of four-footed Beasts; For the Stagirite to recognize his Gods in
his own Book de Animalibus; This (as the Apostle says) was without excuse: And
how will these Men answer for their Sins, who stand thus Condemned for their
Devotions? And thus from the Persons here charged by the Apostle with the Sin
of Idolatry, pass we now to the

3d. Thing proposed; namely, the Cause, or Reason of their falling into this
Sin; and that was their holding of the Truth in Righteousness. For the making
out of which, we must enquire into these Two things.

1. What was the Truth here spoken of.

2. How they held it in Unrighteousness.

For the first of them; there were these six great Truths, the knowledge of
which, the Gentile Philosophers stood accountable for: As,

1. That there was a God; a Being distinct from this visible, material World;
infinitely Perfect, Omniscient, Omnipotent, Eternal, Transcendently Good and
Holy. For all this is included in the very Notion of a God. And this was a
Truth wrote with a Sunbeam, clear and legible to all Mankind, and received by
Universal Consent.

2. That this God was the Maker and Governor of this visible World. The first
of which was evident from the very Order of Causes; the great Argument, by
which Natural Reason evinces a God. It being necessary in such an Order or
Chain of Causes, to ascend to, and terminate in some First. Which should be the
Original of Motion, and the Cause of all other Things, but It self be caused by
none. And then, That God also governed the World, this followed from the other;
For that a Creature should not depend upon its Creator in all respects, in
which it is capable of depending upon Him (amongst which, to be governed by
Him, is certainly one) is contrary to the Common Order, and Nature of Things,
and those Essential Relations, which (by virtue thereof) they bear to one
another; and consequently Absurd and Impossible. So that upon a bare Principle
of Reason, Creation must needs infer Providence; and God's making the World,
irrefragably prove that he governs it too; or, that a Being of a Dependent
Nature, remains nevertheless Independent upon Him in that respect. Besides all
which, it is also certain, that the Heathens did actually acknowledge the World
governed by a Supreme Mind; which knowledge, whether they had it from
Tradition, or the Discourses of Reason, they stood however equally accountable
for, upon either account.

3 ly. That this God, or Supreme Being, was to be Worshipped. For this was
founded upon his Omnipotence, and his Providence. Since He, who could preserve,
or destroy, as he pleased, and withal governed the World, ought surely to be
depended upon by those, who were thus obnoxious to his Power, and subject to
his Government; which Dependence could not manifest it self, but by Acts of
Worship, Homage, and Address to the Person thus depended upon.

4 ly. That this God was to be Worshipped, or Addressed to, by Virtuous and
Pious Practices. For so much his Essential Holiness required, and those Innate
Notions of Turpe and Honestum, wrote in the Consciences of all Men, and joined
with the Apprehensions, they had, of the Infinite Purity of the Divine Nature,
could not but suggest.

5 ly. That upon any Deviation from Virtue and Piety, it was the Duty of every
Rational Creature so deviating, to condemn, renounce, and be sorry for every
such Deviation: That is, in other words, to repent of it. What indeed, the
Issue or Effect of such a Repentance might be, bare Reason could not of it self
discover; but that a peccant Creature should disapprove, and repent of every
Violation of, and Declination from the Rules of Just and Honest, this, Right
Reason, discoursing upon the Stock of its own Principles, could not but Infer.
And the Conscience of every Man, before it is debauched, and hardened by
Habitual Sin, will recoil after the doing of an Evil Action, and acquit him
after a Good.

6 ly. and Lastly, That every such Deviation from Duty, rendered the Person so
deviating liable, and obnoxious to Punishment. I do not say, that it made
punishment necessary, but that it made the Person so transgressing, worthy of
it; So that it might justly be inflicted on him, and consequently ought
rationally to be feared, and expected by him. And upon this Notion, universally
fixed in the Minds of Men, were grounded all their Sacrifices, and Rites of
Expiation, and Lustration. The use of which has been so General, both as to
Times, and Places, that there is no Age or Nation of the World, in which they
have not been used, as Principal Parts of Religious Worship.

Now these six Grand Truths were the Talent entrusted, and deposited by God in
the hands of the Gentiles for them to Traffic with, to his Honor, and their
own Happiness. But what little Improvement they made of this Noble Talent,
shall now be shown in the next Particular; namely, Their holding of it in
Unrighteousness. Which they did several ways. As,

1. By not Acting up to what they knew. As in many Things their Knowledge was
short of the Truth, so, almost in all Things, their Practice fell short of
their Knowledge. The Principles by which they walked, were as much below those
by which they judged, as their Feet were below their Head. By the one they
looked upwards, while they placed the other in the Dirt. Their Writings
sufficiently show, what raised, and sublime Notions they had of the Divine
Nature, while they employed their Reason about that Glorious Object, and what
Excellent Discourses of Virtue and Morality the same Reason enabled them to
furnish the World with. But when they came to transcribe these Theories into
Practice, One seemed to be of no other use to them at all, but only to reproach
them for the Other. For, they neither depended upon this God, as if he were
Almighty, nor worshipped him, as if they believed him Holy; but in both
prevaricated with their own Principles, to that degree, that their Practice was
a direct Contradiction to their Speculations. For the proof of which, go over
all the Heathen Temples, and take a survey of the Absurdities, and Impieties of
their Worship, their monstrous Sacrifices, their ridiculous Rites, and
Ceremonies. In all which, Common Sense and Reason, could not but tell them,
that the Good and Gracious God could not be pleased, nor consequently
worshipped, with any thing Barbarous or Cruel; nor the most Holy God with any
thing Filthy and Unclean; nor a God infinitely Wise with any thing Sottish or
Ridiculous; and yet these were the worthy Qualifications of the Heathen
Worship, even amongst (...) (...) not, by this, assert Contradictions, making a
Deity only to such a measure perfect; whereas a Deity, as such, implies
Perfection beyond all Measure, or Limitation? Nor could they, in the next
place, have slid into those brutish Immoralities of Life, had they duly manured
those first Practical Notions and Dictates of Right Reason, which the Nature of
Man is Originally furnished with; there being not any one of them, but what is
naturally productive of many more. But they quickly stifled, and over-laid
those Infant-principles, those Seeds of Piety and Virtue, sown by God and
Nature in their Hearts; so that they brought a voluntary Darkness and Stupidity
upon their Minds; and, by not Exercising their Senses to discern between Good
and Evil, came at length to lose all Sense and Discernment of either.
Whereupon, as the Apostle says of them, in the 21st. Verse of this Chapter to
the Romans, Their foolish Heart was darkened: And that, not only by the Just
Judgment of God, but also by the very Course of Nature; Nothing being more
evident from Experience, than that the not using or employing any Faculty, or
Power either of Body, or Soul, does insensibly weaken, and impair that Faculty;
As a Sword, by long lying still will contract a Rust, which shall not only
deface its Brightness, but, by degrees, also, consume its very Substance. Doing
Nothing, naturally ends in being Nothing.

It holds in all Operative Principles whatsoever; but especially in such as
relate to Morality; in which, not to proceed, is certainly to go backward;
there being no third Estate, between not advancing, and retreating in a
virtuous Course. Growth is of the very Essence, and Nature of some Things. To
be, and to Thrive, is all one with them; and they know no middle Season between
their Spring, and their Fall.

And therefore, as it is said in Matthew. 13. 12. That from him, who has not,
shall be taken away even that which he has. So he, who neglects the Practice,
shall, in the end also, lose the very Power and Faculty of Doing well. That
which stops a man's Actual Breathing very long, will, in the Issue, take away
his very Power of Breathing too. To hide one's Talent in the ground, is to bury
it; and the Burial of a Thing either finds it dead, or will quickly make it so.

3 ly. These Men held the Truth in Unrighteousness, by concealing what they
knew. For, how rightly soever they might conceive of God, and of Virtue, yet
the illiterate Multitude, who, in such things, must see with better Eyes than
their own, or not see at all, were never the wiser for it. Whatsoever the
inward Sentiments of those Sophisters were, they kept them wholly to
themselves; hiding all those important Truths, all those useful Notions from
the People, and teaching the World much otherwise from what they judged
themselves. Though I think a greater Truth than this cannot well be uttered;
That never any Thing, or Person was really good, which was good only to it
self. But, from hence it was, That, even in a Literal sense, Sin came to be
Established by a Law. For, amongst the Gentiles, the Laws themselves were the
greatest Offenders. They made little or no provision for Virtue, but very much
for Vice: For, the Early, and Universal Practice of Sin, had turned it into a
Custom, and Custom, especially in Sin, quickly passed into Common Law.

Socrates was the only Martyr for the Testimony of any Truth, that we read of
amongst the Heathens; who chose rather to be Condemned, and to die, than either
to renounce, or conceal his Judgment, touching the Unity of the Godhead. But as
for the rest of them, even Zeno, and Chrysippus, Plato, and Aristotle, and
generally all those Heroes in Philosophy, they swam with the Stream, (as foul
as it ran,) leaving the poor Vulgar as Ignorant and Sottish, as Vicious and
Idolatrous as they first found them.

But it has been always the Practice of the Governing Cheats of all Religions,
to keep the People in as gross Ignorance, as possibly they could. For (we see)
the Heathen Impostors used it before the Christian Impostors took it up, and
improved it. Si populus decipi vult, decipiatur, was ever a Gold and Silver
Rule amongst them all; though the Pope's Legate first turned it into a
Benediction: And a very strange one it was, and enough (one would think) to
have made all that heard it look about them, and begin to bless themselves. For
as Demetrius, a great Master in such Arts, told his Fellow-Artist, Acts 19. 25.
It was by this Craft, that they got their Wealth. So, long experience has found
it true of the unthinking Mobile; That the closer they shut their Eyes, the
wider they open their Hands. But this base Trade, the Church of England always
abhorred; and for that Cause, as to its Temporal Advantages, has fared
accordingly; and, by this time, may be thought fit for another Reformation.

And thus I have shown Three notable ways, by which the Philosophers, and
learned Men amongst the Gentiles, held the Truth in Unrighteousness: As, first,
That they did not Practice up to it; 2ly. That they did not Improve it; And,
3ly. and Lastly, That they Concealed, and Dissembled it. And this was that,
which prepared and disposed them to greater Enormities: For, changing the Truth
of God into a Lie, they became like those, who, by often repeating a Lie to
others, came at length to believe it themselves. They owned the Idolatrous
Worship of God so long, till, by degrees, even in spite of Reason and Nature,
they thought, that he ought so to be Worshipped. But this stopped not here:
For, as one Wickedness is naturally a step and introduction to another; so,
from absurd and senseless Devotions, they passed into vile Affections.
Practicing Vice against Nature, and that, in such strange and abominable
Instances of Sin, that Nothing could equal the Corruption of their Manners, but
the Delusion of their Judgments; both of them the true and proper Causes of one
another.

The Consideration of which (one would think) should make Men cautious, and
fearful, how they suppress, or debauch that Spark of Natural light, which God
has set up in their Souls. When Nature is in the Dark, it will venture to do
any thing. And, God knows, how far the Spirit of Infatuation may prevail upon
the Heart, when it comes once to Court, and Love a Delusion. Some Men hug an
Error, because it gratifies them in a freer Enjoyment of their Sensuality: And
for that Reason, God, in Judgment, suffers them to be plunged into fouler, and
grosser Errors; such as even unman, and strip them of the very Principles of
Reason, and sober Discourse. For, surely, it could be no ordinary Declension of
Nature, that could bring some Men, after an ingenuous Education in Arts, and
Philosophy, to place their Summum Bonum upon their Trenchers, and their utmost
felicity in Wine and Women, and those Lusts, and Pleasures, which a Swine, or a
Goat, has as full, and quick a sense of, as the greatest Statesman, or the
best Philosopher in the World.

Yet, this was the Custom, this the known Voice of most of the Gentiles; Dum
vivimus vivamus; Let us eat and drink to day, for to morrow we must die. That
Soul which God had given them Comprehensive of both Worlds, and capable of
looking into the great Mysteries of Nature, of Diving into the Depths beneath,
and of understanding the Motions, and Influences of the Stars above; even this
glorious, active Thing did they confine within the pitiful Compass of the
present Fruition; forbidding it to take a prospect, so far, as into the morrow;
as if to Think, to Contemplate, or be Serious, had been High Treason against
the Empire and Prerogative of Sense, usurping the Throne of their baffled and
deposed Reason.

And how comes it to pass, that even nowadays, there is often seen such a
vast Difference between the former, and the latter part of some men's Lives?
That those, who first stepped forth into the World, with high, and promising
Abilities, vigorous Intellectuals, and clear Morals, come at length to grow
Sots, and Epicures, mean in their Discourses, and dirty in their Practices; but
that, as by degrees, they remitted of their Industry, loathed their Business,
and gave way to their Pleasures, they let fall those generous Principles,
which, in their youthful days, had born them upon the Wing, and raised them to
worthy and great Thoughts; which Thoughts and Principles, not being kept up,
and cherished, but smothered in Sensual Delights, God, for that Cause, suffered
them to flag and sink into low and inglorious Satisfactions, and to enjoy
themselves more in a Revel, or a Merry-meeting, a Strumpet, or a Tavern, than
in being useful to a Church, or a Nation, in being a Public good to Society,
and a benefit to Mankind. The Parts, that God gave them, they held in
Unrighteousness, Sloth, and Sensuality; and this made God to desert, and
abandon them to themselves; so that they have had a doting and a decrepit
Reason, long before Age had given them such a Body.

And therefore, I could heartily wish, that such young Persons, as hear me now,
would lodge this one Observation deep in their Minds; viz. That God, and
Nature, have joined Wisdom, and Virtue, by such a near Cognation, or rather,
such an inseparable Connection, that a wise, a prudent, and an honorable Old
Age, is seldom, or never found, but as the Reward, and Effect of a sober, a
virtuous, and a well-spent Youth.

4. I descend now to the Fourth and Last Thing proposed; namely, the Judgment,
or rather the State and Condition penally consequent upon the Persons here
charged by the Apostle with Idolatry; which is, That they were without excuse.

After the Commission of Sin, it is natural for the Sinner to apprehend himself
in Danger, and, upon such apprehension, to provide for his Safety, and Defense:
And that must be one of these Two ways: viz. Either by pleading his Innocence,
or by using his Power. But since it would be infinitely in vain for a Finite
Power to contend with an Infinite; Innocence (if any thing) must be his Plea;
and that must be, either by an Absolute Denial; or, at least, by an
Extenuation, or Diminution of his Sin. Though indeed this Course will be found
altogether as absurd as the other could be; it being every-whit as irrational
for a Sinner to plead his Innocence before Omniscience, as it would be to
oppose his Power to Omnipotence. However, the last Refuge of a guilty Person,
is to take shelter under an Excuse; and so to mitigate, if he cannot divert the
Blow. It was the method of the great Pattern and Parent of all Sinners, Adam,
first to hide, and then to excuse himself; to wrap the Apple in the leaves, and
to give his Case a Gloss at least, though not a Defense. But now, when the
Sinner shall be stripped of this also, have all his Excuses blown away, be
stabbed with his own Arguments, and (as it were) sacrificed upon that very
Altar, which he fled to for succor, this, surely, is the height, and crisis of
a forlorn Condition. Yet this was the Case of the Malefactors, who stand here
arraigned in the Text; this was the Consummation of their Doom, That they were
Persons, not only unfit for a Pardon, but even for a Plea.

Now an Excuse, in the Nature of it, imports these Two things.

1. The Supposition of a Sin.

2. The Extenuation of its Guilt.

As for the Sin it self; we have already heard what that was, and we will now
see how able they are to acquit themselves in point of its Extenuation. In
which, according to the Two grand Principles of humane Actions, which determine
their Morality, the Understanding and the Will, the Excuse must derive either
from Ignorance, or Unwillingness.

As for Unwillingness, (to speak of this last first,) the Heathen Philosophers
generally asserted the Freedom of the Will, and its inviolable Dominion over
its own Actions; so that no force or co-action from without could entrench up
on the absolute Empire of this Faculty.

It must be confessed indeed, that it has been something lamed in this its
Freedom by Original Sin: Of which Defect, the Heathens themselves were not
wholly ignorant, though they were of its Cause. So that hereupon, the Will is
not able to carry a man out to a choice so perfectly, and in all respects Good,
but that still, there is some adherent Circumstance of Imperfection, which, in
strictness of Morality, renders every Action of it Evil; according to that
known, and most true Rule, Malum ex quolibet defectu.

Nevertheless, the Will has still so much Freedom left, as to enable it to
choose any Act in its kind Good, whether it be an Act of Temperance, Justice, or
the like; as also to refuse any Act in its kind Evil, whether of Intemperance,
Injustice, or the like; though yet, it neither chooses One, nor refuses the
Other, with such a perfect Concurrence of all due Ingredients of Action, but
that still, in the sight of God, judging according to the rigid Measures of the
Law, every such Choice, or Refusal, is indeed sinful, and imperfect. This is
most certain, whatsoever Pelagius and his Brethren assert to the contrary.

But however, that measure of Freedom which the Will still retains, of being
able to choose any Act, materially, and in its kind Good; and to refuse the
contrary, was enough to cut off all Excuse from the Heathen, who never duly
improved the utmost of such a Power, but gave themselves up to all the
Filthiness, and Licentiousness of Life imaginable. In all which, it is certain,
that they acted willingly, and without compulsion; or rather indeed greedily,
and without control.

The only Persons amongst the Heathens, who sophisticated Nature and Philosophy
in this particular, were the Stoics; who affirmed a fatal, unchangeable
Concatenation of Causes, reaching even to the Elicit Acts of Man's Will. So
that according to them, there was no Act of Volition Exerted by it, but, all
Circumstances considered, it was impossible for the Will not to Exert that
Volition. But these were but one Sect of Philosophers; that is, but an Handful
in comparison of the rest of the Gentiles: Ridiculous enough, for what they
held, and taught, and consequently not to be laid in the Balance with the
united Judgment of all other learned Men in the World, unanimously exploding
this Opinion. Questionless therefore, a thing so deeply engraven upon the first
and most inward Notions of man's Mind, as a Persuasion of the Will's Freedom,
would never permit the Heathens, (who are here charged by the Apostle) to
Patronize, and Excuse their Sins upon this score, That they committed them
against their Will, and that they had no Power to do otherwise. In which,
every hour's Experience, and Reflection upon the Method of their own Actings,
could not but give them the Lie to their face.

The only remaining Plea therefore, which these Men can take sanctuary in, must
be that of Ignorance; since there could be no pretense for unwillingness. But
the Apostle divests them even of this also: For, he says expressly, in ver. 19.
That, what might be known of God, that famous and so much disputed of (...),
was manifested in them; and in ver. 21. their unexcusableness is stated upon
the supposition of this very thing; That they knew God, but for all that, did
not glorify him as God. This was the Sum of their Charge; and how it has been
made good against them, we have already shown, in what we have spoken about
their Idolatry, very briefly, I confess; but enough to show its Absurdity,
though not to account for its Variety; when Vossius's very Abridgment of it
makes a thick Volume in Folio.

The Plea of Ignorance therefore is also taken out of their Hands; forasmuch as
they knew that there was a God; and that this God made, and governed the World;
and upon that account was to be worshipped, and addressed to; and that with
such a Worship, as should be agreeable to his Nature; both in respect of the
Piety, and Virtue of the Worshipper, and also of the Means of the Worship it
self. So that he was neither to be worshipped with impious, and immoral
Practices, nor with corporeal Resemblances. For how could an Image help Men in
directing their Thoughts to a Being, which bore no Similitude, or Cognation to
that Image at all? And what Resemblance could Wood, or Stone, bear to a Spirit
void of all sensible Qualities, and bodily Dimensions? How could they put Men
in mind of Infinite Power, Wisdom and Holiness, and such other Attributes, of
which they had not the least mark or character?

But now, if these things could not possibly resemble any Perfection of the
Deity, what use could they be of, to Men in their Addresses to God? For, can a
man's Devotions be helped by that, which brings an Error upon his Thoughts? And
certain it is, that it is natural for a Man, by directing his Prayers to an
Image, to suppose the Being, he prays to, represented by that Image. Which how
injurious, how contumelious it must needs be to the Glorious, Incomprehensible
Nature of God, by begetting such false, and low Apprehensions of him in the
Minds of his Creature, let Common Sense, not perverted by Interest and Design,
be judge. From all which it follows, That the Idolatrous Heathens, and
especially the most learned of them, not being able to charge their Idolatry
either upon Ignorance or Unwillingness, were wholly without Excuse. So that it
is to be feared, that Averroes had not the right way of Blessing himself, when,
in defiance of Christianity, he wished, Sit anima mea cum Philosophis.

And now, after all, I cannot but take notice, that all that I have said of the
Heathen Idolatry is so exactly appliable to the Idolatry of another sort of Men
in the World, that, one would think, this first Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, were not so much an Address to the Ancient Romans, as a Description of
the Modern.

But to draw toward a Close. The Use and Improvement of the foregoing
Discourse shall be briefly to inform us of these Two things.

1. The Signally great, and peculiar Mercy of God to those, to whom he has
Revealed the Gospel, since there was nothing, that could have obliged him to
it, upon the account of his Justice: For if there had, the Heathens, to whom he
revealed it not, could not have been thus without excuse; but might very
rationally have Expostulated the Case with their Great Judge, and Demurred to
the Equity of the Sentence, had they been Condemned by Him. But, it appears
from hence, that what was sufficient to render Men inexcusable, was not
therefore sufficient to save them.

It is not said by the Apostle, nor can it be proved by any one else, that God
vouchsafed to the Heathens the Means of Salvation, if so be the Gospel be the
only Means of it. And yet, I will not, I dare not affirm, that God will save
none of those, to whom the Sound of the Gospel never reached: Though this is
evident, that if he does save any of them, it must not be by that ordinary,
stated, appointed Method, which the Scripture has revealed to us, and which
they were wholly ignorant of. For grant, that the Heathens knew, that there was
a God, who both made and governed the World; and who, upon that account, was to
be worshipped, and that with such a Worship, as should be suitable to such a
Being; yet what Principle of mere Reason could assure them, that this God would
be a Rewarder of such, as diligently sought, and served him? For, certain it
is, that there is nothing in the Nature of God to oblige him to reward any
Service of his Creature; forasmuch as, all that the Creature can do, is but
Duty; and even now, at this time, God has no other Obligation upon Him, but his
own free Promise to reward the Piety and Obedience of his Servants, which
promise Reason of it self could never have found out, till God made it known by
Revelation. And moreover, what Principle of Reason could assure a Man that God
would pardon Sinners upon any terms whatsoever? Possibly it might know, That
God could do so; but this was no sufficient Ground for Men to depend upon. And
then, last of all, as for the way of his Pardoning Sinners, that he should do
it upon a satisfaction paid to his Justice, by such a Savior, as should be
both God and Man; this was utterly impossible for all the Reason of Mankind to
find out.

For, that these things could be read in the Book of Nature, or the Common
Works of God's Providence, or be learned by the Sun and Moon's preaching the
Gospel, as some have fondly (not to say profanely) enough asserted, it is
infinitely sottish to imagine, and can indeed be nothing else, but the Turning
the Grace of God into wanton, and unreasonable Propositions.

It is clear therefore, that the Heathens had no knowledge of that way, by
which alone we expect Salvation. So that all the Hope, which we can have for
them, is, That the Gospel may not be the utmost Limit of the Divine Mercy; but
that the Merits of Christ may overflow, and run over the Pale of the Church,
so, as to reach even many of those who lived and died invincibly ignorant of
him.

But whether this shall be so, or no, God alone knows, who only is privy to the
great Counsels of his own Will. It is a Secret hid from us; and therefore,
though we may hope Compassionately, yet, I am sure, we can pronounce nothing
Certainly; It is enough for us, that God has asserted his Justice, even in his
Dealing with those, whom he treats not upon Terms of Evangelical Mercy. So that
such persons, can neither excuse themselves, nor yet accuse him; who, in the
severest Sentence, that he can pronounce upon the Sinner, will (as the Psalmist
tells us) be justified when he speaks, and clear when he is judged.

2 ly. In the next place, we gather hence the unspeakably wretched, and
deplorable Condition of obstinate Sinners under the Gospel. The Sun of Mercy
has shined too long, and too bright upon such, to leave them any shadow of
Excuse. For, let them argue over all the Topics of Divine Goodness, and Human
Weakness, and whatsoever other pretenses, poor, sinking Sinners are apt to
catch at, to support and save themselves by; yet, how Trifling must be their
Plea! how Impertinent their Defense!

For, admit an Impenitent Heathen to plead, that albeit his Conscience told
him, that he had sinned; yet, it could not tell him, that there was any
provision of Mercy for him upon his Repentance. He knew not whether Amendment
of Life would be accepted after the Law was once broke; or, that there was any
other Righteousness to Atone, or Merit for him, but his own.

But no Christian, who has been taken into the Arms of a better Covenant, and
grown up in the knowledge of a Savior, and the Doctrine of Faith and
Repentance from Dead Works, can speak so much as one plausible word, for his
Impenitence. And therefore, it was said of him, who came to the Marriage Feast
without a Wedding Garment, that, being charged, and apprehended for it, (...),
he was Speechless, struck with Shame, and Silence, the proper Effects of an
Overpowering Guilt, too manifest to be denied, and too gross to be defended.
His Reason deserted, and his Voice failed him, finding himself Arraigned,
Convicted, and Condemned in the Court of his own Conscience.

So that if after all this, his great Judge had freely asked him, What he could
allege, or say for himself, why he should not have Judgment to die Eternally,
and Sentence to be Awarded according to the utmost Rigours of the Law, he could
not, in this forlorn Case, have made use of the very last Plea of a Cast
Criminal; nor so much as have cried, Mercy, Lord, Mercy. For, still his
Conscience would have replied upon him, That Mercy had been offered, and
abused; and, that the Time of Mercy was now past. And so, under this
overwhelming Conviction, every Gospelsinner must pass to his Eternal Execution,
taking the whole Load of his own Damnation solely, and entirely upon himself,
and acquitting the most Just God, who is Righteous in all his Works, and Holy
in all his Ways.

To whom (therefore) be rendered, and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise,
Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now, and for evermore. Amen.

Sacramental Preparation: Set forth in a SERMON ON MATTHEW XXII. 12. Preached
at Westminster-Abbey, On the 8th. of APRIL, 1688. Being Palm Sunday.
MATTHEW XXII. 12. And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither,
not having a Weddinggarment?
THE whole Scheme of these Words is Figurative, as being a Parabolical
Description of God's vouchsafing to the World the Invaluable Blessing of the
Gospel, by the Similitude of a King, with great Magnificence, Solemnizing his
Son's Marriage, and with equal Bounty bidding, and inviting all about him to
that Royal Solemnity; together with his severe Animadversion, both upon those,
who would not come, and upon one, who did come in a very unbeseeming manner.

For the better understanding of which Words, we must observe, that in all
Parables, Two things are to be considered.

First, The Scope and Design of the Parable; And,

Secondly, The Circumstantial passages, serving only to complete and make up
the Narration.

Accordingly, in our Application of any Parable to the Thing designed, and set
forth by it, we must not look for an absolute and exact Correspondence of all
the Circumstantial, or Subservient passages of the Metaphorical part of it,
with just so many of the same, or the like Passages in the Thing intended by
it; but it is sufficient, that there be a certain Analogy, or Agreement between
them, as to the principal Scope and Design of both.

As for the Design of this Parable, it is, no doubt, to set forth the free
Offer of the Gospel, with all its rich Privileges, to the Jewish Church and
Nation, in the first place; and upon their Refusal of it, and God's Rejection
of them for that Refusal, to declare the Calling of the Gentiles in their Room,
by a free, unlimited Tender of the Gospel to all Nations whatsoever; adding
withal a very dreadful, and severe Sentence upon those, who being so freely
invited, and so generously admitted, to such high, and undeserved Privileges,
should nevertheless abuse, and despise them by an unworthy, wicked, and
ungrateful Deportment under them.

For Men must not think that the Gospel is all made up of Privilege and
Promise, but that there is something of Duty to be performed, as well as of
Privilege to be enjoyed. No welcome to a Wedding-supper, without a
Weddinggarment; and no coming by a Weddinggarment for nothing. In all the
Transactions between God, and the Souls of Men, something is expected on both
sides; there being a fixed, indissoluble, and (in the language of the Parable)
a kind of Marriage-Tye between Duty, and Privilege, which renders them
inseparable.

Now, though I question not, but that this Parable of the Wedding-supper
comprehends in it the whole Complex of all the Blessings, and Privileges
exhibited by the Gospel; yet, I conceive, that there is one Principal Privilege
amongst all the rest, that it seems more peculiarly to aim at, or at least may
more appositely, and emphatically be applied to, than to any other whatsoever.
And that is the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, by which all the Benefits
of the Gospel are in an higher, fuller, and more Divine manner conveyed to the
Faithful, than by any other Duty or Privilege belonging to our Excellent
Religion. And for this, I shall offer these Three following Reasons.

1. Because the Foundation of all Parables, is, (as we have shown) some Analogy
or Similitude between the Tropical, or Allusive part of the Parable, and the
Thing couched under it, and intended by it. But now, of all the Benefits,
Privileges, or Ordinances of the Gospel, which of them is there, that carries
so natural a Resemblance to a Wedding-supper as that, which every one of a very
ordinary, discerning Faculty may observe in the Sacrament of the Eucharist?
For, surely, neither the Preaching of the Word, nor yet the Sacrament of
Baptism, bears any such Resemblance, or Affinity to it. But, on the other side,
this Sacrament of the Eucharist so lively resembles, and so happily falls in
with it, that it is indeed it self a Supper, and is called a Supper, and that
by a genuine, proper, as well as a common, and received Appellation.

2. This Sacrament is not only with great Propriety of Speech called a Supper;
but moreover, as it is the grand, and prime means of the nearest, and most
intimate Union, and Conjunction of the Soul with Christ, it may, with a
peculiar Significancy, be called also a Wedding-supper. And, as Christ
frequently in Scripture, owns himself related to the Church, as an Husband to a
Spouse; So, if these Nuptial Endearments, by which Christ gives himself to the
Soul, and the Soul mutually gives it self to Christ, pass between Christ and
Believers in any Ordinance of the Gospel, doubtless it is most eminently, and
effectually in this. Which is another pregnant Instance of the Notable
Resemblance between this Divine Sacrament, and the Wedding-supper in the
Parable; and, consequently, a further Argument, of the Elegant, and Expressive
Signification of one by the other.

3 ly. and Lastly, The very Manner of Celebrating this Sacrament, which is by
the Breaking of Bread, was the way and manner of transacting Marriages in some
of the Eastern Countries. Thus Q. Curtius reports, That when Alexander the
Great Married the Persian Roxana, the Ceremony they used, was no other, but
this; Panem gladio divisum uter que libabat, he divided a piece of Bread with
his Sword, of which each of them took a part, and so thereby the Nuptial Rites
were performed. Besides, that this Ceremony of Feasting belongs most properly
both to Marriage, and to the Eucharist, as both of them have the Nature of a
Covenant. And all Covenants were, in Old times, solemnized, and accompanied
with Festival Eating and Drinking; the Persons newly Confederate, always
thereupon, Feasting together in token of their full and perfect Accord, both as
to Interest and Affection.

And now these three Considerations together, so exactly suting the Parable of
the Wedding-supper to this Spiritual, Divine Banquet of the Gospel, if it does
not primarily, and in its first design, intend it; yet, certainly it may, with
greater advantage of Resemblance be applied to it, than to any other Duty or
Privilege belonging to Christianity.

Upon the Warrant of which, so very particular, and extraordinary a Cognation
between them, I shall, at present, treat of the Words wholly with reference to
this Sacred, and Divine Solemnity, observing, and gathering from them, as they
lie in Coherence with the foregoing, and following Parts of the Parable, these
Two Propositions.

1. That to a worthy Participation of the Holy Mysteries, and great Privileges
of the Gospel; and particularly, that of the Lord's Supper, there is
indispensably required a suitable Preparation.

2. That God is a strict Observer of, and a severe Animadverter upon, such as
presume to partake of those Mysteries, without such a Preparation.

And first, for the first of these; viz. That to a worthy Participation of the
Holy Mysteries, etc.

Now this Proposition imports in it Two things:

1. That to a right discharge of this Duty, a Preparation is necessary.

2. That every Preparation is not sufficient. And first, for the

First of these: That a Preparation is Necessary. And this, I confess, is a
Subject, which I am heartily sorry, that any Preacher should find it needful
to speak so much as one word upon. For, would any Man, in his Wits, venture to
die without Preparation? And, if not, let me tell you, that nothing less than
that, which will fit a Man for Death, can fit him for the Sacrament. The truth
is, there is nothing great, or considerable in the World, which ought to be
done, or ventured upon, without Preparation: But, above all, how dangerous,
sottish, and irrational is it, to engage in any Thing, or Action extempore,
where the Concern is Eternity?

None but the Careless, and the Confident (and few are Confident, but what are
first Careless) would rush rudely into to the Presence of a Great Man: And,
shall we, in our Applications to the Great God, take that to be Religion, which
the Common Reason of Mankind will not allow to be Manners? The very Rules of
Worldly Civility might instruct Men how to order their Addresses to God. For
who, that is to appear before his Prince, or Patron, would not view, and
re-view himself over and over, with all imaginable Care and Solicitude, that
there be nothing justly offensive in his Habit, Language, or Behavior? But
especially, if he be vouchsafed the Honor of his Table, it would be infinitely
more absurd, and shameful to appear foul and sordid there; and in the Dress of
the Kitchen, receive the Entertainments of the Parlour.

What previous Cleansings, and Consecrations, and what peculiar Vestments were
the Priests, under the Law, enjoined to use, when they were to appear before
God in the Sanctuary! And all this upon no less a penalty than Death. This, and
this they were to do, lest they died, lest God should strike them dead upon
the spot: as we read in Levit. 8. 35. and in many other places in the Books of
Moses. And so exact were the Jews in their Preparations for the Solemn Times of
God's Worship, that every (...) had its (...) or (...), that is, a part of the
Sixth Day, from the Hour of Six in the Evening, to fit them for the Duties of
the Seventh Day: Nor was this all; but they had also a (...), beginning about
Three in the Afternoon, to prepare them for that: And indeed, the whole Day
was, in a manner, but Preparative to the next; several Works being disallowed,
and forborne amongst them on that Day, which were not so upon any of the
foregoing Five: So careful, even to Scrupulosity, were they to keep their
Sabbath with due Reverence, and Devotion; that they must not only have a Time
to prepare them for that, but a further Time also, to prepare them for their
very Preparations.

Nay, and the Heathens (many of them at least) when they were to Sacrifice to
their greatest, and most Revered Deities, used, on the Evening before, to have
a certain Preparative Rite or Ceremony, called by them Coena pura; That is, a
Supper, consisting of some peculiar Meats, in which they imagined a kind of
Holiness; and, by Eating of which, they thought themselves Sanctified, and
fitted to officiate about the Mysteries of the ensuing Festival. And what were
all their Lustrations, but so many Solemn Purifyings, to render both
themselves, and their Sacrifices, acceptable to their Gods?

So that we see here a Concurrence both of the Jews and Heathens in this
Practice, before Christianity ever appeared. Which, to me, is a kind of
Demonstration, That the Necessity of men's preparing themselves for the Sacred
Offices of Religion, was a Lesson, which the mere Light and Dictates of Common
Reason, without the help of Revelation, taught all the knowing and intelligent
part of the World.

I will wash my Hands in Innocence, (says David,) and so will I compass thine
Altar, Psalm. 26. 6. And as the Apostle told the Hebrews, Heb. 13. 10. We also,
We Christians, have an Altar as well as they; an Altar as Sacred, an Altar to
be approached with as much Awe and Reverence; and though there be no fire upon
it, yet there is a dreadful one that follows it. A fire, that does not indeed
consume the Offering; but such an one, as will be sure to seize, and prey upon
the unworthy Offerer. I will be sanctified (says God) in them that come nigh
me, Levit. 10. 3. And God then accounts himself sanctified in such persons,
when they sanctify themselves. Nadab and Abihu were a dreadful Exposition of
this Text.

And for what concerns our selves; He that shall thoroughly consider, what the
Heart of Man is, what Sin and the World is, and what it is to approve one's
self to an All-searching Eye, in so sublime a Duty as the Sacrament, must
acknowledge that a Man may as well go about it without a Soul, as without
Preparation.

For the holiest Man living, by conversing with the World, insensibly draws
something of Soil, and Taint from it: The very Air and Mien, the Way and
Business of the World still (as it were) rubbing something upon the Soul, which
must be fetched off again, before it can be able heartily to converse with God.
Many secret Indispositions, Coldnesses and Aversions to Duty, will
undiscernibly steal upon it; and it will require both Time, and close
Application of Mind, to recover it to such a Frame, as shall dispose and fit it
for the Spiritualities of Religion.

And such as have made trial, find it neither so easy, nor so ready a passage
from the Noise, the Din, and Hurry of Business, to the Retirements of Devotion,
from the Exchange to the Closet, and from the Freedoms of Conversation, to the
Recollections and Disciplines of the Spirit.

The Jews, as soon as they came from Markets, or any other such promiscuous
Resorts, would be sure to use accurate, and more than ordinary Washings. And
had their Washings soaked through the Body, into the Soul; and had not their
Inside, reproached their Outside, I see nothing in this Custom, but what was
allowable enough, and (in a People which needed Washing so much) very
commendable. Nevertheless, whatsoever it might have in it peculiar to the
Genius of that Nation, the spiritual Use and Improvement of it, I am sure, may
very well reach the best of us. So, that if the Jews thought this Practice
requisite before they sat down to their own Tables, let us Christians think it
absolutely necessary, when we come to God's Table, not to eat till we have
washed. And when I have said so, I suppose I need not add, that our Washing is
to be like our Eating, both of them Spiritual; that we are to carry it from the
Hand, to the Heart, to improve a Ceremonial Nicety into a Substantial Duty, and
the Modes of Civility, into the Realities of Religion.

And thus much for the First Thing, That a Preparation in General is Necessary.
But then, 2 ly. The other Thing imported in the Proposition, is, That every
Preparation is not sufficient. It must be a suitable Preparation; none but a
Wedding Garment will serve the turn; a Garment, as much fitted to the
Solemnity, as to the Body it self, that wears it.

Now, all Fitness lies in a particular Commensuration, or Proportion of one
thing to another; and, that such an one, as is founded in the very Nature of
Things themselves, and not in the Opinions of Men concerning them. And, for
this Cause it is, that the Soul, no less than the Body, must have its several,
distinct Postures, and Dispositions, fitting it for several distinct Offices,
and Performances. And, as no Man comes with folded Arms to fight or wrestle,
nor prepares himself for the Battle, as he would compose himself to Sleep; so,
upon a true estimate of Things, it will be found every whit as absurd and
irrational, for a Man to discharge the most extraordinary Duty of his Religion,
at the Rate of an ordinary Devotion. For, this is really a Paradox in Practice,
and Men may sometimes do, as well as speak Contradictions.

There is a great Festival now drawing on; a Festival, designed chiefly for the
Acts of a joyful Piety, but generally made only an occasion of Bravery. I
shall say no more of it at present, but this; That God expects from Men
something more than ordinary at such times, and that it were much to be wished,
for the Credit of their Religion, as well as the Satisfaction of their
Consciences; that their Easter Devotions would, in some measure, come up to
their Easter Dress.

Now, that our Preparation may answer the important Work and Duty which we are
to engage in, these Two Conditions, or Qualifications, are required in it.

1. That it be Habitual. 2. That it be also Actual.
For, it is certain, that there may both be Acts, which proceed not from any
pre-existing Habits; and, on the other side, Habits, which lie for a time
dormant, and do not at all exert themselves in Action. But, in the Case now
before us, there must be a Conjunction of both; and, one without the other, can
never be effectual for that purpose, for which both together are but
sufficient. And,

First, For Habitual Preparation. This consists in a standing, permanent Habit,
or Principle of Holiness, wrought chiefly by God's Spirit, and instrumentally
by his Word, in the Heart, or Soul of Man: Such a Principle, as is called, both
by our Savior, and his Apostles, the New Birth, the New Man, the Immortal
Seed, and the like; and, by which a Man is so universally changed, and
transformed in the whole Frame and Temper of his Soul, as to have a new
Judgment, and Sense of Things, new Desires, new Appetites, and Inclinations.

And this is first produced in him, by that mighty, spiritual Change, which we
call Conversion. Which, being so rarely and seldom found in the Hearts of Men,
(even where it is most pretended to) is but too full, and sad a Demonstration
of the Truth of that terrible Saying; That few are chosen; and consequently,
but few save. For, who almost is there, of whom we can with any Rational
assurance, or perhaps so much as likelihood, affirm, Here is a Man, whose
Nature is renewed, whose Heart is changed, and the stream of whose Appetites is
so turned, that he does with as high, and quick a relish, taste the ways of
Duty, Holiness, and strict Living, as others, or as he himself before this,
grasped at the most enamouring Proposals of Sin; Who almost (I say) is there,
who can reach and verify the height of this Character? and yet, without which,
the Scripture absolutely affirms, That a Man cannot see the Kingdom of God,
John 3. 3. For, let Preachers say and suggest what they will, Men will do as
they use to do; and, Custom generally is too hard for Conscience, in spite of
all its Convictions. Possibly sometimes in Hearing or Reading the Word, the
Conscience may be alarmed, the Affections warmed, good Desires begin to kindle,
and to form themselves into some degrees of Resolution; but the Heart remaining
all the time unchanged; as soon as Men slide into the common Course, and
Converse of the World, all those Resolutions, and Convictions, quickly cool,
and languish, and after a few days are dismissed as troublesome Companions. But
assuredly, no Man was ever made a true Convert, or a new Creature, at so easy
a Rate; Sin was never dispossessed, nor Holiness introduced by such feeble,
vanishing Impressions. Nothing under a total, through Change will suffice;
neither Tears, nor Trouble of Mind, neither good Desires, nor Intentions, nor
yet the Relinquishment of some Sins, nor the Performance of some Good Works
will avail any thing, but a new Creature: A Word, that comprehends more in it,
than Words can well express; and, perhaps after all that can be said of it,
never thoroughly to be understood by what a Man hears from others, but by what
he must feel within himself.

And now, that this is required as the Groundwork of all our Preparations for
the Sacrament, is evident from hence; Because this Sacrament is not first
designed to make us Holy, but rather supposes us to be so; it is not a
converting, but a confirming Ordinance. It is properly our spiritual Food: And,
as all Food pre-supposes a Principle of Life in him who receives it, which Life
is, by this means, to be continued and supported; So the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper is Originally intended to preserve and maintain that Spiritual
Life, which we do or should receive in Baptism, or at least by a through
Conversion after it. Upon which account, according to the true Nature and
Intent of this Sacrament, Men should not expect Life, but Growth from it: And
see, that there be something to be fed, before they seek out for provision.
For, the Truth is, for any one who is not passed from Death to Life, and has
not in him that New living Principle, which we have been hitherto speaking of,
to come to this Spiritual Repast, is, upon the matter, as absurd and
preposterous, as if he who makes a Feast, should send to the Graves and the
Churchyards for Guests, or entertain and treat a Corpse at a Banquet.

Let Men therefore consider, before they come hither, whether they have any
thing besides the Name they received in Baptism, to prove their Christianity
by. Let them consider, whether, as by their Baptism, they formerly washed away
their Original Guilt, so they have not since, by their Actual Sins, washed away
their Baptism. And, if so, Whether the converting Grace of God has set them
upon their Legs again, by forming in them a New Nature. And, that such an one,
as exerts and shows it self by the sure, infallible Effects of a Good life:
Such an one, an enables them to reject and trample upon all the alluring Offers
of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, so as not to be conquered, or enslaved
by them; and, to choose the hard and rugged Paths of Duty, rather than the easy
and voluptuous Ways of Sin: which every Christian, by the very Nature of his
Religion, as well as by his Baptismal Vow, is strictly obliged to do: And, if
upon an impartial survey of themselves, Men find that no such Change has passed
upon them, either let them prove, that they may be Christians upon easier
terms, or have a care how they intrude upon so great, and holy an Ordinance, in
which God is so seldom mocked, but it is to the Mocker's confusion. And thus
much for Habitual Preparation. But,

2 ly. Over and above this, there is required also an Actual Preparation; which
is (as it were) the furbishing or rubbing up of the former Habitual Principle.

We have both of them excellently described in Matthew. 25. in the Parable of the
Ten Virgins; of which, the Five Wise are said to have had Oil in their Lamps;
yet, notwithstanding that, Midnight and Weariness was too hard for them, and
they all slumber'd and slept, and their Lamps cast but a dim, and a feeble
Light till the Bridegroom's approach; but then, upon the first Alarm of that,
they quickly rose, and trimmed their Lamps, and without either trimming or
painting themselves (being as much too Wise, as some should be too Old for such
Follies) they presently put themselves into a readiness, to receive their
surprising Guest. Where, by their having Oil in their Lamps, no doubt, must be
understood a Principle of Grace infused into their Hearts, or the new Nature
formed within them; and, by their Trimming their Lamps, must be meant their
Actual Exercise, and Improvement of that standing Principle, in the particular
Instances of Duty, suitable, and appropriate to the grand Solemnity of the
Bridegroom's Reception. In like manner, when a Man comes to this Sacrament, it
is not enough that he has an Habitual stock of Grace, that he has the Immortal
Seed of a Living Faith sown in his Heart. This indeed is necessary, but not
sufficient; his Faith must be, not only living, but lively too; it must be
brightned and stirred up, and (as it were) put into a posture by a particular
Exercise of those several Virtues, that are specifically requisite to a due
performance of this Duty: Habitual Grace is the Life, and Actual Grace the
Beauty and Ornament of the Soul; And therefore, let People in this high and
great Concern be but so just to their Souls, as, in one much less, they never
fail to be to their Bodies; in which the greatest Advantages of Natural Beauty
make none think the further advantage of a Decent Dress superfluous.

Nor is it at all strange, if we look into the Reason of Things, That a Man
habitually Good and Pious, should, at some certain Turns, and Times of his
Life, be at a loss, how to exert the highest Acts of that Habitual Principle.
For, no Creature is perfect and pure Act; especially a Creature so compounded
of Soul and Body, that Body seems much the stronger part in the composition.

Common Experience shows, that the wisest of Men are not always fit and
disposed to act wisely, nor the most admired Speakers to speak eloquently, and
exactly. They have indeed an acquired, standing Ability of Wisdom and Eloquence
within them, which gives them an Habitual Sufficiency for such Performances.
But, for all that, if the deepest Statesman should presume to go to Council
immediately from his Cups, or the ablest Preacher think himself fitted to
Preach, only by stepping up to the Pulpit; notwithstanding the Policy of one,
and the Eloquence of the other, they may chance to get the just character of
bold Fools for venturing, whatsoever good fortune may bring them off.

And therefore, the most Active Powers and Faculties of the Mind require
something beside themselves to raise them to the full height of their Natural
Activity: Something to excite, and quicken, and draw them forth into immediate
Action. And this holds proportionably in all things Animate, or Inanimate, in
the World. The bare Nature, and essential Form of Fire, will enable it to burn;
but there must be an enlivening Breath of Air besides, to make it flame. A Man
has the same strength, sleeping and waking; but while he sleeps, it fits him no
more for business, than if he had none. Nor is it the having of Wheels, and
Springs, though never so curiously wrought, and artificially set, but the
winding of them up, that must give Motion to the Watch. And it would be endless
to Illustrate this Subject by all the various Instances that Art and Nature
could supply us with.

But the case is much the same in Spirituals: For, Grace in the Soul, while the
Soul is in the Body, will always have the ill Neighborhood of some Remainders
of Corruption; which, though they do not conquer, and extinguish, yet will be
sure to slacken, and allay the vigor and briskness of the Renewed Principle;
so that when this Principle is to engage in any great Duty, it will need the
actual Intention, the particular Stress and Application of the whole Soul, to
disencumber, and set it free, to scour off its Rust, and remove those
Hindrances, which would otherwise clog and check the Freedom of its Operations.

And thus having shown, that to fit us for a due Access to the Holy Sacrament,
we must add Actual Preparation to Habitual, I shall now endeavor to show the
several Parts or Ingredients, of which this Actual Preparation must consist.

And here I shall not pretend to give an Account of every particular Duty that
may be useful for this purpose, but shall only mention some of the Principal,
and such as may most peculiarly contribute toward it: As,

First, Let a Man apply himself to the great and difficult Work of
Self-examination by a strict Scrutiny into, and Survey of the whole Estate of
his Soul; according to that known and excellent Rule of the Apostle, in the
very Case now before us; 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that Bread, etc. If a Man would have such a Wedding Garment as may
fit him exactly, let Self-examination take the Measure. A Duty of so mighty an
Influence upon all that concerns the Soul, that it is indeed the very Root, and
Groundwork of all true Repentance, and the Necessary Antecedent, if not also
the direct Cause of a Sinner's Return to God.

For, as there are some Sins which require a particular, and distinct
Repentance by themselves, and cannot be accounted for in the general Heap of
Sins known and unknown; so, how is it possible for a Man to repent rightly of
such Sins, unless, by a through Search into the Nature, Number, and
Distinguishing Circumstances of them, he comes to see how, and in what Degree
they are to be repented of!

But the Sovereign Excellency and Necessity of this Duty, needs no other nor
greater Proof of it, than this one Consideration, That nothing in Nature can be
more grievous, and offensive to a Sinner, than to look into himself; and
generally what Grace requires, Nature is most averse to. It is indeed as
offensive as to rake into a Dunghill; as grievous, as for one to read over his
Debts, when he is not able to pay them; or for a Bankrupt to examine, and look
into his Accounts, which at the same time that they acquaint, must needs also
upbraid him with his Condition.

But as irksome as the Work is, it is absolutely Necessary. Nothing can well be
imagined more painful, than to probe and search a purulent old Sore to the
Bottom, but for all that, the Pain must be endured, or no Cure expected. And
Men certainly have sunk their Reason to very gross, low, and absurd Conceptions
of God, when in the Matter of Sin they can make such false, and short
Reckonings with him, and their own Hearts; for can they imagine, that God has
therefore forgot their Sins, because they are not willing to remember them? or
will they measure his Pardon by their own Oblivion? What pitiful Fig Leaves,
what senseless and ridiculous Shifts are these, not able to silence, and much
less satisfy an accusing Conscience?

But now for the better Management of this Examination of our Past-lives, we
must thoroughly canvass them with these and the like Questions.

As for instance; Let a Man enquire what Sins he has committed, and what
Breaches he has made upon those two great standing Rules of Duty, the
Decalogue, and our Savior's Divine Sermon upon the Mount. Let him enquire also
what particular Aggravations ly upon his Sins; as whether they have not been
committed against strong Reluctance, and Light of Conscience? after many
winning Calls of Mercy to reclaim, and many terrible Warnings of Judgment to
affright him? Whether Resolutions, Vows, and Protestations have not been made
against them? Whether they have not been repeated frequently, and persisted in
obstinately? And lastly, whether the same Appetites to Sin have not remained as
active, and unmortified after Sacraments, as ever they had been before?

How important these Considerations, and Heads of Enquiry are, all who
understand any Thing, will easily perceive. For this we must know, That the
very same Sin, as to the Nature of it, stamped with any one of these
Aggravations, is, in effect, not the same. And, he who has sinned the same
great Sin after several times receiving the Sacrament, must not think that God
will accept him under ten times greater Repentance, and Contrition for it, than
he brought with him to that Duty formerly; Whether God by his Grace will enable
him to rise up to such a Pitch, or no, is uncertain; but most certain, that
both his Work is harder, and his Danger greater than it was, or could be at the
first.

Secondly, When a Man has by such a close and rigorous Examination of himself,
found out the accursed Thing, and discovered his Sin; the next Thing in order
must be, to work up his Heart to the utmost Hatred of it, and the bitterest
Sorrow and Remorse for it. For, Self-examination having first presented it to
the Thoughts, these naturally transmit, and hand it over to the Passions. And
this introduces the next Ingredient of our Sacramental Preparations, to wit,
Repentance. Which arduous Work I will suppose not now to begin, but to be
renewed; and that with special Reference to Sins not repented of before, and
yet more especially to those new Scores which we still have run our selves
upon, since the last preceding Sacrament. Which Method, faithfully and
constantly observed, must needs have an admirable and mighty Effect upon the
Conscience, and keep a Man from breaking, or running behind-hand in his
Spiritual Estate, which, without frequent Accountings, he will hardly be able
to prevent.

But because this is a Duty of such high Consequence, I would by all means warn
Men of one very common, and yet very dangerous Mistake about it; and that is,
the taking of mere Sorrow for Sin, for Repentance. It is indeed a good
Introduction to it; but the Porch, though never so fair and spacious, is not
the House it self. Nothing passes in the Accounts of God for Repentance, but
Change of Life: Ceasing to do Evil, and doing Good, are the Two great Integral
Parts that complete this Duty. For not to do Evil, is much better than the
sharpest Sorrow for having done it; and to do Good, is better, and more
valuable than both.

When a Man has found out Sin in his Actions, let him resolutely Arrest it
there; but let him also pursue it home to his Inclinations, and dislodge it
thence, otherwise it will be all to little purpose; for the Root being still
left behind, it is odds but in time it will shoot out again.

Men befool themselves infinitely, when by venting a few Sighs, or Groans,
putting the Finger in the Eye, and whimpering out a few melancholy Words; and
lastly, concluding all, with, I wish I had never done so; and I am resolved
never to do so more; they will needs persuade themselves, that they have
repented; though, perhaps, in this very thing, their Heart all the while
deceives them, and they neither really wish the one, nor resolve the other.

But whether they do, or no, all true, penitential Sorrow will, and must
proceed much further. It must force, and make its way into the very inmost
Corners, and Recesses of the Soul; it must shake all the Powers of Sin,
producing in the Heart strong, and lasting Aversions to Evil, and equal
Dispositions to Good, which, I must confess, are great Things; But if the
Sorrow which we have been speaking of, carry us not so far, let it express it
self never so loudly, and passionately, and discharge it self in never so many
Shours of Tears, and Vollies of Sighs; yet, by all this, it will no more purge
a man's Heart, than the washing of his Hands can cleanse the rottenness of his
Bones. But,

Thirdly, When Self-examination has both shown us our Sin, and Repentance has
disowned and cast it out, the next Thing naturally confequent upon this, is
with the highest Importunity to supplicate God's Pardon for the Guilt, and his
Grace against the Power of it: And this brings in Prayer as the Third
preparative for the Sacrament. A Duty, upon which all the Blessings of both
Worlds are entailed. A Duty, appointed by God himself, as the great Conduit,
and noble Instrument of Commerce between Heaven and Earth. A Duty, founded on
Man's Essential dependence upon God, and so, in the Ground and Reason of it,
perpetual, and consequently, in the Practice of it, indispensable.

But I shall speak of it now only with reference to the Sacrament. And so,
whatsoever other Graces may furnish us with a Wedding Garment, it is certain
that Prayer must put it on. Prayer is that, by which a Man engages all the
Auxiliaries of Omnipotence it self against his Sin; and is so utterly contrary
to, and inconsistent with it, that the same Heart cannot long hold them both,
but one must soon quit possession of it to the other; and, either Praying make
a Man leave off Sinning, or Sinning force him to give over Praying.

Every real Act of Hatred of Sin, is, in the very Nature of the Thing, a
partial Mortification of it; and, it is hardly possible for a Man to pray
heartily against his Sin, but he must at the same time, hate it too. I know a
Man may think that he hates his Sin, when indeed he does not; but then it is
also as true, that he does not sincerely pray against it, whatsoever he may
imagine.

Besides, since the very Life and Spirit of Prayer consists in an ardent,
vehement Desire of the Thing prayed for; and, since the Nature of the Soul is
such, that it strangely symbolizes with the Thing it mightily desires; it is
evident, That if a Man would have a devout, humble, Sin-abhorring, Self-denying
Frame of Spirit, he cannot take a more efficacious course to attain it, than by
Praying himself into it. And so close a Connection has this Duty with the
Sacrament, that whatsoever we receive in the Sacrament, is properly in answer
to our Prayers. And consequently, we may with great assurance conclude, That he
who is not frequently upon his Knees, before he comes to that holy Table,
Kneels to very little purpose when he is there. But then,

Fourthly, Because Prayer is not only one of the highest, and hardest Duties in
it self, but ought to be more than ordinarily servent and vigorous before the
Sacrament: Let the Body be also called in, as an Assistant to the Soul, and
Abstinence and Fasting added to promote and heighten her Devotions. Prayer is a
kind of Wrestling with God; and, he who would win the Prize at that Exercise,
must be severely dieted for that purpose.

The truth is, Fasting was ever acknowledged by the Church, in all Ages, as a
singular Instrument of Religion, and a particular Preparative to the Sacrament.
And hardly was there ever any thing Great, or Heroic, either done or attempted
in Religion, without it. Thus, when Moses received the Law from God, it was
with Fasting, Deuteronomy. 9. 9. When Christ entered upon the great Office of his
Mediatorship, it was with Fasting, Matthew. 4. 2. And when Paul and Barnabas were
separated to that high and difficult Charge of Preaching to the Gentiles, Acts
13. 2. still it was managed with Fasting. And, we know, the Rubric of our own
Church always, almost, enjoins a Fast to prepare us for a Festival.

Bodily Abstinence is certainly a great help to the Spirit, and the Experience
of all wise and good Men has ever found it so. The Ways of Nature, and the
Methods of Grace, are vastly different. Good Men themselves are never so
surprised, as in the midst of their Jollities; nor so fatally over-taken, and
caught, as when the Table is made the Snare. Even our first Parents ate
themselves out of Paradise; and Job's Children junketted and feasted together
often, but the Reckoning cost them dear at last. The Heart of the Wise (says
Solomon) is in the House of Mourning, and the House of Fasting adjoyns to it.

In a word, Fasting is the Diet of Angels, the Food and Refection of Souls, and
the richest, and highest Aliment of Grace. And, he who Fasts for the sake of
Religion, Hungers and Thirsts after Righteousness without a Metaphor.

Fifthly, Since every Devout Prayer is designed to ascend, and fly up to
Heaven; as Fasting (according to St. Austin's Allusion) has given it one Wing,
so let Almsgiving to the Poor supply it with another. And both these together,
will not only carry it up Triumphant to Heaven, but, if need require, bring
Heaven it self down to the Devout Person who sends it thither; As, while
Cornelius was Fasting and Praying, (to which he still joined giving Alms,) an
Angel from Heaven was dispatched to him with this happy Message, Acts 10. 4.
Thy Prayers, and thine Alms, are come up for a Memorial before God. And
nothing, certainly, can give a greater Efficacy to Prayer, and a more peculiar
Fitness for the Sacrament, than an Hearty, and Conscientious Practice of this
Duty; without which all that has been mentioned hitherto is nothing but Wind
and Air, Pageantry, and Hypocrisy: For, if there be any truer Measure of a
Man, than by what he does; it must be, by what he gives. He, who is truly
Pious, will account it a Wedding-supper to Feed the Hungry, and a
Wedding Garment to Cloth the Naked. And, God and Man will find it a very unfit
Garment for such a purpose, which has not in it a Purse, or Pocket for the Poor.

But, so far are some from considering the Poor before the Sacrament, that they
have been observed to give nothing to the Poor, even at the Sacrament: And
those such, that if Rich Clothes might pass for a Wedding Garment, none could
appear better fitted for such a Solemnity than themselves; yet some such, I
say, I my self have seen at a Communion, drop nothing into the Poor's Basin.

But, good God! What is the Heart of such Worldlings made of, and what a Mind
do they bring with them to so Holy an Ordinance! An Ordinance, in which none
can be qualified to receive, whose Heart does not serve them also to give.

From such indeed as have nothing, God expects nothing; but, where God has
given (as I may say) with both Hands, and Men return with None, such must know,
that the Poor have an Action of Debt against them, and that God Himself will
undertake, and prosecute their Suit for them; and if he does, since they could
not find in their Hearts to proportion their Charity to their Estates; nothing
can be more just, than for God to proportion their Estates to their Charity;
and, by so doing, he cannot well give them a shrewder, and a shorter Cut.

In the mean time, let such know further, That whosoever dares, upon so Sacred,
and Solemn an Occasion, approach the Altar, with Bowels so shut up, as to leave
nothing behind him there for the Poor, shall be sure to carry something away
with him from thence, which will do him but little good.

Sixthly, Since the Charity of the Hand signifies but little, unless it springs
form the Heart, and flows through the Mouth, let the Pious Communicant, both in
Heart and Tongue, Thoughts and Speech, put on a Charitable, Friendly, Christian
Temper of Mind, and Carriage toward all. Wrath and Envy, Malice and
Backbiting, and the like, are direct Contradictions to the very Spirit of
Christianity, and fit a Man for the Sacrament, just as much as a Stomach
over-flowed with Gall would help him to digest his Meat. St. Paul often Rebukes
and Schools such Disturbers of the World very sharply, correcting a base Humor
by a very generous Rule, Phil. 2. 3. Let each (says he) esteem others better
than themselves. No Man, doubtless, shall ever be Condemned of God for not
Judging his Brother: For, be thy Brother or Neighbor never so wicked and
ungodly, satisfy thy self with this, That another's Wickedness shall never
Damn thee; but thy own Bitterness, and Rancour may; and, continued in,
certainly will: Rather let his want of Grace give thee occasion to exercise
Thine, (if thou have any,) in Thinking and Speaking better of him, than he
deserves: And, if thy Charity proves mistaken, assure thy self, that God will
accept the Charity, and overlook the Mistake. But if in Judging him whom thou
have nothing to do with, thou chancest to Judge one way, and God and Truth to
Judge another, take heed of that Dreadful Tribunal, where it will not be
enough to say, That I thought this, or I heard that; and, where no Man's
mistake will be able to warrant an unjust Surmise, and much less justify a
false Censure. Such would find it much better for them to retreat inwards, and
view themselves in the Law of God and their own Consciences; and, that will
tell them their own impartially, that will fetch off all their paint, and show
them a foul Face in a true Glass. Let them read over their Catechism, and lay
aside Spite and Virulence, Gossipping and Meddling, Calumny and Detraction; and
let not all about them be Villains and Reprobates, because they themselves are
Envious and Forlorn, Idle and Malicious: Such Vermin are to be looked upon by
all sober Christians, as the very Cankers of Society, and the Shame of any
Religion; and so far from being fit to come to the Sacrament, that really they
are not fit to come to Church; and would much better become the House of
Correction, than the House of Prayer.

Nevertheless, as Custom in Sin makes People blind, and Blindness makes them
bold, none come more confidently to the Sacrament than such Wretches. But when
I consider the pure and blessed Body of our Savior, passing through the open
Sepulchers of such Throats, into the noisome Receptacles of their boiling,
fermenting Breasts, it seems to me a lively, but sad Representation of Christ's
being first buried, and then descending into Hell. Let this Diabolical Leaven
therefore be purged out; and, while such pretend to be so busy in cleansing
their Hearts, let them not forget to wash their Mouths too.

Seventhly and Lastly: As it is to be supposed, that the Pious Communicant has
all along carried on, so let him likewise, in the Issue, close his Preparatory
Work with Reading and Meditation. Of which, since the Time will not serve me to
speak more now, I shall only remark this, That they are Duties of so near an
Import to the Well-being of the Soul, that the proper Office of Reading is, to
take in its Spiritual food, and of Meditation, to digest it.

And now, I hope, that whosoever shall in the Sincerity of his Heart acquit
himself as to all the foregoing Duties, and thereby prepare and adorn himself
to meet and converse with his Savior at this Divine Feast, shall never be
accosted with the Thunder of that dreadful Increpation from him, Friend, how
came thou in hither, not having a Weddinggarment?

But, because I am very sensible, that all the particular Instances of Duty,
which may one way or other contribute to the fitting of Men for this Great one,
can hardly be assigned, and much less equally and universally applied, where
the Conditions of Men are so very different, I shall gather them all into this
one plain, full, and comprehensive Rule; namely, That all those Duties which
Common Christianity always obliges a Christian to, ought most eminently, and
with an higher and more exalted pitch of Devotion, to be performed by him
before the Sacrament; and convertibly, whatsoever Duties Divines prescribe to
be observed by him with a peculiar Fervor, and Application of Mind upon this
occasion, ought in their proportion, to be practiced by him, through the whole
Course of his Christian Conversation.

And this is a solid and sure Rule. A Rule, that will never deceive or lurch
the sincere Communicant. A Rule, that by adding Discretion to Devotion, will
both keep him from being humoursome, singular, and fantastic in his
Preparations before the Sacrament, and (which is worse, and must fatally
unravel all again) from being (as most are) loose and remiss after it; and
thinking, that as soon as the Sacrament is over, their great Business is done,
whereas indeed it is but begun.

And now I fear, that, as I have been too long upon the whole, so I have been
but too brief upon so many, and those such weighty Particulars. But I hope you
will supply this Defect, by enlarging upon them in your Practice: And make up
the Omissions of the Pulpit, by the Meditations of the Closet. And God direct
and assist us all in so concerning a Work.

To whom be rendered, and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty,
and Dominion, both now, and for evermore. Amen.

The Fatal Imposture, AND Force of WORDS: Set forth in a SERMON PREACHED On
ISAIAHV. 20. MAY the 9th. 1686.
ISA. V. 20. Woe unto them that call Evil good, and Good evil, etc.
THese Words contain in them Two things:

1. A Woe denounced; and,

2. The Sin for which it is denounced; to wit, the calling Evil good, and Good
evil. Which Expression may be taken Two ways:

First, In a Judicial, and more restrained Sense: As it signifies the
Pronouncing of a Guilty Person Innocent, and an Innocent Guilty, in the Course
of Judgment. But this I take to be too Particular, to reach the Design of the
Words here.

Secondly, It may be taken in a General, and more enlarged Sense; as it imports
a Mis-representation of the Qualities of Things, and Actions, to the common
Apprehensions of Men, abusing their Minds with false Notions; and so by this
Artifice making Evil pass for Good, and Good for Evil, in all the great
Concerns of Life. Where, by Good, I question not, but Good Morally so called,
Bonum Honestum ought (chiefly at least) to be understood; and, that the Good of
Profit, or Pleasure, the Bonum Utile, or Iucundum, hardly come into any Account
here, as things extremely below the principal design of the Spirit of God in
this place.

It is wonderful to consider, that, since Good is the natural and proper
object, which all humane Choice is carried out to; and Evil, that, which with
all its Might it shuns, and flies from; And, since withal, there is that
Controlling Worth and Beauty in Goodness, that, as such, the Will cannot but
like, and desire it; and, on the other side, that odious Deformity in Vice,
that it never so much as offers it self to the Affections, or Practice of
Mankind, but under the Disguise and Colors of the other; And, since all this
is easily discernible by the ordinary Discourses of the Understanding; and
lastly, since nothing passes into the Choice of the Will, but as it comes
conveyed, and warranted by the Understanding, as worthy of its choice; I say,
it is wonderful to consider, that notwithstanding all this, the Lives and
Practices of the generality of Men (in which Men certainly should be most in
earnest) are almost wholly took up in a passionate Pursuit of what is Evil, and
in an equal Neglect, if not also an Abhorrence, of what is Good. This is
certainly so; and Experience, which is neither to be confuted, nor denied, does
every minute prove the sad Truth of this Assertion.

But now, what should be the Cause of all this? For, so great, so constant, and
so general a Practice must needs have, not only a Cause, but also a great, a
constant, and a general Cause; a Cause every way Commensurate to such an
Effect: And this Cause must of necessity be from one of those Two Commanding
Powers of the Soul, the Understanding, or the Will. As for the Will; though its
Liberty be such, that a suitable, or proper Good being proposed to it, it has a
Power to refuse, or not to choose it; yet it has no Power to choose Evil,
considered absolutely as Evil; this being directly against the Nature, and
Natural Method of its Workings.

Nevertheless, it is but too manifest that things Evil, extremely Evil, are
both readily chosen, and eagerly pursued and practiced by it. And therefore,
this must needs be from that other governing Faculty of the Soul, the
Understanding, which represents to the Will things really Evil, under the
Notion and Character of Good. And this, this is the true Source and Original of
this great Mischief. The Will chooses, follows and embraces, things Evil, and
destructive; but it is, because the Understanding first tells it, that they are
good, and wholesome, and fit to be chosen by it. One Man gives another a Cup of
Poison, a thing as terrible as Death; but, at the same time, he tells him, that
it is a Cordial, and so he drinks it off, and dies.

From the beginning of the World, to this day, there was never any great
Villainy acted by Men, but it was in the strength of some great Fallacy put
upon their Minds by a false representation of Evil for Good, or Good for Evil.
In the day, that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, says God to Adam;
and so long as Adam believed this, he did not eat. But, says the Devil, In the
Day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall be so far from surely dying, that thou
shall be Immortal, and from a Man, grow into an Angel; and upon this different
account of the thing, he presently took the Fruit, and ate Mortality, Misery,
and Destruction to himself, and his whole Posterity.

And now, can there be a Woe or Curse in all the Stores and Magazines of
Vengeance, equal to the Malignity of such a Practice; of which one single
Instance could involve all Mankind, past, present, and to come, in one
universal, and irreparable confusion? God commanded, and told Man what was
Good, but the Devil fur-named it Evil, and thereby baffled the Command, turned
the World topsyturvy, and brought a new Chaos upon the whole Creation.

But that I may give you a more full Discussion of the sense and design of the
Words, I shall do it under these following Particulars: As,

First, I shall give you some general Account of the Nature of Good and Evil,
and the Reason upon which they are founded.

Secondly, I shall show that the Way by which Good and Evil commonly operate
upon the Mind of Man, is by those respective Names or Appellations by which
they are notified, and conveyed to the Mind. And,

Thirdly and Lastly, I shall show the Mischief, directly, naturally, and
unavoidably following from the Misapplication, and Confusion of those Names.

And, I hope, by going over all these Particulars, you may receive some
tolerable satisfaction about this great Subject, which we have now before us.

1. And first for the Nature of Good and Evil, what they are, and upon what
they are founded. The Knowledge of this I look upon as the Foundation and
Groundwork of all those Rules, that either Moral Philosophy, or Divinity, can
give for the Direction of the Lives and Practices of Men; and consequently,
ought to be reckoned as a first Principle; and, that such an one, that, for
ought I see, the through Speculation of Good, will be found much more difficult
than the Practice. But when we shall have once given some Account of the Nature
of Good, that of Evil will be known by Consequence; as being only a Privation,
or Absence of Good, in a Subject capable of it, and proper for it.

Now, Good in the general Nature, and Notion of it, over and above the bare
Being of a Thing, Connotes also a certain sutableness or agreeableness of it to
some other thing: According to which general Notion of Good applied to the
particular Nature of Moral Goodness, (upon which only we now insist,) a Thing
or Action is said to be Morally Good or Evil, as it is agreeable, or
disagreeable to Right Reason, or to a Rational Nature: And, as Right Reason is
nothing else but the Understanding, or Mind of Man, discoursing, and judging of
Things truly, and as they are in themselves; and (as all Truth is unchangeably
the same; that Proposition, which is true at any time, being so for ever) so it
must follow, That the Moral Goodness or Evil of men's Actions, which consist in
their Conformity, or Unconformity to Right Reason, must be also Eternal,
Necessary, and Unchangeable. So that, as that, which is Right Reason at any
Time, or in any Case, is always Right Reason with relation to the same Time,
and Case; In like manner, that which is Morally Good, or Evil, at any Time, or
in any Case, (since it takes its whole measure from Right Reason) must be also
Eternally, and Unchangeably, a Moral Good, or Evil; with relation to that Time,
and to that Case. For Propositions concerning the Goodness, as well as
concerning the Truth of Things, are necessary, and perpetual.

But you will say, May not the same Action, as for instance, the killing of a
Man, be sometimes Morally Good, and sometimes Morally Evil? To Wit, Good, when
it is the Execution of Justice upon a Malefactor; and Evil, when it is the
taking away the Life of an Innocent person?

To this I Answer: That this indeed is true of Actions, considered in their
General Nature or Kind, but not considered in their Particular, Individual
Instances. For generally speaking; to take away the Life of a Man, is neither
Morally Good, nor Morally Evil, but capable of being either, as the
Circumstances of Things shall determine it; but every particular Act of
Killing, is of necessity accompanied with, and determined by several
Circumstances, which actually, and unavoidably constitute, and denominate it
either Good or Evil. And that, which being performed under such, and such
Circumstances, is Morally Good, cannot possibly, under the same Circumstances,
ever be Morally Evil. And so on the contrary.

From whence we infer the Villainous falsehood of Two Assertions, held and
maintained by some persons, and too much countenanced by some others in the
World. As,

First, That Good and Evil, Honest and Dishonest, are not Qualities existing or
inherent in Things themselves, but only founded in the Opinions of Men
concerning Things. So that any Thing or Action, that has gained the General
Approbation of any People, or Society of Men, ought, in respect of those
Persons, to be esteemed Morally Good, or Honest; and, whatsoever falls under
their general Disapprobation, ought, upon the same account, to be reckoned
Morally Evil, or Dishonest; which also, they would seem to prove from the very
signification of the word Honestus; which, originally and strictly, signifies
no more than Creditable, and is but a Derivative from Honor, which signifies
Credit or Honor; and, according to the Opinion of some, (we know) That is
lodged only in the Esteem and Thoughts of those who pay it, and not in the
Thing, or Person, whom it is paid to. Thus for example, Thieving, or Robbing,
was accounted amongst the Spartans a gallant, worthy, and a creditable Thing;
and consequently, according to the Principle which we have mentioned, Thievery,
amongst the Spartans, was a practice Morally Good and Honest. Thus also, both
with the Grecians, and the Romans, it was held a magnanimous, and highly
laudable Act, for a man under any great or insuperable misery, or distress, to
put an end to his own Life; and, accordingly, with those who had such Thoughts
of it, that, which we call Self-murder, was properly a good, an honest, and a
virtuous Action. And, persons of the highest, and most acknowledged Probity,
and Virtue amongst them; such as Marcus Cato, and Pomponius Atticus, actually
did it, and stand celebrated both by their Orators and Historians, for so
doing. And I could also instance in other Actions of a souler, and more
unnatural Hue, which yet from the Approbation and Credit they have found in
some Countries and Places, have passed for good Morality in those places: But,
out of respect to Common Humanity, as well as Divinity, I shall pass them over.
And thus much for the first Assertion, or Opinion.

Secondly, The second Opinion, or Position, is, That Good and Evil, Honest and
Dishonest, are Originally founded in the Laws and Constitutions of the
Sovereign Civil Power, enjoining some Things, or Actions, and prohibiting
others. So that when any thing is found conducing to the Welfare of the
Public, and thereupon comes to be enacted by Governors into a Law, it is
forthwith thereby rendered Morally Good and Honest; and, on the contrary, Evil
and Dishonest, when, upon its Contrariety to the public Welfare, it stands
prohibited and condemned by the same public Authority.

This was the Opinion heretofore of Epicurus, as it is represented by
Gassendus; who understood his Notions too well, to misrepresent them. And
lately of one amongst our selves, a less Philosopher, though the greater
Heathen of the two, the Infamous Author of the Leviathan. And the like lewd,
scandalous, and immoral Doctrine, or worse (if possible) may be found in some
Writers, of another kind of Note and Character; whom, one would have thought,
not only Religion, but Shame of the World might have taught better things.

Such as, for instance, Bellarmine himself; who, in his 4th. Book and 5th.
Chapter, De Pontifice Romano, has this monstrous Passage: That, if the Pope
should through Error or Mistake command Vices, and prohibit Virtues, the Church
would be bound in Conscience to believe Vice to be Good, and Virtue Evil. I
shall give you the whole Passage in his own Words to a Tittle: Fides Catholica
docet omnem virtutem esse Bonam, omne vitium esse Malum. Si autem erraret Papa,
praecipiendo vitia vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia
esse Bona and virtutes Malas, nisi vellet contra Conscientiam peccare. Good
God! that any thing that wears the Name of a Christian, or but of a Man, should
venture to own such a villainous, impudent, and blasphemous Assertion in the
face of the World, as this! What? must Murder, Adultery, Theft, Fraud,
Extortion, perjury, Drunkenness, Rebellion, and the like, pass for good and
commendable Actions, and fit to be practiced? And, Mercy, Chastity, Justice,
Truth, Temperance, Loyalty and Sincere Dealing, be accounted things utterly
evil, immoral, and not to be followed by Men, in case the Pope, who is
generally a weak, and almost always a wicked Man, should by his mistake, and
infallible ignorance, command the former, and forbid the latter? Did Christ
himself ever assume such a Power, as to alter the Morality of Actions, and to
transform Vice into Virtue, and Virtue into Vice by his bare Word? Certainly
never did a grosser Paradox, or a wickeder Sentence drop from the Mouth or Pen
of any mortal Man, since Reason or Religion had any Being in the World.

And, I must confess, I have often with great Amazement wondered how it could
possibly come from a Person of so great a Reputation both for Learning, and
Virtue too, as the World allows Bellarmine to have been. But, when Men give
themselves over to the Defense of wicked Interests, and false Propositions, it
is just with God to smite the greatest Abilities with the greatest Infatuations.

But as for these Two Positions, or Assertions; That the Moral Good or Evil,
the Honesty or Dishonesty of humane Actions should depend either upon the
Opinions, or upon the Laws of Men: They are certainly false in themselves,
because they are infinitely absurd in their Consequences. Some of which are
such as these. As,

First, If the Moral Goodness, or Evil of men's Actions were Originally founded
in, and so proceeded wholly from the Opinions, or Laws of Men, then it would
follow, that they must change and vary according to the Change, and difference
of the Opinions and Laws of Men: And consequently, that the same Action, under
exactly the same Circumstances, may be morally Good one day, and morally Evil
another; and morally Good in one place, and morally Evil in another: For as
much as the same Sovereign Authority may enact or make a Law, commanding such
or such an Action to day, and a quite contrary Law forbidding the same Action
to morrow; and the very same Action, under the same Circumstances, may be
commanded by Law in one Country, and prohibited by Law in another. Which being
so, the Consequence is manifest, and the Absurdity of the Consequent
intolerable.

Secondly, If the Moral Goodness, or Evil of men's Actions, depended Originally
upon humane Laws, then those Laws themselves could neither be morally Good nor
Evil: The Consequence is evident; Because those Laws are not commanded, or
prohibited by any antecedent humane Laws; And consequently, if the Moral
Goodness, or Evil of any Act were to be derived only from a precedent humane
Law, Laws themselves, not supposing a dependence upon other precedent humane
Laws, could have no Moral Goodness, or Evil in them. Which to assert of any
humane Act (such as all humane Laws essentially are, and must be) is certainly
a very gross Absurdity.

Thirdly, If the Moral Goodness, or Evil of men's Actions were sufficiently
derived from humane Laws, or Constitutions; then, upon supposal, that a Divine
Law should (as it often does) command what is prohibited by humane Laws, and
prohibit what is commanded by them, it would follow, that either such Commands
and Prohibitions of the Divine Law do not at all affect the Actions of Men in
point of their Morality, so as to render them either Good or Evil, or, that the
same Action, at the same time, may, in respect of the Divine Law Commanding it,
be Morally Good; and, in respect of an humane Law forbidding it, be Morally
Evil. Than which consequence, nothing can be more clear, nor withal more
absurd.

And many more of the like nature, I could easily draw forth, and lay before
you. Every false Principle or Proposition being sure to be attended with a
numerous train of Absurdities.

But, as to the Subject Matter now in hand; so far is the Morality of humane
Actions, as to the Goodness or Evil of them, from being founded in any humane
Law, that in very many, and those the principal Instances of humane Action, it
is not Originally founded in, or derived from so much as any Positive, Divine
Law. There being a Ius natural certainly antecedent to all Ius positivum,
either Humane or Divine; and that such, as results from the very Nature and
Being of Things, as they stand in such a certain Habitude, or Relation to one
Another: To which Relation, whatsoever is done agreeably, is Morally and
Essentially Good; and, whatsoever is done otherwise, is, at the same rate,
Morally Evil.

And this I shall exemplify in those Two grand, comprehensive, Moral Duties,
which Man is for ever obliged to, His Duty toward God, and his Duty toward
his Neighbor.

And first, for his Duty toward God; which is, To love and obey him with all
his Heart, and all his Soul. It is certain, that for a rational, intelligent
Creature to conform himself to the Will of God in all things, carries in it a
moral Rectitude, or Goodness; and, to disobey or oppose his Will in any thing,
imports a moral Obliquity, before God ever deals forth any particular Law, or
Command to such a Creature; There being a general Obligation upon Man to obey
all God's Laws, whenever they shall be declared, before any particular
Instance of Law comes actually to be declared. But now whence is this? Why;
from that Essential sutableness, which Obedience has to the Relation which is
between a Rational Creature, and his Creator. Nothing in Nature being more
irrational, and irregular, and consequently more immoral, than for an
Intelligent Being to oppose, or disobey that Sovereign, Supreme Will, which
gave him that Being, and has withal the sole and absolute disposal of him in
all his concerns. So that there needs no positive Law, or Sanction of God to
stamp an Obliquity upon such a disobedience: Since it cleaves to it
Essentially, and by way of Natural result from it, upon the account of that
utter unsutableness which Disobedience has to the Relation which Man naturally
and necessarily stands in toward his Maker.

And then, in the next place, for his Duty to his Neighbor. The whole of which
is comprised in that great Rule, of doing, as a Man would be done by. We may
truly affirm, that the Morality of this Rule does not Originally derive it self
from those words of our Savior, Matthew. 7. 12. What soever ye would that Men
should do unto you, do ye even so unto them: No, nor yet from Moses or the
Prophets; but it is as old as Adam, and bears date with humane Nature it self;
as springing from that Primitive Relation of Equality, which all men, as fellow
Creatures and fellow Subjects to the same supreme Lord, bear to one another, in
respect of that common Right, which every man has equally to his Life, and to
the proper Comforts of Life; and consequently, to all things naturally
necessary to the support of both.

Now, whatsoever one man has a Right to keep, or possess, no other man can have
a Right to take from him. So that no man has a Right to expect that from, or to
do that to another, which that other has not an equal Right to expect from, and
to do to him. Which Parity of Right, as to all things purely Natural, being
undoubtedly the Result of Nature it self, can any thing be inferred from thence
more conformable to Reason, and consequently of a greater moral Rectitude, then
that such an Equality of Right should also cause an Equality of Behavior,
between Man and Man, as to all those mutual Offices, and Intercourses, in which
Life, and the Happiness of Life are concerned? Nothing certainly can shine out,
and show it self by the mere Light of Reason, as an higher, and more
unquestionable piece of Morality than this, nor as a more confessed Deviation
from Morality than the contrary Practice.

From all which discourse, I think we may without presumption conclude, that
the Rations Boni, and Mali, the Nature of Good and Evil, as to the principal
Instances of both, spring from that Essential Habitude, or Relation, which the
Nature of one thing bears to another by virtue of that Order which they stand
placed in, here in the World, by the very Law and Condition of their Creation;
and, for that reason, do and must precede all positive Laws, Sanctions, or
Institutions whatsoever. Good and Evil are in Morality, as the East and West
are in the Frame of the World; founded in, and divided by that fixed, and
unalterable Situation, which they have respectively in the whole Body of the
Universe: Or, as the Right Hand is discriminated from the Left, by a natural,
necessary, and neverto-be-confounded Distinction.

And thus I have done with the First Thing proposed, and given you such an
account of the Nature of Good and Evil, as the measure of the present Exercise
and Occasion would allow. Pass we now to the

2 d Which is to show, That the way by which Good and Evil generally operate
upon the Mind of Man, is by those Words or Names by which they are notified and
conveyed to the Mind. Words are the Signs and Symbols of Things; and, as in
Accounts, Ciphers and Figures pass for real Sums; so in the course of humane
Affairs, Words and Names pass for Things themselves. For Things, or Objects,
cannot enter into the Mind, as they subsist in themselves, and by their own
natural bulk pass into the Apprehension; but they are taken in by their Idea's,
their Notions or Resemblances; which imprinting themselves after a spiritual,
immaterial manner, in the Imagination; and from thence, under a further
Refinement, passing into the Intellect, are by that expressed by certain Words
or Names found out, and invented by the Mind, for the Communication of its
Conceptions, or Thoughts to others. So that as Conceptions are the Images, or
Resemblances of Things to the Mind within it self. In like manner are Words or
Names the Marks, Tokens or Resemblances of those Conceptions to the Minds of
them whom we converse with: (...), being the known Maxim laid down by the
Philosopher, as the first and most fundamental Rule of all discourse.

This therefore is certain, That in humane Life, or Conversation, Words stand
for Things; the common business of the World not being capable of being managed
otherwise. For by these, Men come to know one another's Minds. By these, they
Covenant and Confederate. By these, they Buy and Sell, they Deal and Traffic.
In short, Words are the great Instruments both of Practice and Design; which,
for the most part, move wholly in the strength of them. For as much as it is
the Nature of Man both to Will and to do, according to the persuasion he has
of the Good and Evil of those Things that come before him; and to take up his
Persuasions according to the Representations made to him of those Qualities, by
their respective Names, or Appellations.

This is the true and natural Account of this matter; and it is all that I
shall remark upon this second Head. I proceed now to the

3 d. Which is, to show the mischief which directly, naturally, and unavoidably
follows from the Misapplication and Confusion of those Names. And, in order to
this, I shall premise these Two Considerations.

1. That the generality of Mankind is wholly and absolutely governed by Words
and Names: Without; nay, for the most part, even against the knowledge Men have
of Things. The Multitude, or Common Rout, like a Drove of Sheep, or an Herd of
Oxen, may be managed by any Noise, or Cry, which their Drivers shall accustom
them to.

And, he who will set up for a skillful manager of the Rabble, so long as they
have but Ears to hear, needs never enquire, whether they have any understanding
whereby to judge; but with two or three popular, empty Words, such as Popery
and Superstition, Right of the Subject, Liberty of Conscience, Lord Jesus
Christ well tuned and humored; may whistle them backwards and forwards,
upwards and downwards, till he is weary; and get up upon their Backs when he is
so.

As for the meaning of the Word it self, that may shift for it self: And, as
for the Sense and Reason of it, that has little or nothing to do here; only
let it sound full and round, and chime right to the Humor, which is at present
a Gog, (just as a big, long, rattling Name is said to command even Adoration
from a Spaniard,) and, no doubt, with this powerful, senseless Engine the
Rabbledriver, shall be able to carry all before him, or to draw all after him,
as he pleases. For, a plausible, insignificant Word, in the mouth of an expert
Demagogue, is a dangerous and a dreadful Weapon.

You know, when Caesar's Army mutinied, and grew troublesome, no Argument from
Interest, or Reason, could satisfy or appease them: But, as soon as he gave
them the Appellation of Quirites, the Tumult was immediately hushed; and all
were quiet and content, and took that one Word in good payment for all. Such is
the trivial slightness and levity of most minds. And indeed, take any Passion
of the Soul of Man, while it is predominant, and a-float, and, just in the
critical height of it, nick it with some lucky, or unlucky Word, and you may as
certainly overruled it to your own purpose, as a spark of Fire, falling upon
Gunpowder, will infallibly blow it up.

The Truth is, he who shall duly consider these matters, will find that there
is a certain bewitchery, or fascination in Words, which makes them operate with
a force beyond what we can naturally give an account of. For, would not a man
think, ill Deeds, and shrewd Turns, should reach further, and strike deeper
than ill Words? And yet many Instances might be given, in which Men have much
more easily pardoned ill Things done, than ill Things said against them: Such a
peculiar rancour and venom do they leave behind them in men's Minds, and so
much more poysonously and incurably does the Serpent bite with his Tongue, than
with his Teeth.

Nor are Men prevailed upon at this odd, unaccountable rate, by bare Words,
only through a defect of Knowledge; but sometimes also do they suffer
themselves to be carried away with these Puffs of Wind, even contrary to
Knowledge and Experience it self. For otherwise, how could Men be brought to
surrender up their Reason, their Interest, and their Credit to Flattery? Gross,
fulsome, abusive Flattery; indeed more abusive and reproachful upon a true
estimate of Things and Persons, than the rudest Scoffs, and the sharpest
Invectives. Yet so it is, that though Men know themselves utterly void of those
Qualities and Perfections, which the impudent Sycophant, at the same time, both
ascribes to them, and in his Sleeve laughs at them for believing; nay, though
they know that the Flatterer himself knows the falsehood of his own Flatteries,
yet they swallow the fallacious Morsel, love the Impostor, and with both Arms
hug the Abuse; And that to such a degree, that no Offices of Friendship, no
real Services shall be able to lie in the Balance against those luscious
Falsehoods, which Flattery shall feed the Mind of a Fool in Power with; The
sweetness of the one infinitely over-comes the substance of the other.

And therefore, you shall seldom see, that such an one cares to have Men of
Worth, Honesty, and Veracity about him; For, such persons cannot fall down and
worship Stocks and Stones, though they are placed never so high above them. But
their Yea is Yea, and their Nay, Nay; and, they cannot admire a Fox for his
Sincerity, a Wolf for his Generosity, nor an Ass for his Wit and Ingenuity; And
therefore can never be acceptable to those whose whole Credit, Interest, and
Advantage lies in their not appearing to the World, what they are really in
themselves. None are, or can be welcome to such, but those who Speak Paint and
Wash; for that is the Thing they love; and, no wonder, since it is the Thing
they need.

There is hardly any Rank, Order or Degree of Men, but more or less have been
captivated, and enslaved by Words. It is a Weakness, or rather a Fate, which
attends both high and low. The Statesman, who holds the Helm, as well as the
Peasant who holds the Plough. So that if ever you find an Ignoramus in Place
and Power, and can have so little Conscience, and so much Confidence, as to
tell him to his face, that he has a Wit and an understanding above all the
World besides; The Words of a great Self-opiniator, and a bitter Reviler of the
Clergy.
and That what his own Reason cannot suggest to him, neither can the United
Reason of all Mankind put together; I dare undertake, that, as fulsome a Dose
as you give him, he shall readily take it down, and admit the Commendation,
though he cannot believe the Thing: Blanditiae etiam cum excluduntur, placent;
says Seneca. Tell him, that no History, or Antiquity, can match his Policies,
and his Conduct; and presently the Sot (because he knows neither History, nor
Antiquity) shall begin to measure himself by himself, (which is the only sure
way for him not to fall short;) and so immediately amongst his outward
Admirers, and his inward Despisers, Vouched also by a Test Me-ipso, he steps
forth an exact Politician; and, by a wonderful, and new way of Arguing, proves
himself no fool, because, forsooth, the Sycophant, who tells him so, is an
Egregious Knave.

But to give you yet a grosser Instance of the force of Words, and of the
extreme Vanity of man's Nature in being influenced by them, hardly shall you
meet with any person, Man or Woman, so aged, or ill-favored, but if you will
venture to commend them for their Comeliness; nay, and for their Youth too;
though Time out of mind is wrote upon every line of their face; yet they shall
take it very well at your hands, and begin to think with themselves, that
certainly they have some Perfections, which the generality of the World are not
so happy as to be aware of.

But now, are not these (think we) strange Self-delusions, and yet attested by
common Experience, almost every day? But whence, in the mean time, can all this
proceed, but from that besotting Intoxication, which this Verbal Magic (as I
may so call it) brings upon the Mind of Man? For, can any thing in Nature have
a more certain, deep, and undeniable Effect, than Folly has upon man's Mind,
and Age upon his Body? And yet we see, that in both these, Words are able to
persuade men out of what they find and feel, to reverse the very Impressions of
Sense, and to amuse men with Fancies and Paradoxes, even in spite of Nature,
and Experience. But, since it would be endless to pursue all the Particulars in
which this Humor shows it self; whosoever would have one full, lively and
complete view of an empty, shallow, selfopinion'd Grandee, surrounded by his
Flatterers, (like a choice Dish of Meat by a company of fellows commending, and
devouring it at the same time,) let him cast his Eye upon Ahab in the midst of
his false Prophets, 2 Kings 22. where we have them all with one Voice for
giving him a cast of their Court-Prophecy, and sending him, in a Complement, to
be knocked on the head at Ramoth Gilead. But, says Iehosaphat, (who smelt the
Parasite through the Prophet) in the 7th. verse. Is there not a Prophet of the
Lord besides, that we may enquire of him? Why yes, says Ahab, there is yet one
man by whom we may enquire of the Lord; but I hate him, for he does not
prophecy Good concerning me, but Evil. Ay! that was his crime; the poor man was
so good a Subject, and so bad a Courtier, as to venture to serve, and save his
Prince, whether he would or no; for, it seems, to give Ahab such warning, as
might infallibly have prevented his Destruction, was esteemed by him Evil, and
to push him on headlong into it, because he was fond of it, was accounted
Good. These were his new measures of Good and Evil. And therefore, those who
knew how to make their Court better, (as the Word is) tell him a bold Lie in
God's Name, and therewith send him packing to his certain doom; thus calling
Evil good at the cost of their Prince's Grown, and his Life too. But what cared
they? they knew that it would please; and that was enough for them; there being
always a sort of Men in the World, (whom others have an Interest to serve by,)
who had rather a great deal be pleased, than be safe. Strike them under the
fifth Rib; provided at the same time you kiss them too, as Ioab served Abner,
and you may both destroy and oblige them with the same blow.

Accordingly in the 30th. of Isaiah, we find some arrived to that pitch of
Sottishness, and so much in love with their own Ruin, as to own plainly and
roundly what they would be at; in the 10th. verse; Prophecy not unto us, say
they, right things, but prophecy to us smooth things. As if they had said, Do
but oil the Razor for us, and let us alone to cut our own Throats. Such an
Enchantment is there in Words; and so fine a thing does it seem to some, to be
ruined plausibly, and to be ushered to their destruction with Panegyric and
Acclamation; A shameful, though irrefragable Argument of the absurd Empire,
and Usurpation of Words over Things; and, that the greatest Affairs, and most
important Interests of the World, are carried on by Things, not as they are,
but as they are called.

And thus much for the first Thing, which I thought necessary to premise to the
Prosecution of our Third Particular.

2. The other Thing to be premised, is this; That as the generality of Men are
wholly governed by Names, and Words; so there is nothing, in which they are so
remarkably, and powerfully governed by by them, as in matters of Good and Evil;
so far as these Qualities relate to, and affect the Actions of men. A thing
certainly of a most fatal and pernicious import. For, though in matters of mere
Speculation, it is not much the Concern of Society, whether or no men proceed
wholly upon Trust, and take the bare Word of others, for what they assent to;
since it is not much material to the Welfare either of Government, or of
themselves, whether they Opine right or wrong, and whether they be
Philosophers, or no. But it is vastly the concern both of Government, and of
themselves too, whether they be morally good or bad, honest or dishonest. And
surely, it is hardly possible for men to make it their business to be virtuous
or honest, while Vices are called and pointed out to them by the Names of
Virtues; and they all the while, suppose the Nature of Things to be truly and
faithfully signified by their Names, and thereupon believe as they hear, and
practice as they believe. And that this is the course of much the greatest part
of the World thus to take up their Persuasions concerning Good and Evil by an
Implicit Faith, and a full acquiescence in the Word of those, who shall
represent things to them under these Characters, I shall prove by Two Reasons;
and those such as (I fear) will not only be found Reasons to evince that men
Actually do so; but also sad Demonstrations to conclude that they are never
like to do otherwise.

First, The First of which shall be taken from that Similitude, Neighborhood,
and Affinity, which is between Vice and Virtue, Good and Evil, in several
notable Instances of Each. For, though the General Natures, and Definitions of
these Qualities are sufficiently distant from one another, and so in no danger
of a promiscuous Confusion; yet when they come to subsist in Particulars, and
to be clothed, and attended with several Accidents, and Circumstances, the
Case is hereby much altered, for then, the Discernment is neither so easy, nor
yet so certain. Thus it is not always so obvious to distinguish between an Act
of Liberality, and an Act of Prodigality; between an Act of Courage, and an Act
of Rashness; an Act of Pusillanimity, and an Act of great Modesty or Humility:
Nay, and some have had the good Luck to have their very Dullness dignified with
the Name of Gravity, and to be no small Gainers by the Mistake. And many more
such Actions of Dubious Quality, might be instanced in, too numerous to be here
recounted, or insisted on. In all which, and the like, it requiring too great a
Sagacity for vulgar Minds to draw the Line nicely and exactly between Vice and
Virtue, and to adjust the due Limits of Each; it is no Wonder, if most Men
attempt not a laborious Scrutiny into Things themselves, but only take Names
and Words, as they first come, and so without any more ado rest in them; it
being so much easier, in all Disquisitions of Truth, to suppose, than to prove,
and to believe, than to distinguish.

Secondly, The other Reason of the same shall be taken from the Great, and
Natural Inability of most Men to judge exactly of Things; which makes it very
difficult for them to discern the real Good, and Evil, of what comes before
them, to consider, and weigh Circumstances, to scatter, and look through the
Mists of Error, and so separate Appearances from Realities. For the greater
Part of Mankind, is but slow and dull of Apprehension; and therefore in many
Cases under a Necessity of Seeing with other Men's Eyes, and judging with other
Men's Understandings. Nature having manifestly contrived things so, that the
Vulgar, and the Many, are fit only to be led, or driven, but by no means fit to
guide, or direct themselves.

To which their want of judging or discerning Abilities, we may add also their
Want of Leisure, and Opportunity to apply their Minds to such a serious and
attent Consideration, as may let them into a full Discovery of the true
Goodness, and Evil of Things which are Qualities, which seldom display
themselves to the first View: For in most things, Good and Evil lie shuffled,
and thrust up together in a confused Heap; and it is Study and Intention of
Thought which must draw them forth, and range them under their distinct Heads.
But there can be no Study, without Time; and the Mind must abide and dwell upon
Things, or be always a Stranger to the Inside of them. Through desire (says
Solomon) a Man having separated himself, seeks and intermedleth with all
Wisdom, Prove. 18. 12. There must be Leisure and a Retirement, Solitude, and a
Sequestration of a Man's self from the Noise, and Toil of the World: For Truth
scorns to be seen by Eyes too much fixed upon inferior Objects. It lies too
deep to be fetched up with the Plough, and too close to be beaten out with the
Hammer. It dwells not in Shops or Work houses; nor till the late Age was it
ever known, that any one served Seven Years to a Smith, or a Tailor, that he
might at the End thereof, proceed Master of any other Arts, but such as those
Trades taught him; and much less that he should commence Doctor, or Divine from
the Shopboard, or the Anvil; or from whistling to a Team, come to preach to a
Congregation.

These were the peculiar, extraordinary Privileges of the late blessed Times of
Light and Inspiration: Otherwise Nature will still hold on its old Course,
never doing any thing which is considerable without the Assistance of its two
great Helps, Art, and Industry. But above all, the Knowledge of what is Good,
and what is Evil, what ought, and what ought not to be done, in the several
Offices and Relations of Life, is a thing too large to be compassed, and too
hard to be mastered, without Brains and Study, Parts, and Contemplation; which
Providence never thought fit to make much the greatest Part of Mankind,
Possessors of. And consequently those who are not so, must, for the Knowledge
of most things, depend upon those who are; and receive their Information
concerning Good and Evil, from such Verbal or Nominal Representations of Each,
as shall be imparted to them by those, whose Ability, and Integrity they have
Cause to rely upon, for a faithful Account of these Matters.

And thus, from these two great Considerations premised. 1 st. That the
Generality of the World are wholly governed verned by Words and Names; And 2
dly. That the Chief Instance in which they are so, is in such Words and Names,
as import the Good or Evil of things; ( Which both the Difficulty of Things
themselves, and the very Condition of humane Nature constrains much the
greatest Part of Mankind to take wholly upon Trust:) I say, from these two
Considerations, must needs be inferred, What a fatal, devilish, and destructive
Effect the Misapplication, and Confusion of those great Governing Names of Good
and Evil, must inevitably have upon the Societies of Men. The comprehensive
Mischief of which, will appear from this, that it takes in both those ways, by
which the greatest Evils, and Calamities, which are incident to Man, do
directly break in upon him.

The First of which is by his being deceived, and the Second by his being
misrepresented. And First, for the First of these. I do not in the least doubt,
but if a true and just Computation could be made of all the Miseries, and
Misfortunes that befall Men in this World, Two Thirds of them, at least, would
be found resolveable into their being deceived by false Appearances of Good;
First deluding their Apprehensions, and then by Natural Consequence perverting
their Actions; from which are the great Issues of Life and Death; since
according to the Eternal Sanction of God and Nature, such as a Man's Actions
are for Good or Evil, such ought also his Condition to be for Happiness, or
Misery.

Now all Deception in the Course of Life is indeed nothing else, but a Lie
reduced to Practice, and Falsehood, passing from Words into Things.

For is a Man impoverished, and undone by the Purchase of an Estate? why; it
is, because he bought an Imposture: paid down his Money for a Lie, and by the
help of the best and ablest Counsel (forsooth) that could be had, took a Bad
Title for a Good.

Is a Man unfortunate in Marriage? still it is, because he was deceived; and
put his Neck into the Snare, before he put it into the Yoke, and so took that
for Virtue, and Affection, which was nothing but Vice in a Disguise, and a
Devilish Humor under a Demure Look.

Is he again unhappy, and calamitous in his Friendships? Why; in this also, it
is because he built upon the Air, and trod upon a Quick-sand, and took that for
Kindness, and Sincerity, which was only Malice, and Design, seeking an
Opportunity to ruin him effectually, and to overturn him in all his Interests
by the Sure, but fatal Handle of his own good Nature, and Credulity.

And lastly, is a Man betrayed, lost, and blown by such Agents, and
Instruments, as he imploys in his greatest and nearest Concerns? Why, still the
Cause of it is from this, that he misplaced his Confidence, took Hypocrisy for
Fidelity, and so relied upon the Services of a Pack of Villains, who designed
nothing but their own Game, and to stake him, while they played for themselves.

But not to mention any more Particulars, there is no Estate, Office, or
Condition of Life whatsoever, but groans, and labors under the Killing Truth
of what we have asserted.

For it is this which supplants not only private Persons, but Kingdoms and
Governments, by keeping them ignorant of their own Strengths and Weaknesses;
and it is evident that Governments may be equally destroyed by an Ignorance of
either. For the Weak by thinking themselves strong, are induced to venture and
proclaim War against that which ruins them; And the Strong, by conceiting
themselves weak, are thereby rendered as unactive, and consequently as useless,
as if they really were so. In Luke 14. 31. When a King with Ten Thousand is to
meet a King coming against him with Twenty Thousand, our Savior advises him,
before he ventures the Issue of a Battle, to sit down and consider. But now a
false glozing Parasite would give him quite another Kind of Counsel, and bid
him only reckon his Ten Thousand Forty, call his Fool-hardiness Valor, and
then he may go on boldly, because blindly, and by mistaking himself for a Lion,
come to perish like an Ass.

In short, it is this great Plague of the World Deception, which takes wrong
Measures, and makes false Musters almost in every Thing; which sounds a Retreat
instead of a Charge, and a Charge instead of a Retreat; which overthrows whole
Armies; and sometimes by one lying Word treacherously cast out, turns the Fate
and Fortune of States and Empires, and lays the most flourishing Monarchies in
the Dust. A blind Guide is certainly a great Mischief, but a Guide that blinds
those, whom he should lead, is undoubtedly a much greater.

Secondly, The other great and undoing Mischief, which befalls Men upon the
forementioned Account, is by their being misrepresented. Now as by calling
Evil good, a Man is misrepresented to himself in the Way of Flattery; so by
calling good Evil, he is misrepresented to others in the Way of Slander, and
Detraction. I say Detraction, that killing, poisoned Arrow drawn out of the
Devil's Quiver, which is always flying abroad, and doing Execution in the Dark;
against which no Virtue is a Defense, no Innocence a Security. For as by
Flattery, a Man is usually brought to open his Bosom to his Mortal Enemy; so
by Detraction, and a slanderous Mis-report of Persons, he is often brought to
shut the same even to his best and truest Friends. In both Cases he receives a
fatal Blow, since that which lays a Man open to an Enemy, and that which strips
him of a Friend, equally attacks him in all those Interests, that are capable
of being weakened by the one, and supported by the other.

The most direct and efficacious way to ruin any Man, is to mis-represent him;
and it often so falls out, that it wounds on both sides, and not only mauls
the Person misrepresented, but him also, to whom he is misrepresented: For if
he be Great, and Powerful (as Spies and Pick-thanks seldom apply to any
others) it generally provokes him through mistake to persecute, and tyrannize
over; nay, and sometimes, even, to dip his Hands in the Blood of the Innocent,
and the Just, and thereby involve himself in such a Guilt, as shall Arm Heaven
and Earth against him, the Vengeance of God, and the Indignation of Men; who
will both espouse the Quarrel of a bleeding Innocence, and heartily join Forces
against an insulting Baseness; especially when backed with Greatness, and set
on by Misinformation. Histories are full of such Examples.

Besides, that it is rarely found, that Men hold their Greatness for Term of
Life; though their Baseness, for the most part, they do; and then, according to
the common Vicissitude, and Wheel of Things, the Proud, and the Insolent must
take their Turn too; and after long trampling upon others, come, at length,
Plaudente, and gaudente Mundo, to be trampled upon themselves. For, as Tully
has it in his Oration for Milo; Non semper Viator a Latrone, nonnunquam etiam
Latro a Viatore occiditur.

But, to pass from Particulars to Communities, nothing can be imagined more
destructive to Society than this villainous Practice. For it robs the Public
of all that Benefit, and Advantage, that it may justly claim, and ought to
receive, from the Worth and Virtue of particular Persons, by rendering their
Virtue utterly insignificant. For Good it self can do no good, while it passes
for Evil; and an honest Man is, in effect, useless, while he is accounted a
Knave. Both Things and Persons subsist by their Reputation.

An unjust Sentence from a Tribunal may condemn an Innocent Person; but
Mis-representation condemns Innocence it self. For it is this which revives,
and imitates that unhumane Barbarity of the Old Heathen Persecutors, wrapping
up Christians in the Skins of wild Beasts, that so they might be worried and
torn in pieces by Dogs. Do but paint an Angel black, and that is enough to make
him pass for a Devil. Let us blacken him, let us blacken him what we can, said
that Miscreant A Preaching Colonel of the Parliament-Army, and a Chief Actor in
the Murder of K. Charles the First; Notable before, for having killed several
after Quarter given them by others; and using these Words in the doing it,
Cursed be he, who does the work of the Lord negligently. He was by Extraction a
Butcher's Son; and accordingly, in his Practices all along, more a Butcher than
his Father.
Harrison, of the blessed King, upon the Wording and drawing up his Charge
against his approaching Trial. And when any Man is to be run down, and
sacrificed to the Lust of his Enemies, as that Royal Martyr was, even his Good
(according to the Apostle's phrase) shall be Evil spoken of. He must first be
undermined, and then undone. The Practice is usual, and the Method natural.
But, to give you the whole Malice of it in one Word; it is a Weapon forged in
Hell, and formed by the prime Artificer, and Engineer of all Mischief, the
Devil; and none but that God, who knows all Things, and can do all Things, can
protect the best of Men against it.

To which God, the Fountain of all Good, and the Hater of all Evil, be rendered,
and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both
now, and for ever-more. Amen.

Prevention of Sin AN Unvaluable Mercy: OR, A SERMON Preached upon that
Subject, On I SAM. XXV. 32, 33. AT Christ-Church, Oxon. Nov. 10. 1678.
1 SAMUEL XXV. 32, 33. And David said to Abigail; Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, who sent thee this Day to meet me. And blessed be thy Advice, and
blessed be thou, who have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from
avenging my self with my own Hand.
THese Words are David's Retractation, or laying down of a bloody and
revengefull Resolution; which, for awhile, his Heart had swelled with, and
carried him on with the highest Transport of Rage to prosecute. A Resolution
took up from the Sense of a gross Indignity, and Affront passed upon him, in
Recompense of a signal Favor and Kindness received from him. For during his
Exile, and Flight before Saul; in which he was frequently put to all the
Hardships, which usually befall the Weak, flying before the Strong; there
happening a great, and solemn Festivity, such as the Sheep-shearings used to be
in those Eastern Countries, he condescends, by an Honorable, and Kind Message,
to beg of a Rich, and Great Man, some small Repast, and Supply for himself, and
his poor harassed Companions, at that Notable Time of Joy, and Feasting: A Time
that might make any thing, that looked like Want, or Hunger, no less an
Absurdity, than a Misery, to all that were round about him. And, as if the
Greatness of the Asker, and the Smallness of the Thing asked, had not been
sufficient to enforce his Request, he adds a Commemoration of his own Generous,
and Noble Usage of the Person, whom he thus addressed to; showing how that he
had been a Wall, and a Bulwark, to all that belonged to him, a Safeguard to his
Estate, and a Keeper of his Flocks; and that both from the Violence of Robbers,
and the License of his own Soldiers; who could much more easily have carved
themselves their own Provisions, than so great a Spirit stoop so low as to ask
them.

But in answer to this, (as nothing is so rude and insolent as a wealthy
Rustic) all this his Kindness is overlooked, his Request rejected, and his
Person most unworthily railed at. Such being the Nature of some base Minds,
that they can never do ill Turns, but they must double them with ill Words too.
And thus David's Messengers are sent back to him, like so many Sharks, and
Runnagates; only for endeavoring to complement an ill Nature out of its self;
and seeking that by Petition, which they might have commanded by their Sword.

And now, who would not but think, that such ungrateful Usage, heightened with
such reproachful Language, might warrant the Justice of the sharpest Revenge;
even of such a Revenge, as now began to boil, and burn in the Breast of this
great Warrior? For surely, if any thing may justly call up the utmost of a
Man's Rage, it should be bitter and contumelious Words from an unprovoked
Inferior; and, if any thing can legalize Revenge, it should be Injuries from an
extremely obliged Person. But for all this, Revenge, we see, is so much the
Prerogative of the Almighty, so absolutely the Peculiar of Heaven, that no
Consideration whatsoever can empower, even the best Men, to assume the
Execution of it in their own Case. And therefore David, by an happy and
seasonable Pacification, being took off from acting that Bloody Tragedy, which
he was just now entering upon, and so turning his Eyes from the Baseness of him,
who had stirred up his Revenge, to the Goodness of that God, who had prevented
it; he breaks forth into these Triumphant Praises, and Doxologies, expressed in
the Text: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has kept me this Day from
shedding Blood, and from avenging my self with my own Hand.

Which Words, together with those going before in the same Verse, naturally
afford us this Doctrinal Proposition, which shall be the Subject of the
following Discourse. Namely, That Prevention of Sin is one of the greatest
Mercies, that God can vouchsafe a Man in this World.

The Prosecution of which shall lie in these two Things: First, To prove the
Proposition; Secondly, To apply it.

And First, for the Proof of it: The transcendent Greatness of this
Sin-preventing Mercy, is demonstrable from these Four following Considerations.

1. Of the Condition which the Sinner is in, when this Mercy is vouchsafed him.

2. Of the Principle or Fountain, from whence this Prevention of Sin does
proceed.

3. Of the Hazard a Man runs, if the Commission of Sin be not prevented,
whether ever it will come to be pardoned: And,

4 ly and Lastly, Of the Advantages accruing to the Soul from the Prevention of
Sin, above what can be had from the bare Pardon of it, in Case it comes to be
pardoned.

Of these in their Order: And First, We are to take an Estimate of the
Greatness of this Mercy, from the Condition it finds the Sinner in, when God is
pleased to vouchsafe it to him. It finds him in the direct way to Death and
Destruction; and, which is worse, wholly unable to help himself. For he is
actually under the Power of a Temptation, and the Sway of an impetuous Lust;
both hurrying him on to satisfy the Cravings of it, by some wicked Action. He
is possessed, and acted by a Passion, which, for the present, absolutely
overrules him; and so can no more recover himself, than a Bowl rolling down an
Hill, stop its self in the midst of its Career. It is a Maxim in the Philosophy
of some, That whatsoever is once in actual Motion, will move for ever, if it be
not hindered.

So a Man, being under the Drift of any Passion, will still follow the Impulse
of it, till something interpose, and by a stronger Impulse turn him another
way: But in this Case we can find no Principle within him strong enough to
counter-act that Principle, and to relieve him. For, if it be any, it must be
either, First, the Judgment of his Reason; or, Secondly, the free Choice of his
Will.

But from the First of these there can be no help for him in his present
Condition. For, while a Man is engaged in any sinful Purpose, through the
Prevalence of any Passion, during the Continuance of that Passion, he fully
approves of whatsoever he is carried on to do in the Strength of it; and
judges it, under his present Circumstances, the Best and most Rational Course
that he can take. Thus we see, when Jonas was under the Passion of Anger, and
God asked him, Whether he did well to be angry? He answered, I do well to be
angry even unto Death, Jonas 4. 9. And when Saul was under his persecuting Fit,
what he did, appeared to him good and necessary, Acts 26. 9. I verily thought
with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus.
But to go no further than the Text; Do we not think, that while David's Heart
was full of his revengefull Design, it had blinded, and perverted his reason so
far, that it struck in wholly with his Passion, and told him, That the Bloody
purpose he was going to execute, was Just, Magnanimous, and most becoming such
a Person, and so dealt with, as he was? This being so, how is it possible for a
Man under a Passion, to receive any Succor from his Judgment, or Reason, which
is made a Party in the whole Action, and influenced to a present Approbation of
all the ill Things which his Passion can suggest? This is most certain; and
every Man may find it by Experience, (if he will but impartially reflect upon
the Method of his own Actings, and the Motions of his own Mind,) That, while he
is under any Passion, he thinks and judges quite otherwise of the proper
Objects of that Passion, from what he does, when he is out of it. Take a Man
under the Transports of a Vehement Rage or Revenge, and he passes a very
different Judgment upon Murder and Bloodshed, from what he does when his
Revenge is over, and the Flame of his Fury spent. Take a Man possessed with a
strong and immoderate Desire of any thing, and you shall find, that the Worth
and Excellency of that thing appears much greater, and more dazzling to the Eye
of his Mind, than it does when that Desire either by satisfaction, or otherwise
is quite extinguished. So that while Passion is upon the Wing, and the Man
fully engaged in the Prosecution of some unlawful Object, no Remedy or
Control is to be expected from his Reason, which is wholly gained over to
judge in favor of it. The Fumes of his Passion do as really intoxicate, and
confound his judging and discerning Faculty, as the Fumes of Drink discompose
and stupify the Brain of a Man overcharged with it. When his Drink indeed is
over, he sees the Folly and the Absurdity, the Madness, and the Vileness of
those Things, which before he acted with full Complacency, and Approbation.
Passion is the Drunkenness of the Mind; and therefore, in its present Workings
not controllable by Reason; forasmuch as the proper Effect of it is, for the
Time, to supersede the Workings of Reason. This Principle therefore being able
to do nothing to the stopping of a Man, in the eager pursuit of his Sin; there
remains no other, that can be supposed able to do any thing upon the Soul, but
that Second mentioned, to wit, The Choice of his Will. But this also is as much
disabled from recovering a Man fully intent upon the Prosecution of any of his
Lusts, as the former. For all the Time, that a Man is so, he absolutely wills,
and is fully pleased with what he is designing, or going about. And whatsoever
perfectly pleases the Will, over-powers it; for it fixes and determines the
Inclination of it, to that one Thing which is before it; and so fills up all
its Possibilities of Indifference, that there is actually no room for Choice.
He who is under the Power of Melancholy, is pleased with his being so. He who
is angry, delights in nothing so much as in the venting of his Rage. And he who
is lustful, places his greatest Satisfaction in a Slavish following of the
Dictates of his Lust. And so long as the Will, and the Affections are pleased,
and exceedingly gratified in any Course of Acting, it is impossible for a Man
(so far as he is at his own disposal) not to continue in it; or, by any
Principle within him, to be diverted or took off from it.

From all which we see, that when a Man has took up a full Purpose of Sinning,
he is hurried on to it in the Strength of all those Principles, which Nature
has given him to act by: For Sin having depraved his Judgment, and got
possession of his Will, there is no other Principle left him naturally, by
which he can make head against it. Nor is this all; but to these Internal
Dispositions to Sin, add the External Opportunities and Occasions concurring
with them, and removing all Letts, and Rubbs out of the Way, and (as it were)
making the Path of Destruction plain before the Sinner's Face; so that he may
run his Course freely, and without Interruption. Nay, when Opporunities shall
lie so fair, as not only to permit, but even to invite, and further a Progress
in Sin. So that the Sinner shall set forth, like a Ship launched into the wide
Sea; not only well built and rigged, but also carried on with full Wind and
Tide, to the Port or place it is bound for: Surely in this case, nothing under
Heaven can be imagined able to stop or countermand a Sinner amidst all these
Circumstances promoting, and pushing on his sinful Design. For all that can
give Force and Fury to motion both from within, and from without, jointly meet
to bear him forward in his present Attempt. He presses on like an Horse rushing
into the Battle, and all that should withstand him giving way before him.

Now under this deplorable Necessity of Ruin and Destruction does God's
preventing Grace find every Sinner, when it snatches him like a Brand out of
the Fire, and steps in between the Purpose, and the Commission of his Sin. It
finds him going on resolutely in the high and broad-way to Perdition; which yet
his perverted Reason tells him, is right, and his Will, Pleasant. And therefore
he has no Power of himself to leave, or turn out of it; but he is ruined
jocundly and pleasantly, and damned according to his Heart's desire. And, can
there be a more wretched and woeful Spectacle of Misery, than a man in such a
condition? A man pleasing and destroying himself together; A man (as it were)
doing Violence to Damnation, and taking Hell by force. So that when the
Preventing Goodness of God reaches out its Arm, and pulls him out of this fatal
Path, it does by main force even wrest him from himself, and save him as it
were against his Will.

But neither is this his total Inability to recover or relieve himself the
worst of his condition; but, which is yet much worse, it puts him into a state
of actual Hostility against, and Defiance of, that Almighty God, from whom
alone, in this helpless, and forlorn condition, he is capable of receiving
help. For surely, while a man is going on in a full purpose of Sin, he is
trampling upon all Law, spitting in the face of Heaven, and provoking his Maker
in the highest manner; so that none is, or can be so much concerned as God
himself, to destroy and cut off such an one, and to vindicate the honor of his
great Name, by striking him dead in his Rebellion. And this brings us to the

2 d. Thing proposed; which was to show, What is the Fountain or Impulsive
Cause of this Prevention of Sin? It is perfectly Free Grace. A man at best,
upon all Principles of Divinity, and sound Philosophy, is incapable of meriting
any thing from God. But surely, while he is under the Dominion of Sin, and
engaged in full Design and Purpose to commit it, it is not imaginable what can
be found in him to oblige the Divine Grace in his behalf. For, he is in high
and actual Rebellion against the only Giver of such Grace. And therefore it
must needs flow from a redundant, unaccountable Fullness of Compassion; showing
Mercy, because it will show Mercy; from a Compassion, which is, and must be its
own Reason; and can have no Argument for its Exercise, but it self. No man in
the strength of the first Grace, can merit the second, (as some fondly speak,)
for Reason they do not, unless a Beggar, by receiving one Alms, can be said to
merit another. It is not from what a man is, or what he has done; from any
Virtue or Excellency, any preceding Worth or Desert in him, that God is induced
thus to interpose between Him and Ruin, and so stop him in his full career to
Damnation. No, says God, in Ezekiel. 16. 6. When I passed by, and saw thee
polluted in thine own Blood, I said unto thee, Live; yea, I said unto thee,
when thou wast in thy Blood, Live. The Spirit of God speaks this great Truth to
the Hearts of Men with Emphasis and Repetition, knowing what an Aptness there
is in them to oppose it. God sees a man wallowing in his native Filth and
Impurity, delivered over as an absolute Captive to Sin, polluted with its
Guilt, and enslaved by its Power; and in this most loathsome Condition fixes
upon him as an Object of his distinguishing Mercy. And to show yet further,
that the Actings of this Mercy, in the Work of Prevention, are entirely free;
Do we not sometimes see, in persons of equal guilt and demerit, and of equal
progress, and advance in the ways of Sin; some of them maturely diverted, and
took off, and others permitted to go on without check or control, till they
finish a sinful Course in final Perdition? So true is it, that, if things were
cast upon this Issue, that God should never prevent Sin, till something in Man
deserved it, the best of Men would fall into Sin, continue in Sin, and Sin on
for ever.

And thus much for the Second Thing proposed; which was to show, What was the
Principle, or Fountain, from whence this Prevention of Sin does proceed. Come
we now to the 3 d. Demonstration, or Proof of the Greatness of this preventing
Mercy, taken from the Hazard a Man runs, if the Commission of Sin be not
prevented, whether ever it will come to be pardoned.

In order to the clearing of which, I shall lay down these Two Considerations.

1. That if Sin be not thus prevented, it will certainly be committed; And the
Reason is, because, on the Sinner's part, there will be always a strong
inclination to Sin. So that, if other things concur, and Providence cuts not
off the opportunity, the Act of Sin must needs follow. For, an active
Principle, seconded with the Opportunities of Action, will infallibly exert it
self.

2 ly. The other Consideration is, That in every Sin deliberately committed,
there are (generally speaking) many more Degrees of Probability, that That Sin
will never come to be pardoned, than that it will.

And this shall be made appear upon these Three following Accounts.

1. Because every Commission of Sin introduces into the Soul a certain degree
of Hardness, and an Aptness to continue in that Sin. It is a known maxim; That
it is much more difficult to throw out, than not to let in. Every degree of
Entrance, is a degree of Possession. Sin taken into the Soul, is like a Liquor
poured into a Vessel; so much of it as it fills, it also seasons. The Touch and
Tincture go together. So that although the Body of the Liquor should be poured
out again, yet still it leaves that Tang behind it, which makes the Vessel
fitter for that, than for any other. In like manner, every Act of Sin strangely
transforms, and works over the Soul to its own likeness. Sin in this being to
the Soul, like fire to combustible matter; It assimilates, before it destroys
it.

2 ly. A second Reason is; Because every Commission of Sin imprints upon the
Soul a further disposition, and proneness to Sin. As the second, third, and
fourth Degrees of Heat are more easily introduced, than the first. Every one is
both a preparative, and a step to the next. Drinking both quenches the present
Thirst, and provokes it for the future. When the Soul is beaten from its first
Station, and the Mounds and Outworks of Virtue are once broken down, it becomes
quite another thing from what it was before. In one single Eating of the
forbidden Fruit, when the Act is over, yet the Relish remains; and the
Remembrance of the first Repast, is an easy Allurement to the second. One
Visit is enough to begin an Acquaintance; and this Point is gained by it, that
when the Visitant comes again, he is no more a Stranger.

3 ly. The third and grand Reason is; Because the only thing, that can entitle
the Sinner to Pardon, which is Repentance, is not in the Sinner's power. And he
who goes about the Work, will find it so. It is the Gift of God: And though God
has certainly promised Forgiveness of Sin to every one who Repents, yet he has
not promised to any one to give him Grace to Repent. This is the Sinner's hard
Lot; that the same thing which makes him need Repentance, makes him also in
danger of not obtaining it. For, it provokes and offends that Holy Spirit,
which alone can bestow this Grace. As the same Treason which puts a Traitor in
need of his Prince's Mercy, is a great and a just Provocation to his Prince to
deny it him.

Now, let these Three things be put together: First, That every Commission of
Sin, in some degree, hardens the Soul in that Sin. Secondly, That every
Commission of Sin disposes the Soul to proceed further in Sin: And, Thirdly,
That to repent, and turn from Sin (without which all Pardon is impossible) is
not in the Sinner's power; And then, I suppose, there cannot but appear a
greater likelihood, that a Sin once committed, will, in the issue, not be
pardoned, than that it will. To all which, add the Confirmation of general
Experience, and the real Event of Things, That where one Man ever comes to
Repent, an hundred, I might say a thousand at least, end their days in final
Impenitence.

All which considered, surely there cannot need a more pregnant Argument of the
Greatness of this Preventing Mercy; if it did no more for a man than this; That
his grand, immortal Concern, more valuable to him than ten thousand Worlds, is
not thrown upon a Critical Point; that he is not bronght to his last Stake;
that he is rescued from the first Descents into Hell, and the high
Probabilities of Damnation.

For, whatsoever the Issue proves, it is certainly a miserable thing to be
forced to cast Lots for one's Life; yet in every Sin a man does the same for
Eternity. And therefore, let the boldest Sinner take this one Consideration
along with him, when he is going to Sin, That whether the Sin he is about to
act ever comes to be pardoned or no; yet, as soon as it is acted, it quite
turns the Balance, puts his Salvation upon the venture, leaves him but one Cast
for all; and, which is yet much more dreadful, makes it ten to one odds
against him.

But, let us now alter the state of the matter so, as to leave no doubt in the
case: But suppose, that the Sin, which upon non-prevention comes to be
committed, comes also to be repented of, and consequently to be pardoned. Yet,
in the

Fourth and Last place, The Greatness of this Preventing-Mercy is eminently
proved from those Advantages accruing to the Soul, from the Prevention of Sin,
above what can be had from the bare Pardon of it. And that, in these Two great
Respects.

1. Of the Clearness of a man's Condition.

2. Of the Satisfaction of his Mind. And,

First, For the Clearness of his Condition. If innocence be preferrible to
Repentance; and to be clean, be more desirable, than to be cleansed; then
surely Prevention of Sin ought to have the Precedence of its Pardon. For, so
much of Prevention, so much of Innocence. There are indeed various Degrees of
it; and God in his Infinite Wisdom does not deal forth the same measure of his
Preventing Grace to All. Sometimes he may suffer the Soul but just to begin the
sinful production, in reflecting upon a Sin suggested by the Imagination, with
some Complacency, and Delight; which, in the Apostle's phrase, is to conceive
Sin; and then, in these early, imperfect Beginnings, God perhaps may presently
dash, and extinguish it. Or, possibly he may permit the Sinful Conception to
receive Life and Form, by passing into a purpose of committing it; and then he
may make it prove Abortive, by stifling it, before ever it comes to the Birth.
Or, perhaps, God may think fit, to let it come even to the Birth by some strong
Endeavors to commit it; and yet then, deny it strength to bring forth; so that
it never comes into Actual Commission. Or, lastly, God may suffer it to be
Born, and see the World, by permitting the Endeavor of Sin to pass into the
Commission of it. And this is the last fatal step, but one; which is by
frequent Repetition of the sinful Act, to continue and persist in it, till at
length it settles into a fixed, confirmed Habit of Sin; which being properly
that, which the Apostle calls the finishing of Sin, ends certainly in Death;
Death, not only as to Merit, but also as to Actual Infliction.

Now peradventure in this whole progress, Preventing, Grace may sometimes come
in to the poor Sinner's help, but at the last hour of the Day; and having
suffered him to run all the former risk and maze of Sin, and to descend so many
steps downwards to the black Regions of Death: As first, from the bare Thought
and Imagination of Sin, to look upon it with some Beginnings of Appetite, and
Delight; from thence to purpose and intend it; and from intending, to endeavor
it; and from endeavoring, actually to commit it; and having committed it,
perhaps for some time to continue in it. And then (I say) after all this, God
may turn the fatal Stream, and by a mighty Grace interrupt its Course, and keep
it from passing into a settled Habit, and so hinder the absolute Completion of
Sin in final Obduracy.

Certain it is, that wheresoever it pleases God to stop the Sinner on this side
Hell, how far soever he has been advanced in his way toward it, it is a vast,
ineffable Mercy; a Mercy as great as Life from the Dead, and Salvation to a man
tottering with Horror upon the very Edge and Brink of Destruction. But if, more
than all this, God shall be pleased by an Early Grace to prevent Sin so soon,
as to keep the Soul in the Virginity of its first Innocence, not tainted with
the Desires, and much less defloured with the formed Purpose of any thing vile
and sinful; What an Infinite Goodness is this? It is not a Converting, but a
Crowning Grace; such an one as irradiates, and puts a Circle of Glory about the
Head of him, upon whom it descends; It is the Holy Ghost coming down upon him
in the form of a Dove; and setting him Triumphant above the Necessity of Tears
and Sorrow, Mourning and Repentance, the sad After-games of a lost Innocence.
And this brings in the Consideration of that other great Advantage accruing to
the Soul from the Prevention of Sin, above what can be had from the bare Pardon
of it; Namely,

2. The Satisfaction of a man's Mind. There is that true Joy, that solid and
substantial Comfort, conveyed to the Heart by Preventing-Grace; which
Pardoning-Grace, at the best, very seldom, and, for the most part, never gives.
For, since all Joy passes into the Heart through the Understanding, the Object
of it must be known by one, before it can affect the other. Now, when Grace
keeps a Man so within his Bounds, that Sin is prevented, he certainly knows it
to be so; and so rejoices upon the firm, infallible Ground of Sense and
Assurance. But, on the other side, though Grace may have reversed the
Condemning Sentence, and sealed the Sinner's Pardon before God, yet it may have
left no Transcript of that Pardon in the Sinner's Breast. The Handwriting
against him may be Cancelled in the Court of Heaven, and yet the Enditement run
on in the Court of Conscience. So that a Man may be safe as to his Condition,
but in the mean time dark and doubtful as to his Apprehensions; Secure in his
Pardon, but miserable in the Ignorance of it; and so passing all his days in
the disconsolate, uneasy Vicissitudes of Hopes and Fears, at length go out of
the World, not knowing whither he goes. And, what is this but a black Cloud
drawn over all a man's Comforts? A Cloud, which though it cannot hinder the
supporting Influence of Heaven, yet will be sure to intercept the refreshing
Light of it. The Pardoned Person must not think to stand upon the same vantage
Ground with the Innocent. It is enough that they are both equally safe; but it
cannot be thought, that without a rare Privilege, both can be equally
cheerful. And, thus much for the advantageous Effects of Preventing, above
those of Pardoning Grace; which was the Fourth and Last Argument brought for
the Proof of the Proposition. Pass we now to the next General Thing proposed
for the Prosecution of it; Namely,

2. Its Application. Which, from the foregoing Discourse, may afford us several
useful Deductions; but chiefly by way of Information, in these Three following
Particulars. As,

First, This may inform and convince us how vastly greater a pleasure is
consequent upon the Forbearance of Sin, than can possibly accompany the
Commission of it; And, how much higher a Satisfaction is to be found from a
conquered, than from a conquering Passion. For the proof of which, we need look
no further than the great Example here before us. Revenge is certainly the most
luscious Morsel that the Devil can put into the Sinner's mouth. But, do we
think, that David could have found half that pleasure in the Execution of his
Revenge, that he expresses here upon the Disappointment of it? Possibly it
might have pleased him in the present heat and hurry of his Rage, but must have
displeased him infinitely more in the cool, sedate Reflections of his Mind.
For, Sin can please no longer, than for that pitiful Space of Time while it is
committing; and surely the present pleasure of a sinful Act, is a poor
Countervail for the bitterness of the Review, which begins where the Action
ends, and lasts for ever. There is no ill thing which a man does in his
Passion, but his Memory will be revenged on him for it afterward.

All Pleasure springing from a gratified Passion, as most of the Pleasure of
Sin does, must needs determine with that Passion. It Is short, violent, and
fallacious; and, as soon as the Imagination is disabused, will certainly be at
an end. And therefore Des Carts prescribes excellently well for the Regulation
of the Passions; viz. That a Man should fix and fore-arm his Mind with this
settled Persuasion, that, during that Commotion of his Blood and Spirits, in
which Passion properly consists, whatsoever is offered to his Imagination in
favor of it, tends only to deceive his Reason. It is indeed a real Trapan upon
it; feeding it with Colors, and Appearances, instead of Arguments; and driving
the very same Bargain, which Jacob did with Esau, A Mess of Pottage for a
Birthright, a present Repast for a Perpetuity.

Secondly, We have here a sure unfailing Criterion, by which every Man may
discover, and find out the gracious or ungracious Disposition of his own Heart.
The Temper of every Man is to be judged of from the Thing he most esteems; and
the Object of his Esteem, may be measured by the prime Object of his Thanks.
What is it, that opens thy Mouth in Praises, that fills thy Heart, and lifts up
thy Hands in grateful Acknowledgments to thy great Creator, and Preserver? Is
it, that thy Bags, and thy Barns are full, that thou have escaped this
Sickness, or that Danger? Alas, God may have done all this for thee in Anger!
All this fair Sunshine may have been only to harden thee in thy Sins. He may
have given thee Riches and Honor, Health and Power with a Curse; and, if so,
it will be found but a poor Comfort, to have had never so great a share of
God's Bounty, without his Blessing.

But, has he at any time kept thee from thy Sin? stopped thee in the prosecution
of thy Lust? defeated the malicious Arts and Stratagems of thy mortal Enemy the
Tempter? And, does not the sense of this move and affect thy Heart more than
all the former Instances of Temporal Prosperity, which are but (as it were) the
promiscuous Scatterings of his Common Providence, while these are the
distinguishing Kindnesses of his special Grace?

A truly pious Mind has certainly another kind of relish and taste of these
things; and, if it receives a Temporal Blessing with Gratitude, it receives a
Spiritual one with Ecstasie and Transport. David, an heroic Instance of such a
Temper, over-looks the rich and seasonable Present of Abigail, though pressed
with Hunger and Travel; but her Advice, which disarmed his Rage, and calmed his
Revenge, draws forth those high and affectionate Gratulations from him: Blessed
be thy advice, and blessed be thou, who have kept me this day from shedding
Blood, and avenging my self with my own hand. These were his joyful and
glorious Trophies; not that he Triumphed over his Enemy, but that he Insulted
over his Revenge; that he escaped from himself, and was delivered from his own
Fury. And whosoever has any thing of David's Piety, will be perpetually playing
the Throne of Grace with suchlike Acknowledgment; As, Blessed be that
Providence, which delivered me from such a lewd Company, and such a vicious
Acquaintance, which was the Bane of such, and such a person. And, Blessed be
that God who cast rubs, and stops, and hindrances in my way, when I was
attempting the Commission of such or such a Sin; who took me out of such a
Course of Life, such a Place, or such an Employment, which was a continual
Snare and Temptation to me. And, Blessed be such a Preacher, and such a Friend,
whom God made use of to speak a Word in season to my wicked Heart, and so
turned me out of the Paths of Death and Destruction, and saved me in spite of
the World, the Devil, and my Self.

These are such things as a Man shall remember with Joy upon his Deathbed;
such as shall cheer and warm his Heart even in that last and bitter Agony, when
many from the very bottom of their Souls shall wish, that they had never been
Rich, or Great, or Powerful; and reflect with Anguish and Remorse upon those
splendid Occasions of Sin, which served them for little, but to heighten their
Guilt, and at best to inflame their Accounts, at that great Tribunal which they
are going to appear before.

3. In the Third and Last place. We learn from hence, the great Reasonableness
of, not only a contented, but also a thankful Acquiescence in any Condition,
and under the crossest and severest passages of Providence, which can possibly
befall us: Since there is none of all these but may be the Instruments of
Preventing-Grace in the hands of a merciful God, to keep us from those Courses
which would otherwise assuredly end in our confusion. This is most certain,
that there is no Enjoyment which the Nature of Man is either desirous or
capable of, but may be to him a direct inducement to Sin, and consequently is
big with Mischief, and carries Death in the Bowels of it. But to make the
Assertion more particular, and thereby more convincing, let us take an Account
of it with reference to the three greatest and deservedly most valued
Enjoyments of this Life.

1. Health, 2ly. Reputation; And, 3ly. Wealth.

First. And first for Health. Has God made a Breach upon that? Perhaps he is
building up thy Soul upon the Ruins of thy Body. Has he bereaved thee of the
use and vigor of thy Limbs? Possibly he saw that otherwise they would have
been the Instruments of thy Lusts, and the active Ministers of thy
Debaucheries. Perhaps thy languishing upon thy Bed has kept thee from rotting
in a Gaol, or in a worse place. God saw it necessary by such Mortifications to
quench the Boilings of a furious, overflowing Appetite, and the boundless Rage
of an insatiable Intemperance; to make the Weakness of the Flesh, the Physic
and Restaurative of the Spirit; And, in a word, rather to save thee, diseased,
sickly, and deformed, than to let Strength, Health and Beauty, drive thee
headlong (as they have done many thousands) into Eternal Destruction.

Secondly, Has God in his Providence thought fit to drop a Blot upon thy Name,
and to Blast thy Reputation? He saw perhaps that the Breath of popular Air was
grown Infectious, and would have derived a Contagion upon thy better part.
Pride and Vainglory had mounted thee too high, and therefore it was necessary
for Mercy to take thee down, to prevent a greater fall. A good Name is, indeed,
better than Life; but a sound Mind is better than both. Praise and Applause had
swelled thee to a proportion ready to burst; it had vitiated all thy spiritual
Appetites, and brought thee to feed upon the Air, and to surfeit upon the Wind,
and, in a word, to starve thy Soul, only to pamper thy Imagination.

And now, if God makes use of some poynant Disgrace to prick this enormous
Bladder, and to let out the poisonous Vapor, is not the Mercy greater than the
Severity of the Cure? Cover them with shame (says the Psalmist) that they may
seek thy Name. Fame and Glory transports a Man out of himself; and, like a
violent Wind, though it may bear him up for a while, yet it will be sure to let
him fall at last. It makes the Mind loose, and garish, scatters the Spirits,
and leaves a kind of Dissolution upon all the Faculties. Whereas shame on the
contrary (as all Grief does) naturally contracts and unites, and thereby
fortifies the Spirits, fixes the Ramblings of Fancy, and so reduces and gathers
the Man into himself. This is the sovereign Effect of a bitter Potion,
administered by a Wise and Merciful Hand: And what hurt can there be in all the
Slanders, Obloquies and Disgraces of this World, if they are but the Arts and
Methods of Providence to shame us into the Glories of the next. But then,
Thirdly and Lastly, Has God thought fit to cast thy Lot amongst the Poor of
this World, and that either by denying thee any share of the Plenties of this
Life, (which is something grievous;) or by taking them away, which is much more
so? Yet still all this may be but the Effect of Preventing Mercy. For so much
mischief as Riches have done, and may do to the Souls of Men, so much Mercy
may there be in taking them away. For, does not the Wisest of Men, next our
Savior, tell us of Riches kept to the hurt of the owners of them? Eccles. 5.
13. And, does not our Savior himself speak of the intolerable Difficulty,
which they cause in men's passage to Heaven? Do they not make the Narrow way
much narrower? and contract the Gate which leads to life to the streightness of
a Needle's Eye?

And now, if God will fit thee for this passage, by taking off thy Load, and
emptying thy Bags, and so suit the Narrowness of thy Fortune, to the Narrowness
of the way thou art to pass, is there any thing but Mercy in all this? Nay, are
not the Riches of his Mercy conspicuous in the Poverty of thy Condition?

Thou who repinest at the Plenty and Splendor of thy Neighbor, at the
Greatness of his Incomes, and the Magnificence of his Retinue; Consider what
are frequently the dismal, wretched Consequences of all this, and thou will
have little cause to Envy this gaudy Great One, or to wish thy self in his room.

For, do we not often hear of this or that young Heir newly come to his
Father's vast Estate? An happy Man, no doubt! But, does not the Town presently
ring of his Debaucheries, his Blasphemies and his Murders? Are not his Riches
and his Lewdnesses talked of together? and the Odiousness of one, heightened and
set off by the Greatness of the other? Are not his Oaths, his Riots, and other
Villainies, reckoned by as many thousands as his Estate?

Now consider, had this grand Debauchee, this glistering Monster, been born to
thy Poverty and mean Circumstances, he could not have contracted such a
clamorous Guilt, he could not have been so bad: Nor, perhaps, had thy Birth
enstated thee in the same Wealth and Greatness, would thou have been at all
better.

This God foresaw, and knew, in the ordering both of his and thy Condition:
And which of the Two now, can we think, is the greater Debtor to his Preventing
Mercy? Lordly Sins require Lordly Estates to support them: And where Providence
denies the latter, it cuts off all Temptation to the former.

And thus I have shown by particular Instances, what Cause men have to
acquiesce in, and submit to the harshest Dispensations that Providence can
measure out to them in this life; and with what Satisfaction, or rather
Gratitude, that ought to be endured, by which the greatest of Mischiefs is
prevented. The great Physician of Souls, sometimes, cannot Cure without Cutting
us. Sin has festred inwardly, and he must lance the Impostume, to let out
Death with the Suppuration. He who ties a Mad-man's Hands, or takes away his
Sword, loves his Person, while he disarms his Frenzy. And whether by Health or
Sickness, Honor or Disgrace, Wealth or Poverty, Life or Death, Mercy is still
contriving, acting, and carrying on the Spiritual Good of all those who love
God, and are loved by Him.

To whom therefore be rendered and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might,
Majesty and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Nature and Measures of Conscience: IN Two SERMONS On 1 JOHN
III. 21. PREACHED Before the UNIVERSITY at Christ-Church, Oxon. The First
Preached on the 1st. of Nov. 1691.
1 JOHN III. 21. Beloved, if our Heart condemn us not, we have Confidence
toward God.
AS nothing can be of more moment; so few things, doubtless, are of more
difficulty, than for Men to be rationally satisfied about the estate of their
Souls, with reference to God, and the great Concerns of Eternity. In their
Judgment about which, if they err finally, it is like a man's missing his Cast
when he throws Dice for his Life; His Being, his Happiness, and all that he
does, or can enjoy in the World, is involved in the Error of one Throw. And
therefore it may very well deserve our best Skill and Care, to enquire into
those Rules, by which we may guide our Judgment in so weighty an Affair, both
with safety and success. And this, I think, cannot be better done, than by
separating the false and fallacious, from the true and certain. For, if the
Rule we judge by, be uncertain, it is odds, but we shall judge wrong; and, if
we should judge right; yet it is not properly Skill, but Chance; not a true
Judgment, but a lucky Hit: Which certainly, the Eternal Interests of an
Immortal Soul, are of much too high a Value to be left at the Mercy of.

First of all then: He who would pass such a Judgment upon his Condition, as
shall be ratified in Heaven, and confirmed at that great Tribunal, from which
there lies no Appeal, will find himself woefully deceived, if he judges of his
spiritual estate by any of these Four following Measures: As,

1. The general esteem of the World concerning him. He, who owes his Piety to
Fame and Hearsay, and the Evidences of his Salvation to popular Voice and
Opinion, builds his House not only upon the Sand, but (which is worse) upon the
Wind; and writes the Deeds, by which he holds his Estate, upon the face of a
River. He makes a Bodily Eye the Judge of Things impossible to be seen; and
Humor and Ignorance (which the generality of Men both think and speak by) the
great Proofs of his Justification. But, surely, no man has the Estate of his
Soul drawn upon his Face, nor the Decree of his Election wrote upon his
Forehead. He who would know a man thoroughly, must follow him into the Closet of
his Heart; the Door of which is kept shut to all the World besides, and the
Inspection of which is only the Prerogative of Omniscience.

The favorable opinion, and good word of Men (to some persons especially)
comes oftentimes at a very easy rate; and, by a few demure Looks, and affected
Whines, set off with some odd, devotional Postures and Grimaces, and such other
little Arts of Dissimulation, cunning Men will do Wonders, and Commence
presently Heroes for Sanctity, Self-denial, and Sincerity, while within perhaps
they are as Proud as Lucifer, as Covetous as Demas, as false as Judas; and, in
the whole Course of their Conversation, Act, and are Acted not by Devotion, but
Design.

So that, for ought I see, though the Mosaical part of Judaism be abolished
amongst Christians, the Pharisaical part of it never will. A grave, stanch,
skillfully managed Face, set upon a grasping, aspiring Mind, having got many a
sly Formalist the Reputation of a Primitive and severe Piety (forsooth) and
made many such Mountebanks pass admired, even for Saints upon Earth (as the
word is) who are like to be so nowhere else.

But a man, who had never seen the stately outside of a Tomb, or painted
Sepulcher before, may very well be excused, if he takes it rather for the
Repository of some rich Treasure, than of a noisome Corpse; but should he but
once open and rake into it, though he could not see, he would quickly smell
out, his mistake. The greatest part of the World is nothing but Apperance,
nothing but Show and Surface; and many make it their Business, their Study and
Concern, that it should be so; who having for many years together deceived all
about them, are at last willing to deceive themselves too; and, by a long,
immemorial Practice, and (as it were) Prescription of an aged, thorough-paced
Hypocrisy, come at length to believe that for a Reality, which, at the first
Practice of it, they themselves knew to be a Cheat. But, if Men love to be
deceived, and fooled about so great an Interest as that of their spiritual
Estate, it must be confessed that they cannot take a surer, and more effectual
Course to be so, than by taking their Neighbor's Word for that, which can be
known to them only from their own Hearts. For, certainly, it is not more absurd
to undertake to tell the Name of an unknown person by his looks, than to Vouch
a man's Saintship from the vogue of the World, founded upon his External
Behavior.

2 ly. The Judgment of any Casuist or Learned Divine, concerning the Estate of
a man's Soul, is not sufficient to give him Confidence toward God. And the
Reason is, because no Learning whatsoever can give a man the Knowledge of
another's Heart. Besides, that it is more than possible that the most profound,
and experienced Casuist in the World, may mistake in his Judgment of a man's
spiritual Condition; and, if he does judge right, yet the Man cannot be sure
that he will declare that Judgment sincerely and impartially, (the greatest
Clerks being not always the honestest, any more than the wisest Men,) but may
purposely sooth a man up for Hope or Fear, or the Service of some sinister
Interest; and so show him the face of a foul Soul in a flattering Glass:
Considering how much the raising in some Men a false Hope of another World,
may, with others, serve a real Interest in this.

There is a Generation of Men, who have framed their Casuistical Divinity to a
perfect Compliance with all the corrupt Affections of Man's Nature; and by that
new-invented Engine of the Doctrine of Probability, will undertake to warrant,
and quiet the Sinner's Conscience in the Commission of any Sin whatsoever,
provided there be but the Opinion of one Learned Man to vouch it. For this,
they say, is a sufficient Ground for the Conscience of any unlearned Person to
rely, and to act upon. So that if but one Doctor asserts, that I may lawfully
kill a Man, to prevent a Box on the Ear, or a Calumny, by which he would
otherwise asperse my good Name, I may, with a good Conscience, do it; Nay, I
may safely rest upon this one Casuist's Judgment, though thousands, as learned
as himself; yea, and the express Law of God besides, affirm the quite contrary.
But these Spiritual Engineers know well enough, how to deal with any
Commandment, either by Taking, or Expounding it, away, at their pleasure.

Such an Ascendant have these Romish Casuists over Scripture, Reason, and
Morality; much like what is said of the stupid, modern Jews, that they have
subdued their Sense and Reason to such a sottish Servitude to their Rabbis, as
to hold, That in case two Rabbis should happen to contradict one another, they
were yet bound to believe the Contradictory Assertions of both to be equally
certain, and equally the Word of God: Such an Iron-digesting Faith have they,
and such pity it is, that there should be no such thing in Judaism as
Transubstantiation to employ it upon.

But, as for these Casuists, whom I have been speaking of; if the Judgment of
one Doctor may authorize the Practice of any Action, I believe, it will be hard
to find any sort or degree of Villainy, which the Corruption of Man's Nature is
capable of committing, which shall not meet with a Defense. And of this, I
could give you such an Instance from something wrote by a certain Prelate of
theirs, Cardinal and Archbishop of Beneventum, as were enough, not only to
astonish all Pious Ears, but almost to unconsecrate the very Church I speak in.

But the Truth is, the Way, by which these Romish Casuists speak Peace to the
Consciences of Men, is either by teaching them, that many Actions, are not
Sins, which yet really are so; or, by suggesting something to them, which shall
satisfy their Minds, notwithstanding a known, actual, avowed Continuance in
their Sins: Such as are their Pardons and Indulgences, and giving Men a share
in the Saints Merits, out of the Common Bank and Treasury of the Church, which
the Pope has the sole custody and disposal of, and is never kept shut to such
as come with an open hand. So that, according to these New Evangelists, well
may we pronounce, Blessed are the Rich, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
But God deliver the World from such Guides, or rather such Hucksters of Souls,
the very shame of Religion, and the shameless Subverters of Morality. And, it
is really matter both of Wonder and Indignation, that such Impostors should at
all concern themselves about Rules or Directions of Conscience, who seem to
have no Consciences to apply them to.

3 ly. The Absolution pronounced by a Priest, whether Papist or Protestant, is
not a certain, infallible Ground, to give the person, so absolved, confidence
toward God: And the Reason is, Because, if Absolution, as such, could of it
self secure a Man, as to the Estate of his Soul, then it would follow, That
every person, so absolved, should, by virtue thereof, be, ipso facto, put into
such a Condition of safety, which is not imaginable.

For the Absolution pronounced must be either Conditional, as running upon the
Conditions of Faith and Repentance; and then, if those Conditions are not sound
in the person so absolved, it is but a Seal to a Blank, and so a mere Nullity
to him. Or, the Absolution must be pronounced in Terms absolute, and
unconditional: And if so, then the said Absolution becomes valid and effectual,
either by virtue of the State of the Person, to whom it was pronounced, as
being a true Penitent, or by virtue of the Opus Operatum, or bare Action it
self of the Priest Absolving him. If it receives its Validity from the former;
then it is clear, That although it runs in Forms Absolute, yet it is indeed
Conditional, as depending upon the Qualification of the Person, to whom it is
pronounced; Who therefore owes the Remission of his Sins, not properly to the
Priest's Absolution, but to his own Repentance, which made that Absolution
effectual, and would undoubtedly have saved him, though the Priest had never
Absolved him.

But if it be asserted that the very Action of the Priest absolving him has of
it self this Virtue; then we must grant also, that it is in the Priest's power
to save a Man, who never repented, nor did one good Work in all his life;
for-as-much as it is in his Power to perform this Action upon him in full Form,
and with full Intention to Absolve him. But the horrible Absurdity, Blasphemy,
and Impiety of this Assertion, sufficiently proclaims its Falsity without any
further Confutation.

In a word, if a man be a Penitent, his Repentance stamps his Absolution
effectual. If not, let the Priest repeat the same Absolution to him Ten
thousand times; yet for all his being absolved in this World, God will condemn
him in the other. And consequently, he who places his Salvation upon this
Ground, will find himself like an imprisoned and condemned Malefactor, who in
the Night dreams, that he is released, but in the Morning finds himself led to
the Gallows.

4 ly. and Lastly, No Advantages from External Church Membership, or Profession
of the true Religion, can of themselves give a Man Confidence toward God. And
yet perhaps, there is hardly any one Thing in the World, which Men, in all
Ages, have, generally, more cheated themselves with. The Jews were an Eminent
Instance of this. Who, because they were the Sons of Abraham, as it is readily
acknowledged by our Savior, John 8. 37. And because they were entrusted with
the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. Together with the Covenants, and the Promises,
Romans 9. 4. That is, in other Words, Because they were the True Church, and
Professors of the True Religion (while all the World, about them, lay wallowing
in Ignorance, Heathenism, and Idolatry) they concluded from hence, that God was
so fond of them, that notwithstanding all their Villainies, and Immoralities,
they were still the Darlings of Heaven, and the only Heirs Apparent of
Salvation. They thought (it seems) God and themselves linked together in so
fast, but withal so strange a Covenant, that although they never performed
their part of it, God was yet bound to make good every Tittle of his.

And this made John the Baptist, set himself with so much Acrimony, and
Indignation, to baffle this Senseless, Arrogant Conceit of theirs, which made
them huff at the Doctrine of Repentance, as a Thing below them, and not at all
belonging to them; In Matthew. 3. v. 9. Think not (says he) to say within your
selves, we have Abraham to our Father. This he knew lay deep in their Hearts,
and was still in their Mouths, and kept them Insolent, and Impenitent under
Sins of the highest and most clamorous Guilt; though our Savior himself also,
not long after this, assured them that they were of a very different Stock, and
Parentage from that, which they boasted of; and that whosoever was their Father
upon the Natural Account, the Devil was certainly so upon a Moral.

In like manner, how vainly do the Romanists pride, and value themselves upon
the Name of Catholics, of the Catholic Religion, and of the Catholic Church?
though a Title no more applicable to the Church of Rome, than a Man's Finger,
when it is swelled and putrefied, can be called his whole Body: a Church which
allows Salvation to none without it, nor awards Damnation to almost any within
it. And therefore, as the former Empty Plea served the sottish Jews; so, no
wonder, if this equally serves these, to put them into a Fools Paradise, by
feeding their Hopes, without changing their Lives; and, as an Excellent
Expedient, first to assure them of Heaven, and then to bring them easily to it;
and so in a word, to save both their Souls, and their Sins too.

And to show, how the same Cheat runs through all Professions, though not in
the same Dress; none are more powerfully, and grossly under it, than another
Sort of Men, who, on the Contrary, place their whole Acceptance with God, and
indeed, their whole Religion, upon a Mighty Zeal (or rather outcry) against
Popery, and Superstition; verbally, indeed, uttered against the Church of Rome,
but really meant against the Church of England. To which Sort of Persons I
shall say no more but this, (and that in the Spirit of Truth and Meekness)
namely; That Zeal and Noise against Popery, and real Services for it, are no
such inconsistent Things, as some may imagine; indeed no more than Invectives
against Papists, and solemn Addresses of Thanks to them, for that very Thing,
by which they would have brought in Popery upon us. And if those of the
Separation do not yet know so much, (thanks to them for it) we of the Church of
England do; and so may they themselves too, in due time. I speak not this by
way of Sarcasm, to reproach them, (I leave that to their own Consciences, which
will do it more effectually) but by way of Charity to warn them: For let them
be assured, that this whole Scene and Practice of theirs, is as really
Superstition, and as false a Bottom to rest their Souls upon, as either the
Jews alleging Abraham for their Father, while the Devil claimed them for his
Children; or the Papists relying upon their Indulgences, their Saints Merits,
and Supererogations, and such other Fopperies, as can never settle, nor indeed
so much as reach, the Conscience; and much less recommend it to that Judge, who
is not to be flamm'd off with Words and Phrases, and Names, though taken out of
the Scripture it self.

Nay, and I shall proceed yet further. It is not a Man's being of the Church of
England it self (though undoubtedly the purest and best reformed Church in the
World; indeed so well reformed, that it will be found a much easier Work to
alter, than to better its Constitution;) I say, it is not a Man's being even of
this Excellent Church, which can of it self clear Accounts between God and his
Conscience. Since bare Communion with a good Church, can never alone make a
good Man: For, if it could, I am sure we should have no bad ones in ours; and
much less such as would betray it.

So that we see here, that it is but too manifest, that Men of all Churches,
Sects and Persuasions, are strangely apt to flatter, and deceive themselves
with what they believe, and what they profess; and if we thoroughly consider the
Matter, we shall find the Fallacy to lie in this. That those Religious
Institutions, which God designed only for Means, Helps, and Advantages, to
promote and further Men in the Practice of Holiness, they look upon rather, as
a Privilege to serve them instead of it, and really to commute for it. This is
the very Case, and a fatal Self-imposture it is certainly, and such an one as
defeats the Design, and destroys the Force of all Religion.

And thus, I have shown four several, uncertain, and deceitful Rules, which
Men are prone to judge of their Spiritual Estate by.

But now, have we any better or more certain, to substitute, and recommend in
the Room of them? Why, yes; if we believe the Apostle, a Man's own Heart or
Conscience is that, which, above all other Things, is able to give him
Confidence toward God. And the Reason is, because the Heart knows that by it
self, which, nothing in the World besides, can give it any knowledge of; and
without the Knowledge of which, it can have no Foundation to build any true
Confidence upon. Conscience, under God, is the only competent Judge of what the
Soul has done, and what it has not done; what Guilt it has contracted, and what
it has not; as it is in 1 Corinthians. 2. 11. What Man knows the Things of a Man,
save the Spirit of Man which is in him? Conscience is its own Counselor, the
sole Master of its own Secrets: And it is the Privilege of our Nature, that
every Man should keep the Key of his own Breast.

Now for the further Prosecution of the Words, I shall do these four Things.

1. I shall show, how the Heart or Conscience ought to be informed, in order to
its founding in us a rational Confidence toward God.

2. I shall show, how and by what means we may get it thus informed, and
afterward preserve and keep it so.

3. I shall show, Whence it is that the Testimony of Conscience thus informed
comes to be so Authentic, and so much to be relied upon: And,

4 ly. and Lastly, I shall assign some particular Cases or Instances, in which
the Confidence suggested by it, does most eminently show, and exert it self.

1. And first for the First of these, How the Heart or Conscience, etc. It is
certain, that no Man can have any such Confidence toward God, only because his
Heart tells him a Lie; and that it may do so, is altogether as certain. For
there is the Erroneous, as well as the rightly informed Conscience; and if the
Conscience happens to be deluded, and thereupon to give false Directions to the
Will, so that by Virtue of those Directions, it is betrayed into a Course of
Sin: Sin does not therefore cease to be Sin, because a Man committed it
Conscientiously. If Conscience comes to be perverted so far, as to bring a Man
under a Persuasion, that it is either Lawful, or his Duty, to resist the
Magistrate, to seize upon his Neighbors just Rights, or Estate, to worship
Stocks and Stones, or to lie, equivocate, and the like, this will not absolve
him before God; since Error, which is in it self, Evil, can never make another
Thing Good. He who does an unwarrantable Action, through a false Information,
which Information he ought not to have believed, cannot in Reason make the
Guilt of one Sin, the Excuse of another.

Conscience therefore must be rightly informed, before the Testimony of it can
be Authentic, in what it pronounces concerning the Estate of the Soul. It must
proceed by the Two grand Rules of Right Reason and Scripture; these are the
Compass which it must steer by. For Conscience comes formally to oblige, only
as it is the Messenger of the Mind of God to the Soul of Man; which he has
revealed to him, partly by the Impression of certain Notions, and Maxims upon
the Practical Understanding, and partly by the declared Oracles of his Word. So
far therefore as Conscience reports any Thing agreeable to, or deducible from
these, it is to be hearkened to, as the Great Conveyer of Truth to the Soul;
but when it reports any Thing dissonant to these, it obliges no more than the
Falsehood reported by it.

But since there is none who follows an Erroneous Conscience, but does so,
because he thinks it true, and moreover thinks it true, because he is
persuaded, that it proceeds according to the Two forementioned Rules of
Scripture, and Right Reason; how shall a Man be able to satisfy himself, when
his Conscience is rightly informed, and when possessed with an Error? For to
affirm, that the Sentence passed by a rightly informed Conscience, gives a Man
a rational Confidence toward God; but, in the mean time, not to assign any
means possible, by which he may know, when his Conscience is thus rightly
informed, and when not, it must equally bereave him of such a Confidence, as
placing the Condition upon which it depends wholly out of his Knowledge.

Here therefore is the Knot, here the Difficulty, how to state some Rule of
Certainty, by which Infallibly to distinguish, when the Conscience is right,
and to be relied upon; When erroneous, and to be distrusted, in the Testimony
it gives about the Sincerity, and Safety of a Man's spiritual Condition.

For the Resolution of which, I answer, That it is not necessary for a Man to
be assured of the Rightness of his Conscience, by such an infallible Certainty
of Persuasion, as amounts to the Clearness of a Demonstration; but it is
sufficient, if he knows it upon Grounds of such a convincing Probability, as
shall exclude all rational Grounds of doubting of it. For, I cannot think, that
the Confidence, here spoken of, rises so high as to Assurance. And the Reason
is, because it is manifestly such a Confidence, as is common to all sincere
Christians. Which yet, Assurance (we all know) is not.

The Truth is, the Word in the Original, which is (...), signifies properly
Freedom, or Boldness of Speech; though the Latin Translation renders it by
Fiducia, and so corresponds with the English, which renders it by Confidence.
But whether Fiducia, or Confidence reaches the full Sense of (...), may very
well be disputed. However it is certain, that neither the Word in the Original,
nor yet in the Translation, imports Assurance. For Freedom, or Boldness of
Speech, I am sure, does not; and Fiducia, or Confidence, signifies only a Man's
being actually persuaded of a Thing, upon better Arguments for it, than any
that he can see against it; which he may very well be, and yet not be assured
of it.

From all which, I conclude; That the Confidence here mentioned in the Text,
amounts to no more, than a Rational well grounded Hope. Such an one, as the
Apostle tells us, in Romans 5. 5. Makes not ashamed.

And upon these Terms, I affirm, That such a Conscience, as has employed the
Utmost of its Ability to give it self the best Information, and clearest
Knowledge of its Duty, that it can, is a Rational Ground for a Man to build
such an Hope upon; and, consequently, for him to confide in.

There is an innate Light in every Man, discovering to him the first Lines of
Duty, in the common Notions of Good and Evil; which by Cultivation, and
Improvement, may be advanced to higher, and brighter Discoveries. And from
hence it is, that the Schoolmen, and Moralists, admit not of any Ignorantia
Iuris, speaking of Natural Moral Right, to give excuse to Sin. Since all such
Ignorance is voluntary, and therefore culpable; for as much as it was in every
Man's Power to have prevented it, by a due Improvement of the Light of Nature,
and the Seeds of Moral Honesty sown in his Heart.

If it be here demanded, Whether a Man may not remain ignorant of his Duty,
after he has used the utmost means to inform himself of it? I answer, That so
much of Duty as is absolutely necessary to save him, he shall upon the use of
such a Course come to know; and that which he continues ignorant of, having
done the utmost lying in his Power, that he might not be ignorant of it, shall
never damn him. Which Assertion is proved thus: The Gospel damns no body for
being ignorant of that which he is not obliged to know; but that, which upon
the Improvement of a Man's utmost Power, he cannot know, he is not obliged to
know; for that otherwise he would be obliged to an Impossibility*, since that
which is out of the Compass of any Man's Power, is to that Man Impossible.

He therefore who exerts all the Powers, and Faculties of his Soul, and plies
all Means and Opportunities in the Search of Truth, which God has vouchsafed
him, may rest upon the Judgment of his Conscience so informed, as a Warrantable
Guide of those Actions, which he must account to God for. And if by following
such a Guide, he falls into the Ditch, the Ditch shall never drown him, or if
it should, the Man perishes not by his Sin, but by his Misfortune. In a word,
he who endeavors to know the utmost of his Duty, that he can, and practices
the utmost that he knows, has the Equity and Goodness of the great God to stand
as a mighty Wall, or Rampart between him, and Damnation, for any Errors or
Infirmities, which the Frailty of his Condition has invincibly, and therefore
inculpably exposed him to.

And if a Conscience thus qualified, and informed, be not the Measure, by which
a Man may take a true Estimate of his Absolution, before the Tribunal of God,
all the Understanding of humane Nature, cannot find out any Ground for the
Sinner to pitch the Sole of his Foot upon, or rest his Conscience with any
Assurance, but is left in the Plunge of Infinite Doubts, and Uncertainties,
Suspicions, and Misgivings, both as to the Measures of his present Duty, and
the final Issues of his future Reward.

Let this Conclusion therefore stand as the firm Result of the foregoing
Discourse, and the Foundation of what is to follow; That such a Conscience, as
has not been wanting to it self, in endeavoring to get the utmost, and
clearest Information about the Will of God, that its Power* Advantages, and
Opportunities could afford it, is that great Internal Judge, whose Absolution
is a Rational, and sure Ground of Confidence toward God: And so I pass to the
second Thing proposed. Which is to show, How, and by what Means, we may get our
Heart or Conscience thus informed, and afterward preserve and keep it so.

In order to which amongst many Things, that might be alleged as highly
useful, and conducing to this great Work. I shall insist upon these Four: As,

1. Let a Man carefully attend to the Voice of his Reason, and all the Dictates
of Natural Morality; so as by no means, to do any thing contrary to them. For
though Reason is not to be relied upon, as a Guide universally sufficient to
direct us what to do; yet it is generally to be relied upon, and obeyed, where
it tells us, what we are not to do. It is, indeed, but a weak, and diminutive
Light, compared to Revelation; but it ought to be no disparagement to a Star,
that it is not a Sun. Nevertheless, as weak, and as small as it is, it is a
Light always at hand, and though enclosed (as it were) in a dark Lanthorn, may
yet be of singular use to prevent many a foul Step, and to keep us from many a
dangerous Fall. And every Man brings such a Degree of this Light into the World
with him; that though it cannot bring him to Heaven; yet, if he be true to it,
it will carry him a great way; indeed so far, that if he follows it faithfully,
I doubt not, but he shall meet with another Light, which shall carry him quite
through.

How far it may be improved, is evident from that high and refined Morality,
which shined forth both in the Lives, and Writings of some of the Ancient
Heathens, who yet had no other Light but this, both to live, and to write by.
For how great a Man in virtue was Cato; of whom the Historian gives this
glorious Character; Esse quam videri bonus malebat? And of what an impregnable
Integrity was Fabricius; of whom it was said, that a Man might as well attempt
to turn the Sun out of his Course, as to bring Fabricius to do a base, or a
dishonest Action? And then for their Writings; what admirable Things occur in
the Remains of Pythagoras, and the Books of Plato, and of several other
Philosophers? short, I confess, of the Rules of Christianity, but generally
above the Lives of Christians.

Which being so, ought not the Light of Reason to be looked upon by us as a
Rich, and a Noble Talent, and such an one as we must account to God for? For it
is certainly from him. It is a Ray of Divinity darted into the Soul. It is the
Candle of the Lord (as Solomon calls it) and God never lights us up a Candle
either to put out, or to sleep by. If it be made conscious to a Work of
Darkness, it will not fail to discover, and reprove it; and therefore the
checks of it are to be revered, as the Echo of a Voice from Heaven; for,
whatsoever Conscience binds here on Earth, will be certainly bound there too;
and it were a great Vanity, to hope, or imagine, that either Law or Gospel will
absolve, what Natural Conscience condemns. No Man ever yet offended his own
Conscience, but first, or last, it was revenged upon him for it. So that it
will concern a Man, to treat this great Principle awfully, and warily, by still
observing what it commands, but especially what it forbids: And, if he would
have it always a faithful, and sincere Monitor to him, let him be sure never
to turn a deaf Ear to it; for not to hear it, is the Way to silence it. Let him
strictly observe the first Stirrings, and Intimations; the first hints, and
Whispers of Good and Evil, that pass in his Heart; and this will keep
Conscience so quick, and vigilant, and ready to give a Man true Alarms, upon
the least Approach of his spiritual Enemy, that he shall be hardly capable of a
great Surprise.

On the contrary, if a Man accustoms himself to Slight, or pass over these
first Motions to Good, or Shrinkings of his Conscience from Evil, which
Originally are as Natural to the Heart of Man, as the Appetites of Hunger, and
Thirst are to the Stomach; Conscience will by Degrees grow dull, and
unconcerned; and, from not spying out Motes, come at length to overlook Beams;
from Carelessness it shall fall into a Slumber, and from a Slumber, it shall
settle into a deep, and long Sleep; till, at last, perhaps it sleeps it self
into a Lethargy, and that such an one, that nothing but Hell, and Judgment
shall be able to awaken it. For long disuse of any thing made for Action, will
in time take away the very use of it. As I have read of one, who having for a
Disguise, kept one of his Eyes a long time covered; when he took off the
Covering, found his Eye indeed where it was, but his Sight was gone. He who
would keep his Conscience awake, must be careful to keep it stirring.

2. Let a Man be very tender, and regardfull of every pious Motion, and
Suggestion made by the Spirit of God to his Heart. I do not hereby go about to
establish Enthusiasm, or such fantastic Pretenses of Intercourse with God, as
Papists, and Fanatics (who in most Things copy from one another, as well as
rail at one another) do usually boast of. But certainly, if the Evil Spirit
may, and often does suggest wicked, and vile Thoughts to the Minds of Men; as
all do, and must grant, and is sufficiently proved from the Devil's putting it
into the Heart of Judas, to betray Christ, John 13. 2. And his filling the
Heart of Ananias, to lie to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5. 3. It cannot after this,
with any Color of Reason be doubted, but that the Holy Spirit of God, whose
Power, and Influence to Good is much greater, than that of the wicked Spirit to
Evil, does frequently inject into, and imprint upon the Soul many blessed
Motions, and Impulses to Duty, and many powerful Avocations from Sin. So that
a Man shall not only (as the Prophet says) hear a Voice behind him, but also a
Voice within him, telling him which way he ought to go.

For doubtless, there is something more in those Expressions of being led by
the Spirit, and being taught by the Spirit, and the like, than mere Tropes, and
Metaphors; and nothing less is, or can be imported by them, than that God
sometimes speaks to, and converses with the Hearts of Men, immediately by
himself: And, happy those, who by thus hearing him speak in a still Voice,
shall prevent his speaking to them in Thunder.

But you will here ask, perhaps, how we shall distinguish in such Motions,
which of them proceed immediately from the Spirit of God, and which from the
Conscience? In answer to which, I must confess, that I know no certain Mark of
Discrimination, to distinguish them by; save only in general, that such as
proceed immediately from God, use to strike the Mind suddenly, and very
powerfully. But then I add also, that as the Knowledge of this, in Point of
Speculation, is so nice and difficult, so (thanks be to God) in Point of
Practice it is not necessary. But let a Man universally observe, and obey every
good Motion rising in his Heart, knowing that every such Motion proceeds from
God, either mediately, or immediately; and that, whether God speaks immediately
by himself to the Conscience, or mediately by the Conscience to the Soul, the
Authority is the same in both, and the Contempt of either is Rebellion.

Now the Thing which I drive at, under this Head of Discourse, is to show, That
as God is sometimes pleased to address himself, in this Manner to the Hearts of
Men; so, if the Heart will receive, and answer such Motions, by a ready, and
obsequious Compliance with them, there is no doubt, but they will both return
more frequently, and still more and more powerfully, till at length they
produce such a Degree of Light in the Conscience, as shall give a Man, both a
clear Sight of his Duty, and a certain Judgment of his Condition.

On the contrary, as all Resistance whatsoever of the Dictates of Conscience,
even in the Way of Natural Efficiency brings a kind of Hardness, and
Stupefaction upon it; So the Resistance of these peculiar Suggestions of the
Spirit, will cause in it also a Judicial Hardness, which is yet worse than the
other. So that God shall withdraw from such an Heart, and the Spirit being
grieved shall depart, and these blessed Motions shall cease, and affect, and
visit it no more. The Consequence of which is very terrible; as rendering a Man
past feeling. And then the less he feels in this World, the more he shall be
sure to feel in the next. But,

3. Because the Light of Natural Conscience, is in many Things defective, and
dimn, and the Internal Voice of God's Spirit, not always distinguishable, above
all, let a Man attend to the Mind of God, uttered in his Revealed Word. I say,
his Revealed Word. By which, I do not mean, that Mysterious, Extraordinary,
(and of late, so much studied) Book called the Revelation, and which perhaps
the more it is studied, the less it is understood, as generally either finding a
Man cracked, or making him so; But I mean those other Writings of the Prophets,
and Apostles, which exhibit to us a plain, sure, perfect, and intelligible
Rule; a Rule that will neither fail, nor distract such as make use of it. A
Rule to judge of the two former Rules by: For nothing that contradicts the
Revealed Word of God, is either the Voice of Right Reason, or of the Spirit of
God; nor is it possible, that it should be so, without God's contradicting
himself.

And therefore we see, what high Elogies are given to the Written Word, by the
inspired Penmen of both Testaments. It gives Understanding to the simple,
says David, in Psalm 119. 130. And that, you will say, is no such easy Matter
to do.

It is able to make the Man of God perfect, (says St. Paul) 2 Timothy 3. 17. It is
quick and powerful, and sharper than any Two-edged Sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of the Soul, and Spirit; and is a Discerner of the Thoughts,
and Intents of the Heart, Heb. 4. 12. Now what a Force and Fullness, what a
Vigor and Emphasis is there in all these Expressions! Enough (one would think)
to recommend and endear the Scriptures, even to the Papists themselves. For if
(as the Text says) They give understanding to the simple; I know none more
concerned to read, and study them, than their Popes.

Wherefore since the Light, and Energy of the Written Word is so mighty, let a
Man bring and hold his Conscience to this steady Rule: the unalterable
Rectitude of which, will infallibly discover the Rectitude, or Obliquity, of
whatsoever it is applied to. We shall find it a Rule, both to instruct us what
to do, and to assure us in what we have done. For though Natural Conscience
ought to be listened to, yet it is Revelation alone, that is to be relied upon:
As we may observe in the Works of Art, a Judicious Artist will indeed use his
Eye, but he will trust only to his Rule.

There is not any one Action whatsoever, which a Man ought to do, or to
forbear, but the Scripture will give him a clear Precept, or Prohibition for it.

So that if a Man will commit such Rules to his Memory, and stock his Mind with
Portions of Scripture answerable to all the Heads of Duty and Practice, his
Conscience can never be at a Loss, either for a Direction of his Actions, or an
Answer to a Temptation: It was the very Course which our Savior himself took,
when the Devil plied him with Temptation upon Temptation. Still he had a
suitable Scripture ready to repel, and baffle them all, one after another:
Every pertinent Text urged home, being a direct Stabb to a Temptation.

Let a Man therefore consider, and recount with himself the several Duties, and
Virtues of a Christian. Such as, Temperance, Meekness, Charity, Purity of
Heart, Pardoning of Enemies, Patience. (I had almost said, Passive Obedience
too, but that such old fashioned Christianity, seems as much out of Date with
some, as Christ's Divinity, and Satisfaction.) I say, let a Man consider these,
and the like Virtues, together with the contrary Sins and Vices, that do oppose
them; and then, as out of a full Armory, or Magazine, let him furnish his
Conscience with Texts of Scripture, particularly enjoining the one, and
forbidding, or threatening the other. And yet I do not say, that he should stuff
his Mind like the Margent of some Authors, with Chapter and Verse heaped
together, at all Adventures; but only that he should sortifie it with some few
Texts, which are home, and apposite to his Case. And a Conscience thus
supplied, will be like a Man armed at all Points; and always ready either to
receive, or to attack his Enemy. Otherwise it is not a Man's having Arms in his
house; no, nor yet his having Courage, and Skill to use them; but it is his
having them still about him, which must both secure him from being set upon,
and defend him when he is.

Accordingly, Men must know, that without taking the forementioned Course, all
that they do in this Matter, is but lost Labor; and that they read the
Scriptures to as little purpose, as some use to quote them; Much Reading being
like much Eating, wholly useless without Digestion; and it is impossible for a
Man to digest his Meat, without also retaining it.

Till Men get what they read into their Minds, and fix it in their Memories,
they keep their Religion as they use to do their Bibles, only in their Closet,
or carry it in their Pocket; and that, you may imagine, must improve, and
affect the Soul, just as much as a Man's having plenty of Provision only in his
Stores, will nourish, and support his Body. When Men forget the Word heard, or
read by them, the Devil is said to steal it out of their Hearts, Luke 8. 12.
And for this Cause, we do with as much Reason, as Propriety of Speech, call the
Committing of a Thing to memory, the getting it by heart. For it is the Memory,
that must transmit it to the Heart; and it is in vain to expect, that the Heart
should keep its hold of any Truth, when the Memory has let it go.

4. The Fourth and Last way, that I shall mention, for the getting of the
Conscience rightly informed, and afterward keeping it so, is frequently and
impartially to account with it. It is with a Man and his Conscience, as with
one Man, and another; amongst whom we use to say, that Even Reckoning makes
lasting Friends; and the way to make Reckonings even, I am sure, is to make
them often. Delays in Accounts are always suspicious; and bad enough in
themselves, but commonly much worse in their Cause. For, to deferr an Account,
is the ready way to perplex it; and, when it comes to be perplexed, and
intricate, no Man, either as to his Temporal or Spiritual Estate, can know of
himself what he is, or what he has, or upon what bottom he stands. But the
amazing Difficulty, and greatness of his Account, will rather terrify than
inform him; and keep him from setting heartily about such a Task, as he
despairs ever to go through with. For, no Man willingly begins, what he has no
hope to finish.

But, let a Man apply to this Work, by frequent Returns, and short Intervals,
while the Heap is small, and the Particulars few, and he will find it easy,
and conquerable; And his Conscience, like a faithful Steward, shall give him
in a plain, open, and entire Account of himself, and hide nothing from him.
Whereas we know, if a Steward or Cashier be suffered to run on from year to
year without bringing him to a Reckoning, it is odds but such a sottish
forbearance, will, in time, teach him to shuffle; and strongly tempt him to be
a Cheat, if not also make him so: For, as the Account runs on, generally the
Accomptant goes backward.

And for this Cause, some judge it advisable for a Man to account with his
Heart every day; and this, no doubt, is the best, and surest Course; for still
the oftener, the better. And some prescribe Accompting once a Week; longer than
which it is, by no means, safe to delay it: For, a Man shall find his Heart
deceitful, and his Memory weak, and Nature extremely averse from seeking
narrowly after That, which it is unwilling to find; and being found, will
assuredly disturb it.

So that upon the whole matter it is infinitely absurd to think that Conscience
can be kept in order without frequent Examination. If a man would have his
Conscience deal clearly with him, he must deal severely with That. Often
scouring and cleansing it will make it bright; and, when it is so, he may see
himself in it: And, if he sees any Thing amiss, let this satisfy him, That no
man is, or can be, the worse for knowing the very worst of himself.

On the contrary; if Conscience by a long neglect of, and dis-acquaintance with
it self, comes to contract an inveterate Rust or Soil, a man may as well expect
to see his Face in a Mud-wall, as that such a Conscience should give him a true
Report of his Condition; no, it leaves him wholly in the Dark, as to the
greatest Concern he has in both Worlds. He can neither tell, whether God be his
Friend, or his Enemy, or rather he has shrewd Cause to suspect him his Enemy,
and cannot possibly know him to be his Friend. And this being his Case, he must
live in Ignorance, and die in Ignorance; and it will be hard for a man to die
in it, without dying for it too.

And now, what a wretched Condition must that man needs be in, whose Heart is
in such Confusion, such Darkness, and such a settled Blindness, that it shall
not be able to tell him so much as one true Word of himself? Flatter him it may
(I confess) (as those are generally good at flattering, who are good for
nothing else) but, in the mean time, the poor Man is left under the fatal
Necessity of a remediless Delusion: For, in judging of a man's Self, if
Conscience either cannot or will not inform him, there is a certain Thing
called Self-love that will be sure to deceive him. And thus I have shown, in
four several Particulars, what is to be done, both for the getting and keeping
of the Conscience, so informed, as that it may be able to give us a Rational
Confidence toward God. As,

1. That the Voice of Reason, in all the Dictates of Natural Morality, ought
carefully to be attended to by a strict Observance of what it commands, but
especially of what it forbids.

2. That every Pious Motion from the Spirit of God ought tenderly to be
cherished, and by no means checked or quenched either by Resistance or Neglect.

3. That Conscience is to be kept close to the Rule of the written Word.

4 ly. and Lastly, That it is frequently to be examined, and severely accounted
with.

And, I doubt not, but a Conscience thus disciplined, shall give a man such a
faithful Account of himself, as shall never shame, nor lurch the Confidence,
which he shall take up from it.

Nevertheless, to prevent all mistakes in so critical a Case, and so high a
Concern. I shall close up the foregoing Particulars with this twofold Caution.

First, Let no man think, that every Doubting or Mis-giving about the Safety of
his Spiritual Estate, over-throws the Confidence hitherto spoken of. For (as I
show before) the Confidence mentioned in the Text, is not properly Assurance,
but only a Rational, well-grounded Hope; And therefore may very well consist
with some Returns of Doubting. For, we know, in that Pious and Excellent
Confession and Prayer, made by the poor Man to our Savior, in Mark 9. 24. how,
in the very same Breath, in which he says, Lord, I believe; He says also, Lord,
help my unbelief. So that we see here, that the Sincerity of our Faith or
Confidence will not secure us against all Vicissitudes of Wavering or Distrust;
indeed, no more than a strong Athletick Constitution of Body will secure a man
always against Heats, and Colds, and Rheums, and suchlike Indispositions.

And one great Reason of this, is; Because such a Faith or Confidence as we
have been treating of, resides in the Soul or Conscience, as an Habit. And
Habits, we know, are by no means either inconsistent with, or destroyed by
every contrary Act. But, especially, in the Case now before us, where the Truth
and Strength of our Confidence toward God does not consist so much, in the
present Act, by which it exerts it self, no, nor yet in the Habit producing
this Act; as it does in the Ground or Reason, which this Confidence is built
upon; which being the standing sincerity of a man's Heart, though the present
Act be interrupted, (as, no doubt, through Infirmity, or Temptation, it may be
very often,) yet, so long as that sincerity, upon which this Confidence was
first founded, does continue, as soon as the Temptation is removed, and gone,
the forementioned Faith, or Affiance, will, by renewed, vigorous and fresh
Acts, recover and exert it self, and with great comfort, and satisfaction of
mind, give a man confidence toward God. Which, though it be, indeed, a lower,
and a lesser thing than Assurance, yet, as to all the Purposes of a Pious Life,
may, for ought I see, prove much more useful; as both affording a man due
comfort, and yet leaving room for due caution too; which are Two of the
principal Uses that Religion serves for, in this World.

2. The other Caution, with reference to the foregoing Discourse, is this: Let
no man, from what has been said, reckon a bare silence of Conscience in not
accusing, or disturbing him, a sufficient Argument for Confidence toward God.
For, such a Silence is so far from being always so, that it is usually worse
than the fiercest and loudest Accusations; since it may, and for the most part
does proceed, from a kind of numbness, or stupidity of Conscience; and an
absolute Dominion obtained by Sin over the Soul; so that it shall not so much
as dare to complain, or make a stir. For, as our Savior says, Luke 11. 21.
while the strong Man armed keeps his Palace, his Goods are in peace. So, while
Sin rules and governs with a strong Hand, and has wholly subdued the Conscience
to a slavish Subjection to its Tyrannical Yoke, the Soul shall be at Peace,
such a false Peace as it is; but for that very Cause worse a great deal, and
more destructive, than, when, by continual Alarms and Assaults, it gives a man
neither Peace nor Truce, Quiet nor Intermission. And therefore it is very
remarkable, that the Text expresses the sound Estate of the Heart or the
Conscience, here spoken of, not barely by its not accusing, but by its not
condemning us; which word imports properly an Acquitment, or Discharge of a man
upon some precedent Accusation, and a full Trial and Cognizance of his Cause
had thereupon. For as Condemnation, being a Law Term, and so relating to the
Judicial Proceedings of Law Courts, must still pre-suppose an Hearing of the
Cause, before any Sentence can pass; so likewise in the Court of Conscience,
there must be a strict and impartial Enquiry into all a man's Actions, and a
through heaving of all that can be pleaded for, and against him, before
Conscience can rationally either condemn, or discharge him: And if, indeed,
upon such a fair and full Trial he can come off, he is then Rectus in curia,
clear and innocent, and consequently may reap all that satisfaction from
himself, which it is Natural for Innocence to afford the person who has it. I
do not here speak of a Legal Innocence, (none but Sots and Quakers dream of
such things;) For, as St. Paul says, Galat. 2. 16. By the Works of the Law
shall no flesh living be justified: But I speak of an Evangelical Innocence;
such an one as the Economy of the Gospel accepts, whatsoever the Law enjoins;
and though mingled with several Infirmities, and Defects, yet amounts to such a
pitch of Righteousness, as we call Sincerity. And whosoever has this, shall
never be Damned for want of the other.

And now, how vastly does it concern all those, who shall think it worth their
while to be in earnest with their Immortal Souls, not to abuse and delude
themselves with a false Confidence? a thing so easily taken up, and so hardly
laid down. Let no man conclude, because his Conscience says nothing to him,
that therefore it has nothing to say Possibly some never so much as doubted of
the safety of their Spiritual Estate, in all their Lives; and if so, let them
not flatter themselves, but rest assured, that they have so much the more
reason a great deal to doubt of it now. For the Causes of such a profound
stillness, are generally gross Ignorance, or long Custom of Sinning, or both;
and these are very dreadful Symptoms indeed, to such as are not Hell and
Damnation-proof. When a man's Wounds cease to smart, only because he has lost
his feeling, they are never the less mortal for his not seeing his Need of a
Surgeon. It is not mere, actual, present Ease, but Ease after Pain, which
brings the most durable and solid Comfort. Acquitment before Trial can be no
security. Great and strange Calms usually portend, and go before the most
violent Storms. And therefore, since Storms and Calms (especially with
reference to the State of the Soul) do always follow one another; Certainly of
the Two, it is much more Eligible, to have the Storm first, and the Calm
afterward: Since a Calm before a Storm is commonly a Peace of a man's own
making; but a Calm, after a Storm, a Peace of God's.

To which God, who only can speak such Peace to us, as neither the World not
the Devil shall be able to take from us, be rendered and ascribed, as is most
due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now, and for ever-more*
Amen.

A Further ACCOUNT OF THE Nature and Measures of Conscience: IN A SERMON ON 1
JOHN III. 21. PREACHED Before the UNIVERSITY at Christ-Church, Oxon, October. 30.
1692.
1 JOHN III. 21. Beloved, if our Heart condemn us not, we have Confidence
toward God.
I Have discoursed once already upon these Words in this place. In which
Discourse, after I had set down four several false Grounds, upon which, Men, in
judging of the safety of their Spiritual Estate, were apt to found a wrong
Confidence toward God, and shown the Falsity of them all; and, that there was
nothing but a Man's own Heart or Conscience, which, in this great Concern, he
could with any safety rely upon; I did, in the next place, cast the further
Prosecution of the Words under these four following Particulars.

1. To show, How the Heart or Conscience ought to be Informed, in order to its
founding in us a Rational Confidence toward God.

2. To show, How, and by what means we may get our Conscience thus informed,
and afterward preserve and keep it so.

3. To show, Whence it is, that the Testimony of Conscience, thus informed,
comes to be so Authentic, and so much to be relied upon. And,

4ly. and Lastly, To assign some particular Cases or Instances, in which the
Confidence suggested by it, does most eminently show, and exert it self.

Upon the first of which Heads; to wit, How the Heart or Conscience ought to be
Informed, in order to its founding in us a Rational Confidence toward God,
after I had premised something about an Erroneous Conscience, and shown, both
what Influence that ought to have upon us, and what Regard we ought to have to
that, in this matter, I gathered the Result of all into this one Conclusion;
Namely, That such a Conscience, as has not been wanting to it self, in
endeavoring the utmost Knowledge of its Duty, and the clearest Information
about the Will of God, that its Power, Advantages, and Opportunities could
afford it, is that great Internal Judge, whose Absolution is a Rational, and
sure Ground of Confidence toward God. This I then insisted upon at large, and
from thence proceeded to the

2 d. Particular; Which was to show, How, and by what means we might get our
Conscience thus Informed, and afterward preserve and keep it so.

Where, amongst those many Ways and Methods, which might, no doubt, have been
assigned, as highly conducing to this purpose, I singled out, and insisted
upon, only these Four. As,

1 st. That the Voice of Reason, in all the Dictates of Natural Morality, was
still carefully to be attended to by a strict observance of what it commanded,
but especially, of what it forbad.

2 ly. That every Pious Motion from the Spirit of God was tenderly to be
cherished, and by no means quenched or checked either by Resistance or Neglect.

3 ly. That Conscience was still to be kept close to the Rule of God's written
Word; And,

4 ly. and Lastly, That it was frequently to be examined, and severely
accounted with.

These things also, I then more fully enlarged upon; and so closed up all with
a double Caution, and that of no small Importance as to the Case then before
us: As,

First, That no man should reckon every doubting or mis-giving of his Heart,
about the safety of his Spiritual Estate, inconsistent with that Confidence
toward God, which is here spoken of in the Text: And, secondly, That no man
should account a bare silence of Conscience in not accusing or disturbing him,
a sufficient ground for such a Confidence. Of both which, I then show the Fatal
Consequence And so, not to trouble you with any more Repetitions than these,
which were just necessary to lay before you the Coherence of one thing with
another, I shall now pass to the Third of those Four Particulars first
proposed: Which was to show, Whence it is, that the Testimony of Conscience
(concerning a man's Spiritual Estate) comes to be so Authentic, and so much to
be relied upon.

Now the force and credit of its Testimony stands upon this double Ground.

1. The High Office, which it holds immediately from God himself, in the Soul
of Man; And,

2 ly. Those Properties or Qualities which peculiarly fit it for the discharge
of this High Office, in all Things relating to the Soul.

1. And first, for its Office. It is no less than God's Vicegerent or Deputy,
doing all things by immediate Commission from Him. It commands, and dictates
every thing in God's Name; and stamps every word with an Almighty Authority. So
that it is (as it were) a kind of Copy or Transcript of the Divine Sentence,
and an Interpreter of the Sense of Heaven. And from hence it is, that Sins
against Conscience (as all Sins against Light and Conviction are, by way of
Eminence, so called) are of so peculiar and transcendent a guilt. For, that
every such Sin is a daring and direct Defiance of the Divine Authority, as it
is signified and reported to a man by his Conscience, and thereby ultimately
terminates in God himself.

Nay, and this Vicegerent of God has one Prerogative above all God's other
Earthly Vicegerents; to wit, that it can never be deposed. Such a strange,
sacred, and inviolable Majesty has God imprinted upon this Faculty; not,
indeed, as upon an Absolute, Independent Sovereign, but yet with so great a
Communication of something next to Sovereignty, that while it keeps within its
proper compass, it is controllable by no mortal Power upon Earth. For, not the
greatest Monarch in the World can countermand Conscience so far, as to make it
condemn, where it would otherwise acquit; or acquit, where it would otherwise
condemn; No, neither Sword not Scepter can come at it; but it is above, and
beyond the reach of both.

And if it were not for this Awful and Majestic Character which it bears,
whence could it be, that the stoutest and bravest Hearts droop and sneak when
Conscience frowns; and the most abject and afflicted Wretch feels an
unspeakable, and even triumphant Joy, when the Judge within absolves and
applauds him. When a man has done any villainous Act, though under Countenance
of the highest Place and Power, and under Covert of the closest Secrecy, his
Conscience for all that, strikes him like a clap of Thunder, and depresses him
to a perpetual Trepidation, Horror, and Poorness of Spirit; So that like Nero,
though surrounded with his Roman Legions and Pretorian Bands, he yet sculks and
hides himself, and is ready to fly to every thing for Refuge, though he sees
nothing to fly from. And all this, because he has heard a condemning Sentence
from within, which the secret fore-bodings of his Mind tell him will be
ratified by a sad and certain Execution from above; on the other side, what
makes a man so cheerful, so bright and confident in his Comforts, but because
he finds himself acquitted by God's High Commissioner and Deputy? Which is as
much as a Pardon under God's own Hand, under the Broad Seal of Heaven (as I may
so express it.) For a King never Condemns any whom his Judges have Absolved,
nor Absolves whom his Judges have Condemned, whatsoever the People and
Republicans may.

Now from this Principle; That the Authority of Conscience stands founded upon
its Vicegerency and Deputation under God. Several very important Inferences
may, or rather indeed unavoidably must ensue. Two of which I shall single out,
and speak of: As,

First, We collect from hence the Absurdity and Impertinence; And,

Secondly, The Impudence and Impiety of most of those Pretenses of Conscience,
which have born such a mighty sway all the World over; and in these poor
Nations especially.

1. And first, for the Absurdity and Impertinence of them. What a rattle and a
noise has this word Conscience made? How many Battles has it fought? how many
Churches has it robbed, ruined and reformed to Ashes? how many Laws has it
trampled upon, dispensed with, and addressed against? And, in a word, how many
Governments has it over-turned? Such is the mischievous force of a plausible
Word, applied to a detestable Thing.

The Allegation, or Plea of Conscience, ought never to be admitted barely for
it self: For when a Thing obliges only by a borrowed Authority, it is
ridiculous to allege it for its own. Take a Lieutenant, a Commissioner or
Ambassador of any Prince; and so far as he represents his Prince, all that he
does, or declares under that capacity, has the same force and validity, as if
actually done, or declared by the Prince himself in Person. But then how far
does this reach? why, just so far as he keeps close to his Instructions: But,
when he once baulks them, though what he does, may be indeed a Public Crime,
or a National Mischief, yet it is but a Private Act; and the Doer of it may
chance to pay his Head for his Presumption. For still, as great as the
Authority of such kind of Persons is, it is not founded upon their own Will,
nor upon their own Judgment, but upon their Commission.

In like manner, every Dictate of this Vicegerent of God, where it has a Divine
Word or Precept to back it, carries a Divine Authority with it. But, if no such
Word can be produced, it may indeed be a strong Opinion, or Persuasion, but it
is not Conscience: And no one Thing in the World has done more Mischief, and
caused more Delusions amongst Men, than their not distinguishing between
Conscience, and mere Opinion or Persuasion.

Conscience is a Latin Word, (though with an English Termination,) and,
according to the very Notation of it, imports a double or joint Knowledge; to
wit, One of a Divine Law or Rule, and the Other of a man's own Action: And so
is properly the Application of a General Law, to a Particular Instance of
Practice. The Law of God, for example, says, Thou shall not steal; and the Mind
of Man tells him, That the taking of such or such a thing from a person
lawfully possessed of it, is Stealing. Whereupon, the Conscience joining the
Knowledge of both these together, pronounces in the Name of God, That such a
Particular Action ought not to be done. And this is the true procedure of
Conscience, always supposing a Law from God, before it pretends to lay any
Obligation upon Man: For still I averr, that Conscience neither is, nor ought
to be its own Rule.

I question not, I confess, but mere Opinion or Persuasion may be every whit as
strong, and have as forcible an Influence upon a man's Actions as Conscience it
self. But then (we know) Strength or Force is one Thing, and Authority quite
another. As a Rogue upon the Highway may have as strong an Arm, and take off a
man's Head as cleverly as the Executioner. But then there is a vast Disparity
in the Two Actions, when one of them is Murder, and the other Justice: Nay,
and our Savior himself told his Disciples, That Men should both kill them, and
think that in so doing they did God service. So that here (we see) was a full
Opinion and Persuasion, and a very Zealous one too, of the high Meritoriousness
of what they did; but still there was no Law, no Word or Command of God to
ground it upon, and consequently it was not Conscience.

Now the Notion of Conscience thus stated, if firmly kept to, and thoroughly
driven home, would effectually baffle and confound all those senceless, though
clamorous Pretenses, of the Schismatical Opposers of the Constitutions of our
Church. In defense of which, I shall not speak so much as one syllable against
the Indulgence and Toleration granted to these Men. No; since they have it, let
them (in God's Name) enjoy it, and the Government make the best of it. But
since I cannot find that the Law which tolerates them in their way of Worship
(and it does no more) does at all forbid us to defend ours, it were earnestly
to be wished, that all hearty Lovers of the Church of England would assert its
excellent Constitution more vigorously now than ever: And especially in such
Congregations as this; in which there are so many young Persons, upon the well,
or ill principling of whom (next under God) depends the happiness or misery of
this Church and State. For, if such should be generally prevailed upon by Hopes
or Fears, by base Examples, by Trimming and Time-serving, (which are but Two
Words for the same Thing) to abandon, and betray the Church of England, by
nauseating her pious, prudent, and wholesome Orders, (of which I have seen some
scurvy Instances,) we may rest assured, That this will certainly produce
Confusion, and that Confusion will as certainly end in Popery.

And therefore, since the Liturgy, Rites, and Ceremonies of our Church, have
been, and still are, so much cavilled and struck at; and all upon a Plea of
Conscience, it will concern us, as becomes Men of Sense, seriously to examine
the force of this Plea; which our Adversaries are still setting up against us
as the Grand Pillar and Buttress of the good Old Cause of Nonconformity. For,
come to any Dissenting Brother, and ask him, Why cannot you communicate with
the Church of England? Oh, (says he) it is against my Conscience; my Conscience
will not suffer me to Pray by a Set-form, to Kneel at the Sacrament, to hear
Divine Service read by one in a Surplice; or to use the Cross in Baptism; or
the like.

Very well; And is this the Case then, that it is all pure Conscience that
keeps you from complying with the Rule and Order of the Church in these
matters? If so, then produce me some Word or Law of God forbidding these
things. For Conscience never commands or forbids any thing Authentically, but
there is some Law of God, which commands or forbids it first. Conscience (as
might be easily shown) being no distinct Power or Faculty from the Mind of Man,
but the Mind of Man it self applying the General Rule of God's Law to
particular Cases and Actions. This is truly and properly Conscience. And
therefore show me such a Law; and that, either as a Necessary Dictate of Right
Reason, or a Positive Injunction in God's Revealed Word: (For these Two are all
the Ways, by which God speaks to Men nowadays;) I say, show me something from
hence, which countermands, or condemns all or any of the forementioned
Ceremonies of our Church, and then I will yield the Cause. But if no such
Reason, no such Scripture can be brought to appear in their behalf against us,
but that with screwed Face, and doleful Whine, they only ply you with
senceless Harangues of Conscience, against carnal Ordinances, the Dead Letter,
and human Inventions on the one hand, and loud Outcries for a further
Reformation on the other; then rest you assured, that they have a design upon
your Pocket, and that the word Conscience is used only as an Instrument to pick
it; and more particularly, as it calls it a further Reformation, signifies no
more, with reference to the Church, than as if one man should come to another
and say, Sir, I have already taken away your Cloak, and do fully intend (if I
can) to take away your Coat also. This is the true meaning of this word,
further Reformation; and so long as you understand it in this sense, you cannot
be imposed upon by it.

Well; but if these mighty Men at Chapter and Verse can produce you no
Scripture to overthrow our Churchceremonies, I will undertake to produce
Scripture enough to warrant them; even all those places, which absolutely
enjoin Obedience, and Submission to Lawful Governors in all not unlawful
Things; particularly that in 1 Pet. 2. 13. and that in Heb. 13. 17. (of which
two places more again presently) together with that other in 1 Cor. 14. last
verse, enjoining Order and Decency in God's Worship, and in all things relating
to it. And consequently, till these Men can prove the forementioned Things,
ordered by our Church, to be either intrinsecally unlawful, or undecent, I do
here affirm by the Authority of the foregoing Scriptures, That the use of them,
as they stand established amongst us, is necessary; and that all Pretenses, or
Pleas of Conscience, to the contrary, are nothing but Cant and Cheat, Flam and
Delusion. In a word, the Ceremonies of the Church of England are as necessary,
as the Injunctions of an undoubtedly lawful Authority, the Practice of the
Primitive Church, and the General Rules of Decency, determined to Particulars
of the greatest Decency, can make them necessary. And I would not for all the
World be arraigned at the last and great Day for disturbing the Church, and
disobeying Government, and have no better Plea for so doing, than what those of
the Separation were ever yet able to defend themselves by.

But some will here say perhaps: If this be all, that you require of us, we
both can, and do bring you Scripture against your Church-ceremonies; even
that, which condemns all Will Worship, Col. 2. 23. and such other like places.
To which I answer, first; That the Will Worship, forbidden in that Scripture,
is so termed, not from the Circumstance, but from the Object of Religious
Worship; and we readily own, That it is by no means in the Church's Power to
appoint, or choose, whom, or what it will Worship. But that does not infer,
That it is not therefore in the Church's Power to appoint how, and in what
manner it will Worship the true Object of Religious Worship; provided, that in
so doing, it observes such Rules of Decency, as are proper, and conducing to
that purpose. So that this Scripture is wholly Irrelative to the case before
us; and as impertinently applied to it, as any poor Text in the Revelation was
ever applied to the grave and profound Whimsies of some Modern Interpreters.
But, 2 dly. to this Objection about Will Worship, I answer yet further; That
the forementioned Ceremonies of the Church of England; are no Worship, nor
part of God's Worship at all, nor were ever pretended so to be; and, if they
are not so much as Worship, I am sure, they cannot be Will Worship. But we own
them only for Circumstances, Modes, and Solemn Usages by which God's Worship is
orderly and decently performed: I say, we pretend them not to be parts of
Divine Worship; but, for all that, to be such things as the Divine Worship, in
some Instance or other, cannot be without: For that, which neither does, nor
can give vital Heat, may yet be necessary to preserve it: And he, who should
strip himself of all, that is no part of himself, would quickly find, or rather
feel the Inconvenience of such a Practice; and have cause to wish for a Body,
as void of sense, as such an Argument.

Now the Consequence in both these cases is perfectly Parallel; and if so, you
may rest satisfied; That, what is nonsense upon a Principle of Reason, will
never be sense upon a Principle of Religion. But as touching the Necessity of
the aforesaid Usages in the Church of England, I shall lay down these four
Propositions.

1. That Circumstantials in the Worship of God (as well as in all other humane
Actions) are so necessary to it, that it cannot possibly be performed without
them.

2. That Decency in the Circumstantials of God's Worship is absolutely
necessary.

3. That the General Rule and Precept of Decency is not capable of being
reduced to Practice, but as it is exemplified in, and determined to particular
Instances. And,

4 ly. and Lastly, That there is more of the General Nature of Decency in those
particular Usages and Ceremonies which the Church of England has pitched upon,
than is, or can be shown in any other whatsoever.

These things I affirm; and when you have put them all together, let any one
give me a solid and sufficient Reason for the giving up those few Ceremonies of
our Church, if he can. All the Reason that I could ever yet hear alleged by
the chief Factors for a General Intromission of all Sorts, Sects, and
Persuasions, into our Communion, is, That those who separate from us, are stiff
and obstinate, and will not submit to the Rules and Orders of our Church, and
that therefore they ought to be taken away. Which is a goodly Reason indeed,
and every way worthy of the Wisdom and Integrity of those, who allege it. And
to show, that it is so, let it be but transferred from the Ecclesiastical to
the Civil Government, from Church to State; and let all Laws be abrogated,
which any great or sturdy Multitude of Men have no mind to submit to. That is,
in other words, let Laws be made to obey, and not to be obeyed; and, upon these
terms, I doubt not but you will find that Kingdom (or rather that Commonwealth)
finely governed in a short time.

And thus I have shown the Absurdity, Folly and Impertinence of alleging the
Obligation of Conscience, where there is no Law or Command of God mediate or
immediate to found that Obligation upon. And yet, as bad as this is, it were
well, if the bare Absurdity of these Pretenses were the worst thing which we
had to charge them with. But it is not so. For our second next Inference from
the foregoing Principle of the Vicegerency of Conscience under God, will show
us also the daring Impudence, and downright Impiety of many of those fulsome
Pleas of Conscience, which the World has been too often, and too scandalously
abused by. For a man to sin against his Conscience, is doubtless a great
Wickedness. But to make God himself a Party in the Sin, is a much greater. For,
this is to plead God's Authority against God's very Law; which doubles the Sin,
and adds Blasphemy to Rebellion. And yet such things we have seen done amongst
us. An horrid, unnatural, Civil War raised, and carried on; the purest, and
most primitively Reformed Church in the World laid in the Dust, and one of the
best and most innocent Princes, that ever sat upon a Throne, by a barbarous,
unheard of Violence hurried to his Grave in a bloody Sheet, and not so much as
suffered to rest there to this day; and all this by Men acting under the most
solemn Pretenses of Conscience, that Hypocrisy perhaps ever yet presumed to
outface the World with.

And are not the Principles of those Wretches still owned, and their Persons
Sainted by a Race of Men of the same stamp, risen up in their stead, the sworn
mortal Enemies of our Church? And yet, for whose sake, some Projectors amongst
us have been turning every Stone to transform, mangle and degrade its noble
Constitution to the homely, mechanic Model of those Republican, imperfect
Churches abroad. Which, instead of being any Rule or Pattern to us, ought in
all Reason to receive one from us. Nay, and so short-sighted are some in their
Politics, as not to discern all this while, that it is not the Service, but
the Revenue of our Church which is struck at; and not any Passages of our
Liturgy, but the Property of our Lands which these Reformers would have altered.

For, I am sure, no other Alteration will satisfy Dissenting Consciences; no,
nor this neither, very long, without an utter Abolition of all that looks like
Order or Government in the Church. And this we may be sure of, if we do but
consider both the inveterate Malice of the Romish Party, which sets these
silly, unthinking Tools a-work, and withal that monstrous Principle, or Maxim,
which those who divide from us (at least most of them) roundly profess, avow,
and govern their Consciences by. Namely; That in all matters that concern
Religion, or the Church, though a Thing or Action be never so indifferent or
lawful in it self; yet if it be commanded or enjoined by the Government either
Civil or Ecclesiastical, it becomes ipso facto, by being so commanded, utterly
unlawful, and such as they can, by no means, with good Conscience comply with.

Which one detestable Tenet, or Proposition, carrying in it the very
Quintessence, and vital Spirit of all Nonconformity, absolutely casheirs and
cuts off all Church Government at one stroke; and is withal such an insolent,
audacious Defiance of Almighty God, under the Mask of Conscience; as perhaps
none in former Ages, who so much as wore the Name of Christians, ever arrived
to, or made profession of.

For, to resume the Scriptures aforequoted by us; and particularly that in 1
Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, says the Spirit of
God, speaking by that Apostle. But say these Men; If the Ordinance of Man
enjoins you the Practice of any thing with reference to Religion or the Church,
(though never so lawful in it self,) you cannot with a good Conscience submit
to the Ordinance of Man in that case: That is, in other words, God says, they
must submit; and they say, they must not.

Again, in the forementioned Heb. 13. 17. The Apostle bids them (and in them,
all Christians whatsoever) to obey those who have the Rule over them; speaking
there of Church-Rulers; for he tells them, That they were such as watched for
their Souls. But, says the Separatist, If those who have the Rule over you,
should command you any thing about Church Affairs, you cannot, you ought not,
in Conscience, to obey them; For as much as according to that grand Principle
of theirs, newly specified by us; Every such Command makes Obedience to a thing
otherwise lawful to become unlawful; and consequently, upon the same
Principle, Rulers must not, cannot be obeyed: Unless we could imagine, that
there may be such a thing as Obedience on the one side, when there must be no
such thing as a Command on the other; which would make pleasant sense of it
indeed, and fit for none but a Dissenting Reason, as well as Conscience, to
assert. For, though these Men have given the World too many terrible Proofs by
their own example, That there may be Commands, and no Obedience; yet, I
believe, it will put their little Logic hard to it, to prove, That there can
be any Obedience, where there is no Command. And therefore, it unanswerably
follows, That the Abetters of the forementioned Principle plead Conscience in
a direct and barefaced contradiction to God's express Command.

And now (I beseech you) consider with your selves (for it is no slight matter
that I am treating of;) I say, consider what you ought to judge of those
insolent, unaccountable Boasts of Conscience, which, like so many Fireballs or
Mouth-Granadoes (as I may so term them) are every day thrown at our Church. The
Apostle bids us prove all Things. And will you then take Conscience at every
turn, upon its own word? upon the forlorn Credit of every bold Impostor who
pleads it? Will you sell your Reason, your Church, and your Religion, and both
of them the best in the World, for a Name? and that a wrested, abused,
mis-applied Name? Knaves, when they design some more than ordinary Villainy,
never fail to make use of this Plea; and it is, because they always find fools
ready to believe it.

But you will say then; What course must be taken to fence against this
imposture? Why truly, the best that I know of, I have told you before; namely,
That whenever you hear any of these fly, sanctified Sycophants, with turned
up Eye, and shrug of Shoulder, pleading Conscience for or against any Thing, or
Practice, you would forthwith ask them, What Word of God they have to bottom
that Judgment of their Conscience upon? For-asmuch as Conscience, being God's
Vicegerent, was never Commissioned by him to govern us in its own Name; but
must still have some Divine Word or Law to support and warrant it. And
therefore call for such a word; and that, either from Scripture, or from
manifest Universal Reason, and insist upon it, so, as not to be put off without
it. And if they can produce you no such thing from either of them, (as they
never can;) then rest assured, that they are errant Cheats and Hypocrites; and
that, for all their big Words, the Conscience of such Men is so far from being
able to give them any true Confidence toward God, that it cannot so much as
give them Confidence toward a wise and good Man, no, nor yet toward
themselves, who are far from being either.

And thus I have shown you the First ground upon which the Testimony of
Conscience (concerning a man's spiritual Estate) comes to be so Authentic, and
so much to be relied upon; to wit, the high Office which it holds, as the
Vicegerent of God himself in the Soul of Man: Together with the Two grand
Inferences drawn from thence. The first of them showing the Absurdity, Folly,
and Impertinence of pretending Conscience against any Thing, when there is no
Law of God mediate or immediate against it: And the other setting forth the
intolerable Blasphemy and Impiety of pretending Conscience for any Thing, which
the known Law of God is directly against, and stands in open defiance of.

Proceed we now to the second Ground, from which Conscience derives the Credit
of its Testimony in judging of our spiritual Estate; and that consists in those
Properties and Qualities which so peculiarly fit it for the discharge of its
forementioned Office, in all things relating to the Soul. And these are Three.

First, The Quickness of its Sight.

Secondly, The Tenderness of its Sense: And,

Thirdly and Lastly, Its Rigorous and Impartial way of giving Sentence.

Of each of which in their Order. And first, For the Extraordinary quickness
and sagacity of its Sight, in spying out every Thing, which can any way concern
the Estate of the Soul. As the Voice of it (I show) was as loud as Thunder; so
the Sight of it is as piercing and quick as Lightning. It presently sees the
Guilt, and looks through all the Flaws, and Blemishes of a sinful Action; and
on the other side, observes the Candidness of a Man's very Principles, the
sincerity of his Intentions, and the whole Carriage of every Circumstance in a
Virtuous performance. So strict, and accurate is this spiritual Inquisition.

Upon which Account it is; That there is no such Thing, as perfect Secrecy, to
encourage a rational Mind to the Perpetration of any base Action. For a Man
must first extinguish, and put out the Great Light within him, his Conscience,
he must get away from himself, and shake off the Thousand Witnesses, which he
always carries about him, before he can be alone. And where there is no
Solitude, I am sure there can be no Secrecy.

It Is confessed indeed, that a Long, and a Bold Course of Sinning may (as we
have shown elsewhere) very much dimn, and darken the discerning Faculty of
Conscience. For so the Apostle assures, us, it did with those in Romans 1. 21.
and the same no doubt, it does every Day; but still so, as to leave such
Persons, both then, and now, many notable lucid Intervals. Sufficient to
convince them of their Deviations from Reason, and Natural Religion; and
thereby to render them inexcusable; and so, in a word, to stop their Mouths,
though not save their Souls. In short, their Conscience was not stark Dead, but
under a kind of Spiritual Apoplexy, or Deliquium. The Operation was hindered,
but the Faculty not destroyed. And now, if Conscience be naturally thus
apprehensive and sagacious; certainly, this ought to be another great Ground,
over and above its bare Authority, why we should trust, and rely upon the
Reports of it. For Knowledge is still the Ground and Reason of Trust; and so
much as any one has of Discernment, so far he is secured from Error and
Deception, and for that Cause fit to be confided in. No Witness so much to be
credited, as an Eyewitness. And Conscience is like the great Eye of the World
the Sun, always open, always making Discoveries. Justly therefore, may we by
the Light of it take a View of our Condition.

2 ly. Another Property or Quality of Conscience, enabling it to judge so truly
of our spiritual Estate, is the Tenderness of its Sense. For as by the
Quickness of its Sight, it directs us what to do, or not to do; so by this
Tenderness of its Sense, it excuses or accuses us, as we have done, or not
done, according to those Directions. And it is altogether as nice, delicate,
and tender in Feeling, as it can be perspicacious, and quick in Seeing. For
Conscience (you know) is still called, and accounted the Eye of the Soul: and
how troublesome is the least Mote, or Dust falling into the Eye! and how
quickly does it weep, and water upon the least Grievance that afflicts it!

And no less exact is the Sense which Conscience, preserved in its Native
Purity, has of the least Sin. For, as great Sins wast, so small ones are enough
to wound it; and every Wound (you know) is painful; till it festers beyond
Recovery. As soon as ever Sin gives the Blow, Conscience is the first Thing
that feels the Smart. No sooner does the poisoned Arrow Enter, but that begins
to bleed inwardly. Sin and Sorrow, the Venom of one, and the Anguish of the
other being Things inseparable.

Conscience, if truly tender, never complains without a Cause, though I
confess, there is a new fashioned Sort of Tenderness of Conscience, which
always does so. But that is like the Tenderness of a Bog or Quagmire, and it is
very dangerous coming near it, for fear of being swallowed up by it. For when
Conscience has once acquired this Artificial Tenderness, it will strangely
enlarge, or contract it Swallow as it pleases; so that sometimes, a Camel shall
slide down with Ease, where, at other times, even a Gnat may chance to stick by
the Way. It is, indeed, such a Kind of Tenderness, as makes the Person, who has
it, generally very tender of obeying the Laws, but never so, of breaking them.
And therefore, since it is commonly at such Variance with the Law, I think the
Law is the fittest Thing to deal with it.

In the mean time, let no Man deceive himself, or think, that true Tenderness
of Conscience is any Thing else, but an awful, and exact Sense of the Rule,
which should direct, and of the Law, which should govern it. And while it
steers by this Compass, and is sensible of every Declination from it, so long
it is truly and properly Tender, and fit to be relied upon, whether it checks,
or approves a Man, for what he does. For, from hence alone, springs its
excusing or accusing Power. All accusation, in the very Nature of the Thing,
still supposing, and being founded upon some Law: For where there is no Law,
there can be no Transgression; and where there can be no Transgression, I am
sure there ought to be no Accusation.

And here, when I speak of Law, I mean, both the Law of God, and of Man too.
For where the Matter of a Law is a Thing not Evil, every Law of Man is
vertually, and at a second Hand, the Law of God also. For as much as it binds
in the strength of the Divine Law, commanding Obedience to Every Ordinance of
Man; as we have already shown. And therefore, all Tenderness of Conscience
against such Laws, is Hypocrisy, and patronized by none, but Men of Design,
who look upon it as the fittest Engine to get into Power by; which, by the way,
when they are once possessed of; they generally manage with as little
Tenderness, as they do with Conscience. Of which we have had but too much
Experience already, and it would be but ill venturing upon more.

In a word, Conscience not acting by, and under a Law, is a boundless, daring,
and presumptuous thing: and, for any one by virtue thereof, to challenge to
himself a Privilege of doing what he will, and of being unaccountable for what
he does, is in all Reason too much, either for Man or Angel to pretend to.

3 ly. The third and last Property of Conscience which I shall mention, and
which makes the Verdict of it so Authentic, is its great and rigorous
Impartiality. For, as its wonderful Apprehensiveness made, that it could not
easily be deceived, so this makes, that it will by no means deceive. A Judge,
you know, may be skillful in understanding a Cause, and yet partial in giving
Sentence. But it is much otherwise with Conscience; no Artifice can induce it
to accuse the Innocent, or to absolve the Guilty. No; we may as well bribe the
Light and the Day to represent White things Black, or Black White.

What pitiful things are Power, Rhetoric, or Riches, when they would
terrify, dissuade, or buy off Conscience from pronouncing Sentence according
to the Merit of a Man's Actions? For still (as we have shown) Conscience is a
Copy of the Divine Law; and though Judges may be bribed, or frightened, yet
Laws cannot. The Law is Impartial and Inflexible; it has no Passions or
Affections; and consequently never accepts Persons, nor dispenses with it self.

For let the most potent Sinner upon Earth speak out, and tell us, whether he
can command down the Clamours and Revilings of a guilty Conscience, and impose
silence upon that bold Reprover. He may perhaps for a while put on an high and
a big Look; but can he, for all that, look Conscience out of Countenance? And
he may also dissemble a little forced Jollity, that is, he may Court his
Mistress, and quaff his Cups, and perhaps sprinkle them now and then with a few
Dammees, but who in the mean time besides his own wretched miserable self,
knows of those secret, bitter Infusions, which that terrible thing, called
Conscience makes into all his Draughts? Believe it, most of the appearing Mirth
in the World is not Mirth but Art. The wounded Spirit is not seen, but walks
under a disguise; and still the less you see of it, the better it looks.

On the contrary, if we consider the virtuous Person, let him declare freely,
whether ever his Conscience checked him for his Innocence, or upbraided him for
an Action of Duty; did it ever bestow any of its hidden Lashes, or concealed
Bites on a mind severely Pure, Chaste, and Religious?

But when Conscience shall complain, cry out, and recoyl, let a Man descend
into himself with too just a Suspicion, that all is not right within. For
surely that Hue and cry was not raised upon him for nothing. The spoils of a
rifled Innocence are born away, and the Man has stolen something from his own
Soul; for which he ought to be pursued, and will at last certainly be over-took.

Let every one therefore attend the Sentence of his Conscience: For he may be
sure, it will not dawb, nor flatter. It is as severe as Law; as impartial as
Truth. It will neither conceal, nor pervert what it knows.

And thus I have done with the Third of those four Particulars at first
proposed, and shown whence, and upon what account it is, that the Testimony of
Conscience (concerning our spiritual Estate) comes to be so Authentic, and so
much to be relied upon: Namely, For that it is fully empowered and commissioned
to this great Office by God himself; and withal, that it is extremely
Quick-sighted to apprehend and discern; and moreover very Tender and Sensible,
of every thing that concerns the Soul. And lastly, That it is most exactly and
severely Impartial, in judging of whatsoever comes before it. Every one of
which Qualifications justly contributes to the Credit and Authority of the
Sentence which shall be passed by it. And so, we are at length arrived at the
Fourth and last Thing proposed from the words: Which was to assign some
particular Cases, or Instances, in which this Confidence toward God, suggested
by a rightly informed Conscience, does most eminently show, and exert it self.

I shall mention Three.

1. In our Addresses to God by Prayer. When a Man shall presume to come and
place himself in the Presence of the Great Searcher of Hearts, and to ask
something of him, while his Conscience is all the while smiting him on the
Face, and telling him what a Rebel and a Traitor he is to the Majesty which he
supplicates; surely such an one should think with himself, that the God whom he
prays to, is greater than his Conscience, and pierces into all the filth and
baseness of his Heart with a much clearer, and more severe Inspection. And if
so, will he not likewise resent the Provocation more deeply, and revenge it
upon him more terribly, if Repentance does not divert the Blow? Every such
Prayer is big with Impiety and Contradiction, and makes as odious a noise in
the Ears of God, as the Harangues of one of those Rebel Fasts, or Humiliations
in the year Forty One; invoking the Blessings of Heaven upon such Actions and
Designs as nothing but Hell could reward.

One of the most peculiar Qualifications of an Heart rightly disposed for
Prayer is a well grounded Confidence of a Man's fitness for that Duty. In Heb.
10. 22. Let us draw near with a true Heart, in full assurance of faith, says
the Apostle. But whence must this Assurance spring? Why, we are told in the
very next Words of the same Verse: Having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience: Otherwise the voice of an impure Conscience will cry much louder
than our Prayers, and speak more effectually against us, than these can
intercede for us.

And now, if Prayer be the great Conduit of mercy, by which the Blessings of
Heaven are derived upon the Creature, and the noble Instrument of Converse
between God, and the Soul, then surely that which renders it ineffectual and
loathsome to God, must needs be of the most mischievous and destructive
Consequence to Mankind imaginable: and consequently to be removed with all that
Earnestness and Concern, with which a Man would rid himself of a Plague or a
moral Infection. For it taints and pollutes every Prayer; it turns an Oblation
into an Affront; and the Odours of a Sacrifice into the Exhalations of a
Carcass. And in a word makes the Heavens over us Brass, denying all Passage,
either to descending Mercies, or ascending Petitions.

But on the other side, when a Man's Breast is clear, and the same Heart which
endites, does also encourage his Prayer, when his Innocence pushes on the
Attempt, and vouches the Success. Such an one goes boldly to the Throne of
Grace, and his Boldness is not greater than his Welcome. God recognizes the
voice of his own Spirit interceding within him; and his Prayers are not only
followed, but even prevented with an Answer.

2ly. A Second Instance, in which this Confidence toward God does so
remarkably show it self, is at the Time of some notable Trial, or sharp
Affliction. When a Man's Friends shall desert him, his Relations disown him,
and all Dependencies fail him, and in a word, the whole World frown upon him,
certainly it will then be of some moment to have a Friend in the Court of
Conscience, which shall (as it were) buoy up his sinking Spirits, and speak
greater Things for him than all these together can Declaim against him.

For it is most certain, that no Height of Honor, nor affluence of Fortune can
keep a Man from being Miserable, nor indeed Contemptible, when an enraged
Conscience shall fly at him, and take him by the Throat; so it is also as
certain, that no Temporal Adversities can cut off those inward, secret,
invincible Supplies of Comfort, which Conscience shall pour in upon distressed
Innocence, in spite, and in defiance of all Worldly Calamities.

Naturalists observe, that when the Frost seizes upon Wine, they are only the
slighter and more waterish parts of it that are subject to be congealed; but
still there is a mighty Spirit, which can retreat into it self, and there
within its own Compass lie secure from the freezing impression of the Element
round about it. And just so it is with the Spirit of a Man, while a good
Conscience makes it firm and impenetrable. An outward Affliction can no more
benumb or quell it, than a blast of Wind can freeze up the Blood in a Man's
Veins, or a little Shower of Rain soak into his Heart, and there quench the
Principle of Life it self.

Take the two greatest Instances of Misery, which, I think, are incident to
Humane Nature; to wit, Poverty, and Shame, and I dare oppose Conscience to them
both.

And first for Poverty. Suppose a Man stripped of all, driven out of House and
Home, and perhaps out of his Country too (which having, within our memory,
happened to so many, may too easily (God knows) be supposed again) yet if his
Conscience shall tell him, that it was not for any failure in his own Duty, but
from the success of another Villainy, that all this befell him, why then, his
Banishment becomes his Preferment, his Rags his Trophies, his Nakedness his
Ornament; and so long as his Innocence is his Repast, he feasts and banquets
upon Bread and Water. He has disarmed his Afflictions, unstung his Miseries;
and though he has not the proper Happiness of the World, yet he has the
greatest that is to be enjoyed in it.

And for this, we might appeal to the Experience of those great, and good Men,
who, in the late Times of Rebellion, and Confusion, were forced into foreign
Countries, for their unshaken Firmness, and Fidelity, to the oppressed Cause of
Majesty, and Religion, whether their Conscience did not like a Fidus Achates,
still bear them company, stick close to them, and suggest Comfort, even when
the Causes of Comfort were invisible; and in a word, verify that great saying
of the Apostle in their Mouths; We have nothing, and yet we possess all Things.

For it is not barely a Man's Abridgement in his External Accommodations, which
makes him miserable; but when his Conscience shall hit him in the Teeth, and
tell him, that it was his Sin, and his Folly, which brought him under these
Abridgements. That his present scanty Meals are but the natural Effects of his
former over full ones. That it was his Tailor, and his Cook, his fine Fashions,
and his French Ragou's, which sequestered him; and, in a word, that he came by
his Poverty as sinfully, as some usually do by their Riches; and consequently,
that Providence treats him with all these Severities, not by way of Trial, but
by way of Punishment, and Revenge. The Mind surely, of it self, can feel none
of the Burnings of a Fever; but, if my Fever be occasioned by a Surfeit, and
that Surfeit caused by my Sin, it is that which adds Fuel to the fiery Disease,
and Rage to the Distemper.

2 ly. Let us consider also the Case of Calumny, and Disgrace; Doubtless, the
Sting of every reproachful Speech, is the Truth of it; and, to be conscious,
is that which gives an Edge, and Keenness to the Invective. Otherwise, when
Conscience shall plead not guilty to the Charge, a Man entertains it not as an
Endictment, but as a Libel. He hears all such Calumnies with a generous
Unconcernment; and receiving them at one Ear, gives them a free and easy
Passage through the other: They fall upon him like Rain, or Hail upon an oiled
Garment; they may make a Noise indeed, but can find no Entrance. The very
Whispers of an acquitting Conscience will drown the Voice of the loudest
Slander.

What a long Charge of Hypocrisy, and many other base Things, did Job's
Friends draw up against him? But he regarded it no more, than the Dunghill
which he sat upon, while his Conscience enabled him to appeal, even to God
Himself; and in Spite of Calumny to assert, and hold fast his Integrity.

And did not Joseph lie under as black an Infamy, as the Charge of the highest
Ingratitude, and the lewdest Villainy could fasten upon him? Yet his Conscience
raised him so much above it, that he scorned so much as to clear himself, or to
recriminate the Strumpet by a true Narrative of the Matter. For we read nothing
of that in the whole Story: Such Confidence, such Greatness of Spirit, does a
clear Conscience give a Man; always making him more solicitous to preserve his
Innocence, than concerned to prove it. And so, we come now to the

3 d. and last Instance, in which above all others, this Confidence toward God
does most eminently show, and exert it self; and that is at the Time of Death.
Which surely gives the grand Opportunity of trying both the Strength, and Worth
of every Principle. When a Man shall be just about to quit the Stage of this
World, to put off his Mortality, and to deliver up his last Accounts to God; at
which sad Time, his Memory shall serve him for little else, but to terrify him
with a frightfull Review of his past Life, and his former Extravagances
stripped of all their Pleasure, but retaining their Guilt. What is it then,
that can promise him a fair Passage into the other World, or a comfortable
Appearance before his dreadful Judge, when he is there? Not all the Friends,
and Interests, all the Riches and Honors under Heaven, can speak so much as a
Word for him, or one Word of Comfort to him in that Condition; they may
possibly reproach, but they cannot relieve him.

No; at this disconsolate Time, when the busy Tempter shall be more than
usually apt to vex, and trouble him, and the Pains of a dying Body to hinder
and discompose him, and the Settlement of worldly Affairs to disturb, and
confound him; and, in a word, all Things conspire to make his sick Bed
grievous, and uneasy. Nothing can then stand up against all these Ruins, and
speak Life in the midst of Death, but a clear Conscience.

And the Testimony of that, shall make the Comforts of Heaven descend upon his
weary Head, like a refreshing Dew, or Shower upon a parched Ground. It shall
give him some lively Earnests, and secret Anticipations of his approaching Joy.
It shall bid his Soul go out of the Body undauntedly, and lift up its Head with
Confidence, before Saints and Angels. Surely the Comfort, which it conveys at
this Season, is something bigger than the Capacities of Mortality; mighty, and
unspeakable; and not to be understood, till it comes to be felt.

And now, who would not quit all the Pleasures, and Trash, and Trifles, which
are apt to captivate the Heart of Man, and pursue the greatest Rigors of Piety,
and Austerities of a good Life to purchase to himself such a Conscience, as at
the Hour of Death, when all the Friendships of the World shall bid him adieu;
and the whole Creation turn its Back upon him, shall dismiss his Soul, and
close his Eyes with that blessed Sentence; Well done, thou good and faithful
Servant, enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord!

For he, whose Conscience enables him to look God in the Face, with Confidence
here, shall be sure to see his Face also, with Comfort hereafter.

Which God of his Mercy grant to us all: To whom be rendered, and ascribed, as
is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now, and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS newly printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Thenae Oxoniensis: Or an exact History of all the Writers and Bishops who
have had their Education in the University of Oxford; from 1500, to the end of
1690. Representing the Birth, Fortunes, Preferments, and Death of all those
Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their Lives; with the Fate and
Character of their Writings: The Work being so Complete, that no Writer of Note
of this Nation, for near two hundred years past, is omitted. In Two Volumes in
Fol.

Twelve Sermons preached upon several Occasions, by R. South, D. D. Six of them
never before printed. Vol. First, in Octavo.

Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions, by G. Stradling, D. D. late
Dean of Chichester. Never before printed: together with an Account of the
Author.

Dr. Pocock's Commentary on the Prophets, Joel, Micah, Malachi, etc. in Fol.

A Critical History of the Text, and Versions of the New Testament; wherein is
firmly Established the Truth of those Acts on which the Foundation of Christian
Religion is laid: In Two Parts. By Father Simon, of the Oratory. Together with
a Refutation of such Passages as seem contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of
the Church of England, in Quarto.

Newly printed for Randall Tailor,
Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book, entitled, A Vindication of the Holy
and Ever Blessed Trinity, etc. Together with a more Necessary Vindication of
that Sacred, and Prime Article of the Christian Faith, from his New Notions,
and false Explications of it. Humbly dedicated to His Admirers, and to Himself
the Chief of them: by a Divine of the Church of England.


