A SERMON Preached before His Grace, GEORGE EARL of MELVIL, Their Majesty's
High Commissioner, AND The Nobility, Barons, and Burrows, Members of the High
Court of Parliament. In the Parliament House, upon Sunday, May 11. 1690.

By John Spalding, Minister at Kirkcudbright.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order, Anno DOM. 1690.

1 CHRONICLES. 12. 32. And the Children of Issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do --
THis Text bears an excellent Character of a Party, who came with others in a
very Critical Juncture to Hebron, to assist in making David King, Saul now
being out of the way, and the time of fulfilling the promise to David being now
at hand; wherein you have (1.) a description of the Party thus Characterized,
1. From their Tribe, they were Children of Issachar, a Tribe whose Motto was, a
strong Ass couching down between two burdens, as Genesis 49. 14. discovering their
Disposition, Strength, and Employment about worldly concerns. The Lord will
bring off people from their vvorldly affairs, when he has service for them.
2. From their Number, they were 200 that came to assist in the work. Tho people
be at some disadvantages, yet ought they not to withdraw their hand from the
Lord's work. And 3. From their Station, all of them had command over their
Brethren, either in a Civil or Military capacity. Strong obligations lies upon
those in places of Trust and Command, to put their hand to the Lord's work.
(2.) You have the Character it self, which beyond many others they did bear;
they had understanding of the times: Where we are 1. to consider what is meant
by times? By times here is not meant properly that which Philosophers call the
measure of Motion by first and last; But Figuratively, the state and condition
of times, or these Providence, Affairs, Changes and Vicissitudes that fall out
in time, Esth. 1. 13. And 2. What this understanding of the times is? It were
too narrow a sense to astrict it either to that Physical and Astrological
knowledge, which they had of the Stars and motions of the Heavens, teaching
them the fit Seasons, (they being for most part Husbandmen) of Sowing and
Reaping, etc. Or to that Historical and Chronological understanding which they
had of the times that were past, or of right computing and ordering the times
of celebrating their solemn Feasts; or to that Military knowledge which they
were endowed with of the fit seasons of going forth to, and right management of
their Wars and Battles: But it has reference 1. To that Moral Prudence* and
Policy, whereby they knew the nature, tendency, and duties, with their fittest
seasons of the present posture of affairs. And 2. To that spiritual wisdom and
understanding, whereby they were directed to the discovery and right
improvement of the intricat providence of their time, which seemed to be
greatly perplexed with singular intricacies and rotations, and particularly of
the present dispensation of making David King. And 3. In the Text you have the
effect and result of this gift of their understanding of the times. It was
contributive to the discovery and practice of their own and all Isreal's present
duty, to know what Israel ought to do, whether as a Body Politic, or
Ecclesiastic.

The words that I have chosen for the Subject of this Sermon are these, which
were men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do:
Wherein you have 1. a supposition of two truths, the handling of which is not
my present intendment. 1. That there are some special times and providence,
which may pass over a Church or Kingdom, Eccl. 3. 17. 2. That these signal
times and providence are oft-times very intricat and difficult to understand,
Ez^^* 1. 16. 2. A position of other two Doctrines. As 1. That it is a necessary
duty, and commendable qualification, to understand the times that a Church or
Kingdom may pass under. 2. That the right discerning of these times contribute
much to discover unto, and direct people in the right timing and management of
their present duty. The prosecution of these two truths is my present work.

Doct 1. That it is a necessary duty, and commendable qualification, to
understand the singular times or providence that may pass over a Church or
Kingdom, Eccl. 8. 5. A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment.
Method requires, that in the prosecution of this truth I should first give you
the grounds of it. 2. What are these things which in times we are to study
mainly to understand. And 3. What way we may best come to the understanding of
times.

I. The grounds of this Doctrine are 1. God has expressly commanded, that ye
make serious reflections upon his singular providence, whether of mercy or of
judgment, Psalm. 66. 5. Come and see the works of God, he is terrible in his
doings to the children of men. And when the seven Seals are opened, Rev. 6. 1.
A thundering voice is heard, crying, come and see; and how many Beholds are
prefixed in the Scripture to his signal steps and goings amongst a people?
Exodus 3. 2. Behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
And Job is in a special way called to this duty, Job 37. 14. Hearken unto this,
O Job, stand still and consider the wondrous works of God. 2. The Lord is sore
displeased with, and utters severe threatenings against a people that are not
in this duty, Psalm. 28. 5. Because they regard not the works of the Lord, not
the operations of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up. It
is an high contempt of God when he travelleth amongst a people in signal and
singular steps of providence, not to observe or take notice of his goings, and
lays them open to that sad challenge, whereby the Lord ranks them below Bruits,
Isai. 1. 3. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib, but my
people do not know, and Israel does not consider* 3. Without this knowledge of
the times, the Lord loses his due praises at our hands, for how can we praise
him when we cannot discern his loving kindness, why will ye be so foolish and
unjust as to rob God of the Glory due to him of all his Works, by not studying
to understand them. Psalm. 107. contains a record of his wondrous Works, and at
the close of every Section, there is an Exclamation, O that men would praise
the Lord, etc. And the last verse concludes, Whosoever is wise, and will observe
these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. 4. As
the Lord by neglect of this Duty, loses his Praises, so we lose the benefit of
Times and Providence, if we do not understand them; for by his Works, as well
as by his Word, he causes his people to profit. And without this discerning of
the Times, we want a great part of the Food of our Faith, the exercise of
Patience, and occasion of serious Comtemplation and wonderment. Psalm. 74. 14.
Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to the
people inhabiting the wilderness. 5. Without this knowledge of the Times and
Providence, ye cannot well know how to order your Addresses to God in Prayer
and Supplication anent them, and your own circumstances under them. Psalm. 109.
4. For the right understanding of times will afford you many Articles for your
Prayers, prompt you to plead them, and fit you for discerning the Lord's
returns. For when the floods of great Waters are like to go over David, he
says, Psalm. 32. 6. For this shall every one that is godly call upon thee in a
time when thou may be found. And 6. It is a most pleasant and ravishing
exercise, to be studying to understand the Times, and the seize of the
Saints this way fill their Souls with unspeakable delight: It Is one of the
Fruits of Christ that are sweet to their Taste, Psalm. 111: 2. The works of the
Lord are sought out of all these that take pleasure in them. What a Heaven upon
Earth will this advance thee unto? O! what pleasure to perceive the Wise
Counselor, and excellent Worker against contrary Winds and Tides from men,
steering all to the Harbor of his own praise, the exalting of his Son, and the
happiness of his Church, and secretly carrying on these ends, while men are
driving quite contrary designs, how he promotes his designs, by wicked men's
opposing them; and enlarges and gathers his Church, by their scattering of it.
And O! what satisfaction as to thy own particular case, to behold and discern
the Lord, sometimes lifting thee up, ( Psalm. 102. 10.) and sometimes casting
thee down again, sometimes laying you low, as free among the dead, and again
setting your feet upon a Rock, and making them like hinds feet, so that ye walk
on high places; sometimes enlarging you and your steps under you, and again
straitning you, that ye walk as with fetters, now afflicted, and again
delivered; wounded and cast down, and in three days healed and lifted up;
these are part of his ways, which cannot but be pleasure to us to search into
and contemplat. Yea, how delighting must it be, to begin that exercise here,
that shall continue in Heaven; to view and remember with delight, the various
and wonderful methods that the wise Lord took in bringing you there; and while
you are on Earth, to be transported to have your Conversation in Heaven, or to
have a Wafe of Heaven brought unto your Soul. This cannot be but an unspeakable
delight.

II. What are these things in times that we are to search into, and study to
understand, (1.) We are to search into and to understand the hid and secret
Spring of the Lord's wise and powerful hand in directing, permitting and
ordering all these things that fall out in time. The wheel (Ezekiel: 1. 16.) that
is within the wheel, and the hand that is under the wings of the living
creatures, as in a Clock, or Watch, we see the Hand, but we see not the secret
Spring within* that moves all, and turns about the direct, Retrograd, and
transverse motions of the Wheels to the discovery of the hour, for Times and
Providence may be obvious in their actions, second Causes, and the effects
they produce; but we are in the dark many times: 1. As to the power that acts.
2. As to the reasons and ends he has before him. And 3. As to the mind and
disposition wherewith he moves in them; these ly hid under ground, as matter of
inquiry to the serious and most discerning, whose eyes are in their head. (2.)
We are to search into, and understand the Sins of the times, that we may
confess and mourn over them, escape from them, and get them removed. Ier. 9.
12. Who is the wise man that may understand this, for what the land perishes,
and is burnt up like a wilderness so that none passes through? As to which ye
are to understand; 1. That as there has been many Prophets that have seen vain
and foolish things for us, (Lam. 2. 14.) and have not discovered our iniquity,
to turn away our captivity but have seen for us false causes of banishment. So
the Lords people are often in the dark, as to the grounds of the Lord's
controversy with them* and frequently put to that question, ( Job 9. 10.) Show
me wherefore thou contendest with me? 2. That there are no sins which have
brought down the wrath of God upon any Nation, but it has been found in our
skirts, and so cannot rationally expect that he will bear with that in one
people, which he has punished so severely in another; but that as in Isa. 10.
11. As he has done unto Samaria and her idols, so will he do unto Jerusalem,
(Scotland) and her idols. We may see the dead carcasses of other sinners, and
finful Nations lying in our way for the same sins we are guilty of, which may
make us halt in the course of our backsliding and defection. And 3. If I should
condescend upon the particular sins of our times, as the contempt of the
glorious Gospel, Zech. 7. 11, 12. Our Idolatry, Ezekiel. 14. 5. and chap. 20* 16*
Perfidie, Deuteronomy. 29. 24, 25. Lukewarmness and indifferency in Religion. Rev. 3.
15. Oppression, Ezekiel. 8. 17. etc. It would be fitter for a Volum than a Sermon,
to enumerat them, and therefore I shall satisfy my self with saying, as in
Amos 1. 9. For three transgressions of Tyrus (Scotland) and for four I will not
turn away the punishment thereof, because, etc. and that in Ier. 30. 14. For
the multitude of thine iniquities, and because thy sins were increased, I have
done these things unto thee. (3.) Ye are to study to understand the Signs and
tokens of the times, Matthew. 16. 3. O ye hypocrites ye can discern the face of
the sky* but can ye not discern the signs of the times; and that both the good
and bad signs of the times, I will not mention the bad signs further than (by
way of the contrary) they may be comprehended in the good; but shall mention
only these good and promising Signs of our times, to be studied and understood,
Matthew. 24. 22. When the fig tree casts her blossoms we know that summer is
near. As 1. It is a good and promising Token of a time, when there is a melting
and mourning frame amongst the Lord's people for abounding Iniquity, Ier. 31.
9. When the people come with weeping and supplications, asking the way to Zion;
which Sign is so to be understood, 1. As that though our iniquities testify
against us, (Isai. 48. 11.) yet he will do for his Names sake. 2. That what is
wanting in our mourning frame before our Deliverance may come along with it,
or follow after it. And 3. That his Sovereign grace may prove as the dew that
waits not for man, or his frame, but magnifieth it self in delivering of a
sinful and indisposed, yea ill-disposed people. 2. When there is any measure of
desirable harmony and Union in a State or Church, and every one as one stick of
Bands in the hand of the Lord, and with one consent, (Zeph. 3. 9.) And with one
shoulder. (Amos 9. 11.) Help up with the fallen tabernacle. And ye are to
understand this sign so, as 1 Though people may be of different and imperfect
Light and Sentiments in some things (1 Cor. ^3. 9.) Yet in the main Truths and
Concerns of the Church and Nation, they may, and ought to be as one man, (1
These. 5. 13.) Not striving who shall hold the Candle, least by their struggling
they put it out. 2. That the wisdom of God may out-wit the Devil and his
Instruments, in making the differences among his people, not only prove the
mean of Discovery of the hearts and principles of many, ( Luke 2. 35.) But to
be the occasion of their more closs uniting among themselves, and this fire of
Division to separat Heterogenials, and congregat Homogenials. And 3. That this
Union and Concord, as it is the Ornament and Beauty of a Society, set in
Majesty, ( Ezekiel. 7. 20.) and makes them comely as Jerusalem; and as it is the
strength and safety of a Corporation, a shaft of Arrows not being broken so
easily as single ones: so is it a Terror unto Enemies, and makes them terrible
as any Army with banners, and occasions Enemies to saint in their opposition,
saying, (as in the primitive times) Behold, how they love one another. And 3.
It Is a good sign of a time when there are some hopeful beginnings of Good
breaking up, resembling the voice upon the top of the Mulberry-trees, 2 Samuel 5.
24. And the little cloud like a man's hand seen upon the top of mount Carmel, 1
King. 18 44. which sign is so to be understood, as 1. We are not to despise the
day of small things, Zech. 4 10. But 2. To look upon them as arles of, and so
many steps toward his Work, his strange Work, his Act, his strange Act, which
shall make us all cry with shouting, grace, grace unto it. And 3. As God
mercifully engaging some in a good Cause and Course, to the saving of their
Souls, building of their Houses, and comfort at Death, he has by these
beginnings, wherein ye have been instrumental, happily brought you over to his
side, and I desire to be persuaded, that he will never suffer you to retreat;
which if ye do, he has a witness against you in these things, in your own
Consciences, that ye condemn your selves in these things that now ye allow.
(4.) Ye are to observe and understand the dark Providence of the times, with
reference both to Mercy and Judgment. Eccl. 8. 5. A wise man's heart discerns
both time and judgment. And 1. With respect unto mercy, observe and understand,
1. How the Lord does great works by small means, Deborah, Judges 5. A weak
woman, the worm Jacob, (Isai. 41. 14.) Threshing mountains, Rams Horns, ( Josh.
6. 4.) bringing down high walls; a Straw in the hand of Omnipotency, will do
great things. By unexpected means, bringing Instruments from afar, not thought
upon, to do service to his Church, Exodus 3. 10. From their common and ordinary
Employments, as Gideon, (Judges 6. 11.) from the Threshing-floor, and from his
enemies, as Cyrus, (Isai. 45. 1.) To loose the loins of kings, and break the
gates of brass, and elevating them above their ordinary sphere and ability, to
do exploits, making the feeble among them as David, (Zech. 12. 8*) And the weak
as an Angel of God. By no visible means, Zech. 4. 6. Not by power, or by might,
but by my Spirit, says the Lord: Yea from the furnace of Affliction, Joseph*
brought out of Prison to Rule, and as many of you are lately come from your
Bonds to the Bensh. By contrary means, that would seem to destroy, Clay and
Spittle, that of themselves tend to mar the sight, yet applied by Christ ( Ioh.
9. 6.) heal blind eyes; by affliction, to bring about the Deliverance of his
Church; by darkness to bring light, and by scattering to gather. Yea by means
that have no rational or probable connection with the effect, what rational
connection can be imagined betwixt the King's not getting sleep, calling for a
Book to divert him, etc. Esther 6. 1, 2. and the Deliverance of the Church; yet
the Lord brings forth their Deliverance that way: a Drummer in his Drunkenness
Ringing the Town Bell in Beziers in France, giving the Besieged Protestants the
alarm, just when their enemies were assaulting them, was an observable
Providence. 2. How the Lord by very impressions, and apprehensions upon the
Spirits of enemies, makes them fly when none pursues, and one to chase a
thousand, and two to put ten thousand to flight, a famous instance whereof ye
have in Judges 7. 13. A Dream of a fellow, that a barley cake was tumbled into
the Host of the Midianites, makes them all run crying, this is no other but the
sword of the Lord, and of Gideon; the Sun shining upon the Waters, put an
impression upon the Moabites to their ruin, 2 Kin. 3. 22. etc. which makes the
overthrow of enemies so easy, (whereof we in our time have had pregnant proof)
that as Nahum 3. 12. Their strong Cities fall as ripe figgs into the mouth of
the eater, and their valiant captains melt as* grasshoppers in a Sunny day. 3.
How the Lord makes things fall out contrary to what his enemies design, and in
all humane appearance may expect. The Lord as Isa. 24. 25. turning wise men
backward, and evidencing that the deceived ( Ioh 12. 16.) and deceiver are his,
and turning the Counsels of Achitophels to foolishness. As for instance the
People of Israel would have a King, to put them in a happy condition, like
other Nations (1 Samuel, 8. 5.) But that King destroyed their Nation, and David
behoved to bear up the Pillars thereof, The Church banished from Jerusalem, on
purpose to destroy it, Acts 11. 19, 20. And was a very probable mean to
effectuat the design, but that banishment of the Church, proved the
preservation of the Church, when Jerusalem was destroyed. And Paul bound that
he might not Preach, Phil. 1. 12. But his Bonds do Preach, and tend to the
furtherance of the Gospel. 4. How the Lord brings down his Enemies, when their
strength is greatest, their Combinations strongest, and their Confidences
highest, Nah. 1. 10. When they were drunken as the drunkard (with success) and
folded together as thorns, (by combinations, confederacies and strength) then
shall they be devoured as stubble fully dry. Yea 5. How the Lord brings the
darkest hour upon a Church, immediately before her delivery, and makes her
Furnace hotter in the very carrying on of her deliverance. As faired with the
Church in Esthers time, and in Babylon. And that is a strange word in Mic. 4.
10. Be in pain and labor to bring forth, for ye shall go to Babylon, and there
be delivered, making their light to shine out of obscurity. And I may allude to
that Word, Isa. 21. 11. watchman, what of the night? watchman, what of the
night? The watchman said, The morning comes, and also the night. There may be
a dark Night before the Morning, and even darkest immediately before the break
of day. And 2. Ye are to understand these dark Providence, with reference to
Judgments, as well as mercies. Ier. 8. 7. The stork in the heavens knows her
appointed times, and the turtle, and the cran, and the swallow observe the time
of their coming, but my people know not the judgment of the Lord. And as to
this, ye are to understand, 1. That the Lord with variety of outward Judgments,
oftimes smites a sinful People, he has many sickles to cut down a Nation, when
they are ripe, by abounding, and being impudent, and obstinat in sin, Joel 3.
13. Zach. 5. 1. And in his Soveraignity, he changes them at his pleasure. And
in order to this, he fitteth Instruments to execut his wrath, and prepares them
for doing his pleasure. Isa. 13. 3. I have called my sanctified ones, I have
commanded my mighty ones for mine anger; and proportions the Judgments some way
to the sin of a People, that they who run may read, for what the Lord smitteth
them, when they that spoil are spoiled, etc. 2. That the Lord does sometimes
insensibly consume a People, by spiritual and invisible Judgments, sending a
moth among them, Hos. 5. 12. I will be as a moth to the house of Judah, and as
rottenness to the house of Israel. And making gray hairs to be here and there
upon them, ( Hos. 7. 9.) tho they knew it not. This is worthy of your search,
and studying to understand, how the Lord secretly and insensibly, by Spiritual
Judgments wastes a Nation; Judgments come, and the noise of their feet is not
heard, they are effectually, tho insensibly destroyed. O strange! A People
slain, and the sword not seen, and the shot not heard, but in his wrath they
pine away, by his deserting of them, Mic. 3. 4. By hardening their hearts,
blinding their eyes, and fatning their hearts, Isa. 6. 9. By giving them up to
spiritual barrenness, Ezekiel. 47. 11. And to strong delusions, 2 These. 2. 12. And
by letting them run on in sin, without reproof or correction, Isa. 1. 5. Hos.
4. 14. And by many other spiritual plagues, which makes the case the sadder,
that not only, as I have said, they consume insensibly, but they are both sins
and judgments, Amos. 4. 4. Yea (if not timously prevented by turning to the
Lord) they may prove the sad earnest of hell and damnation, as in that
forecited place, 2 These. 2. 12. That they all might be damned who believe not
the truth. And 3. It Is worthy of your study to understand, how that Moth. at
last (if a People prove incorrigible) turns into a Lion, and a Leopard, Hos.
13. 7. Therefore I will be unto them as a lion, and as a leopard by the way
will I observe them. And how the Lord by out ward and visible strokes destroys
a Nation, Ier. ^4. 12. I will consume them by the sword, and by famine, and by
the pestilence. (5.) You are to labor to understand the great ends and
designs, that the Lord is driving on, by these times and providence that pass
over a People; And if ye observe narrowly, ye will find, 1. That by all these
Providence, in the latter days he is removing these things that are (or as
some read, it may be) shaken, as of things that are made, that the things which
cannot be shaken, may remain, 2. That he is making way for the utter ruin and
fall of Antichrist and Popery, in all the forms of it, that not so much as a
rag of that whore may remain, Rev. 18. 2. And his Church sing a triumph,
Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen. And 3. That he is carrying on the
establishment of Zion, upon her right Basis and Foundation, Isa. 14. last v.
What shall one answer the messenger of the nations. That the Lord has founded
Zion, and the poor of the people shall trust in (or as in the Heb. betake
themselves unto) it. And if these great Ends be carried on by Providence, It
matters not much, tho you, and I, and others, miss our own particular, and self
Ends. And 6. I would propose to you the understanding of the Times, which the
Text relates unto. And if there be any parallel betwixt it and our Times, it is
not I, but Scripture, and Providence, the great Commentary on Scripture, that
has made it. And if ye will search into the case of the Text, you will find,
1. That Saul, David's Father in Law was now dead, and the Throne vacand, 2.
Abner, and his Command that he had over the Tribes, was now removed out of the
way, by the Lord's remarkable hand, 2. Sam. 3. 30. 33. 3. David was now
magnified among the People by his victories over the Philistines, his pious
carriage, and his zeal for the ark of the Lord, and against Idolatry, and for
the public good of the Land, v. 18. of this chap. 4. The time of the Promise,
for making David King, was now at hand to be fulfilled. 2 Samuel 3. 9, 10. 5.
There was a Spirit of Zeal for this work, moving all the Tribes, they flock one
after another, to the work, as here in this chap. v. 2^, 38. It Is said, They
came all with a perfect heart, to make David King over Israel, and all the rest
also of Israel were of one heart to make David King, until as v. 22. they were
a great host, as the host of God, 6. There were both open and secret Enemies to
this great work, of making David King, if ye will consider what is said, in 1
King. 12. 16. and in v. 17. of this chap. And 7. When ever David came to the
Crown, he gave orders to bring back the Ark to its right place. And in the
following chap. to this Text* ye see what orders, after consultation with the
Leaders and Captains, he issues forth, to bring again the Ark of God, for (says
he) we inquired not at it in the days of Saul. Yea 8. In this Juncture, there
were that gave the Ark a wrong touch, which kindled the Anger of the Lord
against him, see v. 9. of the chap. next to this Text. And I must in the 9. and
last place add, That when the Ark was brought home, several remarkable things
followed, As David the King his carnal fear, to bring it to his own City, v.
12, 13. of the following Chapter. The great confirmation of the Kingdom upon
him, by the Lords signal appearances in his behalf, according to his Promise,
by foreign Confederacies and kindness, by a numerous Family, and by victories
over his Enemies, As in 1 Chronicles. 14. 1* 2, 10, 14, etc. And at last, after
several stops and lets, the Ark is brought with shouting, unto it is own place
the City of David, 1 Chronicles. 15. 28* And the called and appointed Officers of
the Lord are set to wait on it, and no foul fingers to touch it, 1 Chronicles. 16.
37, etc. And then, and not till then comes peace, and all the people return to
their houses, and David returned to bless his house, v. 43. There are many
other things in times, that ye ought to understand, but least I exceed the
bounds of a Sermon, I forbear to mention them, and comes to the last thing I
proposed in the method of this Doctrine.

III. What way may People best come to understand the Times? Answ. 1. By
Consulting the Word of God, which is the best Key to unlock Providence and
Times, to the law and to the testimony, Isa. 8. 20. and as Asaph, when he was
puzzled with a singular Providence, Psalm. 73. 16, 17. he went into the Sanctuary
to be resolved, and there was cleared as to the Times and Providence he was
trysted with. The Lords voice cries unto the city, (Mic. 6. 9.) and the man of
wisdom shall know thy name. 2. Labor to have the work of Grace and Renovation
through and clear without Clouds, for the Image of God in a man is of such a
nature, that it has something in it answering (as Face to Face in a Glass) to
all the revealed Will of God, and to its great and best Interpreter Times and
Providence; and the more powerful and lively Grace be in its Actings, the more
infight you will have both in his Word and Works, Psalm. 25. 14. the secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him, etc. 3. Compare former Times and
Providence in their Nature and Circumstances with present Times and
Dispensations, and that will give more Light in what seems hid and obscure to
you, Psalm. 77. 5. Consider the days of old and the years of ancient times, and
bring them home to the present Case, and it may help you to know the Vision,
Mic. 6. 5. Remember from Shittim to Gilgal, that ye may know the righteousness
of the Lord. 4. Employ by Prayer Christ Jesus to open the Book of Times and
Providence to you, for he is worthy to do it, Rev. 5. 2. When ye go forward
and he is not there, and backward but cannot perceive him, on the left hand
where he does work, but cannot behold him, and on the right hand, but ye cannot
see him; then ply the Duty of Prayer, for the right management of that Duty
has given great Light to the Saints in dark and difficult times, Psalm. 77. 19.
when the Lords way is in the sea, and his paths in the deep waters, yet Prayer
will be a mean to discover his Goings, and lay open his Mind in them. 5. If ye
would rightly understand Times, beware of Prejudices at, and rash Censuring of
Times and Providence, as if ye were wiser than God, or could amend what he
has done; who art thou O man that charge God foolishly, and finds fault
with the Almighty, the wise Counselor and excellent Worker. Ye ought to submit
your Will to His, and neither to censure nor quarrel His Ways, but say as Psalm
18. 23. This is the doing of the Lord, and mavelous in our Eyes. I remember
what is recorded that Luther said to Melanchton, when he was ready to censure
the Times, as seeming to threaten the ruin of the Church, Monendus est iste
Philippus ut desinat esse mundi gubernator. Let Melanchton cease (says he) to
govern the World. Men when they overlook a supreme over ruling Hand at the Helm
of Providence, are ready to censure them. It was a severe Construction that
Porphyry put upon the Israelites passing through the Red Sea, and the Egyptians
being drowned, That they took the advantage of a low Water, as if the Ebb there
had ever been so great or better known to Strangers than Natives. And Neh. 4.
2. What do these feeble Jews? And 6. If ye would understand the Times, ye must
not take a light overly view of them, but ye must look attentively upon them,
and pry into them, Psalm. 107. 23. ye must look and look again on them. His
Works are sought out (Psalm. 111. 2.) of them that take pleasure in them. Ye
must look both sides (to speak so) of this Book, and ye will find what is dark
on the one side of the Leaf is clear on the other; on the one side ye may
perceive nothing but Wrath, Trouble, Confusion, Hell, Death, etc. but if ye
will turn over, ye may see, Love, Peace, Order, Heaven, Glory, yea, ye must
wait upon the time of bringing forth, and patiently expect the result; for what
ye see not now, ye shall see hereafter. Times are with Child of many Truths and
Dispensations, and there is a Month of bringing forth, and here is the Faith
and Patience of the Saints.

Doct. 2. That the right understanding of Times is very contributive to the
clear discovery, and seasonable performance of the proper duties which are
called for in these times.

That I may render this Truth useful to you, I shall 1. Give you some things in
the general for Explication. 2. Show you what are the proper Duties of this
time and juncture we are fallen under. 3. What Motives may persuade to the
diligent and serious performance of these Duties. And 4. How the right
discerning of our times do contribute to the discovery and practice of these
Duties: And if your time will allow, I shall make some Application of all.

I. In the general for Explication, let these things be considered. 1. Every
time casts up its proper and seasonable Duties, and not only the luster and
beauty of Duty, by embracing the right season of it, is made to shine as an
Apple of Gold in a Picture of Silver, but much of the success or disappointment
of it depends upon the right timeing of it; Every thing, says Solomon (Eccl.
3. 11.) is beautiful in its season; mis-timed Duties as they are uneasy to
others, and unacceptable to God, so are they of dangerous consequence both to
the Church and the Persons themselves. 2. As every time, so every Person in the
Church and State have proper Duties incumbent to them, according to their
several Capacities, Stations and Talents, for advancing the glory of God, and
securing their own Happiness, and in order thereto, particularly for
preservation and transmitting of the Gospel and its Ordinances to Posterity,
that through your care, the Children that are yet unborn may praise his Name.
3. The Lord does ordinarily Spirit some men for the Duties of their time, and
in a more than ordinary way furnish them with Gifts and Endowments for their
Generation work, elevating them above what they are in ordinary, and raising
their Spirits ( Dan. 11. 32.) to do exploits, making the feeble as David, and
the weak as an angel of God. ^. Its rare to find Acting and Duties of Times
single and pure without the woeful mixture of Self-Interest, a sour Leaven that
has spoiled many glorious Actings and heavy Sufferings: But of this more
hereafter, and therefore ye will find the duty of Self-denial put in the midst
( Luk 9. 23.) betwixt Doing and Suffering, to show that none of them can be
cleanly without it. 5. In the point of Duty and Acting, Times and Providence
are not to be our Rule, Sin is still Sin, and Duty is still Duty, tho
Providence seem sometimes to favor the one and discountenance the other. for
as Eccles. 9. 2* there is one event to the Righteous and to the Wicked, etc.
and therefore make the Word, and not single Providence, the Square of your
Duty, Providence alone without the Word are dangerous Guides. And 6. Tho there
be ordinarily a strong inclination and bensil in Zions Friends toward Acting,
yet the Church has ever thriven better under Suffering than Acting. Act. 11.
21. And as their Prayers and Tears have been their best Armor, so their
Testimony and Blood has been their greatest Trophies and Victory, Rev. 12. 11.
they overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony, for
they loved not their lives unto death.

II. I presume by virtue of my Commission from the King of kings, to lay before
your Grace their Majesty's High Commissioner, and this Honorable House of
Parliament, these particular Duties, which our times, being well understood,
obviously call for, and shall make no other Apology for my freedom in pressing
them, than the obligation that lies on me to be zealous for the Lord of Hosts;
and as I was never before (being but as one born out of time) in such a
Capacity, so it may be I never again have the opportunity of preaching before
such an Honorable Auditory. (1) Our times upon a narrow and spiritual search
call aloud to this Duty, that in a ^^eling and uncertain time every one should
secure their Souls, and put that in sure keeping, 1 Pet. 4. 19. wherefore let
them that, etc. commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing as unto
a faithful Creator. The excellency of the Soul, the price Christ paid for
Souls, the pains that Satan takes to destroy these, and the irreparableness of
the loss not being to be made up by gaining the whole World, plead strongly for
this; and the Souls of great ones being within the reach of that word, 1 Cor.
1. 26. not many wise, not many noble, etc. and obvious to greater and mo
temptations are in greater hazard than others. And therefore in this uncertain
time, I obtest you, that ye secure your Souls, by getting an Interest in Christ
Jesus, that lose what ye will ye may not lose that, which cannot be recovered
at the rate of all the World, and that if times of trouble come upon you, ye
may not be both afflicted here, and damned hereafter. (2) That ye guard against
Apostasy and Defection from the Truth and Way of God, (wherein he has
mercifully engaged you) by falling into Idolatry, Profanity and Opposition, to
the righteous ways of God, 1 Ioh. 5. 21. Little children, keep your selves from
idols; and be not of them that draw back, ( Heb. 10. 39.) lest his Soul take no
pleasure in you; for few Apostats recover, or if they do, many of them have
bitter Agonies of Spirit, and are a very Hell to themselves before they be put
among the Children again. And if Popery and other Corruptions now cast out by
you be embraced again, they will bring with them seven worse Spirits than
before; O do not sweep the House ( Mat. 12. 44.) for the Devil's return again,
and it will be a strange thing to see rational men, (let be professed
Christians) so prodigal of their Souls, Consciences, Relations, Estates and
Bodies, as to thirst and long to be back again to Fgypt, have ye forget the
Burdens and Bondage ye were formerly under? will ye again return to Babylon? O!
for the Lord's sake, hate the Whore and all her Rags spotted with the Flesh. I
tremble to think what may be the sad Consequence of returning again with the
Dog to the Vomit, and with the Sow to the Puddle; that is a severe word in Josh.
24. 20. If ye forsake the Lord and serve other gods, then he will turn and do
you hurt, and consume you after that he has done you good. (3) Labor to
perfect the Reformation ye have happily begun, and is greedily expected. And
that speedily, and in the first place, Command (as in Ez. 7* 23.) that
whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven, be diligently done for the House
of the God of Heaven, Reformation ought to be through, and not by Halves or
sinful Mixtures, Hos. 7. 8. It Is a sad mark put upon Samaria* King. 17. 33.
That they feared the Lord and served their own gods, and swearing by God and by
Ma^cham (Zeph, 1. 5) streaches out his arm still with fury against a Nation;
it is a reproach upon a People to halt between God and Baal, 1 King. 18. 21. If
the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him. And it is a perpetual
stain upon Iehu's Reformation: That tho he destroyed Baal and his Priests, etc.
yet he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, to wit, the Golden Calves at Dan
and Bethel, 2 King. 10. 28 29. Let Reformation, I say, be perfect, and throw to
the Door all that belongs to the Whore, even the rags she has left behind
her, for an errand to return again: And let none of Babels cursed Timber or
Stones be taken to build the Lord's House with. And let it be done speedily,
Ezra 6. 13. They went about the building of the Wall speedily. Let it not be
put off by carnal Policy, or Worldly Respects, saying, as H^g* 1. 2, 4. It is
not time to build the Lords House, the time is not come. Tho I confess there is
a vast difference betwixt pious Prudence, which should order all your Affairs,
and carnal Policy, which will but defile and mar your Work. For men may
apprehend, that if they should go on to the settling of the Government of the
Church, or any piece of Reformation presently, many would fall off, and affairs
would not succeed so prosperously. But let me persuade you, that ye will find
the contrary to be true, if ye will consider 1. That the Policy of this kind
which Jeroboam used, 1 Kings 12. 26. and which the Jews followed, Ioh. 11. 28.
brought the same very evils upon them which they feared, and thought by their
carnal Policy to avoid* For Jeroboam had laid down this Principle, that no Idol
no King, even as some conclude with as little reason, no Bishop, no King: And
the Jews were by their carnal wisdom fixed in this, That Christ and the Gospel,
and their peace and safety could not consist together: But both their measures
failed them, and that which they feared, and thought by their carnal Policy to
evite, came upon them. 2. If ye will consider that good King Hezekiah was not
guided by this carnal Policy in his reformation, 2 King. 18. 4. But in the
first year of his reign (which I pray and hope our King shall make the parallel
of) removed the high places, brake down the images, cut down the groves, and
brake in pieces the brazen serpent, (tho Moses made it) and called it
Nehushtan. And that which in this affair was his best policy, ye have in the 5
verse. He trusted in the Lord God of Israel. And 3. If ye will consider what
Luther that famous Reformer says, That there are three great hindrances of
Reformation, Security among the people of God, secret treachery of enemies, and
carnal policy in managers of the work. For to offer to cure the disorders of
the Church by carnal wisdom, and to determine the great controversies of
Religion by humane Reason, is cum ratione and sapientia insanire, to go mad
with Wisdom and Reason. And I have read what Livy says, That carnal policies
are in their contrivement pleasant, in their management difficult, and in their
issue sad to them that use them, and will leave them with that sad lamentation
of that great Politician Tully, whose Policy had kept him in Place and Honor,
(if I remember) in the time of four Emperors, yet at his end cried out, O me
miserum, and nunquam beatum. It must needs then be a wicked Maxim which some
Father upon Matchiavell, That all the Laws and things of God are to be
subjected and stoop to (that which they call) Reason of State. (4.) It Is a duty
of our times, if we understand them right, to crucify that grand Idol Self;
And all self ends and interests, when they come in competition with Christ and
his Truth, and when the case is, Christ or Barabbas. O! How many worship this
Idol Self. Phil. 2. 21. All seek their own, not the things of Jesus Christ. But
the voice of our times to you, Most Noble Patriots, is not to seek great things
for your self with Baruch, Ier. 45. 5. But with Mordecai, Esth. 10. 3. to seek
always the wealth of your people, and labor for a more Public Spirit: Moses
and Paul seem to lay their Soul and part of Heaven in Pawn for the glory of
God, and delivering of the Church. Will ye prefer your little Stock to the
safety of the whole Cargo and Vessel? O cursed Self, away with it, away with
it, crucify it, crucify it. You were lately by a great Light of this Church,
exhorted to prefer Jerusalem to your chief joy; and I hope the impression of it
abides with you. For 1. It is a Spring and Source of many evils, from whence
flows our Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Vanity, etc. but from this? they are
all the Children of this cursed Mother, and if ye do not slay this Idol, ye
will not have a heart to life at the fallen Tabernacle, or to help to set on
the Crown on Christ's Head. 2. It is the fostering and feeding of this Idol
Self, that is the sad occasion of all those breaches, divisions and animosities
that are amongst a people; for according to the frame of their Idols, so are
all their Methods taken, and some have an Idol of one shape, and some of
another, and according to that Mould, so are all their actings to support it.
And 3. This selfish disposition and temper, as it does cause the enemy to
blaspherne, and opens the mouths of the wicked to say, lo this is the man that
pretended so highly for Christ, now he has left him, when he has drawn his
Stake, or he has left him because he cannot mount up to preforment that way,
and gain nothing from that quarter; so has it provoked the Lord to cut down
these self-interests, that men have preferred to Christ, and his Interest, how
many Crowns has this made to totter, and fall to the Ground, because they
sought a Crown to themselves, and not to Christ. And how many great and fair
Houses have been laid waste, because they built their own Houses, and let the
House of the Lord ly desolat. Iehu his self ends ( Hos. 1. 4. brought ruin upon
him and his House, and all his policy could not prevent it, he that saves
himself this way, shall lose himself. 5. They that rightly understand our
times, will find that moderation, and sobriety is one of the great duties of
it, Phil. 4. 5. Let your moderation be known to all men, etc. winding up of
Instruments to the highest Peg, does not only mar the Harmony, but breaks
the Strings. Let not the Stretches of former times, edge you to the same
methods. You know who it was, who being inquired, what was the best way of
governing Kingdoms? wrote only in return, upon a large Paper, at a great
distance from other, three times, Modus, Modus, Modus, moderation, moderation,
moderation. The Records of experience show us, that violent Administrations,
and running things to the height, have not been long-lived, Omnis felicitas ad
culmen producta Retrogreditur, and nihil violentum durat. And 6. The Duty of
our Times seems to be, that ye should lay such sure and lasting Foundations, as
not only these two strangers in our Land, Righteousness and Peace, (Psalm. 85.
10.) may meet and kiss one another; but that they may live together, and be
perpetuated to the generations to come, that the Children yet unborn may bless
you; As we in this time do bless you in the Name of the Lord, and from the
House of our God, for what ye have done already. Go on then, I say, against
whatsoever opposition, either from Enemies, or false Builders, and lay such a
sure Basis, that after-Generations may build upon it; hear that word in Zech.
8. 9. Let your hands be strong, ye that hear in these days, these words by the
month of the Prophets, which were in the day that the foundation of the house
of the Lord was laid, that the Temple might be built.

III. Let me press these Duties of our times upon you by some Motives. 1. The
Concerns ye have among your hands in this time are great, your Grace, and this
Honorable Court of Parliament, have not only the Matters of an Earthly King,
whom God has singled out to do Exploits for him among your hands, for which ye
are obliged, (as ye have already done) to evidence a great deal of care and
zeal: but ye have under your care and tutory Christ's own Bride, she is a
tender Virgin, and has yet but little Breasts, she has been wounded in the
house of her Friends, as well as by Enemies, and she is not yet heal, her
Wounds are yet bleeding, for the Lord's sake prove to her as the compassionat
Samaritan, Luke 10. 34. Bind up her Wounds, pour Oil into them, and take care
of her; she is Nobly-Born, she is a King's Daughter, ( Psalm. 45. 13.) New come
from her Banishment; and for her Father's Blessing, for her Bridegroom's
Blessing, and for her own Blessing, who is ready to perish, deal kindly with
her, and be faithful Tutors to her. Yea, ye have Christ's Crown, his Glory
among your hands, and if you take away, or suffer one Jewel of it to be los'd
or robbed, not only your Estates and Lives, but your Souls may go for it; for he
will not give his Glory to another, nor suffer any to wear a Pearl of his
Diadem, without evidences of his Anger and Displeasure against them. 2.
Remember, that though ye be as Gods, ( Psalm. 82. 6.) yet ye must die as men,
your Breath is in your Nosthrils, as other men's, and therefore carry so in the
Trust ye have among your hands, as that ye may be desired when ye live, and
lamented when ye die. A Heathen could say, Si bonam famam servavero sat ero
Felix; and there was not any thing more reckoned a plague among the Heathens,
than to die unlamented, and their memorial to be buried in obscurity, or remain
in Infamy: And I believe there is not a man in this House, who would not think
himself extremely miserable to be with Iehoiakim (Ier. 22. 19.) buried with the
burial of an Ass: Think but seriously what Epitaph may be Written on your Tomb,
and what Discourses may be of you when ye are gone, Here lies a man that was
never a Friend to Christ or his Interest; now he is dead, but he was an opposer
and persecuter of Christ, his Truth and People. I have read of Lewis the II.
King of France, that he counterfeited himself to die, to see if his Court would
lament him, and honor his Death with their Tears, or if they would rejoice
that they were freed of such a Governor. It certainly concerns you to acquit
your selves faithfully in your Trust, that ye may live desired, and die
lamented, and to have the Generation following you to the Grave with such a
Lamentation, 2 King. 2. 12. Ah* my father, the Chariots of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof; and to remember what that great Cardinal Wolsey said, when
dying, That if he had served God as faithfully as he had done the King, he had
not been in that misery. And dying is not all, but ye must give an account of
your Stewardship, and Talent, and Duties belonging to this present station, in
which ye are placed, and the opportunities of doing service to God, now put in
your hands, and what will ye say when ye shall be sisted at the general Assize
before the Tribunal of Christ, to that question, what Justice and Vote gave ye
to me and my afflicted Church in the first Parliament of King William and Queen
Mary, in Scotland, was ye for me or against me? 3. Though ye should live the
course of Nature, yet ye may never have so fair an opportunity to do good in
your time, as ye have this day, for it is rare for a Man to be twice high
Commissioner, and but few are twice chosen to be Members of Parliament, of
these who come in by choice, and to whom it is not Hereditary; and this calls
you, that while there is a price in your hand ( Prove. 17. 16.) to do good,
labor to have a heart to it, that is, seriousness, diligence, affection,
courage and resolution, for the work that God has put in your hands, and carry
so as ye may be free of sad Reflections, and after-Challenges, and
late-Repentings; for stultum est dicere, non putabam. And 4 To persuade you to
these Duties of the time, consider that the Lord is aloft, and mounted on his
Conquering Horse, ( Rev. 6. 2.) to do for you, do ye not perceive him
discovering the Plots, defeating the Councils of, and giving you Victory over
your enemies, breaking them on their high places, and making them fall in the
pits they dug for you, Higgaion, Selah. And since he is so visibly, and
graciously doing for you, will ye not do for him? I shall only add in the 5 and
last place, That as the eyes of the Lord, his holy Angels, and all his people
in this Land, (...)fall the Protestant Churches are upon you. So ye are upon
the (...) of the Prayers of the flower of the godly in Scotland, and we for a
return, and in hopes of it, we will sing Salvation to our (...)and to the Lamb.

FINIS.

