A SERMON Preached November. 14. School. AND NOW Published at the Request OF THE
SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners, IN THE Cities of London and Westminster,

By JOHN SPADEMAN. M. A.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside. MDCXCIX.

A SERMON Preached before the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners.
PROVERBS XXVIII. 4. They that forsake the Law, praise the Wicked: But such as
keep the Law, contend with them.
THOUGH it be found impossible, by any Human Methods, to Banish, and Expel Sin
out of the World: This Enemy is so entrenched and fortified, that no created
Power or Skill is able totally to Vanquish, and Drive him out, either from
particular Persons, or Communities of Men: The same Conclusion ought not to be
made concerning open Wickedness, and the visible Practice of Sin, there is a
possibility of Subduing this Monster: As it is found possible to ridd a Country
of some Species of Rapacious Beasts, though it is impractable to destroy all the
Vermin, which lie under Ground, and are hid in Holes, and Dens of the Earth.
That Sin which is concealed in the Heart, or is acted in secret, lies out of
the reach of Human Attempts, a Divine Almighty Arm alone is able to crush, and
destroy it: But when this Pestilence wastes at Noonday, and appears in the
places of Concourse, this Case admits a Remedy, and there are proper Methods
which, under the Divine Benediction, are able to stop the Plague of Wickedness.
The God of the whole Earth has not abandoned it to be wasted by this Infection,
without Means of resisting, and removing it. It Is reasonable to conclude, That
He has formed Men into Civil Societies, on this Design, that Order, and
Government, Laws, and Punishments might be applied to the restraining of Sin
and Immorality. For the best ordered Societies could not be either pleasing to
God, (as the Wisest Pagans judged they were) or, Cicero Somn. Scip.
in the issue, advantageous to Men, if they did only relieve the Necessities,
and minister to the Safety, and Pleasure of Life, and did not serve the higher
Design of repressing Vices, and purging the Impuritie that defiles the World,
and threatens Ruin to whole Nations.

We of this Nation have long experienced the vigilant Care, and continued
Kindness of Heaven, which have defeated the pernicious Designs of our Enemies,
delivered us from many threatening Dangers, and Crowned us with distinguishing
Mercies. How inexcusable shall we be, if we abuse and forfeit the Kindness of
God, and by doing Wickedly, provoke him to Turn, and Destroy us after he has
done us Good? (Josh. 24.20.) And nothing can prevent so dismal an Issue of
Things, but a vigorous Endeavor to check the Contagion of Vice, by a constant
Prosecuting of the truly Christian Design already entered upon, of Reforming
the Lives of Men, and repressing the Vices, which too long have reproached this
Nation: Unto which Design, the instructive Words of Solomon, that have been
read, give an encouraging Assistance: For they both direct to the proper
Method, that is to be used, and enforce that Direction by cogent Motives, drawn
from the infamous Character of those who praise the Wicked and the Honoring
Title of those who contend with (or against) them. They that forsake the Law,
praise the Wicked: But such as keep the Law, contend with them.

The latter part of this Aphorism is more directly suitable to the occasion of
this Day: but the former part, contains an Instruction, that is not improper to
be seriously reflected on, at this time, in which I shall endeavor to assist
you, by I. Describing the Agents spoken of: They that forsake the Law. II.
Explaining the Action ascribed to them: Praise the Wicked. III. Representing
the horrid Character of both. As to the


I. The Agents are said to forsake the Law. I take it for granted, that the
Divine Law is here to be understood, (as in two other Verses of this Chapter,
7, and 9. the Law, without any addition, is so interpreted.) For it is not
universally a Crime to forsake a mere Human Law, which may be so framed, that
we are obliged to forsake and contradict it. But the Divine Law has such
eternal, and invariable Equity, and carries so unchangable Obligation, that
nothing can justify the forsaking of it. It Is the heaviest charge, that can be
drawn up against any Persons, that they have forsaken the Law of God, and the
most dismal Punishments are threatened to such, Jerem. 9.13, 15, 16. And the
Lord says, Because they have forsaken my Law which I set before them; --
Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Behold I will feed
them, even this People with Wormwood, and give them Water of Gall to drink --
And I will send a Sword after them, till I have consumed them. The forsaking of
the Divine Law is not a light trivial matter in the eyes of God, as it is too
commonly in those of Men. But this forsaking of the Law, is not the mere
transgressing of it, by particular Omission of Duty, and Commission of Sin; for
both these are consistent with the Favor of God, and may comport, with the
keeping of the Law, in the Evangelick Sense. Forsaking of the Law, in Scripture
Style, imports such a deserting, or revolting from it, as renders it useless,
and ineffectual for the ordering of our Actions: The Divine Rule is renounced,
and its Yoke cast off, by choosing and obeying another, and contrary Law, even
that of Sin. And though these Lawless Ones are unwilling to acknowledge their
true Character, and ready to profess a respect to the Law of God, yet we shall
certainly know 'em by their Fruits, and particularly, by their praising of the
Wicked, which is

II. The Action ascribed to them who forsake the Law: to understand which, we
must not restrain the term Praise to the narrow Sense, that in common discourse
we fix on it, as if it denoted only a Verbal Commendation, though this Sense is
not excluded. The Practice has been, and still is, too common of absolving and
justifying of bad Men, (when it is said to a Wicked Man, Thou art righteous,
cap. 24.24.) and of adorning with flattering Encomiums, The 70 Int. (...).
those who deserve general abhorrence. How often have those Noble Things, Wit
and Eloquence, been basely employed in extolling the worst Persons and Things.
The Auditors of a persecuting Herod applauded his Oration, by this impious
Acclamation, It is the voice of a God, and not of a Man, Acts 12.22. Which
Blasphemous Adulation was terribly confuted by the Divine Vengeance which
condemned that Mortal God to be eaten by Worms, while he lived, and by that
opprobrious Disease to end his Life. Such another piece of ridiculous
Blasphemy, an Atheistick Poet was guilty of, in praising his Master Epicurus,
Lucretius, Lib. 5.
whom he makes a God, because he had boldly denied a Providence, and a future
State; as if by this rare Discovery, He had been a more worthy Benefactor to
Mankind, than those, whose Inventions had ministered to the Advantage and
Pleasure of Life.

But besides Praising by Words and Language, there is another, by actions which
conciliate esteem, and honor to a Person. As when it is said of the Virtuous
Woman, that her own Works praise her in the gates, Prove. 31.31. i. e. Do create
esteem and respect to her. The Wicked are thus praised, when they are
encouraged and favored by those who have Authority, and occasion to discourage
and depress them: When Honors are placed upon them, who declare themselves to
be Enemies of Righteousness. This has been too commonly practiced in all Ages:
In the times of Pagan Ignorance, some vile and brutish Miscreants have been
Deify'd, and Worshipped after their Death, and Divine Honor paid to those who
deserved the most general abhorrence; (as the instances of the Cretan Jupiter,
and several others, evince.) The Light of the Gospel has banished this impious
usage from the Places which enjoy it; but even among Professing Christians,
it is become too common a Spectacle, that the vilest of Men are favored, and
advanced, and find several who patronize, and protect them: which practice
proved fatal to the Benjamite Tribe, from which the other Tribes, in a solemn
manner, demanded the delivering up of some Children of Belial, (Judge. 20 13.)
that they might be put to death, and by this means, evil might be put away from
Israel: But ('it is added) the Children of Benjamin would not hearken to the
voice of their Brethren. The dismal consequent of this favoring of Evildoers,
is largely related in the Sacred History, to deter all others from this
praising or patronizing of Wicked Men. To which purpose it will be useful.

III. To represent the horrid Character, both of the Agents here mentioned, and
the Act ascribed to them: The former is evident at first view: He that forsakes
the Divine Law bears the blackest marks of Horror. For 1. He is guilty of the
worst Treason and Rebellion: He revolts from his rightful Ruler, he lifts up
his hand against his Father, and makes War against the highest, and best
Sovereign. Who would not dread so infamous a Character? Who would be patient of
so reproachful a Name? A mere transgressing of the Law, is not rebelling
against Heaven, but the forsaking of it, can have no milder name; such who
desert and renounce the Law, do in effect say to the Almighty, He shall not
reign over us; we owe no subjection, or obedience, to the God that made us. A
Language that is so intolerable, that even ungodly Men are ashamed to utter it
with their Lips. 2. There is the basest perfidiousness in the forsaking of the
Divine Law by those who profess Religion: For such, at the same time, forsake
the Covenant of God, and virtually renounce their very Baptism. There cannot be
a more infamous Character than that of a Perfidious Wretch: This exposes an
Adultress to the heaviest reproach, that when she forsakes the guide of her
Youth, she also forgets the Covenant of her God, Prove. 2.17. All who are
dedicated to the blessed God, by Baptism, become Children of the Covenant, (
Acts 3.25.) which strongly obliges them to keep the Divine Law. 3. There is in
those who forsake the Law, the worst Cruelty to themselves, who thereby cast
themselves into the forlorn State of Outlaws, they deprive themselves of the
Divine Protection, and no condition can be so deplorable. All the Defenses
which Power and Wealth, which Wisdom and Alliances can raise up, will prove
refuges of lies, when the Divine Shadow and Protection are withdrawn, Number.
14.9. The potent warlike Nations of Canaan became Bread, i. e. easily devoured,
when their defense was departed from them. No tidings can be so sad, as the
Reply which God made to the Israelites, Ye have forsaken me -- Wherefore I will
deliver you no more, Jud. 10.13. Oh! whether shall we resort for Succor and
Safety, when the Rock of Israel does sell and abandon us?


As to the Act, praising of the Wicked, nothing can be more reproachful,
because it carries in it, 1. The most stupid Folly and Ignorance: For there is
not a more hideous deformed Monster in the World than a Wicked Person, he has
no Comeliness or Beauty, but is a most misshapen, distorted Thing, destitute of
the Divine, Beautifying Image, and a very picture of the Devil, whose Child he
is. What inexcusable folly must it be to praise and commend such an one, yea,
or to cherish the Vipers, whose poison infects the places where they breath.
And 2. There is notorious injustice in the praising and favoring of Wicked
Men: Praise, and Encouragement cannot be due to such, these are the just
Recompenses of Religion and Goodness; whereas Shame is the Promotion that
belongs to Fools or Wicked Men, as it is affirmed, Prove. 3.35. If we will act
justly, we ought to despise a vile Person, for no Praise or Honor are due to
him. The Wisdom of most Lawgivers has directed to appoint such Punishments of
Evil Doers, as carry Shame and Reproach as well as Pain and Loss, by which they
are more adapted to attain the end of Punishment, which is the maintaining of
Moral Order in the World. And it is most equitable, that they who are the
blemish of Human Race, and of the Society they belong to, should bear their
Shame; according to the Sentence pronounced on Judah, Ezekiel. 16.52. Bear thine
own shame, for thy Sins, which thou have committed -- Yea, be thou confounded
also, and bear thy shame. We might hope to see happy days, if sin were
constantly attended with reproach, and not find Praise, and Esteem, as it has
too often done. There is little hope of vanquishing this Monster, while it is
nourished with so strengthening Food as Reputation and Honor: If once this
Provision could be cut off, Vice and Impiety would lose the Day, and
Reformation of Manners have desired Success; provided we comply with the Method
laid down in the latter part of the Text: But they that keep the Law contend
with them, or, against Wicked Men.


In speaking to this, it is not necessary to insist on the Character given to
the Agents, They that keep the Law, (which is directly opposite to the
Forsaking of the Law) which imports an inward suitable esteem of the Divine Law,
which is chosen as a Treasure, and guarded in the heart, against every thing
that opposes it, and also an habitual Observation of it, so that it becomes
the Measure and Rule of the Conversation, which is conducted not by the Will
and Lusts of Men, but by the Will of God. This is one constant effect of the
Grace of God, which works Repentance unto Salvation, to write the Divine Law in
the Heart, and give it the chief Dominion over the whole Man, so that the whole
Course of his Life is guided by the Holy Commandment of God.

Concerning these, it is said, They contend with the Wicked, which Action I
shall endeavor both to describe, and recommend: In describing this important
Action, we are obliged to enquire into these things which it supposes, as well
as to set down the positive instances of it.

The contending with, or against Wicked Men, supposes an acting on our selves;
the Original Word being so expressed, as to denote a reflex Operation. And
some, who have narrowly considered the force of the Hebrew Verb, have rendered
it, Coccei Lexic.
stir up themselves. It Is evident, none can contend with another, who does not
first stir himself; Sampsons great Strength could not be serviceable to him,
when the Philistines were upon him, until he was awaked, and did quit his
unactive posture. If our Souls are asleep, and stupid, void of active
Principles, whieh are to be exerted, it is impossible we should rightly contend
with Wicked Men, which absolutely requires the acting of the following
Dispositions.

Sorrow for the sins of others. He that can view the Impieties, or
Immoralities, of others, with delight, and take pleasure in those who violate
the Divine Laws, will not sincerely contend with Wicked Men. But a hearty
displeasure against Sin, engages unto this contending. This Principle moved
righteous Lot to reprove and contradict the Wicked Sodomites, whose unlawful
deeds did so affect him, that in seeing and hearing of them, He vexed his
righteous soul from day to day, 2 Pet. 2.8. The Apostle Paul, though he stood
single and alone, contended with the Idolatrous Athenians, because his Spirit
was stirred in him when he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry, Acts 17.16.
That Spectacle, which others beheld with patience and pleasure, wrought a
Paroxysm of Sorrow in his Holy Soul. The Jews thought themselves as much
obliged to rent their Garments when they heard Blaspheming Language, as when
the most sorrowful Tidings were brought to them. There is no Law which binds us
to tear our Clothes, at the hearing of impious Words, or sight of wicked deeds;
but we are obliged to rent our Hearts, with Religious Sorrow and Displeasure.

Zeal for the Honor of God, and Interest of Religion, is necessary for the due
performing of this Action. One who is unconcerned about these things, will not
contend earnestly against wicked Men. The Ephesian Christians have got immortal
Renown, by the Character given 'em by the Redeemer, in the Epistle addressed to
that Church. Revelat. 2.2. I know thy Works, and how thou can not bear them
that are Evil. This Christian Zeal much contributed to make a golden happy Age
to the Primitive Church, and would again restore it, might it please the
blessed God to send down this Heavenly Fire: But when many professing
Christians are lukewarm, and unconcerned for the cause of our Common Religion,
this obstructs the contending against Vice, and those who openly affront the
Laws of God. Phineas is celebrated, for his Executing Judgment on some great
Delinquents, against whom he contended, because he was acted by holy Zeal for
the Name of God, Number. 25.11.

Fortitude in the Cause of God, and Religion, is another Principle of this
Action. A Spirit of Fear and Cowardice, does wholly unfit for this Service:
When the Prophet Ezekiel was sent to the Rebellious House of Israel, with a
Commission to contend with that degenerate People, this was the first of his
Instructions. Thou Son of Man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of
their Words, tho Briars and Thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among
Scorpions, etc. Ezekiel. 2.6.

Confidence in the Divine Assistance: If we make flesh our Arm, and rely on
created strength, we shall quickly be discouraged, and our hands will be
weakened, when we experience the difficulty of this Undertaking: None can in a
right manner contend against wicked Men, who makes not the Almighty God his
support, and confidence: In the last place.

Charity toward the Persons of Wicked Men, is a necessary disposition in this
contending with them. For it is not an hostile Act, proceeding from malevolence
and hatred to them, but an Instance of the most real kindness, and designed to
deliver them from the worst misery: This Combat is managed against Sin, which
is the snare of Death, and Gate to Eternal Perdition. None ever so earnestly
contended with ungodly Men, as our Lord Jesus Christ, who was always acted by
the most unfeigned, ardent Love to Sinners, whose highest Happiness was
constantly designed by him.

We come now to lay down the Instances, of this contending with Wicked Men: And
it is obvious to any considering mind; That according to the various capacities
of Persons, there are various corresponding Instances of this important Duty.

I. The exercise of Legislative Authority, in making Laws to prohibit all open
Wickedness. The Magistrates Sword must be brought forth, and placed in view;
that such, who fear not the Displeasure of God, or the Reproaches of
Conscience, and of good Men, may be checked and awed by a menacing Law; which
is the proper Instrument of repressing Evil Doers. A Ruler does not answer his
high Character, if he is not a Terror to Evil Works: as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 13.3. This has been understood, even by those who have wanted the
knowledge of the true God. There never was a civilized People destitute of
Laws, to prohibit that which is openly wicked: We read how a Heathen
Nebuchadnazer, Published his Royal Edict, armed with severe Penalties,
a-against those who should speak any thing amiss against the true God, Dan.
3.29. Blessed be God, who has influenced our Lawgivers to enact various Laws,
to guard the Honor of the Name, and Truth, and Day of God. I know not a Nation
in the World, which has so abundant provision of Excellent Laws against Sin and
Impiety, as our own: But if the Law should sleep, it loses all its force, cannot
reach its end, and the worst Crimes will prove insolent: therefore II. The
actual punishing of such who are found guilty, is included in the contending
with wicked Men. If the Law be not armed with a Penalty, it is an Idol, which
has Hands, but handles not; and these Hands are altogether useless, if they
strike not those who affront and disobey Righteous Laws. To indulge and spare
such Offenders, is Cruelty to them, as well as to the Public: When those who
have been entrusted with Power to Execute Laws, have neglected this part of
their Duty, the consequent has been very dismal: This Neglect awakens Divine
Justice, which on such occasion, has used very severe Methods, both toward
them who have merited the Penalty, and those who have not inflicted it. The
Examples of Eli and David are well known, in whom, when Parental Affection so
far prevailed, that they neglected to punish their Children, the Supreme Judge,
did on that occasion use his own Sword, and strike both Parents and Children.
In the History of the former, there is a very instructive Passage, 1 Samuel 3.13.
I have told him (God speaks of Eli) that I will Judge his House for ever, for
the Iniquity which he knows, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not. Eli's Office as a Magistrate, obliged him to punish his
own Sons, and nothing could excuse his neglect, or prevent the terrible
proceedings of Divine Severity. If there be ground (which I determine not) for
the conjecture of our Translators, who in the Margin have altered the word
restrain, into frown; it intimates, that the frown of a Magistrate, an
indication of his displeasure against Vice, belongs to his Office, and has an
aptitude to repress that which is Evil. III. Instance of this contending with
wicked Men, is solemn pleading and protesting against Wickedness, by those
whose Office requires it. A Magistrate has many occasions of bearing a public
Testimony against Sin, and Evil Courses. As we read, Nehemiah (the Governor of
the Jewish State) judged it his duty to testify against the profanation of the
Sabbath, and contended with the Nobles of Judah, whose bad Examples might have
corrupted others, Nehem. 13.17. Such a Remonstrance, made by one clothed with
Authority, is very Serviceable to repress Sin, which often despises the best
Reasons that are urged by those of a private Condition. It Is the unquestionable
Duty of all Ministers to plead the Cause of Religion, against every thing that
opposes it, with an unwearied Constancy; herein they are to imitate their
great Master, who did not silently behold the Vices of the Age, and People to
whom he was sent, but on all proper occasions testified of the World, that its
Works were Evil, as himself has declared Joh. 7.7. A IV. Instance of this
contending with Wicked Men, is particular reproving of Sin, when a just
occasion is offered. This Office of Charity is enjoined by the Great Law, which
requires every one to love his Neighbor as himself. This Subject has been
frequently discourst, and the Duty of fraternal reproving been pressed, though
('it is to be feared) without desired success. Indeed it is found very difficut to
overcome the (...), or culpable Modesty, which generally obstructs the
performance of this excellent Duty. But there is another kind of reproving,
which has more facility, and would produce good effect, viz. The withholding
of familiar Converse from vicious Persons, which is expressly enjoined by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.11. I have written to you not to keep Company, if any Man,
that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, -- or a Drunkard --
with such a one, no not to eat. I question not, but the practicing of this one
Rule, did very much contribute to the purity of the Christian Church, in her
Virgin Age, when the Heroic Piety of Christians, did adorn their Doctrine, and
more succescesfully vindicate the Christian Religion, than the most Learned
Apologies published in Defense of it. And indeed, the strictest Discipline, and
Ecclesiastic Censures, (though a proper Method of repressing Vice) cannot
attain their End, while the Apostolic Order is neglected; and those who keep
the Law, Xenoph. Lac. Pol. C. 9.
extend their Friendship to such as openly forsake it. A judicious Writer has
related among the Causes, which made the Lacedaemonians so eminent for their
Courage in War: That (contrary to the usage of other Nations) in that City,
every body was ashamed to admit a Coward into the same Lodgings, or so much as
permit him to bear a part with them at their Games and Exercises. There is is
no Law that prohibits civil Commerce, and negotiating with openly Vicious
Persons; but we cannot contend with them, if our Friendship embraces their
Persons, which they (and others) will interpret a favoring of their Crimes;
which also spread their contagion, where a Passage is opened by Familiar
Converse. This Consideration induced a celebrated Pagan Lawgiver, Diodor. S.
Lib. 12. (...)
(Charondas) to enact a severe Law against Conversing with bad Men, for which,
the guilty were to be Endited and Punished: We may fear, such Pagans will rise
up in the Judgment against many professing Christians, and condemn those who
practice not this Method of reproving the works of Darkness. V. Another
Instance of contending with wicked Men, is the assisting of those, whose Office
obliges to the repressing of wickedness. The single Eye of a Ruler cannot
scatter this threatening Evil, if he be not assisted by the Eyes, and Hands, and
Tongues of others. I know the Name of a Delator or Informer is become odious;
but (as might be easily evinced, if it had not been already done) this infamous
Title no ways belongs to those, who only witness concerning a Criminal Act,
which ought to be discovered and punished. In such Cases, Silence and
Concealment make us Confederates with wicked Men, and partakers with their
Sins. Surely, none can fix an opprobrious Character on the Excellent Joseph, of
whom it is related, Genesis 37.2. That he brought to his Father, the Evil report of
his Brethren, who unjustly hated him, while he exercised a real Charity to
them, as well as discharged a Duty he owed to his Parent. None has charged the
Renowned Chrysostom, Tom. 6. Hom. 44.
with being an Informer; though in a Sermon, wherein he vehemently reproves
the Sin of Swearing: He tells his Hearers, that after the parting of the
Assembly, he would largely Discourse every one, that he might know who had, and
who had not reformed that Fault; And if I find (says he) any who have not
reformed, I will make them known to those who have, to the end, that all the
Latter may reprove, and correct them who remain guilty of this Vice. To publish
a secret Fault, may on some occasions, violate the Laws of Charity and
Humanity: but how can it be blameworthy, to witness against those, who declare
their own Sin, and hide not their own Shame? VI. The last Instance of this
contending with Wicked Men, is earnest Prayer, and Supplication to God, to
obtain success to the Methods which have been mentioned; and the Divine
Influence, which can effectually repress all kinds of Wickedness. The Divine
Almighty Arm alone, can destroy this many headed Hydra, which often despises
all Human Attempts. David, though he lived in a State that was provided with
the best Laws against Sin, yet addresseth to God in a most earnest Petition: O
bring the wickedness of the Wicked to an end, Psalm. 7.9.
The Jewish Writers (whose words are set down by a Learned Writer of our own)
tell us. Dr. Outram de Sacr. L. 1. C. 8.
That in the short Prayer used by the High Priest, on the Day of Expiation, this
was always one Petition. Let not the Prayer of them who break the Law, be
gathered before Thee, i. e. Let not God, by granting the Requests of Wicked
Men, put it into their Power, to act their Evil Designs. When we pray, Let thy
Kingdom come, this includes the effectual repressing of Wickedness, which most
directly opposes the Kingdom of God, that is, a State of Purity and
Righteousness.

It only remains, that the described Duty should be pressed, and recommended by
a few Considerations.

1. In contending with Wicked Men, you imitate the best Examples. This Practice
is the most honorable Mode, which makes you resemble the worthiest Inhabitants
of Earth, yea and of Heaven too. This was one distinguishing mark of the
Prophets and Apostles, whose Memory is blessed: They willingly endured all the
Hatred and Scorn of a wicked World, while they contended with it. Who would not
prefer a likeness to such Heroes, above any other empty Titles of Honor, with
which, other Enterprises are rewarded? Yea, this Practice is an imitation of
the Angels in Heaven, who constantly attend on this thing, and most readily
obey all the Divine Orders, for the opposing of Sin, and stopping the progress
of it. The Angel of the Lord ministered to the Justice of God, in punishing the
oppression of Pharaoh, the Pride of David, the Blasphemy of Senacherib, and
Herod. Lastly, The Blessed God himself sets us this Pattern: Who can read the
Word, or view the Works of God, without discerning the Contest, in which he is
engaged against the workers of Iniquity. We of this City and Nation, ought not
to forget the terrible Instances of this Divine Procedure: He has contended
against us, by a wasting Plague, a devouring Sword, and a consuming Fire. There
are Cases of a dubious Nature, in which it is possible, in opposing others, we
may through mistake, be guilty of contending against God: The wise Gamaliel
judged it unsafe to use any Violence against the first Teachers of the
Christian Religion, (which himself did not profess) because there was ground to
suspect, lest those who opposed it, should be found even to fight against God.
Act. 5.39. But in our contending with wicked Men, we are safe from such a
danger, We fight under the Banner of Heaven, and are imitators of God himself.

2. Herein, the most eminent Love to our Country, is acted and signalized. This
noble Disposition has prevailed against the strongest Objections: When the
Roman Brutus Condemned his own Sons to an infamous Death, and was a Spectator
of the Execution; this Act is resolved into this Principle. Vicit amor patriae.
Wicked Men are certainly Enemies to the Public Good, by provoking God to
withdraw his Protection, which is more necessary to our common Interest, than
either the Weapons, or Sinew of War. When the Israelites heard, that two whole
Tribes and a half, had done something, which only appeared a Rebelling against
the Lord: it is related that the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel
gathered themselves together, to go up to War against those whom they suspected
guilty; upon which supposition, they concluded, that the Lord would be wroth
with the whole Congregation of Israel. Josh. 22.18. Which Conclusion, they
prove by an unquestionable Instance, viz. Achan, who committed a Trespass in
the accursed thing, and Wrath fell on all the Congregation of Israel, and that
Man perished not alone in his Iniquity. verse 26. If ungodly Persons did hurt
only themselves, there might be some pretext for indulging and conniving at
them; but the case is otherwise, they do a real harm to the Community, of which
they are Members. Solomon (a proper Judge of this Matter, his Regal Office
assisting him to observe the dangers of the State) has asserted, That
scornful, i. e. ungodly Men bring a City into a Snare, Prove. 29.8. If any
should censure the Accord, and Union in this Reforming Design, of those, whose
Sentiments are not quite the same in some lesser things, they forget the plain
Obligation of a joint opposing a common Enemy. Wicked Men are not Adversaries
to one Part, or Order of Christians (of distinct denominations;) They strike at
the Cause of Religion in general, and if it lay in their power, would not leave
a Christian Church in Being. Our common Rule obliges us to agree in defending
the Cause of Religion, against all who seek to ruin it: and in prosecuting
this Design, we exercise a real Kindness to our Country, and contribute to the
Welfare and Interest of the whole Nation. The Roman History relates, that the
Variance of their two Orders, Patrician and Plebeian, did sometimes endanger
that State; but when their Contests were the highest, the appearing of a Common
Enemy did unite them; the flaming War that threatened the whole Body, did melt
the divided pieces into one.

3. There is encouraging Hope of Success in this contending with wicked Men.
Sin, is in its own Nature, a weak and feeble thing, like Darkness, which flies
at the approach of Light. Indeed, the Number, and boldness of Evil Men, joined
with the faint endeavors used against them, give an appearance of Strength to
their Cause, but it cannot stand its ground, when it meets a vigorous
Opposition. How can that be strong which is supported by Lies and Falsehood, and
has the Wisdom and Power of God engaged against it? This City has already seen
the good effect of those Methods, which have been used in Executing the Laws
made against Profaneness and Immorality. The Vices of Swearing, Vncleaness,
and Violation of the Lords Day, don't now show themselves so openly as formerly
they did. And though some begin to hope, that they shall be indulged in such
Evil Practices, we trust the Care and Piety of our Honorable Magistrates, will
frustrate this impudent Expectation: And that the Example set in this great
City, will influence other places of the Nation, to undertake a Design of
Repressing Vices, and Impieties, which has the praying Wishes of all Good Men,
and the Promise of Divine Assistance, which can overcome all Opposition made
against it.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, near
Mercer's Chapel in Cheapside.
THE Life and Death of Mr. Philip Henry, late Minister of Whitchurch in
Shropshire. The Second Edition. Four Sermons Preached to the Societies, for the
Reformation of Manners, viz. by Mr. How, Mr. Burgess, Mr. Sylvester, Mr.
Spademan. Of Remembrance and Imitation of Deceased Holy Rulers. A Sermon
Preached at Roterdam the Day of Her Majesty's Funeral, by John Spademan. A
Sermon Preached on the late Day of Thanksgiving, December. 2. 1697. To which is
Prefixed Dr. Bates's Congratulatory Speech to the King. A Funeral Sermon on the
Death of that Pious Gentlewoman Mrs. Judith Hammond, late Wife of the Reverend
Mr. George Hammond, Minister of the Gospel in London. Of Thoughtfulness for the
Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the immoderate Desire of foreknowing Things
to come. Of Charity in Reference to other Men's Sins. A Sermon directing what we
are to do after a strict Enquiry whether or no we truly love God. A Calm and
Sober Enquiry concerning the Possibility of a Trinity in the Godhead. The
Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons Preached at the Merchants
Lecture in Broadstreet. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls, in a
Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42. With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally
Discoursed concerning the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to
Will the Salvation of them that perish. A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Ester
Sampson, the late Wife of Mr. Henry Sampson, Doctor of Physic, who Died Novem.
24. 1689. A Letter to a Friend concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr.
Sherlock's Notion of the Trinity in Unity, relating to the Calm and Sober
Enquiry upon the same Subject. A View of that Part of the late Considerations
Addressed to H. H. about the Trinity. Which concerns the Sober Enquiry on that
Subject. All these Eleven by Mr. John How. Navigation spiritualized, or a new
Compass for Seamen, consisting of Thirty Two Points of pleasant Observations,
profitable Applications, serious Reflections, all concluded with so many
spiritual Poems, etc. Two Treatises, the first of Fear, the second, the
Righteous Man's Refuge in the Evil Day. A Saint indeed, the great Work of a
Christian. A Touchstone of Sincerity, or Signs of Grace, and Symptoms of
Hypocrisy, being the second Part of the Saint indeed. A Token for Mourners, or
boundaries for Sorrow for the Death of Friends. Husbandry spiritualized: or the
Heavenly use of Earthly Things. The Divine Conduct, or Mystery of Providence,
its Being and Efficacy asserted and vindicated: All the Methods of Providence
in our Course of Life opened, with Directions how to apply and improve them.
All these Seven by Mr. John Flavel. A Discourse against Transubstantiation.
Thirteen Sermons on several Texts. Defensative Armor against four of Satan's
fiery Darts, viz. Temptations to Atheistical and Blasphemous Impressions and
Thoughts, Self-murder, Despair and Presumption. A Reasonable Account, why some
pious Nonconforming Ministers in England, judge it sinful for them to perform
their Ministerial Acts, in public solemn Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of
others. A Supplement to the Reasonable Account. The Vindication of Liturgies,
Published by Dr. Falkner, proved no Vindication. The Weavers Pocket Book, or
Weaving spiritualized, in a Discourse, wherein Men in that Occupation, are
instructed how to raise Heavenly Meditations, from the several Parts of their
work. A Sermon upon the Happiness of Brethren dwelling together in Unity. The
improveableness of Water Baptism. An Exercitation on that Case of Conscience,
viz. Whether it be lawful for a Person to Act contrary to the Opinion of his
own Conscience formed from Arguments that appear to him probable, though not
necessary and demonstrative? Intercourses of Divine Love between Christ and the
Church, or the particular believing Soul, opened and improved in several
Lectures upon the first and second Chapter of the Canticles, in Two Vol. All
these Eleven by John Collinges, D. D. The Friendly Interposer between the
Authors of those Papers; the one called, A Report, the other called A Rebuke of
that Report. In order to a Reconciliation, between the Presbyterians and
Independants. By Mr. John Humphrey.

