A SERMON PREACHED At the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, November. 9. 1662.

By ROBERT SOUTH, M. A. Public Orator to the University of Oxford, and
Chaplain to the Lord high Chancellor.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for Tho. Robinson, Bookseller in Oxon. 1663.

To the Right Honorable, THE Lord Mayor and Aldermen Of the City of LONDON.
Right Honorable,

WHen I consider how impossible it is for a person of my condition to produce,
and consequently how imprudent to attempt, any thing in proportion either to
the Amplenesse of the Body you represent, or of the Places you bear, I should
be kept from venturing so poor a piece, designed to live but an hour, in so
lasting a Publication; did not what your Civility calls a Request, your
Greatness render a Command. The truth is, in things not unlawful great Persons
cannot be properly said to request, because, all things considered, they must
not be denied. To me it was Honor enough to have your Audience; enjoyment
enough to behold your happy Change, and to see the same City, the Metropolis of
Loyalty and of the Kingdom; to behold the Glory of English Churches reformed,
that is, delivered from the Reformers; and to find at least the service of the
Church repaired, though not the buildings; to see St. Paul's delivered from
Beasts here, as well as St. Paul at Ephesus: and to view the Church thronged
only with Troops of Auditors, not of Horse. This I could fully have acquiesced
in, and received a large personal reward in my Particular share of the public
Joy: but since you are further pleased, I will not say by your Judgment to
approve, but by your Acceptance to encourage the raw endeavors of a young
Divine; I shall take it for an Opportunity, not as others in-their sage
Prudence use to do, to quote three or four Texts of Scripture, and to tell you
how you are to rule the City out of a Concordance; no; I bring not
Instructions, but what much better befits both you and my self, your
Commendations. For I look upon your City as the great and magnificent stage of
Business, and by consequence the best place of Improvement; for from the School
we go to the University, but from the Universities to London. And therefore as
in your City-meetings you must be esteemed the most considerable Body of the
Nation; so met in the Church, I look upon you as an Auditory fit to be waited
on, as you are, by both Universities. And when I remember how instrumental you
have been to recover this universal settlement, and to retrieve the old Spirit
of Loyalty to Kings (as an ancient testimony of which, you bear not tbe Sword
in vain) I seem in a manner deputed from Oxford, not so much as Preacher to
supply a course, as Orator to present her thanks. As for the ensuing
Discourse, which, (lest I chance to be traduced
for a Plagiary by him who has played the thief) I think fit to tell the world
by the way, was one of those that by a worthy hand were stolen from me in the
Kings Chapel, and are still detained; and to which now accidentally published
by your Honors Order, your Patronage must give both value, and protection. You
will find me in it not to have pitched upon any subject, that men's guilt, and
the consequent of guilt, their concernment might render liable to exception;
nor to have rubbed up the memory of what some heretofore in the City did, which
more and better now detest, and therefore expiate: but my subject is
inoffensive, harmless, and innocent as the State of Innocence it felf, and (I
hope) suitable to the present design and Genius of this Nation, which is, or
should be, to return to that Innocence, which it lost long since the Fall.
Briefly, my business is, by describing what Man was in his first estate, to
upbraid him with what he is in his present: between whom Innocent, and Fallen
(that in a word I may suit the subject to the place of my discourse) there is
as great an unlikeness, as between St. Paul's a Cathedral, and St. Paul's a
Stable. But I must not forestall my self, nor transcribe the Work into the
Dedication. I shall now only desire you to accept the issue of your own
requests; the gratification of which I have here consulted so much before my
own reputation: while like the poor widow I endeavor to show my officiousness
by an Offering, though I betray my poverty by the measure; not so much caring
though I appear neither Preacher nor Scholar, (which terms we have been taught
upon good reason to distinguish) so I may in this but show my self

Your Honors very humble Servant,

Robert South.

Worcester-house,

Nov. 24. 1662.

Genesis 1. 27. So God created man in his own Image, in the image of God created
he him.
HOw hard it is for Natural Reason to discover a Creation before revealed, or
being revealed to believe it: The strange Opinions of the old Philosophers, and
the Infidelity of modern Atheists, is too sad a Demonstration. To run the world
back to its first original and Infancy; and (as it were) to view Nature in
its cradle, to trace the outgoings of the Ancient of days in the first
Instance and Specimen of his Creative Power, is a re-search too great for any
mortal Enquiry: and we might continue our Scrutiny to the end of the World,
before Natural Reason would be able to find out when it begun.

Epicurus his Discourse concerning the Original of the World is so fabulous
and ridiculously merry, that we may well judge the Design of his Philosophy to
have been Pleasure, and not Instruction.

Aristotle held, That it streamed by connaturall Result and Emanation from God,
the Infinite and Eternal Mind, as the Light issues from the Sun; so that there
was no Instance of Duration assignable of Gods eternal existence, in which the
World did not also co-exist.

Others held a Fortuitous Concourse of Atoms. But all seem jointly to explode
a Creation; still beating upon this ground, that to produce Something out of
Nothing is Impossible and Incomprehensible. Incomprehensible indeed I grant,
but not therefore Impossible. There is not the least transaction of sense, and
motion in the whole man, but Philosophers are at a loss to comprehend, I am
sure they are to explain, it. Wherefore it is not always rational to measure
the truth of an assertion by the Standard of our Apprehension.

But to bring things even to the bare perceptions of Reason, I appeal to any
one, who shall impartially reflect upon the Ideas and Conceptions of his own
mind, whether he does not find it as easy and suitable to his Natural Notions,
to conceive that an Infinite Almighty Power might produce a thing out of
nothing, and make that to exist De Novo, which did not exist before; as to
conceive the World to have had no beginning, but to have existed from Eternity:
Which, were it so proper for this place and exercise, I could easily
demonstrate to be attended with no small train of absurdities. But then,
besides that the acknowledging of a Creation is safe, and the denial of it
dangerous and irreligious, and yet not more, (perhaps much less) demonstrable
than the affirmative; so over and above it gives me this advantage, that, let
it seem never so strange, uncouth, and impossible, the Nonplus of my reason
will yield a fairer Opportunity to my faith.

In this Chapter we have God surveying the works of the Creation, and leaving
this general Impresse or Character upon them, That they were exceeding good.
What an Omnipotence wrought, we have an Omniscience to approve. But as it is
reasonable to imagine that there is more of design, and consequently more of
perfection, in the last work; we have God here giving his last stroke, and
summing up all into Man, the Whole into a Part, the Universe into an
Individual: so that whereas in other Creatures we have but the Trace of his
footsteps, in Man we have the Draught of his hand. In him were united all the
scattered persections of the Creature; all the graces and Ornaments, all the
Airs and features of Being, were abridged into this small, yet full, Systeme of
Nature and Divinity. As we might well imagine that the great Artificer would be
more then ordinarily exact in Drawing his own Picture.

The Work that I shall undertake from these words, shall be to show what this
Image of God in Man is, and wherein it does consist: which I shall do these two
ways. 1. Negatively, by showing wherein it does not consist. 2. Positively, by
showing wherein it does.

For the first of these we are to remove the erroneous opinion of the
Socinians. They deny that the Image of God consisted in any Habitual
Perfections that adorned the Soul of Adam: But as to his Understanding bring
him in Void of all Notion, a rude unwritten Blanck; making him to be created as
much an Infant as others are born; sent into the World only to read and spell
out a God in the Works of Creation, to learn by degrees, till at length his
Understanding grew up to the stature of his Body. Also without any inherent
habits of virtue in his Will; thus devesting him of all, and stripping him to
his bare Essence. So that all the perfection they allowed his Understanding was
Aptness and Docility, and all that they attributed to his will was a
Possibility to be Virtuous.

But wherein then according to their opinion did this Image of God consist?
Why; in that Power and Dominion that God gave Adam over the Creatures: In that
he was vouced his immediate Deputy upon Earth, the Viceroy of the Creation, and
Lord Lieutenant of the World. But that this Power and Dominion is not
adequately and formally the Image of God, but only a Part ofit, is clear from
hence; Because then he that had most of this, would have most of Gods Image:
and consequently Nimrod had more of it then Noah, Saul then Samuel, the
Persecutors then the Martyrs, and Caesar then Christ himself, which to assert
is a Blasphemous Paradox. And if the Image of God is only Grandeur, Power and
Sovereignty, certainly we have been hitherto much mistaken in our Duty: and
hereafter are by all means to beware of making our selves unlike God, by too
much Selfdenyall and Humility. I am not ignorant that some may distinguish
between (...) and (...), between a Lawful Authority and an Actual Power; and
affirm, that Gods Image consists only in the former: which wicked Princes,
such as Saul and Nimrod, have not, though they possess the latter. But to this
I answer,

1. That the Scripture neither makes nor ownes such a distinction, nor any
where asserts, that when Princes begin to be wicked, they cease of right to be
Governors. Add to this, that when God renewed this Charter of Man's
Sovereignty over the Creatures to Noah and his family, we find no exception at
all, but that Cham stood as fully invested with this Right as any of his
Brethren.

2. But secondly, This savours of something ranker then Socinianisme, even the
Tenants of the Fifth Monarchy, and of Sovereignty founded only upon Saintship;
and therefore is fitter to be answered by the Judge, then by the Divine; and to
receive its confutation at the Bar of Justice, then from the Pulpit.

Having thus made our way through this false Opinion, we are in the next place
to lay down positively what this Image of God in Man is. It is in short, That
Universal Rectitude of all the faculties of the Soul, by which they stand apt
and disposed to their respective Offices and Operations. Which will be more
fully set forth, by taking a distinct survey of it, in the several faculties
belonging to the soul.

1. In the Understanding. 2. In the Will. 3. In the Passions or Affections.
1. And first for its noblest faculty, the Understanding: It was then sublime,
clear, and aspiring, and as it were the souls upper Region, lofty and serene,
free from the vapors and disturbances of the inferior affections. It was the
leading, controlling faculty; all the Passions wore the colors of Reason: it
did not so much persuade, as command; it was not Consul but Dictator. Discourse
was then almost as quick as Intuition; it was nimble in proposing, firm in
concluding: it could sooner determine then now it can dispute. Like the Sun, it
had both light and agility; it knew no rest but in motion; no quiet, but in
activity. It did not so properly apprehend, as irradiate the Object; not so
much find, as make things intelligible. It did arbitrate upon the several
Reports of sense, and all the varieties of Imagination; not like a drousie
Judge, only hearing, but also directing their Verdict. In sum, it was
vegete, quick, and lively; open as the Day, untainted as the Morning, full of
the innocence and spritelinesse of Youth; it gave the Soul a bright, and a full
view into all things, and was not only a Window, but it self the Prospect.
Briefly, there is as much difference between the clear Representations of the
understanding then, and the obscure discoveries that it makes now, as there is
between the Prospect of a Casement, and of a Keyhole.

Now as there are two great functions of the Soul, Contemplation, and Practice,
according to that general division of Objects, some of which only entertain
our Speculation, others also employ our Actions; so the Understanding with
relation to these, not because of any distinction in the faculty it self, is
accordingly divided into Speculative and Practick: in both of which the Image
of God was then apparent.

1. For the Understanding Speculative. There are some general Maxims and
Notions in the mind of Man, which are the rules of Discourse, and the basis of
all Philosophy. As that the same thing cannot at the same time be, and not be.
That the Whole is bigger then a Part. That two Proportions equal to a third,
must also be equal to one another. Aristotle indeed affirms the Mind to be at
first a mere Rasa tabula; and that these Notions are not ingenite, and
imprinted by the finger of Nature, but by the latter and more languid
impressions of sense; being only the Reports of observation, and the Result of
so many repeated Experiments.

But to this I answer two things.

1. That these Notions are universal, and what is universal must needs proceed
from some Universal, constant Principle, the same in all particulars; which
here can be nothing else but humane Nature.

2. These cannot be infused by observation, because they are the rules by which
men take their first apprehensions and observations of things, and therefore in
order of Nature must needs precede them: As the being of the Rule must be
before its application to the thing directed by it. From whence it follows,
that these were Notions not descending from us, but born with us; not our
Offspring, but our Brethren; and (as I may so say) such as we were taught
without the help of a Teacher.

Now it was Adams happiness in the state of innocence to have these clear and
unsullied. He came into the World a Philosopher, which sufficiently appeared by
his writing the Nature of things upon their Names: he could view Essences in
themselves, and read Forms without the comment of their respective Properties:
he could see Consequents yet dormant in their principles, and effects yet
unborn and in the Womb of their Causes: his understanding could almost pierce
into future contingents; his conjectures improving even to Prophecy, or the
certainties of Prediction; till his fall it was ignorant of nothing but of Sin;
or at least it rested in the notion without the smart of the Experiment. Could
any difficulty have been proposed, the resolution would have been as early as
the Proposal; it could not have had time to settle into Doubt. Like a better
Archimedes, the issue of all his Enquiries was an (...) an (...), the
offspring of his brain without the sweat of his brow. Study was not then a
Duty, nightwatchings were needless; the light of Reason wanted not the
assistance of a Candle. This is the doom of fallen man to labor in the fire, to
seek truth in profundo, to exhaust his time and impair his health, and perhaps
to spin out his days, and himself into one pitiful, controverted Conclusion.
There was then no poring, no struggling with memory, no straining for Invention.
His faculties were quick and expedite: they answered without knocking, they
were ready upon the first summons, there was freedom, and firmness in all their
Operations. I confesse'tis difficult for us who date our ignorance from our
first Being, and were still bred up with the same infirmities about us, with
which we were born, to raise our thoughts, and imagination to those
intellectual perfections that attended our Nature in the time of Innocence; as
it is for a Peasant bred up in the obscurities of a cottage, to fancy in his
mind the unseen splendor of a Court. But by ratingPositives by their
Privatives, and other arts of Reason, by which discourse supplies the want of
the Reports of sense, we may collect the Excellency of the Understanding then
by the glorious remainders of it now, and guess at the stateliness of the
building, by the magnificence of its ruins. All those arts, rarities, and
inventions, which vulgar minds gaze at, the ingenious pursue, and all admire,
they are but the relics of an Intellect defaced with Sin and Time. We admire
it now, only as Antiquaries do a piece of old coin, for the Stamp it once
bore, and not for those vanishing lineaments, and disappearing draughts, that
remain upon it at present. And certainly that must needs have been very
glorious, whose decays are so admirable. He that is comely when old and
decrepit, surely was very beautiful when he was young. An Aristotle was but the
rubbish of an Adam, and Athens but the rudiments of Paradise.

2. The Image of God was no less resplendent in that which we call man's
Practical Understanding, namely, that Storehouse of the Soul, in which are
treasured up the rules of Action, and the seeds of Morality. Where we must
observe that many, who deny all Connate notions in the Speculative Intellect,
do yet admit them in this. Now of this sort are these Maxims, That God is to
be worshipped. That Parents are to be honored, That a man's word is to be kept,
and the like; which being of universal influence, as to the regulation of the
behavior, and converse of mankind, are the ground of all virtue, and civility,
and the foundation of religion.

It was the Privilege of Adam Innocent to have these Notions also firm and
untainted, to carry his Monitor in his bosom, his law in his heart, and to have
such a Conscience, as might be its own Casuist: And certainly those Actions
must needs be regular, where there is an Identity between the rule, and the
faculty. His own mind taught him a due dependence upon God, and chalked out to
him the just proportions, and measures of behavior to his fellow creatures. He
had no Catechism but the Creation, needed no Study but Reflection, read no
book but the volume of the world, and that too not for rules to work by, but
for Objects to work upon. Reason was his Tutor, and first principles his magna
moralia. The Decalogue of Moses was but a transcript, not an Original. All the
Laws of nations and wise Decrees of states, the Statutes of Solon, and the
twelve Tables, were but a paraphrase upon this standing rectitude of Nature,
this fruitful principle of Justice, that was ready to run out, and enlarge it
self into suitable determinations, upon all emergent objects, and occasions.
Justice then was neither blind to discern, nor lame to execute. It was not
subject to be imposed upon by a deluding fancy, nor yet to be bribed by a
glozing appetite, for an Utile or Jucundum to turn the balance to a false or
dishonest sentence. In all its directions of the inferior faculties, it
conveyed its suggestions with clearness, and enjoined them with power; it had
the Passions in perfect subjection; and though its command over them was but
suasive, and political, yet it had the force of coactive, and despotical. It
was not then, as it is now, where the Conscience has only power to disapprove,
and to protest against the exorbitances of the Passions; and rather to wish,
then make them otherwise. The voice of Conscience now is low, and weak,
chastising the Passions, as old Eli did his lustful, domineering Sons; Not so
my Sons, not so: but the voice of Conscience then was not, This should, or this
ought to be done; but this must, this shall be done. It spoke like a
Legislator: the thing spoke was a Law; and the manner of speaking it a new
Obligation. In short, there was as great a disparity between the Practical
dictates of the Understanding then, and now, as there is between empire and
advice, counsel and command, between a companion and a governor.

And thus much for the Image of God as it shone in man's understanding.

2. Let us in the next place take a view of it, as it was stamped upon the
Will. It is much disputed by Divines concerning the power of man's will to Good
and Evil in the state of Innocence; and upon very nice, and dangerous
precipices stand their determinations on either side. Some hold that God
invested him with a power to stand, so that in the strength of that power
received, he might without the auxiliaries of any further influence have
determined his will to the choice of good. Others hold, that notwithstanding
this power, yet it was impossible for him, to exert it in any good action,
without a superadded assistance of grace, actually determining that power to
the certain production of such an act. So that, whereas some distinguish
between sufficient, and effectual grace; they order the matter so, as to
acknowledge none sufficient, but what is indeed effectual, and actually
productive of a good action. I shall not presume to interpose dogmatically in a
Controversy, that I never look to see decided. But concerning the latter of
these Opinions, I shall only give these two remarks.

1. That it seems contrary to the common and natural conceptions of all
mankind, who acknowledge themselves able, and sufficient to do many things,
which actually they never do.

2. That to assert, that God looked upon Adams fall as a sin, and punished it
as such, when as without any antecedent sin of his, he withdrew that actual
grace from him, upon the withdrawing of which, it was impossible for him not to
fall, seems a thing that highly reproaches the essential equity and goodness of
the divine Nature.

Wherefore doubtless the will of man in the state of Innocence, had an entire
freedom, a perfect equipendency and indifference to either part of the
contradiction, to stand, or not to stand, to accept, or not accept the
temptation. I will grant the Will of man now to be as much a slave as any one
will have it, and to be only free to Sin; that is, instead of a liberty, to
have only a licentiousness; yet certainly this is not Nature, but Chance. We
were not born crooked: We learnt these windings and turnings of the Serpent,
and therefore it cannot but be a blasphemous piece of ingratitude to ascribe
them to God; and to make the plague of our Nature the condition of our Creation.

The Will was then ductile, and pliant to all the motions of right Reason, it
met the dictates of a clarified understanding half way. And the Active
informations of the Intellect, filling the Passive reception of the will, like
Form closing with Matter, grew actuate into a third, and distinct perfection of
Practice: The Understanding, and Will never disagreed, for the proposals of the
one never thwarted the inclinations of the other. Yet neither did the Will
servilely attend upon the Understanding, but as a favorite does upon his
Prince, where the service is privilege, and Preferment; or as Solomon's
servants waited upon him. It admired its wisdom, and heard its prudent
dictates, and counsels, both the direction, and the reward of its obedience. It
is indeed the nature of this faculty to follow a Superior guide, to be drawn
by the Intellect; but then it was drawn, as a Triumphant Chariot, which at the
same time both follows and triumphs While it obeyed this, it commanded the
other faculties. It was subordinate, not enslaved to the Understanding: Not as
a Servant to a Master, but as a Queen to her King; who both acknowledges a
Subjection, and yet retains a Majesty.

Pass we now downward from man's Intellect and Will,

3. To the Passions; which have their residence and situation chiefly in the
Sensitive Appetite. For we must know, that in as much as man is a compound and
mixture of Flesh as well as Spirit, the soul during its abode in the body, does
all things by the mediation of these Passions, and inferior affections. And
here the Opinion of the Stoics was famous and singular, who looked upon all
these as sinful defects and Irregularities, as so many deviations from right
Reason, making Passion to be only another word for Perturbation. Sorrow in
their esteem was a sin scarce to be expiated by another, to pity was a fault,
to rejoice an extravagance, and the Apostles advice to be angry and sin not,
was a contradiction in their Philosophy. But in this, they were constantly
outvoted by other Sects of Philosophers, neither for fame, nor number less
then themselves: So that all arguments brought against them from Divinity would
come by way of overplus to their confutation. To us let this be sufficient,
that our Savior Christ, who took upon him all our natural infirmities, but
none of our sinful, has been seen to Weep, to be sorrowful, to Pity, and to be
Angry. Which shows that there might be gall in a Dove, Passion without Sin,
fire without smoke, and motion without disturbance. For it is not bare
agitation, but the sediment at the bottom that troubles and defiles the Water.
And when we see it windy and dusty, the wind does not (as we use to say) make,
but only raise a dust.

Now though the Schools reduce all the Passions to these two heads, the
concupiscible, and the irascible Appetite: yet, I shall not tie my self to an
exact prosecution of them under this Division, but at this time leaving both
their terms and their method to themselves, consider only the principal and
most noted Passions, from whence we may take an estimate of the rest. And
first, for the grand leading affection of all, which is Love. This is the great
Instrument and Engine of Nature, the bond and cement of Society, the spring and
spirit of the Universe. Love is such an affection, as cannot so properly be
said to be in the Soul, as the Soul to be in that. It is the whole man wrapped up
into one desire, all the powers, vigor, and faculties of the Soul abridged
into one inclination. And it is of that active, restless nature, that it must
of necessity exert it self; and like the fire, to which it is so often
compared, it is not a Free Agent, to choose whether it will heat or no, but it
streams forth by natural results, and unavoidable emanations. So that it will
fasten upon an inferior, unsuitable Object, rather then none at all. The Soul
may sooner leave off to subsist, then to love; and like the Vine, it withers
and dies, if it has nothing to embrace. Now this affection in the state of
Innocence was happily pitched upon its right Object; it flamed up in direct
fervours of devotion to God, and in collateral emissions of charity to its
Neighbor. It was not then only another and more cleanly name for Lust. It had
none of those impure heats, that both represent and deserve Hell. It was a
vestall and a virgin fire, and differed as much from that which usually passes
by this name now-a-dayes, as the vital heat from the burnings of a fever.

Then for the contrary Passion of Hatred. This we know is the Passion of
defiance, and there is a kind of a versation and hostility included in its very
essence and being. But then, (if there could have been hatred in the world,
when there was scarce any thing odious) it would have acted within the compass
of its proper object. Like Aloes, bitter indeed, but wholesome. There would have
been no rancour, no hatred of our Brother: An innocent nature could hate
nothing that was innocent. In a word, so great is the commutation, that the
Soul then hated only that, which now only it loves, that is, Sin.

And if we may bring Anger under this head, as being according to some a
transient hatred, or at least very like it. This also, as unruly as now it is,
yet then it vented it self by the measures of reason. There was no such thing
as the transports of malice, or the violences of revenge: no rendering evil for
evil, when evil was truly a non entity, and no where to be found. Anger then
was like the sword of Justice, keen, but innocent and righteous. It did not act
like fury, and then call it self zeal. It always espoused Gods honor: nor
ever kindled upon any thing but in order to a Sacrifice. It sparkled like the
coal upon the Altar, with the fervours of piety, the heats of devotion, the
sallies and vibrations of an harmless activity. In the next place, for the
lightsome Passion of Joy. It was not that, which now often usurpes this name;
that trivial, vanishing, superficial thing, that only gilds the apprehension,
and plays upon the surface of the Soul. It was not the mere crackling of
thorns, a sudden blase of the Spirits, the exultation of a tickled fancy, or a
pleased appetite. Joy was then a masculine and a severe thing: the recreation
of the Judgment, the Jubilee of reason: it was the result of a real good
sutably applied. It commenced upon the solidities of Truth, and the substance
of fruition. It did not run out in voice, or undecent Eruptions; but filled the
Soul, as God does the Universe, silently and without noise. It was refreshing,
but composed; like the pleasantness of youth tempered with the gravity of age;
or the mirth of a festival managed with the silence of contemplation.

And on the other side for Sorrow. Had any loss or disaster made but room for
grief, it would have moved according to the severe allowances of Prudence, and
the proportions of the provocation. It would not have sallyed out into
complaint, or loudness, nor spread it self upon the face, and writ sad stories
upon the forehead. No wringing of the hands, knocking the breast, or wishing
ones self unborn; all which are but the ceremonies of sorrow, the pomp and
ostentation of an effeminate grief: which speak not so much the greatness of
the misery, as the smalnesse of the mind. Tears may spoil the eyes, but not
wash away the affliction. Sighs may exhaust the man, but not eject the burden.
Sorrow then would have been as silent as Thought, as severe as Philosophy. It
would have rested in inward senses, tacit dislikes: and the whole scene of it
been transacted in sad and silent reflections.

Then again for Hope. Though indeed the fullness and affluence of man's
enjoyments in the state of Innocence, might seem to leave no place for hope, in
respect of any further addition, but only of the prorogation, and future
continuance of what already he possessed. Yet doubtless, God who made no
faculty, but also provided it with a proper object, upon which it might
exercise, and lay out it self, even in its greatest innocence, did then
exercise man's hopes with the expectations of a better Paradise, or a more
intimate admission to himself. For it is not imaginable, that Adam could fix
upon such poor, thin enjoyments, as riches, pleasure, and the gayeties of an
animal life. Hope indeed was always the Anchor of the Soul, yet certainly it
was not to catch or fasten upon such mud. And if as the Apostle says, no man
hopes for that which he sees, much less could Adam then hope for such things
as he saw through.

And lastly, for the affection of fear. It was then the instrument of caution,
not of anxiety; a guard, and not a torment to the breast that had it. It is now
indeed an unhappiness, the disease of the Soul, it flies at a shadow, and makes
more dangers then it avoids; it weakens the Judgment, and betrays the
succors of reason. So hard is it to tremble, and not to err, and to hit the
mark with a shaking hand. Then it fixed upon him that is only to be feared,
God: and yet with a filial fear, which at the same time both fears, and loves.
It was awe without amazement, dread without distraction. There was then a
beauty even in this very palenesse. It was the color of devotion, giving a
luster to reverence, and a gloss to humility.

Thus did the Passions then act without any of their present jarres, combats,
or repugnances; all moving with the beauty of uniformity, and the stillness of
composure. Like a well-governed Army, not for fighting, but for rank and order.
I confess the Scripture does not expressly attribute these several endowments
to Adam in his first estate. But all that I have said, and much more, may be
drawn out of that short Aphorism, God made man upright, Eccles. 7. 29. And
since the opposite Weaknesses now infest the nature of Man fallen, if we will be
true to the rule of contraries, we must conclude that those perfections were
the lot of man innocent.

Now from this so exact and regular composure of the faculties, all moving in
their due place, each striking in its proper time, there arose by natural
consequence the crowning perfection of all, A good Conscience. For as in the
Body, when the principal parts, as the Heart and Liver, do their offices, and
all the inferior, smaller vessels act orderly, and duly, there arises a sweet
enjoyment upon the whole, which we call Health. So in the Soul, when the
supreme faculties of the Will and U^derstanding move regularly, the inferior
Passions and Affections following, there arises a serenity and complacency upon
the whole Soul, infinitely beyond the greatest bodily pleasures, the highest
quintessence and Elixars of worldly delights. There is in this case a kind of
fragrancy, and spiritual perfume upon the Conscience; much like what Isaac
spoke of his sons garments, That the scent of them was like the smell of a
field which the Lord had blessed. Such a freshness and flavor is there upon
the Soul, when daily watered with the actions of a virtuous life. Whatsoever is
pure, is also pleasant.

Having thus surveyed the Image of God in the Soul of Man, we are not to omit
now those characters of Majesty that God imprinted upon the Body. He drew some
traces of his Image upon this also; as much as a spiritual Substance could be
pictured upon a corporeal. As for that Sect of the Anthropomorphites, that from
hence ascribe to God the figure of a Man, with eyes, hands, feet, and the like,
they are too ridiculous to deserve a confutation. They would seem to draw this
impiety from the letter of the Scripture sometimes speaking of God in this
manner. Absurdly, as if the mercy of Scripture-expression ought to warrant the
blasphemy of our Opinions. And not rather show us, that God condescends to us,
only to draw us to himself; and clothes himself in our likeness, only to win
us to his own. The practice of the Papists is much of the same nature, in their
absurd, and impious picturing of God Almighty: but the wonder in them is the
less, since the Image of a Deity may be a proper object for that, which is but
the Image of a Religion. But to the purpose: Adam was then no less glorious in
his externals; he had a beautiful body, as well as an immortal Soul. The whole
compound was like a well built Temple, stately without, and sacred within. The
Elements were at perfect union and agreement in his body; and their contrary
qualities served not for the dissolution of the compound, but the variety of
the composure. Galen, who had no more Divinity, then what his Physic taught
him, barely upon the consideration of this so exact frame of the body,
challenges any one upon an hundred years study, to find, how any the least
fiber, or most minute particle might be more commodiously placed, either for
the advantages of use, or comeliness. His stature erect, and tending upwards to
his Center; his countenance majestic and comely, with the luster of a native
beauty, that scorned the poor assistances of Art, or the attempts of Imitation.
His body of so much quickness and agility, that it did not only contain, but
also represent the Soul: for we might well suppose, that where God did deposite
so rich a Jewel, he would sutably adorn the Case. It was a fit workhouse for
spritely, vivid faculties to exercise and exert themselves in. A fit tabernacle
for an immortal Soul, not only to dwell in, but to contemplate upon: where it
might see the World without travel; it being a lesser Scheme of the Creation,
Nature contracted, a little Cosmography or map of the Universe. Neither was the
body then subject to distempers, to die by piecemeal, and languish under
Coughs, Catarrhs, or Consumptions. Adam knew no disease, so long as temperance
from the forbidden fruit secured him. Nature was his Physician: and Innocence,
and Abstinence would have kept him healthful to immortality.

Now the Use of this point might be various, but at present it shall be only
this; To re-mind us of the irreparable loss that we sustained in our first
Parents, to show us of how fair a portion Adam disinherited his whole posterity
by one single prevarication. Take the picture of a man in the greenness and
vivacity of his youth, and in the latter date and declensions of his drooping
years, and you will scarce know it to belong to the same person: there would be
more art to discern, then at first to draw it. The same, and greater is the
difference between Man innocent and fallen. He is as it were a new kind or
species; the plague of sin has even altered his nature, and eat into his very
essentials. The Image of God is wiped out, the creatures have shook off his
yoke, renounced his Sovereignty, and revolted from his dominion. Distempers and
Diseases have shattered the excellent frame of his body; and by a new
dispensation, Immortality is swallowed up of Mortality. The same disaster, and
decay also has invaded his spirituals: the Passions rebel, every faculty would
usurp and rule; and there are so many governors, that there can be no
government. The light within us is become darkness; and the Understanding,
that should be eyes to the blind faculty of the Will, is blind it self, and so
brings all the inconveniences, that attend a blind follower under the conduct
of a blind guide. He that would have a clear, ocular demonstration of this, let
him reflect upon that numerous litter of strange, sense-lesse, absurd Opinions,
that crawle about the world, to the disgrace of Reason, and the unanswerable
reproach of a broken Intellect.

The two great perfections, that both adorn, and exercise man's understanding,
are Philosophy, and Religion: For the first of these; take it even amongst the
Professors of it, where it most flourished, and we shall sind the very first
notions of common sense debauched by them. For there have been such, as have
asserted, That there is no such thing in the world as Motion: That
Contradictions may be true. There has not been wanting one, that has denied
Snow to be white. Such a stupidity or wantonness had seized upon the most
raised Wits, that it might be doubted, whether the Philosophers, or the Owls,
of Athens were the quicker sighted. But then for Religion; What prodigious,
monstrous, misshapen births has the Reason of fallen man produced! It is now
almost six thousand years, that far the greatest part of the World has had no
other Religion but Idolatry. And Idolatry certainly is the firstborn of Folly,
the great and leading paradox, nay, the very abridgement and sum total of all
absurdities. For is it not strange, that a rational man should worship an Ox,
nay the image of an Ox? that he should fawn upon his Dog? bow himself before a
Cat? adore Leeks and Garlic, and shed penitential tears at the smell of a
deified Onyon? Yet so did the Egyptians, once the famed masters of all arts and
learning. And to go a little further; we have yet a stranger instance in Isa.
44. 14. A man hews him down a tree in the wood, and part of it he burns, in the
16. ver. and in the 17. ver. with the residue thereof he makes a God. With one
part he furnishes his Chimney, with the other his Chapel. A strange thing,
that the fire must first consume this part, and then burn Incense to that. As
if there was more Divinity in one end of the stick, then in the other; or, as
if it could be graved and painted omnipotent, or the nails and the hammer could
give it an Apotheosis. Briefly, so great is the change, so deplorable the
degradation of our nature, that whereas before we bore the Image of God, we now
retain only the Image of Men.

In the last place, we learn from hence the Excellency of Christian Religion,
in that it is the great and only means that God has sanctified and designed to
repair the breaches of Humanity, to set fallen man upon his legs again, to
clarify his Reason, to rectify his Will, and to compose and regulate his
affections. The whole business of our Redemption is in short only to rub over
the defaced copy of the Creation, to re-print Gods Image upon the Soul, and (as
it were) to set forth Nature in a second, and a fairer edition.

The recovery of which lost Image, as it is Gods pleasure to command, and our
duty to endeavor, so it is in his power only to effect.

To whom be rendered and ascribed, as is most due, all praise, might, majesty
and dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen. FINIS.

