To both the Houses of PARLIAMENT, the GENERAL, and the OFFICERS of the ARMY.
Westminster Palace Yard, the 15th. day of the 3d. Month, 1660.
THis day in our accustomed manner, in our own hired House we were peaceable
Assembled together in the fear of the Lord, to wait upon, and to Worship him in
the Spirit and Truth, to speak of the things of God one to another, as
frequently it is our manner: As those who at the present are entrusted with the
Supreme Authority are not unacquainted with. A little before the middle of this
day some rude people came into our Meeting, and one John Dover amongst them in
a great rage, and swore (by God) that he would have us out, and offered to draw
his Sword; and by him the hands of the rude multitude were exceedingly
strengthened, and their spirits highly exasperated against us; and he the said
Dover did very much abuse and beat the man of the House where the Meeting was,
knocked him down, and Swore he would run him through, and pulled him (with other
Friends) out of his dwelling House amongst the rude multitude.

And afterward those of us that staid in the House, were assaulted by one
Sergeant Warn of Capt. Youngs Company in Coll. Reeds Reg. with a party of
Musketteers, who knocked us down, drew our blood, and exceedingly abused us in a
savage-like manner, crying to us, turn out, turn out; the Soldiers presenting
their Muskets, threatening to fire at us without respect either to Old Age or
Young, or Women with Child, but struck most violently with the great end of
their Muskets; some of our Friends being much bruised, maimed, and their blood
drawn in this Tumult, which was first occasioned by John Dover, and afterward
persued and more fully acted by the Sergeant and Soldiers he brought with him,
who by violence thrust as out of our House into the Street among the rude
multitude: We say and are ready to ^rove that this Tumult was not at all
occasioned on our parts, we being peaceably Assembled (the Lord knows) for no
other end then as before mentioned; and when we desired of the Tumulters to
know their Order for pulling us violently forth, and dissolving our Meeting in
that cruel bloody manner, both Dover and the Sergeant Answered, they had an
Order, Dover saying, his Sword was his Order; and when they had within doors
exercised their cruelty upon us, they drove us forth of our House, the rude
multitude watched for us as for a Prey, who did in the Palace Yard forthwith
exercise their violence upon us with unusual cruelty, insomuch that very few or
none of us that were in the Meeting, escaped their hands without much harm done
to our Persons.

And after they (to wit) Dover, the Sergeant and their Accomplices had wholly
pulled us out, and exposed us to the cruelty of the rude multitude, which we
can truly say is far beyond present expression or utterance, the Soldiers and
multitude came again into the man's House, (who has lived in the same Parish 25
years) and broke open the inner doors, beating the man of the House, his wife
and his servants who had much ado to save their lives.

The same Sergeant (who led this party of Soldiers) the last week in the
Palace Yard hearing the people cry a Quaker, a Quaker, did beat a Friend in a
most violent manner, for no other cause but because the people called him a
Quaker.

Likewise this day several Women big with Child being in the Meeting, were by
these Soldiers, and the rest of the Tumulters abused in such a manner, not
convenient to be named.

These things being by proof made known unto you, let Justice and Equity be
manifested from you upon the evildoers according to the many Promises made for
the Liberty of the Subjects, by this Present Parliament; And also having the
word of a King, that no man shall be Disquieted or called in Question for
difference of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of
the Nation, With your own Declaration, that you will take due care of render
Consciences.

Witnesses hereof, Thomas Salthouse Rich. Hubberthorn Edw. Billinge Ellis
Hooks Tho. Fox. Manasses Kesketer Tho. Rawson Sam. Fisher Rich. Hill John
Dixon Stephen Heart Henry Bedford.



