A SPEECH MADE By a True Protestant English Gentleman, To encourage the CITY of
LONDON To Petition for the Sitting of the Parliament.
GENTLEMEN,
I SHALL not (I hope I need not) use many Arguments to persuade you to look
about you, the Popish Clouds are gathered, and must and will fall: Matters of
Fact and Important Truths need no Artificial Dress to re-commend them, but (to
my unspeakable Grief I speak it) we live in a sordid, degenerate Age; wherein
Truth is under the highest Discouragement, and forced into Corners, the secret
Places where possibly a few own it; yet I cannot but hope at last it will work
its own way, and will overcome and surmount all malicious Arts and
Discouragements. However Gentlemen, I am not a little comforted, to see Men are
more and more awake out of their Lethargy; I hope I speak to true Protestant
English Spirits, my way is plainness, and I do study it, because I know
Englishmen love plain, sincere Dealing. I shall not enlarge (though I could to
a Volume) but will only, as in a Mirror or Glass, represent that you are
determined by Popish Designs and Measures) to Bondage (worse than Egyptian) and
that of a long Duration. I set before you the Death or Life of the Protestant
Religion, our Lives and Liberties; let your Zeal direct your Choice: the Stock
is great, we must work while it is day, least the Night of Popery come (its
already darkish) then it will be too late, except we see by Smithfield Lights.
The True Worship of God is God's Honor, and the greatest Blessing on this side
Heaven. It ought to be weighed how far the very Notional Honor of the World
leads Men to a Vindication of the honor of a Friend or Relation, it puts Life
and Estate to hazard; then how infinitely more ought we, upon a much more truly
Noble Account? It is a Title and Character, infinitely above the highest Titles
the World can confer, to be called and styled, The Friend of God; which none
deserves, nor can ever arrive at, but such as vindicate and assert with their
Blood the True Worship, which is God's Glory and Honor and our great Dignity
and Privilege, to be called to so Noble at Work and Service, which has its
Reward in it self and Crowns (that never fade) for the Conquerours Life,
Liberty, and Estate, are only desirable, as they are Inablements, and as it
were Habilliments for this Glorious Warfare and but as Dust in the Balance,
though great Temporal Means and Blessings thankfully to be valued and prized.
Gentlemen, All those are now in manifest hazard, yet only (under God) a
Parliament can secure them to us: May we not fear, Gentlemen, that there are
some about the King, who from the horror of their Actions are afraid the
Parliament should sit; and labor to possess the K. with an ill Opinion of this
People; but when the K. sees the humble Desires of his People in their
Petitions, no doubt he will alter his Resolutions, and let the Parliament meet
in January. Let us do our Endeavors, and leave the Success to Divine Blessing;
therefore proceed without any dismay: you walk within the Laws, and its your
Birthright and Privilege, and the Kings Honor, to receive the Supplications
of his People. The King of Kings delights that we should come and draw nigh to
him in times of difficulty and danger, and more especially encourages us to do
it. And as it is our Duty and Privilege, so it is, if not the Kings Duty, his
Dignity, to hear, redress, and heal the Sores and Wounds of his People. I have
found sweet Meditations in the Little Book of Martyrs (the Eleventh Chapter to
the Hebrews) of whom the World was not worthy, who despised the shame,
preferred the reproaches of the present World before their Laurels, Triumphs,
and Preferments; having a Prospect of the Recompense of the Reward. I do
earnestly recommend the frequent Reading of that Chapter, the more I read it,
the more novelty I find in it; and it both kindled and bred in me such a
Contempt of the World, that I could cheerfully sacrifice my all (a poor all)
it is only what God gave or rather lent; and it were the highest and blackest
ingratitude, not to leave it at his Feet for his Glory and Honor, and the True
Protestant Religion. I hope, by Gods Blessing, it may have the same effect and
operation in you; it will be a Viaticum and Cordial in the Holy War, which is
like to be not only here, but in Christendom: for Popery or Protestantisme must
fall. Gentlemen, I have no more to add, I speak my mind freely to you, I
advise you to do what I intend to do my self, whatever come of it. I know on
whose side the Jails are, I may be committed; but I have the satisfaction that
I have the Law as a Staff in my Hand to walk by. I am above the fear of Death,
much more of a Jail; I hope all you are too; and therefore I will subscribe: My
Courage allows me to own the Protestant Religion.

FINIS.

