THE SPEECH OF A Reverend Bishop OF THE CHURCH Of ENGLAND.

IN DEFENSE OF THEMSELVES AND THE GOVERNMENT.

Against the Malicious LIBELS of these TIMES.

Printed in the Year, 1679.

MY LORDS,
I Shall not need to speak of the Infamous Course of Libelling in any kind. Nor
of the Punishment of it, which in some cases was Capital by the Imperial Laws.

Nor how patiently some great Men, very great Men indeed, have bourn the
tearing and rending of their Credit and Reputation, with a gentle, nay, a
generous mind.

But of all Libels, they are most odious which pretend Religion: as if that of
all things did desire to be defended by a Mouth that is like an open Sepulcher,
or by a Pen that is made of a sick and a loathsome Quill.

There were times when Persecutions were great in the Church, even to exceed
Barbarity it self: did any Martyr or Confessor, in those times, Libel the
Governors? Surely no; not one of them to my best Remembrance: Yet these
complain without cause; and in the mean time Libel and rayl without all
measure. So little of kin are they to those which suffer for Christ, or the
least part of Christian Religion.

My Lords, It is not every man's spirit to hold up against the Venom which
Libellers spit. For S. Ambrose, who was a stout and a worthy Prelate, tells us,
not that himself, but that a far greater Man than he, that is K. David, had
found out (so it seems in his judgment 'twas no matter of ordinary ability)
Grande inventum, a great and mighty invention, how to swallow and put off those
bitter contumelies of the Tongue: and those of the Pen are no whit less, and
spread farther: And it was a great one indeed, and well beseemed the greatness
of David. But I think it will be far better for me to look upward, and practice
it, than to look downward, and discourse upon it.

In the mean time I shall remember what an Ancient under the name of S. Hierom
tells me, Indignum est and praeposterum, It Is unworthy in it self, and
preposterous in demeanor for a man to be ashamed for doing good, because other
men glory in speaking Ill.

And I can say it clearly and truly, as in the presence of God, I have done
nothing, as a Prelate, to the uttermost of what I am conscious, but with a
single heart, and with a sincere intention for the good Government and Honor
of the Church, and the maintenance of the Orthodox Truth and Religion of Christ
professed, established, and maintained in this Church of England.

For our care of this Church, the upholding of the External Worship of God in
it and the settling of it to the Rules of its first Reformation, are the causes
(and the sole causes, what ever are pretended) of all their malice against us.

For it is most apparent to any man that will not wink, that the Intention of
these men, and their Abettors, is to raise Sedition, being as great
Incendiaries in the State (where they get power) as they have ever been in the
Church; Novation himself hardly greater.

Our main Crime is (would they all speak out, as some of them do) that we are
Bishops: were we not so, some of us might be as passable as other men.

And a great trouble it is to them, that we maintain that our Calling of Bishops
is Jure Divino, by Divine Right: This I will say, and abide by it, that the
Calling of Bishops is Jure Divino, by Divine Right, though not all Adjuncts to
their calling. And this I say in as direct opposition to the Church of Rome, as
to the Phanatick humor.

And I say farther, that from the Apostles times, in all ages, in all places,
the Church of Christ was Governed by Bishops: And Lay Elders never heard of,
till Calvin's new-sangled device at Genova.

Now this is made by these men, as if it were Contra Regem, against the King,
in right or in power.

But that is a mere ignorant shift; for our being Bishops, Jure Divino, by
Divine Right, takes nothing from the Kings Right or power over us. For though
our Office be from God and Christ immediately, yet may we not exercise that
power, either of Order or Jurisdiction, but as God has appointed us, that is,
not in his Majesty's, or any Christian Kings Kingdo^^, but by and under the
power of the King given us so to do.

And were this a good Argument against us, as Bishops, it must needs be good
against Priests and Ministers too; for themselves grant that their Calling is
Jure Divino, by Divine Right; and yet I hope they will not say, that to be
Priests and Ministers is against the King, or any His Royal Prerogatives.

Next, suppose our Callings, as Bishops, could not be made good Jure Divino, by
Divine Right; yet Jure Ecclesiastico* by Ecclesiastical Right it cannot be
denied. And here in England the Bishops are confirmed, both in their power and
means, by Act of Parliament. So that here we stand in as good case, as the
present Laws of the Realm can make us. And so we must stand, till the Laws
shall be repealed by the same, power that made them.

Now then, suppose we had no other string to hol^ by (I say suppose this, but I
grant it not) yet no man can Lib^l against our Calling (as these men do) be it
in Pulpit, Print, or otherwise, but he Libels against the King and the State,
by whose Laws we are established. Therefore, all these Libels, so far forth as
they are against our Calling, are against the King and the Law, and can have no
other purpose, than to stir up Sedition among the people.

If these men have any other intention, or if they have any Christian or
charitable desire, to reform any thing amiss; why do they not modestly Petition
His Majesty about it, that in his Princely Wisdom he might set all things
right, in a Just and Orderly manner? But this is neither their Intention, nor
way. For one clamours out of his Pulpit, and all of them from the Press, and in
a most virulent and unchristian manner set themselves to make a heat among the
people; and so by Mutiny, to effect that, which by Law they cannot: And, by
most false and unjust Calumnies to defame both our Callings and Persons. Put
for my part, as I pity their rage, so I heartily pray God to forgive their
malice.

No Nation has ever appeared more jealous of Religion, then the people of
England have ever been. And their zeal to Gods glory has been, and at this day
is a great honor to them. But this Zeal of theirs, has not been at all times
and in all persons, alike guided by Knowledge. Now Zeal, as it is of excellent
use, where it sees it is way: so is it very dangerous company, where it goes on
in the dark: And these Men, knowing the Disposition of the people, do labor
all they can to mis-inform their knowledge, and misguide their Zeal, and so to
fire that into a Sedition, in hope that they, whom they causlesly hate, might
miscatry in it.

For the main scope of these Libels is, to kindle a Jealousy in men's minds,
that there are some great Plots in hand, to change the Orth^dox Religion
established in England, and to bring in, J know not what, Romish Superstition
in the Room of it. As if the external decent worship of God could not be upheld
in this Kingdom, without bringing in of Popery.

Now by this Art of theirs, give me leave to tell you, that the King is most
desperately abused and wounded in the minds of his people. For there is not a
more cunning trick in the World, to withdraw the peoples hearts from their
Sovereign, than to persuade them that he is changing true Religion, and about
to bring in gross Superstition upon them.

For his Majesty. This I know, and upon this occasion take it my duty to speak:
There is no Prince in Christendom more sincere, both in the Truth of the
Religion here established, and in Resolution to maintain it.

And for the Prelates. I assure my self, they cannot be so base, as to live
Prelates in the Church of England, and labor to bring in the Superstitions of
the Church of Rome, upon themselves and it. And if any should be so foul, I do
not only leave him to Gods Judgment, but if these Libellers, or any other,
can discover that his base and irreligious falsehood) to shame also, and severe
punishment from the State: And in any just way, no man's hand shall be more, or
sconer against him, than mine shall be.

For as basely as these men conceive of us, yet I thank God, we know our duty
well both to God and the King: And I know that all the duty we owe to the King,
is under God: And our great happiness is, that we live under a Gracious and a
Religious King, that will ever give us leave to serve God first, and Him next.

I shall end all with a passage out of S. Cyprian, when he, then Bishop of
Carthage, was bitterly rayled upon by a pack of Schismatics, his answer was,
and it is now mine; They have rayled both bitterly and falsely upon me, and yet
Non oportet me paria cum illis facere: it becomes not me to answer them with
the like, either Levities or Revilings, but to Speak and Write that only which
becomes Sacerdotem Dei, a Priest of GOD.

FINIS.

