A SPEECH MADE BY A Member of the Convention of the States IN SCOTLAND.
WE are now called together by his Highness the Prince of Orange, to Consult
and Deliberate, what Methods will be most proper to secure Our Religion, Laws
and Liberties, in order to which, the first thing that will fall under our
Consideration, is the settling the Sovereign Power.

I take for granted, that you are fully convinced, that King James the 7th, by
his many Violations of the Fundamental Laws, by his endeavoring to establish a
Despotick and Arbitrary Power, and introduce Popery, (tho he himself had
confirmed all the Laws that were enacted in Favor of the Protestant Religion,)
has thereby subverted the Constitution, and (that our Miseries might have no
Redress from him) has left us in a time, when we needed his Protection most.
The Eyes of all Europe are upon us, and it is in our Power to make our Selves,
and our Posterity, either Happy or Miserable, by making a choice either to call
back the same King James, and hazard once more all that Men account Dear, to
his Mercy; or to settle the Government on some other, under whom we may live
Quiet and Peaceable Lives, without the perpetual Terror of being swallowed up
by Popery and Arbitrary Government, which all good Men hoped were now banished,
and yet behold a new Offspring is sprung up, which plead eagerly for both, tho
under the mistaken Names of Duty and Allegiance: It Is strange that any Man can
so far Degenerate, as to prefer Slavery to Liberty, and that they should be so
much in Love with Chains, that when they were fairly shaken off, they should
run furiously to be Fettered again; as if the Ottoman and French Government
were so charming in our Country, that we cannot live without it, tho we have so
lately groaned under the dismal Burden of it: And it might have been supposed
that even these, who had been Instrumental in Enslaving their Fellow Brethren,
and were grown Fat with Sucking the Nations Blood, would have taken another
Method to Reconcile themselves, than by persuading us to purchase their Safety,
at so vast an Expense as the Ruin of more than three Parts of the Nation will
necessarily amount to.

If we do but a little Reflect on the Motives which these Men (blinded by
Self-interest) make use of, to Delude the Nation into a Security that wanted
very little of proving Fatal to it, and compare them with the strong Reasons,
we have to dissuade us from being so imposed on, they will be found so Weak and
Impertinent, that we must Judge it next to Impossibility, to suffer our selves
to be twice Deceived. But if the Experience of our former Miseries, so lately
hanging over our heads, (the very thoughts of renewing which, make all good Men
to tremble) has not made us Wiser, and be not of Efficacy enough, to deter us
from venturing another Shipwreck, and exposing all again to the Discretion of
Roman Catholics: It Is more than probable that GOD has abandoned us, and given
us up to believe strong Delusions.

First, They will endeavor to persuade us, that Kings are Eximed from
Punishments here on Earth, and nothing they do, can be Quarrelled by their
Subjects, which indeed might with some Reason be urged among the Turks, who
reserve nothing from the Power of their Sultans, and where it is Death to
Dispute his Commands, tho never so Arbitrary and Tyrrannical: But with what
Impudence can such Stuff be imposed on us, who never admit our Kings to the
Government, till they Swear to Rule us according to Law, and no other ways? The
Laws are the only Security we have for our Lives and Properties, which if our
Sovereign subvert, Subjects cannot be blamed, for making use of the ordinary
means to preserve them, and since that cannot be done without withdrawing
Obedience from such a Magistrate as goes about to destroy them, such an Act
cannot properly be said to punish him, (because we take nothing from him to
which he has a just Claim, but do only shun the occasion of making our selves
miserable. The Speculative Doctrine of Passive Obedience, has done too much
mischief among us, and what has befallen the King may be justy imputed to it,
for the believing that without Opposition he might do what he pleased,
encouraged him to take such measures as have drawn all these misfortunes on him.

Secondly, Others are so Fond as to believe, that we may be Secure in calling
the King back, provided they so Limit him, that it will not be in his power to
hurt us. These men do not consider, how small a Complement this is to a man of
the Kings Temper, from an Absolute Prince, as he was pleased to fancy himself,
to content himself with the bare Title of a King; and how insupportable the
Change must be, if from being Master of all, he must force himself to comply
with a thousand Masters, and see his Throne become his Prison. But how airy is
it to fancy, that any Restrictions of our Contrivance can bind the King? For
1st, It Is most certain they can never be Voluntary, and what is constrained and
done by Force, is by Law declared to be Void and Null; to whose Assistance the
Popes Dispensing Power being joined, would quickly blow off these Sampson
Cords, and the Royal Power would again revive with all its Vigor and Luster.

Thirdly, The King is of a Religion that has in a famous Council decreed, That
no Faith is to be kept with H reticks, much less with Subjects whom he looks
upon as so many Rebels, and will not miss to treat them as such, whenever they
give him the Opportunity of doing it; for his greatest Admirers do not run to
that height of Idolatry, to imagine him so much Angel, as not to take all
methods to revenge so great an Affront, and secure himself at our Cost from
such a Treatment for the future; the apprehensions of which resentment will
strike such terror in men's minds, that nothing will be capable to divert them
from offering up All for an Atonement, and Popery and Slavery will be thought a
good Bargain, if they can but save their Lives. Then we may lament our
Miseries, but it will not be in our power to help them; for a Prince of Orange
is not always ready to rescue us, with such vast Expense and so great hazard to
his Person; and if our Madness hurry us so far, we deserve rather his pity than
his resentment.

Fourthly, What Arguments has the King given since he left us, to persuade us
he will be more faithful in observing his Words and Oaths, than hitherto he has
been? Does he not in a Letter lately printed here, expressly say he has ruled
so, as to give no occasion of complaint to any of his Subjects? Is not the same
Letter signed by one who sacrificed both Conscience and Honor to Interest,
whose pernicious and headstrong Counsels has posted him to his Ruin, though all
that has been done cannot make Him sensible of it? Sure the reducing Heretics
to the Sea of Rome is not less Meritorious than before, nor King James the
Seventh, by breathing the French Air, become less Bigot: It were a Dream to
fancy it. For so long as the Vatican thunders Excommunications against all such
as do not use their utmost endeavors to extirpate Heresy, a Roman Catholic
must have no Religion at all, if they be not terrible to him.

The fourth Argument they made use of to persuade such as are and shall be
chosen Members of the Convention, That it is their Interest to call back the
King, is, That the Peace and Happiness of the Nation cannot be otherwise
secured, nor Factions or Divisions extinguished. But what Factions do you
observe, but such as they themselves do foment, on purpose to disturb our
Harmony? all which would immediately die, if the Government were once settled on
those who deserved it best: for then, if these Fops continued still fond of
Popery and Tyranny, they would be chastised, as Disturbers of the Public
Peace. The Argument may very justly be retorted; for if the King return, we
will burst out into a flame; and England, which has already declared, will
quickly be on our Top, an Enemy too Potent and too Numerous for us, though we
were all united; besides the Danger to which such a Procedure will expose us,
we cut off all hopes of an Union with that Nation, and thereby deprive our
selves of an unspeakable Advantage, which would redound to all sorts of People,
and would be the only means to support an impoverished and sinking Nation.
Neither is this the only Inconveniency, though it be a very Great One; for if we
state our selves in opposition to England, by Restoring the King whom they
Rejected, it is not to be doubted but he will use his utmost endeavor to
recover that Kingdom, the loss of which is so considerable. Now, seeing it were
vain to suppose that the Scots alone were able to second his desires, he must
needs have recourse to the French and Irish, whose Religion will procure a more
entire Confidence than His Majesty can repose in any others. These therefore
must be received into our Bosom; and because Scotland is the most proper place
for Invading England, it must be the Scence of all the Blood and Confusion that
this melancholy thought gives us a Prospect of. And what treatment can such
Sham-Protestants expect from these, who otherwise would have become their
Friends and Allies? And what Figure will they pretend to make, when they set up
for a separate Interest from all the Confederate Protestants in the World
besides?

The happy Success the PRINCE His Enterprise has met with, has made a
considerable Alteration in the Affairs of Europe; for that great Enemy of the
Protestants, and even of Christianity it self, who had proposed nothing less to
himself than an Universal Monarchy, whom the Strictest Leagues and Contracts
cannot bind, but without regard to GOD or Man, threatens all his Neighbors
with utter Destruction; by the Scene's being changed among us, is so far
humbled, that from a Proud and Insulting Enemy, he is become a Supplicant for
Peace; well foreseeing that if Britain join with those other Princes, whom his
Insolence, Cruelty, and Avarice, has so justly Armed against him, his Ruin is
Inevitable (...) that if we have not Soul enough to enjoy this great Blessing,
and can easily part with the Glory of being once more the Arbiters of Europe,
let us at least have have so much Christian Love and Charity for the
Neighboring Nations of our own Persuasion, as not to expose them to a
necessary Participation of these Plagues, which our Common Enemies are
preparing for us, and which will certainly Terminate in all our Destructions.

Lastly, I beseech you to consider what Persons they are who would Instill this
Poison in you, and you will find them of three kinds. First, those who
Postponing the Common Good of the Nation are wholly acted by Self-Interest,
considering that in a Government where Justice and Mercy equally Flourish,
Virtue and Merit, not Villainy, will be rewarded. Secondly, They who are
ignorant of the Nature of Government and were never at the pains to inform
themselves what Measures the Law of Nature and Nations have set to men's
Obedience, but are angry at every thing that thwarts their wild Notions, and
will admit of nothing, tho never so reasonable and convincing, if their dull
Capacities cannot reach it. The third sort are such as have been instrumental
in the enslaving their Country, and are afraid if they be called to an Account,
they may be brought to suffer Condign Punishment; if such cannot succeed in
their Design, they at least hope to be overlookt in a General Confusion, so
they have nothing unessayed that may tend to their own safety; and if Heaven
fail them, they summon Hell to their Aid; not that Love to their Prince, but
mere Ambition and Interest, drives these Criminals to such Attempts, neither
are they much to blame, if they are at such pains to sow Divisions among us;
But no Person of Wit and Judgment, nor any Good Man that is truly Protestant,
and minds the good of his Country, will suffer himself to be so grossly imposed
on by such Firebrands, who would build their Future Imaginary Greatness on the
Ruin of Our Religion, Laws, and Country.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
MDCLXXXIX.


