A RATIONALE upon the BOOK OF Common Prayer of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

By Anth. Sparrow, D. D. Now Lord Bishop of Exon.

WITH The Form of Consecration of a Church or Chapel, and of the place of
Christian Burial.

By Lancelot Andrews Late Lord Bishop of Winchester.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet, at the Sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane,
near Fleet Street, 1672.



The Litany to be said in the midst of the Church, in allusion to the Prophet
Joel, c. 2. 17. Let the Priest, the Ministers of the LORD, weep between the
Porch and the Altar, and let them say, spare thy people, O Lord, etc. Bishop
ANDREWS Notes upon the Liturgy. A RATIONALE upon the BOOK or Common Prayer of
the CHVRCH of ENGLAND By Anth: Sparrow Now Lord Bp. of Exon

Printed for R Pawlet at ye Bible in Chancery Lane

With Entertainments for the Great, FESTIVALLS, being (...) of the Proper
PSALMS and Lessons for those DAYS.



The Compilers of The Common Prayer Book of the Church of England were
Doctor
CRANMER, Archbishop of Cant. GOODRICK, Bishop of Ely. SKIP, Bishop of
Heref^rd. THIRLBY, Bishop of Westminst. DAY, Bishop of Chichester. HOLBECK,
Bishop of Lincoln. RIDLEY, Bishop of Rochester. MAY, Dean of S. Paul's. TAILOR,
Dean of Lincoln. HEYNES, Dean of Exeter. REDMAN, Dean of Westminster. COX, K.
EDWARDS Alm^ner. M. ROBINSON, Archdeacon of Leicester.
Mense Maio 1549.

Anno regni Edwardi Sexti tertio.

Hardly can the pride of those men that study Novelties, allow former times any
share or degree of Wisdom or Godliness, K. CHARLES Meditat. 16. upon the
Ordinance against the Book of Common Prayer.
THE PREFACE.
THE present Age pretends so great Love to Reason, that, this RATIONALE may
even for its Name, hope for acceptance, which it will the sooner have, if the
Reader know, that the Author vents it not for a full and just, much less a
public and authentic Piece, but as his own private Essay (wholly submitted to
the censure of our Holy Mother The Church, and the Reverend Fathers of the
same, and) composed on purpose to keep some from moving that way, which, it is
feared, some will say, it leads to. The Authors design was not, by Rhetoric
first to Court the Affections, and then by their help, to carry the
understanding. But quite contrary, by Reason to work upon the Judgment, and
leave that to deal with the affections.

The Poor Liturgy suffers from two extremes, one sort says, it is old
superstitious Roman Dotage. The other, it is Schismatically New. This Book
endeavors to show particularly, what Bishop JEWEL (Apol. p. 117.) says in
general, 1. That it is agreeable to PRIMITIVE USAGE, and so, not Novel. 2. THAT
IT IS A REASONABLE SERVICE, and so, not Superstitious. As for those that love
it, and suffer for the love of it, this will show them Reasons, why they should
suffer on, and love it still more^ and more. To end, if the Reader will cast
his Eye upon the sad Confusions in point of prayer, (wherein are such
contradictions made as God Almighty cannot grant) and lay them as Rubbish under
these Fundamental Considerations; First, How many Set Forms (of Petition,
Blessing, and Praise) be recorded in the Old and New^Testament, used both in
the Church Militant and Triumphant; Secondly, How much of the Liturgy is very
Scripture; Thirdly, How admirable a Thing Unity, Unity in Time, Form, etc. is;
Fourthly, How many Millions of poor souls are in the world; ignorant, infirm by
nature, age, accidents, (as blindness, deafness, loss of speech, etc.) which
respectively may receive help by Set Forms, but cannot so well (or not at all)
by extemporary voluntary effusions, and then upon all these will build what he
reads in this Book; he will, if not be convinced to join in Communion with, yet
perhaps be so sweetened, as more readily to pardon those, who still abiding in
their former judgments, and being more confirmed hereby, do use THE ANCIENT
FORM.

ECCLESIAE and LITURGIAE Anglicanae VINDICES, etc.

A Short RATIONALE upon the Book of Common Prayer.
THe COMMON PRAYER BOOK contains in it many holy Offices of the Church: As
Prayers, Confession of Faith, holy Hymns, Divine Lessons, Priestly Absolutions
and Benedictions: all which are Set and Prescribed, not left to private men's
fancies to make or alter; so was it of old ordained CON. CARTHAG. Can. 106. It
is ordained that the Prayers, Prefaces, Impositions of hands which are
confirmed by the Synod, be observed and used by all men. These and no other. So
is our English Can. 13. The COUNCIL of MILEVIS gives the reason of this
Constitution, Can. 12: [Lest through ignorance or carelessness, any thing
contrary to the Faith should be vented or uttered before God, or offered up to
him in the Church.]

And as these Offices are set and prescribed, so are they moreover appointed to
be one and the same throughout the whole National Church. So was it of old
ordained, CON. TOLETAN. 11. c. 3. [That all Governors of Churches and their
people should observe one and the same rite and order of service, which they
knew to be appointed in the Metropolitan See.] The same is ordered CON.
BRACCAR. 1. Can. 19. and Tolet. 4. c. 2. It is appointed that one and the same
order of praying and singing, be observed by us all, and that there should not
be variety of usages by them that are bound to the same Faith, and live in the
same Dominion. This for Conformities sake, that according to divine Canon Romans
15. 6. We may with one mind and one mouth glorify God.

Of Daily saying of MORNING and EVENING PRAYER.
ALL Priests shall be bound to say Daily the Morning and Evening Prayer. The
end of the Preface before the Service, Rubr. 2. So was it of old ordered in the
Church of Christ, Saint CHRYSOSTOM. 6. hom. in 2. cap. 1. ep. ad Tim. and Clem.
Constable. l. 2. c. 39. And this is agreeable to Gods own Law. Exo. 29. 38. Thou
shall offer upon the Altar Two Lambs of the first year, day by day continually;
the one Lamb in the Morning, the other at Evening. Besides the daily private
devotions of every pious Soul, and the more solemn Sacrifices upon the three
great Feasts of the year; Almighty God requires a daily public worship, a
continual burnt offering, every day, Morning and Evening, teaching us by this,
says Saint CHRYSOSTOM. That God must be worshipped daily when the day begins and
when it ends, and every day must be a kind of holy day. Thus it was commanded
under the Law; and certainly we Christians are as much at least, obliged to
God, as the Jews were, our grace is greater, our promises clearer, and
therefore, our righteousness should every way exceed theirs, our Homage to
Almighty God, should be paid as frequently at least. Morning and Evening to be
sure, God expects from us as well as from the Jews, a public worship, a sweet
savor, or savor of rest, as it is in the Hebrew, Number. 28. 6. without which
God Almighty will not rest satisfied.

This public Service and worship under the Law was appointed by God himself
both for matter and manner of performance. Exodus 29. 38. but under the Gospel
our Lord has appointed only materials and essentials of his public worship:
In general, Prayers, Thanksgivings, Confessions, Lauds, Hymns, and
Eucharistical Sacrifices are commanded to be offered up in the name of Christ,
in the virtue and merits of that immaculate Lamb, whereof the other was but a
type, and for whose sake alone, that was accepted, but for the manner and order
of his public worship, for the method of offering up Prayers or praises and
the like; our Lord has not so particularly determined now, but has left that
to be ordered and appointed, by those, to whom he said at his departure out of
this world. As my Father sent me, so send I you, S. John 20. 21. To govern the
Church in his absence, viz. The Apostles and their Successors in the
Apostolic, Commission. And therefore Acts 2. 42. The public prayers of the
Church are called the Apostles Prayers. The Disciples are commended there for
Continuing in the Apostles Doctrine, fellowship, breaking of bread, and
Prayers. And therefore S: Paul writes to Timothy the Bishop and Governor of
the Church of Ephesus, to take care that Prayers and Supplications be made for
all men, especially for Kings, etc. And 1 Cor. 11. 34. Concerning the manner of
celebrating the holy Eucharist, St. Paul gives some directions, and adds, The
rest will I set in order when I come. And 1 Cor. 14. 40. Let all things, i. e.
( all your public services, (for of those he treats in the Chapter at large)
be done dece^tly, and (...), according to Ecclesiastical Law and Canon.

The Service and worship of God thus prescribed, according to our Lords general
rules, by those to whom he has left a Commission and power to order and govern
his Church, is the right public Service and worship of God, commanded by
himself in his Law; for though God has not immediately and particularly
appointed this public worship, yet he has in general commanded a public
worship in the second Commandment. For where it is said, Thou shall not bow
down to them, nor worship them, by the rule of contraries, we are Commanded to
bow down to God and Worship Him. A public worship then God must have^ by his
own Command; and the Governors of the Church, have prescribed this form of
worship, for that public service and worship of God in this Church, which
being so prescribed, becomes Gods service and worship by his own Law, as well
as the Lamb was his sacrifice, Exodus 29.

For the clearer understanding of this, we must know, that some Laws of Gods,
do suppose some humane act to pass and intervene, before they actually bind:
which act of man being once passed, they bind immediately. For example, Thou
shall not steal, is Gods Law, which Law cannot bind actually, till men be
possessed of some goods and property; which property is not usually determined by
God himself immediately, but by the Laws of him, to whom he has given
Authority to determine it. God has given the earth to the children of men, as
he gave Canaan to the Israelites in general; but men cannot say this is mine,
till hu^ane Laws or acts determine the property, as the Israelites could not
claim a property on this or that side Jordan, till Moses had assigned them
their several portions: But when their portions were so assigned, they might
say, this is mine, by Gods, as well as man's Law; and he that took away their
right, sinned not only against man's, but God, Law too, that says, Thou shall
not steal. In like manner; God has in general commanded a public worship and
service, but has not, under the Gospel, assigned the particular form and
method; That he has left to his Ministers and Delegates, the Governors of the
Church to determine agreeable to his general rules; which being so determin'd^
is Gods service and worship not only by humane, but even by divine Law also:
and all other public services whatsoever, made by private men, to whom God
has given no such Commission are strange worship, Lev. 10. 1. Because not
Commanded; for example, As under the Law, when God had appointed a Lamb for a
burnt-offering, Exodus 29. that alone was the right daily worship, The savor of
rest, because Commanded, and all other sacrifices whatsoever, offered up in the
place of that, though of far more value and price than a Lamb, suppose 20.
Oxen, would have been strange Sacrifice; so now, the public worship of God
prescribed as we have said, by Those to whom he has given Commission, is the
only true and right public worship, and all other forms and methods offered up
in stead of that, though never so exactly drawn, are strange worship, because
not Commanded. It is not the elegancy of the phrase, nor the fineness of the
Composition that makes it acceptable to God, as his worship and service, but
obedience is the thing accepted. Behold to obey is better than sacrifice, or
any fat of Rams, 1 Samuel 15. 22.

This holy service offered up to God by the Priest, in the name of the Church,
is far more acceptable to Almighty God, then the devotious of any private man.

For, First, it is the service of the whole Church, to which, every man that
holds Communion with that Church, has consented to and said Amen, and agreed,
that it should be offered up to God by the Priest in the name of the Church,
and, if what any two of you shall agree to ask upon earth, it shall be granted,
S. Matt. 18. 19. How much more, what is asked of God or offered up to God by
the common vote and joint desire of the whole body of the Church?

Besides, this public service and worship of God is Commanded by God, (i. e.
by those whom he has empowered to command and appoint it) to be offered up to
him in the behalf of the Church, and therefore must needs be most acceptable to
him, which is so appointed by him: For, what he Commands he accepts most
certainly. Private devotions and services of particular men which are offered
by themselves, for themselves, are sometimes accepted, sometimes refused by
God, according as the persons are affected to vice or virtue; but this public
worship is like that Lamb, Exodus 29. commanded to be offered by the Priest for
others, for the Church, and therefore accepted, whatsoever the Priest be that
offers it up. And therefore, King David prays, Psalm. 141. 2. Let the lifting
up of my hands be an evening Sacrifice, i. e. as surely accepted as that
Evening Sacrifice of the Lamb, which no indevotion or sin of the Priest could
hinder, but that it was most certainly accepted for the Church, because
commanded to be offered for the Church, S. Chrysostom. Hom. in Psalm. 140.

This public service is accepted of God, not only for those that are present
and say Amen to it, but for all those that are absent upon just cause, even for
all that do not renounce Communion with it and the Church, for it is the Common
service of them all, Commanded to be offered up in the names of them all, and
agreed to by all of them to be offered up for them all, and therefore is
accepted for all them, though presented to God by the Priest alone (as the Lamb
offered up to God, by the Priest, Ex. 29. was the sacrifice of the whole
Congregation of the children of Israel,) a sweet smelling savor, a savor of
rest, to pacify God Almighty daily, and to continue his favor to them, and
make him dwell with them, Exodus 29. 42, 45.

Good reason therefore it is, that this sweet smelling savor should be daily
offered up to God Morning and Evening, whereby God may be pacified and invited
to dwell amongst his people. And whatsoever the world think; thus to be the
Lords Remembrancers putting him in mind of the peoples wants. Esaias 62. Being as
it were the Angels of the Lord, interceding for the people, and carrying up the
daily prayers of the Church in their behalf, is one of the most useful and
principal parts of the Priests office. So S. Paul tells us, who in the 1 Ep.
Tim. chap. 2. Exhorts Bishop Timothy, that he should take care, First of all,
that this holy service be offered up to God. I exhort first of all, that
prayers, and supplications, intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all
men. For KINGS, etc. What is the meaning of this first of all? I will that this
holy service be offered up daily, and the faithful know, how we observe this
rule of S. paul, offering up daily this holy sacrifice Morning and Evening. S.
Chrysostom. upon the place. S. Paul in the first Chapter of this Epistle at the 18.
verse, had charged his son Timothy to war a good warfare, to hold faith and a
good conscience, and presently adds, I exhort therefore, that first of all
prayers etc. be made, as if he had said, you cannot possibly hold faith and a
good conscience in your Pastoral office, unless, First of all, you be careful
to make and offer up prayers, etc. For this is the first thing to be done and
most highly to be regarded by you. Preaching is a very useful part of the
Priests office; and S. Paul exhorts Timothy to preach the word, be instant in
season, out of season. And the more because He was a Bishop, and to plant and
water many Churches in the Infancy of Christianity among many Seducers and
Temptations: But yet First of all he exhorts, that this daily office of
presenting prayers to the throne of grace in the behalf of the Church, be
carefully looked to. This charge of S. Paul to Tim. holy Church here lays upon
all those that are admitted into that holy office of the Ministry, that they
should offer up to God this holy sacrifice of prayers, praises and
thanksgivings, this savor of rest, daily, Morning and Evening: And would all
those whom it concerns, look well to this part of their office, I should not
doubt, but that God would be as gracious and bountiful to us in the performance
of this service, as he promised to be to the Jews in the offering of the Lamb
Morning and Evening, Exodus 29. 43, 44. He would meet us and speak with us, that
is graciously answer our petitions: he would dwell with us, and be our God, and
we should know, by comfortable experiments of his great and many blessings,
that he is the Lord our God.

Of the Mattins, or, MORNING SERVICE.
THe Mattins and Evensong begin with one sentence of holy Scripture, after
which follows the Exhortation, declaring to the peoyle, the end of their
public meeting^ Namely, [ To confess their sins, to render thanks to God, to
set forth his praise, to hear his holy Word, and to ask those things that be
necessary both for body and soul.] All this is to prepare their hearts (which
it does most excellently) to the performance of these holy duties with
devotion, according to the counsel of Ecclus. 18. 23. Before thou prayest,
prepare thine heart, and be not as one that tempts God. To which agrees that
of Ecclesiastes 5. 1. Be not hasty to utter anything before God, but consider
that he is in Heaven, and thou upon earth.

Of CONFESSION.
The Priest and the People, being thus prepared, make their CONFESSION which is
to be done with [ an humble voice,] as it is in the Exhortation. Our Churches
direction in this particular, is grave and conform to ancient rules. The sixth
Counc. of CONSTAN. Can. 75. forbids all disorderly and rude vociferation in the
execution of Holy Services; and S. Cyprian de Orat. Dominica advises thus, [
Let our speech and voice in prayer be with Discipline, still and modest: Let us
consider that we stand in the presence of God, who is to be pleased both with
the habit and posture of our body, and manner of our speech: for as it is a
part of impudence to be loud and clamorous; so in the contrary, it becomes
modesty to pray with an humble voice.]

We begin our Service with Confession of sins, and so was the use in Saint
Basils time. Ep. 63. And that very orderly. For before we beg any thing else,
or offer up any praise or Lauds to God, it is fit we should confess, and beg
pardon of our sins, which hinder Gods acceptance of our Services. Psalm. 66.
16. If I regard iniquity with mine heart, the Lord will not hear me.

This Confession is to be said by the whole Congregation, Says the Rubr. And
good reason. For could there be any thing devised better, than that we all at
first access unto God by prayer, should acknowledge meekly our sins, and that
not only in heart but with tongue; all that are present being made
earwitnesses, even of every man's distinct and deliberate Assent to each
particular branch of a Common Indictment drawn against our selves? How were it
possible that the Church should any way else with such ease and certainty
provide, that none of her children may dissemble that wretchedness, the
Penitent Confession whereof is so necessary a preamble especially to
Common Prayer? Hooker.

The ABSOLUTION.
Next follows the ABSOLUTION to be pronounced by the Priest alone, standing.
For though the Rubric here does not appoint this posture, yet it is to be
supposed in reason, that he is to do it here, as he is to do it in other places
of the Service. And in the Rubric after the general Confession at the
Communion, the Bishop or Priest is ordered to pronounce the Absolution,
standing. Besides, reason teaches, That Acts of Authority, are not to be done
kneeling, but standing rather. And this Absolution is an Act of Authority, by
virtue of a [ Power and Commandment of God to his Ministers, as it is in the
Preface of this Absolution.] And as we read S. John 20. Whosoever sins ye
remit, they are remitted. And if our Confession be serious and hearty, this
Absolution is effectual, as if God did pronounce it from Heaven. So says the
Confession of Saxony and Bohemia: and so says the Augustan Confession, and
which is more, so says S. Chrysostom. in his fifth Hom. upon Esaias. [Heaven waits and
expects the Priests sentence here on Earth; the Lord follows the servant, and
what the servant rightly binds or looses here on Earth, that the Lord confirms
in Heaven.] The same says S. Gregory Hom. 26. upon the Gospels. [ The
Apostles, (and in them all Priests) were made Gods Vi^egerents here on earth in
his Name and stead to retain or remit sins.] S. Augustine and Cyprian, and
generally Antiquity says the same; so does our Church in many places,
particularly in the form Absolution for the sick: but above all, holy Scripture
is clear, S. John 20. 23. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them. Which power of remitting sins was not to end with the Apostles, but is a
part of the Ministry of Reconciliation, as necessary now as it was then, and
therefore to continue as long as the Ministry of Reconciliation, that is, to
the end of the world. Ep. 4. 12, 13. When therefore the Priest absolves, God
absolves, if we be truly penitent: Now this remission of sins granted here to
the Priest, to which God has promised a confirmation in heaven, is not the act
of Preaching, or Baptizing, or admitting men to the holy Communion. For all
these powers were given before this grant was made. As you may see S. Mat. 10.
7. As ye go, preach, saying, etc. And S. John 4. 2. Though Jesus baptized not,
but his disciples. And 1 Cor. 11. In the same night that he was betrayed, he
instituted and delivered the Eucharist, and gave his Apostles authority to do
the like, Do this, that I have done, bless the Elements, and distribute them.
Which is plainly a power of admitting men to the holy Eucharist. And all these
powers were granted before our Saviors Resurrection. But this power of
remitting sins, mentioned S. John^ 20. was not granted (though promised, S.
Matt. 16. 19.) till Now, that is, after the Resurrection. As appears first by
the ceremony of Breathing, signifying that then it was given: And secondly, by
the word Receive, used in that place, Verse 22. which he could not properly
have used, if they had been endued with this power before. Therefore the power
of Remitting, which here God authorizes, and promises certain assistance to, is
neither Preaching nor Baptizing, but some other way of Remitting, namely, that
which the Church calls Absolution. And if it be so, then to doubt of the effect
of it (supposing we be truly penitent, and such as God will pardon) is to
question the truth of God: and he that under pretense of reverence to God
denies or despises this power, does injury to God in slighting his Commission,
and is no better than a Novatian, says S. Ambrose l. 1. de Poenit. cap. 2.

After the Priest has pronounced the Absolution, the Church seasonably prays,
Wherefore we beseech him to grant us true repentance, and his holy spirit, etc.
For as repentance is a necessary disposition to pardon, so as that neither God
will, nor man can absolve those that are impenitent; So is it in some parts of
it, a necessary consequent of pardon; and he that is pardoned, ought still to
repent, as he that seeks a pardon. Repentance, say Divines, out to be
continual. For whereas Repentance consists of three parts, as the Church
teaches us in the Commination. 1. Contrition or lamenting of our sinful lives.
2. Knowledging and confessing our sins. 3. An endeavor to bring forth fruits
worthy of penance, which the Ancients call satisfaction; Two of these,
Contrition and Satisfaction, are requisite after pardon. The remembrance of sin
though pardoned, must always be grievous to us. For, to be pleased with the
remembrance of it, would be sin to us: and for Satisfaction or amendment of
life, and bringing forth fruits worthy of penance, that is not only necessary
after pardon, but it is the more necessary, because of pardon, for diverse
reasons; as first, because immediately after pardon, the Devil is most busy to
tempt us to sin, that we may thereby lose our pardon, and he may so recover us
again to his captivity, from which, by pardon we are freed: And therefore in
our Lords prayer, as soon as we have begged pardon, and prayed Forgive us our
trespasses, We are taught to pray, And lead us not into temptation, suffer us
not to fall into sin again; which very method holy Church here wisely
intimates, immediately after pardon pronounced, directing us to pray for that
part of repentance which consists in amendment of life, and for the grace of
Gods holy Spirit enabling us thereunto. Again, Repentance in this part of it,
viz. an endeavor of amendment of life, is the more necessary upon pardon
granted, because the grace of pardon, is a new obligation to live well, and
makes the sin of him that relapsed after pardon the greater, and therefore the
pardoned had need to pray, for that part of repentance and the grace of Gods
holy Spirit, that both his present service and future life may please God: that
is, that he may observe our Saviors rule given to him that was newly cured and
pardoned by him, that he may go away and sin no more, lest a worse thing happen
to ^im. S. John 5. 14.

There be three several forms of Absolution in the Service. The first is that
which is used at Morning Prayer. Almighty God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. And has given power and commandment to his Ministers to declare
and pronounce to his people being penitent, the Absolution and Remission of
their sins. He pardons and Absolveth.

The second is used at the Visitation of the Sick. Our Lord Jesus Christ who
has left power to his Church to absolve all sinners which truly repent, of his
great mercy forgive thee: and by his Authority committed to me, I absolve thee,
etc.

The Third is at the Communion. Almighty God our heavenly Father, who of his
great mercy has promised forgiveness of sins to all them that with hearty
repentance and true faith turn to him. Have mercy upon you: pardon and forgive
you, etc.

All these several Forms, in sense and virtue are the same; For as when a
Prince has granted a Commission to any servant of his, to release out o^
Prison all penitent offenders whatsoever, it were all one in effect, as to the
Prisoners discharge, whether this servant says, by virtue of a Commission
granted to me, under the Prince^ hand and seal, which here I show, I release
this prisoner. Or thus, The Prince who has given me this Commission, He
pardons you. Or lastly, The Prince pardon and deliver you; the Prince then
standing by and confirming the word of his Servant. So is it here all one as to
the remission of sins in the penitent, whether the Priest Absolves him after
this form; Almighty God who has given me and all Priests power to pronounce
pardon to the penitent, He pardons you. Or thus, By virtue of a Commission
granted to me from God I absolve you. Or lastly; God pardon you, namely, by me
his servant according to his promise, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted.
All these are but several expressions of the same thing, and are effectual to
the penitent by virtue of that Commission mentioned Saint Ioh. 20. Whose sins
ye remit, they are remitted. Which Commission in two of these forms is
expressed, and in the Last, viz. that at the Communion is sufficiently employed
and supposed. For the Priest is directed, in using this form, to stand up and
turn to the people. Rubr. immediately before it. Which behavior certainly
signifies more than a bare prayer for the people (for if it were only a prayer
for the people, he should not be directed to stand and turn to the People when
he speaks, but to God from the people) this gesture of standing and turning to
the people signifies a message of God to the people by the mouth of his Priest,
a part of his Ministry of Reconciliation, a solemn application of pardon to
the penitent by Gods Minister, and is in sense thus much, Almighty God pardon
you by me. Thus the Greek Church, from whom this form is borrowed, uses to
express it and explain it. Almighty God pardon you, by me his unworthy Servant,
or Lord, pardon him, for thou have said, whose sins ye remit, they are
remitted; sometime expressing, always including Gods Commission: So then in
which form soever of these the Absolution be pronounced, it is in substance the
same; an act of authority by virtue of Christ's Commission, effectual to
remission of sins in the penitent.

Of all these Forms, the last, in the Communion-Service was most used in
Primitive times by the Greek and Latin Church, and scarce any other form to be
found in their Rituals or Eccles. History till about four hundred years since,
say some Learned Men. But what then? is another Form unlawful? Has not the
Church power to vary the expression, and to signify Christ's power granted to
her, provided the expression and words be agreeable to the sense of that
Commission? But it may easily be shown that those other Forms are not
novelties. For even of old in the Greek Church, there was used as full a Form
as any the Church of England uses: It Is true it was not written, nor set down
in their Rituals, but delivered from hand to hand down to these times, and
constantly used by them in their private Absolutions. For when the Penitent
came to the Spiritual Man, (so they called their Confessor,) for Absolution,
entreating him in their vulgar language (...), I beseech you, Sir, absolve me:
The Confessor or Spiritual Man, if he thought him fit for pardon, answered,
(...), I absolve thee. See Arcadius de Sacra Poenit. l. 4. c. 3. and Goar. in
Euchol. Graec. where you may find instances of Forms of Absolution as full as
any the Church of England uses.

The LORDS PRAYER.
THen follows the LORDS PRAYER. The Church of Christ did use to begin and end
her Services with the Lords Prayer, this being the Foundation upon which all
other Prayers should be built, therefore we begin with it; that so the right
Foundation being laid, we may justly proceed to our ensuing requests; Tertul.
de orat. c. 9. And it being the perfection of all prayer, therefore we conclude
our prayers with it. S. Augustine Ep. 59. Let no Man therefore quarrel with the
Churches frequent use of the Lords Prayer. For the Church Catholic ever did
the same. Besides, if we hope to have our prayers accepted of the Father only
for his Sons sake, why should we not hope to have them most speedily accepted,
when they are offered up in his Sons own words?

Both in this place and other parts of the Service, where the Lords prayer is
appointed to be used, the Doxology, For thine is the Kingdom, etc. is left out.
The reason is given by Learned Men, because the Doxology is ^o part of our
Lords Prayer. For though in S. Matt. 6. it be added in our usual Copies, yet in
the most ancient Manuscripts it is not to be found, no nor in S. Lukes Copy, S.
Luke 11. and therefore is thought to be added by the Greek Church, who indeed
use it in their Liturgies (as the Jews before them did,) but divided from the
Prayer as if it were no part of it. The Latin Church generally say it as this
Church does, without the Doxology following S. Lukes Copy, who setting down our
Lords Prayer exactly, with this Introduction, when you pray say, not after this
manner, as S. Matthew has it, but say, Our Father, etc. leaves out the
Doxology: and certainly it can be no just matter of offense to any reasonable
Man, that the Church uses that Form which S. Luke tells us was exactly the
prayer of our Lord.

In some places, especially among those Ejaculations which the Priest and
people make in course, the People are to say the last words -- But deliver us
from evil, Amen. That so they may not be interrupted from still bear^ing a
part, and especially in so divine a Pray^er as this, thereby giving a fuller
testification of their Concurrence and Communion.

Then follow the Verses, O LORD open Thou our Lips.
And our mouth shall show forth thy praise, etc.


This is a most wise order of the Church in assigning this place to these
Verses: namely, before the Psalms, Lesson and Collects: and yet after the
Confession and Absolution; insinuating that our mouths are silenced only by
sin, and opened only by God; and therefore when we meet together in the
Habitation of Gods Honor, the Church, to be thankful to him, and speak good of
his Name. We must crave of God Almighty first pardon of our sins, and then that
he would put a New Song in our mouths that they may show forth his praise. And
because without Gods Grace we can do nothing, and because the Devil is then
most busy to hinder us, when we are most desirously bent to serve God:
therefore follow immediately those short and passionate Ejaculations, O Lord
open thou our Lips, O God make speed to save us. which verses are a most
excellent defense against all Incursions and invasions of the De^il, against
all unruly affections of Humane Nature, for it is a Prayer and an earnest one,
to God for his help^ an humble acknowledgement of our ow^ inability to live
without him a minute, O God make haste to help us. If any be ready to faint and
sink with sorrow, this raises him, by relling him that God is at hand to help
us. If any be apt to be proud of spiritual success, this is fit to humble him,
by minding him that he cannot live a moment without him. It is fit for every
Man in every state, degree, or condition, says Cassian, Col. 10. c. 10.

The DOXOLOGY follows. Glory be to the Father, etc. which is the Christians
both Hymn and shorter Creed. For what is the sum of the Christians faith but
the mystery of the holy Trinity, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which
neither Jew, nor Pagan, but only the Christian believes, and in this Doxology
professes against all Heretics old and new? and as it is a short Creed, so it
is also a most excel-Hymn; for the glory of God is the end of our Creation, and
should be the aim of all our services, whatsoever we do should be done to the
glory of that God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: and this is all that we can
either either by word or deed give to God, namely, GLORY. Therefore this Hymn
fitly serves to close any of our Religious services, our Praises, Prayers,
Thanksgivings, Confessions of Sins or Faith. Since all these we do to Glorify
God, it cannot be unfitting to close with Glory be to God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost. It cannot easily be expressed how useful this Divine Hymn is upon
all occasions. If God Almighty send us prosperity, what can we better return
him, than Glory? If he sends Adversity, it still befits us to say, Glory be to,
etc. Whether we receive good, or whether we receive evil at the hands of God,
we cannot say a better Grace than Glory be the Father, etc. In a word, we
cannot better begin the day when we awake, nor conclude the day when we go to
sleep, than by Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
Then the Hallelujah, or Praise ye the Lord; of which S. Augustine says, [There
is nothing that more soundly delights, than the praise of God, and a continual
Hallelujah.

The VENITE.
O come let us sing unto the Lord.
THis is an Invitatory Psalm; For herein we do mutually invite and call upon
one another being come before His presence, to sing to the Lord, to set forth
His praises, to hear His voice, as with joy and cheerfulness, so with that
reverence that becomes His infinite Majesty, worshipping, falling down, and
kneeling before Him, using all humble behavior in each part of His service and
worship prescribed to us by His Church. And needful it is that the Church
should call upon us for this duty, for most of us forget the Psalmists counsel,
Psalm. 69. 7. To ascribe unto the Lord the honor due unto his Name: into his
Courts we come, before the presence of the Lord of the whole Earth, and forget
to worship him in the beauty of holiness.

The PSALMS.
THe PSALMS follow, which the Church appoints to be read over every Month,
oftener than any other part of holy Scripture: So was it of old ordained says
S. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. de poenit. All Christians exercise themselves in David's
Psalms oftener than in any other part of the Old or New Testament. Moses the
great Lawgiver that saw God face to face, and wrote a Book of the Creation of
the World, is scarc^ read over once a year. The holy Gospels, where the
Miracles of Christ are preached, where God converses with Man, where Death is
destroyed, the Devils cast out, the Lepers cleansed, the blind restored to
sight; where the Thief is placed in Paradise, and the Harlot made purer than
the Stars, where the waters of Jordan to the sanctification of Souls, where is
the food of immortality, the holy Eucharist, and the words of life, holy
precepts and precious promises, those we read over once or twice a Week. What
shall I say o^ blessed Paul, Christ's Orator, the Fisher of World, who by his
14. Epistles, those spiritual Nets, has caught Men to salvation, who was wrapped
into the third Heaven, and heard and saw such Mysteries as are not to be
uttered? him we read twice in the week. We get not his Epistles by heart, but
only attend to them while they are reading. But for holy David's Psalms, the
grace of the holy Spirit has so ordered it, that they should be said or sung
night and day. In the Churches Vigils, the first, the midst and the last, are
David's Psalms: in the Morning David's Psalms are sought for, and the first, the
midst and the last is David. And Funeral Solemnities the first, the midst and
the last is David. In private houses where the Virgins spin, the first, the
midst and the last is David: Many that know not a letter, can say David's Psalms
by heart: In the Monasteries, the quires of Heavenly Hosts, the first, the
midst and the last is David: In the Deserts, where Men that have crucified the
world to themselves converse with God, the first, the midst and the last is
David, In the Night when Men are asleep, David awakes them up to sing; and
gathering the Servants of God into Angelical troops, turns Earth into Heaven,
and makes Angels of Men singing David's Psalms. The holy Gospels and Epistles
contain indeed the words of eternal life, words by which we must be saved: and
therefore should be sweeter to us than Honey or the Honeycomb, more precious
than Gold, yea than much fine Gold; but they are not of so continual use as
David's Psalms, which are digested forms of Prayers, Thanksgivings, Praises,
Confessions and Adorations, fit for every temper and every time. Here the
penitent has a form of confession; he that has received a benefit, has a
Thanksgiving; he that is in any kind of need, bodily or ghostly has a prayer;
all have Lauds, and all may adore the several excellencies of Almighty God in
David's forms: and these a Man may safely use, being composed by the Spirit of
God, which cannot err: whereas other Books of Prayers and Devotions are, for
the most part, composed by private men, subject to error and mistake, whose
fancies, sometimes wild ones, are commended to us for matter of devotion, and
we may be taught to blaspheme, while we intend to adore; or at least, to abuse
our devotion when we approach to the throne of grace, and offer up an unclean
Beast instead of an holy Sacrifice. May we not think that this amongst others
has been a cause of the decay of right and true devotion in these latter
days, namely, the neglect of this excellent Book, and preferring Men's fancies
before it? I deny not but that Collects and other parts of Devotion which the
consentient Testimony and constant practice of the Church have commended to us
may, and especially the most divine Prayer of our LORD ought to be used by us
in our private devotion, but I would not have David's Psalms disused, but used
frequently and made as they were by Athanasius and S. Jerome, a great, if not
the greatest part of our private devotions, which we may offer up to God as
with more safety, so with more confidence of acceptance being the inspiration
of that holy Spirit of God, who, when we know not what to say, helps our
infirmities both with words and affections? Romans 8. 26. If any man thinks these
Psalms too hard for him to understand, and apply to his several needs, let him
make trial awhile, and spend that time in them, which he spends in humane
compositions, let him study them as earnestly, as he does books of less
concernment; let him pray the holy Spirit that made them, to open his eyes, to
see the admirable use of them; let him entreat holy and learned guides of Souls
to direct him in the use of them, and by the grace of God, in the frequent use
of them he may attain to the Primitive fervor, and come to be a Man, as holy
David was, after Gods own heart.

S. HIER. in Epitaph. Paulae. [In the Morning, at the third, sixth and ninth
hour; in the Evening at midnight David's Psalms are sung over in order, and no
Man is suffered to be ignorant of David's Psalms.]

These PSALMS we sing or say by course, The Priest one verse, and the People
another; or else one side of the Quire one verse, and the other side another,
according to the ancient practice of the Greek and Latin Church. Socrat. Hist.
l. 6. c. 8. Theodoret. l. 2. c. 24. Basil. Ep. 63. And according to the pattern
set us by the Angels, Esaias 6. 3. who sing one to another, Holy, Holy, Holy.
These reasons may be given for this manner of Singing by course.

First, that we may thus in a holy emulation contend, who shall serve God most
affectionately, which our LORD seeing and hearing, is not a little pleased.
Ter. l. 2. ad ux.

Secondly, that one relieving another we may not grow weary of our service. S.
Aug. l. Conf. 9. c. 7.

When we say or sing these Psalms, we are wont to stand, by the erection of our
bodies, expressing the elevation or lifting up of our souls to God, while we
are serving him in these holy employments.

At the end of every Psalm, and of all the Hymns, (except TE DEUM, which
because it is nothing else almost, but this, Glory be to the Father, etc.
enlarged, has not this Doxology added) we say or sing Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost; which was the use of the ancient Church,
never quarreled at by any till Arius, who, being pressed with this usage as an
argument against his Heresy of making the Son inferior to the Father,
labored to corrupt this Versicle, saying [ Glory be to the Father by the Son,
in the Holy Ghost. Theodoret, Hist. l. 2. c. 24.] The Church on the contrary
was careful to maintain the ancient usage, adding on purpose against Arrius, As
it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, Conc. Vas. can. 7. Now if
this joyful Hymn of Glory, have any use in the Church of God, can we place it
more fitly, than where it now serves as a close, and conclusion to Psalms and
Hymns, whose proper subject and almost only matter, is a dutiful acknowledgment
of Gods excellency and glory by occasion of special effects?

As an Hymn of Glory is fit to conclude the Psalms, so especially this
Christian Hymn, wherein as Christians (not as Jews and Pagans) we glorify God
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; by which Christian conclusion of David's
Psalms, we do, as it were, fit this part of the Old Testament for the Service
of God under the Gospel, and make them Evangelical Offices.

LESSONS.
AFter the Psalms follow two LESSONS; one out of the Old Testament, another out
of the New. This was the ancient custom of all the Churches in Egypt, Cassian.
l. 2. cap. 4. who says it was not taught by men, but from heaven by the
ministry of Angels. This choice may be, to show the harmony of them: for what
is the Law but the Gospel foreshewed: what other the Gospel, but the Law
fulfilled? That which lies in the Old Testament, as under a shadow, is in the
New, brought out into the open Sun: things there prefigured are here performed.
Thus as the two Seraphims cry one to another, Holy, holy, holy, Esaias 6. 3. So
the two Testaments Old and New, faithfully agreeing, convince the sacred truth
of God. First, one out of the Old Testament, then another out of the New,
observing the method of the holy Spirit, who first published the Old, then the
New; first the precepts of the Law, then of the Gospel, Which method of their
reading either purposely did tend, or at the least wise does fitly serve, that
from smaller things the mind of the hearers may go forward to the knowledge of
greater; and by degres climb up from the lowest to the highest things, says
incomparable Hooker.

A wise constitution of the Church it is, thus to mingle Services of several
forts, to keep us from wearisomness. For whereas devout Prayer is joined with a
vehement intention of the inferior powers of the soul, which cannot therein
continue long without pain, therefore holy Church interposes still somewhat for
the higher part of the mind, the understanding, to work upon, that both being
kept in continual exercise with variety, neither might feel any weariness, and
yet each be a spur to other. For Prayer kindles our desire to behold God by
speculation; and the mind delighted with that speculation, takes every where
new inflammations to pray; the riches of the mysteries of heavenly wisdom
continually stirring up in us correspondent desires to them; so that he which
prays in due sort, is thereby made the more attentive to hear, and he which
hears, the more earnest to pray.

The Minister that reads the Lessons standing and turning himself so as he may
be best heard of all such as are present. Rubr. 2. before Te Deum. Turning
himself so as he may best be heard of all, that is, turning toward the people,
whereby it appears that immediately before the Lessons he looked another way
from the people, because here he is directed to turn toward them. This was the
ancient custom of the Church of England, that the Priest who did officiate, in
all those parts of the Service which were directed to the people, turned
himself toward them, as in the Absolution. See the Rubr. before Absol. at the
Communion. Then shall the Priest or Bishop if present, stand and turning
himself to the people say, etc. So in the Benediction, reading of the Lessons,
and holy Commandments: but in those parts of the office which were directed to
God immediately, as Prayers, Hymns, Lauds, Confessions of Faith, or Sins, he
turned from the people; and for that purpose in many Parish-Churches of late,
the Reading-Pew had one Desk for the Bible, looking toward the people to the
Body of the Church, another for the Prayer Book looking toward the East or
upper end of the Chancel. And very reasonable was this usage; for when the
people were spoken to, it was fit to look toward them; but when God was spoken
to, it was fit to turn from the people. And be^ides, if there be any part of
the World more honorable, in the esteem of Men, than another, it is fit to
look that way when we pray to God in public, that the turning of our bodies
toward a more honorable place, may mind us of the great honor and majesty of
the person we speak to. And this reason S. Augustine gives of the Churches
ancient custom of turning to the East in their public prayers, because the
East is the most honorable part of the World, being the Region of Light,
whence the glorious Sun arises, Aug. l. 2. de Ser. Dom. in Monte c. 5. That
this was the constant practice of the Church to turn toward the East in her
public prayers may sufficiently appear by S. Augustine in the place last cited,
where he says, Cum ad orationes stamus, ad Orientem Convertimur; When we stand
at our prayers, we turn toward the East. And by Epiphan. l. 1. haer. 19. c.
19. who there detests the madness of the Impostor Elzaeus, because that amongst
other things he forbad praying toward the East. And the Church of England, who
professes to conform to the ancient practices, as far as conveniently she can,
as may be seen in many passages of her Canons and other places, did observe the
same custom in her prayers, as appears by the placing of the Desk for the
Prayer Book above mentioned, looking that way, and as may be collected from
this Rubric, which directs the Priest in the reading of the Lessons to turn to
the people, which supposes him, at prayer and the Psalms to look quite another
way, namely, as in reason may be concluded, that way which the Catholic Church
uses to do for diverse reasons: and amongst other, for that which S. Augustine
has given, because That was the most worthy part of the World, and therefore
most fit to be looked to when we come to worship God in the Beauty of Holiness.
Again, another reason may be given of turning from the people toward the upper
end of the Chancel in our Prayers, because it is fit in our prayers to look
toward that part of the Church or Chancel, which is the highest and chief, and
where God affords his most gracious and mysterious presence, and that is the
holy Table and Altar, which anciently was placed toward the upper or East end
of the Cha^cel. This is the highest part of the Chancel, set apart to the
highest of Religious Services, the consecration and distribution of the holy
Eucharist, here is exhibited the most gracious and mysterious presence of God
that in this life we are capable of, the presence of his most holy Body and
Blood. And therefore the Altar was usually called the Tabernacle of Gods Glory,
His Chair of State, the Throne of God, the Type of Heaven, Heaven it self. As
therefore the Jews in their Prayers looked toward the principal part of the
Temple, the Mercy-Seat, Psalm. 28. 2. So the Christians in their prayers turned
toward the principal part of the Church, the Altar, of which the Mercy-Seat is
but a type. And as our Lord has taught us in his Prayer, to look up toward
Heaven when we pray, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven; not as if God were
there confined, for he is every where, in Earth as well as in Heaven, but
because Heaven is his Throne, whereas Earth is but his Footstool; so holy
Church by her practice teaches us in our public and solemn prayers to turn and
look, not toward the inferior and lower parts of the Footstool, but toward
that part of the Church which most nearly resembles Heaven, the holy Table or
Altar. Correspondent to this practice, was the manner of the Jews of old, for
at the reading of the Law and other Scriptures, he that did Minister, turned
his face to the people, but he who read the prayers, turned his back to the
people, and his face to the Ark. Mr. THORNDYKE of Relig. Assem. page 231.

For the choice of these Lessons and their Order, holy Church observes a
several course.

For the Ordinary Morning and Evening prayers she observes only this: to begin
at the beginning of the year with Genesis for the first Lesson, and S. Matthew
for the Second in the Morning: and Genesis again for the First, and S. Paul to
the Romans for the Second Lesson at Even, and so continues on till the Books be
read over, but yet leaving out some Chapters, either such as have been read
already, upon which account she omits the Chronicles, being for the most part
the same with the book of Kings which has been read already; and some
particular Chapters in some other Books: having been the same for the most part
read either in the same book or some other: or else such as are full of
Genealogies, or some other matter, which holy Church counts less profitable for
ordinary hearers, Only in this she alters the order of the books, not reading
the prophet Esaias, till all the rest of the books be done: Because the Prophet:
Esaias being the most Evangelical Prophet, most plainly prophesying of Christ, is
reserved to be read a little before ADVENT.

For Sundays somewhat another course is observed; for then Genesis is begun to
be read upon Septuagesima Sunday; because then begins the holy time of penance
and mortification, to which Genesis is thought to suit best, because that
treats of our misery by the fall of Adam, and of Gods severe judgment upon the
world for sin: Then we read forward the books as they lie in order, yet not all
the books, but only some choice Lessons out of them. And if any Sunday be, as
they call it, a privileged day; that is, if it has the history of it
expressed in Scripture, such as Easter, Whit sunday, etc. then there are
peculiar and proper Lessons appointed for it.

For Saints days we observe another order: for upon them (except such of them
as are especially recorded in Scripture, and have proper Lessons) the Church
appoints Chapters out of the moral books, such as Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Ecclesiasticus and Wisdom, for first Lessons, being excellent instructions of
life and conversation, and so fit to be read upon the days of holy Saints,
whose exemplary lives and deaths, are the cause of the Churches Solemn
Commemoration of them, and Commendation of them to us. And though some of these
books be not, in the strictest sense, Canonical, yet I see no reason, but that
they may be read publicly in the Church, with profit and more safety, than
Sermons can be ordinarily preached there. For certainly Sermons are but humane
Compositions, and many of them not so wholesome matter, as these which have been
viewed and allowed by the judgment of the Church for many ages past to be
Ecclesiastical and good, nearest to divine of any writings. If it be thought
dangerous to read them after the same manner and order that Canonical Scripture
is read, lest perhaps by this means they should grow into the same credit with
Canonical: It is answered, that many Churches have thought it no great hurt, if
they should, but our Church has sufficiently secured us against that danger
whatsoever it be, by setting different marks upon them, styling the one
Canonical, the other Apocryphal. As for the second Lessons, the Church in them
goes on in her ordinary course.

The HYMNS. Te Deum, etc.
AFter the Lessons are appointed Hymns. The Church observing, S. Paul's Rule,
Singing to the Lord in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, every way
expressing her thanks to God.

The antiquity of Hymns in the Christian Church, does sufficiently appear by
that of our Savior, S. Matthew 26. When they had sung an Hymn, they went out,
upon which place, S. Chrysostom. says, They sung an Hymn, to teach us to do the
like. Concerning singing of Psalms and Hymns in the Church, we have both the
Precepts and Examples of Christ and his Apostles, S. Aug. Ep. 119. S. Paul
ordered it in the Church of Coloss. Singing to your selves in Psalms and Hymns,
Col. 3. Which we find presently after practiced in the Church of Alexandria,
founded by S. Mark, Eus. Hist: l. 2. c. 17. where Philo reports that the
Christians had in every place Monasteries wherein they sang Hymns to God, in
several kinds of Meeter and Verse. S. Ambrose brought them into Millaine, to
ease the peoples sad minds and to keep them from weariness, who were praying
night and day for their persecuted Bishop, and from hence came all Hymns almost
to be called Ambrosiani, because that by him they were spread over the Latin
Church. With the Morning and Evening Hymns God is delighted, says S. Hierome:
and Possidius in the life of S. Augustine tells us, c. 28. that toward the
time of his dissolution, S. Augustine wept abundantly because he saw the Cities
destroyed, the Bishops and Priests sequestered, the Churches profaned, the holy
Service and Sacraments neglected, either because few or none desired them, or
else because there were scarce any Priests left to administer to them that did
desire them; lastly, because the Hymns and Lauds of God were lost out of the
Church.

These Hymns are to be said or sung; but most properly to be sung; else they
are not so strictly and truly called Hymns, that is, Songs of praise; and not
only by the Church of England, but by all Christian Churches of old, was it so
practiced: and so holy David directs, Psalm. 47. 6. O sing praises, sing praises
unto our God. O sing praises, sing praises unto our King. The profit of which
singing Hymns is much many ways; especially in this, that they inkindle an
holy flame in the minds and affections of the hearers. O how I wept, says S.
Aug. in the Hymns and holy Canticles, being enforced thereunto by the sweet
voices of thy Melodious Church: by reason of the proneness of our affections to
that which delights, it pleased the wisdom of the Spirit to borrow from melody
that pleasure, which mingled with heavenly mysteries, causes the smoothness and
softness of that which touches the ear, to conveigh as it were by stealth, the
treasure of good things into men's minds: to this purpose were those harmonious
tunes of Psalms devised. And S. Basil. in Psalm. By pleasing thus the
affections, and delighting the mind of man, Music makes the service of God
more easy.

When we sing or say these Hymns, we stand, which is the proper posture for
Thanksgivings and Lauds, Psalm. 134. Praise the Name of the Lord standing in the
Courts of the Lord. And 2 Chronicles. 7. 6. The Priests waited on their office, the
Levites also with instruments of music of the Lord, which David the King had
made to praise the Lord (with the 136. Psalm,) because his mercy endures for
ever, when David praised by their ministry, and the Priest sounded Trumpets
before them, and all Israel STOOD. The erection of the body fitly expresses the
lifting up of the heart in joy: whence it is, that rejoicing in Scripture is
called the lifting up of the head, S. Luke 21. 28. Lift up your heads, for your
redemption draws nigh; So then, joy being a lifting up of the soul, and
praise and Thanksgiving being effects of joy, cannot be more fitly expressed,
then by erection and lifting up of the body, Standing in the Courts of the
Lord, when we sing praise unto him.

After the Morning first Lesson follows Te Deum, [ We praise thee O God,] or [
O all ye works of the Lord, etc. called Benedicite.] The first of which [ We
praise thee O God, etc.] was, as is credibly reported, framed miraculously by
^. Ambrose and S. Augustine at his Baptism, and has been in much esteem in the
Church ever since as it deserves, being both a Creed, containing all the
mysteries of Faith, and a most solemn Form of Thanksgiving, Praise, Adoration
and what not? and so has that other Canticle [O all ye works of the Lord] in
the which the whole Creation praises God together, been received and esteemed
universally in the Church. Council. Toletan. 4. c. 13.

After the Second Lesson at Morning Prayer is appointed, Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, called Benedictus, or, O be Joyful in the Lord, called Iubilate.

After the Evening Lessons are appointed Magnificat, or My soul does magnify
the Lord, and Nunc dimittis, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace:
or else two Psalms. And very fitly does the Church appoint sacred. Hymns after
Lessons: For who is there, that hearing God speak from Heaven to him for his
fouls health, can do less than rise up and praise him? and what Hymns can be
fitter to praise God with for our salvation, than those which were the first
gratulations, wherewith our Savior was entertained into the world? And such
are these. Yet as fit as they are, some have quarreled them, especially at
Magnificat, [ My soul does magnify the Lord,] and Nunc dimittis, [or, Lord now
let thou thy servant depart in peace.] The Objections are these: That the
first of these was the Virgin Mary's Hymn for bearing Christ in her womb: The
latter old Simeons, for seeing and holding in his arms the blessed Babe:
neither of which can be done by us now, and therefore neither can we say
properly these Hymns.

The answer may be, that bearing Christ in the womb, suckling him, holding him
in our arms, is not so great a blessing, as the laying up his holy word in our
hearts. S. Luke 11. 27. by which Christ is formed in us, Gal. 4. 19. and so
there is as much thanks to be returned to God for this as for that, He that
does the will of God taught in his word, may as well say. My soul does magnify
the Lord as the holy Virgin; for Christ is formed in him, as well as in the
Virgins womb. S. Matthew. 12. 50. Whosoever does the will of my Father which is
in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother. And why may not we
after the reading of a part of the new Testament, say, Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, as well as old Simeon? for in that Scripture by
the eye of Faith, we see that salvation which he then saw, and more clearly
revealed. We have then the same reason to say it, that old Simeon had, and we
should have the same spirit to say it with.

There can nothing be more fitting for us, as we have said, than having heard
the Lessons and the goodness of God therein Preached unto us, to break out into
a Song of Praise and Thanksgiving, and the Church has appointed two to be used
(either of them) after each Lesson, but not so indifferently but that the
Former Practice of exemplary Churches and Reason may guide us in the choice:
For the Te Deum, Benedictus, Magnificat, and Nunc Dimittis being the most
expressive-Jubilations and rejoycings for the redemption of the world, may be
said more often than the rest, especially on Sundays and other Festivals of
our Lord, excepting in Lent and Advent, which being times of Humiliation, and
Meditations on Christ as in expectation, or his sufferings, are not so fitly
enlarged with these Songs of highest Festivity, (the custom being for the same
reason in many Churches, in Lent, to hide and conceal all the glory of their
Altars, covering them with black to comply with the season) and therefore in
these times may be rather used the following Psalms than the foregoing
Canticles, as at other times also, when the Contents of the Lesson shall give
occasion, as when it speaks of the enlargement of the Church by bringing in the
Gentiles into the Fold of it, for diverse passages of those three Psalms import
that sense.

And for the Canticle Benedicite, [ O all ye works of the Lord] it may be used
not only in the aforesaid times of Humiliation, but when either the Lessons are
out of Daniel, or set before us the wonderful handiwork of God in any of the
Creatures, or the use he makes of them either ordinary or miraculous for the
good of the Church: Then it will be very seasonable to return this Song, O all
ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever:] that is, ye are great occasion of blessing the Lord, who therefore be
blessed, praised, and magnified for ever.

The APOSTLES CREED.
The Creed follows. At ordinary Morning and Evening prayer, and most Sundaies
and Holy Days, the Apostles Creed is appointed; which Creed was made by the
Apostles upon this occasion, says Ruffinus in Symb. n. 2. The Apostles, having
received a Commandment from our Lord to Teach all Nations, and withal being
commanded to tarry at Jerusalem till they should be furnished with gifts and
graces of the holy Spirit, sufficient for such a charge, tarried patiently, as
they were enjoined, expecting the fulfilling of that promise. In the time of
the stay at Jerusalem, they agreed upon this Creed as a Rule of Faith,
according to the analogy of which, they and all others should reach, and as a
word of distinction, by which they should know friends from foes. For as the
Gileadites distinguished their own men from the Berjamites, by the word
Shibboleth, Judges 12. 6. And as Soldiers know their own side from the Enemy
by their Word, so the Apostles and the Church should know who were the Churches
friends, and who were enemies; who were right believers, who false, by this
word of Faith: for all that walked according to this Rule, and professed this
faith, she acknowledged for hers, and gave them her peace: but all others that
went contrary to this rule and word, she accounted Enemies, Tertul. de
praescrip. led by false spirits. For he that hears not us, is not of God;
hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error, 1 John 4. 6.

This Creed is said daily twice, Morning and Evening. So it was of old. Aug. l.
1. de Symb. ad Catech. cap. 1. Take the Rule of Faith, which is called the
Symbol or Creed, say it daily, in the Morning before you go forth; at Night
before you sleep. And l. 50. Hom. 42. Say your Creed daily Morning and Evening.
Rehearse your Creed to God; say not, I said it yesterday, I have said it to day
already, say it again, say it every day: guard your selves with your Faith: And
if the Adversary assault you, let the redeemed know, that he ought to meet him,
with the Banner of the Cross and the shield of Faith, above all taking the
shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6. Faith is rightly called a Shield, S. Chrysostom. in loc.
For as a Shield is carried before the body, as a wall to defend it, so is faith
to the soul; for all things yield to that: This is our victory whereby we
overcome the world, even our Faith. Therefore we had need look well to our
faith, and be careful to keep that entire; and for that purpose it is not amiss
to rehearse it often, and guard our soul with it.

Cum horr^mus aliquid recurrendum est ad Symbolum: When we are affrighted, run
we to the Creed, and say, I believe in God the Father Almighty, this will guard
your soul from fear: If you be tempted to despair, guard your soul with the
Creed, say, I believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who was crucified,
etc. for us men and our salvation; that may secure your soul from despair: If
you be tempted to Pride, run to the Creed, and a sight of Christ's hanging upon
the Cross, will humble you: If to Lust or uncleanness, to the Creed, and see
the wounds of Christ, and the remembrance of them, if any thing will quench
that fiery dart: If we be tempted to presume and grow careless, take up again
this shield of Faith, see. Christ in the Creed coming to judgment, and this
terror of the Lords, will persuade men, In a word, the Creed is a guard and
defense against all temptations of the world, all the fiery darts of the Devil,
all the filthy lusts of the flesh: Therefore, above all, take the shield of
Faith, says S. Paul, and be sure to guard your soul Morning and Evening with
the Creed, thy symbol of the most holy Faith. Besides, This solemn rehearsing
of our Creed, is a plighting of our faith and fidelity to God, before Devils,
Angels, and Men; an engaging and devoting of our souls in the principal
faculties and powers of it, our reason and understanding and will, wholly to
God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, to believe in the ever blessed Trinity,
whatsoever flesh and blood shall tempt to the contrary; which is an high piece
of loyalty to God; and cannot be too often performed. It is that kind of
Confession, that S. Paul says is necessary to salvation, as well as believing,
Romans 10. 10. For it is there said Verse 9. If we confess with our mouth, as
well as, if we believe with the heart, we shall be saved; it is that kind of
Confession that our Lord Christ speaks of, S. Matt. 10. 32. Whosoever shall
confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in
Heaven. And therefore since it is a service so acceptable, it cannot be thought
unreasonable for the Church to require it Morning and Evening. The Creed
follows soon after the Lessons and very seasonably; for in the Creed we confess
that Faith, that the Holy Lessons ^each.

The Creed is to be said not by the Priest alone, but by the Priest and people
together. Rubr. before the Creed. For since Confession of Faith in public
before God, Angels and men is so acceptable a service to God, as is shown; Fit
it is that every man as well as the Priest, should bear his part in it, since
every man may do it for himself as well, nay, better than the Priest can do it
for him, for as every man knows best what himself believes, so it is fittest to
confess it for himself, and evidence to the Church his found Belief, by
expressly repeating of that Creed and every particular thereof, which is and
always has been accounted the Mark and Character, whereby to distinguish a
True Believer from an Heretic or Infidel.

We are required to say the Creed standing, by this Gesture signifying our
Readiness to Profess, and our Resolution to adhere and stand to this holy Faith.

Of Athanasius's CREED.
Besides the Apostles Creed, holy Church acknowledges two other, or rather two
explications of the same Creed, the Nicene, and Athanasius his Creed: of the
Nicene Creed shall be said somewhat in the proper place, the Communion-Service
where it is used. Athanasius his Creed is here to be accounted for, because it
is said sometimes in this place in stead of the Apostles Creed. It was composed
by Athanasius, and sent to Pope Julius, for to clear himself and acquit his
Faith from the slanders of his Arian Enemies, who reported him erroneous in the
Faith. It has been received with great Veneration as a treasure of an
inestimable price, both by the Greek and Latin Churches, Nazianz. de laud.
Athan. orat. 21. and therefore both for that authority, and for the
testification of our Continuance in the same Faith, to this day, the Church
rather uses this and the Nicene explanations, than any other Gloss or
Paraphrase devised by our selves; which, though it were to the same effect,
notwithstanding could not be of the same credit nor authority.

This Creed is appointed to be said upon the days named in the Rubric, for
these Reasons, partly, because those days, many of them are most proper for
this Confession of the Faith, which of all others is the most express,
concerning the Trinity, because the matter of them much concerns the
manifestation of the Trinity, as Christmas, Epiph. Trinity Sunday, and S. John
Baptists day, at the highest of whose Acts, the Baptizing of our Lord, was made
a kind of Sensible manifestation of the Trinity; partly, that so it might be
said once a month at least; and therefore on S. James, and S. Barthol. days,
and withal at convenient distance from each time, and therefore on S. Matt.
Matthias, Sim. and Jude, and S. Andrew's.

The Lord be with you.
This Divine Salutation taken out of Holy Scripture, Ruth 2. was frequently
used in Ancient Liturgies before Prayers, before the Gospel, before the Sermon,
and at other times, and that by the direction of the holy Apostles, says the
Council of Braccara. It seems as an I^troit or entrance upon another sort of
Divine Service, and a good Introduction it is, serving as an holy excitation to
Attention and Devotion, by minding the people what they are about, namely such
holy Services, as without Gods assistance and special grace cannot be
performed, and therefore when they are about these Services, the Priest minds
them of it by saying, The Lord be with you; And again, it is a most excellent
and seasonable Prayer for them, in effect thus much, The Lord be with you, to
lift up your Hearts and raise your Devotions to his Service. The Lord be with
you, to accept your Services. The Lord be with you, to reward you hereafter
with eternal li^e.

The people Answer, And with thy Spirit. Which form is taken out of 2 Timothy 4.
22. and is as much as this, Thou art about to Offer up Prayers and spiritual
Sacrifices for us, therefore we pray likewise for thee, that He, without whom
nothing is good and acceptable, may be with thy spirit while thou art exercised
in these Spiritual Services, which must be performed with the Spirit; according
to S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Thus the Priest prays and wishes well to the
people, and they pray and wish well to the Priest. And such mutual Salutations
and Prayers as this and those that follow, where Priest and people
interchangeably pray each for other, are excellent expressions of the Communion
of Saints, Both acknowledging thus, that they are all one body, and each one
members one of another, mutually caring for one another good, and mutually
praying for one another, which must needs be, if well considered, and duly
performed, excellent Incentives and provocations to Charity and love one of
another; and (as S. Chrysostom. observes hom. 3. in Col.) if these solemn mutual
Salutations were religiously performed, it were almost impossible that Priest
and people should be at Enmity. For can the People hate the Priest that blesses
them, that prays for them, The Lord be with you, or, Peace be with you? which
was anciently the Bishops Salutation, in stead of the Lord be with you. Or can
the Priest forget to love the People that daily prays for him, And with thy
Spirit.

Let us pray. These words are often used in ancient Liturgies, as w^ll as in
ours, and are an Excitation to prayer, to call back our wandering and recollect
our scattered thoughts, and to awaken our Devotion, bidding us mind what we are
about, namely, now when we are about to pray; to pray indeed, that is, heartily
and earnestly. The Deacon in ancient Services was wont to call upon the people
often (...). Let us pray vehemently; nay, (...), still more vehemently, and the
same vehemence and earnest devotion which the manner of these old Liturgies
breathed, does our Church in her Liturgy call for, in these words, Let us pray;
that is, with all the earnestness and vehemence that we may, that our prayers
may be such as S. James speaks of, active, lively spirited prayers, for these
are they that avail much with God. And there is none of us but must think it
needful thus to be called upon and awakened; for thoughts will be wandering, and
devotions will abate and scarce hold out to the prayers end, though it be a
short one; that well said the old Hermit, (whom Melanc. mentions in his
discourse de Crat.) There is nothing harder than to pray.

These words, Let us pray; as they are an Incitation to prayer in general, so
they may seem to be sometimes an Invitation to another Form of petitioning, as
in the Litany and other places: it being as much as to say, Let us collect our
alternate supplications by Versicles and Answers into Collects or Prayers. In
the Latin Liturgies (their Rubricks especially) Preces and Orationes seem to be
thus distinguished, that Preces or Supplications were those alternate
Petitions, where the people answered by responsive Versicles; Oration, or prayer
was that which was said by the Priest alone, the people only answering, Amen.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy, etc.
Lord have mercy, etc.


This short Litany as it was called by some Ancients, this most humble and
piercing Supplication to the Blessed Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, was
frequently used in ancient Liturgies, as it is to be seen in them, and also in
the COUNCIL of VAS. c. 5. Anno Dom. 440, or thereabouts. Because (says that
Council) the sweet and wholesome Custom of saying Kyrie Eleeson; or Lord have
mercy upon us, with great affection and compunction, has been received into
the whole Eastern and most of the Western Church: Therefore be it enacted that
the same be used in our Churches at Mattins, Evensong, and Communion-Service.]
It was anciently called (...), the earnest or vehement supplication; because as
it is a most pathetick Petition of mercy to every Person of the Blessed
Trinity, so it was uttered by those primitive good men, with much earnestness
and intention of Spirit, being sensible of their danger of sinking into endless
perdition, without the mercy of the Blessed Trinity, and therefore (with no
less earnestness than S. Peter cried, Master Save, when he was sinking ^into
the sea) did they cry out Lord have mercy. God the Father have mercy, God the
Son have mercy, God the holy Ghost have mercy: have mercy upon us in pardoning
our sins, which make us worthy to be cast out of thy favor, but unworthy to
serve thee: Have mercy, in helping our weakness, and inability of our selves to
serve thee: Many are our Dangers, many are our wants, many ways we stand in
need of mercy, therefore Lord have mercy, etc. This excellent Comprehensive
^itany is seasonable at all times, and all parts of the Service, after our
Singing of Hymns and Psalms, after our Hearing and Confession of Faith, such is
our unworthiness, such our weakness, that it cannot be thought amiss to beg
Gods Mercy, after we have prayed, such is our dullness and coldness in our
prayers that we had need pray, Lord have mercy upon us.

It may be observed that this earnest and humble supplication was usually in
old Services, and so is in ours, set immediately before the Lords Prayer, as a
preparation to it, and very fitly; For as we cannot devise a more suitable
preparation to prayer than this humble Petition of Mercy, and acknowledgement
of our own misery; so is there no Prayer whereto greater preparation is
required than that Divine Prayer sanctified by the sacred Lips of our Lord,
wherein we say, Our Father, etc. Clem. in Constable. l. 7. c. 25. advises when we
say this prayer to be careful to prepare our selves, so that we may in some
manner be worthy of this divine Adoption to be the Sons of God; lest if we
unworthily call him Father, He upbraid us as he did the Jews, Mal. 1. If I be
your Father, where is mine Honor? The Sanctity of the Son is the Honor of the
Father. Indeed it is so great an Honor to call God our Father, 1 Ioh. 3. that
we had need with all humility beg pardon of his Majesty, before we venture upon
so high a title. Therefore our Mother the Church has been careful to prepare
us for this divine Prayer, sometimes by a confession of our sins and Absol. as
at Morning and Evening Service; but most commonly by this short Litany: First,
teaching us to bewail our unworthiness and pray for mercy, and then with an
humble boldness to look up to Heaven and call God our Father, and beg further
Blessings of Him.

VERSICLES and Answers.
AFter the Lords Prayer follow short Versicles and Answers taken out of Holy
Scripture, Psalm. 85. 7. Psalm 20. 10. Psalm. 132. 9. Psalm. 28. 10. 2. Kings 20.
19. Psalm 51. 10, 11.

The Priest beginning and the people Answering, contending in an holy Emulation
who shall be most devout in these short, but pithy Ejaculations, or Darts cast
up to Heaven. Such short Ejaculations were much used by the devout Brethren,
which S. Augustine commends as the most piercing kind of prayer, Ep. 121. Such
as these were, that of the ^eper, S. Matthew. 8. 1. Lord, if thou will thou can
make me clean: and that of the Disciples, S. Matthew. 8. 24. Master save us, we
perish. Short, but powerful, as you may see by our Saviors gracious acceptance
of them.

And here I must further commend the Order of ANSWERS of the PEOPLE in all
places of the Service where it stands. It refreshes their attention, it
teaches them their part at public prayers; not to stand by and censure how
well the Priest plays the mouth of the Congregation. Lastly, it unites the
affections of them altogether, and helps to keep them in a league of perpetual
amity. For if the Prophet David did think that the very meeting of men together
in the house of God, should make the bond of their love indissoluble, Psalm 55.
15. How much more may we judge it reasonable to hope that the like effects may
grow in each of the people toward other, in them all toward the Priest, and in
the Priest toward them; between whom there daily and interchangeably pass, in
the hearing of God himself, and in the presence of his holy Angels, so many
heavenly Acclamations, Exultations, Provocations, Petitions, Songs of comfort,
Psalms of praise and thanksgiving, in all which particulars, as when the Priest
makes their suits, and they with one voice say, Amen. Or when he joyfully
begins, and they with like alacrity follow, deviding betwixt them the
Sentences, wherewith they strive which shall most show his own, and stir up
others zeal to the glory of God, as in the Psalms and Hymns; Or when they
mutually pray for each other, the Priest for the people, and the people for
him, as in the Versicles immediately before the morning Collects. Or when the
Priest propos^s to God the peoples necessities, and they their own requests for
relief in every of them, as in the Litany: Or when he proclaims the La^r o^ God
to them as in the Ten Commandments: they adjoining an humble acknowledgement of
their common imbecility to the several branches thereof, together with the
lowly requests for Grace to perform the things commanded, as in the Kyries or
Lord have mercy upon us, etc. at the end of each Commandment. All these
Interlocutory Forms of Speech, what are they but most effectual, partly
testifications, partly inflammations of all piety?

The Priest when he^ begins these short prayers is directed by the Rubric to
STAND.

It is noted that the Priest in the holy offices is sometimes appointed to
kneel, sometimes to stand. The Reason of this we shall here once for all
enquire.

The Priest or Minister being a man o^ like infirmities with the rest of the
Congregation, a sinner, and so standing in need of grace and pardon, as well as
the rest, in all confessions of sins, and penitential prayers, such as the
Litany is, directed to beg his pardon and grace upon his knees. He being
moreover a Priest or Minister of the most high God, that has received from him
an office and authority, sometimes stands, to signify that his office and
authority: which office of his may be considered, either in relation to God, or
the people. As it relates to God, so he is Gods Ambassador. 2 Cor. 5. 20. to
whom is committed the Ministry of Reconciliation, in which respect he is to
Teach, Baptize, Consecrate the holy Eucharist, Bless and Absolve the penitent;
and in all these acts of Authority, which he does in the name and person of
Christ, he is to stand.

As his office relates to the people, so he is in their stead, for them
appointed by God to offer up gifts and sacrifices to God, particularly the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, together with their prayers; so we read,
Heb. 5. 1. Every high priest or priest (so the words are promiscuously used,
Heb. 8. 3. 4.) taken from among men, is ordained for men, or in their stead, in
things pertaining to God, to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins. Which
definition of a Priest, belongs not only to a Priest of the Law, but also to a
Priest or Minister of the Gospel. For S. Paul from this definition proves that
our Lord Christ, who was after the order of Melchisede^k, not of Aaron, a
Priest of the Gospel, not of the Law, ought not call himself, v. 5. but was
appointed by God, and moreover, that he ought to have gifts and sacrifices to
offer, Heb. 8. 3. because every high Priest, or Priest, is ordained to offer
gifts and sacrifices. These arguments of S: Paul drawn from this definition are
fallacious and unconcluding, unless this be the definition of a Gospel-Priest
as well as a Legal. Seeing then that we must not conclude. S. Paul's arguments
to be unconcluding, we must grant, that the Ministers of the Gospel are
appointed by God to offer up the sacrifices of prayers and praises of the
Church for the people, thus to stand betwixt God and them and to show this his
office, in these services he is directed to stand. By this we may see what
advantage it is to the people, that their prayers are offered up by a Priest.
For God having appointed him to this office, will certainly assist and accept
his own constitution: and though the Minister be wicked, or undevout in his
prayers, yet God, that will punish this neglect in himself, will certainly
accept of his office for the people. Upon this ground probably it was that God
sent Abimelech to Abraham to pray for him, for he was a Prophet, Genesis 20. 7.

The Collects.
The Collects follow, which are thought by diverse to be so called, either
because they were made by the Priest, super collectam populi, over, or in
behalf of the Congregation, meeting, or collection of the people; or rather,
because the Priest does herein collect the Devotions of the people, and offer
them up to God; for though it has been the constant practice from the
beginning, for the people to bear a vocal part by their Suffrages and Answers
in the public service of God (which for that very reason was by the Ancients
called Common Prayer, as may be gathered out of Justin Martyr. Apol. 2. 8. Aug.
Epist. 118. and others:) yet for the more renewing and strengthening of their
earnestness, importunity, and as it were wrestling with God, and hope of
prevailing, they desired that themselves and their devotions should in the
close be recommended to God by the Priest, they all joining their assent and
saying Amen to it. And that is the reason why in many of the Collects, God is
desired to hear the petitions of the people (to wit, those that the people had
then made before the Collect) that they come in at the end of other devotions,
and were by some of old called Missae, that is to say, Dismissions, the people
being dismissed upon the pronouncing of them and the Blessing, the Collects
themselves being by some of the Ancients called Blessings, and also Sacramenta,
either for that their chief use was at the Communion, or because they were
uttered Per Sacerdotem, by one consecrated to holy Offices.

But it will not be amiss to enquire more particularly what may be said for
these very Collects which we use, they being of so frequent use and so
considerable a part of the Devotion of our Church.

And first concerning their Authors and Antiquity, we may observe, that our
Church endeavoring to preserve, not only the Spirit, but the very Forms (as
much as may be, and in a known tongue) of ancient Primitive Devotion, has
retained these very Collects (the most of them) among other precious Remains of
it: for we find by ancient testimony that they were composed or ordered, either
by S. Ambrose, Gelasius, or Gregory the Great, those holy Bishops and Fathers
of the Church; and therefore having daily ascended up to Heaven like Incense
from the hearts and mouths of so many Saints in the Ages since their times,
they cannot but be very venerable, and relish well with us, unless our hearts
and affections be of a contrary temper.

Secondly, for the object of these Collects, they are directed to God in the
Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, for so usually they conclude, and very fitly:
For Christ is indeed the Altar upon which all our prayers are to be offered,
that they may be acceptable; Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name he
will give it you, S. John 16. 23. And so it was the custom of old: Itaque
Orationes nostras vitam and Sacrificia, and omnia nostra offerimus tibi Pater
assidue per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, etc. Bernard de Amore Dei cap. 8.
But yet we may observe that a few Collects are directed to Christ, and in the
Litany some supplications to the holy Ghost, beside that precatory Hymn of Veni
Creator in the Book of Ordination, and that some Collects, especially for great
Festivals conclude with this acknowledgement, the Christ with the Father and
the holy Ghost, lives and reigns one God world without end. And this seems
to be done to testify what the Scripture warrants, that although for more
congruity we in the general course of our prayers go to the Father by the Son,
yet that we may also invocate both the Son and the Holy Ghost, and that while
we call upon one, we equally worship and glorify all Three together. Qui^ dum
ad solius Patris personam honoris serm^ dirigitur, been credentis fide tota
Trinita^ honoratur, says Fulgentius, lib. 2. ad M^nimum.

Thirdly for their Form and Proportion^ as they are not one long continued
prayer, but diverse short ones, they have many Advantages to gain esteem: The
Practice of the Jews of old, in whose prescribed Devotions we find a certain
number of several prayers or Collects to be said together, the example of our
Lord in prescribing a short form; the judgment and practice of the Ancient
Christians in their Liturgies, and S. Chrysostom among others commends highly
short and frequent Prayers with little distances between, Hom. 2. of Hanna, so
does Cassian also, and from the judgment of others that were much exercised
therein. 2 Lib. cap. 10. de Institut. Coenob. And lastly, as they are most
convenient for keeping away coldness, distraction and illusions from our
devotion, for what we elsewhere say in praise of short Ejaculations is true
also concerning Collects, and that not only in respect of the Minister, but the
people also, whose minds and affections become hereby more erect, close and
earnest by the oftener breathing out their hearty concurrence, and saying all of
them Amen together at the end of each Collect.

Fourthly, the Matter of them is most Excellent and remarkable: It consists
usually of two parts: An humble acknowledgement of the Adorable Perfection and
Goodness of God, and a congruous petition for some benefit from him. The first
is seen not only in the Collects for Special Festivals or benefits; but in
those also that are more general; for even in such what find we in the
beginning of them but some or other of these and the like acknowledgements?
That God is Almighty, everlasting, Full of Goodness and Pity, the Strength,
Refuge and Protector of all that trust in him, without whom nothing is strong^
nothing is Holy, no continuing in safety or Being, that such is our weakness
and frailty that we have no power of our selves to help our selves, to do any
good, to stand upright, cannot but fall; That we put no trust in any thing that
we do, but lean only upon the help of his heavenly Grace, That he is the Author
and giver of all good things, from whom it comes that we have an hearty desire
to pray or do him any true or laudable Service, That he is always more ready
to hear than we to pray, and to give more than we desire or deserve, having
prepared for them that love him such good things as pass man's understanding.

These, and the like expressions can be no other than the breathings of the
Primitive Christians, who with all self-denial made the grace of God their
Hope, Refuge, Protection, Petition, and Profession against all proud Heretics
and Enemies of it: And the Petitions which follow these humble and pious
acknowledgements and praises are very proper, holy and good, which will better
appear, if we consider the matter of each Collect apart.

The first in order among the Collects is that for the day. Now as on every day
or season there is something more particularly commended to our meditations by
the Church, so the first Collect reflects chiefly upon that, though sometimes
more generally upon the whole matter of the Epistle and Gospel, desiring
inspiration, strength and protection from God Almighty, in the practice and
pursuance, of what is set before us. But concerning the matter of the Collects
for the day, is spoken afterward in the particular account that is given of
each Epistle, Gospel and Collect.

The second Collect is for Peace, according to S. Paul's direction, 1 Timothy 2.
and Orbem Pacatum, that the World might be quiet, was ever a clause in the
Prayers of the Primitive Church; and good reason: For Peace was our Lords
Legacy, My peace I leave with you, his New Years gift, Pax in terris, Xenium
Christi, He prayed for peace, paid for peace, wept for it, bled for it: Peace
should therefore be dear to us, all kind of peace, outward peace and all: for
if there be not a quiet and peaceable life, there will hardly be godliness and
honesty, 1 Timothy 2. This Collect then is fit to be said daily, being a prayer
for peace, and so is that which follows.

The third for Grace to live well: for if there be not peace with God by an
holy life, there will never be peace in the World. No man can so much as think
a good thought, much less lead a godly life without the grace of God; therefore
that is also prayed for, together with Gods protection for the day or night
following.

Then the Prayers -- according to S. Paul. 1 Timothy 2. Who exhorts that Prayers
and Supplications be made for all men. In particular for Kings, and the Reason
he there gives, sufficiently shows the necessity of Praying particularly and
especially for them; namely, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty: which can hardly be done if they do not help toward it.
For as the Son of Syrach says Chap. 10. 2. As the Judge of the people is
himself, even so are his officers, and what manner of man the Ruler of the City
is, such are all they that dwell therein. A good Josiah, Hezekiah, or David,
promote religion and honesty and the right worship of God among the people; but
a Jeroboam by setting up Calves in Dan and Bethel, makes all the people sin.

After this follows a prayer for the Church, excellently described by Bishops,
Curats, and the people committed to their Charge.] By Curates here are not
meant Stipendaries, as now it is used to signify, But all those whether
Parsons or Vicars, to whom the Bishop, who is the chief Pastor under Christ,
has committed the cure of souls of some part of his flock and so are the
Bishops Curates. The Bishop with these Curates, a flock or Congregation
committed to their charge, make up a Church. For according to our Saviors
definition, a Church is a Shepherd, and his Sheep that will hear his voice; to
which S. Cyprians description agrees, Ep. 69. Illi sunt Ecclesia plebs
Sacerdoti adunata, and pastori suo grex adhaerens. The Church is a Congregation
of Believers united to their Bishop, and a Flock adhering to their Shepherd;
whence you ought to know, says he, that the Church is in the Bishop, and the
Bishop in the Church, and they that are not with the Bishop, are not in the
Church. Now because the Bishops are the guides and governors of the Church, so
that all acts of the Church are ordered and directed by them, as the same
Cyprian says, therefore the Custom of the Church always was, and not without
reason, to pray particularly by name for their Bishop, as they did for the King.

To make this Church, to gather it from among Infidels and Heathens, and to
preserve it from all her subtle and potent enemies, by the healthful Spirit of
his Grace, is an act of as great power, and a greater miracle of Love, than to
create the world. Although thou be wonderful, O Lord, in all thy works, yet
thou art believed to be most wonderful in thy works of pi^ty and mercy, Says
S. Augustine, and therefore the Preface is suitable, Almighty God which only
workest great marvails, send down upon thy Church, Bishops, Curats, and the
Congregatious committed to their charge, the healthful spirit of thy grace.

The BLESSING.
We end our Service with a BLESSING, which is to be pronounced by the Bishop,
if he be present. See the Rubric before the Blessing in the Communion-Service.
Then the Priest or Bishop, if present, shall let them depart with this
Blessing. This is ordered for the honor of the Bishops authority, Heb. 7. 7.
Without contradiction the less is blessed of the greater.

Therefore blessing being an act of Authority, the Bishop ought not to be blessed
by the Priest, but the Priest by the Bishop.

This blessing of the Bishop or Priest was so highly esteemed in the Primitive
times, that none durst go out of the Church till they had received it,
according to the Councils of Agatha Can. 31. in the year 472. and Orleans the
third, Can. 22.

And when they received it, they did it kneeling or bowing down their heads.
And the Deacon, to prepare them to it, was wont to call out immediately before
the time of the Blessing in such words as these, Bow down your selves to the
Blessing, Chrysostom. Liturg. The Jews received it after the same manner, Eccles. c.
50. v. 23. When the Service was finished, the high Priest went down, and lifted
up his hands over the Congregation to give the blessing of the Lord with his
lips, and they bowed down themselves to worship the Lord, that they might
receive the Blessing from the Lord the most high. And doubtless did we consider
the efficacy and virtue of this blessing of Priest or Bishop, we could do no
less than they did. For it is God from heaven that blesses us by the mouth of
his Minister. We have his word for it Numb. 6. 22. And the Lord spoke to Moses,
saying, Speak to Aaron and his sons, saying, On this wise shall ye bless the
children of Israel. The Lord bless thee, etc. And they shall put my name upon
the children of Israel, And I will bless them. And the same promise of Gods
assistance, and ratifying the Priests Blessing, we have in the Gospel, S.
Matthew. 10. 13. S. Luke 10. 5. where our Savior charges his Apostles and
Disciples that into whatsoever house they enter they should say, not pray; say
with authority, Peace be to this house, and (not if your prayers be servent, or
if they in the house join in prayer with you, but) if the Son of peace be
there; that is, if he that dwells in the house hinders not, nor resists your
blessing, if he be a person capable of so much good as your blessing; (for this
is signified by this Hebrew phrase, Son of peace) your peace shall rest upon
him: but if he be not such a son of peace, your blessing shall return to you
again, which it could not be said to do, unless virtue together with the
blessing had gone out from them.

The EVENING SERVICE differs little or nothing from the Morning, and therefore,
what has been said concerning the Morning office, may be applied to that.

The LITANY.
LItany signifies an humble, an earnest Supplication. These Forms of prayers
called Litanies, (wherein the people are more exercised than in any other part
of the Service, by continual joining in every passage of it,) are thought by
some to have been brought into the Church about four hundred years after
Christ, in times of great calamity, for the appeasing of Gods wrath. True it
is, that they are very seasonable prayers in such times, and therefore were by
Gregory and others used in their Processions, for the averting of Gods wrath in
public calamities, but it is as true, that they were long before that time,
even in the first Services that we find in the Church, used at the
Communion-Service, and other Offices, as Ordination of Priests, and the like:
witness Clem. Constable. l. 8. c. 5, 6, 10. where we find the Deacon ministering to
the people, and directing them from point to point what to pray for, as it is
in our Litany, and the people are appointed to answer to every Petition, Domine
miserere, Lord have mercy. And in all Liturgies extant, (as Mr. Thorndyke has
well observed in his Book of Religious Assemblies,) the same Allocutions or
(...) which are indeed Litanies, may be seen. And S. Aug. Ep. 119. c. 18: tells
us of the Common Prayers, which were indicted or denounced by the voice of the
Deacon. All which make it probable, that the practice of Litanies is derived
from the Apostles, and the custom of their time. And S. C^rys. in Romans c. 8.
seems to assert the same: For upon that verse, We know not what we should pray
for as we ought, but the Spirit helps our infirmities, he says thus; In those
days amongst other miraculous gifts of the Spirit, this was one, Donum pr^^um,
the gift of making prayers for the Church, to help the ignorance of the people
that knew not what to pray for as they ought; he that had this gift, stood up,
and prayed for the whole Congregation, and taught them what to pray for: whose
Office now the Deacon performs: viz. by directing them from point to point,
what to pray for. To every of which Petitions, says Clem. above cited, the
people were to answer, Domine Miserere. This continual joining of the people in
every passage of it, tends much both to the improving and evidencing that
fervor and intention, which is most necessary in prayers. Hence was it that
these Forms of prayers, (where the peoples devotion is so often excited^
quickened, and exercised by continual Suffrages, such as Good Lord deliver us,
We beseech thee to hear us good Lord,) were called (...) earnest or intense
Petitions. In which, if they were relished aright, the earnest and vehement
devotion of Primitive times, still breaths; and in these prayers, if ever we
pray with the Spirit.

Concerning the Litany of our Church, we may boldly say, and easily maintain
it, that there is not extant any where; 1. A more particular excellent
enumeration of all the Christians either private or common wants; Nor 2. A more
innocent, blameless form, against which there lies no just exception; Nor 3. A
more Artificial Composure for the raising of our devotion, and keeping it up
throughout, than this part of our Liturgy.

In the beginning it directs our prayers to the right object, the Glorious
TRINITY. For necessary it is, that we should know whom we worship. Then it
proceeds to Deprecations, or prayers against evil; lastly, to Petitions for
good. In the Deprecations, as right method requires, we first pray against sin,
then against punishment; because sin is the greatest evil. From all which we
pray to be delivered by the holy actions and passions of CHRIST, the only
merits of all our good. The like good order is observed in our Petitions for
good. First, we pray for the Church Catholic, the common mother of all
Christians; then for our own Church, to which, next the Church Catholic, we
owe the greatest observance and duty. And therein, in the first place for the
principal members of it, in whose welfare the Churches peace chiefly consists.
After this we pray particularly for those sorts of men that most especially
need our prayers, such amongst others, as those whom the Law calls miserable
persons.

The Litany is not one long continued prayer, but broken into many short and
pithy Ejaculations: that the intention and devotion which is most necessary in
prayer, may not be dulled and vanish, as in a long prayer it is apt to do; but
be quickened and intended, by so many new and quick petitions; and the nearer to
the end, the shorter and livelier it is, strengthening our devotions by raising
in us an apprehension of our misery and distress, ready, as it were to sink and
perish; and therefore crying out as the Disciples did, Master, save us, we
perish: D Lamb of God hear us, D Christ hear us, Lord have mercy upon us. Such
as these are the active, lively spirited prayers, (...) which S. James mentions
and tells us, avail much. S. James 5. 16.

The Doxology, or Glory be to the Father, etc. is much used in our Service,
after Confession, after Athanasius's Creed, and especially after each Psalm and
Canticle, as a most thankful adoration of the holy Trinity, upon reflection on
the matter going before, And therefore is very fitly divided betwixt the Priest
and people in saying it, according as the matter going before was; and it is in
those places said standing, as the most proper posture for thanksgiving or
Adoration. Here in the Litany, it is said in a way somewhat different; for
after that the Priest and people have in the supplications before going besought
God that He would arise, help and deliver them, as he did their forefathers of
old for his Names sake and Honor, the Priest does Collect wise sum up This;
praying, that by such deliverances, all glory may redound to God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, as it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, etc.
the people answering only, Amen, as it were after a a Collect, and continuing
kneeling; because both this, as it is here used, and other parts of the Litany
before and after, are matters of humble supplication, and so most fit to be
tendered to God in that posture.

In the former part of the Litany, the Priest has not a part so proper but
that it may be said by a Deacon, or other, and it uses to be sung by such in
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Chapels, and both it and all other our
alternate Supplications, which are as it were the Lesser Litanies, do much
resemble the ancient Prayers indicted by the Deacons, as we have said; but in
the latter part of the Litany, from the Lords prayer, to the end, the Priest
has a part more peculiar, by reason of the eminen^y of that prayer and other
Collects follow, wherein the Priest does recommend again the petitions of the
people to God (as in that prayer, ^^e humbly beseech thee O Lord mercifully to
look upon our infirmities, etc.) and Solemnly offers them up to God in the
behalf of the people, to which the people answer, Amen: and therefore these
Collects after the Litany, though the matter of them has been prayed for
before particularly in the Supplications foregoing, may be said, without the
charge of needless tautology, for here the Priest does by virtue of his sacred
Office, solemnly offer up and present to God these petitions of the people, as
it was usually done in ancient Liturgies; Praying God to accept the peoples
Prayers as he does more than once in S. Chrysostom. Liturgy, particularly in that
Prayer which we have out of it in our Litany. For when the Deacon has (as we
have observed) ministered to the People several Petitions, to which they answer,
Lord have mercy, Litany-wise, then the Priest Collect-wise makes a Prayer to
God to accept the peoples petitions, the Deacon in the mean time proceeding to
dictate to the people more Supplications, which the Priest in another Collect
offers up to God Solemnly, but secretly, so that though in some of those
Collects the Priest at the Latter end, spoke out so that the people might hear
and answer, Amen, or Glory be to the Father, or the like, (which they might
well do, for though the Prayer were said by the Priest secretly, yet it was
prescribed, and such as the people knew before hand) yet some of them were said
throughout secretly by the Priest, to which the people were not required to
make any Answer;

The reason of these Secreta, secret prayers said by the Priest, may be partly
for variety to refresh the people, but chiefly, as I conceive, that by this
course the people might be taught to understand and reverence the office of the
Priest, which is to make an atonement for the people, and to present their
prayers to God, by that very offering of them up, making them more acceptable
to God. All which depends not upon the peoples consent or confirmation of his
office, but upon Gods alone appointment and institution; who has set him apart
to these offices of offering gifts and Sacrifices for the people, Heb. 5. 1.
And therefore as it was appointed by God, that when Aaron by his Priestly
office was to offer for the people and make an atonement for them, none of the
people were to be present, Lev. 16. 17. So the Church ordered that at some
times, when the Priest was making an atonement for the people, and offering up
for them and the acceptance of their prayers, the Merits and Passion of
Christ, none should seem actually to assist, but the Priest should say it (...)
secretly and mystically. Yet lest the people should be unsatisfied, and
suspicious that the Priest had neglected this his office, which they could not
be assured that he had performed, because it was done secretly; therefore the
Church appointed that the Priest should at the end of the Service come down
from the Altar, and standing behind the Pulpit in the midst of the people say a
loud prayer, (called (...) Goar. P. 154.) which was a sum or Compendium of all
that the people had before petitioned for, which he then solemnly offered up to
God.

The Church of England is generally in her Common Prayers, as for an humble, so
for an audible voice, especially in the Lords Prayer appointing it to be said,
in the Rubric before it, with a loud, that is, an audible voice, not secretly;
and this, for the more earnest repetition of so divine words, and to make them
more familiar to the people. But though this Church does not order the Priest
to say these Prayers secretly, yet she retains the same order of offering up by
the Priest in Collects following the peoples foregoing supplications.

The Litany is appointed in the Rubricks to be read Wednesdays and Fridays, the
days kept in the Greek Church for more solemn Fasts, because the Bridegroom
was then taken from us, being sold by Judas on Wednesday, and murdered on
Friday, Epiphan. adv. Aerium. And though our Church in imitation of the Western
has changed the Wednesday-Fast to Saturday, yet in memory of the Eastern
custom, the still appoints the Litany to be used upon Wednesday.

Friday was both in Greek Church and Latin a Litany or Humiliation-day, and so
is kept in ours. And whosoever loves to feast on that day rather than another,
in that holds not communion with the ancicient Catholic Church, but with the
Turks, who in contumely of Christ crucified, Feast that day. Chemnit. in 3.
praec.

Of HOLY DAYS.
HOly in Scripture phrase is all one with separate or set a part to God, and is
opposed to common. What God has cleaned, that call not thou common, Acts 10.
15. Holy days then are those which are taken out of common days, and
separated to Gods holy service and worship, either by Gods own appointment, or
by holy Churches Dedication. And these are either Fasting and Penitential days
(for there is a holy Fast, Joel 2. as well as a holy Feast, Nehem. 8. 10.) such
as are Ash Wednesday, Good Friday, and the whole week before Easter commonly
called the Holy-week, which days holy Church has dedicated to Gods solemn
worship, in religious fastings and prayers. Or else holy Festivals which are
set apart to the solemn and religious commemoration of some eminent mercies and
blessings of God. And amongst those Holy Days, some are higher days than
other, in regard of the greatness of the blessing commemorated, and of the
solemnity of the Service appointed to them. So we read, Lev. 23. 24. etc. The
Feast of Tabernacles was to continue seven days, but the first and the eighth
were the highest days because then were the most solemn Assemblies.

This sanctification or setting apart of Festival-daies, is a token of that
thankfulness, and a part of that public honor which we owe to God for
admirable benefits; and these days or Feasts so set apart are of excellent
use, being, as learned Hooker observes, the 1. Splendour and outward dignity of
our Religion. 2. Forcible witnesses of ancient truth. 3. Provocations to the
exercise of all Piety. 4. Shadows of our endless felicity in heaven. 5. On
earth, everlasting records teaching by the eye in a manner, whatsoever we
believe.


And concerning particulars. As the Jews had their Sabbath, which did
continually bring to the mind the former World finished by Creation; so the
Christian Church has her Lords days or Sundays to keep us in perpetual
remembrance of a far better World begun by him who came to restore all things
to make Heaven and Earth new. The rest of the holy Festivals which we celebrate
have relation all to one Head CHRIST. We begin therefore our Ecclesiastical
year (as to some accounts, though not as to the order of our service) with the
glorious Annunciation of his Birth by Angelical message. Hereunto are added his
blessed Nativity it self, the mystery of his legal Circumcision, the
Testification of his true Incarnation by the Purification of his blessed Mother
the Virgin Mary: his glorious Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven the
admirable sending down of his Spirit upon his chosen.

Again, for as much as we know that CHRIST has not only been manifested great
in himself, but great in other his Saints also; the days of whose departure
out of this world are to the Church of Christ, as the birth and
coronation-dayes of Kings or Emperors; therefore especial choice being made of
the very flower of all occasions in this kind, there are annual selected times
to meditate of Christ glorified in them, which had the honor to suffer for his
sake, before they had age and ability to know him, namely, the blessed
Innocents: glorified in them which knowing him as S. Stephen, had the sight of
that before death, whereinto such acceptable death does lead: glorified in
those Sages of the East, that came from far to adore him, and were conducted by
strange light: glorified in the second Elias of the World, sent before him to
prepare his way: glorified in every of those Apostles whom it pleased him to
use as founders of his kingdom here: glorified in the Angels, as in S. Michael:
glorified in all those happy souls that are already possessed of bliss.

Besides these, be four days annexed to the Feasts of Easter and Whitsunday,
for the more honor and enlargement of those high solemnities. These being the
days which the Lord has made glorious, Let us rejoice and be glad in them.
These days we keep not in a secret Calendar, taking thereby our private
occasions as we list our selves to think how much God has done for all men:
but they are chosen out to serve as public memorials of such mercies, and are
therefore clothed with those outward robes of holiness, whereby their
difference from other days may be made sensible, having by holy Church a
solemn Service appointed to them.

Part of which Service are the Epistles and Gospels: of which in the first
place we shall discourse, because these are peculiar and proper to each several
Holy Day, the rest of the Service for the most part being common to all.

Concerning these, two things are designed. 1. To show the Antiquity of them.
2. Their fitness for the day to which they belong, or the reason of their
choice.


Concerning the Antiquity of Epistles and Gospels, it will be sufficient once
for all, to show that the use of them in the Christian Church was ancient.
Concerning the antiquity of the days themselves, to which the Epistles and
Gospels appertain, it will be sit to be more particular.

That the use of Epistles and Gospels peculiar to the several Holy Days was
ancient, appears first by ancient Liturgies: Secondly by the testimony of the
ancient, Fathers. Let S. AUGUSTINE testify for the Latin-Church, in his
Preface to his Comment upon the Epistle of S. John, and in his X. Sermon De
verb. Apost. We heard first, says he, the Apostolical Lesson, then we sung a
Psalm, after that the Gospel was read: Now let S. CHRYSOSTOM. testify for the
Greek, Romans 19. in cap. 9. Act. The Minister stands up, and with a loud voice
calls, [Let us attend:] then the Lessons are begun: which Lessons are the
Epistles and Gospels (as appears in his Liturgy) which follow immediately after
the Minister has so called for attention.

The fitness of the Epistle and Gospel for the day it belongs to, and the
reason of the choice will plainly appear, if we observe that these holy
Festivals and Solemnities of the Church, are, as I have touched before, of Two
Sorts; The more high days, or the rest: The First commemorate the signal Acts
or Passages of our Lord in the Redemption of mankind, his incarnation and
Nativity, Circumcision, Manifestation to the Gentiles, his Fasting, Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension, the sending of the Holy Ghost, and thereupon a
more full and express manifestation of the Sacred Trinity. The Second sort is
of Inferior days that supply the Intervals of the greater, such as are either
the remaining Sundays, wherein without any consideration of the sequence of
time (which could only be regarded in great Feasts) the holy Doctrine, Deeds
and Miracles of our Lord are the chief matters o^ our meditations; or else the
other Holy days of which already has been spoken. And for all these Holy
Times we have Epistles and Gospels very proper and seasonable, for not only on
high and special days, but even in those also, that are more general and
indifferent, some respect is had to the season, and the holy affections the
Church then aims at, as Mortification in Lent, Joy, Hope, newness of Life, etc.
after Easter; the Fruits and Gifts of the Spirit and preparation for Christ's
Second coming in the time between Pentecost and Advent. But these things I
shall show in the Discourse of the Holy days severally. As for the Les^ons,
although they have another Order, and very profitable, being for each day of
the week, following usually the method of Chapters, and taking in the Old
Testament also (the Communion dealing chiefly with the New as most fit for the
nature of that Service) yet in them also regard is had to the more solemn times
by select and proper readings, as has been showed. This being the Churches
Rule and Method (as she has it from the Apostle) that all things be done unto
edifying, that we may be better acquainted with God, and with our selves, with
what has been done for us, and what is to be done by us. And this Visible as
well as Audible preaching of Christian Doctrine by these Solemnities and
Readings in such an admirable Order is so apt to infuse by degrees all
necessary Christian knowledge into us, and the use of it to the ignorant is so
great, that it may well be feared (as a Reverend person has forewarned) that
When the Festivals and Solemnities for the Birth of Christ and his other famous
passages of life, and death, and Resurrection, and Ascensi^^ and Mission of the
Holy Ghost, and the Lessons, Gospels (and Collects) and Ser^^ons upon them, be
turned out of the Church together with the Creeds also, 'twill not be in the
power of weekly Sermons on some head of Religion to keep up the knowledge of
Christ in men's hearts, etc. And no doubt for this and other good Reasons which
he gives us, it was that the primitive Christians were so exact and religious
in these Solemnities and Meditations on the occasions of them, and therefore
the Sermons o^ the Fathers were generally on the Readings of the Day, as
hereafter is showed. And we have from another the like hand thus: The Blessings
of God whereof these Solemnities renew the Remembrance are of that esteem to
the Church, that we are not able to express too much thankfulness in taking
that occasion of Solemnizing his Service. And the greatest part of Christians
are such as will receive much improvement in the principal Mysteries of our
Faith by the Sensible instruction which the Observation of such Solemnities
yields. The remembrance of the Birth, the Sufferings, the Resurrection of
Christ, the Coming of the Holy Ghost, the Conversion of the Gentiles by sending
the Apostles, the way made before his coming by the Annunciation of the Angel
and the coming of the Baptist, as it is a powerful mean to train the more
ignorant sort in the Understanding of such great Mysteries, so it is a just
occasion for all sorts to make that a particular time of Serving God upon which
we solemnize those great works of his. See Dr. Hammonds View of the Directory,
page 38. Mr. Thorndyke of public Assemblies page 256. and what we have above
said concerning the excellent use of Festival days at page 105.

The same Method shall be observed in this Discourse of Holy Days, which the
Service Book uses; not that in the Title Page in the beginning of the book
(which perhaps reckons for Holy Days only those days in which we are solemnly
to worship God, and also to rest from usual labor) but that in the Services
appointed by the Book which adds over and above, that old Catalogue of
Holy Days, S. Paul, And S. Barnabas, Ashwednesday, and the Holy-Week: All
which must be reckoned for Holy Days in the Churches account, because they
have Holy Day service; Epistles and Gospels, and Second-service appointed to
them, though there be no Law that inflicts a penalty upon them that do their
usual works upon those days, they being only desired to be present at the
Churches service at the Hours appointed.

Of ADVENT Sunday.
THe Principal Holy Days as Christmas, Easter, and Whitsunday, have some days
appointed to attend upon them: some to go before, some to come after: as it
were to wait upon them for their greater solemnity.

Before Christmas are appointed four Advent-Sundays, so called because they are
to prepare us for Christ his Advent or coming in the flesh. These are to
Christmas Day, as S. John Baptist to Christ forerunners to prepare for it, and
point it out.

First Sunday Adv.
The Gospel S. Matthew. 21. 1. seems at first more proper to Christ's Passion than
his Birth; yet is it read now principally for those words in it, Blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord. That is, Blessed is he for coming in the
Flesh, the cause of all our joy, for which we can never say enough, Hosanna in
the Highest.

The Epistle labors to prepare us to behold with joy this rising Sun, bidding
us awake from sleep, according to the Prophet Esaias 60. 1. Arise, and shine, for
thy light is come.

The Collect is taken out of both, and relates to both, the first part of it is
clearly the words of the Epistle, That we may cast away the works of darkness,
and put upon us the armor of light, That which follows, In the time of this
mortal life, in the which thy Son Jesus Christ came to visit us, in effect is
the same with that in the Epistle: Let us put off the works of darkness, etc.
because the night is spent, the day is at hand, and our salvation is near; that
is, our Savior Christ, the light of the world is coming into the world to
visit us in great humility, according to the Prophet, Zach. 9. 9. which the
Gospel records, Tell ye the daughter of Sion (to her great joy) that behold Her
King comes unto her, meek, (or in great humility) sitting upon an Ass.

2. Sunday Adv.
The Gospel treats of Christ's second coming to judgment, an excellent
meditation to prepare us for the welcome and joyful entertainment of Christ's
first coming. A Savior must needs be welcome to him that is afraid of
damnation.

The Epistle mentions the first coming of our Lord for the Salvation even of
the Gentiles, that is of us, for which all praise is by us, to be given to him.
Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye nations together.

The Collect is taken out of the Epistle; and though it seems not to relate to
the day, yet is it an excellent prayer for all times, and so not unseasonable
for this.

3. Sunday Adv.
The Epistle mentions the second coming of Christ; the Gospel, the first. The
Collect prays for the benefit of this light.

This week is one of the four Ember weeks, concerning which see after the first
Sunday in Lent.

4. Sunday Adv.
The Epistle and Gospel set Christ, as it were, before us, not prophesied of,
but being even at hand, yea standing among us; pointing him out as S. John
Baptist did to the people; Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world.

The Collect Prays most earnestly and passionately to him, to succor us
miserable sinners.

Feast of Christmas Day.
THe Epistle, Gospel, and Collect are plainly suitable to the day, all
mentioning the birth of Christ. Besides, this Feast has proper Psalms, in
which some Verses are peculiar to the day, as will appear, if they be well
considered. The First Psalm for the Morning Service, is the 19. The heavens
declare the glory of God; very suitable to the Feast, for at His Birth a a new
Star appeared which declared his Glory and Deity so plainly, that it fetched the
Sages of the East to come and worship him, S. Matt. 2. Where is he that is born
King of the Jews? for we have seen his Star in the East, and are come to
worship him.

The Second Psalm for the Morning is 45. Which at the beginning of it is a
Genethliack or Birth-song of Christ, The fairest of the children of men, v.3.
And of his mighty success in subduing the Devil and the world by the word of
truth, of meekness and righteous^ess, verse. 5. etc.

The third is Psalm. 85. which is principally set for the Birth of Christ. For
it is a thanksgiving to God for sending a Savior, which should save his people
from their sins, the greatest captivity that is; and therefore cannot properly
be meant of any but Christ, who was therefore called Jesus, because be should
save his people from their sins, S. Matt. 1. 21. And so the Primitive Church
understood it, and therefore selected it out as a part of their Office for this
day, as being proper and pertinent to the matter of the Feast: For the meeting
here specified, ver. 10. 11. of Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and Peace, was
at Christ's birth, who said of himself, that he was the Truth; who as he had a
birth from Heaven, to wit, his Divine nature, so had he another as Man from
Earth from the Virgin; which birth drew Righteousness to look from Heaven, upon
poor sinners with a favorable look, and made righteousness and peace kiss, for
the delivering of sinners from their captivity. True it is, the Prophet in the
first Verses speaks of this delivery as of a thing past, Lord thou have turned
away the captivity of Jacob. Yet for all this it may be a prophecy of our
salvation by the coming of Christ hereafter: for as S. Peter says, Acts. 2 30.
David being a Prophet, and seeing this before, spoke of Christ's Nativity, as if
it were already past.

The Evening Psalms are 89, 110, 132. The first and last of which are thankful
commemorations of Gods merciful promise of sending our Lord Christ into the
world, that seed of David, which be had sworn to establish, and set up his
Throne for ever. For which, O Lord, the very heavens shall praise thy wondrous
works, and thy truth in the congregation of the Saints, v. 5. Psalm. 89. The
Church was in aff^iction now, as is plain in both these Psalms: but such was
the joy that they were affected with, at the promise of Christ's birth and
coming into the world, that they could not contain, but even in the midst of
their misery, break forth into Thanksgiving for it: and how can the Church
excite us better to Thanksgiving to God for the birth of Christ, upon the day,
then by showing us how much the promise of it afar off wrought upon the Saints
of old? The 110. Psalm expressly mentions the birth of Christ, ver. 3. The dew
of thy birth, is of the womb of the Morning; as the morning dew brings forth
innumerable fruit, so shall the birth of Christ bring forth innumerable
faithful people: and therefore the Prophet here does, as we should this day,
adore and praise the goodness of God for the birth of Christ, the cause of so
much good.

It is admirable to behold the frame of the Churches holy Office and Service
this day. In the First Lessons, she reads us the prophecy of Christ's coming in
the flesh: in the Second Lessons, Epistle and Gospel, she gives us the History
of it. In the Collect, the teaches us to pray, that we may be partakers of the
benefit of his birth: In the proper Preface for the day, as also in the proper
Psalms, she sets us to our duty of Adoring and Glorifying God for his mercy. In
the Lessons and Gospels appointed, holy Church does the Angels part, brings us
glad tidings of our Saviors Birth, Behold I bring you glad tidings of great
joy, for unto you is born this day a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, S. Luke
2. 10. In pointing the special Hymns and Psalms, the calls upon us to do the
Shepherds part, to glorify and Praise God for all the things that this day we
hear and see, ver. 20. And to sing with the Angels, Glory to God in the
highest, for this good will to Men.

For the Antiquity of this day, many testimonies might be brought out of the
Ancients; but, because I intend brevity, I shall be content with two beyond
exception. S. Augustine, Ep. 119. witnesses, that it was the custom of holy
Church to keep this day: And upon the five and twentieth of December, in Psalm.
132. S. Chrysostom makes a Sermon to prove that the keeping of Christmas Day
was ancient, even from the first times; and that the Church kept the true day.
In the same same sermon he says, It is a godly thing to keep this day. Nay
further, that the keeping of this day was one of the greatest signs of our love
to Christ. Amongst other Arguments which he uses there, to persuade his hearers
to keep this day, he brings this, that the custom of keeping this day was
religious, and of God, or else it could never have been so early spread over
the whole World, in spite of so much opposition. Orat. in Natal. Dom. Tom. 5.
Edit. Savil.

S. Stephen, S. John, Innocents.
IMmediately after Christmas ^ollow as attendants upon this high Festival S.
Stephen. S. John, and Innocents; not because this was the very time of their
suffering, but because none are thought fitter attendants on Christ's Nativity,
than the blessed Martyrs, who have laid down their lives for him, from whose
birth they received spiritual life. And there being three kinds of Martyrdom;
I. In will and deed, which is the highest. 2. In will, but not in deed. 3. In
deed, but not in will: in this order they attend; S. Stephen first, who
suffered both in will and deed. Next S. John, who suffered Martyrdom in will,
but not in deed, being miraculously delivered out of boiling Cauldron, into
which he was put before Port-Latin in Rome. Lastly, the holy Innocents who
suffered in deed, but not in will: yet are reckoned amongst the Martyrs,
because they suffered for Christ: whose praise these his witnesses confessed and
showed forth not in speaking but in dying. [Collect for the day.]

The reason of the choice of the Epistles, Gospels and Collects for these days
is plain, these being all privileged days, that is, days which have in
Scripture their peculiar histories. But ^or the Collect for S. Stephens day we
may note in particular, That as the Church offers up some of her Collects
directly to the Second Person of the Trinity, so one of them is this for S.
Stephens day, and very properly; For as S. Stephen in the midst of his
Martyrdom prayed to Jesus saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and, Lord lay
not this sin to their charge; so the Church in imitation of this blessed
Proto-Martyr upon his day calls upon the Lord Jesus also desiring of him such a
spirit as that of S. Stephen, to love and pray for our Enemies, which is that
Heroical and Transcendant virtue which is peculiar to Christian Religion.

Before we endeavor to show the antiquity of these days in particular, it will
not be amiss to give some account of the ancient observation of Saints days in
general.

That the observation of Saints days was very ancient in the Church will appear
by these testimonies following. The Council of Carthag. 3. c. 47. tells us that
the Church did celebrate the Passions and Anniversaries of the Martyrs. This
Counc. was held in S. Augustines time. S. Aug. in Psalm. 88. Attend therefore my
Dearly Beloved; All of you unanimously hold fast God your Father and the Church
your Mother. Celebrate the Saints Birthdays (so they Anciently called the days
of their Death and Martyrdom) with sobriety, that we may imitate them that have
gone before us, that they may joy over us, who pray for us, that so the
Blessing of God may remain upon us for ever. Amen, Amen.

Chrysostom. Hom. 66. ad Pop. Antioch, The sepulchers of the Saints are honorable,
and their days are known of all, bringing a festival joy to the world.

Before these S. Cyprian, l. 4. ep. 5. We celebrate the Passions of the Martyrs
and their days with an anniversary commemoration. And before him Anno 147. the
Church of Smyrna says the same Enseb. Hist. l. 4. c. 15.

If it be demanded why the Church kept the days of the Saints deaths, rather
than of their Birth or Baptism? The answer may be: 1. Because at their deaths
they are born Citizens of Heaven, of the Church triumphant, (which is more than
to be born either a man or a Christian, a member of the Church Militant) whence
(as above said) these days were usually styled by the Ancients, Their
Birth-days. 2. Then do they perfectly triumph over the Devil and the world, by
which the Church Militant has gained, to her comfort, an example of
persevering constancy and courage, and the Church Triumphant has gained a new
joy by the addition of a new member. For surely if the Saints and Angels in
heaven joy at the conversion of a sinner, much more do they joy at the
admission of a Saint into Heaven.

Thus much of the Saints days in general. For these three holy days in
particular, that they are ancient, S. Augustine shows us, who has Sermons upon
all these days, Tom. 10. And Chrysol. who has Sermons upon S. Stephen, and
Innocents: And Origin in his Comment upon these words, A voice was heard in
Rama, tells us, the Church did, and did well in it to keep the Feast of
Innocents, and there is as much reason for the keeping of S. Stevens day, who
was the first Martyr, and of S. John's the beloved Disciple and Evangelist, as
for the keeping of Innocents; and therefore it is to be thought, that the
Church did then as well observe them as this, ^ince, as we have proved, she did
keep the days of Martyrs.

Sunday after Christmas.
THis Sunday has the Collect with Christmas Day; and the Epistle and Gospel
treat about the same business, the birth of Christ; for we have not yet done
with the Solemnity of Christmas. Thus great Solemnities have some days after
them, to continue the memory of them, in prorogationem Festi.

Feast of CIRCVMCISION, or Newyears-day.
THe Feast of the Circumcision is affirmed by Learned men to be of a later
institution: for though many of the ancients mention the Octave of Christmas
and Newyears-day, yet they do not mention or seem to keep it, say they, as a
Feast of the Circumcision. But suppose it be so; yet surely it cannot be denied
that there is reason enough for the keeping of this day solemn, as it is the
Feast of Christ's Circumcision: For as at Christmas CHRIST was made of a woman
like us in nature, so this day he was made under the Law, Gal. 4. 5. and for us
took upon him the curse of the Law; being made sin for us, and becoming a
surety to the offended God, for us sinners. Which suretiship he sealed, this
day with some drops of that precious blood which he meant to pour out whole
upon the Cross.

As by his Birth we received the adoption of Sons; so by his Circumcision, the
redemption of the Law: and without this, his Birth had not availed us at all.

The Epistle, Gospel, and Collect are plainly fit for the day.

This Holy day has no fast before it, the Reason we shall show: and to save
trouble, we will here once for all show Why some Holy Days have Fasts before
them: and then, Why this and some other have none.

For the first. It was the religious custom of the primitive times to spend the
night (or a greater part of it) before the Holidays, in watching and prayers
and tears, partly to prepare them for the more solemn and religious observation
of the Holy Day following; partly to signify that we should be as the blessed
Saints were, after a little time of mortification and affliction, translated
into glory and joy, according to the Psalm, Heaviness may endure dure for a
night, but joy comes in the morning.] Thus after a Vigil comes a Holyday.
These Vigils, or night-watches, being in continuance of time, abused by the
wickedness of some, who under color of those holy nightly exercises stole a
liberty of intemperance, lust and other villainy, were, say some, by the wisdom
of holy Church, to avoid scandal, turned into Fasts, which still retain the old
name of Vigils. The truth of this Assertion I question; for neither do I find
any decree of holy Church for bidding these Vigils: (the 35. Can. of the Counc.
of Eliber; and the fifth Can. of the Counc. of Altisiodorum or Auxeres, which
are usually produced to this purpose, coming far short of such a prohibition)
nor is it so probable, that the Church should, for some particular men's abuse,
forbid a practice so religious, commanded by our Savior, S. Matthew. 25. 13.
commended to us by his practice at Gethsemaine, S. Matthew. 26. 38. S. Luke 6.
12. earnestly urged by the Fathers of the Primitive times. I therefore rather
think, that, whereas it was the ancient custom to fast the day and watch the
night before the Holy Day, as s. Bernard tells us. Ser. de Vigil S. Andrei: in
time, as charity and devotion grew cold, through sloth and restiness, this more
troublesome part of devotion, the nightly watches were laid aside, and the Fast
only retained, and that but slenderly observed. But it were to be wished, that,
as the Fast might be retained, and more strictly observed, so the holy Vigils
might be in part at least revived. For the night was not made only for sleep.
Tradesmen, Mariners, Merchants, will tell you so much; they spend a good part
of the night in watching for gain; will not you do as much for your soul?
Besides, the darkness and silence of the night, are helps to compunction and
holy sorrow; helps to meditation and contemplation: the soul is the more free
from outward distraction. The sight of men lying a-sleep in their beds, like
dead men in the grave, suggests a meditation of Doomsday. Let me therefore
persuade men and women; Bend your knees, sigh, watch and pray in the night,
Blessed is he, whom our Lord when he comes shall find so doing: and because we
know not what hour he will come, watch therefore. See Chrysostom. Hom. 26. in Act.
This for the first; why some Holy Days have Fasts before them.

Now why this Feast of CIRCUMCISION, and some other have no Fasts, the reason
is double.

First, because sometimes the signification of the Vigil or Fast, mentioned
above, ceases: and the signification or mystery failing, the Vigil or Fast is
omitted. For example, S. Michael upon this account has no Fast, because the
Angels did not by sufferings and mortifications, enter into their joy, but were
created in the joy they have. But then secondly, though this signification and
Mystery of vigils and Fasts holds good in S. Mark, S. Philip and S. Jacob, and
some other, yet they have no Fasts for another reason; because they fall either
betwixt Easter and Whitsunday, or betwixt Christmas and Epiphany, which holy
Church held for such high times of joy and Festivity, that they would not have
one day among them sullied by pensive sorrow and fasting: Con. Turon. 2. c. 13.
Epiph. in brevi expos. Fidei.

If the Fast for a Holy Day, fall upon a Holy Day; that is, if the day before
the Holy Day upon which the Fast regularly is to be kept, be it self also a
Holy Day, then the Fast must be kept the day before that. Decretal. l. 3. Tit.
46.

EPIPHANY.
THis Greek Word signifies Manifestation, and has been of old used for
Christmass-day, when Christ was manifested in the flesh; and for this day,
wherein the Star did appear to manifest CHRIST to the Wise men: as appears by
Chrysostom. and Epiphan. Upon this identity of the word, some unskilful ones were
missed, to think that anciently the Feasts of Christmas and Epiphany were one
and the same: but plain it is by Chrysostom. Epiphan. Nazianzen in their Sermons
upon this day, that these two Feasts were observed, as we do, upon several
days. Nazianzen calls this day on which Christ was baptized, The holy lights of
Epiphany; which to day we celebrate, says he, having already celebrated the
holy Feast of Christmas.] S. Chrysostom says the day of Christ's birth is not
so usually and properly called Epiphany, as the day of his Baptism.

This Feast is called in Latin Epiphaniae, Epiphanies, in the plural; because
upon this day we celebrate three glorious apparitions or manifestations, all
which happened upon the same day, though not of the same year. Chrysostom. Sermon. 159.

The first manifestation was of the Star, (mentioned in the Gospel) the
Gentiles guide to Christ.

The Second Epiphany or manifestation was that of the glorious Trinity at the
baptism of Christ, mentioned in the second Lesson at morning prayer. S. Luke 3.
22.

The third was of Christ's glory or Divinity, by the miracle of turning water
into wine, mentioned in the second Lesson at Evening prayer, S. John 2.

The Collect is plain. The Epistle and Gospel mention Christ's manifestation to
the Gentiles; for this was the day of the Dedication of the Gentiles Faith,
Chrysostom. in diem.

For the antiquity of this day, we have already seen Nazianzen Chrysostom. and
Epiphan. to which I shall add only S. August. de temp. Ser. 32. [ The
solemnit) of this day known throughout all the world, what joy does it bring
us? But the Donatists, says he, will not keep it, both because they are
Schismatics and love not unity, and also because they hate the Eastern Church,
where the Star appeared.]

1. Sunday after Epiphany.
From Christmas to Epiphany, holy Churches design, is, to set forth Christ's
Humanity, to make Christ manifest in the flesh, which the offices do, as we
have seen; but from Epiphany to Septuagesima, especially in the four next
Sundays after Epiphany, she endeavors to manifest his glory and Divinity, by
recounting some of his first miracles, and manifestations of his Deity, so that
each Sunday is in this respect a kind of Epiphany.

The Gospel of this day mentions Christ's manifestation to the Doctors of the
Jews, astonishing all his hearers with his miraculous answers.

The Epistle exhorts us to make a spiritual use of the wisemens mysterious
offerings, especially of Myrrh; which signifies very rightly the mortifying of
the flesh, and the offering of our bodies as an holy Sacrifice to God by Christ.

The Collect prays for grace to enable us thereunto.

2. Sunday after Epiphany.
The Gospel mentions Christ's turning water into wine, by which, he manifested
both his glory by the miracle, and his goodness in ministering to the
necessities of others: to which virtue, the Epistle exhorts us, that whatsoever
gifts we have, we should use them as Christ did, to the good and benefit of
others.

The Collect as diverse others recommends to God the supplications of the
people, etc. See more of the Collects in general. Page 81. and for the Day 86.

3. Sunday after Epiphany.
The Gospel is concerning our Lords healing of the Leper that believed in him.

The Epistle at first sight seems not to agree to the Gospel; but yet, if
rightly applied, it suits well with it in the mystical sense. For the healing
of the Leper, signifies, that Christ will heal us from the Leprosy of sin, if
we believe in him, and come to him for cure as the Leper did.

The Epistle labors to prevent the mo^^ over-spreading leprous sins of pride
(against which the first verse is directed^ Be not wise in your own conceits)
and wrath and revenge in the following words, rendering to no man evil for evil.
Or rather, the Epistle does remove the two great impediments of Christ's cure of
our sinf^^^ leprosy: namely pride, which God resists. S. James 4. 6. and
malice or revenge which makes us unpardonable and uncurable, F^^ unless we
forgive, Christ will not forgive us, S. Matthew. 6. 15.

The Collect prays to God through Christ to heal us.

4. Sunday after Epiphany.
The Gospel treats of Christ's miraculous stilling of the waves and the wind. By
the tempest on the Sea, may be signified the tumultuous madness of the people,
which endangers the peace of the Church, Christ's ship: so the Psalm expounds
it, Thou stillest the raging of the Sea, and the madness of the people: which
would never be quiet, unless Christ by his word and power should command it to
be still: And because he does now rule the peoples madness by Ministers of his
vengeance to whom he gives his power: therefore the Epistle teaches and exhorts
us to submit conscientiously to that power of Christ, that so the ship of the
Church may be still and safe.

The Collect prays to God to keep the Church safe amidst the many storms and
waves that shake it.

5. Sunday after Epiphany.
The four precedent Sundays have manifested Christ's glory to us in part, by
the miracles He wrought while He conversed with us on Earth: The Gospel for
this day mentions his Second coming to judgment, when he shall appear in his
full glory, and all the holy Angels with him: which glorious appearance, as it
will be dreadful to those who have resembled the Tares, for they shall then be
burned with unquenchable fire: So it will be a joyful appearance to such as the
Epistle persuades us to be, viz. The Meek, and Gentle, and Charitable. And the
Collect is for such, praying God to keep his Church and Household continually in
the true Religion, etc.

Septuagesima Sunday.
MAny reasons are given of this name; but in my apprehension the best is a
consequentia numerandi, because the first Sunday in Lent is called
Quadragesima, containing about forty days from Easter; therefore the Sunday
before that being still farther from Easter, is called Quinquagesima, five
being the next number above four; and so the Sunday before that Sexagesima, and
the Sunday before that Septuagesima.

This and the two next Sundays and weeks were appointed as preparatives to the
Lenten Fast, that when it came, it might be the the more strictly and
religiously observed. And the Regulars and those of the strictest life did fast
these weeks, though the common people began not their Fast till Ashwednesday.
Bernard in Septuages.

The observation of Septuagesima, Sexagesima, and Quinquagesima, are to be sure
as ancient as GREGORY the Great.

The Epistle persuades us to works of penance and holy mortification; and lest
we should shrink from these hardships, it encourages us by propounding the
reward of these religious exercises; namely, an everlasting crown.

The Gospel is much to the same purpose. It tells us that Gods vineyard is no
place for idle loyterers; all must work that will receive any penny or reward.

Sexagesima Sunday.
The Epistle propounds the example of S. Paul, who was eminent for works of
mortification, and Lenten Exercises: and lest we should think that there is no
need of such strictness and holy violence in Religion, the holy Gospel tells us
what danger we are in of coming short of heaven, how that scarce one of four
that profess Religion, and hear the word, brings forth fruit to salvation, most
losing it after they have received it, for want of due care and heed.

Quinquages. Sunday.
Septuagesima and Sexagesima Sundays have persuaded us to fasting and other
exercises of mortification in the Lent following; and because all these bodily
exercises profit little, unless we add faith and charity, or faith working by
love, therefore this day the Epistle commends charity, the Gospel faith in
Christ, by which our darkness is enlightened, as the blind man's eyes were, who
wisely desired that he may see, for in sight of God consists our happiness.

LENT.
THe Antiquity of Lent is plain by these Testimonies following. Chrysol. Ser.
11. Chrysostom. in Heb. 10. 9. Ethic. Cyril. Catech. 5. August. Ep. 119. [Vt
quadraginta dies ante Pascha observent^r Ecclesiae consuetudo roboravit, That
forty days should be observed before Easter, the custom of the Church has
confirmed, Hieron. ad Marcellam. Nos unam quadragemam toto anno, tempore
congruo jejunamus, secundum traditionem Apostolorum, etc. One Fast in the year
of forty days we keep at a time convenient, according to the Tradition of the
Apostles.]

Epiphanius adv. Aerium, tells us, that the Aerians were the most brainsick
Heretics that ever were; for they held that Bishops and Priests were all one;
that Presbyters might ordain Presbyters, besides, they held that they were not
bound to keep Lent, and the holy week, as holy Churches laws required, but
would then feast and drink drunk in spite, saying, that it was against
Christian liberty to be tied to Fast.

This forty days Fast of Lent was taken up by holy Church in imitation of Moses
and Elias in the old Testament; but principally, in imitation of our Saviors
Fast in the New Testament, Augustine, ep. 119. That we might, as far as we are
able, conform to Christ's practice, and suffer with him here, that we may reign
with him hereafter.

But if this Fast were taken up in imitation of our Savior; it may be asked,
why we do not keep it at the same time that he did, who fasted immediately
after his Baptism. S. Matt. 4. 1. which was at Epiphany; whereas our Fast
begins not till some weeks after?

For answer of this, many reasons may be given, why now, rather than at that
time we keep our Lent.

1. Because at this time when blood and affections are at the highest, it is
most fit to restrain them; and to that perhaps S. Ierom alludes, when he says,
Iejunamus tempore congruo, we fast at a time convenient.

2. As Christ's sufferings ended in an Easter, a Resurrection; so did holy
Church think fit that our spiriturl afflictions and penances should end, as his
did, at Easter. The fast of Lent signifies this present troublesome life, and
Easter signifies eternal happiness and rest. August. Ep. 119.

3. Holy Church appoints that all Christians whatsoever should receive the holy
Communion at Easter; and therefore appoints this time before, to prepare
themselves by fasting and prayer; thus judging themselves that they might not
be judged of the Lord; and this is after Gods own pattern, who commanded the
Israelites to afflict themselves, and eat bitter herbs before they should eat
the Paschal Lamb. All Churches therefore agreed that Lent should end in Easter,
though some difference there was when it should begin.

This Fast is called Lent from the time of the year in which it is kept, for
Lent in the Saxon Language is Spring. The Spring-Fast, or Lent.

ASH WEDNESDAY.
THe Church begins her Lent this day to supply the Sundays in Lent, upon which
it was not the Churches custom to fast, Sundays being high Festivals in memory
of our Saviors joyful Resurrection. Now if you take out of the six weeks of
Lent, Six Sundays, there will remain but thirty six. Fasting-days; to which,
these four of this week, being added, make the just number of forty.

This was anciently called Caput^ jejunii, the Head of Lent, and was a day of
extraordinary humiliation. Upon this day were Ashes sprinkled upon their heads,
to mind them of their mortality and also to mind them what they had deserved to
be, namely, burnt to Ashes.

Hence was it called [Dies cinerum,] ASH WEDNESDAY: and upon this day they were
wont to cloth themselves in Sackcloth. These rites are mentioned Esaias 58. 5.
as the usual rites of penitents. This was common to all penitents. But
notorious sinners were this day put to open penance. Which godly discipline,
says our Church [in her office of Commination] it is much to be wished that it
might be restored again. Now that we may know what it is the Church wishes
there; it will not be amiss to set down in part the solemnity used upon those
sinners at this time, which was ordered thus.

Let all notorious sinners who have been already, or are now to be enjoined
public penance, this day present themselves before the Church doors to the
Bishop of the place, clothed in sackcloth, barefooted, with eyes cast down
upon the ground, professing thus by their habit and countenance, their guilt.
There must be present the Deans or Arch-Presbyters, and the public
penitentiaries, whose office is to examine the lives of these penitents, and
according to the degree of their sin to apportion their penance, according to
the usual degrees of penance. After this, let them bring the penitents into the
Church, and, with all the Clergy present, let the Bishop sing the seven
penitential Psalms, prostrate upon the ground, with tears for their Absolution.
Then the Bishop arising from prayer, according to the Canons, let him lay his
hand upon them (that is, to ratify their penance, not to absolve them) let him
sprinkle ashes upon their head, and cover them with sackcloth: and with
frequent sighs and sobs, let him denounce to them; that as Adam was cast out of
Paradise, so are they cast out of the Church for their sins. After this, let
the Bishop command the Officers to drive them out of the Church-doors, the
Clergy following them with this Respond, In the sweat of thy brows shall thou
eat thy bread: that these poor sinners seeing holy Church afflicted thus, and
disquieted for their sins may be sensible of their penance, Gratian, did. 50.
c. 64.

I. Sunday in Lent.
The Epistle exhorts to patience in afflictions. The Gospel reads to us Christ's
victory over temptations, to keep us from despair of conquest, that we should
be of good cheer and heart, since he our Captain has overcome the world. S.
John 16. v. last. The Collect for the day is another of those Collects where in
the Church directs her Petitions to Christ, thereby manifesting her belief that
he is the true Son of God, for she prays to none but God; in praying to him
therefore she professes to believe him to be God, as it is in the close of the
Collect; and this in opposition to the Tempter Satan and all his Adherents, who
are still tempting Christ in his Members, to misbelief in that Article.

Of EMBER-WEEK.
THe Week after Ash Wednesday is Imber or Ember-week, of which Fast we will
here treat in general. There be Four Ember-weeks, called in Latin Iejunia
quatuor Temporum, the Fasts of the four Seasons, because they were kept in the
four parts of the year, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter. The first of these
begins upon Wednesday next after Ash Wednesday. The second upon Wednesday next
after Whitsunday: the third upon Wednesday next after Holy Cross. Sept. 14. The
last upon Wednesday next after S. Lucie. Dec. 13. The days of fasting and
prayers in these weeks are, Wednesday, Friday, Saturday. Wednesday, because
then our Lord Christ was betrayed by Judas: Friday, because then he was
crucified: Saturday, because then we represent the Apostles sorrow for the loss
of their Lord lying in the grave. The causes of such religious fastings and
prayers upon these weeks were formerly many, as namely that Christians in these
religious duties might let the World know, that they were as devout, as the
Jews formerly had been, whose custom it was to observe four solemn Fasts,
Zach. 8. 19. That they might dedicate to God, as the first fruits, the
beginnings of the several seasons of the year set apart to his religious
worship, and by this means obtain Gods-blessing upon them, the remainders of
those times. But the principal cause was for preparation to the solemn
Ordination of Ministers; holy Church imitating the Apostles practice, who when
they were to set apart men to the Ministry, prayed and fasted, before they
laid on their hands, Acts 13.3. And in aftertimes, at these solemnities, these
Ember-Fasts, special regard was had to the Ordination of Priests and Deacons.
In what manner, and with how much care and Christianity these Fasts have been
heretofore observed, may be gathered from S. Leo in his Sermons upon them, and
from others: And the second Council of Millain decreed herein to good purpose
(Tit. 1. Dec. 22.) That upon the Sundays before these Fasts, the Priests should
not only in their Parishes bid the solemn Fast, but every one in his several
Parish should piously and religiously say the Prayers and Litanies, etc. That
Gods assistence being implored, both the Bishop may be guided by the Holy
Spirit, in the choice of those whom he shall Ordain, and also that they that
are ordained, may grow in Learning and holiness of life. These four Fasts have
been anciently observed, both in the Church of England, and in other Churches.
In the Laws of K. Canute, Chap. 16. thus it is said, Let every man observe the
Fasts that are commanded, with all earnest care, whether it be the Ember-Fast,
or the Lent-Fast, or any other Fast. And the like Decrees are found in other
Councels of our Nation before his time. See Sir Henry Spelmans Council. Britan.
p. 256. and 518. and 546. Now for the reason of the name, we find in Tho.
Becon. (as he delivers it out of others that wrote before him) By opinion of
much people, these days have been called Emberdaies, because that our Fathers
would on these days eat no bread, but Cakes made under Embers; so that by
eating of that they reduced into their minds, that they were but ashes, and so
should turn again, and wist not how soon. These Fasts are still appointed by
the Church of England. For though she has not reckoned them amongst the Holy
days, because there is no peculiar Office appointed for them, (as there is to
all those that are reckoned in the Catalogue of Holy days) yet by custom they
have been always kept with Litanies, Prayers and Fasting, and are commanded to
be kept still as formerly they were by that excellent Can. 31. Anno Dom. 1603.
Forasmuch as the Ancient Fathers of the Church, led by example of the apostles
who set men apart to the ministry of the Gospel by imposition of hands with
prayer and fasting,) appointed prayers and fasts at the solemn ordering of
Ministers, and to that purpose allotted certain times, in which only sacred
orders might be given or conferred, we following their holy and religious
example, do constitute and decree that Deacons and Ministers be Ordained or
made, but only upon the Sundays immediately following jejunia quatuor temporum,
commonly called Ember weeks, appointed in ancient time for Prayer and Fasting,
purposely for this cause at their first institution, and so continued at this
day in the Church of England.

2. Sunday.
The Epistle persuades to temperance and abstinence from all uncleanness.

The Gospel tells us how we may subdue that Devil, namely, by steadfast faith
and servent and importunate prayer.

3. Sunday.
The Epistle, as the time, calls for strictness of life.

The Gospel commends perseverance showing the danger of relapsing, For the end
of that man is worse than the beginning.

4. Sunday.
This is called Dominica Refectionis. For the Gospel tells us of Christ's
miraculous feeding and satisfying the hungry souls, that hunger after him and
his doctrine: and the Epistle tells us of a Jerusalem which is above, which is
free, and a joyous place, to which, we as children, are heirs. Thus holy Church
mixes joy and comfort without sorrow and afflictions.

5. Sunday.
This is called PASSION-SUNDAY. For now begins the commemoration of the Passion
of our Lord, and after a long funeral pomp and train, the corpse follows upon
Good Friday.

The Epistle treats of the Passion.

The Gospel, of our Lords being slandred by the bold malice of the Jews, who
call him Samaritan, and tell him he has a Devil, which must needs be a thorn
in his side, and a part of his Passion.

6. Sunday.
This is PALM SUNDAY on which CHRIST came from Bethany to Jerusalem, and was
received with joy, some strewing their garments, others cutting down branches,
and strewing them in the way; whose religion it is fit that we should imitate:
Bernard [We should meet Christ by keeping innocence; bear Olive, by doing works
of mercy; carry Palms, by conquering the Devil and our vices; green leaves and
flowers we carry, if we be adorned with virtues; and we strew our garments in
the way, when by mortification we put off the old man.]

This week was called of old, the GREAT-WEEK, because it has a larger Service
than any other Week, every day having a Second-service appointed.

It was called also the Holy-week, because men gave over all worldly
employments, and betook themselves wholly to devotion this week. The Courts
were shut up, and civil affairs laid aside, and prisoners that were put in for
small faults were freed. Chrysostom. Hom. 30. in 10. cap Genesis Code. l. 1. tit. 4. 3.

It was also called the week of Fasts; Because fasting was then heightened and
intended with watching and prayers: for these six days were spent in lying
upon the ground and afflicting the body, in prayers, watchings and fastings
longer than ordinary. And when they did eat, their refreshing was only bread,
salt and water. Epiphan. adv. Aerium. It will not be amiss to set down
Epiphanius somewhat more at large: [Aerius and his disciples had flouted at the
Catholic Christians severities at this time. Why, say they, do you keep
Easter? why do you keep such a strict fast before it? it is Ienish thus to keep
days of fasting by a law: it is an enslaving your selves to a yoke of bondage:
if I would determine to fast at all, I would fast what day I pleased, at mine
own liberty. Upon this principle it is, says that Father, that Aerius and his
followers affect to fast on Sunday, and feast on Friday, and to spend this week
of Religion and Devotion in jollity and sport, rising early to fill themselves
with flesh and wine, with which being full stuffed, they sport and scoff at the
Catholic Christians folly in afflicting themselves with such severities. But
who, says he, are the more fools; Aerius a silly fellow of yesterday still
living with us, or we who observe this severe discipline which our Fathers
delivered us, which they received from their Fathers, and they from theirs, and
so from the Apostles?

The Epistles and Gospels of this week are concerning Christ's Passion, to the
contemplation of which this week is dedicated.

Thursday.
THis day CHRIST washed his Disciples feet, and gave them a commandment to do
likewise. Hence it is called Dies mandati, Mandate or Maundy Thursday.

This day, the penitents that were put out of the Church upon Ash Wednesday,
were received again into the Church: partly, because there was this day an holy
Communion in memory of our Lords institution of the same this day: and the
Epistle is fitted to that purpose, sit therefore it was that penitents should
be reconciled this day (upon which this Sacrament was instituted for the
remission of sins) to receive the holy Communion. Partly, because this day our
Lord was apprehended and bound, whose binding wrought our deliverance^ and
freedom.

The form of reconciling penitents was in short this. The Bishop goes out to
the doors of the Church, where the penitentsly prostrate upon the earth, and
thrice in the Name of CHRIST he calls them, Come, Come Come ye children,
hearken to me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord: then after he has prayed
for them, and admonished them, he reconciles them, and brings them into Church.
The peniterts thus received, trim their heads and beards, and laying off their
penitential weeds, they reclothe themselves in handsome apparel. The Church
doors were wont to be set all open this day; to signify that penitent sinners
coming from North, or South, or any quarter of the World, shall be received to
mercy and the Churches favor.

GOOD FRIDAY.
THis day holy Church keeps a most strict Fast; It is called GOOD FRIDAY. For a
good day it was for us, even the cause of all our good, and ground of all our
joy: And so in respect of the effect of it, Christ's Passion may be a Gospel for
a Feast; and so it is upon Palm Sunday. But if we consider that our sins were
the cause of his Sufferings, and that it was we that crowned his head with
thorns, nailed his hands and feet, and gored his side with a Spear; so his
Passion considered in the cause of it, is matter of the greatest sorrow, and in
this respect we keep it a Fast.

The Gospel is taken out of S. John rather than out of any other Evangelist;
because he was present at the Passion, and stood by the Cross, when others
fled; and therefore the Passion being represented as it were before our eyes
this day; his Testimony is read, who saw it himself; and from whose example we
may learn not to be ashamed, nor afraid of the Cross of Christ.

This day holy Church prays expressly for all Jews, Turks and Infidels, Enemies
of the Cross of Christ; for this day Christ both prayed and dyed for his
Enemies; and as he expressed the height of his love this day, by dying for them;
so does the Church her height of Charity in praying for them.

The Antiquity of this Holy day appears by Euscb. Hist. l. 2. c. 17. who there
tells us, That it was an Holy Day in his time, and long before. That day of our
Saviors Passion we are wont to celebrate, not only with fastings and
watchings, but also with attentive hearing and reading of the holy Scriptures.

SATURDAY.
THis day the Gospel treats of Christ's body ly in the Grave: the Epistle, of
his Souls descent into Hell.

Of the Collects from Septuagesima to Easter.
THough the Church be always militant while she is upon Earth, yet at this time
(the time when Kings go out to battle, 2 Samuel 11.) she is more than ordinary
militant, going out to fight against her avowed enemies, the World, the Flesh
and the Devil, making it her especial business to get the mastery over them, so
far, that they may not be able to prevail over her the year following. Now
because (as S. Paul says 1 Cor. 9.25.) Every one that strives for mastery is
temperate in all things; therefore at this time especially, when she is seeking
the mastery over her Enemies, holy Church does more than ordinary addict her
self to temperance, fasting and other works of Penance and Mortification: and
accordingly she suits her Readings, not aiming to fit them to each particular
day (this is to be expected only upon privileged days, the subject matter of
whose solemnity is more particularly recorded in holy Scripture) but to the
Season in general and the Churches design at this time, commending to us
Fasting, Repentance, Alms, Charity and Patience in undergoing such voluntary
afflictions. And the Collects are suitable also to the Readings and the time,
praying earnestly for those Graces and Virtues before mentioned, which are
especially requisite to this her holy undertaking. And because she knows her
own weakness and her Enemies both craft and strength, who will then be most
active and busy to hurt when we thus set our selves to fight against them,
therefore does she earnestly and frequently also in diverse Collects pray for
Gods protection and defense from those Enemies, for his strength and assistence
whereby she may overcome them, That he would stretch forth the right hand of
his Majesty, and by his power defend us both outwardly in our bodies, and
inwardly in our souls, which of our selves have no power to help our selves.
And in such prayers as these the Church continues, lifting up her hands (as
Moses did his against the Amalekites) all the time of this spiritual conflict.

EASTER.
THis is the highest of all Feasts, says Epiphanius upon the day. This day
Christ opened to us the door of Life, being the first fruits of those that rose
from the dead: whose Resurrection was our life, for he rose again for our
justification, Romans 4.45.

Instead of the usual Invitatory, O come let us sing unto the Lord, holy Church
uses special Hymns or Anthems concerning Christ's Resurrection. Christ rising
again from the dead, etc. And, Christ is risen, etc. set down before the
Collect on Easter Day. Having kept company with the Apostles and first
Believers, in standing by the Cross weeping upon Good Friday, and kept a Fast
upon the Saturday following to comply with the Apostles and Catholic Church
who were that day sad and pensive, because their Lord was taken away from them,
we are directed this day to rejoice with them for the Rising again of our Lord,
and to express our joy in the same words that they then did, and the Church
ever since has done, Christ is risen, S. Luke 24. 34. the usual Morning
salutation this day, all the Church over; to which the Answer in some places
was, Christ is risen indeed; and in others, this, And has appeared to Simon.

Holy Church her aim is in all these chief days, to represent as full as may be
the very business of the day, and to put us into the same holy affections that
the Apostles and other Christians were, when they were first done; she
represents Christ born at Christmas, and would have us so affected that day
yearly, as the first believers were at the first tidings delivered by the
Angel. So at his Passion she would have us so affected with sorrow, as they
were that stood by the Cross. And now at his Resurrection she desires to
represent it to us, as may put us into the same rejoicing, that those dejected
Christians were, when the Angel told them, He is not here, but is risen, S.
Luke 24. 6. Holy Church supposes us to have fasted and wept upon Good Friday,
and the day following, because our Lord was taken away according to that of our
Savior, The time shall come that the Bridegroom shall be taken away from them,
then shall they fast in those days, and now calls upon us to weep no more, for
Christ is risen. And that she may keep time also with the first tidings of the
Resurrection, she observes the Angels direction to the Women, S. Matt. 26. 7.
Go quickly and tell his Disciples that he is risen. Supposing us as eager of
the joyful news of Christ's Resurrection, as they were, she withholds not the
joy, but immediately after Confession and Absolution, she begins her Office
with Christ is risen.

Proper Psalms at Morn. are 2. 57. 111.

The first of these is a Triumphant Song for Christ's victory over all his
Enemies that so furiously raged against him, Ver. 6. Yet I have set my King
upon my holy hill of Sion. Notwithstanding all the fury of his Enemies that
persecuted and murdered him, Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion,
by his glorious Resurrection from the dead, as it is expounded, Acts 13^ 33.

The 57. Psalm is of the same nature. It mentions Christ's Triumph over Hell and
Death. My Soul is among Lions, Verse 4. And the children of men have laid a net
for my feet, and pressed down my soul, crucifying the Lord of glory, but God
sent from Heaven, Ver. 3. and saved him from the Lions, both Devils and Men by
a glorious Resurrection. And therefore he ^reaks forth, Ver. 9. Awake up my
glory, awake Lute and Harp, I my self will awake right early: I will give
thanks unto thee O Lord, etc.

The 3. Psalm. is a Psalm of Thanksgiving for mavelous works of redemption,
Ver. 9. works worthy to be praised and had in honor, Ver. 3. And therefore
though it be not set particularly for the Resurrection, but may serve for any
mavelous work of mercy, yet is it most fit for this day and the work of this:
for amongst all the mavelous works of Redemption, this of Christ's
Resurrection is the chief, and most worthy by us to be had in honor. For If
Christ be not risen, we are yet in our sins, We are utterly lost, 1 Cor 15. But
Christ is risen, The merciful and gracious Lord has so done his mavelous
work of Christ's Resurrection, that it ought to be had in remembrance. For which
holy Church teaches us to sing, as we are bound, I will give thanks unto the
Lord with my whole heart secretly amongst the faithful, and in the
Congregation, Ver. 1.

Evening Psalms are 113. 114. 118.

The first is a Psalm of Thanksgiving especially for raising up Christ, Ver.
6,7. Taking him out of the dust, and lifting him out of the mi^e, to set him
with and above the Princes, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at
his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all Principalities and
powers, and Might and Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come, Ephesians. 1. 21.

The 118. Psalm. is (part of it at least) of Christ's Resurrection, as it is
expounded S. Matt. 21. and Acts 4. 11. The stone which the builders refused, is
become the the head of the corner, this day. And therefore This is the day
which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. ver. 27.

The 114. Psalm. may seem at first sight not so applyable to Christ's
Resurrection: for it is a Thanksgiving for the Jews deliverance out of Egypt.
Yet notwithstanding if we look well into it, we shall find it proper enough for
the day. For as the Apostle teaches us, All things happened to them in types and
figures; not only words but actions were typical. Egypt was a type of Hell, and
their captivity there, a type of our captivity under sin and the Devil. Their
deliverance from thence, a type and figure of our deliverance from Hell: and
that which the Psalmist here gives thanks for as past, in the History, is
understood to be meant as much or more in the prophecy of Christ's Redemption
of his Church, (the true Israelites, that walk in the steps of the Faith of our
Father Abraham, (from sin and Hell, by the power of his glorious Resurrection
this day.

The first Lesson Morn. is Exodus 12. in which is mentioned the Institution of
the Passover, proper for this day, the feast of the Passover: For as S. Aug.
observes, Ep. 119. We do in this Feast not only call to mind the history of our
Saviors Resurrection, but also celebrate the mystery of ours. That as Christ
this day rose again from death to life, so by Christ and the virtue of his
Resurrection shall we be (...) alive, and rise from death to life eternal.
Christ is therefore our true Passover, where of the other was a type. The
Lesson then is proper for the day.

So is the first Lesson Even. Exodus 14^ For it is concerning the Israelites
deliverance out of Egypt, a type of our deliverance from Hell this day by
Christ's gloririous resurrection. As that day Israel saw that great work, which
the Lord did upon Egypt, Ver. 31. So this day we see the great conquest over
Hell and Death finished, by Christ's triumphant Resurrection from the dead.

The Second Lessons are plain.

The Gospel gives us the full evidence of Christ's Resurrection: The Epistle
tells what use we should make of it, If Christ be risen, seek those things that
are above, etc.

The Collect prays for grace, to make that use of it which the Epistle directs.

Thus holy Church is careful to teach and instruct all her children in the
matter of the Feast, preaching Christ's Resurrection to us, both in the type and
Prophecy out of the Old Test. and in the History of it out of the New. And she
does not only teach us to know what God has done for us this day, but also she
is careful that we may do our duty to God for this his mavelous goodness,
commanding and (...) recting us to pray for grace to do our duty, prescribing
us excellent forms of adoring and blessing God for his mercy, this day such
methods as the Holy Ghost has set down, in which we may be sure to pray and
praise God by the Spirit.

For the Antiquity of this Feast, heaps of Testimonies might be brought, but
these two following may suffice.

1. S. AUGUST. Epist. 118. These things which are not written, but we keep them
by tradition, if they be observed all the world over, are to be understood to
be commended to us, and commanded either by General Councels (whose authority
in the Church is most safe) or else by the Apostles: as for example, That the
Passion of our Lord, his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, and the coming
of the Holy Ghost, should be observed by an Anniversary solemnity.

2. CONSTANTINE The Great. c. 17. The Feast of Easter we have kept from the
first day of the Passion until now. Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 3. c. 17. And
this was not in the practice of some few, but of all Churches, as he there
testifies, and is apparent, from the great contention in the Church about the
day. Some following the Jewish account who kept this Feast the Fourteenth day
of the first Month (The first Month began with the new Moon whose fourteenth
day (or Moon as they called it) was the day of the Vernal Equinox, or if none
such happened, then that whose fourteenth day came the soonest after the Equinox)
but the most Churches kept their Easter the first Sunday after the fourteenth
day of the first Month, which usage the Council of Nice confirmed for these
reasons.

First, because it was the most general custom of the Churches.

Secendly, because they would not in this particular comply with the Jews, for
though in some other cases they did it on purpose to sweeten them and make them
pliable to Christianity, as our Lord himself did and his Apostles, Acts 21. 24.
retaining many of their la^dable and useful Rites, as of Ex^ommunication,
Benediction, Imposition of hands, with many more which you may see in Grotius
Annot. in S. Matthew. 18. and Append. p. 54. (for they loved not Innovation, nor
measured: the goodness of their Religion by their distance from the Jews in
things lawful and useful) though I say the Primitive Christians did not like
the Jewish Rites ever the worse because they were Theirs, i.e. of Gods
Institution, but did use as many of them that were useful as they had occasion
for, yet in this of the time of keeping Easter they would not, because it was
of ill signification and scandalous, for the Jews keep their Easter as typical
and prefiguring Christ to come; the Christians kept their Easter in thankful
remembrance of Christ Come, and Risen from the dead: and therefore differing so
much in the main of the Feast, they would not comply with them, no not so much
as in the Time, lest by that they might have been though to have complied also
in the very Feast, and so have seemed to have denied their Lord as the Jews did.

Thirdly, because after the Jews fashion of keeping of Easter (they following
at that time an Erroneous Account which had not due regard to the time of the
Equinox) it might happen that there might be two Easters in one year, ( viz.
one in the first Month and another in the last) and none in the next year.

After our English Account Easter is found by finding out Shrove-Tuesday; which
is always the first Tuesday in the New Moon after Candlemas; the Sunday six
weeks after, is Easter.

MONDAY and TVESDAY in Easter-week
THese two Holy days are added as Attendants upon Easter Day in honor of this
high Feast and the more solemnity of it. And we find S. Austin upon occasion
mentioning them De civit, Dei l. 22. c. 8. although both from him (elsewhere)
and others we may gather that these two days were not all which at that time
were added to the Feast: For of old, this Queen of Feasts, as the Fathers call
it, was so highly esteemed, that it was in a manner solemnized fifty days
together, even from Easter to Whitsuntide. See Ambr. Ser. 61. Per hos
quinquaginta dies nobis est jugis and continuata Festivitas, etc. See also
Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 4. c. 64. And Tertul. de Iejuniis. And in his Book
de Idol. where he affirms that all the Heathen Festivals put together could not
equal this one great and solemn Feast of the Christians. From these and the
like places some conclude, and most probably, That every day of that time the
Christians met together in public to sing with greatest joy Psalms and
Allelujah to God Almighty, and to take the Cup of Salvation, the holy
Communion, praising the Name of the Lord. All which time they did not kneel at
their prayers which was accounted a posture of mourners, but Stand, (as upon
Sundays they were wont) in token of joy, thus making every of those days equal
in a manner to Sundays. The reason of this so great and long Festivity at this
time, was principally because it was the Feast of Easter, or of our blessed
Lords Resurrection, a principal Article of our faith: for as S. Paul says, 1
Cor. 15. If Christ be not risen we are yet in our sins, and we Christians of
all men m^st miserable. Now that Christ is risen, needs must there be in
Christians hearts an overflowing of joy, which in those times they expressed by
such daily public exercises of Religion, principally of receiving the holy
communion, the pledge of our resurrection (as our Savior says S. John 6. He
that eats my flesh shall live for ever) that by this means the memory of the
resurrection might be fixed deeply in their minds. We must not think that the
Christians then did keep all this Time holy, so as to cease from labor (for
the poverty of many, and the care and charity required in all, would not permit
that) but only as to religious exercises and services. As devotion abated, the
Feast was shortened; yet long after Tertullian, even till Gratians time and
downward, the whole week of Easter, as also of Whitsuntide, were reckoned among
Holy Days. Gratian. de Consec. Did. 3. And our Church, though she enjoy^s only
Monday and Tuesday of this week for Holy Days, yet seems to me to commend the
keeping holy of this whole week, as also of the whole week after Christmas,
Ascension, and Pentecost: For she directs the proper Prefaces for Christmas,
Easter, Ascen. and Pentecost to be used every day the week after; Which
Prefaces are to be used only at the Communion, as appears by the Rubricks; so
that by prescribing the Prefaces to be used upon every day of the week, she
does withal prescribe the Communion every day likewise, which is properly the
keeping of a day Solemnly Holy; and this weeks solemnity is principally, as we
have said, for the expressing of our joy for our Lords Resurrection, and the
honor of the Feast, which Christians were not willing to make shorter than the
Jews Feast of unleavened Bread.

Among the Ancients there was another peculiar Reason for the keeping of the
whole week of Easter Holy, besides that of the Resurrection. For they
ministering Baptism (except in case of necessity) a^ no other times but the Eves
of Easter and Whitsunday, did make it a part of their Festivity, the week
following to congratulate the access of a new Christian progeny; the New
Baptized coming each day to Church in white vestures with lights before them:
where Thanksgivings and Prayers were made for them, with Instructions also to
those that were of years of discretion (for at that time, there were many such
that came in from Heathenism) in the principles and ways of Christianity. But
afterward, when most of the baptized were Infants, and so not capable of such
solemnities, this custom was altered, and Baptism administered all times of the
year, as at the beginning of Christianity. Tertul. de Bapt. S. Chrysostom. Hom.
1. in Act. Apost.

1. Sunday after Easter.
It was the custom of our forefathers to observe the Octave or Vtas of their
high and principal Feasts: and this is the Octave or eighth day after Easter.
Upon every Octave, the use was to repeat some part of that Service, which was
performed upon the Feast it self; and this is the reason that the Collect used
upon Easter, is renewed upon this day.

The Epistle exhorts the new baptized persons that are born of God, to labor
to overcome the World, which at their baptism they vowed to do.

The Gospel shows how Christ conversed with his Disciples after his
Resurrection; instructing and confirming them in the faith of the Resurrection.

This Sunday is called Low-Sunday, because it is Easter Day repeated, the
Octave of Easter, but the Sunday before is high Easter, and this is a lower
Feast, Low Easter: in Latin Dominica in albis, or rather, Post Albas (sc.
depositas) as some old Rituals call it: because those that were baptized on
Easter-eve, wore, seven days after, white garments, called Chrysoms; signs of
the purity which they received in Baptism; which white clothes they this day
put off.

2. Sunday.
As the last Sunday instructed the young and newborn Christians, how they
should imitate Christ in a Resurrection from sin and death to life; so this
Sunday instructs the Shepherds of the flock, how to imitate their great
Shepherd. And the Epipistle sets before us his great patience and goodness in
the work of our redemption. The Collect prays for thankfulness and imitation
of his holy life.

3. Sunday after Easter.
Hitherto since Easter the Church has been as it were overwhelmed in the
joyful meditation of Christ's Resurrection from the dead, or chiefly about it,
and that has been the subject of all the Collects since then. Now in this
Collect (as somewhat also in one of the Readings aforegoing) the Church
reflects upon that other ancient Paschal Solemnity, the general Baptism that
was used at that time; so that this Collect is for the new baptized or new
Regenerates by Baptism: desiring Almighty God who shows the light of his truth,
to them that be in error, (enlightening them by baptism, which was therefore
called (...) illumination, and the baptized the Enlightened) to grant them that
be admitted into the fellowship of Christ's religion, namely by baptism, that
they may eschew those things that be contrary to their profession, or vow in
baptism, etc. Though this custom of general baptism at Easter be not in use
now, yet this Collect is still seasonable, as a general anniversary
Commemoration of the great blessings received from God by our baptism, and our
solemn vow and profession made to him therein.

The Ancients were wont to observe Pas^ha annotinum, an anniversary
commemo^ation of their baptism; they that were baptized at Easter the year
before, came the year following the same day to the Church, and solemnly with
ob^ations and other religious offices commemorated the anniversary day of their
new birth. Though our Church does not in every particular observe the same
custom, yet she draws near to the ancient practice, in this solemn, though
general Anniversary Commemoration of baptism this day, minding us all this day
of our baptism, and our vow made therein, and praying to God to enable us all
to keep it. And for this very reason does she appoint children to be baptized
upon Sundays and other Holy Days when most people are present, that they may be
put in remembrance of their own profession made to God in baptism; Preface
before Baptism: and happy were it for us, if we would made good use of this
care of the Church, and be often remembering that solemn vow; by which we have
dedicated our selves to God to be an holy people; the wilful breach of which
vow is horrid Sacrilege.

In the Gospel our Savior tells his Disciples, that though they should weep
and lament (by reason of his death) their sorrow should be turned into joy,
which no man should take from them (namely after his Resurrection.) And such
joy belongs to this time and to us in it, if we be also his true Disciples and
followers; which how we may be, the Epistle shows by minding us of (what we
promised and vowed, when admitted into Christ's School, and gave up our names to
him) the abstaining from fleshly lusts, and having honest conversation in all
our Relations. And this is the main drift of the whole Epistle (the first of S.
Peter) out of which this is taken, to persuade them that were born again, and
lately become Christians, to walk suitably to such an holy profession and that
chiefly in regard of the lively hope unto which they were begotten again by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and so is most agreeable to the
Churches meditations this day and season.

4. Sunday after Easter.
This Collect is fit for this Paschal time from Easter to Pentecost, a time of
greatest joy, the Church therefore prays that we may rightly observe the time;
be full of joy in a joyful time; withal that our joy may be a true and real
joy, that our hearts may surely there be fixed, where true joys are to be
found: Such joys as Christ's Resurrection, and the promised Comforter affords.
And one or both of these two grand occasions of Joy and Exultation (to wit,
Christ's Resurrection, and the promise of a Comforter) are the principal Subject
of the Gospels from Easter to Whitsuntide; but lest our joy should grow
presumptious and luxuriant (as joy is apt to exceed) the Epistles for the same
time admonish us of duties answerable, as to believe in Christ, to rise from
the grave of sin, to be patient, loving, meek, charitable, etc. having our Lord
for an example, and the promise of his Spirit for our guide, strength and
comfort.

5. Sunday after Easter.
The Gospel before promised a Comforter. The Epistle and Gospel this day direct
us what to do to obtain that promise. Two conditions are required on our parts
for the receiving of that promised Comforter: First prayers or Rogations, this
the Gospel teaches, Ask and ye shall receive that your joy may be full.
Secondly to love God and keep his Comandments, S. John 14. 15. This the Epistle
exhorts to, See that ye be doers of the Word. etc. The Collect prays that we
may feel the fruits and comforts of this holy Spirit in our hearts by good
thoughts and abilities to perform them.

Of Rogation week.
This is called Rogation Sunday: because upon the three following days
Rogations and Litanies were used, and Fasting, for these two reasons. 1.
Because this time of the year, the fruits of the earth are render and easily
hurt: therefore Litanies extraordinary are said to God to avert this judgment.
2. Because our LORDS Ascension is the Thursday following, therefore these three
days before are to be spent in prayers and fasting. Conc. Aurelian. that so the
flesh being tamed, and the soul winged with fasting, we may ascend with Christ.

The Gospel is concerning Rogations, teaching us how to ask of God, so as we
may obtain, and withal foretells his approaching Ascension.

The Fast this week is voluntary: for there is no Fast commanded betwixt Easter
and Whitsunday, as has been observed before.

The Service formerly appointed in the Rogation days of Procession was the 103
and 104. Psalm. with the Litany, and Suffrages, and the Homily of Thanksgiving
Artic. Eliz. in the 7. year of her reign. The 2. Psalms were to be said at
convenient places, in the common perambulation: the people thus giving thanks
to God, in the beholding of Gods benefits, the increase and abundance of his
fruits upon the Earth. At their return to the Church, they were to say the rest
of the Service mentioned, Eliz. Injun. 18, 19.

ASCENSION-Day.
THis day was Christ's perfect triumph over the Devil, Leading captivity
captive, Ephesians. 4. 8. This day He opened the kingdom of Heaven to all
believers, as we say daily in the Te Deum. See S. John 3. 13. Acts 2. 24. Heb.
10. 23. His flesh opened that passage, in that he deserved to enter there
first: For when he was taken up on high, then he opened the Gates of Heaven
Chrysostom. upon that place of the Hebrews. Therefore the Church appoints for
this day the 24. Psalm. Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. This day gives us hopes
of Heaven, in that our flesh in the first fruits is th^ther ascended. For if
God had not intended some great good to our nature, he would not have received
the first fruits up on high: Christ taking the first fruits of our nature, this
day carried it up to God, and by those first fruits, has made the whole stock
to be sanctified. And the Father highly esteemed the gift, both for the
worthiness of him that offered it up, and for the purity of the offering, so as
to receive it with his own hands, and to set it at his right hand. To what
Nature was it that God said, Sit thou on my right hand? To the same, to which
formerly he had said, dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. This gift
went far beyond the loss; Paradise was the place from which we fell; but we
were this day carried up to heaven; and mansions are there provided for us,
Chrysostom. in diem. Christ ascended up into heaven in the sight of his Disciples,
that they and we might assuredly believe, that we should follow, and not deem
it impossible for us body and soul, to be translated thither; Cypr. in diem.

This day has proper Lessons and Psalms.

The First Lesson at Morning Service is Deuteronomy. 10. Wherein is recorded Moses
going up into the Mount to receive the Law from God, to deliver it to the Jews,
a type of Christ's ascension into Heaven to send down the new Law, the Law of
Faith: For when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave
gifts to men, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, to publish the new
Law to the world, Ephesians. 4. 8.

The First Lesson at Even. is 2 Kings 2. Wherein Elias his ascending into
Heaven was a type of Christ's Ascension, but Christ went far beyond his type in
many particulars. Elias went up with a single Chariot, but Christ was attended
with thousands, Psalm. 68. 17. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even
thousands of Angels, and the Lord ascending is among them. Elias upon his
ascension doubles his Spirit upon Elisha; But Christ gave such an abundance of
the holy Spirit to his Disciples upon his Ascension, that they not only were
filled with it themselves, but it ran over upon others from them, by laying on
of hands they imparted it to others, Acts 8. 17.

We have no proper Second Lessons appointed; but in Edw. 6. Liturgy were
appointed; S. John 14. Ephesians. 4. both very fit for the day.

Psalms for the More. are 8. 15. 21. Psalms.

The 8. Psalm. begins, O Lord our Governor how excellent is thy name in all the
world, thou that have set thy glory above the heavens. This was fulfilled this
day. For this day he set his glory above the Heavens, ascending from earthly
humility to heavenly glory. This made thy Name wonderful in all the world: For
hereby it appears, that thou that did before descend so low, and were for a
time so vile reputed, art greater than all Principalities and Powers in Heaven
and Earth; since some saw, and all men now believe, that thou did ascend into
Heaven, whereby thou have gotten A name above all names, That at the Name of
Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in Hevven, and earth, Phil. 2. 9,
10.

Psalm. 15. Who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, or who shall rest upon thy holy
hill? even he that has clean hands, etc. shows both how just it was that
Christ should ascend and rest upon the holy Hill, the highest Heaven, of which
Mount Sion was a type: for he of all others had clean hands and a pure heart,
and withal tells us the way which we must walk, viz. the way of righteousness
and holiness, if we desire to follow Christ to heaven.

The 21. Psalm. is to be understood of Christ. S. Aug. in loc, Ver. 4. Thou
gave him a long life, even for ever and ever, his honor is great in thy
salvation. The raising him from death, has made his honor great, and all the
world to believe in him. Glory and great worship shall thou lay upon him, by
setting him at thy right hand in Heaven. The rest of the Psalm is to the same
purpose, of Christ's absolute triumph over his enemies, which was this day
fulfilled, when he led captivity captive.

The Even. Psalms are 24. 68. 108. Psalms.

The 24. was sung this day at Christ's Ascension, by a Quire of Angels, some
going before the Lord Christ, knocking, as it were, at Heaven gates, and
singing, Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors,
and the King of glory shall come in: to whom other Angels in Heaven, desirous
to know, who this King of glory was, sing the next words, Who is the King of
glory? The first Angels, that waited upon our Lord in his Ascension answer, The
Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in battle, as ye may see by the
prisoners that he leads captive in his triumph. Therefore Lift up your heads, O
ye gates, that never were yet opened to humane nature, where never man yet
entered, S. John 3. 13. Acts 2. 24. Heb. 10. 20. The other Angels as yet, as it
were, amazed at the glory of the triumph, ask again, Who is the King of glory?
what Lord is it that is so mighty? His heavenly Guard answer again, The Lord of
hosts, he is the King of glory; Theodor. in Psalm. Then Heaven gates were
opened, and our dear Lord entered, and took possession for us, and prepared
places for us S. John 14. 2.

The 68. Psalm. at the 18. ver. is by the Apostle applied to the Ascension of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 8. Thou have ascended up on high, and led captivity captive.
It is not to be denied, but that it may be applied to others also, (for the
Scripture is full of sense,) as to Moses. For he from the bottom of the Red
Sea, went up to the top of Sinai, leading with him the people of Israel, that
long had been captive to Pharaoh: and there received gifts, the Law, the
Priesthood, but above all, the Ark of the Covenant to be the pledge of Gods
presence amongst them: this is the literal sense.

This of Moses, by analogy, does King David apply to himself, to his going up
to mount Sion, and carrying up the Ark thither. For all agree, this Psalm was
set upon that occasion. The very beginning of it (Let God arise,) shows as
much; the acclamation ever to be used at the Arks removing, Number. 10. 35. This
was done immediately upon his conquest of the Iohnsites, whom he had taken
captives, what time for the honor of the solemnity, he dealt gifts, bread and
wine to the people, 1 Chronicles. 15. But in the prophetical sense, this Psalm
belongs to Christ, to the Testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of all
prophecy, Rev. 19. 10. For that was the greatest captivity that ever was led
captive; his the highest up-going, higher than Sion or Sinai far: that the most
gracious and glorious triumph, when Christ made a show of Principalities and
Powers of Hell, triumphing over them in his own person, Col. 2. 19. which was
this days triumph. Bishop Andrews Sermon 7. in Pentecost.

In the 108. Psalm. The Prophet awakes himself and his Instruments of Music, to
give thanks to God among the people, and among the Nations, for setting himself
above the heavens, and his glory above all the earth, which was most literally
fulfilled in his Ascension into Heaven, and sitting down at the right hand of
God. It is true, this Psalm is thought to be set upon another occasion, viz.
Gods promise of subduing the Ammonites and Idumeans under David, for which, he
here vows his best thanks: yet for all this, it may be, and that principally,
meant of Christ and his triumphant Ascension. For God Almighty did so direct
the mind of the Prophets, that, that which was spoken by them of other persons
and actions, is oft-times more exactly fulfilled in and by Christ. Osee 11. 1.
Out of Egypt have I called my Son, was there spoken of the deliverance of the
people of Israel out of Egypt, fulfilled in Christ, S. Matthew, 2. 15. What David
says of himself, I will open my mouth in a payable, was fulfilled by Christ,
S. Matthew. 13. 35. The 72. Psalm was written for Solomon, as the title shows,
but more exactly fulfilled of Christ. David's complaint or his own n^sery, Psalm.
35. 19. verified in Christ. S. John 15 25. Nay more, (which is worth our
observation) some things David spea^s of himself, which do not agree to him,
but in a figure, which agree to Christ in the letter; as, They parted my
garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture, Psalm 22. 17, 18. Nay, in
the same Psalm, (and sometimes in the same verse) some words will not agree to
Christ, as Psalm. 69. 5. My faults are not hid from thee: These cannot be spoken
of Christ who knew no sin. Some words again most properly belong to Christ, as
verse 22. They gave me gall to eat, and when I was thirsty, they gave me
vinegar to drink.

Thus holy Church has in the Lessons and Gospel preached to us the Ascension
of Christ, in the type and antitype. In the Epistle she teaches us our duty not
to stand gazing up to Heaven, wondering at the strangeness of the sight, but to
take heed to demean our selves so, as that we may with comfort behold him at
his second coming, his coming to judgment, Act. 1. 11. Why stand ye gazing up
into heaven? there is other business to be done, fit your selves for another
coming, for this same Jesus which was taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come, even as ye have seen him go into heaven.

In the Collect we are taught to pray, that we, as far as may be, may conform
to our Lord in his Ascension, that like as we believe him to have ascended into
the Heavens, so we may also in heart and mind thither ascend, and with him
continually dwell. In the special Psalm. and Hymn we adore and bless God for our
Saviors glorious Ascension. It is pleasant to behold the rare beauty of the
Churches offices, as on others, so on this day, how each part suits the other.

The Gospel to the Lessons, the Epistle to the Gospel, the Collect and Psalms
and Hymns, all fitted to the same, and all to the day.

For the Antiquity of this day, See S. Aug. Epist. 118. cited upon Easter day,
Epiphan^ and Chrysostom. upon the day.

Sunday after Ascen.
This is called Expectationsweek; for now the Apostles were earnestly expecting
the fulfilling of that promise of our Lord. If I go away I will send the
Comforter to you, S. John 16. 7.

The Epistle exhorts to earnest prayer. for the Comforter promised in the
Gospel; which the Church performs in the Collect.

WHIT SUNDAY.
THis day the HOLY GHOST came down from heaven upon his Church, as the Epistle
tells; according to the promise of the Gospel.

As in a long war it happens; when the war is ended, and peace concluded,
Pledges and Hostages are mutually sent, both as tokens of, and securities for,
the mutual agreement and peace: so was it betwixt God and Man. After our Lord
Jesus had ended the long war betwixt God and Man, and finished the
reconciliation, he sent up, or rather he carried up himself, our Hostage, our
flesh and nature ennobled by the union with his Divine Person, as a royal
pledge to his Father: on the other side, God sent this day his royal Hostage,
his holy Spirit, a security for our future peace. 1. S. John 4. 12, 13. Chrysostom.
Hom. 1. in Pentecost. Edit. Savil. tom. 5. The Devil had taken us captive, our
Lord Christ undertakes the quarrel, his death was his battle, but then he
seemed to be overcome: but up he got again at his Resurrection; that was his
victory; his Ascension was his triumph: and as the ancient custom was for
Conquerours to scatter gifts amongst the beholders, especially on the last and
great day of the triumph: so does our Lord, in this last day of the Feast, the
Conclusion of his triumph, he does, as it were, make the Conduits run with
Wine; he poured out his Spirit so upon all flesh, that some mockers said, they
were full of new wine, Acts 2. 12. He casts abroad his new wine, new gifts and
graces of the world, giving to some the word of wisdom, to others the gift of
knowledge, to others faith, to others the gift of healing, to others the
working of miracles, to others prophecy, to others discerning of spirits, to
others diverse kinds of tongue, to others the interpretations of tongues: all
these works one and the same spirit, the Holy Ghost (1 Cor. 12. 4.) whom the
Lord Christ as he promised, sent down this day with these gifts, in honor of
whom and his gifts we keep this day holy.

This time was also appointed of old for solemn baptism. The reason was: 1.
Because this day the Apostles were baptized with the holy Ghost and fire, Acts
2. 3. 2. Because this day three thousand were baptized by the Apostle, Acts 2.
40. In memory of which, the Church ever after held a solemn custom of
baptizing at this Feast. Gratian. de Consec. Dis. 3. c. 13.

This day is called Pentecost, because it is fifty days betwixt the true
Passover and Whitsunday.

As there were fifty days from the Jews Passover to the giving of the Law to
Moses in Mount Sina, which Law was written with the finger of God: (for from
the 14. day of the first month, the day of the Passover, to the third day of
the third month, the day of the Laws giving, Exodus 19. are fifty days) so from
the true Passover which was celebrated, when Christ was offered up for us, are
fifty days to this time when the Holy Ghost came down upon the Church, to write
the new Law^ of Charity in their hearts. Upon this meditation S. Aug. breaks
out thus, Who would not prefer the joy and pleasure of these mysteries, before
all Empires of the world? Do you not see, that as the two Seraphins cry one to
another, holy, holy, holy, Esaias 6. 3. So the two Testaments Old and New
faithfully agreeing, convince the sacred truth of God? S. Aug. Ep. 119. Note
that we must not count the fifty days from the very day of the Passover, but
from the Sunday following; and so God directed the Jews Lev. 23. 15. speaking
of their Pentecost or Feasts of Weeks, And ye shall count from the morrow after
the Sabbath, from that day seven weeks shall be complete.

It is also called Whitsunday from the glorious Light of Heaven which was then
sent down upon the Earth, from the Father of Lights: so many tongues, so many
Lights, which kindled such a light in the world on this day, as never shall be
put out to the worlds end: as also because the new baptized, which were many at
that Feast ( Whitsunday and Easter, being the two solemn times of baptism) and
of old called Illuminati, the Enlightened, Heb. 6. 6. from the spiritual light
they received in baptism, were then clothed in white garments, as types both
of that spiritual whiteness and purity of soul, which they received in baptism,
and were carefully to preserve all their life after, As also of their joy for
being made then by baptism members of Christ, Children of God, and Heirs of the
Kingdom of Heaven. White is the color of joy, says Eccles. 9. 8. Let thy
garments be always white, for God now accepts of thy works. S. Cyril in his 4.
Cat. mist. alluding to this ancient custom of the new baptized, of putting off
their old garments, and clothing themselves in pure white, has words to this
effect. This white clothing is to mind you, that you should always hereafter go
in white. I speak not this to persuade you always to wear white clothes, but
that you should ever be clothed with spiritual white, brightness and purity o
soul. that so you may say with divine Esaias 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in
the Lord, for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has
covered me with the robe of righteousness. Of which robe of righteousness and
garment of salvation, the white vestment was a resemblance. Apoc. 19. 8. And to
her was granted, that he should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, for
fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints.

Whitsunday then is as much as Domini^a in albis, the Sunday in white. The
Greeks for the same reason call Easter (...), the Bright Sunday, because then
also the new baptized wore white: But the Latins call neither of these days
from thence, but give them their names from the Resurrection, and Pentecost,
and the Octave of Easter or Low Sunday is by them called Dominica in Albis, as
is abovesaid, page 154, 155.

This Holy day has Proper Lessons and Psalms.

The Second Lessons are plain. The Morning first Lesson Deuteronomy. 16. gives us the
Law of the Jews Pentecost, or Feast of Weeks, which was a type of ours.

The Evening first Lesson Wisd. 1. is fit for this day. For it treats of the
holy Spirit, ver. 5, 6. how it fills the world, ver. 7. which was most exactly
fulfilled this day, in which they were all filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 2.

The Psalms for the morning 45. 47. are very proper to the day. The beginning
of the 45. is concerning the Birth of Christ, and therefore used upon
Christmas Day; but the latter part is concerning the calling of the Gentiles,
ver. 10, 11. and the glory of the Church the King of Heavens Daughter, v. 14.
Who is all glorious within, through the heavenly gifts and graces of the holy
Ghost, sent down this day; which glorious gifts miraculously poured upon the
Church brought in the Gentiles to the Christian faith, ver. 15. The Virgins
that be her fellows shall bear her company; and shall be brought unto thee. For
which all the people shall (as holy Church directs us to do this day) give
thanks unto thee, verse 18. In holy `Davids Psalms, as we do, so Theodoret in
Psalm. I will remember thy Name from one generation to another, therefore shall
the people give thanks unto thee, world without end: That is, all people to the
worlds end shall praise God for these blessings upon the Church with those
Psalms which I compose, and so, (though I be dead long before) yet in my Psalms
sung by them, I will remember thy Name from one generation to another.

The 47. Psalm is a song of praise for the conversion of the Gentiles, by the
Gospel published this day in all Languages, Acts 2. for which the Prophet
invites them to active praises, ver. I. O clap your hands together all ye
people; O sing unto God with the voice of melody, for God is gone up, in
jubilo, with a merry noise, ver. 5. That was upon Ascension day. And now he is
set upon his holy and royal seat, he reigns over the heathen, makes the Princes
of the people joy^ in one body unto the people of the God of Abraham, brings
the Gentiles in to the Jews, and makes one Church of both; and that by the
Gospel of the kingdom, published this day, to all Nations, and so, that was
done this day, for which this Psalm gives thanks.

Evening Ps. are 104, 145. These two are thankful Commemorations of the various
gifts of God the Holy Ghost, who then gave temporal, this day, spiritual gifts,
which spiritual gifts of this day were shadowed out by those temporal, and all
come from the same spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 4. to whom this Feast is held sacred: So
that in blessing the Author of them, we bless the Author of these, the holy
Spirit from whom these diverse gifts. Some part of the 104. is more particularly
appliable to this Feast. He makes the clouds his chariots, that was upon
Ascension day, when he went up to Heaven in a cloud, Acts 1. 9. ver. 5. Then
follows ver. 30. Emittis spiritum, Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, and they
shall be made, thou shall renew the face of the earth, which is proper to this
day; for this day the Holy Spirit was sent, and renewed the face of the Earth,
with new Creatures, new Men of new hearts and new tongues, Acts 2. Old things
passed away, and all things are become new.

The same Harmony of Epistle, Gospel and Collect, and Lessons and Psalm. that we
have observed upon Christmas and Easter, and Ascension, may with pleasure be
meditated upon this day.

The same Ancients testify the Antiquity of this Feast, that gave in evidence
for Easter.

Monday and Tuesday in Whit sun-week.
THe Epistles for both relate not only to the sending of the Holy Ghost, but
also to Baptism, which the Church takes often occasion to remember us of by her
Readings and Usages, and would have us improve them all toward most useful
Meditations.

This is one of the four Ember-weeks; of which see above, after the first
Sunday in Lent, p. 149.

TRINITY-SVNDAY.
IN Ancient Liturgies and Ritualists, we find this day looked upon as an Octave
of Pentecost, or as Dominica vacans (of which Name is spoken p. 219.) and that
the observing of it as a Feast of the Trinity was of later use, and more late
in the Roman Church than in some other, (See Decretal lib. 2. T. 9. De Feriis)
And there were who objected, that because on each day (and especially Sundays)
the Church celebrates the praises of the Trinity, in her Doxologies, Hymns,
Creeds, etc. Therefore there was no need of a Feast on one day for that which
was done on each. But yet the wisdom of the Church thought it meet, that such a
Mystery as this, though part of the Meditation of each day, should be the chief
subject of one, and this to be the day. For no sooner had our Lord ascended
into Heaven, and Gods holy Spirit descended upon the Church, but there ensued
the notice of the glorious and incomprehensible Trinity, which before that time
was not so clearly known. The Church therefore having solemnized in an
excellent order all the high Feast of our Lord, and after, That of the descent
of Gods Spirit upon the Apostles, thought it a thing most seasonable to
conclude these great solemnities with a Festival of full, special and express
Service to the holy and blessed Trinity. And this the rather in aftertimes,
when Arrians and such like Heretics had appeared in the world, and vented
their blasphemies against this Divine Mystery.

Some proper Lessons this day has, as the Morning First and Second.

The first Lesson is Genesis 18. wherein we read of three that appeared to
Abraham, or the Lord in three Persons, ver. 1, 2. A type of that mysterious
Trinity in Unity, which was after revealed in the Gospel: So Theodor. l. 2. ad
Graec. Because the Jews had long lived in Egypt, and had learned there the
worship of many gods; the most wise God did not plainly deliver to them the
mystery of the Trinity, lest they should have mistaken it for a doctrine of a
plurality of gods. Yet the Doctrine of the Trinity was not wholly hidden in
those times, but some seeds of that perfection of Divinity were dispersed: and
for that cause, the Quire of Angels sing thrice Holy, but once Lord, holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts; and here Three Men appeared to Abraham.

The Second Lesson, S. Matthew. 3. is thought fit for this Feast, because it
delivers to us the baptism of Christ, at which was discovered the mystery of
the Trinity; for there the Son is baptized, the holy Spirit descends upon him,
and the Father speaks from Heaven, This is my beloved Son.

The Epistle and the Gospel are the same that in Ancient Services were assigned
for the Octave of Pentecost, (The Epistle being of the vision of S. John, Rev.
4. and the Gospel the Dialogue of our Lord with Nicodemus) And the mentioning
(which we find therein) of Baptism, of the holy Spirit and gifts of it, though
it might then fit the day, as a repetition (as it were) of Pentecost, so is it
no less fit for it as a Feast to the Blessed Trinity. The mission the Holy
Ghost brings with it (as aforesaid) more light and clearness to the doctrine of
the Trinity, and when more fit to think of the gifts of the Spirit, than on a
solemn day of Ordination (as this is one) when Men are consecrated to spiritual
Offices? But besides this, we have in the Gospel set before us, all the Three
Persons of the Sacred Trinity, and the same likewise represented in the Vision
which the Epistle speaks of, with an Hymn of praise, Holy, holy, holy Lord God
Almighty, etc. which expressions by ancient interpretation relate to the holy
Trinity, as is above said.

Of the Sundays after TRINITY till ADVENT.
THe Church has now finished the celebration of the high Festivals and thereby
run, as it were, through a great part of the Creed, by setting before us in an
orderly manner the highest Mysteries of our Redemption by Christ on earth, till
the day he was taken up into Heaven, with the sending down of the Holy Ghost at
Pentecost. Now after she has in consequence and reflection upon these
Mysteries, broke out into a more solemn and special Adoration of the Blessed
Trinity, she comes according to her Method in the Intervals of great Feasts (of
which see Page 93.) to use such Epistles, Gospels, and Collects, as suit with
her holy affections and aims at this season. Such, namely, as tend to our
edifying, and being the living Temples of the Holy Ghost our Comforter with his
Gifts and Graces; that having Oil in our Lamps, we may be in better readiness
to meet the Bridegroom at his second Advent or coming to judgment. And this
done in the remaining Sundaies till Advent, which in their Services are, as it
were, so many Eccho's and Reflections upon the Mystery of Pentecost (the life of
the Spirit) or as Trumpets for preparation to meet our Lord at his second
coming. Which will be more manifest if we take a general view of the Gospels
together, and afterward of the Epistles and Collects.

The GOSPELS for this time, according to the method which has before been
declared, page 93. are of the holy Doctrine, Deeds and Miracles of our Savior,
and so may singularly conduce to the making us good Christians, by being
followers of Christ, and replenished with that Spirit which he both promised
and sent, and for which the Church lately kept so great a solemnity: For to be
charitable, heavenly-minded, repentant, merciful, humble, peaceable, religious,
compassionate and thankful, to trust in God and abound with such spiritual
qualities, are the Lessons taught us by our Lord in these Gospels; and that not
only by word and deed, but many miracles also, for diverse Gospels are of such,
and tend much to our edifying. From his healing of the sick, and going about
doing good, we may learn to employ that power and ability we have in works of
mercy and goodness. He that raised the dead, and did such mighty works, can be
no other, we may be sure, than God and Man, the Savior of the world, and able
to protect us, even against death it self, to raise our bodies from the dust,
and glorify them hereafter.

Thus we have in general the intent of these Gospels (as may easily appear by
particular observation) and withal, how pertinent they are to the time. And
with them the Church concludes her Annual course of such readings, having
thereby given us (and in such time and order as most apt to make deep
impression) the chief matter and substance of the four Evangelists.

True it is, that in ancient Rituals, and particularly in S. Hieromes Comes (or
Lectionarius) where we find this same order of Epistles and Gospels (See
Pamelii Liturg. Eccles. Lat. T. 2.) there are some other besides these which
our Church uses, as for Wednesdays, Fridaies and other special times and
Solemnities. But these for Sundaies and other Holy Days, which are retained by
our Church, are so well chosen for the fitness, variety and weightiness of the
matter, and out of that Evangelist that delivers it most fully, that the
chiefest passages of all the Evangelists are hereby made known and preached to
us; and what we meet not with here is abundantly supplied by the daily Second
Lessons. And the like also may be said concerning the Epistles.

In the EPISTLES for this time there is an Harmony with the Gospels, but not so
much as some have thought in their joint propounding of-particular
considerations, and those several and distinct, as the days they belong to
(for that belongs to more special solemnities) but rather as they meet all in
the common stream, the general meditation and affection of the season.

We may therefore observe, that as all the Gospels for Sundaies since Easter
day hitherto are taken out of the beloved Disciple S. John, who therein gives
us many of the last and most tender and affectionate words of our dear Lord
before his Passion and Ascension; his promising of a Comforter bidding them not
fear, bequeath^ing his peace to them, and the like: so now the two first
Epistles are taken (and most fitly) out of the same Apostle, who therein minds
us with much earnest affection of that spirit which our Lord promised for our
Comforter, and of the great effect and sign of it, the love of one another: If,
says he, we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfect in
us: Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit. And the Epistle for the second Sunday exhorts us in like
manner, To love one another as he gave commandment, and he that keeps his
Commandments dwells in him, and he in him; and hereby we know that he abides
in us, even by the Spirit which he has given us. In the Epistle for the third
Sunday, we are put in mind by S. Peter of submission, and being humble, (for
God gives grace to such) of sobriety, watching, faith and patience in
affliction, with an exhortation to cast our care upon God, who cares for us,
and shall perfect, se^tle, strengthen and stablish us, which is according to
what Christ said, That he would not leave us Comfortless. The fourth Epistle is
out of Romans 8. and is a comfort against afflictions, as not worthy of that
glory which shall be showed upon us, provided we be such as they whom the
Apostle there speaks of, who had received the first fruits of the Spirit. The
Epistle for the fifth being taken out of S. Peter, exhorts us to Love, Peace,
Innocence and such spiritual affections; and if any trouble us, not to be
afraid, but to sanctify the Lord God in our hearts. The rest of the Epistles
for all the days following, relate much to the same business, as newness of
life, and all the fruits and gifts of Gods holy Spirit, and as a particular
insight will sufficiently manifest. But being not the first that are used in
this season, they seem to have been chosen with more indifferency, for they are
taken out of S. Paul, and keep the very order of his Epistles, and the place
they have in each Epistle. For of them the first are out of the Epistle to the
Romans, and (so in order) the next out of the Epistles to the Corinthians
(first and second) Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, and Colossians, for so
far the Order reaches till the time of Advent. Only two of the Sundaies (the
18. and 25.) do vary from this method in the choice of their Epistles, and
there is reason for both.

And first, for the 25. or last Sunday the reason is manifest: for it being
looked upon as a kind of preparative or forerunner of Advent, as Advent is to
Christmas (and in S. Ieromes Lectionarius it is comprised within the time of
Advent) an Epistle was chosen not as happened according to the former method, but
such an one as prophesied of Christ's Advent or Coming; for that plainly appears
in This out of Jeremy, Behold the time comes says the Lord, that I will raise
up the righteous branch of David, which King shall bear rule, and he shall
prosper with wisdom, and shall set up Equity and Righteousness again in Earth.
The like Prophecy is employed in the Gospel, and applied to Jesus in the words
of the people when they had seen his miracle. This is of a truth the same
Prophet that should come into the world. And therefore when there are either
more or fewer Sundays than 25 between Trinity and Advent, if we so dispose of
the Services as always to make use of this for the last of them, it will be
agreeable to reason and exemplary practice, and that from time of old, for we
find such a Rule in Micrologus an ancient Ritualist. The other Sunday that
follows not the method of the rest, is the 18. after Trinity; for its Epistle
is taken out of the first to the Corinthians, not out of that to the Ephesians,
as other are for the Sundays that go next before and after. This seems to be
occasioned by a particular circumstance for which a fit Epistle was to be found
out, though it were not taken out of its place in the usual order, and that was
the Ordination of Ministers; for the understanding of which, and the ancient
care about Ordinations, it will not be amiss to be somewhat the larger. We may
therefore note that what was said of Collects (page 70.) is true also of this
order of Epistles and Gospels, that it comes down to us from Ancient Times, as
appears by S. Hieromes Lectionarius above mentioned, and other old Liturgists
and Expositors. And by them we find that it was the Custom of old to have
proper Services for Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdayes in each Ember-week, and
then followed (as with us) the conferring of Holy Orders. But care being taken
that the Ordination should be performed after continuance the same day in
Prayer and fasting, and yet be done upon the Lords day also; and because by
ancient Canon that day was not to be fasted, they therefore took this course,
to perform it on Saturday (it being one of the Ember Fasts) and yet in the
Evening of it, for that time was accounted as belonging to the Lords day
following; or if they would continue so long fasting, to do it early in the
morning following. See Le^ Epist. 81. ad Diosc.

In regard therefore that this was accounted a Sundays work, and that there had
been so much Exercise and Fasting on Saturday, the Sunday following had no
public Office, and was therefore called Dominica Vacat (or Vacans) a vacant
Sunday. But it was afterward thought better not to let that day pass in that
manner, nor to continue so long and late on Saturday in such Abstinence and
Exercise; and therefore the Ordination came to be dispa^cht sooner on Saturday,
and the Sunday following had a Service said on it, which at first for some time
was borrowed of some other days, but afterward One was fixed, being fitted to
the day or season with some respect in the frame of it to the Ordination at
that time. For although there were peculiar Readings, Rites and Prayers for the
Ordination it self (as there is also in our Church much resembling the ancient
Form,) yet besides that, in the general Service of the day, some reflection was
made on the business of Ordination.

Only the Vacant Sunday for the Ember week in September had no constant
peculiar ^ervice; for being fixed to a certain time ^f^ that Month, it chances
that the said Sunday sometimes is the 18. after Trinity, sometimes the 17. or
sooner, as Easter falls out; and accordingly takes the service of the 18.
Sunday, or some other before it, as it happens to be that year. But of old
after other Vacant days had their proper Services, this day continued for some
while to make use of borrowing; so Berno and Micrologus say it was in their
times: and what Service can we think could be more useful for that purpose,
than this of the 18th Sunday, especially if we consider it with all the
accessaries It had then?

In ancient Rituals, as S. Hieromes Lectimarius, S. Gregory's Antiphonarius,
Liber Sacramentorum, etc. we find the service of Ember week placed immediately
before ^^t of this Sunday, and the chief reason ^^y be this aforesaid, their
affinity of matter. Rupertus Tuitiens. in his 12. Book De Divin. Officiis, and
18. Chap. is very ^^pious in showing, how much the office of this day (in that
largeness it then had) concerned them that had the cure of souls: and Berno
Augiens. in his 5. Chap. is as large in showing how well it might serve in that
regard for a supplement to the Vacant Sunday. All which considered, and withal
that the usual order of the Epistles from 5. to the 25. was changed only in
This, and that according to the course of Easter, the Ordination falls on this
Sunday, or some other before it, we may very probably conclude that the choice
of this Epistle (and Gospel also) was with design to exercise our meditations
somewhat on the Ordination this day celebrated, or not long before it. And
hereby a good ground was given to the Preacher in his Sermon (for that was
usually upon the Readings of the day) to declare in a fit season the duty of
Pastors and their flocks, according as he saw occasion.

The Epistle is a Thanksgiving in behalf of the Corinthians for the grace of
God which was given them by Jesus Christ: It appears by what the Apostle says
of them in diverse places, that they had been taught by many learned
Instructers, and that many of them had much profited, and abounded in many
spiritual gifts: And such gifts are here mentioned as are specially requisite
for them that are Ordained to be Spiritual Guides, as the being enriched in all
utterance, and in all knowledge, and being behind in no good gift. And the
Gospel is of our Saviors answering a question of a Doctor of the Law, of his
silencing both Pharisees and Sadduces by his doctrine and questions: whereby he
shows how those whom he sends on Divine Messages should be qualified, how able
to speak a word in due season, to give a reason of their faith, and to convince
gainsayers. This is the Gospel in the ancient Lectionary above mentioned; and
though some Churches use other, yet we may observe that they are all very
appliable to this occasion. And the old Anthems or Versicles for the day S.
Greg. Antiphonary (which are to be found most of them in some Latin Services)
are herein most express: desiring of God, That his Prophets may be found
faithful; and speaking of being glad of going into the house of God, Bringing
presents, coming into his Courts, etc. Of telling out among the Heathen that
the Lord is King; Of Moses hallowing an Altar, and offering Sacrifices,
ascending into the Mount, praying for the people, of Gods showing himself to
him, etc.

It is true, that other Ordination-Sundays relate principally (as is most meet)
to the chief Meditations of those special seasons wherein they fall, but yet
therein we may find matter very pertinent to this occasion. How fit the Service
of Trinity Sunday is in this regard, has already been declared p. 182. nor
could any season have been more aptly chosen for this occasion. In that of Lent
the Epistle tells us what holiness of life is required in all, and therefore
certainly in them whom God has called to such an holy profession: and that
saying of Christ (in the Gospel for the same day) that he was sent to the lost
sheep, etc. may mind them of their duty who are sent by him to be Pastors of
his flock. The like Advertisements they may gather from both Epistle and Gospel
of the Sunday of Ordination in time of Advent as may be obvious to view. And no
less proper is that Epistle, which the Lectionary and some Churches appoint for
the same day: Let a man, says the Apostle there, thus wise esteem us, even as
the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Secrets of God. Furthermore it is
required of Stewards that a man be found faithful. Which Epistle with us, and
some other Churches, is applied to the Sunday next before this, changing place
with another Epistle, not unfit for this occasion, and more fit to come next to
Christmas: For by those words in it. The Lord is even at hand, it may excite us
to such a preparation for the Feast of Christ's coming in the flesh, as may
prepare us for that other coming in glory which we look for.

Thus have we taken a view of these Epistles and Gospels, and upon occasion
also of those which are used after Ordinations, and somewhat also of the time
when holy Orders were given. Our Church herein keeps to the day that is most
proper: and that is to the Sunday which next follows the Ember Fast. A day on
which Christ bestowed his Spirit upon his Apostles, gave them their Commission,
and many wonderful gifts for the good of the Church. For this and other reasons
does Leo show, how congruous the Lords day is for such a work. Besides this may
be added, that a business of such consequence being done upon such a day, is
attended with more solemnity and presence of the Congregation. See the
discourse of Ember weeks, page 149. and Leo Epist. 81. ad Diosc.

The COLLECTS remain to be now spoken of: and they in the same manner with the
Epistles and Gospels have a general congruity with the affection of the season.
For as Faith, Hope and Charity, graces and gifts of the Holy Ghost are the
general subject more or less of these Epistles, and the same taught,
exemplified and confirmed in the Gospels; so are these Collects certain general
Invocations upon God for the assistance of his holy Spirit, and bringing forth
the fruits of it, and consist usually of a most humble acknowledgment, and a
petition suitable, as is above declared, Page 85.

And as we have taken there a brief view of the pious sense and spirit of these
acknowledgments, so will it not be amiss to do the same here concerning the
petitions; which in each Collect are some or other of these following, or such
like: That God would be pleased to prevent and follow us always with his grace,
and with his mercy in all things direct and rule our hearts, to stir up our
wills, pour into our hearts (graff in them) the love of his holy ^ame, make us
to have a perpetual fear and love of it, to ask such things as shall please
him, to have the Spirit, to think and do always such things as be rightful (to
please him, both in will and deed) that he would increase, nourish, keep us in
true Religion and all goodness; give unto us the increase of Faith, Hope and
Charity, that we may live according to his will, with pure and free hearts
follow him; accomplish those things he would have done, may be cleansed,
assoyled, delivered from all our offenses, have pardon, peace, protection and
defense; may plentifully bring forth the fruits of good works, and by him be
plenteously rewarded, and obtain his promises which exceed all we can desire.
Such requests as these (besides some other, That God would hear the prayers of
the people, of which see, page 68, and 85.) are by the Priest presented to God,
fit for the Churches meditations at this time after Pentecost, and not unfitly
following the Lessons, the Decalogue, and the following Supplications of the
people, as the proper place of Collects: Being all of them (though in several
branches and expressions) in effect thus much: That by the merciful Grace,
Inspiration, Defense and Protection of God Almighty, we may be cleansed from
our sins, may obey his Commandments, may live as Christians ought, not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit, and so to be fitter to meet our blessed Lord
at his second Advent to judge the world.

And this meditation of the second Advent of Christ is thought so seasonable in
the last place; that some Churches instead of those Readings which we have for
the last Sunday of this Time, make use of some other which concern the day of
judgment: But our Church, as she has good reason for her method, as we have
seen, p. 187, 188. So is she not at all defective in her thoughts of Christ's
second coming: In time of Advent, and often afterward she takes occasion to
remember it, but most especially at this season. The last Gospel (except that
which implies a prophecy of Christ's advent) sets before us his raising up of
one from the dead, a great ground of our faith and hope of a Resurrection. The
Epistle that goes with it, and all the rest in a manner aim most evidently at
this, the Quickening us to a life spiritual by the hopes of an eternal. The last
Collect, with some other, is for the enjoyment of it ac cording to Gods
promises. So that we see the Church in her Meditations for the conclusion of
the year, takes in that for her subject which is the close of our Creed, end of
our Faith, and Crown of our Devotions: The Rosurrection of the body, and the
life everlasting.

S. ANDREW.
THis Saints day is the first that is kept solemn, because he first came to
Christ, and followed him before any of the other Apostles, S. John 1. 38. He
brought his brother Simon to Christ, 42. He it was that said, We have found the
Messiah, and therefore his day is right set at the beginning of Advent for
ever, to bring news De Adventu Domini, of the Advent or coming of our Lord.

Conversion of S. PAVL.
WHereas other Saints martyrdoms, or at least the days of their death are
celebrated by holy Church; S. Paul's Conversion is made the Holy Day. For these
reasons:

1. For the Example of it: that no sinner, how great soever, might hereafter
despair of pardon, seeing Saul a grievous persecutor made S. Paul: For this
cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might show forth all
long-suffering for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe, 1 Timothy 1.
36.

2. For the joy which the Church had at his Conversion.

3. For the miracle wrought at his Conversion.

Purification of S. MARY, or Feast of Candlemas.
SOme Churches keep four Holy Days in memory of the blessed Virgin, namely,
The Annunciation, the Assumption, the Nativity, and Purification. Our Church
keeps only the Purification and Annunciation which are common to her and our
Blessed Lord.

The Purification is a double Feast, partly in memory of the Virgins
purification (this being the fourtieth day after the birth) which she observed
according to the Law, Leviticus 12. 4. though she needed it not: but chiefly in
memory of our Lords presentation in the Temple, which the Gospel commemorates.

Our Savior thus presented in the Temple, offered himself alive Oblation for
us, that so the whole obedience of his life might be ours.

This day had one solemnity of old peculiar to it: namely, Procession; the
order and manner of which I shall set down briefly out of S. Bernard.

We go in Procession two by two, carrying Candles in our hands, which are light
(...) at a common fire, but a fire first blessed in the Church by a Bishop. They
that go out first return last; and in the way we sing; Great is the glory of
the Lord.

We go two by two, in commendation of Charity and a social life; for so our
Savior sent out his Disciples.

We carry lights in our hands: First, to signify that our light should shine
before men. Secondly, this we do this day especially in memory of the wise
virgins (of whom this blessed Virgin is the chief) that went to meet their Lord
with their Lamps light and burning. And from this usage and the many lights set
up in the Church this day, it is called Candelaria or Candlemas.

Because our works should be all done in the holy fire of Charity; therefore
the Candles are light with holy fire.

They that go out first, return last, to teach humility, in humility preferring
one another, Phil. 2. 3.

Because God loves a cheerful giver, therefore we sing in the way.

The Procession it self, is to teach us, that we should not stand idle in the
way of life, but proceed from virtue to virtue, not looking back to that which
is behind, but reaching forward to that which is before.

For the Antiquity of this day, see Cyril. Alex. Gregory Nys. in diem. And for
the Feast of the Annunciation Athanas. Ser. de Dei para.

S. Philip, and S. James.
WHereas in the Primitive Church, the Apostles had not several days of
solemnity; it was appointed that one day should be allowed for them all;
namely, in the Latin Church, the Calends or first of May: in the Greek, the
Feast of S. Peter and S. Paul. Afterward, when the other Apostles had peculiar
days appointed, this first of May was left to S. Philip and S. Jacob, because
it was thought that they suffered upon that day. Thus Durandus and some other
deliver it: but upon further enquiry it seems to be a mistake; for it (as has
been proved in the discourse upon S. Stephens day) Martyrs and other Saints had
their several days observed in the first times, it is not probable, that the
Apostles, those Founders of Churches, those Princes over all Lands (as they are
called Ps. 44. 10.) should be hudled up all into one day, and have a less
respect given them by the Church than other Saints and Martyrs had. I conceive
therefore that they had several days allowed them as well as other Saints: and
this mistake of Durandus was occasioned by this, that in some old
Martyrologists, this Feast of Philip and Jacob, was called the Feast of S.
Philip and Jacob and all the Apostles, and in some, the Feast of Philip and
Jacob and All Saints. The reason of which was not, because the Apostles had no
other Feasts appointed them but only this, but because the Feast of Philip and
Jacob is upon the Kalends of May, and so falls within the Paschal Solemnity
betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide; All which time the Church of old was wont to
commemorate not one Saint alone, but altogether; and therefore not Philip and
Jacob alone, but all the Apostles and Saints together with them: The reason of
which was, says Gemma de Antiq. Mis. rit. cap. 140. Because in our heavenly
Country, which that time signifies, the joy of all is the joy of every one; and
the joy of every Saint, the common joy of all. Or because as Micrologus says,
De Eccl. Offic. c. 55. At the general Resurrection (of which Easter solemnity
is a type) there is a common Festivity and joy of the Righteous.

The Philip this day commemorated, was Philip the Apostle, whom the Gospel
mentions, not Philip the Deacon. Yet the Church gives us a Lesson Acts 8.
concerning him; and it was a thing not unusual in ancient Martyrologies to
commemorate diverse of the same name on the same day.

The James that is commemorated this day is not one of the sons of Zebedee
whose day is kept in July, but James who was called the brother of our Lord,
the first Bishop of Jerusalem; who wrote the Epistle called the Epistle of S.
James, part of which is this day read.

This day has no Fast, because it falls betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide. See
the Feast of Circumcision.

S. John Baptist.
WE celebrate the birth of S. John Baptist, and of our Savior, For these
reasons:

The Births of both were full of joy and mystery. Our Saviors we have already
observed. Now for S. John's, it is plain, there was more than ordinary joy at
his birth, S. Luke 1. 14. And full of mystery and wonder it was. As a Virgin
conceived our Lord, so a barren woman brought forth S. John, S. Luke 1. 36.
Again, his birth was prophetical of our Lord, whom he saluted out of his
mothers womb. Lastly, his birth was made memorable by the prediction of the
Angel Gabriel, S. Luke 1. 19.

There was formerly another Holy Day for the beheading of S. John Baptist; but
our Church keeps only this Holy Day in memory of him, wherein though she
principally commemorates his mysterious Nativity, as you may see in the Gospel;
yet she does not omit his Life and Death; his Life and Office in the Morning
Lessons are recorded. His death is related in the Second Lesson Evening, and
the Collect prays for grace to imitate his example, patiently suffering for
the Truths sake.

S. Michael.
HOly Church holds a Feast in memory of the holy Angels. First, because they
minister to us on earth, Heb. 1. 14. being sent forth to minister to them that
shall be heirs of salvation. Secondly, because they fight against the Devil for
us, by their prayers and recommendation of us and our condition at the throne
of grace; as appears bp the Epistle, and the Gospel at the end of it.

The Church in this Feast particularly commemorates S. Michael, because he was
Prince or tutelar Angel of the Church of the Jews, Daniel 10. 13. 12. 1. and so
of the Christian Church: For the Church, which was once in the Jews, is now in
the Christians.

All Saints.
BEcause we cannot particularly commemorate every one of those Saints in whom
Gods graces have been eminent, for that would be too heavy a burden: and
because in these particular Feasts, which we do celebrate, we may justly be
thought to have omitted some of our duty, through infirmity or negligence:
therefore holy Church appoints this day, in commemoration of the Saints in
general.

Other Holy Days not here spoken of, are either mentioned in other places, or
need no other explication than what already has been said in general of Holy
days, and their Readings.

The COMMUNION, or Second-Service.
IN the Liturgy it is called The Communion, and well it were that the piety of
the people were such as to make it always a Commwnion. The Church as appears
by her pathetical Exhortation before the Communion, and the Rubric after it,
labors to bring men oftener to communicate than she usually obtains. Private
and solitary Communions of the Priest alone she allows not; and therefore when
other cannot be had she appoints only so much of the Service, as relates not of
necessity to a present Communion, and that to be said at the Holy Table; and
upon good reason, the Church thereby keeping, as it were, her ground, visibly
minding us of what she desires and labors toward, our more frequent access to
that holy Table, and in the mean while that part of the Service which she uses
may perhaps more fitly be called the Second Service than the Communion. And so
it is often called, though not in the Rubr, of the Liturgy, yet in diverse Fast
books and the like set out by Authority. If any should think that it cannot
properly be called the Second Service, because the Morning Service and Litany
go before it, which we prove in the following discourse to be two distinct
Services, whereby this should seem to be the Third rather than the Second
Service, it is Answered, that sometimes the Communion-Service is used upon such
days as the Litany is not; and then it may without question be called the
Second Service: nay, even then when the Litany and all is used, the Communion
Service may be very fitly called the Second Service: For though in strictness
of speech the Litany is a service distinct, as is shown; yet in our usual
acception of the word Service, namely for a complete Service with all the
several parts of it, Psalms, Readings, Creeds, Thanksgivings, and Prayers, so
the Litany is not a Service, nor so esteemed, but called The Litany, or
Supplications; and looked upon sometimes, when other Offices follow, as a kind
of Preparative (though a distinct form) to them, as to The Communion,
Commination, etc. And therefore it was a custom in some Churches, that a Bell
was tolled, while the Litany was saying, to give notice to the people, that the
Communion Service was now coming on. This Service consists of Four parts, The
first reaches to the Offertory, called anciently Missa Catechumenorum, the
service of the Catechumens: The second is the Offertory, which reaches to the
Consecration. The third begins at the Consecration, and ends at the Angelical
Hymn, Glory be to God an high. The last is the Post-Commwnion, or Thanksgiving,
which with us is nothing but that holy Hymn.

Part. 1. We begin the first part as the Church was wont to begin her Services,
with the LORDS PRAYER, concerning which, see the Morning Service.

After this follows an excellent prayer to God to cleanse our hearts by his
holy inspiration.

Then follow the COMMANDMENTS, with a Kyrie, or Lord have mercy upon us, after
every one of them. Which though I cannot say it was ancient, yet surely cannot
be denied to be very useful and pious. And if there be any that think this
might be spared, as being fitter for poor Publicans than Saints; let them turn
to the Parable of the Publican and Pharisee going up to the Temple to pray, S.
Luke 18. and there they shall receive an answer.

Then follows the COLLECT for the day, with another for the King, which the
Priest is to say standing, etc. Of this posture enough has been said in the
Morning Service. Though there has been a Prayer for the King in the Morning
Service, and another in the Litany; Yet the Church here appoints one again,
that she may strictly observe S. Paul's rule, 1 Timothy 2. who directs that in all
our public prayers for all Men, an especial prayer should be made for the
King. Now the Morning Service, Litany and this Communion-Service are three
distinct Services, and therefore have each of them such an especial prayer.

That they are three distinct Services will appear. For they are to be
performed at distinct places, and times. The Morning Service is to be said at
the beginning of the day, as appears in the third Collect for Grace. (...),
says, S. Chrysostom. which is translated, S. Matthew. 27. 2. in the Morning: and S.
John 18. 28. Early. In S. Mark 13. 35. it is translated, The dawning of the
day. The place for it is the accustomed place in the Chancel or Church, says
the Rubr. before Morning prayer, or where the Ordinary shall appoint it.

The Litany is also a distinct Service, for it is no part of the Morning
Service, as you may see Rubr. after Athanas. Creed. Here ends the Morn. and
Even. Service. Then follows the Litany. Nor is it any part of the Com. Service,
for that begins with Our Father, and the Collect, Almigh^y God, etc. and is to
be said after the Litany. The time and place for this, is not appointed in the
Rubr. but it is supposed to be known by practice. For in the Commination, the
51. Psalm. is appointed to be said, where they are accustomed to say the Litany,
and that was in the Church. Eliz, Inj. 18. before the Chancel door. Bishop
Andrews notes upon the Liturgy: It being a penitential Office, is there
appointed, in imitation of Gods command, to the Priests in their penitential
Service, Joel 2 17. Let the Priests weep between the Porch and the Altar. The
time of this, is a little before the time of the Com. Service, Inj. 18. Eliz.

The Communion-Service is to be some good distance after the Morn. Service,
Rubr. 1. before the Communion-Service, So many as intend to be partakers of the
holy Communion, shall signify their names to the Curate, over night, or before
Morning prayer, or immediately after, which does necessarily require a good
space of time to do it in. The usual hour for the solemnity of this Service,
was anciently, and so should be, Nine of the clock, Morning. C. Aurel. 3. c.
11. This is the Canonical hour De Consecr. did. 1. c. Et Hos. Thence probably
called, the holy hour, Decret. did. 44. c. sin. In case of necessity it might
be said earlier or later, Durant, de Rit^bus; but this was the usual and
Canonical hour, for it. One reason which is given for it is, because at this
hour began our Saviors Passion, S. Mark 15. 25. the Jews then crying out
Crucify, etc. At this hour therefore is the Com. Service (part of which is a
commemoration of Christ's Passion) performed. Another reason given is, because
this hour the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles, Acts 2. 15. Lastly,
because it is the most convenient hour for all to meet, and dispatch this with
other offices before Noon. For, 'till the Service was ended, Men were persuaded
to be fasting; and therefore it was thought fit to end all the Service, before
Noon, that people might be free to eat. Durant. l. 2. c. 7. Why this Service is
called the Second, see page 207, 208.

The place for this Service is the Altar or Communion Table, Rubr. before the
Com. And so it was always in Primitive times, which is a thing so plain as it
needs no proof.

After this, the Priest reads the Epistle and Gospel for the day. Concerning
the antiquity of which, and the reason of their choice, has been said already:
nothing here remains to be shown, but the antiquity and piety of those Rites,
which were used both by us and the ancient Church, about the reading of the
Gospel. As

First, when the GOSPEL is named, the Clergy and the people present; say or
sing, Glory be to thee O Lord. So it is in S. Chrysostom. Liturg. Glorifying God
that has sent to them also the word of salvation. As it is in the Acts of the
Apost. 11. 18. When they heard these things they glorified God, saying, Then
has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.

2. While the Gospel is reading, all that are present stand Great. de Conser.
did. 1. c. 68. And Zozomen in his Hist. l. 7. c. 19. tells us it was a new
fashion in Alexandria, that the Bishop did not rise up when the Gospel was
read: [Quod apud alios usquam fieri, neque comperi neque audivi; Which, says
he, I never observed nor heard amongst any others whatsoever:] The reason was
this. Anciently, whenever the holy Lessons were read, the people stood, to
express their reverence to the holy word. Aug. ^l. hom. 50. hom. 26. Nehem. 8.
5.

But because this was counted too great a burden, it was thought fit to show
our reverence, especially at the reading of the Gospel, which historically
declares somewhat which our Savior spoke, did, or suffered in his own person:
By this gesture, showing a reverend regard to the Son of God, above other
messengers, although speaking as from God. And against Arrians, Jews, Infidels,
who derogate from the honor of our LORD, such ceremonies are most profitable.
As judicious Mr. Hooker notes.

3. After the Gospel is ended, the use was to praise God, saying, Thanks be to
God for this Gospel. So was it of old ordained, Tolet. Conc. 4. c. 11. that the
Lauds or Praises should be said, not after the Epistle, but immediately after
the Gospel, for the glory of Christ, which is preached in the Gospel.

In some places the fashion was, then to kiss the book. And surely this book,
by reason of the rich contents of it; deserve^ a better regard than too often
it finds. It should in this respect be used so, as others may see we prefer it
before all other books.

Next is the NICENE CREED; so called, because it was for the most part framed
at the great Council of Nice. But because the great Council of Constantinople
added the latter part, and brought it to the frame which we now use, therefore
is it called also the Constantinopolitan Creed. This Creed began to be used in
Churches at the Communion Service immediately after the Gospel, in the year of
our Lord 339.

Afterward it was established in the Churches of Spain and France, after the
custom of the Eastern Church, Conc. Tolet. 3. c. 2. and continued down to our
times.

The Reason why this Creed follows immediately after the Epistle and Gospel, is
the same that was given for the APOSTLES CREED following next after the Lessons
at Morning and Evening prayer. To which the Canon of Toledo last cited, has
added Another Reason of the saying it here before the people draw near to the
holy Communion: namely, [That the breasts of those that approach to those
^readful mysteries may be purified with a ^^ue and right faith.]

A third reason is given by Dionys. Eccl. Hierar. c. 3. par. 2. and 3. It will
not be amiss to set down some passages of his at large, because they will both
give us a third reason of using the Creed in this place, and discover to us, as
I conceive, much of the ancient beautiful order of the Communion-Service.

The Bishop or Priest standing at the Altar, begins the melody of Psalms, all
the degrees of Ecclesiastics singing with him. This Psalmody is used, as in
almost all Priestly Offices, so in this, to prepare and dispose our souls by
holy affections, to the celebration of the holy mysteries following; and by the
consent and singing together of divine Psalms, to work in us an unanimous
consent and concord one toward another. Then is read by some of the Ministers,
first a Lesson out of the Old Testament, then one out of the New, in their
order, (for the reasons before mentioned in the discourse of Lessons at Morning
Service:) After this the Catechumens, the possessed, and the penitents are
dismissed, and they only allowed to stay, who are deemed worthy to receive the
holy Sacrament: which being done, some of the under Ministers keep the door of
the Church, that no Infidel or unworthy person may intrude into these sacred
Mysteries. Then the Ministers and devout people (reverently beholding the holy
signs, not yet consecrated, but blessed and offered up to God on a by-standing
Table, called the Table of Proposition (...) Praise and bless the Father of
Lights, (from whom, as all good gifts, so this great blessing of the Communion
does come) with the Catholic hymn of praise, which some call the Creed; others
more divinely, The Pontifical Thanksgiving, as containing in it all the
spiritual gifts which flow from Heaven upon us, the whole mystery of our
salvation; when this hymn of praise is finished, the Deacons with the Priest,
set the holy Bread and Cup of Blessing upon the Altar; after which, the Priest
or Bishop says the most sacred, that is, the Lords Prayer, gives the Blessing
to the people; then they (in token of perfect charity, a most necessary virtue
at this time of offering at the Altar, S. Mat. 5. 23.) salute each other. After
which, the names of holy Men that have lived and died in the faith of Christ
are read out of the Diptychs, and their memories celebrated, to persuade others
to a diligent imitation of their virtues, and a steadfast expectation of their
heavenly rewards. This commemoration of the Saints, presently upon the setting
of the holy signs upon the Altar, is not without some mystery; to show the
inseparable sacred union of the Saints with Christ, who is represented by those
sacred signs. These things being rightly performed, the Bishop or Priest, that
is to Consecrate, washes his hands, a most decent Ceremony, signifying, that
those that are to do these holy Offices should have a special care of purity. I
will wash mine hands in innocence, O Lord, and so will I compass thine Altar,
Psalm. 26. 6. After he has magnified these divine gifts, and God that gave
them, then he consecrates the holy Mysteries: and having uncovered them,
reverently shows them to the people, inviting them to the receiving of them.
Himself, and the Priests and Deacons receive first, then the people receive in
both kinds; and having all received, they end the Service with a Thanksgiving,
which was Psalm. 34.

After the Epistle and Gospel and the confession of that Faith which is taught
in holy Writ, follows THE SERMON. Amb. ep. 33. ad Marcel. Leo 1. Ser. 2. de
Pascha, which usually was an exposition of some part of the Epistle or Gospel,
or proper Lesson for the day, as we may see in S. Augustine in his Sermon. de
Temp. according to the pattern in Nehem. 8. 8. They read in the book, in the
law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused the people to understand
the reading. And the Preacher was in his Exposition appointed to observe the
Catholic interpretation of the old Doctors of the Church; as we may see in the
19. Can. of the sixth Council of Constantinople held in Trull. The Canon is
this. Let the Governors of Churches every Sunday at the least, teach their
Clergy and people the Oracles of pie^y and true Religion; collecting out of
Divine Scripture, the sentences and Doctrines of truth, not transgressing the
ancient bounds and traditions of the holy Fathers. And if any doubt or
controversy arise about Scripture, let them follow that interpretation, which
the Lights of the Church and the Doctors have left in their writings. By which
they shall more deserve commendation, than by making private interpretations,
which if they adhere to, they are in danger to fall from the truth.

To this agrees the Canon made in Queen Elizabeth's time. Anno Dom. 1571. The
Preachers chiefly shall take heed that they teach nothing in their preaching,
which they would have the people religiously to observe and believe, but that
which is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Old Testament and the New, and that
which the Catholic Fathers and Ancient Bishops have gathered out of that
Doctrine. These Golden Canons had they been duly observed, would have been a
great preservative of Truth and the Churches peace.

The Sermon was not above an hour long. Cyril. Catech. 13.

Before the Sermon no prayer is appointed but the Lords Prayer, the petitions
being first consigned upon the people, by the Preacher or Minister, who is
appointed to bid the prayers, as it is in Edw. 6. and Queen Eliz. Injunctions;
that is, to tell the people beforehand, what they are at that time especially
to pray for in the Lords Prayer; which in the 55. Can. of the Constit. Anno
Dom. 1603. is called, moving the people to join with the Preacher in praying
the Lords Prayer. Of old, nothing was said before the Sermon, but Gemina
Salutatio, the double Salutation, Clem. Constable. l. 8. c. 5. Optat. 1. 7. The
Bishop or Priest never begins to speak to the people; but first in the Name of
God he salutes the people and the salutation is doubled, that is, the Preacher
says, The Lord be with you, and the people answer, And with thy Spirit. Much
after this manner was the Jews practice, Neh. 8. 4. and 6. Ezra the Scribe
stood upon a Pulpit of wood, etc. and opened the book in the sight of all the
people; and when he opened it, all the people stood up, and Ezra blessed the
Lord the great God, and all the people answered Amen, Amen, and worshipped.
Verse 8: Then Ezra read in the Book, and gave the sense, and caused them to
understand the reading. So we see, that both amongst Jews and Christians of
old, the Preacher before his Sermon used only a short Salutation, or Blessing;
to which the people having answered, the Sermon began. And though the Church of
England uses not the very same form, yet in this she follows the ancient
practice, prescribing only the short prayer of our Lord: and indeed what need
any more? For whatsoever we can desire, is abundantly prayed for before in the
Liturgy, and needs not be prayed over again immediately. And therefore there
being no need of such a solemn prayer, the Church has appointed none, but only
the Lords Prayer: and no other being appointed, no other should be used by the
Preacher. For, as has been shown, Page 1. No prayers should be used publicly,
but those that are prescribed; lest through ignorance or carelessness, any thing
contrary to the faith should be uttered before God. How necessary such
restraint of privatemens prayers in public is, and how good that reason is for
such restraint, a little experience of licentious times will abundantly show.
The pulpit is no security from errors. Men may as well speak blasphemy or
vanity before the Sermon, as in it. Is it not reason then that the Church
should take care what she can, to prevent this danger, by restraining that
liberty, which is so likely to run men into it? Suppose some Preacher should be
so careful, as not to vent any thing unsavory, yet the Church cannot be secured
of all, and therefore must not allow a general liberty. Nay, suppose the Church
could be assured of all Preachers care in this particular, that their prayers
should be for matter sound and good; yet how should it be reasonable for the
Church to allow any private person or Preacher to offer up to God a prayer in
the name of the Congregation, as their joint desire, to which, they never
before consented themselves, nor their Governors for them. A Preacher may pray
for his Auditory by himself, though they know it not, nor consented to it
before hand; but it is not imaginable how he should offer it up in their name,
or call it their prayer to God, as sometimes the use has been, which neither
they themselves, nor their Governors, whom Christ has empowered to make prayer
for them, have consented to, or acknowledged for theirs: no more than any man
can call that the Petition of a Town, which he shall present in their names,
though they never before consented to it, or so much as saw it before it was
presented.

This Form of bidding Prayers is very ancient: we may see the like in S. Chrysostom.
and other Liturgies which they called (...), Allocutions, in which the Deacon
speaks to the people from point to point, directing them what to pray for (as
has been said before.) This is all the difference betwixt them and this; that
in them the people were to answer to every point severally, Lord have mercy,
etc. In this, they are taught to sum up all the Petitions in the Lords Prayer,
and to pray for them all together.

This was the practice in King Edw. the Sixth's time, as appears by Bishop
Latymer, Jewel, and others in those days, whose Forms of Bidding Prayers,
before Sermon, are to be seen in their writings.

If there be no Sermon, there shall follow one of the Homilies set forth. So
was it of old appointed Conc. Vas. c. 4. [If the Parish Priest be sick, or
cannot preach, let the homilies of the holy Fathers be read by the Deacon.

Part 2. The OFFERTORY follows, which are certain sentences out of holy
Scripture, which are sung or said while the people offered. Durant.

Offerings or Oblations are an high part of Gods service and worship, taught by
the light of nature and right reason: which bids us to honor God with our
substance, as well as with our bodies and souls: to give a part of our goods to
God as an homage or acknowledgement of his Dominion over us, and that all that
we have comes from God; 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. Who am I, and what is my people, that
we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort; for all things come of
thee, and of thine own have we given thee? To bring presents to him that ought
to be feared, Psalm. 76. 11. This duty of offerings was practiced by the Fathers
before the Law, with a gracious acceptance. Witness Abel, Genesis 4. 4. Commanded
in the Law, Exodus 25. 2. Speak to the children of Israel that they bring me an
offering. So Deuteronomy. 16. 16. Confirmed by our Savior in the Gospel, S. Matthew. 5.
23. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and
go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift. If any man conceives that this offering here mentioned was a Jewish
perishing rite, not a duty of the Gospel to continue; let him consider,

First, that there is the same reason for this duty under the Gospel, as there
was under or before the Law, God being Lord of us and ours as well as of them;
and therefore to be acknowledged for such by us, as well as by them.

Secondly, that all the rest of our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount was Gospel,
and concerning duties obliging us Christians: and it is not likely that our
Savior should intermix one only Judaical rite amongst them.

Thirdly, that our Savior before all these precepts mentioned in this his
Sermon, whereof this of oblations is one, prefaces this severe sanction, S.
Matthew. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of the least of these commandments, and
shall teach men so, shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven; which
could not be truly said concerning the breach of a Jewish outworn rite.

4. That, our Savior has carefully taught us there, the due manner of the
performance of this duty of oblations, like as he did concerning alms and
prayers, and no man can show that ever he did any where else; nor is it
probable that he should here carefully direct us, how to do that which was
presently to be left, and was already out of force, as this was, supposing it
to be a Jewish rite. We may then, I conceive, suppose it for a truth, that
oblations are here commanded by our Savior.

Add to this, that offerings were highly commended by the Gospel, in the Wise
men that offered Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, S. Matthew. 2. 11. and that they
were practiced by the Father in the Christian Church. So says Epiphan. haer.
80. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 34. [By a gift to the King, his honor and our affection
is shown; therefore our Lord willing us to offer with all simplicity and
innocence, preached, saying, When thou bring thy gift to the altar, etc. We
must therefore offer of our goods to God, according as Moses commanded, Thou
shall not appear before the Lord empty. There are offerings under the Gospel,
as well as under the Law: the kind of offerings is the same: Here is all the
difference, they were offered then by servants, now by sons.] S. Hier. ep. ad
Heliodor. The axe is laid to the root of the tree, if I bring not my gift to
the Altar: nor can I plead poverty, since the poor widow has cast in two
mites,] We should do well to think of this.

Though oblations be acceptable at any time, yet at sometimes they have been
thought more necessary, as

First, when the Church is in want, Ex. 35. 4, etc.

Secondly, when we have received some signal and eminent blessing from God.
Psalm. 76. When David had recounted the great mercy of God in breaking the bow
and the shield of the Churches enemies, at the 11. verse, he presses this duty,
Bring presents to him that ought to be feared.

Thirdly, at our high and solemn Festivals, Deuteronomy. 16. 16. Three times in the
year shall they appear before me, and they shall not appear empty; Especially
when we receive the holy Communion. Theodoret Hist. l. 5. c. 17. tells us, that
it was the ancient custom, before the receiving of the holy Sacrament, to come
into the Quire and offer at the holy Table. And surely it becomes not us to be
empty-handed, when God comes to us full-handed, as in that Sacrament he does.

Next to the OFFERTORY is that excellent PRAYER for the CHVRCH-MILITANT,
wherein we pray for the Catholic and Apostolic Church; For all Christian
Kings, Princes and Governors, for the Whole Clergy and people, for all in
adversity, Such a prayer has S. Chr. in his Liturg, a little before the
Consecration.

After which follow some wholesome Exhortations to those that are coming to the
holy Communion, seriously exhorting the unprepared to forbear. So was the
custom of old in the Greek Church. The Priest admonishes all that are coming
to that holy Sacrament, driving away the unworthy, but inviting the prepared,
and that with a loud voice, and hands lifted up, standing aloft, where he may
be seen and heard of all. Chrysostom. in Heb. hom. 9. in Ethic.

Those that after these exhortations stay to receive, the Church supposing
prepared, invites, to draw near; and after their humble confession the Priest
or Bishop absolves and comforts them with some choice sentences taken out of
holy Scripture. After which the Priest says, Lift up your hearts. For
certainly at that hour when we are to receive the most dreadful Sacrament, it
is necessary to lift up our hearts to God, and not to have them grovelling upon
the earth: for this purpose the Priest exhorts all, to leave all cares of this
life and domestic thoughts, and to have our hearts and minds in heaven upon
the lover of mankind. The people then answer, We lift them up unto the Lord,
assenting to the Priests admonition. And it behooves us all to say it seriously:
For as we ought always to have our minds in heaven, so especially at that hour
we should more earnestly endeavor it.

The Priest goes on, Let us give thanks to our Lord God, and many thanks we
ought to render him, that calls and invites such unworthy sinners as we be, to
so high grace and favor, as to eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of the Son of
God.

The people answer, It is meet and right so to do. For when we give thanks to
God, we do a work that is just, and of right due to so much bounty.

Then follow for great days some proper Prefaces, containing the peculiar
matter or subject of our thanks that day, which are to be said seven days
after, Rubr. ibidem. except Whitsunday Preface, which is to be said but six
days after; because Trinity Sunday is the seventh day after, which has a
peculiar Preface. By this it appears that the Church intends to prorogue and
continue these high Feasts several days, even eight days together, if another
great Feast comes not within the time, which requires a peculiar Service. But
when we say that the Church would have these high Feasts continued so long, it
is not so to be understood, as if she required an equal observance of those
several days, for some of those days she commands by her Canons and Rubricks.
Some she seems only to commend to us to be observed; some are of a higher
festivity, some of less. The first and the last, namely, the Octave of the
first, are usually the chief days for solemn Assemblies; yet every of those
days should be spent in more than ordinary meditation of the blessings of the
time, and thanksgiving for them: according to that which the Lord commanded to
the Jews concerning the Feast of Tabernacles, Lev. 23. 36. Upon every one of
the days of that Feast an offering was to be made, but the first and last were
the solemn Convocations.

The reason of the Churches proroguing and lengthning, out these high Feasts,
for several days, is plain. The subject matter of these Feasts, as namely,
Christ's Birth, Resurrection, Ascension, the sending of the holy Ghost, is of so
high a nature, so nearly concerning our salvation, that one day is too little
to meditate of them, and praise God for them as we ought; a bodily deliverance
may justly require a day of thanksgiving and joy; but the deliverance of the
soul, by the blessings commemorated on those times, deserve a much longer
Feast. It were injurious to good Christian souls to have their joy and
thankfulness for such mercies confined to a day, therefore holy Church upon the
times when these unspeakable blessings were wrought for us, by her most
seasonable commands and counsels here invites us, to fill our hearts with joy
and thankfulness, and let them overflow eight days together.

See above, of the Continuation of great Solemnities, page 128. 174. 180. and
of the service of Octaves. p. 178.

But two Quaeries here may be fit to be satisfied.

First, why eight days are allowed to those high Feasts, rather than another
number?

For which the reasons given are diverse; one is from the example which Almighty
God sets us, commanding his people the Jews, to keep their great Feasts some of
them seven days, and one, namely, the Feast of Tabernacles, eight days, Lev.
23. If the Jews were to keep their Feasts so long by a daily Burnt-offering
(which were but as types of the Christians great Feasts) the Christians ought
by no means to come short of them, but offer up to God as long, daily, hearty
thanksgivings, presenting our selves souls and bodies, a reasonable, holy and
lively Sacrifice unto him. Other reasons, for an Octave to great Feasts, are
given, which are mystical. The Octave or eighth day, signifies Eternity, for
our whole life is but the repetition or revolution of seven days. Then comes
the eighth day of Eternity, to which, by Gods mercy we shall be brought, if we
continue the seven days of our life in the due and constant service and
worship of God; or else, which is much the same in sense; the eighth day is a
returning to the first, it is the first day of the week begun again,
signifying, that if we constantly serve God the seven days of our life, we
shall return to the first happy estate that we were created in.

The Second Quaere is, how the Prefaces appointed for these eight days can be
properly used upon each of them: for example, how can we say eight days
together, Thou did give thine only Son to be born this day for us? as it is
in the Preface.

To which the Answer may be, That the Church does not use the word Day, for a
natural day of 24. hours, or an ordinary artificial day, reckoning from Sun to
Sun; but in the usual acception of it in holy Scripture, where by the word Day,
is signified the whole time designed to one and the same purpose, though it
lasts several natural days. Thus all the time that God appoints to the
reclaiming of sinners by merciful chastisements or threatenings is called, The
day of their visitation, Luke 19. 42, 44. So all the time allotted us for the
working out of our salvation, though it be our whole life long, is called a
day, Work while it is day, the night comes when no man can work; and most
directly to our purpose speaks S. Paul, Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily,
while it is called to day, or this day, that is, while you live here in this
world. In like manner all that time which is appointed by the Church, for the
thankful commemoration of the same grand blessing, for the solemnity of one and
the same Feast, is as properly called a day, and all that time it may be said
daily, to day, as well as all our life S. Paul says is called Hodie, this day.

After which follows the thrice holy and triumphant song, as it was called of
old [ Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company of heaven
we laud and magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising thee and saying,
holy, holy, holy, etc.] Here we do, as it were, invite the heavenly host to
help bear a part in our thanks to make them full. O praise the Lord with me,
and let us magnify his name together. And in this hymn we hold communion with
the Church triumphant. Which sweet hymn, in all Communions is appointed to be
said; and though it should be said night and day, yet could it never breed a
loathing. Conc. Vasen. c. 6. All that is in our Service from these words, Lift
up your hearts, to the end of the Communion-service, is, with very little
difference to be seen in S. Chrysostom. Liturg. and in S. Cyrils Catech. mystag. 5.

Part. 3. Next is the CONSECRATION. So you shall find in Chrysostom. and Cyril
last cited. Which Consecration consists chiefly in rehearsing the words of our
Saviors institution, This is my body, and this is my blood, when the Bread and
Wine is present upon the Communion Table. Can. Anglie. 21. S. Chrysostom. Ser. 2. in
2. ad Tim. The holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which the Priest now makes,
is the same that Christ gave to his Apostles. This is nothing less than that.
For this is not sanctified by men, but by him that sanctified that: for as the
words which God our Savior spoke are the same, which the Priest no^ uses, so
is the Sacrament the same. Again, Ser. de Judah, lat. Ed. tom. 3. Christ is
present at the Sacrament now, that first instituted it. He consecrates this
also: It is not man that makes the body and blood of Christ by consecrating the
holy Elements, but Christ that was crucified for us. The words are pronounced
by the mouth of the Priest, but the Elements are consecrated by the power and
grace of God, THIS IS, says he, MY BODY: By this word the bread and wine are
consecrated.]

Before these words [THIS IS MY BODY] the bread and wine are common food fit
only to nourish the body; but since our Lord has said, Do this, as often as you
do it in remembrance of me, This is my body, this my blood: as often as by
these words and in this faith they are consecrated, the holy bread and blessed
cup are profitable to the salvation of the whole man: Cyprian de coena Dom. The
same says S. Ambr. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 4. and 5. S. Aug. ser. 28. de verb.
Dei. And others.

After the Consecration, the Priest first receives himself. so is it ordained
Conc. Tolet. 12. 5. wherein it is decreed that, The Priest shall receive
whenever he offers up the Sacrifice. For since the Apostle has said, Are not
they which eat of the Sacrifice, partakers of the Altar? 1 Cor. 10. it is
certain, that they who sacrifice and eat not, are guilty of the Lords
Sacrament.]

After he has received, he is to deliver it to the people in their hands. So
was it in Cyrils time, Cat. mystag. 5. and Let every one be careful to keep it,
for whosoever carelessly loses any part of it, had better lose a part of
himself, says he, And Whosoever wilfully throws it away, shall be for ever
excluded from the Communion. Conc. Tolet. 11. c. 11.

It is to be given to the people KNEELING. for a sin it is not to adore when we
receive this Sacrament, Aug. in Psalm. 98. And the old custom was to receive it
after the manner of Adoration, Cyril. ibidem.

When the Priest has said at the delivery of the Sacrament, the body of our
Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul into
everlasting life. The Communicant is to answer, AMEN. Cyril, Mist. 5. By this
Amen professing his faith of the presence of Christ's Body and Blood in that
Sacrament.

The people were of old called out of the Body of the Church into the Chancel,
even up to the Rails of the Holy Table, there to receive it of the Priest,
Niceph. l. 18. c. 45. So Clement Constable. l. 2. c. 57. these be his words in
English, Afterward let the Sacrifice be made, all the people standing and
praying secretly; and after the Oblation let every Order apart receive the Body
and precious Blood of the Lord, coming up in their Order with fear and
reverence as to the Body of a King. Where you see they were to come up to the
Sacrament, and to, or near the Railes of the Holy Table, says S. Chrysostom.
Liturgy. For after the Priest and Deacons have received, the Deacon goes to the
door of the Rails, (...), and lifting up the holy Cup, shows it to the people,
saying, In the faith and fear of God (...), come hither, or as our Liturgy
says, draw near, the people Answer, Amen, Amen, Amen, Blessed be he that comes
in the Name of the Lord, and so come and receive in both kinds.

Every Parishioner shall communicate at the least three times in the year,
whereof Easter to be one. Rubr. last after the Communion.

In the Primitive Church, while Christians continued in their strength of Faith
and Devotion, they did communicate every day. This custom continued in Africa
till S. Cyprians time, Orat. Dom. We daily receive the Eucharist, for to be our
food of salvation. And after him till S. Augustines time Ep. 23. ad Bonifac.
Insomuch as these words in our Lords Prayer, Give us this day our daily bread,
they interpreted of the Eucharist, as being daily to be celebrated. But
afterward when charity grew cold and devotion faint, the custom grew faint
withal; and within a small time began to be left by little and little; and some
upon one pretense, and some upon another, would communicate but once a week. In
the East-Church they grew to a worse custom betimes, which in after Ages came
into the Latin Churches too. They fell from every day to Sundaies and Holy
days only, and from thence to once a year, and no oftener. S. Ambr. is cited
for the proof of this, De Sacram. l. 4. c. 4. But this wicked custom of
receiving the Eucharist but once a year, was but of some Greeks in the East,
says S. Ambrose there; which cannot properly be understood of any but the
Diocese (as it was anciently called) or Patriarchate of Antioch. For though the
Eastern Empire, whereof Constantinople was the Metropolis, contained many
Provinces, yet the Eastern Church, or Greeks in the East, were properly those
of Antioch, Theodor. Hist. 1.5. c. 9. And possibly some of these might be so
supine, as has been observed; but of the Greeks in general, no such careless
custom can be affirmed: for S. Chrysostom. tells us that in his time, in every
meeting or congregation of the Church, the healthful mysteries of the Eucharist
are celebrated, Hom. 26. in Matthew. In regard of this neglect, after-Councels
did, as the Church of England, make Canons, that if men could be got to receive
it no oftener, yet they should be forced to receive it, at least three times in
the year; Christmas, Easter and Whitsontide. Nor was he to be reckoned amongst
good Catholic Christians, that did not receive at those feasts, Conc. Agat. c.
18. [Eliber. c. 81. as they are cited by Gratian. de Consor. dis. 2.] Three
times a year at the least they were to receive, whereof Easter to be one; and
good reason: For when Christ our Passover was Sacrificed for us, then, of all
times, let us keep a Feast with this holy banquet, 1 Cor. 5. 7. These Canons
were made for the Laity, but for those of the Clergy that lived in Cathedral
and Collegiate Churches, (where there were enough of themselves, to make a
sufficient company to receive the Sacrament) they were bound to receive much
oftener, every day, Edw. 6. Liturg. every Sunday at the least, Rubr. 4. after
the Communion. Thus we see holy Church her care to bring all her Children;
Clergy and Laity, to the heavenly banquet of the body and blood of Christ; she
invites all to a frequent and due receiving of this holy Sacrament in most
passionate and kind manner, in that most excellent exhortation, next after the
prayer for the Catholic Church militant here on earth. An exhortation, fit to
be read weekly by the Priest, and seriously considered daily by all the people.
In which holy Church one while exhorts us by the mercies and bowels of Christ,
to come to this holy feast; another while terrifies us by the indignation of
God against those that despise his so great love, and refuse to come, she sends
her Ministers, as the man in the Gospel S. Luke 14. to tell them all things are
ready^ and to bid them in the Name of God, to call them in Christ's behalf, to
exhort them as they love their own salvation, to come to this holy Supper; and
those, that, notwithstanding all this bidding, shall go about to make excuses,
because they had bought a Farm, or would try their yoke of Oxen, or because
they were married, holy Church by her Canons and Laws endeavors to compel to
come in at least three times in the year. And it were to be wished that all
those that despise the Churches passionate exhortations, and contemn her
wholesome Canons and commands in this particular, would seriously at last, think
of that dreadful sentence of our Lord, upon those that still refuse so great
mercy, I say unto you that none of those men which were bidden, shall taste of
my Supper. S. Luke 14. 24. None of those that are thus bidden by Christ and his
Church to his holy Supper, the holy Communion, and shall refuse to come, shall
ever taste of his great Supper hereafter, or eat and drink with him at his
Table in his Kingdom S. Luke c. 22. 29.

If any of the Bread and Wine remain, the Curate shall have it to his own use.
[Rubr. 5. after the Communion Service.] That is, if it were not consecrated:
for if it be consecrated, it is all to be spent with fear and reverence by the
Communicants, in the Church Gratian de Consecr. did. 2. c. 23. Tribus Council,
Constant. Resp. ad. Qu. 5. Monachon. apud Balsam. Theophil. Alexand. cap. 7.

Part 4. After all have received, we say the LORDS PRAYER according to ancient
Custom, Ambr. l. 5. de Sacram. c. 4. The people are to repeat every Petition
after the Priest. Rubr. If the Church did ever devise a thing fit and
convenient, what more than this; That when together we have all received those
heavenly Mysteries, wherein Christ imparts himself to us, and gives visible
testification of our blessed Communion with him, we should in hatred of all
Heresies, Factions, and Schisms declaredly approve our selves united as
Brethren in one, by offering up with all our hearts and tongues that most
effectual prayer, Our Father, etc. In which we profess our selves Sons of the
same Father, and in which we pray for Gods pardon no otherwise than as we
forgive them that trespass, etc. For which cause Communicants have ever used
it, and we at that time do show we use, yea every syllable of it, as
Communicants, saying it together with one consent and voice.

This done, the Priest offers up the Sacrifice of the holy Eucharist, or the
Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for the whole Church, as in all old
Liturgies it is appointed, and together with that is offered up that most
acceptable Sacrifice of our selves, souls and bodies devoted to Gods service.
Of which see Romans 12. and S. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 10. c. 6.

Then we say or sing the Angelical Hymn, GLORY BE TO GOD ON HIGH, etc. wherein
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy does admirably imitate the Heavenly, singing this
at the Sacrament of his Body which the Angels did at the Birth of his Body. And
good reason there is to sing this for Christ's being made One with us in the
Sacrament, as for his being made One of us at his Birth. And if ever we be fit
to sing this Angels song, it is then, when we draw nearest to the estate of
Angels, namely, at the receiving of the Sacrament. After the receiving of the
holy Sacrament, we sing an Hymn in imitation of our Savior; who after his
Supper sung an Hymn, to teach us to do the like. Chrysostom. Hom. 83. S. Matthew. And
when can a Psalm or Hymn of thanksgiving be more seasonable and necessary, than
after we have received this heavenly nourishment? Is it possible to hear these
words, This is my Body, take and eat it; Drink ye all of this, This is my
Blood: and not be filled, as with a kind of fearful admiration, so with a sea
of joy and comfort for the Heaven which they see in themselves? Can any man
receive this Cup of Salvation, and not praise and bless God with his utmost
strength of soul and body? The Ancients did express their joy at this time in
the highest manner that they could. Some were so ravished with joy, that they
immediately offered themselves to martyrdom, impatient of being longer absent
from their so gracious Lord, unable to keep themselves from expressing their
love to Christ, by dying for him; the highest expression of love. All men then
counted it a sin, to fully the day of their receiving the Eucharist with any
sorrow or fasting, these days they called days of mirth, days of remission,
days of Immunity, solemn days, Festival days.

This Angelical Hyman was made of old by Ecclesiastical Doctors, and who
refuses it, let him be excommunicated, Conc. Tole^. 4. c. 4.

The Hymn being ended we depart with a BLESSING, Goar. in Euch. page 154. tells
us, That of old, when the Communion Service was ended, and the Deacon had
dismissed the people, they would not for all that depart till they had the
Blessing; by this Stay, saying in effect the same to the Priest, that Jacob did
to the Angel. We will not let thee go unless thou blessest us. The Priest
therefore departing from them, as our Savior from his Disciples, with a
Blessing; but first he comes down from the Altar, by this descending showing
his condescension to the people in affection as well as in Body; and standing
behind the Pulpit (Retro Ambonem, whence the Blessing was called (...)) in the
midst of the people, in this also imitating our Savior, S. John 20. 9. who
there gave the Bles^ing or peace of God standing in the midst, by the place
showing how equally he stood affected to all, how he would have his Blessings
spread upon all.

Of BAPTISM.
HOly Churches aim being in all her Services to make them Reasonable; that
according to S. Paul 1 Cor. 14. We may all join with her in her Offices, both
with our spirit and understanding, she has been careful, not only to put them
into a known tongue, but also to instruct us in the nature of them; making thus
her Prayer Book a sum of Divinity. Therefore here in the beginning, she
instructs out of holy Scripture concerning the necessity and efficacy of
Baptism, as very briefly, so very pith^ly and fully. First, laying down this
for a rule, That we are all born in sin, as it is Romans 5. 18, 19. all guilty in
Adams fall, (so the Catholic Church spread over the world always understood
it, CON. MILEVAN. c. 2.) and therefore by our first birth have no right to
heaven, into which no unclean thing shall enter, Ephesians. 5. 5. Secondly, that
therefore there is need of a second birth, to give us right to that, as it is
S. John 3. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. Thirdly, that this second or new birth is by Water and the Holy Ghost, S.
John 3 5. Except a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God. By Water and the Holy Ghost is there meant holy
Baptism. For first, this is the most literal interpretation of the words (for
what is Baptism but Water and the Holy Ghost?) and therefore the best: for that
is certainly the sense of the Holy Ghost, who, as we all believe, was the
Author of the letter of the Scriptures, and therefore of the literal sense,
where that is not contrary to, but agreeable with the other Scriptures. Now
this literal sense given is agreeable to other texts: as namely, to Acts 8. 38.
and 10. 47. Where Water is declared to be the element of Baptism. And expressly
again, Ephesians. 5. 26. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water. And as this is the
most literal, so is it the most Catholic interpretation of the words, and
therefore also the best, by S. Peter's rule, 2 S. Pet. 1. 20. Knowing this
first, that no prophecy of Scripture is of private interpretation. That this
is the most Catholic interpretation appears by S. August. l. 1. de peccator.
mer. and rem. c. 30. Tertul. de Bapt. and all the ancient interpreters upon the
place, who expound it all of Baptism. And indeed if it were lawful to expound
it otherwise, seeing no other Scripture contradicts this literal sense; I know
not how it can be avoided, but that men may lose all their Creed, by playing so
with Scripture, leaving the letter for figures. Thus are we instructed in the
nature, necessity, and efficacy of holy Baptism, that it is the only ordinary
means of our Regeneration or second birth, which gives us a right and title to
Heaven.

Then is prescribed a Prayer, usually called the Benediction or Consecration of
the Water, which is used only for reverence and decency, not for necessity, as
if the Water without this were not available to Baptism: For, as the Prayer
has it, Jordan and all other matters are sanctified by Christ to the mystical
washing away of sin. So that there needs no Consecration here, as in the other
Sacraments there is, where the Bread and Wine must be blessed by us, says S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 16. before it be the Communion of the body and blood of Christ
to us. And that the Church does not think any Consecration of Water necessary,
appears in her office of PRIVATE BAPTISM, where, haste admitting no delays, no
such Prayer or blessing is used.

Then follows a Prayer for Gods merciful acceptance of the Infant that is
brought; that, as he is to receive the Sacrament, so he may receive all the
benefits of it, And lest any should doubt whether CHRIST will accept an Infant
to Baptism, and the Effects of it, holy Church propounds to us the 10. chap. of
S. Mark, out of which she concludes CHRIST'S love and good will to children in
general; For he commanded them to be brought to him; he rebuked those that
would have kept them from him, he embraced them in his arms, and blessed them:
which are all plain arguments that he will receive them when they are brought
to him: Yea, and that he will so far embrace them as to receive them to eternal
life, if they be brought to him, is plain by his own words in that Gospel;
Suffer little children to come unto me, for to such, and therefore to
themselves (for Quod in uno similium valet, valebit in altero, what belongs to
others because they are such as children are, must needs belong to the
children) belongs the kingdom of God. Since then they be capable of the
Kingdom of heaven, and there is no ordinary way for them to the Kingdom of
heaven, but by a new and second birth of Water and the Holy Ghost, that is,
Baptism; Doubt ye not, but that He who expressed so much love to them as is
mentioned in the Gospel, will favorably receive the present infant to baptism,
and graciously accept our charitable work in bringing it to him. Thus holy
Church concludes out of Scripture according to the practice and doctrine of the
Catholic Church.

CYPRIAN tells us that no Infant is to be hindered from baptism. Ep. 59. This
was the sentence of that Council: Anno Dom. 246. and this was no new decree,
but fides Ecclesiae firmissima, the most established faith of the Church, AVG.
ep. 28. ad Hieron. Haec sententia olim in Ecclesia Catholica summa authoritate
fundata est. This definition was long before. S. Cyprian settled in the
Catholic Church by the highest Authority. AVG. de verb. Apost. Ser. 14. Let no
man whisper to you any strange doctrines. This the Church always had, always
held, this she received from our forefathers, and this she holds constantly to
the end. And, Quicunque parvulos recentes, ab uteris matrum, baptizandos negat,
Anathema sit, says the COVNC. of Milevis, c. 2. being the CXth in the African
Code. That Council pronounced Anathema to any that shall deny the baptism of
Infants. And that Counc. is confirmed by the fourth and sixth GENERAL COVNCILS.

Next follows a Thanksgiving for our Baptism, which we are put in mind of by
this occasion, with an excellent prayer for our selves; and the Infants before
us, that we may walk worthy of baptism; and they be accepted to it graciously.

Then shall the Priest demand of the Godfathers, etc. These questions, Do
thou forsake, etc. This Form of interrogating the Godfathers in the name of the
child, is very Ancient and Reasonable.

For the Antiquity of it, see S. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 14. Adducit quisquam infantem
ubera sugentem, ut baptizetur, and statim sacerdos exigit ab infirma aetate,
pacta, conventa, assensiones, and minoris aetate fide jussore^^ ^ccipit
susceptorem, and interrogat an renunciat Satanae. The sucking Infant is brought
to baptism. The Priest exacts of that Infant covenants, contracts and
agreements: and accepting of the Godfather in the Infants stead, he asks,
whether he does forsake the Devil, etc.] Cyprian ep. 7. We renounced the world
when we were baptized: and their form of abrenunciation was much like ours, as
you may see, Salvian. l. 6. Aug. Ep. 23. and Cyril. Cat. Mist. 1. Where you may
see at large the ancient Form and Manner of Abrenunciations. First, you entered
into the Church Porch the place of the Font or Baptistery, and standing toward
the West, you heard it commanded you, that with hands stretched out you should
renounce the Devil, as if he were there present. It behooves you to know that a
Type or Sign of this, you have in the Old Testament. When Pharaoh the most
bitter and cruel Tyrant oppressed the free people of the Jews, God sent Moses
to deliver them from the grievous servitude of the Egyptians, the posts of the
doors were anointed with the blood of the Lamb, that the destroying Angel might
pass by the houses which had that sign of blood: and the people were delivered
beyond expectation. But after that the Enemy saw them delivered, and the Red
sea divided; he followed and pursued them, and was overwhelmed with the waves
of the Sea. Pass we from the Figure to the Truth, there was Moses sent by God
into Egypt; here Christ is sent into the world; he to deliver the people
oppressed by Pharaoh, Christ to deliver the Devils captives; there the blood of
the Lamb turned away the Destroyer; here the blood of the immaculate Lamb
Christ Jesus is the defense against the Devil; That Tyrant followed our Fathers
to the Red Sea, this impudent Prince of wickedness the Devil, follows there
even to the waters of Salvation; he was drowned in the Sea, this is stifled in
the waters of Life. Hear now what with a beck of the hand is said to the Devil,
as present; I renounce thee Satan: It is worth the while, to explain why you
stand to the West when you say this. The sunset is the place of darkness, and
the Devil is the Prince of darkness; and therefore in token of this, ye
renounce the Prince of darkness, looking toward the West, I renounce thee
Satan thou cruel Tyrant, I fear thy force no more, for Christ has dissolved
the power of darkness, I renounce thee, subtle Serpent, who under the show of
friendship, actest all thy villainy, Then he adds, and all thy works. Those are
sins of all sorts, which you must of necessity renounce. And this you must not
be ignorant of, that whatsoever thou say in that dreadful hour, is written
down in Gods book, and shall be accounted for. After this you say, And all his
pomp, all vain shows from which holy David prays to be delivered. Turn away
mine eyes lest they behold vanity, Psalm. 119. and all thy worship, all Idolatry
and Superstition, all Magic and Southsaying, all worship of, and prayers to
the Devil. Take heed therefore of all these things which thou have renounced:
For if after the renunciation of the Devil, you fall back again into his
captivity, he will be a more cruel Master than before; the last state of that
man is worse than the beginning.

When you have renounced the Devil, then the Paradise of God is opened to you,
which was planted in the East; and therefore as a Type of this you are turned
from the West to the East, the Region of light.

We have seen that it was Ancient. And that it is Reasonable we shall perceive,
if we consider, that in baptism we are making or concluding a Covenant, the New
Covenant of the Gospel; in which Covenant Gods part is promises, precious
promises, as S. Peter calls them, 2 S. Pet. 1. 4. for performance of which he
has given his word; and therefore good reason it is, that we also should give
our word, and promise for performance of conditions on our parts, viz. to
renounce the Devil and the World, and swear fidelity to our LORD. In all other
Covenants and Contracts it is thought reasonable, that the several parties
should mutually engage for performance of conditions, and that at the making
and concluding of the Contract.

And why should not that which is thought reasonable in all other contracts, be
thought reasonable in this? As thus to give our faith and word for performance
of conditions is reasonable; so, if it be done with grave solemnity and in
public, it is so much the better, and more obliging: For grave solemnities
make a deep impression upon the apprehension: (whence it is, that a corporal
oath vested with the religious solemnity of laying on the hand upon, and
kissing the holy Gospels, is more dreaded, than a naked and sudden oath) and
promises made in public bind more, because of the shame of falsifying, where
so many eyes look on: which very shame of being noted to be false, oft-times is
a greater bridle to sin, than the fear of punishment, as the World knows.

And this use the ancient Fathers made of it, to shame gross offenders by
remembering them of their solemn promise made in Baptism to renounce the Devil,
and give up themselves to God. Children, who by reason of their tender age,
cannot perform this solemnity, have appointed them by the Church, Susceptores,
Godfathers, who shall in the name of the child do it for them. As, by the
wisest laws of the World, Guardians may contract for their Minors or Pupils to
their benefit; and what the Guardians in such cases undertake, the Minors or
Pupils are bound, when they are able to perform. For the Law looks upon them,
not the Guardians, as obliged. So did the Church always account, that these
promises which were made by the Godfathers in the name of the child, did bind
the child, as if in person himself had made it. And when the Ancients did
upbraid any offenders with the breach of their promise made in baptism; none of
those that were baptized in their infancy, were so desperate, as to answer
scornfully, it was not I but my Godfathers that promised; and if any should so
have answered, he would have been loudly laughed at for that his empty criticism.

Though this promise of Abrenunciation made in baptism be ancient and
reasonable; yet is it not absolutely necessary to baptism, but when danger
requires haste, it may be omitted, as the Church teaches in Private Baptism:
yet if the child lives, it is to be brought to Church, and this solemnity to be
performed after baptism. Rubr. at private Bapt.

Then follow certain short prayers. O merciful God, etc. which I conceive to be
the same in substance with the ancient Exorcismes, which were certain prayers
taken out of holy Scripture, Cyril. Cat. 1. and composed by the Church, CONC.
CARTH. 4. c. 7. for the dispossessing of the person to be baptized; who being
born in sin is under the Devils tyranny, from which the Church by her prayers,
endeavors to free him. And so available they were, that oftentimes those that
were corporally possessed, were freed by them, Cyp. ep. 77. and thereupon
Cyril, Nazianz. Gennadius, and others, earnestly persuade not to despise the
Churches Exorcisms. That it was ancient to use these Exorcisms before baptism,
Nazianz. in lavacrum, S. Cypr. ep. 77. and Gennad^us witness, who says, that
it was observed Vniformiter in universo munndo, uniformly throughout the World.

Next follows the Commemoration of Christ's institution of Baptism; and his
Commission to his Disciples to Baptize. Thus the Priest reads his Commission,
and then acts accordingly: and because no man is sufficient for these things, 2
Cor. 2. 16. therefore he prays for Gods assistance and acceptance of his
ministration.

Then the Priest asks the child's name. As under the Law at Circumcision the
name was given, so now at Baptism, because then we renounce our former Lord and
Tyrant, and give up our names to God as his servants.

Then the Minister Baptizes the child dipping or spinkling it, etc. either of
which is sufficient Gennad, dog. 74. For it is not in this spiritual washing,
as it is in the bodily, where if the bath be not large enough to receive the
whole body, some part may be foul when the rest are cleansed. The soul is
cleansed after another manner, Totum credentibus conferunt divina compendia, a
little water can cleanse the believer, as well a whole River, CYPR. ep. 77.

The old fashion was to dip or sprinkle the person thrice, to signify the
mystery of the TRINITY, and the Apost. can. 50. deposes him that does
otherwise. The Church so appointed then because of some Heretics that denied
the Trinity: upon the same ground afterward it was appointed to do it but once
(signifying the unity of substance in the Trinity) lest we should seem to agree
with the Heretics that did it thrice. Toletan. 4. c. 5.

This baptizing is to be at the FONT. What the Font is, everybody knows, but
not why it is so called. The rites of baptism in the first times were performed
in Fountains and Rivers, both because their converts were many, and because
those ages were unprovided of other Baptisteries: we have no other remainder of
this rite but the name. For hence it is that we call our Baptisteries, Fonts;
which when Religion found peace, were built and consecrated for the more
reverence and respect of the Sacrament. These were set at first some distance
from the Church, Cyril cat. mist. 1. after, in the Church Porch, and that
significantly, because Baptism is the entrance into the Church mystical, as the
Porch to the Temple. At the last, they got into the Church, but not into every,
but the City-Church, where the Bishop resided, hence called the Mother Church,
because it gave spiritual birth by baptism; afterward they were brought into
Rural Churches. Wheresoever they stood, they were had in high veneration.
Anastas. ep. ad Orthodox. complains sadly of impiety in his time; such as never
was heard of in war, that men should set fire to Churches and Fonts, and after
mentioning the Fonts. Good God! Christ-killing Jews, and heathenish Atheists,
have without all reverence entered and defiled the Fonts.

After the Priest has baptized the child, he receives it into the
congregation, by this solemnity declaring that he is by baptism made a member
of the Church, I Cor. 12. 13. We are all baptized into one body. And when he
thus receives it, he signs it with the sign of the Cross, as of old it was
wont, AVG. in Psalm. 30. and on the forehead, the seat of blushing and shame,
that he may not hereafter blush and be ashamed of the disgraced cross of
Christ, Cypr. ep. 56. By this badge, is the child dedicated to his service,
whose benefits bestowed upon him in baptism, the name of the cross in holy
Scripture does represent. Whosoever desires to be fully satisfied concerning
the use of the cross in baptism, let him read the 30. Can. of our Church, Anno
1603.

After thanksgiving for Gods gracious admitting the child to baptism, and a
most divine Prayer, that he may lead his life according to that beginning: This
Office ends with a grave and pious exhortation to the Godfathers, to remember
their duty toward the Infants; the like to which you may read, S. Aug. de
Temp. Ser. 116.

Of PRIVATE BAPTISM.
THough holy Church prescribes the Font for the place, and Sundaies and
Holydays for the usual times of baptism, that she may conform as much as
conveniently may be to the usages of Primitive Antiquity, (which is her aim in
all her services) and for other reasons mentioned Rubr. 1. before Baptism. Yet
in case of necessity she permits and provides that a child may be baptized in
any decent place at any time: in such cases requiring the performance only of
Essentials, not of Solemnities of baptism: according to the practice of the
Apostles who baptized at any time as occasion required, and in Fountains and
Rivers: and according to the use of succeeding Ages. CONC. MATISCON. 2. c. 3.
Did. de Consec. 4. c. 16, 17. Elibert. Conc. c. 38. Anno 313. He that is
baptized himself, may in a case of necessity baptize, if there be no Church
nere. Nor can I see what can be reasonably objected against this tender and
motherly love of the Church to her children, who chooses rather to omit
solemnities, than hazard souls: Which indulgence of hers cannot be interpreted
any irreverence or contempt of that venerable Sacrament; but a yielding to just
necessity (which defends what it constrains) and to Gods own rule, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice, S. Mat. 12. 7.

If it be objected that this may be an occasion of mischief, that the form of
baptism may be vitiated and corrupted in private, by heretical Ministers, and
so the child robbed of the benefits of baptism; it is answered, that this is
possible; but were it not great folly to prevent a possible danger, by a
certain? to deny all infants in such cases baptism, lest some few should be
abused by the malice of the Priest? Which possible, but scarce probable
mischief, the Church has taken all possible care to prevent. For if the child
lives, it is to be brought to the Church, 1. Rubr. in private baptism, and
there the Priest is to demand [ by whom the child was baptized, and with what
matter and words:] and if he perceives plainly that it was well baptized for
the substance, then shall he add the usual solemnities at public baptism, that
so the child may want nothing, no not of the decent pomp: but if he cannot by
such questioning be assured that it was truly baptized for essentials, then
shall he baptize it thus, [ If thou be not already baptized, I baptize thee] as
it was ordered Carthage, 5. c. 6. Anno Dom. 438.

of CONFIRMATION.
IT is ordered Rubr. 1. at Confirm. That none should be confirmed till they
come to the use of reason, and can say their Catechism, for these reasons.

1. Because then they may with their own mouth ratify and confirm the promise
made for them by their Godfathers.

2. Because they then begin to be in danger of temptation, against which they
receive strength in confirmation.

3. Because this is agreeable with the usage in times past; by times past, we
must not understand the first times (for then confirmation was administered
presently after baptism,) but later times; in which the first order has been
of a long time omitted for these reasons given; and this order, which our
Church observes generally received throughout Christendom.

Lest any man should think it any detriment to the child to stay till such
years, holy Church assures us out of holy Scripture, that children baptized,
till they come to years to be tempted, have no need of confirmation, having all
things necessary for their, that is, childrens salvation, and be undoubtedly
saved. The same says Antiquity, S. Aug. Ser. 2. post Dom. Palmar. You are
coming to the holy Font, ye shall be washed in baptism, ye shall be renewed by
the saving laver of regeneration; ascending from that laver, ye shall be
without all sin: if so, then safe; for blessed is the man whose iniquities are
forgiven, Psalm. 32. 1. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 11. in ep. ad Romans c. 6. Quemadmodum
corpus Christi sepultum in terra fructum tulit, universi orbis salutem, ita and
nostrum sepultum in baptismo, fructum tulit, justitiam, sanctificationem,
adoptionem, infinita bona, ferc^ autem and resurrectionis postea donum. The
body of Christ buried in the earth, brought forth fruit, namely the salvation
of the whole world; so our body buried in baptism has brought forth fruit,
righteousness, sanctification, adoption, infinite good things, and shall
afterward have the gift of the Resurrection. It were too long to cite
particulars, take the COUNC. of MILEVIS for all. Can. 2. Ideo parvuli qui nihil
peccatorum in semetipsis committere potuerunt, in peccatorum remissionem
veraciter baptizantur, ut in eis regeneratione mundetur, quod generatione
contraxerunt. Therefore infants, who could not sin actually, are truly baptized
for the remission of sins, that that which they have contracted by their birth
might be cleansed by their second birth. And the Council pronounces Anathema to
them that deny it. But more than all this is the express words of Scripture,
Gal. 3. 26. where S. PAVL proves that they were the children of God, for, or
because they were baptized; if they be children, then are they heirs of God,
Romans 8. 27. 1 S. Pet. 3. 21. Baptism saves us. Again, Gal. 3. 27. As many of
you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, and that surely is
enough for salvation. By all this, we see the effect of Baptism is salvation:
Now if children be capable of baptism, as has been proved, then since they no
way hinder or resist this grace, it necessarily follows that they are partakers
of the blessed effects of baptism, and so are undoubtedly saved.

The children that are to be confirmed are to be brought to the Bishop by one
that shall be their Godfather, who may witness their confirmation. The
Godfather may be the same that was at baptism, but in most places, the custom
is to have another. De Cons. Did. 4. c. 100.

And the Bishop shall confirm them. Rubr. before confirmation. So was it of old
S. Aug. de Trinit. l. 15. c. 20. Chrysostom. hom. 18. in Act. speaking of Philip,
when he had baptized, He did not give the holy Ghost to the baptized, for he
had no power, for this was the gift of the Apostles alone. Before him Cyprian
ep. 73. Those that were baptized by Philip the Deacon, were not baptized again,
but that which was wanting was supplied by Peter and John, by whose prayers and
imposition of hands the holy Ghost was called upon, and poured upon them. Which
very thing is done amongst (...) now; they that are baptized, are offered up to
the Bishops of the Church, that by our prayer and imposition of hands they may
receive the holy Ghost. Before him Urban Anno Dom. 222. tells us, that Bishops
only did confirm. And S. Hierom. dial. adv. Lucifer. says it was, Totius orbis
consensus in hanc partem, the general acknowledgement of the whole Christian
World.

The Office begins on this wise, Our help stands in the Name of the Lord. Of
such short ejaculations in general has been said in the Morning Prayer;
concerning these in particular, that they are fitted to the Office, will appear
to them that consider, that Confirmation is appointed for the strengthening of
us against all our ghostly enemies; which though they be many and great; yet is
there no reason to despair of obtaining strength enough to resist them, for Our
help stands in the Name of the Lord, who has made heaven and earth: who is
therefore able enough and willing also to help them that call upon his Name,
Blessed therefore be the Name of the Lord hence forth and for ever.

After these Versicles follows a Prayer, that God would strengthen the
baptized, with the holy Ghost the Comforter, who had in their baptism received
him as a Sanctifier. These two ways, to omit others, we are taught in holy
Scripture, that the holy Ghost may be received, as a sanctifier and cleanser in
holy baptism, Tit. 3. 5. He saved us by the washing of regeneration and
renewing of the holy Ghost: and after baptism we may receive him again as a
Comforter and strengthener. The Apostles, who received him the first way in
baptism, are promised to receive him the second; S. John 16. 7. Acts 1. 8.
which was performed Acts 2. 4. They were filled with the holy Ghost.

Then shall the Bishop lay his hands upon them severally. By this sign
certifying them of Gods Goodness toward them, and consigning it upon them.
This is the most ancient and Apostolical Rite of Confirmation, Acts 8. 17. and
by this name it is known, Heb. 6. 2. The doctrine of baptisms, and laying on of
hands.

After a most excellent prayer for their continuance in Gods love, and
obedience to him, the Bishop departs them with a Blessing. Of such blessings
has been said already.

This holy Rite has been too little understood by many, and therefore too
lightly esteemed and valued: for the remedy whereof, it may not be amiss to
show the benefit of it in these conclusions following.

1. The Holy Ghost was given to persons baptized, by the Apostles prayers and
laying on of hands, Acts 8. 14, 15, 16. Acts 19. 6.

2. This gift of the Holy Ghost so giv^n, was not only, nor principally, the
gift of miracles or speaking with tongues. For, first, Confirmation is reckoned
by S. Paul amongst Fundamentals, Heb. 6. 1, 2. which were necessary to all ages
of the Church; but the gift of miracles was not such, for that lasted but a
wh^le, as experience has taught us. Again, confirmation was administered to all
baptized persons, Acts 8. 15. 19. 6. but all baptized persons were not to have
the gift of miracles, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9. To one is given by the Spirit the word
of wisdom, to another the working of miracles. And again, 29. verse, Are all
workers of miracles? It is true that in the Apostles times, the inward grace of
confirmation was attended with miracles, but it will not thence follow that
miracles were the principal intended gift in confirmation, no more than that
the visible opening of Heaven is the proper effect of baptism, because at our
Saviors baptism, the heavens were so opened, S. Matthew 3. or that the proper
effect of preaching is to work miracles, because that at the Apostles preaching
miracles were wrought, Acts 10. 44. In those first times, the Holy Ghost fell
upon Believers and they spoke with tongues. Signa erant tempori opportuna,
[Those signs were seasonable to those times:] does any man now expect that
those, that receive the holy Ghost by our prayers and imposition of hands,
should speak with tongues? and if they do not speak with tongues, is any man of
so perverse a heart, as to say, that they have not received the holy Ghost? S.
Aug. in ep. S. Ioh. tractat. 6. In the beginning of spiritual and mavelous
dispensations, outward signs appeared to confirm the new preached faith, but
now that the faith is sufficiently confirmed, although such miracles be not
wrought, yet we receive those inward graces and virtues, which were signified
and demonstrated by those signs. Chrysostom. in S. Matthew. Hom. 13.

3. The proper and principal effect of confirmation was, and is, Ghostly
strength and power to resist temptations, as our Church teaches Rubr. 1. before
the Catechism. That the baptized, when they come to years and the use of
reason, may have, not their baptism confirmed (which needs no confirmation to
perfect it,) but themselves and their souls, by some new virtue and power, or
by an addition and increase of former graces, by which they may be enabled
against those temptations that shall assault them, whence it is called
Confirmation. Regeneramur ad vitam per baptismum, in ho^ confirmamur ad pugnam.
[By baptism we are regenerated to life, in confirmation we are strengthened to
fight, against our enemies: Melchiad. ep. ad Epis. Hisp. about the year 311.]
In Confirmation the Holy Ghost is given for strength, as he was given to the
Apostles at Pentecost, that Christians may boldly confess the Name of Christ.
Conc. Flor. Tertul. de bapt. Cypr. ep. 2. ad donat. For our fuller persuasion
of this, it will be necessary to consider that our Lord Christ promised to his
Apostles after they had been baptized, that, When he went away, he would send
them the holy Ghost to be their comforter or strengthener, S. John 16. 7. to
make them able to bear witness of Christ, notwithstanding all the threats and
terrors of men, S. John 15. 27. 16. 1, 2, 3. And Acts 1. 5. he promises them,
that, Not many days hence, they should receive the holy Ghost, or the power of
the Holy Ghost, whereby they (that forsook him formerly and fled) should be
henceforth emboldned and encouraged to bear witness to him all the World over,
verse. 8. This promise was performed at Pentecost, Acts 2. 4. They were filled
with the holy Ghost, and began to speak, and to bear witness of Christ with
courage, verse 36. This very promise made to the Apostles formerly, and
performed at Pentecost, belongs to every one of us that are baptized, Acts 2.
38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost: For
this promise of the holy ghost fulfilled on us, verse 33. is unto you and to
your children, and to all that are afar off. And what S. Peter here promises
them, was fulfilled by him and the other Apostles; for by their prayer and
imposition of hands, they received, after baptism, the holy Ghost, not only
enabling them to speak miraculously, but also strengthening and comforting them
inwardly, as he did the Apostles. For the same that was promised to the
Apostles, belonged to them and their children, and was given by imposition of
hands. Now that which was promised to the Apostles, was principally, ghostly
strength and comfort, on which that gift of miracles was an attendant, as we
have seen: this then is the principal effect of confirmation, the gift of the
holy Ghost by way of eminence, Acts 2 38. Hence this phrase, Full of the holy
Ghost, is interpreted by Scripture to be the same in effect with this, Full of
ghostly courage and strength. Act. 4. 8. 31. They were all filled with the holy
Ghost, and spoke with boldness the word of the Lord, Acts 7. 55. and Acts 6. 5.
Stephen full of faith and the holy Ghost, that is, full of faith and power,
verse 8.

4. This Office of Confirmation, as well as that of Baptism, is to continue in
the Church as long as that shall be Militant here on earth. For S. Paul Heb. 6.
l, 2. joins them together, calling them Fundamentals; and a Fundamental in one
age is so in another. Besides we have seen that Confirmation was the means used
by the Apostles, (and doubtless not without their Lords directions and guidance
of his Spirit,) for conveying the holy Ghost the Comforter into persons
baptized: and since that all ages have as much need of that ghostly strength as
the age of the Apostles had, and that the promise of it belongs to us all, as
well as to them, as formerly has been proved; and since that we find no other
means appointed instead of Confirmation, for the conveighing of the gift of the
holy Ghost, then given by confirmation; it remains, that we conclude, that
Confirmation is still to continue. And so the Church Catholic has taught us
both by her doctrine and practice: as may be seen by the quotations cited above.

5. That Bishops, who succeed the Apostles, are to be the Ministers of this
holy Rite has been shown above.

of MATRIMONY.
FIrst, holy Church instructs us in the ends of Matrimony, which are three. 1.
The procreation of children. 2. Aremedy against sin. 3. A mutual help to each
other.

Then the Priest requires the parties to be married, by the terror of the
dreadful judgment day, to declare, if they know any impediment, why they may
not be lawfully married? which is as much care and caution as can be used by
those that are not able to discern the secrets of the heart.

Then follows the Contract in the future tense, whereby these persons mutually
promise to the Priest, Gods Minister, before the Congregation, to enter into
that holy state of Wedlock, and strictly to keep those sacred laws of marriage
which Almighty God has ordained. This is that, as I conceive, which S. August.
de Genesis ad lit. l. 11. c. 4. calls Votorum solennitatem, [ the solemnities of
vows and promises,] which was in his time and formerly an usual ceremony of
marriage: And of very good use is this solemnity; for by this have the persons
bound themselves to their duty, by all the obligations that a sacred solemn vow
or promise can lay upon the soul.

Then the Priest asks [ Who gives this woman to be married to this man?] This
was the old custom, that the Bride should be given by the Father or friend,
Aug. de Genesis ad lit. 11. c. 41. to which S. Paul may be thought to allude, 2
Cor. 11. 2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I might present you as a
chaste virgin to Christ. And Psalm. 45. 13. The Queen the Spouse, shall be
brought to the King. The reason of this says Learned Mr. Hooker l. 5. Eccl.
Pol. Sect. 73. was, That in ancient times all women which had not Husbands or
Fathers to govern them, had their Tutors, without whose authority, there was no
act, which they did warrantable; and for this cause they were in marriage
delivered unto their husbands by others. Which custom retained, has still this
use, that it puts women in mind of a duty, whereto the very imbecility of
their sex does bind them, namely, to be always directed and guided by others.
Whether this were the very cause of this custom, I will not determine, nor what
else was: but whatsoever was the first cause of it, this is certain, that it is
a decent custom. For it cannot be thought fit, that a woman, whose chiefest
ornament is modesty and shamefacedness, should offer her self before the
Congregation to marriage to any person, but should rather be led by the hand of
another, and given by him.

After the marriage it self [ The man puts a Ring upon the woman's finger.] The
Ring has been always used as an especial pledge of faith and fidelity.
Nothing more fit to serve as a token of our purposed endless continuance in
that which we never ought to revoke; and therefore fitly used in marriage,
which is a contract not to be dissolved but by death. Aurum nulla nor at
praeter uno digito, quem sponsus oppign^rasset pronubo annulo. No woman was
permitted to wear gold, save only upon one finger, which the husband had
fastened to himself with a wedding Ring. This he puts upon the fourth finger of
the left hand, because there is a vein that goes from thence to the heart; by
which is signified that the love should be hearty: say some Rituals.

Then follows [ With my body I thee worship, etc.] For the better understanding
of this phrase, we must know that anciently there were two sorts of wives; One
whereof was called the primary or lawful wife; the other was called the half
wife or Concubine. The difference betwixt these two, was only in the differing
purpose of the man, betaking himself to the one or the other: If his purpose
was only fellowship, there grew to the woman by this means no worship at all;
but rather the contrary. In professing that his intent was to add by his
person, honor and worship unto hers, he took her plainly and clearly to be his
Wife, not his Concubine. This is it which the Civil Law does mean, when it
makes a Wife to differ from a Concubine in dignity. The worship that grew unto
her, being taken with declaration of this intent, was, that her children became
by this means free and legitimate, heirs to their father: Gen 25. 5, 6. her
self was made a mother over his family: Lastly, she received such advancement
of state, as things annexed to his person might augment her with. Yea, a right
of participation was thereby given her both in him, and even in all things
which were his: and therefore he says not only [ With my body I thee worship,]
but also, with all my worldly goods, thee endow. The former branch having
granted the principal, the later grants that which is annexed thereto, Hooker
Eccl. Pol. l. 5. Sect. 73.

The Jews anciently used the same phrase [ Godwin Jew. Customs.] Be unto me a
wife, and I according to the word of God, will worship, honor and maintain
thee, according to the manner of husbands amongst the Jews, who worship, honor
and maintain their wives. And that no man quarrel at this harmless phrase, let
him take notice, that to worship here signifies, to make worshipful or
honorable, as you may see, 1. Sam. 2. 30. For where our last Translation reads
it, Him that honors me, I will honor; in the old Translation, which our
Common Prayer book uses, it is, Him that worships me, I will worship; that is,
I will make worshipful, for that way only can God be said to worship man.

After the Priest has prayed for grace and Gods assistence, for the married
persons, to enable them to keep their solemn vow and contract, then does he as
it were seal that bond and contract, by which they have mutually tied
themselves, with Gods seal, viz. Those whom God has joined together, let no
man put asunder.

The persons having consented together in wedlock, and withnessed the same
before God and the Church, and plighted their troth each to other, and declared
the same by giving and taking of a Ring, and joining of hands; and the Priest
having sealed and ratified all, as it were, with Gods seal, which no man must
break, he pronounces them man and wife, in the Ntame of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost. Which Proclamation, or pronouncing of the married persons to be man
and wife; thus in the Church by the Priest, was one of those laws and rites of
marriage, which the Church received of the Apostles. Euar. ep. ad Epis. Aphric.
Anno 110.

Then the Priest blesses them solemnly according to the old rules, Conc. Carth.
4. c. 13. Of the efficacy of which blessings has been said formerly.

After this follows the 128 Psalm which was the Epithalamium or marriage-song
used by the Jews at Nuptials, says Muscul. in loc.

Then pious and devout prayers for the married persons, and lastly the
COMMUNION. Such religious solemnities as these, or some of these, were used by
the Jews at marriages: For, their rites and ceremonies of their marriage were
publicly performed with blessings and thanksgivings; whence the house was
called the House of Praise, and their marriage song Hillulim, praises; the
Bridegrooms intimate friends sung the marriage -song, who are called children
of the Bride-chamber, S. Matthew. 9. 15. [ Godwin of Jews mar.] The Primitive
Christians had all these which we have. The persons to be married were
contracted by the Priest, the marriage was solemnly pronounced in the Church,
the married couple were blessed by the Priest, prayers and thanksgivings were
used, and the holy Communion administered to them. And these religious rites,
the Church received from the Apostles, says Euarist. Ep. ad Epis. Aphr. And
doubtless highly Christian and useful these solemnities are: For first, they
beget and nourish in the minds of men, a reverend esteem of this holy mystery,
Ephesians. 5. 32. and draw them to a greater conscience of wedlock, and to esteem
the bond thereof, a thing which cannot without impiety be dissolved. Then, are
they great helps to the performance of those duties which God Almighty has
required in married persons; which are so many, and those so weighty, that
whosoever duly considers them, and makes a conscience of performing them, must
think it needful to make use of all those means of grace, which God Almighty
has appointed. For if we duly consider the great love and charity that this
holy state requires, even to the laying down of life, Husbands love your wives,
even a Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5. 25. of the
weighty charge of the education of children, which if well performed procures a
blessing, and an advantage to salvation, 1 Timothy 2. 15. She shall be saved in
childbearing, if they continue in faith and charity, etc. so if it be
carelessly performed, it procures a most heavy curse, 1 Samuel 2. 29, 31. etc. Or
lastly, the chastity and holiness necessary to that state of marriage,
heightened now up to the representation of the mystical union of Christ with his
Church, Ephesians. 5. 32. This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and
the Church; to which holy conjunction, our marriage and all our works and
affections in the same, should correspond and be conformable. I say, if we
consider all these duly, can we think we may spare any of those divine helps to
performance; whether they be vows and holy promises to bind us, or our Fathers
and Mothers, Gods and the Ci^^ches blessings, or holy prayers for Gods
assistance; or lastly, the holy Commun on that great strengthener of the soul?
If men's vices and licentiousness have made this holy service seem unseasonable
at this time, reason would that they should labor to reform their lives, and
study to be capable of this holy service, and not that the Church should take
off her command for the receiving of the holy Communion for their unspeakable
good. For would men observe Gods and the Churches commands, and enter into this
holy state; not like beasts or heathens at the best, but like Christians with
these religious solemnities, the happiness would be greater than can easily be
expressed. I know not which way I should be able to show the happiness of that
wedlock, the knot whereof the Church does fasten and the Sacrament of the
Church confirm, says Tertual. l. 2. ad Uxor.

VISITATION OF THE SICK.
THe Priest entering into the sick man's house, shall say, Peace be to this
house: so our LORD commanded, S. Luke 10.5. And if the Son of peace be there,
his peace shall rest upon it.

Then kneeling down, he prays those prayers and ejaculations ^ollowing, which
whosoever reads and considers impartially, shall find them to be both very
pious and suitable to the occasion.

Then shall the Priest exhort the sick person after this manner. The prayers
are all prescribed, but the exhortation is left arbitrary to the discretion of
the Priest, who can hardly be thought to make a better.

Then shall the Priest e^amine the sick person concerning his Faith] whether it
be Christian. And this is very necessary, for if that be wrong, all is wrong.
Christian Religion consists in these two, a right Faith and a righteous Life;
and as a right Faith without a righteous Life, will not save, so neither will a
righteo^s Life, without a right belief. He that has said, Do this and live,
has said, Believe and live: and how then can we think him safe, that lives
indeed justly, but blasphemes impiously? Cyril. Cat. 4. This then is a
principal Interrogatory or question to be put to the sick person, whether he
believes as a Christian ought to do? And this he does by rehearsing to him the
CREED. And there can be no better rule to try it by. For whatsoever was
prefigured in the Patriarchs, or taught in the Scriptures, or foretold by the
Prophets, concerning God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, is all briefly
contained in the Apostles Creed. S. Aug. Ser. de Temp. 137. This Creed, it is
the touchstone to try true faith from false, the rule of faith, contrary to
which no man may teach or believe, Ruffin. in Symb. Tertul. de praescrip. This
the Catholic Church received from the Apostles. Holding this rule, we shall be
able to convince all Heretics whatsoever; that they be departed from the
truth, Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 3, and 19.

In the next place holy Church directs the Priest to examine the sick person
concerning his life and conversation; especially concerning these two
particulars. 1. Whether he forgives all the World. 2. Whether he has satisfied
all injuries done to others: without which the medicine of repentance, which is
necessary to the sick persons salvation, will not profit him. For the first,
our Savior tells S. Matthew. 6. 14. That unless we forgive others neither our
persons nor our Prayers will be accepted: God will not forgive us. And for the
second, Non remittetur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum, Repentance without
restitution and reparation of injuries cannot be true and serious; or if it
can, it cannot profit, Aug. ep. 5. For if he that is injured by another cannot
be forgiven of God, unless he forgives him that injured him; how can he that
injures others, and does not make him restitution, hope for pardon? Chrysostom.
Hom. 15. in S. Matthew. The Priest therefore is to advise him, that whereinsoever
he has injured any, he should make satisfaction to the uttermost of his power.
By the uttermost of his power, is not meant that he must give to the injured
persons all his estate, nor that he must restore fourfold, for injuries done,
(which was required in some cases under Moses Law, by way of punishment, rather
than of satisfaction) but that he be careful to the uttermost of his power,
that the person injured be so repaired, that he be no loser by him; which is
all, that by the law of justice, which commands to give every man their due, is
required, Ezekiel. 33. 14, 15. When I say to the wicked, he shall surely die: if
he turn from his sin, if he restore the pledge, give again that he has robbed,
it is not, if he restore fourfold, but if he restore that which he has robbed,
he shall surely live.

Then the Priest is to admonish the sick person to settle his estate, For the
discharging of his own conscience, and quietness of his Executors. But holy
Church exhorts men to do this work in their health, that when they are sick,
they may not be troubled about the world, but may bestow their whole time and
care, as it is fit, about settling and securing their future estate. And were
men possessed with that fear and trembling, that S. Paul speaks of, Phil. 2. 12.
they would be careful to gain all the time that might be then, to work out
their salvation.

The Minister may not forget to move the sick person, and that most earnestly,
to liberality toward the poor. This is to have mercy upon our own souls, says
S. Aug. or Christum scribere haeredem, [to make Christ our heir.] For when the
poor receives from us, Balsam. in Nom^ca^. tit. 2. 6. 2.
Christ stands by and reaches out his hand to receive with them. In as much as
ye have done it to one of these little ones, ye have done it to me. S. Mat. 25.
40. As it is always necessary to be put in mind of this duty, so especially, at
this time of sickness. For then we are failing, and therefore most necessary it
is then, to make friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that, when we fail, they
may receive us into everlasting habitations, S. Luke 16. 9. Then we are going
to give up our account to God, and therefore then most necessary it is to do
the best we can to procure a gracious Absolution at the day of judgment. Now
nothing seems more powerful with God to procure that, than liberality to the
poor, Come ye blessed, for I was hungry, and ye gave me meat, S. Mat. 25. 34,
35.

Here shall the sick person make a special Confession, if he feel his
conscience troubled with any weighty matter. It would be considered, whether
every deadly sin be not a weighty matter?

After which Confession the Priest shall absolve him. After which, follows a
most excellent prayer or two, and the 71. Psalm, all very fit to a sick persons
condition; as will appear without an Interpreter, to the attentive Reader.

A most excellent and pious Benediction of the Priest concludes all, and so
ends this Office.

Of the Communion of the Sick.
THe Churches care for the sick, ends not here: For, besides all this, she
appoints, that if the sick person desires it, the Priest may communicate him in
his private house, if there be a convenient place, where the Curate may
reverently minister. [ Rubr. before priv. Com. of Sick] so was the ancient
decree of holy Church. Nic. Can. 13. Cod. Eccl. univer. Generalitor omni
cuilibet in exitu posito, and Eucharistiae participationem petenti, Episcopus
cum examination^ oblationem impertiat. [To every man that is ready to depart
out of this world, let the Bishop after examination and trial give the holy
Communion, if he desires it.] For this, says the Counsel, is antiqua and
Canonica lex, ut siquis vita excedat, ultimo and necessario viatico minime
privetur. [This is the ancient law of the Church, says this Conc. there,
concerning him that is dying, that whosoever he be, he shall not be denied the
last and most necessary viaticum of his life.] This viaticum, or provision for
the way, is the holy Communion, as is plain in the Canon cited. For though as
learned Albaspineus observes, this word Viaticum was applied to more things
besides the Eucharist, as to Alms, to Baptism, to Absolution, which are all
necessary helps in our journey to heaven; Yet in this Canon I conceive the
Viaticum or provision for the way, to be the holy Eucharist. For in the first
part of the Canon it is called Vltimum Viaticum, the last provision for the
way; which cannot be meant of any other properly but of the holy Eucharist: For
the rest, for instance, Absolution, (of which Albaspineus understands this
Canon,) is Reconciliatio Altaribus, a Reconciliation to the Altar, or
Sacraments, as it was anciently called, a fitting or qualifying of the
Communicant for the holy Eucharist, and therefore to go before it, as the 76.
Can. of Carth. 4. directs; and for Alms, they are part of the fruits of
penance, and so necessary to fit us for Absolution, and Baptism is janua
Sacramentorum, the first admission into Christ's Church, which gives the first
right to the Communion and Sacrament-of the Church; and therefore, all these
being pr^ced^^ous to the holy Eucharist, cannot be called any of them ultimum
viaticum, the last provision, but only the Euchari^^ it self. Besides, in the
last part of the Canon there is expressly mentioned, the participation of the
Eucharist, which must be the same with the Viaticum in the first part, as may
appear by this: The Canon immediately before this, had ^rected, that penitents,
especially those of the first or second degree, should fulfill the C^urches tax,
before they were received to the Churches prayers: but if those should fall
into danger of death, the ancient Canon shall be observed (says this Canon in
the beginning) that they shall be admitted, notwithstanding the former Canon,
to the last Viaticum; the reason is given in the later part of this Canon:
Because that to every one whatsoever, that shall in danger of death desire the
Eucharist, it shall be given to him if he be found fit to receive it. This
could be no reason of the former part of the Canon, namely, of giving the last
viaticum to penitents in danger of death, unless that Viaticum and the
Eucharist, here be all one. To that which may be objected that this Viaticum
cannot be the same with the Eucharist mentioned in the last part of the Canon,
because this Viaticum here is allowed to persons in danger of death without any
examination, but the Eucharist is granted to persons in the same danger with
this exception, if the Bishop after examination shall find him fit. It may be
answered, that notwithstanding this, the Viaticum and the Eucharist may be all
one, for the Canon in the first part, where it allows it to persons in
necessity without examination, speaks only of penitents, who had already
undergone the examination, and had received their penance, and submitted to the
Churches discipline, and so professed themselves truly penitents; and were in
such necessity desiring the Eucharist, in the judgment of charity supposed fit
to receive it; though the Church denied the same to them, when there was no
such necessity, for the maintenance of holy discipline, and in terror of
offenders. But generaliter de quolibet for every one that should desire it,
before he had given testimony of his repentance, there could not be sufficient
ground of charity to believe so well; and therefore they were to be examined by
the Bishop, or some others by his appointment. So then I think the Canon may be
interpreted thus of the holy Communion, without any contradiction; and that it
ought to be so understood, may, I think, be concluded by these Testimonies
following, Con. Ilerd. c. 5. Constable. Leon. 17. And most clearly by S. Cyprian
Ep. 54. After consultation we have determined, that those that have fal^ in
time of persecution, and have defiled themselves with unlawful Sacrifices,
should do full penance: yet if they were dangerously sick, they should be
received to peace. For divine clemency does not suffer the Church to be shut
against them that knock; nor the succor of saving hope to be denied to those
that mourn and beg it; nor to send them out of the World without peace and the
Communion. This is exactly agreeable to that Canon of Nice. What Communion that
was, he tells us soon after; that it was not only Absolution but the holy
Eucharist besides, as appears by that which follows: Formerly we made this
rule, That penitents, unless in time of extreme sickness, should not receive
the Communion. And this rule was good, while the Church was in peace and quiet;
but now in time of persecution, not only to the sick, but to the healthful
peace is necessary; not only to the dying, but to the living, the Communion is
to be given; that those whom we persuade to fight manfully under Christ's
Banner, and to resist even to blood, may not be left naked and unarmed, but be
defended with the protection of the body and blood of Christ; which for this
cause was instituted, that it might be a strength and defense to them that
receive it: how shall we teach them to shed their blood for Christ, if we deny
them Christ's blood to strengthen them? Or how shall we fit them for the cup of
Martyrdom, if we do not admit them to the Communion of the Cup of the Lord?
Upon this very ground was it provided, that all dying men might have the holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist, the great defense in that dangerous hour, when the
Devil is doing his worst and last. Agreeable to this of S. Cyprian is the 76.
Canon of the 4. Carth. Coune. He that in time of sickness desires penance, if
happily while the Priest is coming to him, he falls dumb, or into a frenzy,
let them that heard his desire bear witness to it, and let him receive penance:
and if he be like to die speedily, Let him be reconciled by imposition of
hands, and let the Eucharist be put into his mouth. If he recovers, let him be
acquainted with what was done by the former witnesses, and be subject to the
known laws of Penance. And those penitents which in their sickness received the
Viaticum of the Eucharist, let them not think themselves absolved without
imposition of hands, if they shall recover, c. 78. Car. 4. And the Coun. of
Orange. c. 3. says the same. They, that after penance set them, are ready to
depart out of this life, it has pleased the Synod to give them the Communion,
without the reconciliatory Imposition of hands. Which suffices for the
reconciling of a dying man, according to the definition of the Fathers, who
fitly called the Communion a Viaticum. But if they recover, let them stand in
the rank of penitents, that by showing the necessary fruits of penance, they
may be received to the Canonical Communion by the reconciliatory Imposition of
hands.

It will not be amiss for the clearer understanding of all passages in these
Canons, to consider the Church her discipline in this particular. Holy Church
for preserving of holy discipline and deterring men from sin, did appoint for
wasting sins, such as Adultery, Murder, Idolatry, and the like, severe penance
for three or four, six or seven years, more or less, according to the quantity
and quality of the offense. In the Greek Church they had several degrees of
penance to be gone through in this set time.

1. First, they were (...), Lugentes, Mourners, standing without the Church
Porch; they were to beg of all the faithful that entered into the Church, to
pray for them: in this degree they continued a year or more, according as their
crime deserved.

2. They were (...), Audiente8, Hearers; these might come into the Church Porch
into a place called (...), Ferula (so called, because those that stood there,
were subjected to the Churches censure of Ferula) where they might stand and
hear the Scriptures read, and Sermons, but were not admitted to join with the
Church in her prayers.

3. They were (...), Substernentes, the prostrate, as we may say; so called,
because they were all to prostrate themselves upon their faces, and so
continued till the Bishop said certain prayers over them, and laid his hands
upon them. They might be present at Sermon and the first Service of the
Catechumens, and then go out. Laodic. Con. 19. apud Nicolin. these were
admitted into the Nave of the Church, and to stand behind the Pulpit.

4. (...), the Consistents; they might stay after the rest of the Penitents
were gone out, and pray with the faithful, but not receive the holy Sacrament.

5. (...), Communicants, they were received to the participation of Sacraments,
but were still to wear some marks of penance, till by prayers and entreaties
they had obtained the full Communion of the Churches favors and honors, says
Goar. in Euch. Graec.

These several degrees were poor penitents to go through in the Greek Church,
and as much affliction in the Latin, unless the Bishop should think fit to
remit any thing of it, before they were fully admitted to the Churches favor:
but if any of these were desperately sick, Holy Church took care, that upon
their desire they should have the Churches peace by Absolution, 4. Carth. c.
78. and 77. and the holy Communion, says the same Canon, and Cypr. Epist. 54.
lest they should want that great strengthening and refreshing of their souls in
their last and greatest necessity. Provided nevertheless, that if they should
recover, then they should resume their several places and degrees of penance
they were in before, and go through and perfect their task of penance, which
having done, they should receive Vltimam reconciliationem, their last and
highest reconciliation; a favor which was denied to some that had been
admitted to the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as you may see Con. Vas. 2. c. 2.
This last Reconciliation was a solemn Absolution from all the Churches censures
and penances, by the laying on of the hands of the Bishop, and some of his
Clergy, says Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 14. A Declaration to all the Church, that they
were received not only to necessary Viatica, and assisting such as the former
Absolution mentioned, 76. Can. 4. Carth. and the holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist were; which they were permitted to receive in case of necessity; but
also to all the honor and solemnities, and privileges of the faithful, quite
free from all brands and marks of penitents. They were restored Legitimae
Communioni, to the Canonical and Legitimate Communion, Orang. c. 3. they might
offer with the faithful, and their offerings be received by the Church; and
they might receive the kiss of peace, and all other favors of the Church. This
that has been said, may help us to understand the true meaning of the so much
controverted Canon of Orange, before mentioned, together with the 78. Can.
Carth. 4. Qui recedunt de corpore, etc. They, that after penance received, are
ready to depart out of this life; it has pleased, that they shall be received
to the Communion, without the Reconciliatory Imposition of hands: that is, they
shall be admitted to the Communion without that last, outward, solemn
Absolution in the Court of the Church, which Balsam^n rightly calls (...), the
full reconciliation to the Churches honors and dignities, (...), a loosening
of the Churches censures; which those penitents in case of extremity could not
receive, because, as by the Canons appears, they were, if they recovered, to
return to their several tasks of penance again, till they had fulfilled them.
It was enough for them to be reconciled to the Altar and Sacrament, by the
Absolution in foro Coli in Heavens Court. The power of which was granted to the
Apostles and their Successors, S. John 20. Whose sins ye remit, etc. Which
Balsamon calls (...), or the Absolution from sin; and this they were to receive
Can. 76. Carth. 4. and after that the holy Eucharist. And this says the Canon
of Orange was sufficient for a dying man's Reconciliation according to the
definition of the Fathers. And this the Church of England provides for all
dying men that shall desire it. And infinitely bound to their Mother, for this
her care, are all true Sons of the Church. For thrice happy souls are they, who
shall have the happiness at their last and greatest extremity, worthily to
receive the Reconciliation and the holy Communion, the Bread of Heaven, the
Blood of God, our Hope, our Health, our Light, our Life. For if we shall depart
hence guarded with this Sacrifice, we shall with much holy boldness ascend to
the holy Heavens, defended as it were with golden Arms, says S. Chrysostom.

We have seen the Churches care to provide all necessaries for sick persons
salvation: 'Twere an happy thing to see in the people an answerable diligence
in the use of these Ghostly Offices, that they would, when they are sick, send
for the Priest; not verbally only to comfort them, by rehearsing to them
comfortable texts of Scripture, whether they belong to them or not (which is
not to heal the sick, but to tell them that they have no need of the spiritual
Physician, by which means, precious souls perish, for whom Christ died:) but to
search and examine the state of their souls, to show them their sins, to
prepare them by ghostly counsel, and exercises of penance, for absolution, and
the holy Communion, whereby they might indeed find comfort, remission of sins
and the holy Ghost the Comforter. And this should be done while the sick person
has strength and ability to attend and join with him in these holy Services.
There is an excellent Canon to this purpose, Decretal. l. 5. tit. 38. c. 13. By
this present Decree we strictly charge and command all Physicians, that when
they shall be called to sick persons, they first of all admonish and persuade
them to send for the Physicians of souls, that after provision has been made
for the spiritual health of the soul, they may the more hopefully proceed to
the use of corporal medicine: For when the cause is taken away, the effect may
follow. That which chiefly occasioned the making of this good Law, was the
supine carelessness of some sick persons, who never used to call for the
Physician of the soul, till the Physician of the body had given them over. And
if the Physician did, as his duty was, timely admonish them, to provide for
their souls health, they took it for a sentence of death, and despaired of
remedy, which hastened their end, and hindered both the bodily Physician from
working any cure upon their body, and the ghostly Physician from applying any
effectual means to their souls health. It is good counsel that Eccles. gives
c.38. 9. where we are advised, not first to send for the Physician, and when we
despair of his help, and are breathing our last, then to send for the Priest,
when our weakness has made him useless. But first to make our peace with God
by ghostly offices of the Priest, and then give place to the Physician. Which
method our Savior has taught us also by his method of Cure; who, when any
came to him for bodily cures, first cured the soul of sin, before he healed the
bodily infirmity: teaching us, that sin is the cause of sickness, and that cure
first to be looked after. And by thus doing, we may possibly save the body,
without the Physician, S. James 5. 14. Is any sick, let him send for the Elders
or Priests of the Church to pray over him, and the prayer of faith shall save
the sick. But if he fails of that bodily cure by these means, yet he may be
sure to obtain remission of sins by their means: If he has committed sins,
they shall be forgiven him, ver. 15. by the benefit of absolution, so the words
import. For (...), sins, being a feminine plural, seems not to agree with the
verb (...), it shall be forgiven, of the singular number, and therefore this
word more properly seems to be rendered impersonally thus, If he has committed
sins, pardon or absolution shall be given him: and so by this means the sick
person shall be sure, if not to save his body, yet at least to save his soul.

There was an ancient Canon, which that it might be truly practiced and
observed, it must be the wish of all good men. It is Can. 7. Con. Aurelian 5.
ut qui pro quibuscunque culpis in carceribus deputantur, ab Archidiacono seu a
Praeposito Eccles. diebus singulis Dominicis requirantur, at necessitas
vinctorum, secundum praeceptum divinum, misericorditer sublevetur; That all
prisoners, for what crime soever, shall be called for and visited by the
Archdeacon or Bishop of the Church, every Lords day, that the necessities,
bodily and ghostly, of the prisoners, according to Gods command, may be
mercifully relieved. The neglect of which duty, how dangerous it is, we may
read, S. Mat.25. 43. Go ye cursed, for I was sick and in prison, and ye visited
me not. The Rubric at the Communion of the sick, directs the Priest, to
deliver the Communion to the sick, but does not there set down how much of the
Communion-Service shall be used at the delivering of the Communion to the sick;
and therefore seems to me, to refer us to former directions in times past. Now
the direction formerly was this:

If the same day (that the sick is to receive the Communinn) there be a
celebration of the holy Communion in the Church, then shall the Priest reserve
(at the open Communion) so much of the Sacrament of the body and blood as shall
serve the sick person, and so many as shall communicate with him. And as soon
as he may conveniently, after the open Communion ended in the Church, shall go
and minister the same first to them that are appointed to communicate with the
sick, if there be any; and last of all to the sick. But before the Curate
distribute the holy Communion, the appointed general Confession, (in the
Communion-Service) must be made in the name of the Communicants, the Curate
adding the Absolution, with the comfortable sentences of Scripture, following
in the open Communion immediately, and so proceeding in the Communion-Service
to the end of the Consecration and Distribution: and after the Communion ended,
the Collect is to be used, which begins; Almighty and everliving God, we most
heartily thank thee, etc.

But if the day wherein the sick person is to receive the Communion, be not
appointed for the open Communion, in the Chruch; then upon convenient warning
given, the Curate shall come and visit the sick person before noon. And cutting
off the form of the visitation at the Psalm, In thee O Lord, shall go straight
to the Communion, Rubr. 3. Com. of sick; that is, after he has said the
Collect, Epist. and Gosp. there directed, he shall go to the Communion-Service.
K. Edw. 6th. 1.

BVRIAL.
THe Priest meeting the Corpse at the Church style, shall go before it to the
grave, saying or singing, I am the resurrection and the life. This, in triumph
over death, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? thou
may a while hold the corpse, but he that is the resurrection and the life,
will make the dead man live again. Therefore thanks be to God, who gives this
victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Much after this sort did the Ancients,
Hieron. ep. 30. ad Ocean. de Fabiola. Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in Hebr. Quid fibi volunt
istae lampades tam splendidae? nonne sicut athletas mortuos comitamur? quid
etiam aymni? nonne ut Deum glorificemus, quod jam coronavit discedentem, quod a
laboribus liberavit, quod liberatum a timore apud se habeat? [ What mean the
bright burning torches? do we not follow the dead like Champions? what mean the
Hymns? do we not thereby glorify God, for that he has crowned our departed
brother, that he has freed him from labors, that he has him with himself,
freed from fear? All these are expressions of joy, whereby we do in a holy
valor laugh at death, says Chrysostom. there.] And this is Christian-like, whereas
if we be sad and dejected as men without hope, mortem Christi, qua mors
superata est, Calumniamur, [we disgrace the death of Christ, that has
conquered death:] and Heathens and Atheists will deride us, saying, how can
these contemn death, that cannot patiently behold a dead friend? talk what you
will of the Resurrection, when you are out of passion, it is no great matter,
nor persuades much; but show me a man in passion of grief for the loss of his
friend, playing the Philosopher, and triumphantly singing to God for his happy
deliverance, and I will believe the Resurrection. Of so good use are such
triumphant hymns at this time: and of this sort are the three first.

When they come to the Grave, while the corpse is made ready to be laid into the
grave, the Priest shall say or sing, Man that is born of a Woman, etc.] closing
with a most devout prayer for grace and assistence in our last hour; a prayer
very suitable to such a time, and such a spectacle before us.

Then they commit the body to the earth (not as a lost and perished carcass,
but as having in it a seed of eternity) in sure and certain hope of the
resurrection to eternal life. This is to bury it Christianly; the hope of the
resurrection, being the proper hope of Christians. Such was the Christians
burial of old, that it was accounted both an evident argument and presage of
the resurrection; and an honor done to that body, which the Holy Ghost had
once made his Temple for the Offices of piety. Aug. de Civit. l. 1. c. 13.

After follows another Triumphant Hymn. Then a Lesson out of S. PAVL to the
same purpose; Then a Thanksgiving for that our brothers safe delivery out of
misery; Lastly a Prayer for his and our consummation in Glory, and joyful
Absolution at the last day. By all which prayers, praises, and holy Lessons,
and decent solemnities, we do glorify God, honor the dead, and comfort the
living.

Take away these prayers, praises and holy lessons, which were ordained to show
at Burials, the peculiar hope of the Church of the Resurrection of the dead,
and in the manner of the dumb funerals, what one thing is there, whereby the
world may perceive that we are Christians? HOOKER 1. 5. Eccl. pol.. 75. There
being in those dumb shows nothing but what heathens and pagans do, How can any
unlearned or unbeliever be convinced by them, that either we who are present at
them do, or that he ought to believe any part of Christian Religion? but when
the unlearned or unbeliever hears us sing triumphant songs to God for our
victory over death, when he hears holy Lessons and discourses of the
Resurrection, when he hears us pray for a happy and joyful Resurrection to
Glory: by all these he must be convinced, that we do believe the Resurrection,
which is a principal Article of Christian faith, and the same may be the means
to convince him also, and make him believe the same, and so fall down and
worship God. And this is according to S. Paul's rule, 1. Cor. 14. 23, 24, 25.
who thence concludes, that all our public religious services ought to be done,
that the unlearned or unbeliever may be convinced, and brought to worship God.

For the due performance of these holy public services, a Priest, ordained for
men in things pertaining to God, Heb. 5.1. is required by the Church, as it
ought to be, and as it was of old. S. Chrysostom. Hom.4. in Hebr. Ambr. Ser. 90.

It was an ancient custom, after Burial to go to the holy COMMUNION, unless the
office were performed after noon. For then, if men were not fasting, it was
done only with Prayers. Conc. Carth.3. 29. Can.

Funeral Doles were an ancient custom, Chrysostom. Hom. 32. in Mat.

Thanksgiving of Women after Childbirth, commonly called the CHVRCHING OF
WOMEN.
THe Woman when she comes to give her thanks, shall kneel near to the place
where the holy Table stands: but in the Church of Rome, she was to kneel at the
Church door.

The Woman may come to give her thanks, whenever she shall be able, Decretal.
l. 3. Tit. 4. But if she be likely to live, she is required by the Civil Law,
according to the Tradition of the Church, to forbear the coming to partake of
the holy Mystery forty days after the Birth. Not for any unholiness in the
Woman, or incapacity of receiving the holy Mysteries at that time; (for if
there be fear of death, she may receive them, as soon as she please after the
birth;) but for some secret reasons in the Law, which are set down, Constit.
Leon. 7.

The Woman that is to be Churched, is to have a Veil; and good reason; For if
as S. Paul 1 Cor.11. says, Every woman, when she prays in public, ought to
have a veil or covering on her head, in token of her modesty and subjection:
then much more, when she is to sit in a more eminent place of the Church, near
to the holy Table, apart from the rest of her Sex, in the public view, ought
she to have such a Veil or covering. Nor can it be deemed unreasonable for her
at that time to have a Veil or habit distinct from others; that so it may be
known, for whom thanks is then particularly given.

The Preface following. Forasmuch, etc. is left arbitrary to the Priest, but
the prayers are all prescribed.

Then shall the Priest say the 121. psalm. I have lifted up mine eyes unto the
Hills, etc. The Church appointing this Psalm at this time, does not intend to
persuade us by this, that this Psalm was penned for such a particular occasion
as this; or that the promises of Gods protection and assistence there
expressed, were directly and primarily made to persons in that danger of
childbirth: but because the Psalm at the very beginning tells us all, that our
help comes from God, it is thought seasonable at this time to be used, to mind
the woman from whom she has received that mercy of deliverance, and to whom
she is to return the honor due for such a mercy, even to him from whom comes
all our help, the Lord that made heaven and earth. And this were enough to
justify the Churches choice of this Psalm at this time; in that, part of it is
so fit for this business in hand, though it were not penned upon this very
occasion (for so we find Hezekiah commended, for appointing of the Psalms of
David and Asaph, to set forth the praises of God in the public services, 2.
Chr. 29. 30: although neither had Hezek and the Church then, the very same
occasions to use them, which David and Asaph had, nor did every particle of
those songs, so directly and properly belong to Hezekias and the Church then,
as they did to David and Asaph.) But not only the beginning of this Psalm, but
even the whole body of it is fit and suitable to this service, and those
promises of divine assistence therein expressed, though they were primarily and
in their first intention made to the Church of the Jews: yet in their
proportion they do belong to the person coming to give thanks, and to every one
that shall lift up their eyes to the Hills, and trust in God. For not Israel at
large, but Israel lifting up her eyes to God, and trusting in God, is the
formal and true object of this promise; which therefore, belongs to every such
person as shall be so qualified, so depending upon God. This rule S. Paul has
taught us, Heb. 13. 5. applying there the promise made particularly to Ioshuah
Chap. 1. 5. to every one of us that shall contentedly depend upon God, as
Ioshuah was commanded to do in expectance of that promise. Let your
conversation be without covetousness; and be content with such things as ye
have; For he has said, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. So that we may
boldly say, the Lord is my helper.

One verse of this Psalm may perhaps at the first sight seem not so well
expressed, namely this, the sun shall not burn thee by day, nor the Moon by
night; for the Moon does not burn but cool. But it i^ easily cleared, by taking
notice that to burn is not always taken in the strict and proper sense, but
usually in a larger; whereby it is the same with, to grieve or hurt; a ordinary
skill in language will enform us; so the meaning is, The Sun shall not hurt
thee by day, nor the Moon by night, whose shine is held to be very hurtful.

After the Psalm follow the Kyrie or short Litany, and the Lords Prayer, so
admirably good and useful, that there is scarce any public service dispatched
without them: after these follow some Verses and Responds, of which and the
reason of their use, together with the antiquity of it, has been said already,
and need not be here repeated. But there is one thing observable in these
Responds or Answers which was not spoken of hitherto, nor was so observable in
some of the former Verses and Responds as in these here; and that is this, that
some of these Answers are not of themselves entire sentences or petitions, as
the others were, but are parts or ends of the foregoing verses, the verse and
Answer together making up one entire petition. For example, O Lord save this
Woman thy Servant,
R. Which puts her trust in thee.
And, Be thou to her a strong Tower,
R. From the face of her Enemy.


This I observe, because it seems to be the remain of a very ancient custom.
For Eus. in Hist. l. 2. c. 17. tells us, that the Primitive Christians in the
singing of their hymns, had this use; that one began and sung in rhythm; the
rest hearing with silence, only the last part, or (...) the ends of the Psalm
or Hymn, all the rest joined and sung together with him. Agreeable to this says
Clem. Constable. l. 2. c. 57. was the usage in his time and before. After the
readings of the Old Testament, says he, Let another sing the Psalms of David,
and let the people answer (...) the extremes or ends of the Verses. What the
reason of this ancient custom was, I will not peremptorily determine; whether
it were only for variety, which much pleases and delights, and is a great help
against weariness; which those Primitive Christians, (who continued in sacred
exercises from morning to night) had need of. For which cause says Eusebius. in
the place above cited, they used all decent and grave variety of rhythmes and
Meeters in their Hymns and Psalms. Or whether it were to avoid the
inconvenience of indecorum and confusion, which the people (usually not very
observant of decency) were guilty of in their joint singing: and yet to reserve
them apart in these Offices; that it was so appointed, that they should only
sing the extremes or ends of the Verses. Or what else was the cause, I leave it
to others to judge.

The prayer following is clearly fitted to the occasion.

The woman that comes to give her thanks, must offer. Rubr. after the
Thanksgiving. Although Offerings be always acceptable to God, yet some times
there are, in which the Church has held them more necessary, as has been
shown formerly about offerings. First, when the Church is in want. Secondly, at
the holy Communion. Thirdly, when we come to give thanks for some more than
ordinary blessing received; Then not only in word, but in Deed also to thank
God, by bringing a present to God. Psalm. 76. 10, 11. That this is more than an
ordinary blessing, a deliverance that deserves even perpetual thanks, David
tells us, Psalm. 71. 5. Thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb, my
praise shall be always of thee. This service is to be done betwixt the first
and second Service, as I have learnt by some Bishops enquiries at their
Visitation; the Reason perhaps is, because by this means it is no interruption
of either of these Offices.

COMMINATION.
THis Office the Church confesses not, to be ancient, but appointed instead of
an ancient godly discipline of putting notorious sinners to open penance, which
being lost with us, holy Church wishes might be restored again.

Though it be not ancient, yet is it a very useful penitential service, either
in public or private, consisting of holy sentences taken out of Gods word, fit
for the work of repentance; Gods holy Commandments, the glass wherein we see
our sins; Holy penitential prayers taken for the most part out of holy
Scripture: so that, he which prays this form, is sure to pray by the Spirit,
both for words and matter.

Nothing in it seems to need exposition, but the AMEN, which is to be said
after the Curses, which being commonly used after prayers, may perhaps here be
accounted by some, a wish or prayer; and so the people be thought to curse
themselves.

For the satisfying of which scrupulosity, it is enough to say, that God
himself commanded these Amens to be said after these Curses. Deuteronomy. 27. and
therefore good there may be in saying of them, but harm there can be none, if
men when they say them understand them. Now that we may understand them when we
use them, let us consider, that Amen is not always a wish or prayer. For, it
signifies no more but verily or truly, or an assent to the truth of that to
which it is added. If that to which it is added, be a prayer, then this must
needs be a joining in the prayer, and is as much as so be it; but if that to
which it be added be a Creed, or any affirmative proposition, such as these
curses are, then the Amen is only an affirmation, as that is, to which it is
annexed. In this place therefore it is not a wishing that the Curses may fall
upon our heads, but only an affirming with our own mouths that the curse of
God is indeed due to such sins, as the Church here propounds it. The use of it
is to make us flee such vices for the future, and earnestly repent of them, if
we be guilty: since, as we acknowledge, the curse and vengeance of God does
deservedly follow such sins and sinners.

Having gone through the several Offices in the Book of Com. Prayer, we will
now speak of the Rubricks and other matters thereunto belonging.

Of the Dedication of CHVRCHES and CHAPELS to Gods Service.
THe public Service and Worship is to be offered up in the Church. Last Rubr.
of the Preface.

And the Curate that ministers in every Parish Church or Chapel shall say the
same in the Parish Church or Chapel. And where may it be so fitly done as in
the Church? which is the house of Prayer, S. Matthew. 21. 13. My house shall be
called the house of Prayer. Almighty God always had both Persons and Places set
apart for his public Service and worship, (...) A Temple and a Priest are
necessary instruments of public and holy worship. The Priest, to offer it up,
and the Church with an Altar to offer it upon. Symeon Thessal. The Light of
Nature taught Heathens thus much; and they obeyed that Light of Nature, and
dedicated and set apart to the worship of their gods, Priests and Temples. The
Patriarchs, by the same Light of Nature, and the guidance of Gods holy Spirit,
when they could not set a part houses, being themselves in a flitting
condition, dedicated Altars for Gods service, Genesis 22. 9. 28. 22. etc. Under
the Law, God called for a Tabernacle, Exodus 25. within which was to be an
Altar, upon which was to be offered the daily Sacrifice, Morning and Evening,
Exodus 29. 38. David by the same Light of Nature, and the guidance of the holy
Spirit, without any express direction from God, (as appears 2 Samuel 7. 7. and
also by this, that God did not suffer him to build it) intended and designed an
House for Gods service and worship; which, (though for some reasons, viz.
because he had shed much blood, being a man of war) God did not suffer him to
build, yet he accepted it highly from him, and for this very intention promised
to bless him and his, for many generations,2. Sam. 7. But Solomon built him an
house, which God accepted, and our Savior owns under the Gospel, for His house
of prayer, whither the Apostles go up to pray, Acts 3.1.

Afterward the Christians set apart and consecrated with great solemnity of
religious Rites and holy Prayers, Churches and Oratories for the same solemn
service and worship. Nor can it with reason be thought needless or
superstitious to use solemn religious Rites and Prayers, at the Consecration
and setting of those Houses apart to religious uses and services. For as S.
Paul argues in another case, Does not even nature teach you, that it is
unseemly for any man to go about the building of an house to the God of Heaven
with no other appearance, than if his end were to rear up a Kitchen or a Parlor
for his own use? Did not this light of Nature teach the Patriarchs in the state
of Nature, when they erected Altars for Gods service, to consecrate and set
them apart with religious solemnities? Genesis 28. 18. etc. And did not Moses, by
the direction of the God of Nature, consecrate the Tabernacle and Altar, with
the like solemnities? Exodus 40. And Solomon after consecrated the Temple, with
religious Prayers and Rites, 1. Kings 8. without any particular direction from
God, that we find, only by the Light of Nature and right reason, which
teaches, that it is fit, that the House which is dedicated and given up to
God, should be solemnly surrendered into his possession, and by religious Rites
guarded and defended from Sacrilegious usurpation.

Again, Nature teaches us by these solemnities, that the House so consecrated,
is to be no more used to Common and profane employments, but set apart to holy
and religious services, such as those are, with which it is consecrated. These
things, those pious Christians in Primitive times did not account superfluous.
They knew how easily that which was meant should be holy and sacred, might be
drawn from the use whereunto it was first provided. They knew how bold men are
to take even from God himself; how hardly those Houses would be kept from
impious profanation: they knew, and right wisely therefore endeavored by such
solemnities to leave in the minds of men that impression, which might somewhat
restrain their boldness, and nourish a reverend affection toward the House of
God. Thus therefore they built and set apart to Gods holy service and worship
by religious solemnity, Churches and Oratories, which they called Dominica's,
the Lords Houses, and Basili^a's, Royal and Kingly houses; because. Sacrifices
and holy worship were offered up there to the great King of all the world. And
when persecutors at any time destroyed those holy places, as soon as the storm
was over, those blessed Souls, the first thing they did, rebuilt, and
re-beautified them, Eusebius. l. 10. c.2. that they might worship God, according
to the Psalmists rule, in the beauty of holiness.

Thus to offer up Gods public service and worship in separate and dedicated
places, which we call Churches, is most fit; both for the honor of God, and
our own profit. It is for the honor of God to have a House of his own, for his
service alone, where flesh and blood has no right or interest, where no common
or profane thing may be done. S. Matthew. 21. 22. therefore called the
habitation of his honor. Psalm. 27. 8.

Again, it is for our profit many ways; for First, it begets and nourishes in
us, dull flesh, a reverence and awe to God and his service, to offer it up thus
in places set apart to that purpose, and so helps devotion. Besides, our
prayers and public services are most readily accepted, in such holy separate
places, 2. Chron. 7. 15. Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ^ars attent unto
the prayer in this place. This promise of acceptance of our prayer was there,
indeed, made directly to the House which Solomon built, but belongs to any
place so Dedicated and Consecrated unto God for his holy service and worship:
For that is the reason that God gives of his gracious readiness to hear the
prayer of that holy place; For now have I chosen and sanctified this house,
that my name may be there. Now that it is dedicated and solemnly set apart by
religious rites and prayers to my service, Now have I chosen or accepted it for
mine, to be called by my name, S. Matthew. 12. 13. to be for a house of prayer,
and therefore mine eyes and my heart shall be there. Then, by the Rules of
Logic, a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia; if because he has so sanctified
this place and accepted it for his, therefore his eyes and ears shall be open
to the prayer of that place; by the like reason, whatsoever place shall be
dedicated to him and accepted by him, shall have his eyes open, and his ear
attentive to the prayer of it. And God Almighty promises as much, Exodus 20. 24.
In all places, where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless
thee. In all places dedicated to me and my service, and so made mine, called by
my name (as Jacob calls his dedicated stone, Gods house, Genesis 28. 22.) I will
come and bless thee. And such are all Consecrated Churches and Chapels. And
therefore holy Church wisely orders that the prayers and public services of
God shall be offered up there, in the accustomed place of the Church, Chapel,
or Chancel.

Of Chancels, Altars, Fashion of Churches.
ANd the Chancels shall remain as they have done in times past.

That we may the better understand the intent of this Rubric, it will not be
amiss to examine, how CHANCELS were in time past both for the fashion and
necessary furniture; for as they were then, so they are to continue still in
the same fashion, and with the same necessary Appendices, Utensils, and
Furniture. All this may be, and for ought appears to me, must be meant in these
words, The Chancels shall remain as they have done in times past.

In times past, the fabric of the Church, as to the Nave or Body, was built
somewhat in the form and fashion of a Ship, which very figure might mind us
thus much; that we were in this world as in a Sea; tossed and hurried with the
troublesome waves and bo^sterous winds of diverse temptations, which we could
not be carried safely through, to our haven of rest and happiness, but only in
the ship of the Church.

The Church of old was parted into two principal parts. Navis the NAVE or body
of the Church; and Sacrarium the CHANCEL. The first, the Nave, was common to
all the people that were accounted worthy to join in the Churches Service: the
Chancel was proper and peculiar to the Priests and Sacred persons. The Nave
represents the visible world, and the Chancel typifies heaven, or as Symeon
Thessal applies it.

The whole Church is a type of heaven, Genesis 28. 17. the house of God is heaven
upon earth; the Nave represents the visible or lowest heaven or Paradise; the
lights shining alost, represent the bright Stars; the circling roof, the
Firmament; the Priests within the Quire beginning the divine Hymns, represent
the first order of Angels that stand before God; the Deacons with the Readers
and Singers orderly succeeding, the middle order or quire of heaven; the whole
company of true believers joining with the Priests and Deacons in heart and
affection, saying Amen to the divine Hymns and prayers, and so inviting and
alluring the mercy of God, resemble the lowest rank of Angels, with whom no
profane Heretic, or unclean notorious sinner is suffered to assemble; for,
what fellowship has light with darkness? thus the whole Church typifies
heaven, but the Chancel, parted and separated from the Nave or body of the
Church, so as, that it cannot be seen into by those that are there, typifies
the invisible heaven, or things above the heaven, not to be seen by the eye of
flesh.

The Nave or body resembles the lowest visible heaven or Paradise: and as man
for sin was cast out of Edens Paradise into the earth, accursed to briars and
thorns, there to eat his bread in sorrow and not suffered by the flaming sword
to enter again, Genesis 3. till, after much affliction and sorrow in this
troublesome world, he shall be reconciled to God by repentance, and so, his
peace being made, be received, as the thief upon the Cross was, to our Lord
Christ in Paradise; so in like manner notorious sinners were by the sentence of
excommunication cast out of that Paradise the body of the Church, abroad into
the Church porch, which represents the earth, not to be received in again to
the society of the fa^thful, till after a wearisome attendance there in a
place, called of old Narthex or Ferula (because those that stood there, were
under the Churches Ferula or censure) begging the prayers, entreating the
tears, hanging upon the knees of all that entered into the Church, by much
spiritual affliction and castigation they had made their peace and were
reconciled.

In the Nave, we shall mention but two things as observable here; First, the
Doors, called (...) the beautiful Doors or Gate, Acts 3. 2. because those that
had entered them, might see the whole beauty of the Church; and the Pulpit
(...), which stood in the midst or side of the Nave, Sym. These. This signifies
the stone rolled away from the Sepulcher; and because the Angel sitting upon
it, preached the Gospel of the Resurrection of Christ to the women, S. Matthew.
28. 6. the Priests and Deacons, imitating the Angels pattern, from this Pulpit,
publish and proclaim the glad tidings of the Gospel.

The Chancel was divided from the Body of the Church, Cancellis, whence it is
called the Chancel. This was, as was said, peculiar to the Priests and sacred
persons. In it were, at least in some principal Churches, these divisions;
Chorus Cantorum, the Quire; where was an high Seat for the Bishop, and other
Stalls or Seats for the rest of the Quire: yet perhaps this Chorus, as also the
next, called Soleas, might be more properly reckoned a part of the Nave; and
the Chancel properly that which of old was called (...), the Sanctuary, which
was separated from the rest of the Church with rails, and whither indeed none
but sacred persons entered: whereas the Laity entered into the other, as will
appear after; but account it to which you please, such a place there was, and
immediately beyond it, divided from the Quire with boards on the one side, and
from the Sanctuary by the rails of the Altar on the other side, was a place
called Soleas, from the Latin Solium or Throne, because this was Christ's lower
Throne; his higher or upper Throne was the Altar, where the precious body and
blood of Christ was consecrated and offered: And this was his lower Throne,
where the Bishop or Priest in Christ his stead, stood and distributed the holy
Sacrament to the people. Beyond this is (...), the Sanctuary, railed in of old,
as you may see plainly Syn. Calc. Acts 1. that it might not be pressed upon by
the multitude, Eusebius. Hist. l. 10. c. 4. At the upper end of this Sanctuary or
Chancel is a large Arch or Absis; within that a Seat called (...), a Seat or
Seats built for the Bishop and his assistent Priests in the Celebration; the
middle of which is the highest, where the chief Bishop sat, which S. Chrysostom. in
his Liturgy calls (...) Of this Seat is the 56. Can. of Laodic. to be
understood, The Priests ought not to go into the Church and sit in
Tribunalibus, before the Bishop be entered, unless he be sick, and cannot come.
The Bishop sitting in this Seat by the Altar (having his assistent Priests
sitting with him,) resembles Christ (with his Apostles by him) instituting the
holy Sacrament, and blessing the prayers offered up at the Altar by the Priest;
Right under this Seat stood the Altar or holy Table, the Propitiatory, Christ's
Monument, and the Tabernacle of his glory. The Shop of the great Sacrifice,
Sym. Thessal.

Now that no man take offense at the word Altar, Let him know that anciently
both these names Altar or holy Table were used for the same things, though most
frequently, the Fathers and Councils use the word Altar. And both are fit names
for that holy thing: For the holy Eucharist, being considered as a Sacrifice,
in the representation of the breaking of the Bread, and pouring forth the Cup,
doing that to the holy Symbols, which was done to Christ's Body and Blood, and
so showing forth and commemorating the Lords death and offering upon it the
same Sacrifice that was offered upon the Cross, or rather the commemoration of
that Sacrifice, S. Chrysostom. in Heb. 10. 9. may fitly be called an Altar, which
again is as fitly called an holy Table, the Eucharist being considered as a
Sacrament, which is nothing else but a distribution and application of the
Sacrifice to the several receivers.

To put all out of doubt, it is questionless lawful and safe to speak the
language of the New Testament, and to give this holy thing the name, which is
given it there; now there it is called an Altar, Heb.13. 10. we have an Altar:
S. Paul in the verse before had persuaded that they should not be carried away
with strange doctrines of Jewish and carnal observances, which are grown
unprofitable to those that walk in them. For we have an Altar now, whereof they
that serve at the Tabernacle, the Jewish Priests, have no right to eat, unless
they will receive the Faith of Christ; our Altar is better than theirs, and
theirs was but a shadow of ours; the Sacrifices of their Altar, but types of
ours; theirs are vanished and ours only continue. And for this reason, do you
leave strange doctrines of legal observances, and Jewish Altars, and continue
in the grace of the Gospel, whose Altar is to continue; for we have an Altar.
Again S. Mat. 5. 23. When thou bring thy gift to the Altar. That precept and
direction for Offerings is Evangelical, as is proved at large. p. 258, [ in the
office for the Communion,] and if the duty there mentioned be Evangelical, then
Altars are to be under the Gospel; for those gifts are to be offered upon the
Altar, so that I hope, we may go on and call it Altar without offense.

To return then to the appendices of the Chancel: On each side or Wing of the
Altar, in the Transverse Line, which makes the figure of the Cross, stand Two
Side-Tables. The one Mensa propositionis, (...) a by-standing Table, appointed
for the Peoples offerings, which the Bishop or Priest there standing received
from the people, offered upon that Table in their name, and blessed; and though
the oblations there offered were not yet Consecrated, yet were they there
fitted and prepared for Consecration, and were types of the body and blood of
Christ says Sym. These. The other was (...) Sacristae Mensa, The Vestry where
the holy books and Vestments were laid up and kept by the Deacons, who also sat
there at the time of the Communion-Service, at least, as many of them as were
necessary to assist the Bishop or Priest in his ministration. Thence was the
same place called also Diaconicum. These several places, and this furniture
some principal and Cathedral Chancels had; which I have named, not that I think
this Rubric does require them all in every Chancel, but because I conceive the
knowledge of them may serve to help us in the understanding of some ancient
Canons, and Ecclesiastical Story. But though all Chancels of old had not all
these, yet every Chancel had even in Rural Churches an Altar for the
Consecrating of the holy Eucharist, which they always had in high estimation.
The Ancients, says S. Chrysostom. would have stoned any one, that should have
overthrown or pulled down an Altar, Hom. 53. ad pop. Antioch. S. Gregory
Nazianz. commends his Mother for that she never was known to turn her back upon
the Altar. Orat. 28. in Fun. Patr. And Optat. l. 6. accuses the peevish
Donatists of the highest kind of Sacrilege, because They broke and removed the
Altars of God, where the peoples prayers were offered, Almighty God was
invocated, the holy Ghost was petitioned to descend; where many received the
pledge of eternal life, the defense of faith, the hope of the Resurrection.
What is the Altar, but the seat of the Body and Blood of Christ? and yet your
fury, has either shaken, or broken, or removed these: every of these is crime
enough, while you lay sacrilegious hands upon a thing so holy. If your spite
were at us, that there were wont to worship God, yet wherein had God offended
you, who was wont to be there called upon? What had Christ offended you, whose
Body and Blood, at certain times and moments dwelt there? In this you have
imitated the Jews, they laid hands upon Christ on the Cross, you have wounded
him in his Altars. By this doing, you are entered into the list of the
Sacrilegious. You have made your selves of the number of them that Elias
complains of, 1 Kings 19. Lord, they have broken down thine Altars. It should
have sufficed your madness that you had worried Christ's members, that you had
broken his people, so long united, into so many Sects and Factions, at least
you should have spared his Altars. So he, and much more to the same purpose.

Many more testimonies to the same purpose might be brought; but this may show
sufficiently the respect they had to the Altar; First, the Epithets they gave
it, calling it the Divine, the Dreadful Altar: Secondly, their bowing and
adoring that way, turning their faces that way in their public prayers, as
toward the chiefest and highest place of the Church: Lastly, placing it aloft
in all their Churches at the upper end, the East. For so both Socrates and
Niceph. l. 12. c. 34. tell us, the Altar was placed Ad Orientem, at the East,
in all Christian Churches, except in Antiochia Syriae, in Antioch. And so they
stood at the East in the Church of England, till Q. Elizabeth's time, when some
of them were taken down indeed, upon what grounds I dispute not; but
wheresoever the Altars were taken down, the holy Tables, which is all one; were
set up in the place where the Altars stood, by the Queens Injunctions, and so
they continued in most Cathedral Churches; and so ought to have continued in
all; for that was enjoined by Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, forbidden by no
after-Law, that I know, but rather confirmed by this Rubr. For the Chancels are
to remain as in times past.

The Divine Service may be said privately.
WE have seen the reason of the Churches command, that the holy Service should
be offered up in the Church or Chapel, etc. But what if a Church cannot be had
to say our Office in? shall the Sacrifice of Rest, the holy Service be omitted?
By no means. If a Church may not be had, The Priest shall say it Privately,
says the same Rubr. 2. And good reason; for Gods worship must not be neglected
or omitted for want of a circumstance. It is true, the Church is the most not
convenient place for it, and adds much to the beauty of holiness. And he that
should neglect that decency, and despising the Church should offer up the
public worship in private, should sin against that Law of God that says,
Cursed is he that having a better Lamb in his flock, offers up to God a worse:
For God Almighty must be served with the best we have, otherwise we despise
him. He that can have a Church, and will offer up the holy service in a worse
place, let him fear that curse: but if a Church cannot be had, let him not fear
or omit to offer up the holy Service in a convenient place in private, having a
desire to the Church, looking toward the Temple in prayer, 2 Chronicles. 6. 28. for
it will be accepted, according to that equitable rule of S. Panl, 2 Cor. 8. 12.
If there be a willing mind, God accepts according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not.

Agreeable to this command of holy Church, we find it directed in Clem.
Constit. l. 8. c. 34. If, O Bishop, or Priest, you cannot go to the Church
because of Infidels or persecutors, gather a congregation in a private house;
but if you cannot be suffered to meet together, no not in a private house,
Psallat sibi unusquisque. Let every man say the Office in private by himself.
Let every Layman say this More and Even. Office, his Psalter, leaving out that
which is peculiar to the Priest, Absolution, and solemn benediction; and let
him know that when he prays thus alone, he prays with company, because he
prays in the Churches communion, the Common prayer and vote of the Church. But
let not the Priest of all others, fail to offer this service of the
Congregation. This public worship, this savor of rest, though by himself in
private looking toward the Temple, Lifting up his hands toward the mercy seat
of the holy Temple, Psalm. 84. that is, having in his soul a desire and longing
to enter into the courts of the Lord, praying with David, that he may go unto
the Altar of God, the God of our joy and gladness, to offer up his service
there, and it will be acceptable.

Of the Ornaments to be used in Divine Service.
THe Minister in time of his ministration shall use such Drnaments as were in
use in the 2. of Edw. 6. Rubr. 2. viz. A Surplice in the ordinary Ministration,
and a Cope in time of Ministration of the holy Communion, in Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches, Qu. Eliz. Artic. set forth the seventh year of her reign.
This appointment of decent sacred vestments for the Priest in his holy
ministration is according to Gods own direction to Moses, Exodus 28. 2. Thou
shall make holy raiments for Aaron and his Sons, that are to minister unto me,
that they may be for Glory and Beauty. And good reason: For if distinct habits
be esteemed a Beauty to solemn actions of Royalty and Justice, so that Princes
and Judges appear not without their Robes, when they appear in public to do
those solemn acts; shall they not be esteemed a Beauty likewise to solemn
religious services? Or shall it be thought necessary to preserve respect and
awe to Royalty and Justice? and shall it not be counted as necessary to
preserve an awful respect to Gods holy service and worship? And if such respect
to Gods service be indeed necessary, then cannot sacred distinct vestments, nor
sacred separate places be thought unnecessary: For by these and such like
decencies, our awe to Religion is preserved: and experience teaches, that where
they are thrown off, Religion is soon lost.

White Garments in holy services, were anciently used, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 60. as
pop. Antioch. ana they suit fitly with that lightsome affection of joy wherein
god delights, when the Saints praise him, Psalm. 149. 2. and lively resemble the
glory of the Saints in heaven, together with the beauty, wherein Angels have
appeared to men, Rev. 15. 6. S. Mark 16. 5. that they which are to appear for
men in the presence of God as Angels, if they were left to their choice and
would choose, could not easily devise a garment of more decency for such a
service, says excellent Master Hooker.

Of the word Priest.
THe Greek and Latin words which we translate Priest, are derived from words
which signify holy: and so the word Priest according to the Etymology,
signifies him whose mere charge and function is about holy things: and
therefore seems to be a most proper word to him, who is set apart to the holy
public service and worship of God: especially when he is, in the actual
ministration of holy things. Wherefore in the Rubricks, which direct him in his
ministration of these holy public services, the word Priest is most commonly
used, both by this Church and all the Primitive Churches Greek and Latin as far
as I can find, and I believe it can scarce be found, that in any of the old
Greek or Latin Liturgies the word Presbyter was used in the Rubricks that
direct the order of service, but in the Greek, (...) and in the Latin Sacerdos,
which we in English translate Priest, which I suppose to be done upon this
ground, that this word Priest is the most proper for him that ministers, in the
time of his ministration.

If it be objected, that according to the usual acception of the word, it
signifies him that offers up a Sacrifice, and therefore cannot be allowed to a
Minister of the Gospel, who has no Sacrifice to offer.

It is answered: that the Ministers of the Gospel, have Sacrifices to offer, S.
Peter 1 ep. 2. 5. Ye are built up a spiritual house, a holy Priesthood to offer
up spiritual Sacrifices of prayer, praises, thanksgivings, etc. In respect of
these the Ministers of the Gospel may be safely in a metaphorical sense called
Priests; and in a more eminent manner than other Christians are; because they
are taken from among men to offer up these Sacrifices for others. But besides
these spiritual Sacrifices mentioned, the Ministers of the Gospel have another
Sacrifice to offer, viz. the unbloody Sacrifice, as it was anciently called,
the commemorative Sacrifice of the death of Christ, which does as really and
truly show forth the death of Christ, as those Sacrifices under the Law did
foreshew it, and in respect of this Sacrifice of the Eucharist, the Ancients
have usually called those that offer it up, Priests. And if Melchisedeck was
called a Priest, (as he is often by S. Paul: to the Hebrews) who yet had no
other Offering or Sacrifice that we read of, but that of Bread and Wine, Genesis
14. He brought forth Bread and Wine; and, or, for (the Hebrew word bears both)
he was a Priest, that is, this act of his was an act of Priesthood, for so must
it be referred, he brought forth Bread and Wine; for he was a Priest. And not
thus, and he was a Priest, and blessed Abraham (for both in the Hebrew and
Greek there is a Full point after these words, and, or, for he was a Priest.)
If, I say, Melchisedeck be frequently and truly called a Priest, who had no
other Offering, that we read of, but Bread and Wine, why may not they whose
Office is to bless the people as Melchisedeck did, and besides that to offer
that holy Bread and Wine, the Body and Blood of Christ, of which, his Bread and
wine, at the most, was but a type, be as truly and without offense called
Priests also?

If it be again objected, that the word Priest is a Jewish name, and therefore
not to be used by Christians.

1. It is answered, first, that not every thing that was Jewish is become
unlawful for Christians to use. I find indeed that those things amongst the
Jews that were shadows of things to come, are abolished now that Christ is
come, Col. 2. 16, 17. and therefore to use them, as still necessary and
obliging to performance, is unlawful under the Gospel, for it is virtually to
deny Christ to be come, Gal. 5. 3. An entangling our selves again in the yoke
of bondage, from which Christ has set us free, Col. 2. And therefore S. Paul
tells the Colossians there, that he was afraid of them for their superstitious
observation of Sabbaths which were shadows of things to come: and in that
Chapter to the Galat. he does denounce damnation to them that entangle
themselves again in that yoke of bondage, v.2. But that other things, rites or
usages of the Jews, which were no such shadows, should be unlawful to
Christians if they were used without such an opinion of necessity, as we
formerly spoke of; I cannot persuade my self can ever be proved by either
direct Scripture, or necessary inference from it. It will not therefore follow,
that the name of Priest, (which is no shadow of things to come) though it were
Jewish, would become unlawful to Christians.

2. The names of those rites and ceremonies, which were most Jewish, and are
grown damnable to Christians, may still be lawfully used by Christians in a
spiritual and refined sense. S. Paul who tells that the Circumcision of the
Jews is become so unlawful, that if it be used by Christians (with an opinion
of the necessity aforesaid) it forfeits all their hopes of salvation by Christ,
Col. 2. 2. uses the word Circumcision frequently, particularly in that very
Chapter, Ver. 11. In whom ye Christians, are circumcised, See p. 149.

3. The word Priest is not a Jewish name, that is, not peculiar to the Jewish
Ministry. For Melchisedeck who was not of Aarons Order or Priesthood, is
called a Priest by S. Paul to the Hebrews often: and our Savior is a Priest
after the Order of Melchisedeck: and the Ministers of the Gospel are called
Priests by the Prophet Esaias 66. 21. Ier. 33. 17. where they prophecy of the
times of the Gospel, as will appear by the Context, and ancient Exposition.
Lastly, S. Paul, where he defines a Minister of the Gospel, as well as of the
Law, as has been proved (p. 78. of the Ration.) calls him Priest, Heb. 5. and
8. Chap. To sum up all then; That name which was not Jewish but common to
others; that name which was frequently and constantly used by Primitive
Christians; that name, by which the Prophets foretell that the Ministers of the
Gospel shall be called: Lastly, that name by which S. Paul calls them, may not
only lawfully, but safely, without any just ground of offense to sober men, be
used still by Christians, as a fit name for the Ministers of the Gospel: and so
they may be still called, as they are by the Church of England in her Rubric,
Priests.

Page 236. lin. 13. Add this. This Sacrament should be received fasting. 3.
Counc. of Carthag. can. 29. And so was the practice of the universal Church,
says S. Aug. Epist. 118. which is authority enough, (in things of this nature,
namely, circumstances of time, etc.) to satisfy any that do not love
contention, 1 Cor. 11. 16. Yet it will not be amiss in a word to show the
reasonableness of this Catholic usage. And the first reason may be this,
because our minds are clearest, our devotion quickest, and so we fittest to
perform this most high service, when we are are in our Virgin spittle, as
Tertullian expresses it. A Second is this; it is for the honor of so high a
Sacrament, that the precious body of Christ should first enter into the
Christians mouth before any other meat. S. Aug. Ep. 118. It is true, that our
Savior gave it to his Disciples after Supper; but dare any man quarrel the
universal Church of Christ, for receiving it fasting? This also pleased the
holy Ghost, that, for the honor of so great a Sacrament, the body of Christ
should first enter into the Christians mouth, before all other meats. Neither,
because our Savior gave it to his Disciples after Supper, will it necessarily
follow that we should receive it so, mingling the Sacrament with our other
meats: a thing which the Apostle seems to reprehend, 1 Cor. 11. there was a
special reason for our Saviors doing so, his Supper was to succeed immediately
to the Passover; and therefore as soon as that was over, he instituted his;
and that he might the more deeply imprint the excellency of this mystery into
the minds and hearts of his Disciples, he would give it them the last thing he
did, before he went from them to his Passion, knowing that dying men's words
move much: but he no where appointed what hour and time it should afterward be
received; but left that to be ordered by them that were after his departure, to
settle the Churches, namely, the Apostles, and accordingly we find S. Paul 1
Cor. 11. rectifying some abuses, and prescribing some rules for the better
ordering of some Rites and Ceremonies about the Sacrament, and promising when
he should come, to settle an order for the rest, verse 34. from whom S. Aug.
seems to think that the Catholic Church received this custom of receiving the
Sacrament fasting, Ep. 118.

Of the Translation of the PSALMS in the Book of Common Prayer.
THe PSALMS in our English Liturgy are according to the Translation set forth
in the latter part of King Henry the Eighths Reign, after that Petrus Galatinus
had brought in the pronouncing and writing the name Jehovah, never before used
or heard of in any Language: which is used in this our Translation. Psalm. 33.
12. and Psalm. 83. 18.

The Bishops Bible (set forth in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and
used in Churches till the New Translation under King James,) though a much
different Translation from the former in other parts, yet retains the same
Psalms without any alteration. And therefore whereas it has Notes upon all the
rest of the Books both of the Old and New Testament, it has none at all upon
the Psalms, not so much as references to parallel places.

The Reason hereof I suppose was to avoid offending the people, who were used
to that Translation, and to whom the Psalms were more familiar than any other
part of the Bible. As S. Hierom in his Edition of the Latin Bible retains the
Psalms of the Old Latin Translation out of the Septuagint, though himself also
had translated them juxta Hebraicam Veritatem, as they are extant at the end of
the Eighth Tome of his works.

This Our Translation was doubtless out of the Hebrew. And though it ties not
it self so strictly to the Letter and words of the Hebrew as the Later
Translations would seem to do, but takes the Liberty to vary a little for the
smoothing of the Language: yet it holds to the sense and scope more than some
suppose it does, and many times much more than those who would seem to stick so
close to the Letter.

Some have had a conceit that this Translation was out of the Septuagint, or
(which is all one in effect) out of the Vulgar Latin. But the Contrary is
evident and will appear to any man that shall compare them but in any one Psalm.

In one Case indeed this Translation may seem to follow the LXX and Vulgar
Latin against the Hebrew, namely, in addition of some words or Clauses,
sometimes whole Verses, not found in the Hebrew. But this Case excepted, where
it once agrees with the LXX and Vulgar Latin against the Hebrew, it forty times
agrees with the Hebrew against them.

And for these Additions. 1. They were made to Satisfy them who had missed
those words, or Sentences in the former English Translations, finding them in
the Greek or Latin. See the Preface to the English Bible in folio 1540.

2. In that Edition 1540. they were put in a different Character from the rest,
and in some Later Editions between two hooks [] of which there are even still
some remainders, though now for the most part neglected.

3. Neither does this our Translation always follow the LXX. And Vulgar Lat.
Even in Additions. As for Example.

Not Psalm 1.5. in the repetition of the words [(...)]

Not Psalm 68. 5. [(...)]

Not Psalm 125.3. [(...)]

Not Pslam 138.4. [(...)]

Not Psalm 145. in the verse put in between the 13, and 14. [(...) ] though it
may seem to be wanting in our present Hebrew Copies, all the rest of the verses
of this Psalm going in the order of the Alphabet, and this verse which should
begin with (^) only wanting in our present Copies, but found or supposed by the
LXX to begin with [(...)]

4. The Additions are not very many wherein it does follow them. The chiefest
which I have observed are these: Psalm. Ver. 1. 5. [from the face of the Earth,]
2. 11. [unto him,] 12. [right,] 3. 2. [His,] 4. 8. [and Oil,] 7. 12. [strong
and patient,] 11. 5. [the poor,] 13. 6. [yea I will praise the Name of the Lord
most Highest,] 14. 4. [no not one,] 14. 5, 6, 7. [Their throat is an open
Sepulcher, etc. before their eyes,] 9. [Even where no fear was,] 19. 12. [my,]
14. [all way,] 22. 1. [look upon me,] 31. [my,] and ver. 32. [the Heavens,] 23.
6. [thy] 24. 4. [his neighbor,] 28. 3. [neither destroy me,] 29. 1. [bring
young Rams unto the Lord,] the Hebrew words (...) twice translated, 30. 7.
[from me,] 33. 3. [unto him,] and ver. 10. [and casts out the counsels of
Princes,] 36. 12. [All,] 37. 29. [*the unrighteous shall be punished,] Edit.
1540. v. 37. [his place,] 38. 16. [Even mine Enemies,] v.22. [God,] 41. 1. [And
needy,] ver.11. [And Amen,] 42. 12. [That trouble me,] 45. 10. [wrought about
with diverse colors,] 12. [God] in the Latin only not in the Greek. 47. 6.
[Our,] 48. 3. [of the Earth,] 50. 21. [wickedly,] 51. 1. [Great,] 55. 13.
[peradventure] ver.25. [O Lord,] 65. 1. [In Jerusalem,] 67. 1. [And be merciful
unto us,] 71. 7. [that I may sing of thy glory,] 73. 12. [I said,] ver.27. [In
the Gates of the daughter of Sion.] 77. 23. [Our,] 85. 8. [Concerning me,] 92.
12. [of the house,] 95. 7. [the Lord,] 108. 1. [my heart is ready] repeated.
111. 11.[Praise the Lord for the returning again of Aggeus and Zachary the
Prophets,] Edit. 1540. 115. 9. [thou house of] 118. 2. [That He is gracious
and] 119. 97. [Lord,] 132. 4. [Neither the Temples of my head to take any
rest,] 134. 1. [Now] ver.2. [Even in the Courts of the house of our God,] 136.
27. [O give thanks unto the Lord of Lords: for his mercy endures for ever,]
being in the Latin only, not in the Greek. 137. 1. [Thee O] 145. 15. [The
Lord,] 147. 8. [And herb for the use of men,] 148. 5.[He spoke the word and
they were made.]

For Psalm. 58. 8. Or ever your Pots, etc. I conceive our Translation to agree
very well both with the sense and letter of the Hebrew. Neither does it go
alone: but so translated both Pagnin a little before, and Castellio since; who
both keep as close to the sense of the Hebrew, and Pagnin to the letter also,
as any that I have observed.

Pagnin ( whom Vetablus follows) Antequam sentiant lebetes vestri ignem rhamni:
sicut care cruda, sic ira ut turbo perdat cum.

Castellio. Ac veluti si cujus ollae spinas [Annot. ignem qui fieri solet ex
spinis] nondum senserint: sic illi tanquam crudi per iram vexentur. [Annot.
Pereant aetate immatura, ut si carnes ex olla extrahantur semicrudae.]

See also Calvin in Loc.

For Psalm. 105. 28. They were not obedient, etc.

Herein our Translators follow the LXX. who (supposing this to be spoken of the
Egyptians, translate the Hebrew words (...) (leaving out the negative particle)
(...) Et exacerbaverunt sermones ejus (or according to another reading (...),
quia exacerbaverunt) which is all one with our English [ They were not
obedient] that is, they rebelled, or were disobedient, (...) and (...)
exchanging significations.

And this reading is also followed by the Syriack, the Arabic and the
Ethiopick translations.

Only (which is strange) the Vulgar Latin, which usually in the Psalms is a
mere translation of the LXX, yet here differs from them, and puts in the
Negative Particle according to the Hebrew. And in three other things in the
same Hemistick it differs not only from the LXX, but also from the Hebrew, and
from S. Hierome, and from all other Translations that I have seen. viz.
Altering the Verb from the plural number to the singular. 2. supposing Deus to
be the Nominative case to it. And so 3. making the Pronoun affixed to be
reciprocal. Et non exacerbavit sermones suos.

See Mr. HOOKERS Eccles. Polity, lib. 5. Sect. 19. page 214. where he defends
this our Translation thus far at least, that it does not contradict the present
Hebrew, as (it seems) was objected.

The Epistles and Gospels in our Liturgy seem to follow Coverdales
Translation, Printed 1540.

Here ends the book of Common Prayer, truly so called, being composed by the
public spirit, and prescribed by the public Authority of the Church, for the
public service and worship of God, to be offered up to him, in the name and
spirit of the Church, by those who are ordained for men in things pertaining to
God, to which every person of the Church, may according to S. Paul, say Amen
with understanding, because he knows before hand to what he is to say, Amen.
(...). Come all together to the same prayer, let there be one Common Prayer,
one and the same mind and Spirit. Ignat. ad Magnesianos.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.
I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also.

Obsecrationem sacerdotalium Sacramenta respiciamus, quae ab Apostolis tradita
in toto Orb, at que in omni Catholica Ecclesia uniformiter celebrantur, ut
legem Credendi, lex statuat supplicandi. GENNAD. Eccles. Dogm. 30.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
THe Absolution by the Priest alone standing, why? page.13, 19, 20. Remission of
sins by the Priest; what it is not, p. 15, 16. What it is, p. 16. Three parts
of Repentance, p. 17. The several forms of Absolution in the Service, p. 18.
All in sense and virtue the same, p. 19. Advent Sundays, p. 98. Ashwednesday,
125. Caput Jejunii, ibid. Dies Cinerum, ibid. The solemnity then used upon
sinners, p. 126. S. Andrew, p. 198. All Saints, why kept, p. 206. Ascension-day
has proper Lessons and Psalms, p. 162. the Antiquity thereof, p. 170.
B.
Of Baptism, p. 245. S. John 3. 5. expounded, p. 246. The Benediction or
Consecration of the Water in Baptism, used only for reverence and decency, not
for necessity, p. 247. Not thought necessary by the Church, p. 248. Infants to
be Baptized, ibid. etc. Interrogatories at Baptism ancient and reasonable, p.
250, and 253. The ancient Abrenunciations in Baptism, p. 251, etc.
Abrenunciation not absolutely necessary to Baptism, p. 256. The ancient
Exorcisms what, ibid. Observed Uniformiter in Universo Mundo, ibid. Names given
at Baptism, why, p. 257. Susceptores, Godfathers, p. 255. their promises bind
the child, ibid. Dipping or sprinkling sufficient in Baptism, p. 257. Thrice
dipping of old to signify the Mystery of the Trinity, ibid. Why afterward but
once, 258. vide Font. The sign of the Cross used in Baptism, and in the
Forehead, and why, p. 259. The Necessity and Efficacy of Baptism, p. 245.
Guardians contract for Pupils, p. 255. He that is Baptized may Baptize in case
of necessity, p. 261. Baptism ministered at Easter, vide Easter. Baptism is
Janua Sacramentorum, p. 288. Of Private Baptism, p. 260. in case of necessity
in any decent place, ibid. Justified against Objections, p. 261, etc. Of the
Blessing, by whom to be pronounced, p. 76. How to be received, p. 77. God
blesses by the mouth of his Minister, p. 78. The Priest giving the Blessing
comes down from the Altar, and why, p. 244. Bidding of prayers, p. 220.
Ancient, p. 223. No prayer before Sermon but the Lords Prayer, p. 220. Nothing
said before Sermon of old, but Gemina salutatio, ibid. Restraint of private
prayers in public, necessary, p. 221. and 222. Bidding of Prayers practiced by
Bishop Latymer, Jewel, etc. p. 223. Of Burial and the Rites thereof, p. 303,
etc. An Ancient custom after Burial to go to the Holy Communion, p. 306.
Funeral Doles an ancient custom, p. 307.
C.
Of Churches, Chapels dedicated to Gods service, p. 316. Of Churches, Chancels
and the Fashion of Churches, p. 322. Church divided into the Nave and Chancel,
p. 322, 323. Nave what it is, p. 323. Chancel why so called, ibid. (...) what.
(...) what. (...) what, p. 325. Chorus Cantorum. what, ibid. Soleas, (...). The
Sanctuary what, p. 326. Absis, (...), Altar, p. 326, etc. (...), what, 329.
(...), what, ibid. Diaconicum what, 330. The respect given to Altars, p. 331.
Consecration of Churches and Chapels. See Dedication. Mother Church why so
called, p. 258. A description of the Church, p. 75. What meant by Curates,
ibid. The Collects why so called, p. 67. called of old Missae, Blessings,
Sacramenta, and why, 68. by whom Composed, p. 69. The Object of them, ibid.
Their Form and proportion, p. 70. The Matter of them. p. 71. Of the Collect for
Peace, 73. for Grace, 74. for Kings, ibid. for the Church, p. 75. Of the
Collects from Septuagesima to Easter, 139. From Trinity to Advent, p. 195.
Common Prayers set and prescribed, and why, p. 1. But One and the same in the
whole National Church, p. 2. The public prayers of the Church called the
Apostles Prayers: why, p. 4. Essentials only of public worship appointed under
the Gospel, p. 3. Public Service more acceptable than private, p. 7. and why,
p. 8. Accepted of God not only for the present, but absent alsoon just cause,
p. 9. Strange worship, what, p. 6, 7. Divine Service may be said privately. See
Service. The Communion Service, p. 207. Second Service, ibid. to be read at the
holy Table, ibid. The Church by reading the Second Service there, keeps her
ground, ibid. why so called, ibid. Much of the order of the Communion Service
set forth out of Dionysius Eccles. Hierar, p. 215, 216. The thrice holy
triumphant Song, p. 233. The Consecration of the holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper in what words it consists, p. 234. The Bread and Wine common before the
Consecration, p. 235. The Priest to receive the Sacrament first, ibid. The
Sacrament to be delivered the people in their hands, ibid. Kneeling, 236. Amen
to be said by the Communicant, and the Reason of it, ibid. The Sacrament of old
delivered to the people at the Railes of the holy Table, ibid. Thrice a year
every Parishioner to Communicate, at Easter by name, p. 237. In the Primitive
Church they communicated every day, ibid. How this failed, p. 238. Care of the
Church to reduce the Primitive Order, p. 239. Why at Easter, ibid. Bread and
Wine remaining after the Consecration how to be disposed of, p. 241. the
Angelical Hymn, when sung, and why, p. 242, 243. It was made of old by
Ecclesiastical Doctors, the penalty of refusing it, p. 244. (...), why so
called, ibid. Washing of hands before the Consecration, why, 218. This
Sacrament to be received fasting. Commandments repeated at the
Communion-Service, p. 209. Of the Communion of the sick, p. 286. That the
Communion is not to be denied to persous dangerously sick appears by the 13
Can. Con. Nice, p. 287. The several degrees of penance for wasting sins in the
Greek Church, p. 293, 294, etc. (...), who, ibid. (...), who p. 294. (...)
Ferula, what, p. 293. (...), what, p. 296, 297. How much of the
Communion-Service shall be used at the delivery of the Communion to the sick,
in case there had been that day a Communion, p. 302. Confession by Priest and
people with an humble voice, p. 1^, 13. Service begins with it, and why, p. 13.
Churching of women, and the Rites thereof. p. 307, 308. Of the 121 Psalm, and a
doubt about one expression therein cleared, p. 308. Women to be Church'd must
offer, p. 313. To be veiled, and why, p. 308, etc. Chrysomes, what, p. 155. Of
Commination, p. 314. Of Amen in the Commination, and what it means, ibid.
Confirmation when to be administered, and why then, p. 262, 263. A Godfather to
witness the Confirmation, p. 265. Confirmation the act of the Bishop, ibid.
Imposition of hands the most Ancient and Apostolical Rite of Confirmation, p.
267. The benefit of Confirmation, p. 267, etc. To continue in the Church while
Militant, p. 272. A Fundamental, ibid. The Apostles Creed, upon what occasion
made, p. 49. to be said daily twice, Morn. and Even. p. 51. by Priest and
People; Why, p. 53. Standing, why, p. 54. Athanasius Creed, p. 54. When used,
and why, p. 55. The Nicene Creed, why so called, p. 214. called also the
Constantinopolitan, and why, p. 215. When begun to be used at the
Communion-Service, ibid. why read after the Epistle and Gospel, ibid.
Christmas Day, p. 101. The Proper Psalms for it, p. 101,102,103. The frame of
the Church Service that day admirable, p. 104. The Antiquity of the day, and
upon the 25 of December, p. 105. Candlemas, p. 200. Procession peculiar to it,
ibid. The Antiquity thereof, p. 201, 202.
D.
Of the Dedication of Churches and Chapels to Gods service, p. 316. Reasons
why, 318, etc. The advantage of having our Services performed in such places,
p. 320, 321. That Service may be said privately; and why, p. 333, etc. The
Diptychs, p. 217. Doxology, or Glory be to the Father, etc. p. 25, 32. Dominica
Vacat, or Vacans, which, and why so called, p. 190. Dominica refectionis, p.
132. Dominica in Albis, or post Albas rather, why so called, p. 155.
E.
Ejaculations commended by S. Aug. p. 62, 63. Of Ember-weeks, p. 128. which
they are, ibid. Why Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, observed in them, ibid. On
Easter Day special Hymns instead of the usual Invitatory, p. 141. Proper Psalms
for it, p. 143. and proper Lessons, 145, etc. The Antiquity thereof, p. 147.
Contention in the Church, when to be kept, p. 148. The determination of the
Nicene Council about it, ibid. How to find out Easter, p. 150. Monday and
Tuesday in Easter-week, why kept, p. 150. Easter solemnized of old Fifty days
together, 151. Baptism ministered anciently at no times but the Eves of Easter
and Whitsuntide, p. 153. The new Baptized come to Church in White Vestures with
Lights before them, ibid. Baptism ministered all times of the year, p. 154.
(...) Easter, p. 175. Epiphany used of old for Christmas Day, p. 115. Mistakes
upon the Identity of the word, ibid. In Latin Epiphany, why, ibid. Of the
Antiquity thereof, p. 116. Of the Sundaies after the Epiphany, p. 116, etc.
Epistles, p. 92. of the Antiquity and fitness of the Epistles and Gospels, p.
92, 93. Epistles from Trinity to Advent, and the reason of their choice, 185,
etc.
F.
Fast. See Lent, Good Friday, etc. If a Fast for an Holyday fall upon an
Holyday, then the Fast is to be kept the day before that, p. 114. To Feast on
Friday is not to hold Communion with the Catholic Church, but with the Turks,
p. 88. The Week of Fasts, which, and why so called, p. 134. Festivals. S.
Andrew, p. 198. Conversion of S. Paul, p. 199. why kept rather than the day of
his death, ibid. S. Philip, p. 202. S. James, p. 204. The Apostles in the
Primitive times had not several days of Solemnity, says Durandus, not probably
though, p. 202. One day for all, ibid. In the Latin Church the Calends or first
of May. In the Greek the Feast of S. Peter and S. Paul, ibid. No Fast on S.
Philip and S. James, why, p. 204. S. John Baptist his Birth celebrated, and
why, p. 204. His beheading, 205. S. Michael, and All Angels, why a Feast then,
p. 205. Tutelar Angel of the Church of the Jews, and so of the Christians, p.
206. All Saints why kept, p. 206. S. Stephen, p. 106. 109. S. John, H.
Innocents. The Observation of Saints Days, ancient, p. 107. The Days of Saints
deaths kept, rather than of their Births or Baptism; why, p. 108, ^^9 ^ome Holy
days have Fasts, and some (...) 111, 113, 114. Purification of S. Mary, p. 200.
Feast of Circumcision or New Years day, p. 110. Of a later institution, ibid.
Great solemnities have some days after them in Prorogationem Festi, ibid. Font.
Baptism to be at the Font, p. 258. Why so called, ibid. placed in the
Church Porch, Significantly, ibid. After, in Churches, but not all; but only in
the City Church, hence called the Mother Church, ibid. in high Veneration, p.
259.
G.
Glory be to the Father, etc. is both Hymn and Creed, p. 25. A fit Close for
any religious Services, ibid. Glory be to the Father, etc. said at the ends of
Psalms; never quarrelled by any till Arius, 32. Glory be to the Father, etc. in
the Litany. p. 85. Glory be to thee O Lord. Reason of saying it when the Gospel
is named, p. 213. Thanks be to God for this Gospel. Used to be said after the
Gospel; and the Reason of it, p. 214. Godfathers, p. 255. Good Friday a most
strict Fast. Why so called, p. 137. The Gospel out of S. John, why upon that
day, ibid. The Antiquity thereof, p. 138. Gospel. R^tes used at the reading of
the Gospel, p. 213, etc. Standing at the Gospel, ibid. To kiss the Book the
Fashion in some places, p. 214. Of Gospels, and the reason of their choice, p.
93. Reason of saying, Glory be to thee, O Lord, at the Gospel, 213, etc. Of the
Gospels from Trinity to Advent, p. 183.
H.
Holy Days, p. 88. They are either Fasting-days or Festivals, p. 89. Are of
excellent use, ibid. Of the particular Festivals, p. 90, 91, 92. Holy week,
which, and why so called, p. 134. Called also Great Week. ibid. Holy Table; so
called considering the Eucharist as a Sacrament, p. 327. The Altar so called
considering the Eucharist a Sacrifice, ibid. And so it is called Heb. 13. 10.
and S. Matthew. 5. 23. p. 328. Altars always had in high estimation, p. 330. The
Holy Tables set where the Altars stood, ib. Of Hymns; the Antiquity of them, p.
42. Most properly to be Sung, p. 44. And why, ibid. The profit of it, ibid.
Standing the proper posture of Hymns, ibid. Why, 45. Te Deum framed
miraculously by S. Ambrose and Aug. ib. Why Hymns after Lessons. 46. And why
those appointed, ibid. Magnificat, Nunc Dimittis quarreled at. Answered, p.
47.
L.
Lent. The Antiquity thereof, p. 122. In imitation of Moses, Elias, and our
Savior, p. 123. Why not kept immediately after Christ's Baptism, p. 123,124.
Why called Lent, p. 125. In Lent the glory of the Altar's hid; why, 48.
Benedicite then used, p. 49. Te Deum, Benedictus, Magnificat, Nunc Dimittis may
be said more often. Excepting in Lent and Advent why, p. 48. The Litany, p. 79.
Used in Processions, why, ib. Used at the Communion, Ordinations, etc. ib.
Probable to be derived from the Apostles Times, p. 80. Donum Precum, ib. Of the
Litany of our Church, 81. The Sum of it, 81, 82. The Nature of it. Short
Ejaculations, 82. The former part of the Litany may be said by a Deacon; as in
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches. The Later peculiarly by the Priest; and why,
84, 85. Secretae. what they are. The reason of them, 86. The Litany when to be
said; and why then, 87, 88. The Litany a distinct Service, p. 208. Lords
Prayer, p. 22. The frequent use thereof: why, ib. The Doxology omitted in the
Lords Prayer: why, p. 23. But deliver us from evil, Amen. Said by the people,
when and why, ib. Give us this day our daily Bread, understood by the Fathers
of the Eucharist, 237, 238. No prayer before Sermon, but the Lords Prayer, p.
220. The Lessons. Of the choice of them out of the Old and New Test. p. 33, 39.
Mingling Services of diverse sorts, a wise Constitution of the Church: why, 34.
At the Reading of the Lessons the Minister is to turn to the people, 35, 36.
The Prophet Esaias read last before Christmas, and why, p. 40. A several course
in reading Lessons: Ordinary, p. 39. for Sundaies, p. 40. for Saints days, p.
41. The Salutations. The Lord be with you. Of the use of them, p. 56. And with
thy Spirit, ib. Excellent Incentives to Charity, 57. Let us pray: Often used,
and why, p. 58, 59. Lord have mercy, etc. A short Litany. Frequently used in
Ancient Liturgies, p. 59. Seasonable at all parts of the Service, 60. Set
before the Lords Prayer; why, p. 61.
M.
Of Marriage. Three ends of it, p. 273. The Contract of marriage called by S.
Aug. Votorum Solennitas, ib. The Bride given by Father or Friend; why, p. 274,
etc. The Ring a pledge of fidelity, 275. Why upon the fourth finger of the left
Hand, ib. With my body I thee worship: the meaning of it, p. 275, etc. The 128
Psalm tbe Epithalamium used by the Jews at Nuptials, 278. Devout Prayer and the
H. Communion very useful and highly Christian at Marriages, 278, etc. The Jews
religious Solemnities at Marriages, ib. The Primitive Christians used the like
solemnities at Marriages which we do, 279. which the Church received from the
Apostles, ibid. Maunday Thursday, Dies Mandati, why so called, p. 135. Practice
of the Church upon that day, and form of reconciling Penitents, p. 136. Missa
Catechumenorum, p. 209. Morning-Prayer, Litany, and Communion-Service, Three
distinct Services, p. 210, etc. The several places and times of the performance
of them, ib. Nine in the Morning the usual hour for the Communion-Service; and
why, 212. Morning and Even. Prayer to be said daily, p. 2. and 4. Public
Prayers of the Church called the Apostles Prayers: why, p. 4.
O.
Ornaments to be used in time of Divine Service: and why, p. 335. Offerings,
Oblations, an high part of Gods Service, p. 224. A duty of the Gospel: proved,
225, 226, etc. When most necessary, 226, 127. Offerings at the Churching of
women, p. 313. The Octave of Christmas, p. 110. The Octave or Utas of High
Feasts observed by our Forefathers, p. 154. Upon which, some part of the
service of the Feast, repeated: Why Eight days allowed to High^ Feasts, 231.
How the Prefaces for those Eight days can be properly used on each of them, p.
232. See Prefaces.
P.
Priests are the Lords Remembrabrancers, p. 9, 10. Priests bound to say daily
Morning and Evening prayer, p. 2. The Reason of the Priests sometimes Kneeling,
and sometimes standing, p. 65. The Priest giving the Blessing came down from
the Altar and why, p. 244, 245. Priest, what the word signifies. It may be
applied to the Ministers of the Gospel. Reasons why, 337, etc. Priests not a
Jewish name; why, p. 341. Ministers of the Gospel called Priests by the P.
Esaias, ibid. Prefaces proper for some great days, p. 229. An argument that the
Church intends the Prorogation and continuance of those Feasts, ib. How this
Prorogation to be understood, p. 229, 230. Praying with the Spirit. A man may
safely use David's Forms, as being composed by the Spirit, p. 30, and 31. Donum
Precum peculiar to the Apostles times, p. 80. The Psalms read over every
Month, and why, p. 27, 28, etc. Fit for every Temper and Time, p. 30. Sung or
said by Course, by Priest and People; and why, p. 31, 32. Standing, why, p. 32.
Of the Translation of the Psalms in our English Liturgy, p. 344. Objections
against some passages in the Translation of the Psalms, 344, etc.
R.
The Rogation days service and Procession formerly appointed, p. 160. Rogation
week why so called, p. 160. Litanies and Fasting then, ib. The Fast then is
voluntary, ib. No Fast betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide, ibid. Passion Sunday why
so called, p. 133. Palm Sunday why so called, ibid. Low Sunday why so called,
p. 154. Rogation Sunday, p. 160.
S.
Septuagesima Sunday, so called, a consequentia numerandi, p. 120.
Septuagesima, Sexagesima, Quinquagesima, Preparatives to Lent, Regulars fasted
those weeks, p. 120, 121. Secretae, what they are; the reason of them, 86. The
Sermon, when, p. 218. Usually an Exposition of part of the Epistle or Gospel,
etc. of the day, ib. not above an hour long, p. 220. Preachers in their
Expositions appointed to observe the Catholic Interpretation of the old
Doctors, vid. p. 218, 219. Golden Canons about Preachers, p. 220. No Prayer
before the Sermon but the Lords Prayer, ibid. The Divine Service may be said
privately, and the reason why, p. 333.
T.
Trinity Sunday, the Octave of Pentecost, or Dominica vacans, p. 179. how
ancient, ibid. Proper Lessons, p. 180. Of the Sundays after Trinity till
Advent, p. 182. The last Sunday after Trinity a Preparative to Advent has
therefore an Epistle purposely chosen out of the P. Jer. prophesying of Christ's
Advent. p. 188, etc.
V.
Visitation of the sick, p. 281. The Orders of the Church about and at it, ib.
etc. Examination of the Faith of the sick person, p. 282. and of his Life and
Conversation, p. 283. No true Repentance without Restitution, ibid. The sick
person to be admonished to settle his estate, p. 284. and to be liberal to the
poor, p. 285. Sick persons to send for the Priest, p. 298. and to what purpose,
ib. Prisoners anciently Visited by the Archdeacon or Bishop, p. 301. Verses or
Versicles and Responds. The Reason of placing the Verses after the Confession,
etc. and before the Psalms, 24, 25. Versicles and Answers by Priest and People,
a holy emulation, p. 62. Answers of the People, the Benefit of them, p. 63.
Versicles and Resp. p. 311. Some of the Answers are not entire sentences, but
parts or ends of the foregoing Verses, and the Reason why, 312. The word
Viaticum applied to more things beside the Eucharist, p. 287. Only the
Eucharist is Ultimum Viaticum, ibid. Of Vigils turned into Fasts, why, p. 112.
The Venite is an Invitatory Psalm, p. 26. The Vestry, why so called, p. 329.
W.
Whitsunday, p. 170. Appointed of old for solemn Baptism, 172. Why called
Pentecost, ibid. and Whitsunday, p. 173. and why, p. 174. (...), Easter, p.
175. Whitsunday has Proper Lessons and Psalms, ibid. Of the Antiquity of it,
p. 178.
FINIS.
To your Liturgical Demands I make as good Return to you as I am able, on this
wise.
In the Preface, etc.

1. COMMEMORATIONS were the recital of the Names of famous Martyrs and
Confessors, Patriarchs, Bishops, Kings, Great Orthodox Writers, Munificent
Benefactors: which recitation at the Altar took up much time, and those Names
were anciently wont to be read out of DIPTYCHS, or Folded Tables; and tedious
quarrels have been anciently about dispunging some Names out of the DIPTYCHS,
which have run into schisms.

2. SYNODALS were Synodical Constitutions, such as are in Linwood, wont to be
read on Sundays in time of Service, to the great waste of time; and you may
remember that our Canons of Anno 1604. are appointed to be read at least once a
year in all Churches.

3. The PIE, I should suppose did come from (...), or (...). A Table of Order,
how things should be digested and performed. But the Latin word is Pica, which
perhaps came from the ignorance of Friars, who have thrust in many barbarous
words into Liturgies. I have heard some say, it came from Litera Picata, a
great black Letter in the beginning of some new order in the Prayer, and among
the Printers that term is still used, the Pica Letter, as I am informed.

4. No wonder the USE of SARVM, YORK, LINCOLN, HEREFORD, BANGOR are mentioned.
For the Missals and Breviaries of the Roman Church were of diverse models in
several Countries and several Diocesses. The Trident. Council first endeavored
to bring them all into one shape, yet that order was not obeyed till Anno 1568.
under Pope Pius the Vth, yet is not observed to this day; the Spaniards in some
places keeping the Mozarabique Form, the Premonstratenses another, and sundry
besides. Nay, that Church has altered the Breviaries of Pius the V^ and new
Corrections have come forth under Clement the VIII. 1598. and what have been
done since I know not. But why the use of those five Churches? Perhaps that was
accidental, that the diversities of them were more signal than others. (Some
Historians mention Osmundus the Bishop of Salisbury and Chancellor for the
Compiler of the Use of Sarum, about Anno 1070. or after) yet since we read of
no Use of Canterbury, Winton, Ely, perhaps those places observed the true Roman
Breviaries, and the other five mentioned, were discrepant Dialects from the
Original Breviary. However they are called Uses and Customs, not Appointments
from Provincial Synods.

5. The DIVISION of the whole Bible into several Sections has varied
infinitely: It was a long time parted into Titles; for S. Matthew. 355. for S.
Mark. 335. for S. Luke. 343. S. John. 332, etc. See for this Sixth. Senenf. l.
3. p. 158. Some have thought that the present distinction of Chapters generally
now used, was by Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury, 1060. because sooner you
shall not meet with it; and after him all Commentators and Schoolmen use it;
and Rabbi Kimchi and other Learned Jews from that time, usurp the same
partition of Chapters on the Old Testament: you may read in Goodwin, that
Lanfranc took much care to procure sound and incorrupt Copies of the Bible.
Look more for this in Possevines Bibliotheca. Yet (according to Io. Bale)
Steph. Lancton Archbishop of Canterbury, divided the Bible into Chapters about
Anno 1224. But for the deduction of all Chapters into Verses I am sure it was
the work of Robert Stephens, Anno 1550. so his son Henry Stephens testifies in
his Epistle before the Greek Concordance. See also Sir Henry Spelman Gloss. in
Verb. Heptaticus.

6. EMBER-WEEKS. The reason of the name is very uncertain. Some derive Ember
from (...), b was interposed as from (...). As Lent, a Fast of weeks, so these,
a Fast of days. I believe it a Saxon word. Surely I have read it in Gower or
Chaucer, our old Poets. Some think it betokens Fasting. But after my small
skill in Saxon Terms, Em is a brother, Bert is noble or very worthy; this put
together is Hebdomada Embert, the week of the noble or worthy brothers. But
look better into it.

7. AFALDISTORY, is the Episcopal Seat or Throne within the Chancel, for in the
barbarous Language of that middle age, Falda is a place shut up, a Fold; and
Faldistorium, is Cathedra Episcopi intrasepta Cancelli; so I find in many,
particularly in Sir Hen. Spelman.

8. What should a CANTICLE be but the praise of God, not only to be read, but
sometimes to be sung. By the Order of the Codex Canonum, Can. 121. the
Laodicean Fathers appointed an Hymn or Canticle interserted between the
Lessons, Te Deum, Magnificat, etc.

9. One direct answer cannot be rendered what PRIESTS and CLERKS together are.
1. The chief Rector of a Parish (called the Cardinal Priest of old, quia
incardinatus in Beneficio) was (...), and the rest under him his Clerks. 2.
Where there were Cantores, the Laodicean Council, Can. 119. called (...), who
only till our Reformation were to sing in the Church, and none else; these were
the Priest his Clerks. 3. Where there were Chantries, as there were in most
Churches of England, their assisting the Rector of the Church, made up that
form of speech, The Priest and Clerks.

10. You tell me News, that a Latin Copy of our Service Book, printed 2. Eliz.
has in it an Office for a Communion at burials ( Celebratio Coenae Domini in
Funebribus, etc.) It is a Translation of some private pen, not licensed by
Authority, as I guess; Communions by the direction of our Service are joined
with Morning Prayers, burials are mostly in the Afternoon. Offertories at
Burials did last to be frequent (if they were considerable Funerals) to the
middle of King James his Reign, the Ministers of Parishes keeping up the profit
of oblations as long as they could; and these Offertories at Funerals are
spoken of in the first Liturgy of King Edward the VI.

This is as much as comes into my head at present, enquire of them that are
more skilful, but none shall be more willing to observe you, etc.

FINIS.
It is not to be forgotten, though it be forgotten, that who ever gave any
Lands or Endowments to the Service of God, gave it in a formal writing, as now
adays betwixt Man and man, Sealed and Witnessed: and the tender of the Gift
was super Altar by the Donor on his knees B. Andrews Notes upon the Liturgy.

The Form of CONSECRATION of a CHVRCH or CHAPEL. and of the place of
Christian Burial.

Exemplified by the R. R. Father in God LANCELot ANDREWS late L. Bishop of
Winchester.



Bishop Andrews Form of Consecration of a Church or Chapel, etc.
Consecratio CAPELLAE JESUS, ET COEMETERII, PER LANCELOTVM Episcopum Winton.
JVxta Southamptoniensem villam Ecclesia Beatae Mariae collapsa cernitur solis
Cancellis ad saeros usus superstitibus: paucae aliquot aedes ibi in propinqua
part numerantur; caetera Parochianorum multitudo hinc inde sparsim inhabitant
in villis, tum loci longinquo intervallo, tum aestuario long periculoso divisi
ab Ecclesia. Ex ea accedendi difficultate non profanae modo plebeculae animos
facile invasit misera negligentia atque dispretio divini cultus, sed and viri
probi sedulique pietatis cultores remoram in trajectu saepe experti sunt, hand
ipso quidem capitum discrimine eluctabilem; consortem hujus infortunii cum se
factum sentiret (dum ibi loci familiam poneret) Vir strenuus Richardus Smith
Armiger, heroicos plane animos gestans, atque inspiratos de Coelo, commune hoc
Religionis dispendium privatis quingentarum aliquot libraram expensis (aut plus
eo) redemit, and Capellam egregiam, quam Deo aivinisque off.ciis dicari supplex
vovet, in altera part fluminis magnifice extruit.

Spectato probatoque Capellae hujus Jesus ^mni adparatu, adest tandem
Reverendissimus in Christo pater, Honourandissimus Lancelotus, Episcopus
Wintoniensis, Septembris 17. Anno I620. Hora octava matutina aut circiter; erat
autem dies Dominicus: Episcopus Capellam statim ingressus induit se
pontificalbus, quem secuti itidem (qui ipsi a sacris domesticis aderant,)
Matthaeus and Christopherus Wren, SS. Theol. Bacc. Sacerdotalibus induuntur;
Egressus dein cum illis Episcopus, convenarum magna stipante caterva,
Fundatorem affari orditur in haec fere verba.

Captain Smith, you have been an often and earnest Suitor to me, that I would
come hither to you: now that we are come hither to you, what have you to say to
us?

Tum ille praefata humi^lime Reverentia schedulam porrigit, quam suo nomine
recitari cupit per Willielm, Cole, qui Episcopo a Registris erat: eam ille (ad
nutum Episcopi) clara voce sic perlegit.

IN the Name of Richard Smith of Peer-tree in the County of Southampton
Esquire, Right Reverend Father in God, I present unto you the state of the
Village of Weston, and the Hamlets, Itchin, Wolston, Ridgeway, and the part of
Bittern Manor (being all of the Parish of S. Mary's, near Southampton in the
Diocese of Winton) as well in his own, as in the name of the Inhabitants of the
said Village, Hamlets, etc. wherein are many Households, and much people of all
sorts, who not only dwell far from the Church, but are also divided from the
same by the great River of Itchin, where the passage is very broad, and often
dangerous; and very many times on the days appointed for Common Prayer, and
that Service of God, so tempestuous, as the River cannot be passed; and so the
people go not over at all, or if any do, yet they both go and return back in
great danger, and sometimes not the same day. Besides, in the fairest weather,
at their return from Church, they press so thick into the Boat for haste home,
that often it proves dangerous, and ever fearful, especially to women with
child, old, impotent, sickly people, and to young children; many times also
they are forced to baptize their children in private Houses, the water not
being passable; and when they lie sick, they are without comfort to their
souls, and dye without any Ghostly advice or counsel; their own Minister not
being able to visit them, by reason of the roughness of the water, and other
Ministers being some miles off remote from them.

And thus much formerly having been presented to your Predecessor, he
favorably gave leave to the said Richard Smith to erect a Chapel on the
East Side of the said River, at the only proper Cost and Charges of him the
said Richard Smith: which Chapel being now finished with intent and purpose
that it may be dedicated to the worship of God; and that his Holy and Blessed
Name might there be honored and called upon, by the said R. Smith his Family,
and the Inhabitants aforesaid, who cannot without great danger pass over unto
their Parish Church, I, in the name of the said Richard Smith, and in the names
of them all, do promise hereafter to refuse and renounce to put this Chapel,
or any part of it, to any profane or common use whatsoever; and desire it may
be dedicated and consecrated wholly and only to religious uses, for the Glory
of God, and the Salvation of our Souls.

In which respect he humbly beseeches God to accept of this his sincere intent
and purpose, and he and they are together humble Suitors unto your Lordship, as
Gods Minister, the Bishop and Ordinary of this Diocese, in Gods stead to accept
of this his Free Will offering; and to decree this Chapel to be severed from
all common and profane uses, and so to sever it: as also by the Word of God and
Prayer, and other Spiritual and Religious Duties to dedicate and consecrate it
to the sacred Name of God, and to his Service and Worship only; promising that
we will ever hold it as an holy Place, even as Gods House, and use it
accordingly; and that we will from time to time, and ever hereafter, as need
shall be, see it conveniently repaired, and decently furnished in such sort as a
Chapel ought to be; And that we will procure us some sufficient Clerk, being
in the Holy Order of Priesthood by your Lordship, as Ordinary of that place,
and by your Successors to be allowed and licensed, and unto him to yield
competent Maintenance, to the end that he may take upon him the Cure of the
said Chapel; and duly say divine Service in the same at times appointed, and
perform all other such offices and duties, as by the Canons of that Church, and
the Laws of the Realm every Curate is bound to perform.

Post haec Episcopus.

CAptain Smith is this the Desire of you and your Neighbors?

Quo affirmato, Ille:

In the Name of God let us begin.

Orditur igitur a Psalmo 24.

THe earth is the Lords, and all that is therein, etc.

Alterni vero respondent uterque Sacellanus, and sic deinceps ad finem Psalmi:
dicta autem (...), paulatim se promovet Episcopus ad portam Capellae, atque
recitat e Psalmo 122.

I Was glad when they said unto me, we will go into the House of the Lord. Our
feet shall stand in thy Gates, O Jerusalem.

Substitit it aque prae foribus universa multitudo intrante Episcopo and
Fundatore, cum Sacellanis, qui genua statim flectunt, ubi spectari commode
audirique possint a plebe: atque Episcopus infit.

Let us dedicate and offer up unto God this Place with the same prayer that
King David did dedicate and offer up his: I Chron. 29. 10.

BLessed be thou O Lord our God, and the God of our Fathers for ever and ever,
etc. usque ad finem verse. 18. paucis mutatis. Deinde

MOst glorious God, the Heaven is thy Throne, and the Earth is thy Footstool;
what house then can be built for thee, or what place is there that thou can
rest in? Howbeit we are taught by thy Holy Word, that thy will is not to dwell
in the dark Cloud, but that thy delight has been ever with the Sons of Men; so
that in any place whatsoever, where two or three are gathered together in thy
name, thou art in the midst of them; But specially in such places as are set
apart and sanctified to thy name, and to the memory of it, there thou have
said, thou will vouchsafe thy gracious Presence after a more special manner,
and come to us and bless us.

Wherefore in all Ages of the world, thy Servants have separated certain places
from all profane and common uses, and hallowed unto thy Divine Worship and
Service, either by inspiration of thy blessed Spirit, or by express Commandment
from thine own mouth.

By inspiration of thy holy Spirit. So did thou put into the heart of thy
Holy Patriarch Jacob to erect a stone in Bethel to be an house to thee, which
act of his thou did call for, and highly allow of.

By express Commandme^t from thine own mouth. So did Moses make thee the
Tabernacle of the Congregation in the Desert, which thou did honor by
covering it with a Cloud, and filling it with thy Glory.

And after, when it came into the heart of thy servant David to think it was in
no wise fitting that himself should dwell in an house of Cedar, and the Ark of
God remain but in a Tabernacle, thou did testify with thine own mouth, that
in that David was so minded to build a House to thy Name, it was well done of
him, to be so minded, though he built it not.

The material Furniture for which house though his Father plentifully prepared,
yet Solomon his Son built it and brought it to perfection. To which House thou
went pleased visibly to send fire from Heaven to consume the Sacrifice, and to
fill it with the Glory of thy presence before all the people.

And after, when for the sins of thy people that Temple was destroyed, thou
did by thy Prophets, Aggai and Zachary (by showing how inconvenient it was
that they should dwell in cieled houses, and let thy house lie waste) stir up
the spirit of Zorobabel, to build thee the second Temple anew: which second
House likewise by the fullness of the Glory of thy presence, thou did show thy
self to like and allow of.

Neither only were thou well pleased with such as did build thee these Temples,
but even with such of the people afterward, as being moved with zeal added
unto their Temple, their Mother Church, lesser places of prayer, by the names
of Synagogues, in every Town throughout the Land; for the Tribes to ascend up
to worship thee, to learn thy holy will and to do it. Which very Act of the
Centurion, to build thy people a Synagogue, thou did well approve and commend
in the Gospel.

And by the bodily presence of thy Son our Savior at the feast of the
Dedication, testified by S. John, did really well allow of, and do honor to
such devout Religious services, as we are now about to perform.

Which also by thy holy Word have taught us, that thine Apostles themselves,
and the Christians in their time, as they had houses to eat and drink in; so
had they also where the whole Congregation of the Faithful came together in one
place, which they expressly called Gods Church, and would not have it despised,
nor abused, nor eaten nor drunken in, but had in great Reverence, being the
very place of their holy Assemblies.

By whose godly examples the Christians in all Ages successively have erected
and consecrated sundry godly houses, for the Celebration of Divine Service and
Worship (Monuments of their Piety and Devotion) as our eyes see this day.

We then as Fellow-Citizens with the Saints and of the Household of God, being
built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the head cornerstone, walking in the steps of their most holy Faith, and
ensuing the examples of these thy Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles have
together with them done the same work (I say) in building and dedicating this
house, as an habitation for thee, and a place for us to assemble and meet
together for the observation of thy Divine Worship, invocation of thy Name,
reading, preaching and hearing thy most holy Word, administering thy most holy
Sacraments; and above all in thy most holy place, the very gate of Heaven upon
earth, as Jacob named it, to do the work of Heaven; to set forth thy most
worthy praise, to laud and magnify thy most glorious Majesty, for all thy
goodness to all men; especially to us of the Household of Faith. Accept
therefore we beseech thee, most gracious Father, of this our bounden duty and
service; accept this for thine house; and because thine Holiness becomes thine
house for ever, sanctify this house with thy gracious presence, which is
erected to the honor of thy most glorious Name.

Now therefore, arise O Lord, and come into this place of thy rest, thou and
the ark of thy strength; Let thine eye be open toward this House day and
night; Let thine ears be ready toward the Prayers of thy children, which they
shall make unto thee in this place, and let thine heart delight to dwell here
perpetually: And whenever thy servants shall make to thee their petitions in
this House, either to bestow thy good graces, and blessings upon them, or to
remove thy punishments and judgments from them; hear them from Heaven thy
dwelling place, the Throne of the glory of thy Kingdom, and when thou hear
have mercy; and grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that here and elsewhere thy
Priests may be clothed with Righteousness, and thy Saints rejoice in thy
Salvation.

And whereas both in the Old and New Testament thou have consecrated the
measuring out and building of a material Church, to such an excellent Mystery,
that in it is signified and presented the fruition of the joy of thy Heavenly
Kingdom, we beseech thee that, in this material Temple made with hands, we may
so serve and please thee in all holy Exercises of Godliness and Christian
Religion, that in the end we may come to that thy Temple on high, even to the
holy places, made without hands, whose Builder and Maker is God; so as when we
shall cease to pray to thee on Earth, we may with all those that have in the
like manner erected such places to thy Name, and with all thy Saints eternally
praise thee in the highest Heavens, for all thy goodness vouchsafed us for a
time here on earth, and laid up for us there in thy Kingdom for ever and ever;
and that for thy dear Sons sake, our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, to whom, etc.

BLessed Father, who have promised in thy holy Law, that in every place where
the remembrance of thy Name shall be put, thou will come unto us and bless us;
according to that thy promise come unto us and bless us, who put now upon this
place the memorial of thy Name, by dedicating it wholly and only to thy Service
and Worship.

Blessed Savior, who in the Gospel, with thy bodily presence, did honor and
adorn the Feast of the dedication of the Temple; at this dedication of this
Temple unto thee be present also, and accept, Good Lord, and prosper the work
of our hands.

Blessed Spirit, without whom nothing is holy, no person or place is sanctified
aright, send down upon this place thy sanctifying power and grace, hallow it,
and make it to thee an holy habitation for ever.

Blessed and glorious Trinity, by whose Power, Wisdom and Love all things are
purged, lightened, and made perfect; enable us with thy Power, enlighten us
with thy Truth, perfect us with thy Grace, that both here and elsewhere
acknowledging the glory of thy eternal Trinity, and in the Power of thy Divine
Majesty worshipping the Unity, we may obtain to the fruition of the glorious
Godhead, Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity to be adored for ever.

God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost accept, sanctify, and
bless this place to the end whereunto, according to his own Ordinance, we have
ordained it, to be a Sanctuary to the most High, and a Church for the living
God: The Lord with his favor ever mercifully behold it, and so send upon it
his spiritual Benediction and Grace, that it may be the House of God to him and
the Gate of Heaven to us. Amen.

Haec precatus Episcopus Baptisterium adit, atque imposita manu ait,

REgard, O Lord, the Supplications of thy Servants, and grant that those
Children that shall be baptized in this Laver of the New birth, may be
sanctified and washed with the Holy Ghost; delivered from thy wrath, received
into the Ark of Christ's Church, receive herein the fullness of Grace, and ever
remain in the number of thy faithful and elect Children.

Suggestum dein:

GRant that thy Holy Word, which from this place shall be preached may be the
savor of life unto life, and as good seed take root and fructify in the
hearts of all that shall hear it.

(...) quoque.

GRant that by thy Holy Word, which from this place shall be read, the hearers
may both perceive and know what things they ought to do, and also may have
Grace and Power to fulfill the same.

Sacram etiam Mensam.

GRant that all they that shall at any time partake at this Table the highest
blessing of all, thy Holy Communion, may be fulfilled with thy Grace and
Heavenly Benediction, and may to their great and endless Comfort obtain
Remission of their sins and all other Benefits of thy Passion.

Locum Nuptiarum.

GRant that such persons as shall be here joined together in the holy estate of
Matrimony by the Covenant of God may live together in holy Love unto their
lives end.

Vniversum denique Pavimentum.

GRant to such bodies as shall be here interred, that they with us, and we with
them, may have our perfect consummation and bliss both in body and soul in
thine everlasting kingdom.

Tum flexis genibus ante sacram Mensam pergit porro.

GRant that this place which is here dedicated to thee by our Office and
Ministry, may also be hallowed by the sanctifying power of thy holy Spirit, and
so for ever continue through thy Mercy, O blessed Lord God, who do live and
govern all things, world without end.

Grant as this Chapel is separated from all other common and profane uses, and
dedicated to those that be sacred only, so may all those be that enter into it.

Grant that all wandering thoughts, all carnal and worldly imaginations, may be
far from them, and all godly and spiritual cogitations may come in their place,
and may be daily renewed and grow in them.

Grant that those thy servants that shall come into this thy holy Temple, may
themselves be made the Temples of the Holy Ghost, eschewing all things contrary
to their profession, and following all such things as are agreeable to the same.

When they pray, that their prayers may ascend up into Heaven into thy
presence, as the Incense; and the lifting up of their hands be as the morning
sacrifice; purify their hearts, and grant them their hearts desire, sanctify
their spirits, and fulfill all their minds, that what they faithfully ask, they
may effectually obtain the same.

When they offer, that their Oblation and Alms may come up as a Memorial before
thee, and they find and feel that with such Sacrifices thou art well-pleased.

When they sing, that their souls may be satisfied as with marrow, and fatness,
when their mouth praises thee with joyful lips.

When they hear, that they hear not as the word of man, but as indeed it is the
Word of God, and not be idle Hearers, but Doers of the same.

Populus interea tacit ingressus in imis substitit, dum haec in Cancellis
agerentur; quibus finitis, seeds quisque suas jussi capessunt, atque ad
solennem Liturgiam Sacellani se parant.

Alter Sacellanorum coram sacra mensa venerans sic incipit.

IF we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth, etc.

Confessionem, Absolutionem, Dominic. (...) recitant, etc. Psalmos canunt pro
tempore accommodos, Ps. 84. 122, and 132. alternis respondente populo quibus
facultas erat and libri. Lectio prima definitur ex 28. Genesis a ver. primo ad
finem. Hymn. Te Deum, etc. Lectio secunda ex secundo capite S. Joh. a vers^ 13.
ad finem. Hymn. Psalm. 100.

I Believe in God, etc.

Et post usitatas Collectas hanc specialem addidit Episcopus.

O Lord God, mighty and glorious and of incomprehensible Majesty, thou fillest
Heaven and earth with the Glory of thy presence, and can not be contained
within any the largest compass, much less within the narrow walls of this Room;
yet forasmuch as thou have been pleased to command in thy holy Law, that we
should put the Remembrance of thy Name upon places, and in every such place
thou will come to us and bless us; we are here now assembled to put thy name
upon this place, and the Memorial of it, to make it thy house, to devote and
dedicate it for ever unto thee, utterly separating it from all worldly uses,
and wholly and only consecrate it to the invocation of thy glorious Name,
wherein supplications and intercessions may be made for all men; thy sacred
Word may be read, preached and heard, the Holy Sacraments, (the Laver of
Regeneration, and the Commemoration of the precious death of thy dear Son) may
be administered; thy Praise celebrated and sounded forth, thy people blessed by
putting thy Name upon them; we (poor and miserable creatures as we are) be
altogether unfit, and utterly unworthy to appoint any earthly thing to so great
a God; And I the least of all thy servants, no ways meet to appear before thee
in so honorable a service; yet being thou have often heretofore been pleased to
accept such poor offerings from sinful men, most humbly we beseech thee,
forgiving our manifold sins, and making us worthy by counting us so, to
vouchsafe to be present here among us in this religious action, and what we
sincerely offer graciously to accept at our hands, to receive the prayers of us
and all others, who either now or hereafter entering into this place, by us
hallowed, shall call upon thee; And give us all grace when we shall come into
the house of God, we may look to our feet, knowing that the place we stand on
is holy ground, bringing hither clean thoughts, and undefiled bodies, that we
may wash both our hearts and hands in innocence, and so compass thine Altar.

I am alter Sacellanus denuo exiens, and venerans ante sacram Mensam, incipit
Litaniam; in fine cujus recitavit hoc ipse Episcopus.

O Lord God, who dwell not in Temples made with hands (as says the Prophet)
yet have ever vouchsafed to accept the devout endeavors of thy poor servants
allotting special places for thy Divine Worship, promising, even there, to hear
and grant their requests; I humbly beseech thee to accept of this days duty and
service of dedicating this Chapel to thy great and glorious name; Fulfill, O
Lord, I pray thee thy gracious promises, that whatsoever prayer in this sacred
place shall be made according to thy will, may be accepted by thy gracious
favor, and returned with their desired success to thy glory and our Comfort.
Amen.

Post benedictionem populi cantatur Psalm. 132. conscenditqne suggestum M.
Robinson, Theol. Bac. Funaatoris summo rogatu; Episcopus hoc ei tandem
concessit; (geminas sorores ille atque Fundator in uxores duxerant, sed utraque
defuncta, jam tertiis gaudebat thalamis Concionator.)

Thema ejus desumptum e 28 Cap. Genesis verse. 16, 17. inter caetera docte egit de
omnipraesentia Divina, ubivis Lo^orum, tum speciatim (pro beneplacito suo) in
Ecclesia, deque reverentia and veneratione ibi debita.

Pergitur in Liturgia, qua Mulier quaedam paupercula purificanda ad limen
Cancellorum accedens, genua flectit, gratiasque post partum (solenni Ecclesiae
ritu) agit: Baptizandus autem vel Matrimonio jungendus, nullus aderat.

Itur dein ad Coenae Dominicae administrationem, Sacellanorum altero ad
Austral^m, altero ad Septentrionalem partem sacrae mensae genu slectente and
dicente;

OUr Father, etc.

Ante Epistolae lectionem hanc specialem Collectam (una cum Collecta solita pro
Rege) recitat Sacellanorum alter.

MOst blessed Savior, who by thy bodily presence at the Feast of Dedication
did honor and approve such devout and religious services, as we have now in
hand, be thou present also at this time with us, and consecrate us into an Holy
Temple unto thy self, that thou dwelling in our hearts by Faith, we may be
cleansed from all carnal affections, and devoutly given to serve thee in all
good works. Amen.

Epistolam secundus Sacellanus ante Saecram Mensam stans, legit ex 1 Cor. cap.
3. a verse. 16. ad finem: SS. Evangelium prior Sacellanu^ ibidem stans recitat
ex 10. cap. 8. Iohannis, a verse. 22. ad finem: Dein Symbolum Nicenum, omnibus
etiam stantibus.

Post illa Episcopus sede sua egressus, coram sacra mensa sese provolvit atque
ait.

Let us pray the prayer of King Solomon, which he prayed in the day of the
Dedication of his Temple; the first Temple that ever was, 2 Chronicles. 6. ab initio
verse. 18. ad versum 40. quo finito ait,

THus prayed King Solomon, and the Lord appeared unto him, and answered and
said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place for my self,
to be an house of Sacrifice, 2 Chr. 7. 12.

Thus did God answer; We have prayed with Solomon, answer us, O Lord, and our
prayer, as thou did him and his. Behold the face of thine Anointed, even
Christ our Savior, and for his sake grant our requests.

Dein in Cathedram ibidem se collocat, (assidentibus Thoma Ridley Cancellario
Episcopi a dextris, a sinistris vero Doctore Barlo Archidiacono Winton.)
Actumque Consecrationis (pileo tectus) promulgat in hanc formam.

IN Nomine Domini Amen. Cum strenuus vir Richardus Smith de Peer-tree in
Comitatu Southampt. Armiger, pia and Religiosa Devotione ductus, Capellam hanc
in quodam solo vasto vocato Ridgway-heath, juxta aedes suas communiter nuncupat
as Peer-tree, infra Parochiam Ecclesiae paroch. Betae Mariae juxta villam
Southampt. Dioceseos and jurisdictionis nostrae, continentem intra muros
ejusdem in longitudine ab Orient ad Occidentem 50 pedes and dimid. aut
circiter; in latitudine vero ab Aquilone ad Austrum 20 pedes and dimid. aut
circiter, propriis suis sumptibus aedificaverit, erexerit, and construxerit;
candemque Capellam Cancellis ligneis distinxerit; sacra Mensa decenter
instructa, Baptisterio, Pulpito, sedibus convenientibus, tam ipfra super solum
quam supra in modum Galeriae, Campana etiam aliisque necessariis ad divinum
cultum sussicienter and decenter ornaverit; nobisque supplicaverit, tam suo
nomine quam aliorum inhabitantium in villa de Weston, ac Hamlettis de Itchin,
Ridgway, ac quorundam etiam inhabitantium in Manerio nostro de Bitterne, de
Parochia praedicta, quatenus nos authoritate nostra ord^naria and Episcopali
pro nobis and successoribus nostris dictam Capellam ab usibus pristinis
communibus and profanis quibuscunque separare, and in usu^ sacros and divinos
consecrare, and dedicare dignaremur.

Nos Lancelotus permissione divina Winton. Episcopus, pio and religioso tam
ipsius quam aliorum in villa and Hamlettis praedictis habitantium desiderio, in
hac part favorabiliter annuentes, ad Consecrationem Capellae hujus de novo
propriis sumptibus dicti strenui viri Richardi Smith, sic ut praefertur erectae
and ornatae, authoritate nostra ordinaria and Episcopali procedentes, ^andem
Capellam ab omni communi and profano usu in perpetuum separamus, and soli
divino cultui ac divinorum celebrationi in perpetuum addicimus, dicamus,
dedicamus: Ac insuper eadem authoritate nostra ordinaria and Episcopali, pro
nobis and Successoribus nostris licentiam pariter and facultatem in Domino
concedimus, ad rem divinam ibidem faciendam, nempe Preces publicas, and sacram
Ecclesiae Liturgiam recit andam, ad Verbum Dei sincere proponendum and
praedicandum, Sacramenta Sacrae Eucharistiae and Baptismatis in eadem
ministranda, Matrimonia solemnizanda, Mulieres post puerperium ad gratiarum
actionem publicam recipiendas and adjuvandas, Mortuos sepeliendos, caeteraque
quaecunque peragenda, quae in aliis Capellis licite fieri possunt and solent.
Ac tam Presbytero in Capell^ praedicta deservituro preces divinas dicendi,
caeteraque praemissa faciendi, quam Domino Ric. Smith, and Familiae ejus,
reliquisque in dictis locis haebitantibus, preces divinas audiendi, caeteraque
praemissa percipiendi, plenam in Domino potestatem concedimus. Eandemque
Capellam ad levamen (Anglice, a Chapel of Ease) sub dicta Ecclesia parochiali
B. Mariae juxta villam Southampt. tanquam Matrice Ecclesia sua, quantum in
nobis est, and de jure divino, Canonibus Ecclesiae and Statutis hujus Regni
Angliae possumus, in honorem Dei and sacros inhabitantium usus, nunc and in
futurum consecramus, per nomen Capellae JESUS in Parochia Sanctae Mariae juxta
villam Southampt. and sic consecratam fuisse, and esse, and in futuris
perpetuis temporibus remanere debere, palam and public pronunciamus,
decernimus, and declaramus; and per nomen Capellae JESUS nominamus and
appellamus; and sic perpetuis futuris temporibus nominandam and appellandam
fore decernimus: Privilegiis insuper omnibus and singulis in capite usitatis,
and Capellis ab antiquo fundatis competentibus^ Capellam hanc JESUS, praedictam,
ad omnem juris effectum munitam and stabilitam esse volumus; and quantum in
nobis est, and de jure divino possumus, sic munimus and stabilimus per
praesentes; Absque praejudicio tamen ullo, and salvo semper jure and interesse
Ecclesiae parochialis sanctae Mariae juxta villam Southampt. tanquam Matricis
Ecclesiae; and Rectoris, Guardianorum, aliorumque Ministrorum ejusdem pro
tempore existentium (in cujus Parochia dicta Capella JESUS notorie sita and
siluata est) in omnibus and singulis decimis, oblationibus, obventionibus,
vadiis, feudis, proficuis, privilegiis, juribus and emolumentis quibuscunque
ordinariis and extraordinariis eisdem respective debitis vel consuetis, ac
infra praecinctum seu limits Capellae JESUS praedictae orientibus and
provenientibus, and ad dictam Ecclesiam Matricem sanctae Mariae, Rectori,
Guardianis vel aliis Ministris ejusdem de jure vel confuetudine quoquo modo
spectantibus, vel pertinentibus; in tam amplis modo and forma, prout eisdem
debebantur, aut solvi solebant, ante hanc nostram consecrationem hujus Capellae
praedictae.

Proviso, quod praedictus strenuus vir Rich. Smith, ac ejus haeredes and
Assignati, aliique in dicta villa and Hamlettis, etc. habitantes, non solum
dictam Capellam quoties opus fuerit, impensis suis propriis reficere and
reparare, sed etiam ad reparationes praedictae Matricis Ecclesiae sanctae
Mariae juxta villam Southampton, and Goemeterii ejusdem Ecclesiae, ac ad omnia
alia onera, ad quae caeteri Parochiani dictae Matricis Ecclesiae teneantur.

P^oviso etiam, quod tam dictus strenuus vir Rich. Smith, haeredes and
assignati ejus, quam reliqui omnes in dictis villis and Hamlettis, etc.
habitantes, in signum subjectionis Capellae hujus sub Ecclesia Matrice Beatae
Mariae juxta Southampt. ac senioritatis ejusdem Ecclesiae supra dictam
Capellam, singulis annis de tempore ad tempus ad Festum Paschatis, vel ad
Festum Pentecostes, ad dictam Ecclesiam Matricem venire, and in dicta Matrice
Ecclesia tantum, non in dicta Capella, (si tuto ad Ecclesiam Parochialem venire
possint) Preces audire, and Sacramentum Eucharistiae ibidem percipere; vel si
tempestate aut alio impedimento detineantur, quo minus tunc venire possint, tum
die Dominico, quo tuto venire possunt, subsequente, venire and Eucharistiam
accipere omnino teneantur, absque speciali Licentia nostra, seu Vicarii nostri
generalis in hac part obtenta.

Proviso etiam, quod in dicta Capella Sacramentum Baptismatis non ministretur,
nec Matrimonia solemnizentur, neque Verbum Dei praedicetur, neque Sacramenta
vel Sacramentalia aliquibus profanis conferantur, praterquam solis
inhabitantibus seu degentibus in villa, Hamlettis, etc. praedict nec etiam
reliquis dictae Matricis Ecclesiae Parochianis in Occidentali part ripae
inhabitantibus, inscio vel invito Rectore Ecclesiae Matricis sanctae Mariae
juxta villam Southampt. praedict. seu absque assensu, consensu and licentia
ejusdem prius habita and obtenta.

Et ulterius dicto strenuo Richardo Smith, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis,
liberam and plenam potestatem in Domino concedimus per praesentes, idoneum
Presbyterum de tempore in tempus nominandi ad deserviendum, and divina officia
in dicta Capella exequenda, a Nobis and Successoribus nostris de tempore in
tempus approbandum, and licentiandum: At quod dictus strenuus vir R. Smith,
Haeredes and assignati sui, and reliqui in dictis villa and Hamlettis, etc.
inhabitants de tempore in tempus in futurum propriis suis sumptibus dictum
Presbyterum sive Curatum in eadem Capella deservientem, and authoritate nostra,
vel successorum nostrorum ut praefertur approbatum and licentiatum, alent and
sustinebunt, ac annuale stipendium viginti marcarum ad minimum eidem Presbytero
vel Curato praestabunt, and solvent ad quatuor Festa; Nativitatis Christi;
Annunciationis; Nativitatis sancti Iohannis Baptistae; and sancti Michaelis,
per aequales portiones, sine ulla tamen diminutione, vel defalcatione juris
Ecclesiastici, decimarum, oblationum, vel obventionum quarumcunque ad dictam
Ecclesiam Parochialem sanctae Mariae, seu ad Rectorem ejus pro tempore
existentem, quo modo de jure vel consuetudine spectantium seu pertinentium.

Et ulterius quod pro sepulturis in Capella praedicta, and in Choro seu navi
ejusdem, omnibusque aliis in dicta Capella vel extra gerendis, vadia, quoad
defunctos tam in domo dicti strenui viri Rich. Smith, Haeredum and Assignatorum
suorum, quam in dicta villa, Hamlettis, etc. Rectori dictae Ecclesiae Matricis
pro tempore existenti, and successoribus suis, and Guardianis respective, and
Clerico, caeterisque Ministris dictae Ecclesiae Parochialis debite solvantur,
in tam amplis modo and forma, prout pro sepulturis in Choro seu intra
Cancellos, seu etiam in navi dictae Ecclesiae Matricis, solvi consuetum fuit,
and prout solvi solet and deberet, si personae praedictae intra Cancellos seu
navim dictae Matricis Ecclesiae sepultae fuissent.

Quod si autem aliquando defuerit in dicta Capella Presbyter, Curatus legitime
per nos aut successores nostros licentiatus and approbatus, tunc praedictus
strenuus vir Rich. Smith, Haeredes and assignati sui ac reliqui in dicta villa,
and Hamlettis, etc. inhabitants, ad Matricem Ecclesiam convenire, aut ibidem
precibus interesse teneantur, prout ante solebant, donec dicta Capella de
legitimo Curato, ad ibidem divina celebranda idonee provideatur and idem
admittatur. Quod si autem aliquo tempore in posterum, quod Deus avertat, per
continuos sex menses per culpam aut negligentiam Parochianorum defuerit idoneus
Curatus in dicta Capella, qui ibidem divina celebret, aut si Curatus sit qui
per sex menses continuos non celebret, tunc nobis and successoribus nostris
potestatem reservamus pro ea vice tantum, idoneum Curatum ad dictam Capellam
nominandi, ad supplendam negligentiam dictorum Rich^ Smith, Haeredum and
Assigantorum suorum. Quod si autem dicta Capella decenter non fuerit reparata
vel instructa Libris, aliisque ad cultum divinum necessariis per tempus
praedictum (nisi ex legitima in ea part causa per Episcopum approbanda hoc
contigerit) tunc in perpetuum post dictos sex Menses continuos sic elapsos,
teneantur omnes infra praecinctum, seu limits dictae Capellae inhabitants ad
Matricem Ecclesiam convenire, pro divinis audiendis, prout ante hanc nostram
consecrationem tenebantur; aliqua in hac concessione seu consecratione nostra
in contrarium non obstante, ac perinde ac si haec concessio seu consecratio
facta nunquam fuisset.

Postremo reservamus nobis and successoribus nostris, Episcopis Winton.
potestatem visitandi dictam Capellam, prout alias Capellas infra nostram
Diocesin situatas, communiter nuncupatas peculiares, ut nobis eisque constet,
an decenter in reparationibus aliisque^ conservetur, and an omnia ibidem
decenter and secundum ordinem fiant. Quae omnia and singula sic reservamus;
quoad caetera vero praemissa quatenus in nobis est, and de jure possumus, pro
nobis and successoribus nostris decernimus and stabilimus per praesentes.

Actu demum recitato veneratur den^o, atque infit.

BLessed be thy name O Lord God, for that it pleased thee to have thy
Habitation among the Sons of Men: and to dwell in the midst of the Assembly of
thy Saints upon earth; Bless we beseech thee this days action unto thy people,
prosper thou the work of our hands unto us, yea prosper thou our handy work.

Finitis precationibus istis Dominus Episcopus sedem separatim capessit (ubi
prius) populusque univer^^s no^ communicaturus dimittitur, and Porta clauditur;
Pri^r Sacellanus pergit legendo sententias ^^as hortatorias ad Eleemosynas,
interea dum alter Sa^ellanus singulos Communicaturos adit, atque in patinam
argenteam oblationes colligit: Collecta est summa 4. 1. 12. s. 2. d. quam
Dominus Episcopus convertendam in Calicem hui^ Capellae donandum dercernit.

Caeteris rebus ordine gestis, demum Episcopus sacram Mensam redit. (Sacellanis
utrisque ad aliquamulum recedentibus) lotisque manibus, panc fracto, vino in
Calicem effuso, and aqua admista, stans ait,

ALmighty God our Heavenly Father, etc.

Eucharistiam ipse primo loco accipit, sub utraque specie: proximo loco tradit
Fundatori (quem jam coram sacra Mensa in genua supplicem collocarant) dein
utrique Sacellano Ad caeteros vero pergentem Episcopum atque panem iis
tradentem, prior Sacellanus subsequitur and Calicem ordine porrigit. Cum vinum,
quod prius effuderat, non sufficeret Episcopus de novo in Calicem ex poculo,
quod in sacra Mensa stabat effundit, admistaque aqua, recitat clare verba illa
confecratoria.

Finita tandem exhibitione Dominus Episcopus ad Sacrae Mensae Septentrionem in
genibus, recitante quoque populo, ait,

OUr Father, etc.

O Lord our Heavenly Father, etc.

GLory be to God on high, etc.

Concludit denique cum hac precatione.

BLessed be thy name O Lord, that it has pleased thee to put into the heart of
this thy servant to erect an house to thy worship and service, by whose pains,
Care and Cost, this work was begun and finished. Bless (O Lord) his substance
and accept the work of his hands: Remember him O our God concerning this, wipe
not out this kindness of his that he has showed for the house of his God, and
the offices thereof, and make them truly thankful to thee, that shall enjoy the
benefit thereof, and the ease of it; and what is by him well intended, make
them rightly to use it, which will be the best fruit and to God most acceptable.

Post haec vota populum stans dimittit cum Benedictione hac.

THe peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and Minds
in the knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: and the
Blesling of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

Consecratio COEMETERII.
STatim a prandio (quod in adibus suis vicinis Fundator Capellae satis laute
appararat Domino Episcopo, atque convenarum magnae frequentiae) ad rem divinam
reversis, alter Sacell anorum praeit.

OUr Father, etc.

Post Responsas, Psalmus 90. recitatur alternis.

Post Psalmum Episcopus cum universa multitudine egreditur Capella, atque ad
Orientalem Coemeterii partem stans, denuo sciscitatur.

Captain Smith, for what have you called us hither again?

Ille schedulam, ut prius humillime porrigit, quam praefatus a Registris
recitat in haec verba.

IN the name of Richard Smith of Peer-tree in the County of Southampton
Esquire, R. Reverend Father in God, I present unto you the state of the Village
of Weston, etc. ut prius, usque ad, the River cannot be passed, whereby it
often comes to pass that they have been constrained to bury their dead in the
open fields, the water not being passable, or if they durst venture over, yet
the dead body was followed with so little Company, as was no way seemly.

And thus much formerly having been presented to your Predecessor, the R. R. F.
in God, James late Bishop of Winton; and Petition to him made to give and to
grant leave unto the said Richard Smith, to enclose a piece of ground for a
burial place on the East side of the said River, he favorably gave license and
granted power unto the said Richard Smith so to do, as may appear by an
instrument under his Episcopal Seal, bearing date the 23. of February in the
year of our Lord God according to the Computation of the Church of England,
1617.

Which place of Burial being now enclosed with a decent Rail of Timber, at the
only proper cost and charges of him the said Richard Smith, with intent and
purpose that it might be dedicated and consecrated only and wholly for
Christian burial, for him the said Richard Smith, and his Family, and the said
inhabitants, and none other.

In which respect I beseech God to accept of this sincere intent and purpose,
and both he and they are together humble Suitors to your Lordship, as Gods
Minister, the Bishop and Ordinary of this Diocese, in Gods stead to accept this
his free will offering, and to decree this ground severed from all former
common and profane uses, and to sever it, as by the Word of God and prayer, and
other special Religious duties to dedicate and consecrate it to be a Coemeterie
or place of Christian burial, as aforesaid; wherein their bodies may be laid up
until the day of the general Resurrection; promising that they will ever so
hold it for holy ground, and use it accordingly, applying it to no other use,
but that only, and that they will from time to time, and and ever hereafter, as
need shall be, see it conveniently repaired and fenced in such sort as a
Coemetery or burying place ought to be.

Hoc ipsum vero (ab Episcopo paucis interrogatis) viva voce confirmant
Fundator, and qui e vicinia.

Lectio prima desumitur e 23. Genesis Secunda Lectio destinabatur e prima Epist.
ad Cor. cap. 15. a verse. 15. ad finem, propter angustias temporis omissa.

Tum Dominus Episcopus in genua ibi submissus precatur.

O Lord God, thou have been pleased to teach us in thy holy Word, as to put a
difference between the soul of a Beast, and the spirit of a Man; for the soul
of a Beast goes down to the earth from whence it came, and the spirit of man
returns unto God that gave it; so to make diverse accounts of the Bodies of
Mankind and the Bodies of other living Creatures; in so much as the Body of
Adam was resolved on, and afterward the workmanship of thine own hands, and
endued with a soul from thine own breath: But much more since the second Adam,
thy blessed Son, by taking upon him our nature, exalted this flesh of ours to
be flesh of his flesh, whose flesh thou sufferedst not to see Corruption; so
that the Body returns to the earth, and the soul to him that gave it. It shall
from thence return again, it is but a rest, and a rest in hope (as says the
Psalmist) for it is a righteous thing with God that the Body which was partaker
with the soul both in doing and suffering, should be raised again from the
Earth to be partaker also with the soul of the reward, or punishment which God
in Mercy or Justice shall reward, not to one of them alone, but jointly to them
both.

There being then so great difference, it is not thy will, O Lord, that our
Bodies should be cast out as the Bodies of Beasts to become dung for the earth,
or our bones lie scattered abroad to the sight of the Sun; But when thy
servants are gathered to their Fathers, their Bodies should be decently and
seemly laid up in the bosom of the Earth from whence they were taken.

Neither is it thy pleasure, O Lord, that they should be buried as an Ass in
the open fields, but in a place chosen and set apart for that purpose.

For even so from the Beginning we find the holy Patriarch Abraham (the Father
of the faithful) would not bury his dead in the common fields; nay nor amongst
the Bodies of Hethites who were heathen men, but purchased a burial place for
himself in the plain of Mamre which became as it were the Churchyard of the
Patriarchs, therein they laid the dead bodies of Sarah his Wife, of himself,
his son Isaac and Rebecca his wife; after them Jacob and Leah were buried there.

After this manner did the Patriarchs in old time, who trusted in God, sever
themselves places for Burial: whose children we are so long as we do their
works, and walk in the steps of their most holy Faith.

Ensuing then the steps of the Faith of our Father Abraham, we for the same
purpose have made choice of the very same place, wherein we now are; that it
may be as the Cave of Mamre, even Gods storehouse for the Bodies of such our
Brethren and Sisters to be laid up in, as he shall ordain there to be interred;
there to rest in the sleep of peace till the last Trump shall awake them; for
they shall awake and rise up that sleep in the dust; for thy dew shall be as
the dew of herbs, and the earth shall yield forth her dead.

We beseech thee good Lord to accept this work of ours in ^hewing mercy to the
dead; and mercifully grant, that they whose bodies shall be here bestowed, and
we all, may never forget the day of putting off the Tabernacle of this flesh,
but that living we may think upon death, and dying we may apprehend life; and
rising from the death of Sin to the life of Righteousness, which is the first
rising of Grace^ we may have our parts in the second, which is the (...) to
glory by thy Mercy, O most gracious Lord God, who do live and govern all
things, world without end.

Priorem dein formulam per omnia secutus, in Cathedram ibi se collocat, atque
Actum consecrationis promulgat.

IN Dei Nomine. Amen. Nos Lancelotus permissione divina Winton. Episcopus hunc
locum jacentem in vasto solo vulgo nuncupatum Ridgway-heath, infra Parochiam
Ecclesiae parochialis sanctae Mariae, etc. and jam propriis sumptibus strenui
viri Richardi Smith de Peer-tree Armigeri in circuitu Capellae noviter ab eo
quoque propriis sumptibus suis constitutae, palis inclusum and arboribus
consitum; continentem in longitudine 148 pedes, aut circiter, in latitudine 124
pedes, aut circiter, in toto vero circuitu 435 pedes aut circiter; a pristinis,
aliisque quibuscunque communibus usibus and profanis in usus sacros separandum
fore decernimus, and sic separamus; ac eundem inhabitantibus vel degentibus in
familia Ric. Smith, in villa de Weston, Hamlettis de Itchin, Wolston, Ridgeway,
and in part Manerii de Bitterne, quae est de Parochia sancta Mariae juxta
Southampt. in Caemeterium sive locum Sepulturae pro corporibus inibi
decedentium Christiano ritu humandis, quantum in nobis est, ac de jure and
Canonibus Ecclesiasticis, ac de statutis hujus Regni Angliae possumus
authoritate nostra ordinaria and Episcopali assignamus: ac per nomen Coemeterii
Capellae JESUS designamus, dedicamus, and in usum praedictum consecramus; ac sic
assignatum, dedicatum, and consecratum fuisse and esse and in futurum,
perpetuis temporibus remanere debere palam ac public declaramus; Ac
Coemeterium Capellae JESUS deinceps in perpetuum nuncupandum decernimus:
Privilegiis insuper omnibus and fingulis Coemeteriis and locis sepulturae ab
antiquo consecratis and dedicatis competent. Coemeterium praedictum sive locum
sepulturae ad omnem juris effectum munitum esse volumus, and quantum in nobis
est and de jure possumus, sic munimus and stabilimus per praesentes.

Proviso tamen, quod praedict. Richardus, Haeredes and Assignati sui, ac
reliqui in dicta villa, Hamlettis, etc. inhabitants, propriis suis sumptibus
dictum coemeterium de tempore in tempus, in decenti statu conservabunt, and
clausuras ejus quoties opus fuerit sufficienter and convenienter reparabunt.
Salvis etiam and omnino reservatis Rectori Ecclesie Parochialis sanctae Mariae
praedictae, ac Guardianis aliisque Ministris dictae Ecclesiae pro tempore
existentibus in perpetuum, omnibus and singulis oblationibus, mortuariis,
Feudis and vadiis, pro omnibus and singulis sepulturis Mortuorum in hoc
coemeterio, aut ratione eorundem de jure, sive consuetudine debitis, and in tam
amplis modo and forma, ac si personae praedictae sepultae fuissent in
Coemeterio Matricis Ecclesiae praedictae. Quas quidem oblationes and mortuaria,
feuda and vadia omnia and singula sic de jure ac consuetudine debita Rectori,
Guardianis and Ministris dictae Matricis Ecclesiae pro tempore existentibus in
perpetuum soltendi, quantum in nobis est, and jura patiuntur, reservamus per
praesentes: salva item nobis and successoribus nostris, tanquam loci
Ordinariis, potestate visitandi dictum Coemeterium de tempore in tempus, and
inquirendi an sufficienter reparatum fuerit in clausuris; and an omnia ibi
decenter et secundum ordinem fiant; et, si minus fiant, per censuras
Ecclesiasiicas corrigendi.

His finitis precatur denuo.

LOrd God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who because thou art the God, not of the
dead, but of the Living, show hereby that they are living and not dead, and
that with thee do live the spirits of all them that dye in the Lord, and in
whom the Souls of them that are Elect after they be delivered from the burden
of this flesh, be in joy and felicity; thou have said thou will turn men into
small dust, and after that wilt say, Return again you Children of men: Thou art
the God of Truth, and have said it; thou art the God of power and might, and
wilt do it; by that power whereby thou art able to subdue all things unto thy
self, and bring to pass whatsoever pleases thee in Heaven and Earth, with whom
nothing is impossible.

Lord Jesu Christ, who art the Resurrection and the Life, in whom if we
believe, though we be dead yet shall we live; who by thy death have overcome
death, and by thy rising again have opened to us the Gate of everlasting life,
who shall send thine Angels and gather the bodies of thine Elect from all the
Ends of the Earth, and especially those who by a mystical union are flesh of
thy flesh, and in whose hearts thou have dwelt by Faith; we humbly beseech thee
for them, whose bodies shall in this place be gathered to their Fathers, that
they may rest in this hope of Resurrection to eternal life through thee, O
blessed Lord God, who shall change their vile bodies, that they may be like thy
Glorious body according to the mighty working whereby thou art able to bring
all things, even death and all into subjection to thy self.

Holy and blessed Spirit, the Lord and giver of life, whose Temples the bodies
of thy Servants are, by thy sanctifying Grace dwelling in them; we verily trust
that their bodies that have been thy Temples, and those hearts in which Christ
has dwelt by Faith, shall not ever dwell in corruption, but that as by thy
sending forth thy Breath at first we received our Being, Motion, and Life in
the beginning of the Creation, so at the last by the same Spirit sending forth
the same breath in the end of the Consummation, Life, Being and Moving shall be
restored us again; so that after our dissolution, as thou did show thy holy
Prophet, the dry bones shall come together again, Bone to his Bone, and Sinews
and Flesh shall come upon them, and thou shall cause thy Breath to enter into
them, and we shall live; and this Corruption shall put on Incorruption, and
this Mortal shall put on Immortality.

God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, accept, sanctify and
bless this place to that end whereunto according to thine own Ordinance we have
ordained it, even to bestow the Bodies of thy Servants in, till, the number of
thine Elect being accomplished, they with us, and we with them, and with all
other departed in the true Faith of thy Holy Name, shall have our consummation
and Bliss both in Body and Soul in thy eternal and everlasting glory.

Blessed Savior, that did for this end dye and rise again, that thou
might be Lord both of the Living and the Dead, whether we live or die thou
art our Lord, and we are thine; living or dying we commend our selves unto
thee, have mercy upon us, and keep us thine for evermore.

Reintrantes igitur Capellam cantant priorem partem Psalm. 16. Conscendit
suggestum Magister Matthaeus Wren; Thema ei posterior pars verse. 17. cap. 2. S.
Joan. Zelus domus tuae, etc. Agit de affectibus in Christo, Zelo inter
caeteros; nec illo falso, sed pro Deo; nec caeco, sed secundum scientiam, pro
Domo, pro Cultu Dei; de praesentia Dei, praecipue in Templis; magno non Morum
solummodo nostrorum, sed s^ei quoque and Fidei incremento fulcimentoque: Deum
Locorum distinctione gaudere confirmat, tum exemplo mirifice Jacobi tantopere
distinguentis Bethel; tum maximo omnium miraculo, quo Christus Mercatores e
Templo ejecit. Enarratis Christi per hoc factum devotionibus concludit in
debitam a nobis Templorum reveren^^^^, atque istius Fundatoris Encomium
meritissimum.

Cantatur pars reliqua; and Vespertinae precationes (incipiendo jam a Symbolo
Apostolico) secundum communem Ecclesiae formulam; finiuntur.

FINIS.

