THE Descent from France, I confess finds more credit with me than I was
willing at first to give it; and from the just Apprehension I have of the
Consequences of it, I now Rise to speak; and with that freedom which belongs to
the part I have in this Assembly, and the Importance of the present Occasion. I
have observed the warmth of some of the Members of this Council, their
disbelief or contempt of the Design, and their great assurance of the
insuccesfulness of it, But by the force of their Arguments, they seem to show
more of Inclination than Reason to recommend their Opinions; and by their Age,
that they have never felt the miseries of a Civil War: They can perhaps endure
them in another Country, and read of them in Gazets without shrinking, but
seeing, and feeling them, are other things: Those that have been in the midst
of the Fire, Rapes and Slaughter, of a Country torn in pieces by Civil War, as
I have been, will, I hope with me, think it too costly, and desperate a Remedy
for any Disease in Government; But to be sure it should be the last, and to be
then only used when nothing else will do. For it is then, that we can truly
call nothing our own; and that instead of one, we have ten thousand Tyrants:
For every body is Arbitrary in such Cases; and the dear Property, for which we
make War, is by nothing else so dangerously exposed. No forms of Law then to
fly to, Nor Justice to protect us; But Power supercedes Right, and the
strongest is the lawful Possessor. In this dismal state, we are as unsafe in
our Lives, as in our Fortunes. When we rise, we are not sure to escape till
Night: Nor when we lie down, that we, our Wives, and little Ones, shall ever
live to see another Day. And if our Lives, to be sure our Estates, must be
precarious. And the manner of this Misery has something so frightful in it,
that the loss is yet less than the Terror. And when I consider the Preparation
that is in the minds of Men amongst us, of both Interests, by their repeated
Provocations, and old and fresh Prejudices; I cannot but dread the Consequences
of the Civil War our opposition will engage us in.

If this Descent was designed for Destruction, and not for Restoration; If it
were to Invade a Crown, instead of returning to one Invaded, and coming home to
ones own, we might have the pretense of a Fr. Invasion to resist it; and the
powerful motives of Liberty and Property, to hinder the Depredation of
Foreigners. But this is not our Case, we talk of opposing one that comes as Our
King, and Our Legal King, a King according to the Constitution of our Realm. In
whom, as I have heard great Lawyers say, we cannot Legally disinterest our
selves; Who was compelled from us, for his own Safety, and returns now for
ours, before we are quite ruined. That he retired for his own, what has
followed declares, and that he comes for ours, the nature of his coming informs
us; It is not as a Conqueror, or an Avenger, Because he seeks us as a Friend,
and a Father; Not with Fire and Sword, but the Olive Branch of Peace; Remitting
instead of Revenging Wrongs; and assuring us, of all the Security that our
selves in Parliament can reasonably devise, for our Religion and Property. This
is not the strain of Conquest, or the style of Vengeance. Now the question is
which of the two we will choose, Peace or War, Plenty or Poverty, Safety or
Ruin? But, I think, it ought to be none, at this time of day, with us; For
since God only knows who shall Survive such a Tragedy, it is our great care to
prevent it. For we cannot suppose if we refuse his R^yl*Offer, and make head
against his Return, but he will contest our Denials, and appeal to Heaven (the
constant Avenger of his Injured Ancestors) and pursue his Claim to extremity:
Nor is it to be thought that they who have lent him this Strength, will not
pour in more to Support him. The French K. does not use to venture
inconsiderately; he has satisfied himself (no doubt) of the charge, and
probability of the Enterprise, (...) to (...)allowances for all Accidents: For
no Prince puts less to hazard, and by what he has done, and does still to our
astonishment, notwithstanding the Enemies he has upon his hands, We have just
cause to apprehend the Consequences of this Descent, if we obstinately oppose
the Return of our King: We may believe he does not only know his own strength,
but our weakness to resist it; that our Army is small, and discontented; very
few Fortifications; none within Land, and that we are broken with Factions
within our selves. He must also be satisfied with the assurances K. James has
received from hence, tho the extreme Caution he shows in every thing will not
suffer him to rely upon that: And I am not absolutely satisfied, that even some
of those we may think to oblige by our opposition, are not of the number of
them that have Promised: I say, I will not answer for them. However I cannot
think but the King will find a considerable Interest here, among every sort.
First, All those that have never quitted him, and find themselves oppressed, by
the payment of double Taxes, for not Swearing to this Government: This sort
will adhere and dispute it to the last; for if he miscarry, they know they must
either comply against their Consciences, or be ruined in their Fortunes, which
another Year will certainly become a Tax to the Government, for the Penalty
will rise with their Constancy, and the Exigency of the Times. Secondly, There
is another sort of People that were carried out of their depth, by the strength
of the Tide, that moved things at the P. of O. coming hither; and tho these Men
would have others excuse them from the necessity of the Times, they show daily
in their Discourses they cannot forgive themselves: Their old profession of
Loyalty flies in their Faces, and they would be glad of the opportunity of
recovering that slip, at almost any rate; and their number is as great as their
desire to set themselves right in the good Opinion of their Friends. Thirdly,
There is a Party that liked the Change ver^ well, but are miserably
disappointed under it; and as none are more discontented with it, so none are
sharper upon it. They talk loudly of breach of Faith, That the public Money is
imbezled, Double Accounts kept, Strangers preferred before Englishmen, The one
paid, the other not; That the great Instruments and Leaders of the Change are
laid aside, or neglected; All popular Bills stifled, or rejected; and that
Oppression, and Corruption in Officers, both by Sea and Land, connived at; And
these Gentlemen will doubtless close upon reasonable Terms, or be safe by a
Neutrality. Fourthly, All Tradesmen and Farmers find that deadness in
Business, together with heavy and growing Taxes, that they begin to feel, what
they have hitherto refused to hear, that they are like to be ruined by the War,
and what the Gentleman does will sway most with them. Lastly, The Mob who are
almost starving everywhere for want of Peace, always loved Changes and Novelty,
expecting still that there is something to be got by them. So that upon the
whole Matter, there seems no sort of Men but those who are actually in Office,
likely to venture for the present Government in an extremity; and when they
cannot find their Names in the King's Declaration among the excepted, I dare
say, they will not be to be found by the Government when it wants their Support.
Not to say that some of them would perhaps be willingly thought by King James's
Party to intend his Service, by being in it; They can the better conduct it to
his ends, and recommend themselves, by making the Change easier, when the time
comes.

Shall we then of this City add to our former Reckonings? Or by our wise
management blot them out? It is not a time of day for us to be Tools; London
that has most to loose, has most to take care of, and for that reason should
run the least hazard; for it is certain if We resist, whoever has the best of
it, Poor England will have the worst; and of all England, to be sure London: I
think that is enough to men in business, that have something to loose, and
desire to get by honester ways than Sacking and Plundering.

But though these considerations seem moving enough, upon a prudent account,
yet there is something I must leave with you, that sticks much with me in point
of Judgment and Conscience, and which I beseech you to hear with patience, and
interpret with Candor. First, I do profess to you, I am not satisfied with the
power of changing Governments, that we have lately exercised; It is plain, our
Laws have never allowed it; and in the end have ever punished it: Observe the
conclusion of those four or five Interruptions of the right Line, that have
been since the Conquest, which is now more than Six hundred years, and you will
find things have ever returned to their own Channel, with unhappy marks upon
the Families that have been the Authors of them. Of which Sir Walter Raleigh in
his excellent Preface to his History of the World is very particular and
instructing; And we are sure, that the Law was so understood, and given by all
the learned Judges and Council of the Kingdom, Anno 1660. at the Trial of the
Kings Judges: A Gentleman of my Intimacy obliged me lately with the reading of
it; and truly I could not but lament the unhappiness of us Englishmen, that
Loyalty and Rebellion should have such uncertain significations with us; and
that in less than half an Age, what was then called Loyalty, is now accounted
Treason, and that which is Loyalty now, was then adjudged Rebellion: For it was
the sense of that great presence, great both in Quality and Law, when the P.
Council, Judges, Lawyers, and many of both Houses of Parliament were there, but
particularly of Sir Orlando Bridgman, and Sir Heneage Finch, one Keeper, the
other Chancellor since, that the Kings of England are Sovereign Princes, and
not accountable to the People, either Collectively or Representatively; and
they urged that old maxim, The King cannot err, because the King acts by other
Persons. And indeed no man would be a King to answer for every fault, in the
Administration, which he either cannot always understand, or must be
omnipresent to hinder: But here the Case was quite contrary, and this ancient
Doctrine of Law turned upside down; For no body was punished but the King. And
it is whispered by some that should know, that the most offensive acts of his
Government, were the advices of those, that are in the favor of this, as if
they had been concerted, and laid elsewhere, for his ruin. I think we should
be more constant to our selves, and have one fixed Rule of Duty, and that our
Obedience to it, should be our safety: And if that pernicious Principle, or
Practice at least of doing evil that good may come of it, was out of the World;
we might be quiet if not prosperous, that were a great part of happiness; I
cannot think, but they who to mend the matter, step out of Gods way, as well as
that of the Law, in the end miss the mark, and loose by the Attempt; they seem
to disengage Providence, from taking care of their Prosperity or Protection,
that seek it by indirect means.

Another thing is this, that as the supposition of the Kings Imposing a false
Child upon the Kingdoms, to the prejudice of the undoubted Heirs, was the best
excuse, as well as the pretense for the Dutch Invasion; so besides what the
King did before, to prove the Legitimacy of the Prince of Wales; He has put his
Queens Childableness, or capacity of having Children, out of all question, by
sending above 30 Letters to Lords, Ladies, and Gentlemen of the Protestant
Religion amongst us, viz. Some of his old Privy Council, and others in this
Government to be Witnesses of the Birth of the Child she now goes with; A
Condescension in a King and Queen, that would overcome any obstinacy but ours;
and I hope we are not so senslesly and malic^ously tenacious, as to reject the
conviction and satisfaction the King offers us; especially, when we made the
pretense of wanting it before, an Argument to reject him. For then we proclaim
our dissatisfaction but a pretense, and therein our own Immorality to the
World. And truly Gentlemen, when I remember that other Folks have forgotten to
examine in Parliament that point of the Pr. of Ws; it is beyond all scruple
with me, the doing it was never meant, and it is a question to be free with
you, if they made any of the truth of his Birth, that have got so much by
pretending the Imposture. Else they would not have sent Monsieur Zulesteine to
Complement the K. and Qu. upon it as they did; and to my own knowledge this
Government has been challenged upon this point; that if People might have
leave, the truth of the Birth of the Pr. should be made out in Parliament,
beyond all manner of exception, but no Answer was ever yet obtained. And if the
Kings of Engl. were deposable, as they are not, (for if the Crown takes away
the defects in a lawful Successor, as says our Law, it receives, and admits,
of none in the Regnant person) yet the next Heir always Inherits: But here the
next Heir is excluded, and excluded as an Imposture, and yet the Imposture is
not at all m^de appear: The K. and Qu. own him, and 17. or 18. People of
Quality that are Protestants; and some of them in this Government are Witnesses
of his Birth; and more off^r to prove it: This sticks with me, I have Children
of my own, and all of them had not so many Witnesses of the truth of their
Birth, and yet I should take it very ill, if any should question it; and before
I end this particular, I must say, that for a King, so far to humor this base
Jealousy, and to stoop to our prejudice, as well as our ignorance, to let our
Eyes convince us, and justify him, shows to me Gentlemen, I don't know what it
does to you, that he d^sires not to cut his way to his Cr^wn through Blood, nor
to appease his displeasure, with the Lives and Estates of his mislead, or
misleading Subjects; but to be reconciled to his offending People; or else he
would certainly not se^k to inform them, but to destroy them. My last poi^^ i^,
that he does not appear to me, to be that Arbitrary Man, any more, than the
Insincere Man, we have had him represented to us. For if he intended an
absolute Rule, He would come as a Conqueror, and not as a Legal King; with no
Declaration, but his Sword, and that should be the Tenor of his Crown, and the
Condition of our Obedience. This is our fear or pretense; if this were his aim,
or hope, he would never come, while we were able to resist; He would stay till
the War had not left us the power, as well as the heart to do it. But his
coming now, tells us plainly he had rather be a King than a Tributary, and the
King of a Free and a Rich People, then of Beggars and Slaves; For he knows as
well as we, the many Millions we have paid, the Lives that are lost, the Ships
that are taken, and the decay also of Trade; And that all this Treasure, Blood,
and Loss, have only humbled England; and that France is not a jot the weaker
for it; but that the War at home (to get and keep his Crown) has only devoured
it, and that now we are beginning the War with France; (That he knows is Wise,
Rich, and Strong) after three years Consumption, within our selves, upon
private ends. A fearful and costly Ambition! What we were told was never
intended, but what we see, and feel, has been the effect of the change. God
help us, and help us to understand our selves, that we may help our selves,
while we can, in the evening of our time, or we are a lost People. I have done
Gentlemen, when I have told you, I am for meeting the King in the Ways of Peace
and Duty, and beseech you, by the love you bear, to your Wives, your Children,
your Selv^^, and your Country, that you embrace my Motion, for Honest Men, and
English Men, can have no Pleasure, or Interest, in seeing the Royal Family,
torn in pieces, and these Kingdoms destroyed in the Fray.

FINIS.

