Reliquiae Spelmannianae.

THE POSTHUMOUS WORKS OF Sir HENRY SPELMAN Knight. Relating to the LAWS and
ANTIQUITIES OF ENGLAND.

Published from the ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS.

With the LIFE of the AUTHOR.

Sine dubio, domus Jurisconsulti est totius oraculum Civitatis.

Cicero.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER for Awnsham and John Churchill at the
Black-Swan in Paternoster Row, LONDON. School.

Imprimatur,

JOH. MEARE VICE-CAN. OXON.
Jan. 17. School.
TO THE Most Reverend Father in God THOMAS LORD ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY,
PRIMATE of All ENGLAND And METROPOLITAN, And one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
I BEG leave to lay before your Grace these Posthumous Discourses of Sir Henry
Spelman; promising them a favorable reception, both for their own worth, and
for the sake of their Author. He was a Person endowed with those excellent
Qualities, which never fail to recommend others to your Grace's good opinion
and esteem: A Gentleman of great Learning, and a hearty Promoter and Encourager
of it: In his Temper Calm and Sedate; and in his Writings, Grave and
Inoffensive: a true lover of the Established Church, and a zealous maintainer of
her Rights and Privileges. In which respect, the Clergy of this Nation were
more particularly engaged to Him; because being a Layman, and so not liable to
the suspicion of Prejudice or Interest, his Reasonings carried in them a
greater weight and authority, than if they had come from one of their own Order.

I might add, as some sort of excuse for this Trouble, that He had the honor
to be particularly respected by two of your Grace's Predecessors; and some of
his Posthumous Works, by a third. Archbishop Abbot and his immediate Successor
were the chief Encouragers of the First Volume of his Councils: and after his
death, the Second Part of his Glossary was published by the procurement of
Archbishop Sheldon. So that these Papers have a kind of hereditary right to
your Grace's Protection.

All the share that I have in this Work, is the handing it into the World: and
to make the first Present to your Grace, would be no more than a decent regard
to the Eminence of your Station; though I had no particular obligation to do
it. But in my Circumstances, I should think my self very ungrateful, if
enjoying so much Happiness under your Grace's Patronage, I should omit any
opportunity of expressing my Thankfulness for it. Especially, since such small
Acknowledgements as this, are the only Returns that I can ever hope to make for
the Encouragement, which You daily afford to

Your GRACE'S

THE PREFACE.
I Shall not make any Apology for the publication of these Treatises: They
seemed to me to be very useful toward a right understanding of the Laws and
Antiquities of England; and I hope they will appear so to others too. Nor need
I endeavor to recommend them to the world, any otherwise than by showing them
to be the genuine Labors of Sir H. Spelman, whose Learning, Accuracy, and
Integrity are sufficiently known.

The first of them, concerning Feuds and Tenures in England, was written in the
Year 1639. and is printed from a fair Copy in the Bodleian Library, corrected
with Sir Henry Spelman's own hand. The Occasion of writing it, was the Great
Case of Defective Titles in Ireland; as may be gathered in some measure from
the hints, that our Author has given us; but is much more evident from the Case
it self, printed afterward by order of Thomas Viscount Wentworth the then Lord
Deputy. The Grounds thereof (with the Pleadings and Resolutions, so far as
they concern the Original of Tenures) were, in short, thus: The several
Mannours and Estates within the Counties of Roscomon, Sligo, Mayo and Gallway,
in the Kingdom of Ireland, being unsettl d as to their Titles; King James I. by
Commission under the Great Seal dated the 2d. day of March in the 4th. Year of
his Reign, did authorize certain Commissioners, by Letters Patents to make
Grants of the said Lands and Mannours to the respective Owners. Whereupon,
several Letters Patents to that effect, passed under his Majesty's Great Seal,
by virtue of the said Commission, for the strengthening of Titles that might
otherwise seem defective. And afterward, in the Reign of King Charles I. upon
an Inquiry into his Majesty's Title to the County of Mayo, there was an Act
of State published, commanding all those who held any Lands in that County by
Letters Patents from the Crown, to produce them or the Enrollment thereof
before the Lord Deputy and Council, by a certain day. To the end that they
might be secured in the quiet possession of their Estates, in case the said
Letters were allowed by that Board to be good and effectual in Law.

In pursuance of this Order, several Letters Patents were produced, and
particularly the Lord Viscount Dillon's; which last, upon the perusal and
consideration thereof by his Majesty's Council, were thought to be void in
Law. And therefore it was ordered by the Lord Deputy and Council, that the
doubt arising upon the Letters Patents should be drawn up into a Case, and that
Case to be openly argued at the Council Board. The Case was drawn up in these
words: King James by Commission under the Great Seal dated the second day of
March in the fourth year of his Reign, did authorize certain Commissioners to
grant the Manor of Dale, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of this
Kingdom, to A. and his heirs, and there is no direction given in the said
Commission touching the Tenure to be reserved. -- There are Letters Patents by
color of the said Commission passed unto A. and his heirs, to hold by
Knights*Service, as of his Majesty's Castle of Dublin.

Here, it was agreed on all hands* that the Letters Patents were void as to the
Tenure, and that the Commissioners had acted beyond their Commission in
reserving a mean Tenure, to the prejudice of the King; when they ought either
to have reserved an express Tenure by Knight's Service in Capite, or have
mentioned no Tenure at all, but have left the Law to imply a Tenure in Capite.
The question therefore was, Whether the deficiency of the Tenure did so far
affect the Grant, as wholly to destroy the Letters Patents? Or, Whether the
Letters Patents might not be good as to the Land, and void only as to the
Tenure?

The Case was argued several days by Counsel on both sides; and was afterward
delivered up to the Judges, who were required by the Lord Deputy and Council,
to consider of it and to return their Resolution. But upon private Conference,
not agreeing in their Opinions, it was thought necessary for public
satisfaction to have it argued solemnly by them all: which was accordingly
done. And when it came to be debated, whether the reservation of a Tenure, so
different from that intended and warranted by the Commission, could make void
the whole Grant; this happened to lead them to a more general Inquiry, What
the reservation of a Tenure is to the Grant? whether it be a part of the Grant,
and the modus concessionis, or whether it be a distinct thing, and Aliud from
the Grant? For (so the Printed Case represents their Opinion) if the
Reservation of the Tenure and the Grant of the Land, be aliud and aliud, two
distinct things, in the consideration of the whole Grant made, and the
authority given by the said Commission for the making thereof; then the Patent
may be void as to the Tenure, and yet good for the Grant of the Land. But if
the Reservation of the Tenure be incident unto the authority and included
within it, and the Reservation of the Tenure and the Grant of the Land make up
but one entire Grant, so that the one is a part of the other, and the
Reservation of the Tenure be Modus concessionis; then the granting of the Land,
reserving a diverse or contrary Tenure to that which their [nude] authority did
warrant them to reserve, is a doing of Idem alio modo, and so the whole Act is
void.

They who pleaded for the validity of the Letters Patents as to the Lands, and
their being void only as to the Tenure; urged, among other arguments, That
Tenures in Capite were brought into England by the Conquest, but Grants were by
the Common Law; and therefore Grants being more ancient than Tenures, the
Tenure must of necessity be aliud from the thing granted. And to prove that
this Tenure came in with the Conqueror, they cited Mr. Seldom in his Spicileg*
ad Eadmerum, p. 194. where he has that out of Bracton de Acquir. Rerum
Dominio. b. 2. Forinsecum servitium dicitur Regale servitium quia spectat ad
Dominum Regem and non ad alium, and secundum quod in Conquestu fuit adinventum.

But this Argument and the Authority were both overruld; and it was affirmed,
that Tenures were not brought into England by the Conqueror, but were common
among the Saxons. Their Answer to Mr. Selden's Opinion, with the Reasons upon
which they grounded their position, I will transcribe at large from the Printed
Case; the Book being very scarce, and this the only Point wherein Sir Henry
Spelman is concerned.

It was answered that Mr. Seldom in that place does barely recite the words of
Bracton, not delivering any Opinion of his own.

For in that Book cited, page 170. and in his Titles of Honor, the last
Edition. p. 612. We find that he was of another Opinion, and that this Tenure
was in use in England in the times of the Saxons.

What were those Thani Majores, or Thani Regis among the Saxons? but the Kings
immediate Tenants of Lands, which they held by personal service, as of the
Kings person by Grand Serjeanty, or Knights-service in Capite.

The Land so held, was in those times called Thain-land, as Land holden in
Socage was called Reveland, so frequently in Doomsday: Haec terra fuit terra
Regis Edwardi Thainland, sed postea conversa est in Reveland. Cokes Instit.
Sect. 117.

After some years that followed the coming of the Normans, the title of Thane
grew out of use, and that of Baron and Barony succeeded for Thane and
Thain-land.

Whereby we may understand the true and original Reason, of that which we have
in the Lord Cromwels Case, 2. Coke 81. That every Barony of ancient time was
held by Grand Serjeanty; by that Tenure were the Thain-lands held in the time
of the Saxons, and those Thain-lands were the same that were after called
Baronies.

It Is true, the Possessions of Bishops and Abbots were first made subject to
Knights-service in Capite by William the Conqueror, in the fourth year of his
Reign, for their Lands were held in the times of the Saxons: in pura and
perpetua Eleemosyna, free, ab omni servitio saeculari.

But he then turned their Possessions into Baronies, and so made them Barons of
the Kingdom by Tenure, so that as to them, this Tenure and Service may be said
to be in Conquestu adinventum. But the Thain-lands were held by that Tenure
before.

As the Kings Thane was a Tenant in Capite, so the Thanus mediocris or middle
Thane, was only a Tenant by Knights-service, that either held of a mean Lord
and not immediately of the King, or at the least of the King as of an Honor or
Manor, and not in Capite.

What was that Trinoda Necessitas, which so often occurs in the Grant of the
Saxon Kings, under this Form. Exceptisistis tribus Expeditione, Arcis and
pontis exstructione? (See it in a Charter of King Etbeldred in the Preface to
Cokes 6. Report, etc.) But that which was after expressed by Salvo forinseco:
Bracton lib. 2. cap. 26. and 35. 12. Edw. 1. Guard 152. 26. Ass. 66. Seldom
Analect. Anglobrit. 78.

And therefore it was said that Sir Henry Spelman was mistaken, who in his
Glossary verbo feudum, refers the original of Feuds in England to the Norman
Conquest.

It is most manifest, that Capite Tenures, Tenures by Knights-service, Tenures
in Socage, Frank-almoigne, etc. were frequent in the times of the Saxons.

And if we will believe what is cited out of an old French Customary, in a MS.
Treatise of the Antiquity of Tenures in England, which is in many men's hands,
all those Tenures were in use long before the Saxons, even in the times of the
Britains, there it is said* The first British King divided Britain into four
parts,

And gave one part to the Arch-Flamines to pray for him and his posterity.

A second part he gave to his Earls and Nobility to do him Knights-service.

A third he divided among Husbandmen, to hold of him in Socage.

The fourth part he gave to Mechanical persons to hold in Burgage.

But that Testimony was waved, there being little certainty or truth in the
British Story before the times of Caesar. Neither would they make use of that,
which we are taught by William Roville of Alenzon in his Preface to the Grand
Customier of Normandy, that all those Customs (among which these Tenures are)
were first brought into Normandy out of England by Edward the Confessor.

Besides, that which has been said, we find Feuds both the name and thing in
the Laws of those times, among the Laws of Edward the Confessor, cap. 35. where
it is thus provided,

Debent enim universi Liberi homines, and secundum feodum suum, and secundum
tenementa sua, Arma habere, and illa semper prompta conservare, ad tuitionem
Regni, and servitium dominorum suorum, etc. Lambard. Archaionom. 135.

This Law was after confirmed by William the Conqueror, vid. Cokes Instit.
Sect. 103.

As these Tenures were common in those times, so were all the fruits of them,
Homage, Fealty, Escuage, Reliefs, Wardships.

For Releifs, we have full testimony in the Reliefs of their Earls and Thanes,
for which see the Laws of King Canutus, cap. 66, and 69. The Laws of Edward the
Confessor, cap. de Heterochiis, And what out of the Book of Doomsday Coke has
in his Instit. Sect. 103. Camden in Bark-shire. Seldom in Eadmer. p. 154.

That Wardships were then in use, and not brought in by the Normans, as Camden
in his Britt. 178. Nor by Hen. III. as Randolph Higden in his Polichronicon;
and others (not understanding him) would persuade. Vid. Seldens Notes on
Fortescue. 51.

Among the privileges granted by Edward the Confessor to the Cinque Ports, we
meet with this, that their heirs shall shall not be in Ward. Lambards
Perambulat. of Kent. 101.

And in the Customs of Kent, which are in the Magna Charta of Tottels Edition,
and in Lambards Perambulation, There is a Rule for the Wardship of the heir in
Gavelkind, and that he shall not be married by the Lord. And those Customs say
of themselves, that they were Devant le Conquest, and en le Conquest.

For the Antiquity of Wardships in England and Scotland, see also Hect. Boet.
lib. 11. Buchanan rerum Scot. lib. 6. and the Laws of Malcolm II. which prove
the Antiquity of Wardships in Scotland, and therefore in England before the
Norman Conquest; for in those times it is probable the Laws of both Nations did
not much differ, as for the times after, it appears they did not, by comparing
their Regiam Majestatem, and our Glanvil. Neither is the bare conjecture of Sir
Henry Spelman sufficient, to take away the force of those Laws. Vid. Spelman.
Glossar. verbo Feudum.

Upon this (amongst other reasons) they did conclude, That upon consideration
of the Authority given, and Grant thereupon made, the reservation of the Tenure
cannot be said to be Aliud. So. a separate and distinct thing from the
Authority of Granting the Land, but rather included within it. And that the
Reservation of the Tenure, though it be not Ipsa concessio, the Grant it self,
yet it is Modus concessionis, and a part of the Grant; and that therefore the
Authority being not pursued in that, the whole Grant is void.

These were their Arguments for Tenures among the Saxons; as they are set down
in the Case it self, drawn up and Printed by Order of the Lord Deputy. Sir
Henry Spelman has severally considered both the Truth and Force of them; not
strictly confining himself to their Reasons and Reflections, but taking
occasion from thence to write a very elaborate Treatise of the Nature and
Original of Feuds and Tenures.

The two discourses, Of the ancient Government of England, and Of Parliaments,
are both of them published from the Original Manuscripts in the hands of Mr.
Charles Spelman of Congham in Norfolk, son of Sir John Spelman, and Grandson to
Sir Henry.

That, concerning the Original of the four Terms, was published in the Year
1684. from a very uncorrect and imperfect Copy, which probably had been taken,
when the Author first wrote the Discourse. The Original Manuscript (with very
many Additions and Corrections, that Sir Henry afterward made in it) is
preserved in the Bodleian Library; from whence the Work is now printed entire.

The Apology for Archbishop Abbot, by an unknown Author, and the Answer to it
by Sir Henry Spelman; are in the pos^ession of Mr. Henry Spelman (son to Mr.
Clement Spelman, who was Sir Henry's youngest son) both written with our
Author's own hand. To this Answer he refers us in his Glossary* under the title
Muta Canum.

The Letters relating to the same subject, are in a Collection of Original
Papers and Records, delivered to Mr. Wharton by Archbishop Sancroft, and now
in the hands of Mr. Ch^^wel.

The Treatise of the Original of Testaments and Wills, and his Icenia, or the
description of Norfolk* are both published from the Author's own Copies, in the
Bodleian Library. The latter of these is not so complete, as he had intended to
make it.

The Catalogue of the Earls Marshal of England, and the Dissertation de Milite,
were evidently designed for a part of his Glossary; as appears from the manner
of the Composition, and from several passages in them. But when the Papers were
delivered to Sir William Dugdale, for the publication of the second part of
that Work, these two (it seems) had been mislaid. The account of the Earls
Marshal is (I fear) imperfect in some places; but will however be of good use
toward a more accurate Catalogue of them.

The succession of the Family of Sharnburn, is a piece of Antiquity that was
exceedingly valued by Sir Henry Spelman; as appears both from his Page 188.
Recommendation, and from the use that he has made of it in some part of his
Works. Having met with a Copy in Mr. Ashmole's Museum at Oxford, I thought it
might not be improper to publish it among his Remains.

The Dialogue concerning the Coin of the Kingdom, and the Catalogue of the
Places of the Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm; are in the possession of
Mr. Charles Spelman. The first is written in a hand not unlike Sir Henry
Spelman's, only somewhat less; which (if it was really his) may have been
occasioned by his writing it while he was young. For it Page 208.
appears to have been composed in the 36. of Elizabeth; when Sir Henry was but
about thirty three years of age. The Catalogue was drawn up Page 212.
Durham-house.
in the time of King James I. for the use of the then Archbishop of Canterbury;
as I gather from those words in the beginning, written in a different hand, Pro
Domino Archiepiscopo Cantuar. I dare not positively affirm, that either of
these is Sir Henry Spelman's; but the finding them among his other Papers, and
the accurate knowledge of our English affairs which appears in both, incline me
to believe that he was really the Author of them; and for that reason, they are
printed upon this occasion.

This is all I have to say concerning the Posthumous Works of Sir Henry
Spelman; which I was willing to make public, for the Author's reputation and
the service of the World.

THE LIFE OF Sir Henry Spelman Knight.
Birth.
HENRY SPELMAN was born at Congham, a Town in Norfolk near Lynn. He was
descended from an ancient Family of that name; who, about Henry the III's* time
were seated in Hampshire, but afterward removed into Suffolk, and from thence
into Norfolk, about 200. years since. His Father's name was Henry Spelman Esquire
as I learn from a Pedigree of the Family under Sir Henry's own hand; and not
John, as a Praef. ad Gloss. Edit. 1687 by J. A.
late Writer has told us. His Mother was Frances, daughter of William Sanders of
Ewel in Surrey Esquire.

Education.
After his Education at School, he was sent to Trinity College in Cambridge,
before he was quite 15. years of Age, and indeed (as he Praef. ad Gloss.
himself complains) before he was ripe for the University. He had not stayed
there two years and a half, but his Father died; and he was called home to
assist his Mother in the management of the Family. Afterward, when he came
into the World, and betook himself to Writing, and the study of our Laws, he
found the want of University Education; and condoles his misfortune in that
particular, in a Letter against Impropriations, printed among the Treatises
published by Jer. Stephens, 1647. 4t^
Letter to his friend Mr. Richard Carew. Contrary to a persuasion, very common
now adays, That Philosophy, Oratory, Poetry, and the other Exercises which take
up the first four years in our Universities, are altogether foreign to the
business of Lawyers; and that the study of them is so much loss of time, to
Gentlemen designed for that honorable Profession.

Sent to Lincoln's Inn.
After he had continued at home about a twelvemonth, he was sent to study the
Law at Lincoln's End; either with a design to practice it, or (which is more
likely) as a necessary accomplishment of an English Gentleman. There he stayed
almost three years; but was then unhappily removed, when we may imagine he
began to relish the Law, and in some measure to conquer the difficulties of it.
Many years after, we find him complaining of his hard Fortune, in the Preface
to his Glossary: and he concludes his complaint with a character of the
Common Law, which I will here transcribe for the honor of the Profession.
Excussit me interea e Clientela sua (speaking of the Law) gratiae, potestatis,
dignitatis, immensaeque apud nos largitrix opulentiae: Illa (inquam) vestitu
simplici and inculto, sed jurium omnium Municipalium (absit dictis invidia)
nobilissima domina; omni utpote justitia, moderamine, prudentia, sublimique
acumine (temere licet eam perstrinxerit Hottomannus) refertissima.

Marriage
He was about twenty years of Age; and retiring into the Country, married the
eldest Daughter and Coheir of John Le Strange, a Gentleman of an ancient Family
in Norfolk. By this match, he became Guardian to Sir Hamon Le Strange; during
whose Minority, he lived at Hunstanton, (the Seat of that Family,) and was 2
Jac. 1
High Sheriff of Norfolk. By degrees, he begun to be taken notice of, for his
great Prudence and Abilities* and was accordingly, three several times, sent by
the Employments.
King into Ireland upon public business. At home, he was appointed one of the
Commissioners To enquire into the oppression of exacted Fees, in all the Courts
and Offices of England, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; which a late Hacket,
Life of Bishop Williams, Part 2. page 93.
Author calls A noble Examination and full of Justice. To this business he gave
his constant attendance for many years together, with great integrity and
application; and the Government was so sensible of his good services, that the
Council procured his Majesty's Writ of Privy Seal for 300l. to be presented to
him; not as a full Recompense (for so they declared) but only as an occasional
Remembrance, till they should have an opportunity of doing something for him,
that might be a more suitable consideration for his diligence, in that and
other public Affairs. This attendance made him neglect his own private
business, to the great prejudice of his Family; as he himself seems to
complain, in his Preface to the Glossary. And his eldest Son (Sir John Spelman)
represented to the Privy Council, how much his Father's Estate had suffered by
it; appealing (for a proof of his great pains therein) to the knowledge of
several of their Lordships, to the Journals of that Commission, and to his
papers and collections relating to the same.

Knighted
I cannot give any particular account, of the other public Services wherein he
was employed. He was Knighted by K. James, who had a particular esteem for him,
as well on account of his known capacity for business, as his great Learning in
many kinds; more especially in the Laws and Antiquities of our Nation. These,
for a good part of his Life, he seems to have studied for the service of his
Prince, and his own diversion; but not with an eye to any particular design.

Came to live in London.
When he was about 50. years of Age, he resolved to draw his affairs into as
narrow a compass as might be; with a full design to bestow the remainder of his
time among Books and Learned Men. With this resolution he sold his Stock, let
his Estate, quitted the Country, and settled in London with his wife and
family. His next business was ( Pref. to the Gloss.
as he himself tells us) to get together all such Books and Manuscripts, as
concerned the subject of Antiquities, whether foreign or domestic: For in
these Enquiries he had ever had a particular delight; and now being in a good
measure freed from the daily disturbances he was before exposed to, it was
natural for him to fall into a study, to which his own genius had always led
him.

Study of our ancient Historians.
It is likely, he had then a good understanding of the Laws and Customs of the
Kingdom; I mean the Modern part of them, such as is commonly used in the
ordinary practice of it. But such a general knowledge could not satisfy a Mind
so curious, and a Judgment so solid, as his appears to have been, in all his
Writings. These inclined him to search into the Reasons and Foundations of the
Law, which he knew were not to be learnt, but from the Customs and Histories of
our Nation in all Ages; nor these Usages to be traced out, but by a strict
examination of the most ancient Records and Manuscripts. And as his own
inclination led him to this Enquiry; so, not troubling himself with the
Practice of the Law, but content to live quietly upon his own Estate, he was
perfectly at leisure to pursue it. And indeed (as the best things in this world
are attended with inconveniences) it is very much to the disadvantage of the
Law, that those of the Long Robe, who are best qualified to improve the
knowledge of it from original Records, are so much taken up with the business
of their Profession, that they have little time to bestow upon those matters.
As on the other hand, Men who are born to Leisure and Estates, however
inclinable they may be to the more polite parts of Learning, do seldom care to
engage in a study, which at first sight seems to be so rough and tedious. Thus,
the one wants Leisure, and the other Resolution; and so the Monuments of our
Forefathers being neglected, we are deprived of a great deal of useful
knowledge* that might be drawn from them. It was the happiness of Sir Henry
Spelman (and much more, of the English Nation) that he had both time and
inclination to do it; I mean, to examine the ancient Laws and Monuments, not
only of our own, but also of most other Northern Kingdoms. Particularly, he was
very well versed in the old Feudal law; and has shown us in a Discourse upon
that head, how most of the Tenures here in England, have their foundation from
thence. This near relation between their Customs and our Constitutions, made
him Law-Terms, Chap. 8 in MS. Oxon
many times marvel, that my Lord Cook adorning our Law with so many flowers of
Antiquity and foreign learning, should not turn aside into this field, from
whence so many roots of our Law have of old been taken and transplanted. And I
wish (so he goes on) some worthy Lawyer would read them diligently, and show
the several heads, from whence these of ours are taken. They beyond the seas,
are not only diligent, but very curious in this kind; but we are all for
profit, taking what we find at market, without enquiring from whence it came.
With this honest freedom does he censure his own times. Not but then (as well
as now) the studies to which he directs, were pursued and encouraged by Persons
of the highest Stations in the Law; and some of them were so far concerned for
the improvement of ancient Learning, that they formed themselves into a Society
of Antiquaries for that purpose: as we learn from Sir Henry's Introduction to
his Law-terms. With this design of understanding the foundation of our Laws,
Ecclesiastical as well as Civil; he read over the Fathers, Councils, and as
many of the middle-age Historians as he could meet with, whether foreign or
domestic, Printed or Manuscript. The roughness of style could not be very
pleasing; but that which chiefly discouraged him, was the great number of
strange and obsolete words; which are very hard to be understood, and yet
oftentimes are so considerable, that the meaning of the whole sentence depends
upon them. However, he went forward; and where he met with any such word, set
it down in it is proper order; with a distinct reference to the place: till by
degrees he had collected a variety of instances, and by comparing the several
passages where the same word occurred, was able to give a tolerable conjecture
at the true signification. After he had made a considerable collection of this
kind, and observed how by this means the reading of the old Historians became
every day more easy and pleasant; he begun to digest his materials; and from
the several quotations, to draw a judgment of the strict acceptance of each
word, in the respective Ages wherein it was used. For he considered, that what
had been a discouragement to him, would be so to others too; and that a work of
this nature, would remove one of the greatest difficulties in the reading of
our old Historians. But though a number of instances gave him good satisfaction,
as to the several Words; yet finding that many of our Laws since the Conquest
are drawn from the Constitution of the Saxons, and that many obsolete Terms in
our Latin Historians must be of a pure Saxon Original; he despaired of ever
accomplishing his design, for want of understanding that Language. At least, he
was certain, that the knowledge of it must needs lead him to a clearer
interpretation of many obscure passages, and enable him (throughout the whole
Work) to deliver his Opinion with a better assurance. This Language, at that
time, was not to be learnt without great difficulty: Little assistance was to
be expected from conversation, in a study which few People of that Age ever
minded. Nor had he the directions either of Grammar or Dictionary; as we at
this day are accommodated with both, very accurate in their kind. However, he
set heartily about it; and though, I think, he never perfectly conquered it; yet
(under so many inconveniences) it is a greater wonder that he should attain so
good a knowledge, than that he should not make himself an absolute Master of it.

Glossary.
After he had made large Collections, and got tolerable knowledge of the Saxon
Tongue; he resolved to go on with his undertaking: but because he would not
depend altogether upon his own Judgment, he Printed a sheet or two for a
Specimen, whereby his Friends might be able to give him their opinion of the
design. Praef. ad Gloss.
He was encouraged, on all hands by the most Learned Persons of that Age; at
home by Archbishop Usher, Bishop Williams then Lord Keeper, Mr. Seldom, and Sir
Robert Cotton; abroad, by Rigaltius, Salmasius, Piereschius, and others; as
also Bignonius, Meursius, and Lindenbrogius, whose assistances he very
gratefully acknowledges, in his Preface to the work. Brady, Answ. to Mr. Petit,
page 229.
Upon their encouragement, he prepared part of it for the Press, and offered the
whole Copy to Mr. Bill the King's Printer. He was very moderate in his demands;
desiring only five pound, in consideration of his labor, and that too to be
paid him in Books. But Mr. Bill absolutely refused to meddle with it; knowing
it to be upon a subject out of the common road, and not likely to prove a
saleable work. So that Sir Henry was forced to carry it on at his own charge;
and in the year 1626. published the first part of it, to the end of the Letter
L. Why he went no farther, I cannot tell; nor has he so much as hinted to the
cause of it, either in his Preface, or any part of his works, that I know of.
Monsieur du Fresne (who very much laments that he should not publish the second
part himself) fancies that his design of compiling the English Councils, might
be the occasion of his breaking off in the middle of his Glossary. But it is not
likely, that a Person of Sir Henry Spelman's settled Temper and Resolution,
should leave one work imperfect, to make way for another. I have heard it
affirmed by others, that he stopped at the Letter M. because he had said
somethings under Magna Charta, and Magnum Consilium, that his Friends were
afraid might give offense. But I believe, the true reason was this: Printing it
at his own charge, he must have laid out a considerable sum upon the first
part, and having a large Family, there was no reason why he should venture as
much more, without the prospect of a quicker return, than either the coldness
of the Bookseller, or the nature of the work gave him. It fell out accordingly;
for, eleven years after, the greatest part of the Impression remained unsold;
till in 1637. two of the London Booksellers took it off his hands. And (though he
should afterward have had encouragement to go forward) that was not a time to
speak freely, either of the King's Prerogative or the Liberties of the Subject;
both which would upon many occasions fall in his way. Besides, that the
finishing the second part, with the same copiousness and accuracy as he had
done the first, would have been too heavy a task for a Man of his great Age.

The Author has told us in an Advertisement before the book, that he chose to
entitle his work Archaeologus, rather than Glossarium, as we commonly call it.
For a Glossary, strictly speaking, is no more than a bare explication of Words;
whereas This does more especially treat of Things, and contains entire
Discourses and Dissertations upon several of the heads therein mentioned. For
which reason, it is not only to be consulted upon occasion, like our common
Lexicons; but ought to be carefully perused and studied, as the greatest
Treasure extant, of the ancient Customs and Constitutions of England. Before
the Edition of 1626. he has this remarkable Dedication:

Deo, Ecclesiae, Literarum Reipub. HENRICUS SPELMANNUS Omni supplex humilitate
D. D.

I have therefore set it down at large, because in the Editions of 1664. and
1687. they have thought fit to omit it: and I would not have the good Man
deprived of such a public testimony of his Modesty, and love for Truth.

The second part of the Glossary.
About the Year 1637. Sir William Dugdale acquainted our Author, that many
Learned Men were very desirous to see the Second Part published; and requested
of him to gratify the world with the Work entire. Upon that, he showed him the
Second part; as also the improvements that he had made upon the First: but
withal told him, what great discouragements he had met with from the
Booksellers. So, for that time, the matter rested; and upon the Author's death,
all the papers came into the hands of his eldest Son Sir John Spelman; a
Gentleman who had sufficient parts and abilities, to complete what his Father
had begun, if death had not prevented him.

After the Restoration of King Charles II. Archbishop Sheldon and the Lord
Chancellor Hyde, inquired of Sir William Dugdale, what became of the Second
part of the Glossary, or whether it was ever finished. He told them that it was
finished by the Author, and that the Copy was in the hands of Mr. Charles
Spelman, Grandson to Sir Henry. They desired, that it might by all means be
printed, and that he would prevail upon Mr. Spelman to do it; for the Service
of the Public and the honor of his Grandfather. Whereupon, having got a good
number of Subscriptions, the management of that whole affair was referred to
Sir William Dugdale; as well to treat with the Booksellers, as to prepare the
Copy for the Press.

The share that Sir William Dugdale had, in the publication of this Second
Part, has been made the ground of a suspicion, that he inserted many things of
his own, that were not in Sir Henry Spelman's Copy; and particularly, some
passages which tend to the enlargement of the Prerogative in opposition to the
Liberties of the Subject. The objection has been raised on occasion of a Mr.
Petit's Jani Anglorum facies Nova, p. 219. and 265. And the answer to it, by
Dr. Brady, page 229.
Controversy, about the Antiquity of the Commons in Parliament; the Authority
of Sir Henry being urged, to prove that there was no such thing as a House of
Commons till the time of Henry III. It is agreed on all hands, that this
Learned Knight was a very competent Judge of that Controversy; that as he had
thoroughly studied our Constitution, so he always writ without partiality or
prejudice; that he was not engaged in a party, nor had any other design but to
publish the truth fairly and honestly, as he found it asserted by the best
Historians. Upon these grounds, his Opinion in matters of this nature, has ever
been thought confiderable; and his bare Judgment will always be valued, when
we can be sure that it is his own. And there can be no doubt, but his
Assertions under the Title Parlamentum (upon which the controversy is raised)
are his own, and not an interpolation of Sir William Dugdale's. For the very
Copy from which it was Printed, is in the Bodleian Library, in Sir Henry
Spelman's own hand; and agrees exactly with the Printed Book: particularly, in
the passages under dispute, they are the same, word for word. So far then as
this Copy goes (for it ends at the word Riota,) it is a certain testimony, that
Sir William Dugdale did no more than mark it for the Printer, and transcribe
here and there a loose paper. And though the rest of the Copy was lost, before it
came to the Oxford Library, and so we have not the same authority for the
Glossarie's being genuine, after the Letter R; yet it is not likely that Sir
William had any more share in the seven last Letters of the Alphabet, than he
had in the others. For all the parts of such a Work must be carried on at the
same time; and so, to be sure, the Author left equal materials for the whole.
The Gentleman also, who is concerned to prove the Second Part to be all
genuine, has urged Sir William Dugdale's own authority for it; and that too
while he was living Brady, page 229.
. Then, I have seen a Letter from Sir William Dugdale to Mr. Spelman, giving
him an account of the great losses he had sustained by the Fire of London, and
the pains he had taken in the publication of the Councils and Glossary. As to
the former, he expressly lays claim to the better half of it, as his own Work
and Collection; adding, that if the Impression had not perished, in all right
and reason he ought to have had consideration for the same; as also (so he goes
on) for my pains in fitting the Copy of the Glossary for the Printer, by
marking it for the difference of Letter, and introducing and transcribing those
loose papers left by your Grandfather, without fit directions where they should
come in. This is all that he pretends to, in the Glossary; and if he had any
further share in it, it is likely he would have insisted upon it, on this
occasion; to convince Mr. Spelman the more effectually of the good services he
had done him in that business.

I have been the more particular in this matter, because if it should appear in
the main, that Sir William had taken the liberty of adding or altering; every
single passage after would be liable to suspicion, and the authority of the
whole very much weakened. For though that worthy Person was extremely well versed
in our English affairs; yet it must be owned, that Sir Henry Spelman was a
better judge of our ancient Customs and Constitutions; and consequently,
whatever he delivers as his opinion, ought to be allowed a proportionable
authority. Had he put his last hand to this Second Part, the Glossary (as it is
now printed together) would have made a much nobler Work. But the latter part,
in comparison of the other, is jejune and scanty; and every one must see, that
it is little more than a collection of Materials, out of which he intended to
compose such Discourses, as he has all along given us in the First Part, under
the words that are most remarkable. It was my good fortune, among others of his
papers, to meet with two of these Dissertations, De Marescallis Angliae and De
Milite; which are published among these Remains for the present, and will be of
use hereafter, in a new Edition of the Glossary; as properly belonging to it,
and originally designed for it by the Author.

Councils.
Though it is not likely that he should lay aside his Glossary, for the sake of
the Councils; yet it is certain, that he entered upon this latter Work, before
the Glossary was finished Praef. ad Council. Vol. I.
. He was particularly encouraged in it, by Dr. George Abbot and Dr. William
Laud, successively Archbishops of Canterbury; and above all, by the most
Learned Primate of Armagh, Archbishop Usher. And in his Preface, he tells us
that he was much confirmed in his design, by what he had heard from Dr. Wren,
first, Bishop of Norwich, and afterward of Ely. He told him, how Dr. Andrews
(the then late Bishop of Winchester) had been reflecting with great concern,
upon the diligence of the Germans, French, Italians, and other Nations, in
publishing the Histories and Decrees of their respective Synods; whilst the
English (who had a greater plenty of Evidences both in Ecclesiastical and Civil
affairs, than any of their Neighbors) had never so much as attempted such a
public Service to their Church, Upon that occasion, the good Bishop desired
Dr. Wren, that for the credit of the Kingdom and the honor of Religion, he
would think of such an Undertaking; and lest it should prove too tedious for
any single hand, that he would draw to his assistance a convenient number of
Men, of sufficient Learning and Judgment for a Work of that nature. Upon this
request, he promised to consider of it; and had proceeded, but that the Bishop
excused him, upon an assurance, that Sir Henry Spelman was engaged in the same
design. Sir Henry having been told this passage by the Bishop of Norwich, with
great modesty expressed his concern, for taking the Work out of much abler
hands. But since it had hapen'd so, he did not any longer look upon it as a
matter of choice, whether or no he should go forward; but thought he was bound
in justice to make the best satisfaction he was able, for depriving the Church
of the joint labors of so many Learned Men.

He branched his Undertaking into three parts; assigning an entire Volume to
each Division: 1. From the first Plantation of Christianity, to the coming in
of the Conqueror, in 1066. 2d. From the Norman Conquest, till the casting off
the Pope's Supremacy, and the dissolution of Monasteries by King Henry VIII.
3d. The History of the Reformed English Church, from Henry VIII. to his own
time.

(...) Councils.
The Volume containing the First of these Heads, was published in the Year 1639.
(about two years before his death) with his own Annotations upon the more
difficult places. He confesses, that it would have been impossible for him to
finish it, without the assistance of his own son and Mr. Jerem. Stephens. Of
the former of these we have occasion to speak more at large, among Sir Henry's
children: and also of the latter, upon occasion of some papers, that he left at
his death, to the care of that Learned Gentleman. Only, it may be proper to
observe in this place, that Archbishop Laud procured for him a Prebend in the
Church of Lincoln, for his assisting in the publication of the First Volume of
the Councils. And Sir Henry does, in effect, recommend to him the preparing the
Second and Third; as a person every way qualified to complete the Design.

The Author honestly tells us (...) Council.
, (that in such a confusion of thoughts and papers) he had omitted the accounts
of some Synods, which he had ready by him: that he had received Observations
from many Learned persons, after the Press was gone too far to have them
inserted: and that particularly the Learned Primate of Armagh had communicated
his Animadversions upon the whole Volume. I have seen, among his own papers,
the Remarks of Salmasius and De Laet; but where the rest are to be met with, I
cannot tell. Out of these, the Corrections and Additions that he himself had
made, he resolved to publish an Appendix to the Tome, but I suppose was
prevented by death. However, to incline the Reader to a favorable
interpretation of the omissions or imperfections of his Work; he desires him to
consider that most of his Materials were to be fetched from Manuscripts;
whereof indeed there were very great numbers, both in the Universities and
other parts of the Kingdom* but being neglected by the generality of Scholars,
they lay in confusion and were in a great measure useless, to his or any other
Design. At that time, this was a just and proper Apology; but our Age is much
more curious in those matters. Witness that noble Catalogue of Manuscripts
which we daily expect from the Oxford Press, and a Volume of the same kind
intended by the University of Cambridge.

The second Volume of the Councils.
The Second Volume of the Councils (at the same time with the second part of
the Glossary) was put into the hands of Sir William Dugdale, by the direction
of Archbishop Sheldon and Chancellor Hyde. He made considerable Additions to
it out of the Archbishop's Registers and the Cottonian Library; so that he
affirms in a Letter to Mr. Spelman, Grandson to Sir Henry, That of the 200.
sheets in that Book, not above 57. were of his Grandfather's collecting. And it
appears from the Original in the Bodleian Library, under the hands of Sir Henry
Spelman and Sir William Dugdale; that the former had left little more toward
the second Volume, than hints and references where the Councils were to be met
with. It was published in the Year 1664. but with abundance of faults,
occasioned by the negligence either of the Copier or Corrector, or both. Life
of Mr. Somner.
Mr. Somner, sensible of this, took great pains in collecting the printed Copy
with many of the Original Records; correcting the Errors in the margin of his
own book. This is now in the Library of the Church of Canterbury, and will be a
good help toward a more accurate Edition; Mr. Nicolsons English Library, part
2. page 43.
as well as those collections of Mr. Junius, in the possession of Mr. Jones of
Sunningwell. The truth is, we very much want a new Edition; the greatest part
of the Impression having been burnt in the Fire of London; so that the Book is
hardly to be met with, and (uncorrect as it is) has ever since bore an
immoderate price. I know no Work that would be a greater service to our Church,
than an entire History of all the Councils before the Reformation, *for the
account of 'em which we have already, is far from being entire* with the
Addition of a Third Volume, to contain the Public Affairs of our Reformed
Church. (It is probable, that toward this last part, some assistance may be
had from that (...) As^mol Oxon
Manuscript of Sir William Dugdale's, entitled Papers to be made use of for a
Third Volume of the Councils; though I fear not so much as the title promises.)
The great discoveries of Manuscripts; the many observations that have been made
by the Learned Bishop of Worcester and others, upon the Constitution of the
British and Saxon Churches; and the general approbation that the Work must
needs meet with; are all of 'em very good Encouragements to such an Undertaking.

Next to his Glossary and Councils; we are to give an account of that part of
his Works, wherein he asserts a due Veneration to Persons, Places, and Things,
consecrated to the service of God.

(...)
The first that he published of this kind, was his noted Treatise De non
temerandis Ecclesiis; printed at London in the 16^3. and afterward at other
places. It was written (as the title informs us) for the sake of a Gentleman,
who having an appropriate Parsonage, employed the Church to profane uses, and
left the Parishioners uncertainly provided of Divine Service in a Parish there
adjoining. The two Oxford Editions came forth with a large Preface by his son
Clement Spelman, containing many things relating to Impropriations, and several
instances of the judgments of God upon Sacrilege. The greatest part of these
instances seems to be taken from his History and Fate of Sacrilege, a book
still in Manuscript. The Gentleman, for whose sake it was written, died
immediately upon the publication of this book; but however it did very good
service to the Church. This, Mr. Stephens has made appear, in a Preface to some
of his Posthumous Works; wherein he instances in several Gentlemen who were
induced by the reading of this book, to restore their Impropriations to the
Church. That part of the Preface is since reprinted before an Edition of this
book which came out in the Year 1668. and therefore I shall not repeat the
Catalogue of them in this place. I will only beg leave to mention a more modern
benefaction of this kind; as it is set down in the late Edition of Camden's
Britannia Page* ^24.
. Scarce two miles from Arksey (in the West Riding of Yorkshire) lies Adwick
in the street, memorable on this account, that Mrs. Ann Savill (a Virgin
benefactor yet living) daughter of John Savill of Medly Esquire purchased the
Rectory thereof, for which she gave about 900l. and has settled it in the hands
of Trustees for the use of the Church for ever; and this from a generous and
pious principle upon the reading of Sir Henry Spelman's noted Treatise, De non
temerandis Ecclesiis.

Some reflections were made upon this Discourse, by an unknown Author; who
could not forgive Sir Henry for paying so much respect to Churches, and
particularly for applying the word Ecclesia to a material Church; urging that
this term belongs only to the Assembly or Congregation. This Sir Henry takes
notice of in his Glossary, under the title Ecclesia, producing some instances
of the use of that word in ancient Authors: and afterward honored it with a
fuller Apology. It is published by Mr. Stephens, at the end of his Larger work
of Tithes, (so called with respect to the Smaller Treatise De non temerandis
Ecclesiis;) together with a pious Epistle to Mr. Richard Carew, who in a Letter
to the Author had expressed his dissatisfaction in some particulars of this
Work.

Larger Work of Tithes.
His next book upon this subject, is that which he calls the Larger work of
Tithes; published by Mr. Jerem. Stephens in the Year 1646. with an excellent
Preface by the same hand. In this Discourse, he asserts Tithes to the Clergy,
from the Laws of Nature and of Nations; from the Commands of God in the Old and
New Testament; and from the particular Constitution of our own Kingdom.

The History and Fate of Sacrilege, MS
Another work, in vindication of the Rights of the Church, is still in
Manuscript, with this title; The History and Fate of Sacrilege, discovered by
examples of Scripture, of Heathens, and of Christians; from the beginning of
the world continually to this day, by Sir Henry Spelman Knight. Anno Domini 1632.
The account which the Ath. Oxon p. 230. Part 2.
Oxford Antiquary gives us of it, is this: In the Year 1663. Mr. Stephens began
to print the History of Sacrilege, designed and began by Sir Henry Spelman,
and left to Mr. Stephens to perfect and publish. But that work sticking long in
the Press, both the Copy, and sheets printed off, perished in the grand
Conflagration of London, 1666. I have been told by a Learned Divine *since, a
Prelate of our Church,) that Mr. Stephens was forbidden to proceed in an
Edition of that Work, lest the publication of it should give offense to the
Nobility and Gentry* But, whatever was the occasion of its continuing in the
Press till the Fire of London; it has been taken for granted, that the whole
book was irrecoverably lost: and I was satisfied of the same* upon Mr. Wood's
relation of the matter; till examining some Manuscripts which were given to the
Bodleian Library by the late Bishop of Lincoln, I met with a transcript of some
part of it. Upon further enquiry, I found other parts, in other places: so that
now the Work seems to be pretty entire.

He begins with a general definition of Sacrilege; then reckons up various
kinds of it, as to Places, Persons, and Things; after which, he enumerates (at
large) the many signal punishments of it among Heathens, Jews, and Christians;
describing more particularly the instances of that kind, which have formerly
happened in our Nation. Then, he proceeds to give an account of the attempt
upon the lands of the Clergy in Henry the IV's. time, and how it was
disappointed; afterward he descends to the suppression of Priories-Alien in
the Reign of Henry V. and so on to the general Dissolution under Henry VIII.
Here, he shows us the several steps of the Dissolution; the King's express
promise to employ the Lands to the advancement of Learning, Religion, and
Relief of the Poor; with the remarkable Calamities that ensued, upon the King,
his Posterity, his principal Agents in that affair, the new Owners of the
Lands, and the Lords who promoted and passed the Dissolution Act: Concluding
with a Chapter, which contains The particulars of diverse Monasteries in
Norfolk, whereof the late Owners since the Dissolution are extinct, or decayed,
or overthrown by Misfortunes and grievous Accidents.

This is a short account of a large Work: wherein the judicious Author is far
from affirming, that their being concerned in this Affair (either as promoters
of the Alienation or Possessors of the Lands) was directly the occasion of the
Calamities that ensued. On the contrary, he declares more than once, that he
will not presume to judge of the secret methods of God's Providence; but only
relates plain matters of fact, and leaves every man to make his own
application. Though it must be granted, that many of the instances (and those
well asserted) are so terrible in the Event, and in the Circumstances so
surprising; that no considering Man can well pass them over, without a serious
reflection. This Discourse might have appeared among his other Posthumous
Works; but that some persons in the present Age would be apt to interpret the
mention of their Predecessors (in such a manner, and on such an occasion) as an
unpardonable reflection upon their Families.

Codex Legum Veterum MS.
These, I think, are all the Treatises that he either wrote or published about
the Rights of the Church. The next Work that I shall mention, is a History of
the Civil affairs of the Kingdom, from the Conquest to Magna Charta, taken from
our best Historians, and generally set down in their own words. It is a
Manuscript in the Bodleian Library, and the title which Sir Henry has given it,
is this: Codex Legum Veterum and Statutorum regni Angliae, quae ab ingressu
Gulielmi, usque ad annum nonum Henrici tertii edita sunt; Hoc est, ante primum
Statutum omnium Impressorum in libris juridicis, quod Magna Charta appellatur,
ab Edwardo I. confirmata. E variis monimentis, Authoribus, Manuscriptis, and
antiquis paginis concinnatum. Opere and Studio Henrici Spelman collecta. Anno
Dom. 1627. With the Imprimatur of Sir John Bramston, July 6. 1640. Many
Instruments in this Collection, are printed in the Second Volume of his
Councils; and it might be much improved from some Historians that have been
published since his time.

De Sepultura.
In the Year 1641. there came out a Discourse de Sepultura, by Sir Henry
Spelman, concerning the Fees for Burials. It Is likely, that it was composed on
occasion of his being one of the Commissioners for regulating the Fees, in our
Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts. The Treatise consists of five sheets in 4to.
so that I wonder why J. A. in his Preface to the Glossary, should tell us that
is was no more than two leaves.

Aspilogia
His Latin Treatise entitled Aspilogia was next published (with Notes) by Sir
Edw. Bish Anno 1654. in Folio. In this (though it was one of his first Pieces) he
discourses with great variety of Learning concerning the Original and different
kinds of those Marks of Honor, since called Arms.

Book of Abbreviations.
He also drew up a scheme of the Abbreviations and such other obsolete forms of
writing, as occur in our old Manuscripts; to facilitate the reading of ancient
Books and Records. There are several Copies of it in Manuscript; as, one in the
Bodleian Library; another in the Library of the late Dr. Plot; a third in the
possession of Mr. Worsley of Lincoln's Inn; and it is probable, there may be more
of *em abroad in other hands.

(...)
Two other things he was concerned in; which I shall but just mention. The
Villare Anglicum, or a view of the Towns in England, (published in the Year
1656.) was collected Pref. to that Book.
By the appointment, at the charge, and for the use of that (...)
worthy Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman. And Mr. Speed, in his Description of Great
Britain, acknowledges that he received the account of Norfolk from the same
Learned Knight. As for his Posthumous Works which are published together on this
occasion, I shall give a more particular account of 'em in the Preface; and in
this place shall only add an instance or (...)
two, of his Encouragement to Learning and Learned Men. It was he, who first
advised Dr. Wats to the study of Antiquities, and when he had arrived to a good
skill in those matters, put him upon a new Edition of Matthew Paris. The
Doctor, in the Preface to that excellent Work, makes this grateful mention of
his Friend, and Patron: Tertium Manuscriptum accommodavit Nobilis ille
Doctissimusque Dominus Henricus Spelmannus Eques Auratus, Eruditionis
reconditioris, Judicii acerrimi Vir, nostrae Britanniae Lumen Gloriaque; Amicus
insupermeus singularis, in studiis adjutor praecipuus; and qui me primus ad
Antiquitates eruendas tam verbo quam exemplo aliquoties stimulavit erudivitque.

He was likewise a great Favourer of Sir William Dugdale; who had been
recommended to him by Sir Simon Archer, a Gentleman of Warwickshire, very well
versed in Heraldry, and the affairs of our own Nation. At that time, Mr.
Dodsworth (who was much assisted and encouraged by Sir Henry Spelman) had got
together a vast collection of Records, relating to the Foundation of
Monasteries in the Northern parts of England. Sir Henry thought that these
might be very well improved into a Monasticon Anglicanum; and lest the design
should miscarry by Mr. Dodsworth's death, he prevailed upon Mr. Dugdale to join
him in so commendable a Work; promising to communicate all his Transcripts of
Foundation Charters, belonging to several Monasteries in Norfolk and Suffolk.
For his further encouragement, he recommended him to Thomas Earl of Arundel,
then Earl Marshal of England, as a person very well qualified to serve the King
in the Office of Arms. Accordingly, upon his character of him (seconded by the
importunity of Sir Christopher Hatton) he was settled in the Heralds-office;
which gave him an opportunity to fix in London, and from the many assistances
there, to compile the laborious Volumes which he afterward published.

His revival of the old Saxon Tongue, ought to be reckoned a good piece of
service to the study of Antiquities. He had found the excellent use of that
Language in the whole course of his Studies; and very much lamented the neglect
of it, both at home and abroad: which was so general, that he did not then know
one Man in the world, who perfectly knew it. Paulatim (says he) ita exhalavit
animam, nobile illud Majorum nostrorum and pervetustum idioma; ut in universo
(quod sciam) orb, ne unus hodie reperiatur; qui hoc site perfecteve calleat;
pauci quidem, qui vel exoletas literas usquequaque noverint. Hereupon he
settled a Saxon Lecture in the University of Cambridge, allowing 20l. per An.
to Mr. Abraham Wheelock; who tells us, Dedicat. ad Tho. Adamsium ante Bedam.
that upon his advice and encouragement, he spent the best part of seven years
in the study of that Language: Magnam septennii quod effluxit partem consumpsi
Saxonum nostrorum inquirendo Monumenta, eorumque vetus idioma (Veritatis and
pacis Catholicae magistram) perquirendo; ne nobilissimi Viri and in his studiis
monitoris mei honoratissimi (...) D. Henrici Spelmanni, Antiquitatum nostrae
gentis instauratoris eximii, consilio defuissem. This stipend was intended to
be made perpetual; but both He and his eldest Son dying in the compass of two
years, the Civil Wars breaking forth, and the Estate being sequestered; the
Family became incapable of accomplishing that Design. Nor indeed was that a
Time for settlements of this kind, when such a terrible storm threatened the
Universities and the Revenues that belonged to 'em.

Acquaintance.
After he came into business, he was intimately acquainted with the most
considerable Persons of that Age. He calls Mr. Camden, his ancient Friend; and
how entire a Familiarity there was between him and Archbishop Usher, we are
informed from the Life and Letters of that Learned Primate. To these I might
add Sir Rob. Cotton, Mr. Seldom, Olaus Wormius; with Peireschius, Meursius,
Beignonius, and others of great note both at home and abroad, whom he himself
occasionally mentions, as the chief Encouragers of his Glossary. Upon the whole
matter; as his Loyalty, Wisdom, and Experience in public Affairs, would
sufficiently recommend him to the great Statesmen of his time; so his eminent
Piety and Learning must needs make him highly esteemed among Divines and
Scholars.

Children.
He had eight Children, four Sons and four Daughters. His eldest Son (the heir
of his Studies, Praef. ad Council. T. 1.
as he calls him) was John 2 Camd. Ep. 226.
Spelman Esquire a Scholar and a Gentleman; who had great assurances of favor and
encouragement from King Charles I. This good Prince sent for Sir Henry Spelman,
and offered him the Mastership of Suttons Hospital, with some other things, in
consideration of his good services both to Church and State. But after his
humble thanks to his Majesty, he told him, that he was very old and had one
foot in the grave; and that it would be a much greater obligation upon him, if
his Majesty would please to consider his Son. Accordingly, the King sent for
Mr. Spelman; and with many expressions of kindness, immediately (...) Spelman
conferred on him the honor of Knighthood. After the Civil Wars broke out, his
Majesty, by a Letter under his own hand, commanded him from his own house in
Norfolk, to give his attendance at Oxford; where he was oftentimes called to
Private Council, and employed to write several papers in Vindication of the
Proceedings of the Court. But while he was thus attending the affairs of the
Public, and *when these would give him leave) his own Private Studies; he fell
sick, and died the 25. of July, 1643. His Funeral Sermon, by his Majesty's
special order, was Preached by Archbishop Usher; an intimate Acquaintance both
of the Father and Son. In the Year 1640. he had published the Saxon Psalter from
an ancient MS. of Sir Henry's; which (as he tells us in the Preface) was a task
enjoined him by his Father. He also wrote the Life of King Alfred in English;
which having layn several years in Manuscript, was at last translated into
Latin, and published in 1678. with Mr. Walker's Commentary upon it.

Clement Spelman.
Clement Spelman (youngest Son to Sir Henry) was a Councellor, and made Puny
Baron of the Exchequer, upon the Restoration of King Charles II. He Wood, Ath
Oxon. p. 511. part 2.
published some pieces relating to the Government, and a large Preface to his
Father's Book De non temerandis Ecclesiis. Dying in June 1679. he was buried in
St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.

(...)
To return to Sir Henry: He died in London, at the house of Sir Ralph Whitfeild
his Son-in-law; being about 80. years of Age. His body, by the favor of King
Charles, was appointed to be interred in Westminster-Abbey; whither it was
carried with great solemnity, on the 24 th. of October, 1641. and buried at the
foot of the Pillar over against Mr. Camden's Monument.

The Several DISCOURSES Contained in this Volume.
1. THe Original, Growth, Propagation and Condition of Feuds and Tenures by
Knight Service, in England, page 1. CHAP. I. The occasion of this Discourse,
and what a Feud is, p. 1. CHAP. II. The Original, Growth, and Propagation of
Feuds: first in general, then in England, p. 2. CHAP. III. That none of our
Feodal words, nor words of Tenure, are found in any Law or ancient Charter of
the Saxons, p. 7. CHAP. IV. Of Tenures in Capite, more particularly, p. 10.
CHAP. V. What degrees and distinctions of Persons were among the Saxons, and of
what coudition their Lands were, p. 11. CHAP. VI. Of Earls among our Saxons, p.
13. CHAP. VII. Of Ceorls; and that they were ordinarily but as Tenants at will;
or having Lands, held not by Knight Service, p. 14. CHAP. VIII. Of Thanes, and
their several kinds, p. 16. CHAP. IX. Charters of Thane-lands granted by Saxon
Kings, not only without mention of Tenure or Feodal-service, but with all
Immunity, except Expedition, etc. p. 19. CHAP. X. Observations upon the
precedent Charters, showing that the Thane-lands or Expedition were not Feodal,
or did lie in Tenure, p. 21. CHAP. XI. More touching the freedom of Thane-land
out of Doomsday, p. 23. CHAP. XII. The fruits of Feodal Tenures; and that they
were not found among the Saxons, or not after our manner, p. 24. CHAP. XIII. No
profit of Land by Wardship in the Saxons time, p. 25. CHAP. XIV. No Wardship in
England amongst the Saxons: objections answered, p. 25. CAAP. XV. No Marriage
of Wards, p. 29. CHAP. XVI. No Livery; no Primer-seisin, p. 30. CHAP. XVII.
That Reliefs (whereon the Report most relyeth) were not in use among the
Saxons; nor like their Heriots, p. 31. CHAP. XVIII. Difference between Heriots
and Reliefs, p. 32. CHAP. XIX. No Fines for License of Alienation, p. 33. CHAP.
XX. No Feodal Homage among the Saxons, p. 34. CHAP. XXI. What manner of Fealty
among the Saxons, p. 34. CHAP. XXII. No Escuage among the Saxons: what in the
Empire, p. 36. CHAP. XXIII. No Feodal Escheate of hereditary Lands among the
Saxons, p. 37. CHAP. XXIV. Thaneland and Reveland what: no marks of Tenure, but
distinctions of Land-holders, p. 38. CHAP. XXV. How the Saxons held their
Lands; and what obliged them to so many kinds of Services, p. 40. CHAP. XXVI.
The Charter whereby Oswald Bishop of Worcester, disposed diverse Lands of his
Church after the Feodal manner of that time, entitled, Indiculum Libertatis de
Oswalds-Laws-Hundred, p. 41. CHAP. XXVII. Inducements to the Conclusion, p. 43.
CHAP. XXVIII. The Conclusion, p. 46. II. Of the Ancient Government of England,
p. 49. III. Of Parliaments, p. 57. IV. The Original of the four Terms of the
Year, p. 67. The Occasion of this Discourse, p. 69. SECT. I. Of the Terms in
general, p. 71. SECT. II. Of the names of Terms, ibid. SECT. III. Of the
Original of Terms or Law-days, p. 73* SECT. IV. Of the Times assigned to
Law-matters, called the Terms, ibid. CHAP. I. Of Law-days among the Ancients,
p. 74. CHAP. II. Of Law-days amongst the Romans, using choice days, p. 75.
CHAP. III. Of Law-days among the first Christians, using all times alike, p.
75. CHAP. IV. How Sunday came to be exempted, p. 76. CHAP. V. How other
Festival and Vacation-days were exempted, ibid. CHAP. VI. That our Terms took
their original from the Canon Law, p. 77. CHAP. VII. The Constitution of our
Saxon Kings in this matter, ibid. CHAP. VIII. The Constitution of Canutus, more
particular, p. 78. CHAP. IX. The Constitution of Edw. the Confessor, most
material, p. 79. CHAP. X. The Constitution of William the Conqueror, p. 80.
CHAP. XI. What done by Will. Rufus, Henry I. K. Stephen, and Hen. II. p. 81.
CHAP. XII. The Terms laid out according to their ancient Laws, p. 82. CHAP.
XIII. Easter-term, p. 83. CHAP. XIV. Trinity-term, p. 84. CHAP. XV. Of
Michaelmass-term, according to the ancient Constitutions, p. 85. CHAP. XVI. The
later Constitutions of the Terms, p. 86. CHAP. XVII. How Trinity term was
altered and shortn'd, p. 87. CHAP. XVIII. [How Michaelmass-term was abbreviated
by Act of Parliament, 16. Car. I. Cap. 6.] p. 81. SECT. V. Other considerations
concerning Term-time, ibid.
CHAP. I. Why the High-Courts sit not in the afternoons, p. 89. CHAP. II. Why
they sit not at all some days, p. 90. CHAP. III. Why some Law business may be
done on days exempted, p. 93. CHAP. IV. Why the end of Michaelmass-term is
sometimes holden in Advent, and of Hilary in Septuagesima, etc. p. 95. CHAP. V.
Why Assizes be holden in Lent, ibid. CHAP. VI. Of the Returns, p. 96. CHAP.
VII. Of the Quarta dies post, p. 97. CHAP. VIII. Why there is so much Canon and
Foreign Law used in this Discourse; with an excursion into the original of our
Laws, p. 98. Appendix, p. 104.
V. An Apology for Archbishop Abbot, touching the death of Peter Hawkins the
Keeper, wounded in the Park at Bramsil, July 24. 1621. p. 107. VI. An Answer to
the said Apology, p. 111. VII. Letters and Instruments relating to the killing
of Hawkins, by the A. B. p. 121. VIII. Of the Original of Testaments and Wills,
and of their Probate, to whom it it anciently belonged, p. 127. IX. Icenia,
sive Norfolciae Descriptio Topographica, p. 133. X. Catalogus Comitum
Marescallorum Angliae, p. 165. XI. Dissertatio de Milite, p. 172. De aetate
Militari, p. 174. De evocatis ad Militiam suscipiendam, p. 175. De modo ^reandi
Militem honoratum; and primo de Cingulo militari, p. 176. Qui olim fiebant
Milites, p. 179. Qui possint militem facere, p. 180. Judices etiam sub
appellatione Militum censeri; scil. Equ. esse Palatinos, p. 182. De loco and
tempore Creationis, p. 183. De Censu militari, p. 184. Modus Exauctorandi
Militem, quod Degradare nuncupatur.
XII. Historia Familiae de Sharnburn, p. 187. XIII. Familiae Extraneorum (sive
Lestrange) accurata descriptio, p. 200. XIV. A Dialogue concerning the Coin of
the Kingdom; particularly, what great treasures were exhausted from England, by
the usurpt Supremacy of Rome, p. 203. XV. A Catalogue of the Places or
Dwellings of the Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm (now or of former
times) in which their several Owners have Ordinary Jurisdiction, as if parcel
of their Diocese, though they be situate within the precinct of another Bishop's
Diocese, p. 211.
THE Original, Growth, Propagation and Condition OF FEUDS and TENURES BY
KNIGHT SERVICE, In ENGLAND.
CHAP. I.
The occasion of this Discourse, and what a Feud is.
IN the great case of Tenures, upon the Commission of Defective Titles, argued
by all the Judges of Ireland, and published after their resolution by the
commandment of the Lord Deputy, this year 1639. it fell out upon the fourth
point of the Case to be affirmed, That Tenures had their original in England
before the Norman Conquest: And in pursuit of this Assertion it was concluded,
That Feuds were then and there in use. In proof hereof diverse Laws and Charters
of the Saxon Kings, and some other Authorities be there alleged, which being
conceived to have cleared that point, it thus follows in the Report, p. 35.

And therefore it was said that Sir Henry Spelman was mistaken, who in his
Glossary (verbo Feodum) refers the original of Feuds in England to the Norman
Conquest. And for a Corollary (p. 38.) adds these words:

Neither is the bare conjecture of Sir Henry Spelman sufficient to take away
the force of these Laws. Vide Spelman in Glossar. verbo Feodum.

Being thus by way of voucher made a chief Antagonist to the Reverend opinion
of these learned, grave, and honored Judges, I humbly desire of them, that
writing what I did so long ago, and in a transitory passage among a thousand
other obscure words (not thinking then to be provoked to this account) they
will be pleased to pardon my mistakings where they fall, and to hear without
offense, what motives led me to my conjectures which they speak of. It is
necessary therefore, that first of all we make the question certain, which (in
my understanding) is not done in the Report. For it is not declared whether
there were diverse kinds of Feuds or no; nor what kind they were that were in
use among the Saxons: nor what kind those were that I conjectured to be brought
in by the Norman Conqueror. I will therefore follow the direction of the
Orator, and fix the question upon the definition.

(...) d^finit^^n of a (...).
A Feud is said to be Vsus fruct^s quidam rei immobilis sub condition fidei.
But this Definition is of too large extent for such kind of Feuds as our
Question must consist upon: for it includes two members or species greatly
differing one from the other, the one Temporary and revocable, (as those at
Will or for Years, Li^e or Lives) the other Hereditary and perpetual. As for
Temporary ^eu^s, which (like wild fig trees) could yield none of the feodal
fruits of Wardship, Marriage, Relief, etc. unto their Lords, they belong
nothing unto our argument, nor shall I make other use in setting of them forth,
than to assure the Reader they are not those that our Laws take notice of.

To come therefore to our proper Scheme, let us see what that Hereditary Feud
is, whereupon our Question must be fixed: for none but this can bear the feodal
fruits we speak of, Wardship, Marriage, etc.

The (...).
Cujac. in praefat. ad. lib. 1. feud. p. 10. and seq.
A Feud is a right which the Vassal has in Land, or some immovable thing of
his Lord's, to use the same and take the profits thereof hereditarily: rendering
unto his Lord such feodal duties and services as belong to military tenure: the
mere propriety of the soil always remaining unto the Lord. I call it as the
Feudists do, Jus utendi praedio alieno; a right to use another man's Land, not a
property in it; for in true feodal speech the Tenant or Vassal has nothing in
the Cujac. ad lib. 3. feud. tit. 1. p. 178.
propriety of the soil it self, but it remains entirely unto the Lord, and is
comprehended under the usual name which we now give it of the Seignory. So that
the Seignory and the Feud being joined together, seem to make that absolute and
complete estate of Inheritance, which the Feudists in time of old called
Allodium. But this kind of Feud (we speak of) and no other, is that only
whereof our Law takes notice, though time has somewhat varied it from the
first institution, by drawing the propriety of the soil from the Lord unto the
Tenant. And I both conceive and affirm under correction, That this our kind of
Feuds being perpetual and hereditary, and subject to Wardship, Marriage, and
Relief, with other feodal services, were not in use among our Saxons; nor our
Law of Tenures (whereon they depend) once known unto them. As shall appear by
that which hereafter follows.

CHAP. II.
The Original, Growth, and Propagation of Feuds: first in general, then in
England.
BEfore I enter into the Question in hand, it will be necessary for better
understanding that which follows, to set forth the original, growth,
propagation, and condition of Feuds in general: which I conceive to be thus.

There were no doubt from the beginning of Jus Gentium, Lords and Servants; and
those servants of two sorts. Some to attend and guard the person of their Lord
upon all occasions in War and Peace. Some to manure his Lands for the
sustenance of him and his Family. When private Families were drawn into a
Kingdom, the Kings themselves held this distribution. Instances of Feuds among
the (...).
Examples hereof are in all Nations. 1 Chronicles. ^hap. 23, and 2^
King David well observed it in the Institution of the Kingdom of Israel: where,
if such services have any show of Feuds or Tenures, we have a pattern for them
all: viz. For that of Francalmoine Ibid. Cap. 23.
in the Levites: for Knight Service, Tenure in Capite, and Grand Serjeanty Cap.
27.
in the Military men, which served the King personally by monthly courses: for
Socage, in those whom David appointed to manure the Fields, dress the
Vineyards, the Olive Trees, the Mulberry-trees, and that had the care of the
Oil, of the Oxen, of the Camels, Asses, Sheep, etc. For the lands and portion
of the Levites was given to do the service of the Tabernacle; Number. 21. 14. 1
Kings 13. 17.
the lands of the other tribes, to fight the battles of the Lord against his
idolatrous enemies, and to root them out. Thus may fancy couple the remotest
things. To come lower down and nearer home, Lib. de Phocid. p. 118.
Pausanias tell's us, that when Brennus (who they say was a Britain) invaded
Greece with an army of Gauls; every horseman of the better sort, had two other
Among the Gauls.
horsemen to attend and second him (as his Vassals) and they three together were
called (...) Trimarcesiam, i. e. a society of three horsemen. Bell. Gall. lib.
6. p. 118.
But Caesar says, that the nobler Gauls in his time, had (according to their
abilities) many horsemen attending them in war, whom by a German word he
calls Ambactos, which properly signifies servants, vassals, workmen, Ambact^.
and laborers; yet he by a fairer name expounds it there Bell. Gall. p. 184.
in Latin Clientes, and in another place Ibid. p. 124.
calls them among the Germans Comites and familiares, as accounting them (like
Abraham's Genes. 14. 14.
318. Soldiers) to be all their Lord's followers and of his family. Tacitus
Germ. Mor. p. 129.
likewise names them Comites, as companions and followers; quod bello sequi
Dominum coguntur, says Cujac. ad Constit. Lotharii feud. lib. 5. p. 284.
Cujacius. But Tacitus further says, Gradus quinetiam ipse Comitatus habet
judicio ejus quem sectantur; that there were degrees in those companies, as he
whom they followed did appoint. Like them, perhaps, in after-ages of Earls,
Barons, Knights, etc. But how the Comites or Ambacti were maintained, neither
Caesar nor yet Tacitus have related. As for such portions of land, as we call
Knights-Fees, they could not then have any; for Caesar Bell. Gall. lib. 6. p.
120.
speaking of the Germans says, (and so it appears by Tacitus) Germ. Mor.
neque quisque agri modum certum, aut fines proprios habet, etc. That no man
has any certain estate or peculiar bounds of lands; but the Magistrate and
Lords (of the place) assign from year to year to kindreds and such as live
together, what quantity of land, and in what place they think good; and the
next year force them to remove. The reason you may see in Caesar, who Bell.
Gall. p. 121.
also shows, That they had no common Magistrate; but the Lord of the Town or
territory set what laws he would among his followers or Ambactos.

These laws, the Goths, the Swedes, the Danes, and Saxons, called Bilagines; of
By, which in all these languages signifies a town, and lagh or laghen which
signifies laws, as Gravius In Epist. ad Bon. Vulcan. Vid. Bellagines in
Glossario nostro.
Suecus, and our Saxon Authors testify. And though Jornandes a Spanish Goth
writes it after the Spanish corruption Bellagine^, yet we in England keep the
very radix and word it self Bylaws even unto this day, though diverted somewhat
from the sense that Caesar speaks of. For we call them Town-laws or Bylaws
which the Townsmen make among themselves; but Caesar shows that the Lords
imposed them. Herewith agrees, that of Tacitus, or some other Ancient, who
speaking of the Germans says, Agricolis suis jus dicunt, They give laws to
them which dwell upon their lands. For I take Agricolis here in the larger
sense, to extend to all that dwell upon the Lord's lands (as well his military
followers as his husbandmen) in the same manner as solicolae contains all
that live upon the soil, ruricolae all that live in the Country, and coelicolae
all that live in heaven.

These Lordships of Towns, which Caesar speaks of, were after by the Normans
called Maneria. The Ambacti or Comites, and these which he says sectabantur
Dominos suos, were called Vassalli, and sectatores manerii sive Curiae Domini
Vassals and Suitors of Court. The Bilagines or Town-laws were called
Consuetudines and customs of the Manor. The jurisdiction, which the Lord had
over his followers and suitors, was called the Court Baron, and the portions of
land, etc. assigned to his followers for their stipend or maintenance, were at
first called Munera, after Beneficia; and lastly Feuda or Tenant-lands, which
were of two sorts, one for military men called Feudum militare and Feudum
nobile, tenure by Knights-service; the other for husbandmen called therefore
Feudum rusticum and ignobile, tenure in Socage, or by the Plough.

Thus it appears that Feuds and Tenures and the Feudal law it self, took
their original from the Germans and Northern Nations. In such condition
therefore (how obscure soever) as Caesar and Tacitus left them to us, Cujac. in
pr^^. a^ lib. p. 1.
Gerardus Niger the Consul of Milan (who flourished about A. D. 1176. and first
composed them into a book) takes them up as he there finds them, and
speaking of the times of Caesar and Tacitus (as having the forementioned
passages under his eye) says, Antiquissimo tempore sic erat in Dominorum
potestate connexum, ut quando vellent, possent auferre rem in feudum a se
datam. And this agrees with Caesar, by whom it seems in the places before
mentioned, that the Ambacti or followers of the Germans had in those times
either no land at all, or no estate at all in their land, or first but at the
will of the Lord, and then but for one single year. Which Gerardus also
confesses to have been the condition of the eldest sort of feudataries, for he
says presently after his former words, Postea vero eo ventum est, ut per annum
tantum stabilitatem haberent (res in feudum datae). Thus for another while
their Feudal Vassals (whom here he calls fideles, and we now tenants by
Knights-Service) enjoyed their feuds no otherwise than from year to year at the
pleasure of their Lords, either by grant or sufferance, Cujac. ad li^ 1. feud.
p. 21.
till further grace confirmed them to them for diverse years, and at length for
term of life, which Gerardus also presently there declares, saying, Deinde
statutum est ut usque ad vitam fidelis producerentur (feuda.) In this manner
stood the principal feuds themselves, even those of Earldoms and Dukedoms
(which they call feuda majora and feuda regalia) in the latter time of the
Saxons, till the coming of the Conqueror. But as touching the lesser feuds
which we call Knights-Fees, I find nothing in Abby-books, otherwise than a
numerous multitude of Leases and Grants made by Bishops and Abbats to their
followers for term of life, without mention of Tenure or Feudal service. Yet I
must confess that there is a notable precedent Vid infra Chap. ^6
left us by Oswald Bishop of Worcester in the time of King Edgar, who in
granting out the lands of his Bishopric unto his followers, for life or three
lives, imposed upon them by a solemn Instrument, ratified by the King himself,
a multitude of services and charges, as well military as civil: which after you
shall here see, and then consider how and whether they conduce to our Feuds or
not.

Tenu^e^ ^^r Li^e.
If we understand them to be Feuds among the Saxons or of that nature, then are
we sure they were no more than for life, and not inheritable nor stretching
further, without further grace obtained from the Lord. For which purpose
Conradus Salicus (a French Emperor, but of German descent) going to Rome about
forty five years before the time of our King Edgar (viz. sub An. Dom. 915.) to
fetch his Crown from Pope John X. made a Constitution upon the petition of his
Soldiers: That filii or aviatici, the sons, or if no Sons were living the
Nephews or Grandsons (as they call them) of some of them, should succeed in the
Feud of their Father. (See the Constitution in the beginning of the fifth book
of Feuds.) But Gerardus notes that this law settled not the Feud upon the
eldest Son, or any other Son of the Feudatarie particularly; but left it in the
Lord's election to please himself with which of them he would. After this,
Feuds were continued in diverse places by several increments to the third,
fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh generation, and sometime (for want of lineal
issue) collaterally to the brother, as Gerardus testifies; but whether by some
positive law, or by the munificence of the Lords, he does not tell us; nor when
or by whom they were made perpetual and hereditary; though he confesses, that at
last they grew to be extended in infinitum, and then they began to be settled
upon the eldest Son, who formerly had no pre-eminence above a younger brother.
But while they stood sometimes produced in this manner by the indulgence of
Princes, to the third, fourth, or fifth generation, etc. some men of learning
have concluded them to be hereditary, as though there were no medium between a
limitation (how far so ever extended) and infinitum.

How Feuds became hereditary.
To pass by that; let us now go on in examination, when and how Feuds became
Hereditary. Some suggest a show of such a matter under the two Othones, German
Emperors (who succeeded one the other about the year 973.) But to rest upon
the common and received opinion (which we shall hereafter more at large
declare,) the truth is, that when Hugh Capet usurped the Kingdom of France
againgst the Carolinges, he to fortify himself, and to draw all the Nobility
of France to support his Faction about the year 987. granted to them in the
year 988. that whereas till then they enjoyed their Feuds and Honors but for
life or at pleasure of their Princes; they should from thenceforth for ever
hold them to them, and their heirs, in Feudal manner by the Ceremony of Homage,
and oath of Fealty: And that he would accordingly maintain them therein, as
they supported him and his heirs in the Crown of France; which they joyfully
accepted.

Feuds hereditary in England.
This was a fair direction for William of Normandy (whom we call the
Conqueror) how to secure himself of this his new acquired Kingdom of England;
and he pretermitted not to take the advantage of it. For with as great
diligence as providence, he presently transferred his Country-customs into
England (as the Black book of the Chequer witnesses) and amongst them (as
after shall be made perspicuous) this new French custom of making Feuds
hereditary, not regarding the former use of our Saxon Ancestors; who, like all
other Nations, save the French, continued till that time their Feuds and
Tenures, either arbitrary or in some definite limitation, according to the
ancient manner of the Germans, received generally throughout Europe. For by the
multitude of their Colonies and transmigrations into all the chiefest parts
thereof, they carried with them such Feodal rights, as were then in use amongst
them; and planting those rites and customs in those several Countries where
they settled themselves, did by that means make all those several Countries to
hold a general conformity in their Feuds and Military customs. So by the
Longobards they were carried into Italy, by the Saliques into the Eastern parts
of France, by the Franks into the West part thereof, by the Saxons into this
our Britain, by their neighbors the Western Goths (who communicated with the
Germans in manners, laws, and customs,) into Spain; and by the Eastern Goths
into Greece it self, and the Eastern parts of Europe, etc. These (I say)
carried with them into the parts of Europe, where they settled, such ancient
Feudal customs, as at the time of their transmigration were in use among them.
But the more prevalent and more generally received customs, were those that
were in use or taken up in the time of Conradus the Emperor, and when Feuds
became hereditary; for on them especially is the Feudal Law grounded and
composed, though enlarged oftentimes by Constitutions of the Emperors, and
spread abroad into diverse Nations by their example, countenance, or authority.
Wherein the Court of Milan was chiefly followed in rebus judicatis (as
appears by Duarenus Comment. in consuet. F^^d. Cap. 1.
and Merula Rex Mediolan. lib. 3.
;) but reserving unto every Nation their peculiar rights and customs. Gunt. p.
409.
For it was generally received into every Kingdom, and then conceived to be the
most absolute law for supporting the Royal estate, preserving union, confirming
peace, and suppressing robberies, incendiaries, and rebellions. I conclude with
Cujacius, who upon the abovecited passages of Gerardus Niger, says, A^ lib. 1.
Feud. Tit. 1. p. 21.
Quam aliam Feudorum originem quaerimus? His veluti incrementis paulatim feuda
constituta sunt; quae and post Conradum usus recepit, ut transirent ad liberos
mares in infinitum, etc.

The great growth of (...) ^s to title.
The Military and Lay-Feuds being thus advanced from an arbitrary condition to
become perpetual and hereditary, Cujac. Feud. lib. 3. p. 180.
did now in ordinary account leave their former name of Beneficia (which were
only temporary for years, or life) unto the Livings of the Clergy, and retained
to themselves the proper name of Feuds, whereby they were produced to be
perpetual and hereditary. Cujacius therefore speaking of them both, says, Ibid.
Feudum differt a beneficio, quod hoc temporaneum fuit, illud perpetuum. And
treating in another place of these beneficiarii and temporarii possessores, he
says further, Lib. 1. p. 7.
Iisdem postea c^pit concedi feudum in perpetuum, quod est verum, and proprium
Feudum. Concluding in a third place, Feud. lib. 1. p. 5.
that Propria Feudi natura haec est, ut sit perpetua. So that Cassineus in the
Feuds of Burgundy says, (...) 3. ^. 5. (...) 437.
that Omne Feudum quocunque modo acquisitum fit haereditarium, cum successione
sit redactum ad instar Allodialium: That all Feuds by what means soever they be
acquired, are made hereditary; in so much as by the continual succession of the
children into the Feuds of their Fathers, the Feuds are now brought to be like
Allodial or patrimonial inheritances. Thus Feudum (which at first was but a
tottering possession, ad voluntatem Domini) growing at length to be an
irrevocable estate, descending by many successions from son to son, became at
last to be an absolute inheritance, and thereupon the words themselves Feudum
and Haereditas in common use of speech (Quem penes arbitrium est and jus and
norma loquendi)
to be voces convertibiles, and by a fair metonymia each to signify other. For
as Horace further says, -- Verborum vetus interit aetas,
Et juvenum ritu florent modo nata vigentque.
Aptly therefore and truly is it said by the ever honored Justice Littleton,
that Feodum idem est quod haereditas; and the captious criticism of Sir Thomas
Smith (Dr. of the Civil Law) in denying it, is to his own reproach: for his
great Master Cujacius (as before appears) supporteth Littleton; and his
fellow Civilians do tell him, quod in feudis particularis and localis
consuetudo attendenda est. And Littleton received it as used in this
signification from the eldest writers of our Law. Of the like indiscretion is
that of Dr. Cowell, who carpeth at this ancient phrase used in the formulis of
our pleading, where it is ordinarily said, Rex seisitus fuit in Dominico suo ut
de feodo, as tho de feodo was there to be understood according to the Court of
Milan, for praedium militare superiori Domino and servitiis obnoxium; not by
the laws of England, pro directo dominio vel haereditate pura and absoluta.

No proper Feuds before the Conquest.
To conclude therefore. It appears by this passage of Justice Littleton's,
joined to that we have formerly delivered, that our Law took no notice of Feuds
till they were become hereditary with us; which being since the Conquest (as we
have already showed, and shall prove abundantly hereafter) overthrows all the
arguments in the Report produced for proving our Feodal rites of Tenure,
Wardship, Marriage, Relief, etc. to have been in use among the Saxons; for till
they were hereditary, these appendances could not belong to them. It is also
very improbable that Feuds were made hereditary here in England before other
Countries; or that the more civil Nations of Europe, should take example herein
from our rude (if not illiterate) Saxons.

CHAP. III.
That none of our Feodal Words, nor Words of Tenure, are found in any Law or
ancient Charter of the Saxons.
What Tenures were in use among the Saxons.
IT appears by that which has been said, that our modern kind of Feuds could
not be in use among our English Saxons. And it will now be a question, whether
any of our modern Tenures (or which of them) were then in use, or not? The
Report says, It is most manifest that Capite-Tenures, Tenures by
Knight Service, Tenure in Socage, Frank-Almoign, etc. were frequent in the time
of the Saxons. I desire that without offense, I may examine this that is so
manifest, and so frequent. I confess there be many specious shows of
Knight Service and Socage among our Saxon Ancestors; but whether by way of
Tenure, Contract, or De more Gentium, must be well examined. For the Romans and
other Nations had formerly as great command over their followers, and such as
dwelt upon their lands, as our Saxons had, yet was it without any rule or
speech of Tenure.

Tenures when first used.
The word Tenura is neither known nor found in any Latin Author of antiquity,
nor any conjugate thereof (as tenentes, tenementa, tenere or tenendum) in a
feodal sense. The first place where I meet with tenere in that manner, is
amongst the Saliques and Germans, in the Constitution before mentioned of
Conradus the Emperor, about the year 915, when Beneficia (which we now call
Feuds) were first continued to some of the sons and grandchildren of the male
line of them that then enjoyed them. But I find not one of those words or any
consignificant or equivalent to them, in all our Saxon-laws. The word Feodum,
Feud or Fee it self, is never mentioned in them, nor is there any sound of
Tenure in Capite, Tenure by Knightservice, Tenure in Socage, Frank-Almoign,
etc. either in our Saxon laws or in the laws of any other Nation (that I can
find) till the time that Feuds began to be perpetual or hereditary (as before
is mentioned.) It is true that in some Latin Charters of the Saxon time, we now
and then find the words Tenere, tenementum, and tenendum: and in a Charter of
Beorredus King of the Mercians dated Anno 868. the words de eodem seodo, (as
though Lordships at that time had been distributed into Feuds;) which being
reported by Ingulfus Translation of Saxon Charters.
a Saxon, gives great probability that Feuds were then in use. But it is to be
noted, that these Charters are (as I said) in Latin and not in Saxon; and
therefore not likely to be the very originals, but translations of them made
after the Conquest for the instruction of the Normans, either by Ingulf
himself, or some other expert in the Norman language, laws, and customs. Who
applying himself to the understanding of the Normans, used Norman words, and
such interpretation as they were best acquainted with, though differing from the
propriety of the Saxon tongue; and so perhaps translated de eodem f^odo for de
eodem territorio or patrimonio; and tenentes, tenementa and tenendum, for
possidentes, possessiones and possidendum. Not unlike our translators of the
holy Scriptures, who tell us of the Arms of Families, Chancellors, Sheriffs,
Recorders, Townclerks, Doctors of Law, Homage done to Solomon, and of the
arraignment of our blessed Savior; as though the Jewish and Asiatick Nations had
in those days of old, their College of Heralds, the same Magistrates, Officers,
Degrees in School, Customs of Law, Pleas of the Crown, and form of Government,
which we in England have at this day. No Feodal words among the Saxons.


By such allusions I suppose (or illusions rather) came our later Feodal words
into ancient Latin Charters. I desire to see but one Charter in the Saxon
tongue before the Conquest, wherein any Feodal Word is apparently expressed. A
Saxon Chronicle tells us, that King Alfred in the year 896. gave London to
Ethelred (an Earl or Alderman that married his daughter Ethelfled) to healdo,
that is ad tenendum, which some understand Feodally as to hold it of him; but
Wigorniensis reports the matter plainly ad servandum, that is, to keep and
defend it. So among the customs of Kent, the word healder (i. e. holder) is
used for a Tenant in the Saxon distich there cited. But it is to be noted, that
those customs were collected long after the Conquest, and therefore written in
the Norman tongue, not in the Saxon; and that the distich it self is not of the
ancient Saxon, but of a puisne dialect used vulgarly since the Conquest.

The charter of Beorredus examined.
But because the Charter of Beorredus (produced by my self against my self) is
more material for proof of Feuds among the Saxons, than all that is alleged to
that purpose in the Report; First, in respect of the Antiquity thereof; then
for that it names the word feodo expressly; and thirdly, for that it declares
certain lands to be de eodem feodo, as if there were many other Feods then in
use: Give me leave (I beseech you) to examine this Charter yet more largely and
particularly. It is therefore to be understood, that the elder Saxons made
their ordinary conveyance of Lands, etc. without deed or writing, by delivery
of a Turff or Spear, a Staff, an Arrow, or some other symboll, in token
thereof. Yea their very Laws (like those of the Lacedaemonians called Rhetra)
were unwritten; till Ethelbert their first Christian King, caused his own Laws
to be put in writing about the year 605. (as other Western Nations in an age or
two before had done) and as Bede says, Hist. Lib. 2. c. 5.
wrote them in the Saxon tongue. The first Charter (if I shall so call it) or
writing, touching lands and privileges, was (as a MS. of Canterbury reports)
made by Withredus King of Kent in the year 694. and (as that Charter it self
witnesses) was appointed to be kept in the Church of our Savior at
Canterbury, as a precedent for posterity to imitate; and though it appears not
there in what language it was written, yet I presume it was in the same with
their Law, which was the Saxon tongue. For there be two copies of it extant in
Latin, so differing the one from the other, as thereby they both appear to be
translations. For proof thereof, the one of them uses the words Charta and
Chartula, which Ingulfus affirms to be brought in hither by the Normans, that
is, above three hundred years after the time of this Charter of Withred's. The
other Latin copy terms it Scriptum not Chartam; and the Saxons themselves
used neither of those words, but called such writings in Latin Chirographos,
not Chartas; as Ingulfus there also testifies. So that it hereby appears,
that the Prototype or first pattern of Charters which the Saxons imitated, was
not in Latin but in Saxon.

Saxon Charters in the Saxon tongu^.
Secondly, it is therefore to be presumed (and very strongly) that though this
Charter of Beorredus remains to us by a Latin copy, yet the original it self
(like a thousand others) was in the Saxon tongue. Nor could it in all
probability be otherwise; for at the very time when it was made, (viz. in anno
868.) learning was so generally subverted throughout England, by the barbarous
Danes, that King Alfred (who began to reign within four years after the date
thereof) says, Council. Brit. p. 378.
Paucissimi fuerunt cis Humbrum, qui vel preces suas communes sermon Anglico
intelligere potuerant, vel scriptum aliquod e Latino transfer. Tam sane pauci
fuerunt, ut ne unum quidem recordari possum ex australi part Thamesis, tum cum
ego regnare occaeperam. But as their original Charters were in the Saxon
tongue; so in the Leiger-books in which they are preserved to us, they are
often set down in the Saxon, and then (because the books themselves are in
Latin) they are there translated also into Latin, and often times set down in
the Latin only without the Saxon; as in the book of Ramsey-Abby, which having
no Charters in it in the Saxon tongue, the Author of it says, In praesatione
illius Libri.
that himself had there translated them all into Latin, after that that Abbey in
the days of King Stephen had recovered her liberty. Yet I deny not, that Latin
Charters might be often used by their latter Clergymen, when learning (which
in Beorred's time was utterly subverted) began at last to recover life again.

Feudum not in use in Beorredus's days.
Thirdly, (I conceive) that the word feudum or feodum was not in use in
Beorredus's days, (viz. anno. 868.) For proof whereof, we are to consider the
infancy, youth, and full age of the Feodal Law; for according to these several
times, the Feodal Lands had their several denominations. First, they were
called Munera, then Beneficia, and lastly Feuda (as is aforesaid.) Marculfus,
who collected the Formulas (or Precedents as we call them) of Charters and
Instruments of the time he lived in (which was under Clodovaeus II. King of
France about the year 660.) makes mention, in his first book of Munera, and in
his second of Beneficia; but no where of Feuda: and he who a hundred years or
more after him collected the Formula's incerti Autoris, speaks diverse times
Chap. 20. and 21.
of Beneficium, but never names Feudum: for that this term came not into use
till afterward, when these Beneficia began to be granted in perpetuity.
Beneficium Regis (says Ad Marcul^. p. 470.
Bignonius) postea Feudum dictum est. And in another place he says, P. 550.
Beneficii nomine ea praedia dicta (sunt) -- quae Feuda posteritas dixit;
initio namque vita accipientis finiebantur. As if he should say, they were
called Beneficia when they were granted only for life of the Grantee; but were
called Feuda when they began to be granted in perpetuity, and not before.
Cujacius therefore speaking Prooem ad lib. Feud. p. 7.
of Feudatarii, which word came into use with Feudum, (for Relatives mutuo se
ponunt and auferunt) says, that when Actores, custodesque proediorum nostrorum
temporarii, perpetui esse caeperunt, etc. when those who had the use and
ordering of our Lands for a certain time, began to enjoy them in perpetuity,
and yet retained their Latin name of Homines (our Men,) they grew then also to
be called after new and foreign names, Vassalli, Leudes and Feudatarii, by the
Princes and great Noblemen; who choosed rather to grant them lands in
perpetuity, in consideration that they should do them military service. And he
says, that these names were first brought into Italy by the German Princes.
Where (and particularly in Milan, as Merula reports) the Feodal Laws and
Customs have had their original, and from thence been propagated throughout
Europe. By this it appears, that the words Feudum and Feudatarii were not in
use till that the word Munera was grown obsolete. Nor afterward, till
Beneficia, leaving to be temporary or but for life, became to be perpetual
possessions; which (as I have often said) was not long before the Conquest. So
that the word Feudum could not be in use in Beorredus's time, who lived two
hundred years before.

Feuda and Beneficia.
Fourthly, Though the word Feudum were in the original Charter of Beorredus, yet
does it not prove that our Feuds were then in use. For call them Beneficia or
call them Feuda, certain it is that neither the one nor the other were then
hereditary or perpetual, but either temporary or for life only; which at length
begat the difference between Feuda and Beneficia, for Beneficia in a restrained
sense began to signify no more than an estate for life, (in which sense it
rests at this day in our Clergy-men's Livings called Benefices) and the word
Feuda grew to be understood only of such Beneficia or Benefices, as were
perpetual and hereditary.

To return from whence we digressed. I suppose it now appears sufficiently,
how some Feodal words are crept into Charters and writings of Saxon date; and I
think I may conclude, that the words before mentioned (Tenura, tenentes,
tenementa, tenere or tenendum, in a feodal sense, or feodum it self) were not
in use among them. Much less Tenure in Capite, Tenure by Knight Service, Tenure
in Socage, or Frank-Almoign; though the like services were performed to the Saxon
Lordships, by their Thanes and Theodens, their Socmen or Husbandmen, and their
Beads-men or Clergymen, by way of contract for the lands received from them;
as were after the Conquest to the Norman Lordships by way of Tenure, for lands
holden of them.

The Neapolitan and Sicilian Constitutions (which had their original from
Princes of Norman lineage) Lib. 1. Tit. 65. etc.
do..... the Conquest here in England Lib. 3. Tit. 21. etc.
make mention of tenens, tenere, tenementum and tenere de Rege in Capite; but
whether the Normans carried these terms into Italy, when they Conquered Naples
about the year 1031. Norm. Reform. p. 4.
or brought them from thence into Normandy, I cannot determine. Certain it is,
that from the Normans they came to us in England; for being not met with before
in any authentic Author, we presently after the Conquest begin to hear of
them, even about the third or fourth year of the Conqueror's reign, as
appears In Gul. Rege.
by his Charter of Emendationes Legum in the Red book of the Exchequer, f. 162.
b. and in Lambard's Archaionomia.

CHAP. IV.
Of Tenures in Capite, more particularly.
No Tenures in Capite among the Saxons.
TOuching Tenures therefore in Capite, I think I may boldly say, that here were
none in England in the Saxons time, after the manner now in use among us.

First, For that their Feodal Lands (as we have showed) were not descendible
before the Conquest. For though there were hla^ord and thane amongst the Saxons,
that is, Lord and Thane, or Servitour, whom beyond the Seas they called
Seigneur and Vassal, alias Vassallum, Dominum and Clientem, while their feuds
were arbitrable or but for years or life; yet grew not the words of tenure into
use, till that Feuds became descendable to posterities, and thereby obliged the
whole succession of heirs to depend and hold upon their Capital Lords by the
services imposed at the creation of that Feud.

Secondly, The word in Capite is like a Relative in Logic; which being a
supreme degree of it self, implies some other degrees to be under it, as
Tenant in medio or Tenant in imo, or both, viz. Tenant in Capite, Tenant in
menalty, and Tenant Paravale, or at least Tenant in Capite and Tenant Paravale,
which inferior Tenants could not be in the Saxons time, for that the granting
of Feuds in perpetuity (out of which the under-Tenancies must be deduced) was
(as I have said) not yet in use.

Tenure in Capite of two sorts.
Thirdly, to hold in Capite is of two sorts, The one general, which is of the
King, as Caput regni and caput generalissimum omnium Feodorum, the fountain
whence all feuds and tenures have their main original. The other special or
subaltern, which is of a particular subject, as Caput feudi or terrae illius,
so called because he was the first that created and granted that feud or land
in that manner of tenure, wherein it stands, and is therefore at this day so
to be understood by the ordinary words (in our Deeds) of tenendum de
Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius, etc. signifying that the lands so granted
(since the statute of Quia Emptores terrarum) must now be holden mediately or
immediately of him or his heirs or assigns, that was Caput Feodi, the first
that created or granted that Feud in that tenure, who thereupon was called
Capitalis Dominus and Caput terrae illius; among the Feudists Capitanus feudi
illius* And the Grantee and his heirs were said to be Tenants in Capite,
because they held immediately of him that first granted that feud or land in
that manner. Hereupon David I. King of Scots and Earl of Huntingdon here in
England, was in right of his Earldom (in the time of King Henry I.) said to be
Capud terrae de Crancfeld and Craule post regem Angliae Lib. Ramsey f. 42. d..
279.
. And Roger de Molbray about the same time or shortly after, made a grant in
these words: Roger de Molbray omnibus hominibus and fidelibus suis Normannis
and Anglis salutem. Sciatis quod ego concessi Roberto de Ardenna Clerico amico
meo totum nemus de Bedericheslea cum omnibus antiquis libertatibus and
consuetudinibus ejusdem nemoris ad tenendum de me in Capite and haeredibus meis
ita libere and quiet, etc. sicut ego unquam, etc. The Deed is without date;
but note that the direction of it is Omnibus hominibus fidelibus suis Normannis
and Anglis, which implies that it was made before Henry II's time: for he
being of Anjou in France and bringing in Frenchmen with him, altered then very
properly the directions of Charters into Hominibus and fidelibus suis Francis
and Anglis. Yet I find the same direction, though more improperly, to be some
time used under the Norman Kings. Qu.

So likewise (as before) W. Marshall the great Earl of Pembrock, in a Charter
of his, uses these words about the beginning of Henry III's time (as I take
it:) Nisi forte forinseca tenementa tenueris de me (in) Capite. And Pap. 157.
Mat. Paris in An. 1250. making mention of one G. a Knight, says, that Rex
memoratus (Hen. III.) cuidam militi tenenti de Ecclesia S. Albani in Capite,
etc. warennam concessit: where the words tenenti de Ecclesia S. Albani in
Capite, do signify, that some Abbat of the Church of St. Alban first created
and granted that Feud.

Having thus in general manner prepared my way to the ensuing discourse, I
shall now (God willing) by the patience of them whom it most concerns,
examine such particular assertions, as are produced in the Report, either to
prove our Tenures and Feuds with their dependancies, to have been in use among
the Saxons, or to disprove what I have affirmed in my Glossary, or in the
Chapters here precedent, and will first show therein as follows.

CHAP. V.
What degrees and distinction of persons were among the Saxons, and of what
condition their lands were.
Distinction of persons among the Saxons.
FOr the better understanding of our discourse, it is necessary that we should
show what degrees and distinctions of persons were among the Saxons, and of
what condition their lands were. Touching their persons, they are by themselves
divided in this manner, Eorle and Ceorl and THegn and THeoden. In Latin Comes
and Villanus, Tainus [unus] and alius, singuli pro modo suo. That is to say,
the Earl and the Husbandman, the Thane of the greater sort called the King's
Thane, and the Thane of the lesser sort called the Theoden or Vnder-thane. More
degrees the Saxons had not in their Laity, and among these must all the tenures
lie that were in use with them. As for their bondmen (whom they called Theowes
and Esnes) they were not counted members of that Commonwealth, but parcels of
their Master's goods and substance.

Lands among the Saxons. Bocland.
Touching lands among the Saxons they were of two sorts, Bocland and Folcland.
Bocland signifies terram codicillarem or librariam, Charter-lands: for the
Saxons called a Deed or Charter an bec, i. e. librum, a book; and this properly
was their terra haereditaria: for it commonly carried with it the absolute
inheritance and propriety of the Land, and was therefore preserved in writing,
and possessed by the Thanes and Nobler sort, as proedium nobile, liberum and
immune a servitiis vulgaribus and servilibus. In which respect the Thanes
themselves were also called liberales, as appears Vid. Gloss. in Verb.
Foresta.
by Canute's Forest-laws (Art. 1. 3. and seqq.) a name not well agreeing with
Feodal servitudes. But it seems by diverse Abby-books, that some Estates for
life, which we call Frank tenements, were also put in writing, especially among
the latter Saxons. Yet were not these accounted bocland; for they were laden
commonly with many feodal and ministerial services, whereas bocland (as I said)
was free from all services not holden of any Lord, the very same that Allodium;
descendable (according to the common course of Nations and of Nature) unto all
the sons, and therefore called Gavelkind, not restrained to the eldest son (as
feodal lands were not at first) but devisable also by will, and thereupon
called Terrae testamentales, as the Thane that possessed them was said to be
testamento dignus.

Folcland.
Folcland was terra vulgi, the land of the vulgar people, who had no estate
therein, but held the same (under such rents and services as were accustomed or
agreed of) at the will only of their Lord the Thane; and it was therefore not
put in writing, but accounted proedium rusticum and ignobile.

But both the greater and the lesser Thanes, which possessed Bocland or
hereditary lands, divided them according to the proportion of their estates
Inland.
into two sorts; i. e. into Inland and Outland. Ing. Sax. p. 864.
The Inland was that which lay next or most convenient for the Lord's
Mansion House, as within the view thereof, and therefore they kept that part in
their own hands for supportation of their family and Hospitality. The Normans
afterward called these lands terras dominicales, the Demains or Lord's lands:
The Germans, terras indominicatas, lands in the Lord's own use: The Feudists,
terras curtiles or intra curtem, lands appropriate to the Court or House of the
Lord.

Outland.
Outland was that which lay beyond or out from among the Inlands or Demeans,
and was not granted out to any Tenant hereditarily, but, like our Copy-holds of
ancient time (having their original from thence) merely at the pleasure of the
Lord. Cujacius Praef. ad libr. Fend. p. 12.
speaking of this kind of land, calls it proprium feudum, that is to say, such
land as was properly assigned for Feodal lands. Proprium feudum est (says he)
extra curtem, and consistit in praediis. As if he should say, That land
properly is a Feud or Feudal land, which lies without the Demains of the
Manor, and consists in land not in houses. We now call this Outland the
Tenants land or the Tenancy, and so it is translated out of Biritrick's will in
the Saxon tongue Itinerar. Cant. p. 495.
.

This Outland they subdivided into two parts; whereof one part they disposed
among such as attended on their persons either in war or peace, (called
Theodens or lesser Thanes) after the manner of Knights Fees; but much differing
from them of our time, as by that which follows shall appear. The other part
they allotted to their Husbandmen, whom they termed Ceorls (that is Carles or
Churles.) And of them we shall speak farther by and by, when we consider all
the degrees aforesaid; beginning with the Earl.

CHAP. VI.
Of Earls among our Saxons.
Earl no title of dignity anciently.
AN Earl, in the signification of Comes, was not originally a degree of
dignity, as it is with us at this day; but of Office and Judicature in some
City or portion of the Country, circumscribed anciently with the bounds of the
Bishopric of that Diocese; for that the Bishop and the Earl then sat together
in one Court, and heard jointly the causes of Church and Commonwealth, as they
yet do in Parliament. But in process of time the Earl grew to have the
government commonly of the chief City and Castle of his Territory, and withal a
third part of the King's profits arising by the Courts of Justice (Fines,
Forfeitures, Escheats, etc.) annexed to the office of his Earldom. Yet all this
not otherwise than at the pleasure of the King; which commonly was upon good
behavior, and but during life at most. This is apparent by the severe
injunction of King Alfred the Great (laboring Asser. de gest. Alfredi p. 21.
to plant literature and knowledge amongst the ignorant Earls and Sheriffs of
his Kingdom) imposed upon them, That they should forthwith in all diligence
apply themselves to the study of wisdom and knowledge, or else forgo their
Office. Herewith (says Asser Menevensis who lived at that time and was great
with the King) the Earls and Sheriffs were so affrighted that they rather
choose insuetam disciplinam quam laboriose discere, quam potestatum ministeria
dimittere, that is, To go at last to the School of knowledge, how painful
soever, rather than to lose their offices of Authority, and degrees of Honor;
which Alfred there also declares, that they had not by Inheritance, but by
God's gift and his; Dei (says he Ibid.
) dono and meo, sapientium ministeria and gradus usurpatis. This is manifest by
diverse other authorities and examples in my Glossary (in verbo Comes) as the
Reader, if he please, may there see.

No Earldoms hereditary.
Some conjecture, that Deira and Bernicia in Northumberland, and Mercia in the
midst of England, were Feudal and hereditary Earldoms in the Saxon times. Those
of Northumberland presently after their first arrival under Hengistus, about
the year 447. that of Mercia by the gift of Alfred the Great (about the year
900.) to Ethelredus, a man of power, in way of marriage with his daughter
Ethelfleda: but for ought I see it is neither proved by the succession of those
Earldoms, nor our Authors of Antiquity. For my own part, I think it not
strange, that there was not at the entry of the Saxons a Feudal and Hereditary
Earldom in all Christendom. As for this our Britain, the misery of it then was
such, as it rather seemed an Anarchy and Chaos, than in any form of Government.
Little better even in Alfred's days, through the fury of the Danes; though he at
last subdued them for his time. How soever three or four examples in five
hundred years before the Conquest differing from the common use, is no
inference to overthrow it, especially in times unsettled and tumultuous. The
noble Earldom of Arundel in our days of peace, differs in constitution from
all the other Earldoms of England; yet that impeacheth not their common manner
of succession.

Earldoms in France.
Loyseau Loyseau ^e Seignier. c. 5. p. 106. lin. ^lt.
and Pasquier, learned Frenchmen, speaking of the Dukes and Earls of France,
which England ordinarily follows (and sometimes too near the heels) justify
at large what I have said; showing the Dukes and Earls in the Roman Empire
(from whose example others every where were derived) were like the Proconsuls
and Presidents of Provinces, simple Officers, who for their entertainment had
nothing else but certain rights and customs raised from the people (which we in
England called Tertium denarium.) And that the Dukes and Earls of France were
Officers in like manner, but had the Seigneurie of their territory annexed to
their Office: so that they were Officers and Vassals both at once, (that is to
say) Officers by way of Judicature, and Vassals (whom we call Feodal tenants)
for their Seignories of Dukedoms and Earldoms. But (say they) tenue neant
moiens en fief a vie, etc. holden notwithstanding as a fief for life, not
hereditary nor patrimonial in the beginning, as afterward they were. This
change they assign to have been begun about the end of the first line of their
Kings; who being at that time weak and simple men, the Dukes and Earls took
opportunity to make their Estates hereditary. But it continued not long; for
the first Kings of the second line reduced them presently to conformity. Yet
some there were in the remote Provinces, that maintained themselves hereditary
in despite of the Kings, whereupon ensued many wars. Thus far both these
Authors do concur, and then Loyseau adds further, That at the end of the
second line, Hugh Capet having made himself King of France, permitted all to
hold their Dukedoms, Earldoms, and Seigneuries hereditarily; and taking homage
of them as of hereditary Fiefs, each party obliged themselves to support the
other and their posterity in those dignities as hereditarily. This happened in
France a little before the Conquest of England, and from this precedent of Hugh
Capet's did our William the Conqueror make the Earldoms and Feuds in England
first hereditary, as we have already showed in the second Chapter. So that I
conclude (as I assumed in the beginning) that the Saxon Earldoms were not
hereditary, nor otherwise Feodal (if we shall so term them) than for life,
whereon neither Wardship, nor Marriage, etc. could depend. Yet I confess that
the Dukes and Earls of the Saxon times both had and might have great
possessions in other lands as patrimonial and hereditary, namely their
Thaneland: and in what condition they possessed them, it shall appear anon,
when we come to speak more at large of Thanes and Thanelands.

CHAP. VII.
Of Ceorls; and that they were ordinarily but as Tenants at will, or having
lands held not by Knight Service.
Ceorls.
THe division before mentioned, which the Saxons made of their own degrees,
leads me in this next place (though not orderly) to speak of the Ceorle (that
is of the Carle or Churl) and Husbandman. The Ancients called him in Latin
Villanus, not as we ordinarily take it for a Bondsman, but for him that dwelling
in a Village or Country Town, lived by the Country course of Husbandry. Mr.
Lambard therefore (to decline the misconceiving of the word Villanus) does
render it in the Saxon laws by Paganus, which signifies the same that Villanus
does, according to the French for a Villager, but not according to our English
for a Bondsman. Our Saxons otherwhile did term them, like the Dutchmen, Boors,
that is, such as live by tilth or grasing, and by works of husbandry. Such were
the Ceorls among the Saxons; but of two sorts, one that hired the Lord's
Outland or Tenementary land (called also the Folcland) like our Farmers: the
other that tilled and manured his Inland or Demeans, (yielding operam not
censum, work and not rent) and were thereupon called his Socmen or Ploughmen.
These, no doubt, were oftentimes his very Bondmen; I therefore shall not meddle
with them, but will hold me to the first sort, who having ordinarily no lands
of their own, lived upon the Outlands before mentioned of their Lord the Thane,
as custumary Tenants at his will, (after the usual manner of that time)
rendering unto him a certain portion of victuals, and things necessary for
Hospitality. This rent or retribution they called Feorme, but the word in the
Saxon signifies meat or victuals* and though we have ever since Henry II's time,
changed this reservation of victuals into money, yet in letting our lands, we
still retain the name of Fearms and Fearmers unto this day. The quantity of the
Fearme or rent for every plough-land, seems in those times to have been
certain in every Country, according to the nature of the place. King Ina in his
Cap. 70.
laws did make it so through all the territory of the West Saxons, as you may
see (with much more touching this matter) in my Glossary, verbo Firma.

Ceorls.
But insomuch as the chiefest part of the fruit and profits of the lands thus
manured by the Ceorls or Husbandmen, redounded to the benefit of their Lords
and not of the Ceorls themselves; the Romans counted them to be as bondmen and
not freemen. Caesar therefore speaking of them while they were yet in Germany,
P. 116.
says, Plebs pene servorum habebatur loco: That their common people were in a
manner bondmen. And Tacitus to the same purpose, De Mor. Germ. p. 132.
Caeteris servis (meaning these Ceorls or Husbandmen) non in nostrum morem
descriptis per familiam ministeriis utuntur; suam quisque sedem, suos penates
regit. Frumenti modum Dominus aut pecoris aut vestis, ut colono, injungit. Et
servus hactenus paret. But this service was no bondage. For the Ceorl or
Husbandman might as well leave this land at his will, as the Lord might put him
from it at his will: and therefore it was provided by the laws of Ina Cap. 65.
in what manner he should leave the land when he departed from it to another
place. And the Writ of Waste in Fitz-Herbert Fol. 55. C.
seems to show that they might depart if they were not then well used.

It is apparent also that the Ceorl was of free condition, for that his person
was valued as a member of the Commonwealth in the laws of Aethelstan Cap. de
Weregild*
, and his least valuation is there reckoned to be 200s. whereas the Bondsman was
not valued at all, for that he was not (as I said) any part of the
Commonwealth, but of his Master's substance: nor was he capable of any public
office. But the Ceorl (though he had no land) might rise to be the leader of his
Countrymen, and to use the armor of a Thane or Knight Ll. Aethelst. ibid.
, viz. an Helmet, an Habergeon, and a gilt Sword. And if his wealth so
increased as that he became owner of five hides of land, the valuation of his
person (which they called his Were or Weregild) was increased to two thousand
thrimsas, that is six thousand shillings, and being then also adorned with
other marks of dignity, he was counted for a Thane; as you shall see in the
next Chapter.

Earls capable of Knight's-Fees.
But (for all this) a Ceorl or Husbandman (though he were a Freeman) was not by
the Feodal law of that and later times, capable of a Knights-fee, or land
holden by military service; and therefore what land soever he purchased, was to
be intended land of no such tenure. And it appears further by the laws of
Aethelstan, that the five hides of land (before mentioned) purchased by the
Ceorl, were descendable to his posterity; which shows also that they were not
feodal land, for that feuds at that time were not here descendable, as we have
often declared. So that I hope I may conclude, that the Ceorls or Husbandmen
among the Saxons held no land by our tenure of Knight Service.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Thanes, and their several kinds.
SEeing then the weight of the question will rest wholly upon the Thanes, we
must consider them the more diligently, first in the quality of their persons,
secondly in the tenure of their lands.

Thane, what.
A Thane was (in like manner as the Earl) not properly a title of dignity, but
of service: so called in the Saxon of ^enian servire, and in Latin Minister a
ministrando. But as there be many degrees of service, some of greater
estimation and some of less; so those that served the King in places of
eminency, either in Court or Commonwealth, were called Thani majores and Thani
Regis; and those that served under them in like manner as under Dukes, Earls,
and other great Officers of the Kingdom, and also under Bishops, Abbats, and
the greater Prelates of the Church, were called Thani minores, or the lesser
Thanes. And as the titles of honorable office and service in Dukes, Earls,
etc. became at length to be made hereditary; so this of Thanes, like our titles
of Noblemen and Gentlemen, descended at last with their Fathers land upon their
Children and posterity. And continued thus till after the Conquest, as appears
by some Writs and Charters of the Conqueror.

The quality of Thanes.
Buchanan Hist. Se^^. Lib. 6.
describing the quality of their persons, calls them, Praefectos regionum sive
Nomarchas and Quaestores rerum capitalium, Governors of places, principal
Ministers of justice, Chequer men, Sheriffs, etc. But we will take them as the
Saxons themselves describe them in the place before mentioned, where it thus
follows, gif Ceorl getheah that he hefde fullice fif hyda agenes land, etc.
if a churl or husbandman thrive, so that he had fully five hydes of his own
land, a Church and a Kitchen, a Bell-house, and a Gate House, a seat and a
several office in the King's Hall; then he was from thenceforth worthy of the
rights of a Thane: meaning (as I understand it) he was then one of the greater
Thanes or King's Thanes. For the lesser Thane is by and by described also in
that which follows, viz. And gif thegen getheah, etc. And if a Thane himself
so prospered that he served the King, and ridd upon his message as others of
his Court, and then had a Thane (i. e. an under or lesser Thane) that followed
him, which had five hydes (or plough-land) chargeable to the King's expedition,
and served his Lord in the King's Court, and had gone thrice upon his errand to
the King: he (this under-Thane) might take an oath instead of his Lord, and at
any great need supply the place of his Lord. And if a Thane did so thrive as he
became an Earl, he had the rights of an Earl. And a Merchant might become a
Thane, etc.

Mr. Lambard It^n. Cant. p. 502.
conceives this place to discover but three degrees among the Saxons, viz.
Earls, Thanes and Ceorls, not admitting the under-Thane to be a several degree.
The words seem otherwise, and the Saxon division before recited makes four
degrees, Earl, Ceorl, Thegn and Theoden or under Thane. Some therefore
distinguish Thanes into majores and minores, some into majores, minores
(otherwise called mediocres) and minimi, whom Canutus in his Forest-laws
calls Minuti and Tinemen. I dare not venture to define them particularly, but
will rest upon the Saxon division first mentioned, which I find to be pursued
by Norman terms in the laws of Edw. Confess. and William Conq. delivered by
Ingulfus, viz. Count, Baron, Valvasor, and Villain. Where he places Count
instead of Earl, Baron instead of Kings-Thane, Valvasor instead of Theoden or
lesser Thane, and lastly Villain instead of Churl. As though the division both
of the Saxon and Norman times did hold analogy one with the other, and both of
them with ours at this day, viz. of Earls and Barons of the Kingdom, including
the greater Nobility, Barons of Towns and Mannours (including the lesser
Nobility or Gentry) and that of our Yeomen including the Husbandmen.

To return to the Thanes. This Saxon passage has per transennam showed unto
us, not only the quality of their person, but the nature of their land,
whereupon all our Question does depend. And true it is, it shows that both
they and it were subject to military service, called in Latin Expeditio, in
Saxon utfare and ferdgung, and in foreign Nations Heribannum, that is the
calling forth of an Army. And it appears by an ancient MS. of Saxon Laws in
the Kings Library, that the Thanes were not only tied to this, but to many
other services to be done unto the King, and that in respect of their land,
which notwithstanding bred no Tenure in Capite or by Knights-service. The words
be these, Cap. de dignitate hominum f. 163.
Tbani lex est, ut sit dignus rectitudine testamenti sui, and ut tria faciat
pro terra sua, Expeditionem, Burghbotam and Brugbotam, and de multis terris
majus Landirectum. Exurgit ad Bannum Regis, sicut est Deorhege, ad mansionem
regiam, and Sceorpum in hosticum, and custodiam maris, and capitis, and pacis,
and Elmesfeoh, and Ciricsetum, i. e. pecunia Eleemosynae, and Ciricsceatum, and
aliae res. Thus in English. The Law touching a Thane is; That he have power to
make a will, and that in respect of his land he shall do three things, viz.
Military Expedition, Repairing of Castles, and mending of Bridges, and for more
lands to do more Land-duties. To go forth upon the King's summons to the
enclosing of his Park and Mansion House, and to Sceorp, vestitus, apparatus
Somn.
..... into the enemies Lands, and to defend the Sea, his own head, and the
peace, to pay Alms-monies, Church-seeds, Church-shots, and other things.

What is there in all this to show either a Tenure in capite or by
Knight Service? It will be said that the Military Expediton, and Warding of the
Sea against enemies, imply a tenure by Knight Service, and that those and the
other services being to be performed to the King, (and upon the King's summons)
show a Tenure in capite. And no doubt, so would it be for lands given in this
manner by the King since the Conquest. But I conceive that none of all this
rises out of any Tenure, or Feodal reservation made by the Saxon Kings in
granting these lands, or by any particular contract agreed of by the Thane or
Subject in accepting them, but out of a fundamental law or custom of the
Kingdom, (as ancient as the Kingdom it self) whereby all the land of the whole
Kingdom was obliged to this Trinodae necessitati, of military The three
services upon Lands
Expedition, and building or repairing of Castles and Bridges; so that if this
made a tenure by Knight Service in Capite in the Thane Lands, then must it
follow also, that all the land of the Kingdom was likewise holden by
Knights-service in capite: for it was wholly tied to those three services, as
appears in the Council of Eanham, (Cap. 22. 23 Conc. Brit. sub An. 1009. p.
520.
.) where they are commanded to be yearly done. And by the laws of Canutus (Cap.
10. 62.) where they are appointed to be done as necessity requires. And also
by the law of King Ethelred, who about the thirtieth year of his reign,
ordained, that every al. 9.
eight hides or plough-land through the whole Kingdom, shall find a man with a
Crosset and Helmet to the Naval Expedition. And every three hundred and ten
plough-lands, an ordinary ship. For these purposes, Triremem.
was the whole Land formerly divided, either by Alfred the great or some other
precedent King, into 243600. hydes or plough-lands, and according to this
division were the military and other charges of the Kingdom imposed and
proportioned, without ever any mention of Tenures in ^^^ite or by
Knight Service. Hence it rose that the Saxon Kings in granting o^ lands,
liberties, and privileges unto Ecclesiastical persons and others, were usually
so careful in reserving Expedition, Burghbote and Brigbote, as you may see in
the Charters of King Withred Con. Brit. p....
, Ina P. 227.
, Aethelbald P. 256.
, Aethelwulph P. 349.
, Edgar P. 433.
, etc. in the Britain Councils, as also in the Charters here following, and in
a multitude of others elsewhere besides. Neither did this Military Expedition
otherwise at that time bind the Saxons to a Tenure in capite or Knight Service,
then it does us at this day in the Naval Expedition lately now revived.

(...) not subject to (...)
For better manifestation that Thanelands were subject to no feudal service,
consider, I pray you, the words of the Saxon passage before mentioned, where it
is said that a Thane must have three hydes at least of his agenes land, i. e.
of his own land, not terrae emphiteuticariae, or precariae, not
usu-fructuariae, or feodatariae, but as a Latin copy has it terrae suae
propriae, where the word propriae carries another sense than is ordinarily
conceived, as to signify in this place, land wherein no other man has any
interest by feodal superiority or dominion, but whereof himself has meram
proprietatem, the sole and absolute propriety; even the same Alodium that is
spoken of in the Report P. 29.
, and which no man has or can have now at this day, but the King's land holden
of no man in the feodal sense, (for the phrase of tenure was not then in use
amongst the Saxons) nor tied any man to do any feodal service. Another old
Latin MS. therefore recites the same Saxon passage in these words, Si villanus
(so they at that time called a Husbandman) ita crevisset sua probitate, quod
pleniter haberet quinque hidas de suo proprio alodio, etc. dignus erat honor
Liberalitatis, quod Angli dicunt THanescipes surthe: si autem liberalis homo,
1. THegen [Thanus] ita profecisset ut Regi servisset, and vice sua equitaret in
Missatico Regis, hic talis si haberet alium [Thanum] sub se, qui ad
expeditionem Regis quinque hidas teneret and in Aula Regis domino suo
servisset, etc. Here I must say with Cujacius Lib. 2. Tit. 27. p. 166.
, speaking of the Author of the second Book of Feuds: Proprietatem [alias]
vocat quod hic Alodium: Noting thereby that Proprieta^ and Alodium are
synonima, signifying land free from all feodal service and holden of no body.
Yet in that sense Alodium is here said to be Terra ad expeditionem Regis, land
obliged to the warfare of the King.

I must note also by the way, that he that thus translated the Saxon passage by
the words, qui ad expeditionem Regis quinque hidas teneret, followed the manner
which before we spoke of, in rendering Saxon customs by Norman phrases. The
Reader perhaps will here understand teneret in the feodal sense, for to hold of
his Lord, whereas in the Saxon book the words are no otherwise than gif he
he^de, i. e. if he had five hydes of land, so that teneret here is no otherwise
to be taken than for possideret.

To return to our purpose. Thaneland might no doubt be tied to do Military
service or Knight Service, and yet not holden in capite or by Knight Service;
for it is one thing to hold by Knight Service, and another to be tied to do it.
No man holds, that has not tenementum or tenementale quiddam: But a man
might be tied to do this military expedition for his personal estate (though he
had no land) or for his very person it self, as appears by the laws of King
Ina, Cap. 52. where it is said gif se sithcundman, etc. If the Sithcundman
having land forbeareth to go the Expedition, he shall forfeit his land and
120s. and if he have no land yet he shall forfeit 60s. and an Husbandman (who
if he had land was but Tenant in Socage according to our Law) 30s. It appears
also by many Charters of the Saxon Kings that Thane lands were not feodal, and
that the military Expedition mde no Tenure by Knight Service. Give me leave
therefore to produce some of them, that you may see thereby the use of those
times, and what the Kings themselves conceived therein.

CHAP. IX.
Charters of Thane-lands granted by Saxon Kings, not only without mention of
Tenure or Feodal service, but with all Immunity, except Expedition, etc.
Eadwigus
EGO Eadwigh Monarchiam totius Britanniae Insulae cum superno juvamine
obtinens, cuidam meo fideli Ministro, vocitato nomine Aelfwine, duas mansas and
dimidiam tribuo perenniter illic ubi antiquorum hominum relatu nominatur at
Schylfhinghatune, habeat quam diu vivat, and post cui voluerit impertiat, cum
his rebus quae sibi rite pertinent tam in magnis quam in minimis. Sit haec
donatio immunis a servitute mundana, excepto illo labor, qui communis omni
populo videtur esse (not naming Expeditione, etc. but concluding) Si quis
augeat, augeatur. Si quis minuat, careat praemio aeterno, etc. So that here he
was freed a servitute mundana both great and small, that was incident or
inherent to the land by way of Tenure, and yet he was chargeable to military
Expedition, and to the repairing of Bridges, Castles, Buroughs, and
Fortifications, but that not otherwise than as all the land of the Kingdom was
charged, (as before we have showed).

Edgarus.
Regnante in perpetuum Domino nostro, etc. Ego Eadgarus Rex Anglorum,
caeterarumque gentium in circuitu persistentium gubernator and rector, cuidam
fideli meo Ministro vocato nomine Alur. modicam muniminis mei partem Terrae, i.
e. in Dorset. and tres perticas in illo loco, ubi Anglica appellatione dicitur
at Lonk, ut habeat ac possideat quamdiu vivat, and post se unum haeredem,
quicunque sibi placuerit, derelinquat. Sit hoc praedictum rus liberum ab omni
malorum obstaculo cum omnibus ad rus rite pertinentibus, campis, pascuis,
pratis, sylvis; Excepto communi labor, Expeditione, pontis and arcis
constructione. Si quis vero hominum hanc meam Donationem cum stultitiae
temeritate jactando infringere tentaverit, sit ipse gravibus per colla
depressis catenis inter flamivomes tetrorum doemonum catervas, nisi prius ad
satisfactionem emendare voluerit. Istis terminis haec tellus ambita videtur:
THis is the landgemark at Lonk, etc. Haec charta scripta est Anno Dominicae
Incarnationis, 958.

Ethelredus.
MS. Mon. de Hyde sub tit. R. Ethelredi.
Mundi denique status Christi moderatoris disponente, etc. Ego Ethelredus totius
Albionis Basileus, cuidam mihi obsequentium Aethelwoldo vocitatione, pro ejus
placabili Obsequio quandam terrae particulam, i. e. december manentia in loco quem
coloni Maningforde appellant in perpetuam concedo haereditatem, quatenus ille
been perfruatur ac prospere possideat quamdiu presenti fruitur vita, and post
vitae suae terminum cuicunque sibi placuerit haeredi derelinquat. Sit autem
praesata terra liberrima ab omni munduali obstaculo, cum omnibus ad eam
pertinentibus in campis and pascuis pratisque ac cursibus aquarum, tribus
tantummodo causis exceptis, i. e. Expeditione, pontis arcisve restauratione. Si
quis autem hanc donationem pervertere studuerit, perpetuae maledictionis
incurrat reatum, and gehennae aeternum sustineat incendium nisi mortis ante
exitum hanc praesumptionem emendare curaverit. Istis terminis ambitur praefata
tellus AErst of eastreeardan, etc.

So King Ethelred in the Charter to his Thane Sealwyne, grants five cassatos
in Readdn, cum omnibus, etc. cuicunque sibi libuerit cleronomo direlinquat
haereditate, etc. Sit autem istud praefatum rus liberrimum ab omni mundali
obstaculo in magnis ac modicis, campis, pascuis, pratis; tribus tantummodo
rationabiliter rebus exceptis quae Sic Ed. Conf. in chart. fact. Orco Minist. 7.
usuali ritu observantur, i. e. cum glomerata sibi expeditioni compulerit
populari commilitonum confligere castra, atque cum sua petivit pontis
titubantia muniri vada: ac cum concinni turma urbium indigent muniri stabiliter
septa, etc. Dat. anno Dominicae incarnat. 1014. Indict. 12.

(...)
MS de Abb. ub. Chart. 2.
In nomine Dei almi and agiae Sophiae, etc. Idcirco ego Cnute Rex, Anglorum
gubernator and rector, quandam ruris portionem, december and septem viz. terrae
mansas illo in loco ubi jamdudum solicolae illius regionis nomen imposuerunt at
Abbodesbury meo fideli Ministro, quem notis affines Orc appellare solent, in
perpetuam confirmo haereditatem quatenus ille been perfruatur ac perpetualiter
possideat quamdiu Deus per suam ineffabilem misericordiam vitam illi and
vitalem spiritum concedere voluerit, deinde namque sibi succedenti cuicunque
voluerit cleronomi jure haereditario derelinquat, ceu supra diximus in aeternam
haereditatem. Maneat igitur hoc nostrum donum immobile aeterna liberate
jocundum cum universis quae ad eundem locum pertinere dinoscuntur tam in magnis
quam in modicis rebus, in campis, pascuis, pratis, rivulis, silvis, aquarumque
cursibus. Excepto communi labor quod omnibus liquide patet, viz. Expeditione,
pontis constructione, arcisve munitione. Si quis autem, etc.

Edward Confess.
And King Edward the Confessor granting duas mansas and dimidiam in Wudeton,
etc. to Thola (widow of the foresaid Orc, whom in a Saxon Charter he calls
his Man, that is his Thane) says thus: In aeternam haereditatem concedo
quatenus illa habeat and perpetualiter possideat hanc meam regalem donationem
quamdiu vivat, and post obitum suum cuicunque voluerit haeredi relinquat. Sit
autem praefatum rus liberum ab omni seculari gravedine tam in magnis quam in
modicis rebus, in campis, pascuis, pratis, silvis, aquarumque decursibus;
tribus exceptis quae omnibus hominibus communia sunt, viz. Expeditione, pontis,
arcisve restauratione.

After all these, I will yet add one other of King Eadgar's, having somewhat of
note above the rest, as anon we shall observe. It was made to the new Monastery
of Hide near Winchester in these words.

Edgar.
Lib. MS. ejusd. Monast. sub Tit. Edgar Chart. ult.
Annuente altitoni moderatoris imperio, etc. Ego Edgar totius Britanniae
basileus quasdam villas ut nominantur, Dunketone habens quinque hidas terrae
and Ecclesiam, Sueyse cum 28. hydis terrae, etc. Concedo in puram and perpetuam
eleemosynam novae Wintoniensi Ecclesiae beato Petro Apostolorum principi
dicatae, etc. cum omnibus utensilibus, pratis, viz. pascuis, rivulis, aeterna
largita sint haereditate, etc. Sint autem praedictae villae, rus, mansiones,
terrae, rivuli, omni terrenae servitutis jugo liberae imperpetuum, tribus
exceptis, Rata viz. Expeditione, pontis arcisve restauratione. Si quis autem
hanc nostram donationem in aliud quam constituimus transfer voluerit,
privatus consortio Sanctae Dei Ecclesiae, aeternis baratri incendiis, etc.
puniatur, etc.

Whatsoever the phrase be in the Saxon original, (for I take this to be a
translation of the Norman time) it here makes the lands to be given in
Franckalmoign, but without mention of Tenendum, and yet shows that they were
tied to Expedition, etc. Yea, and calls it notwithstanding puram Eleemosynam,
whereas though in libera Eleemosyna a rent in old deeds has sometime been
reserved, yet can it not be called pura, if any rent or service at all were
reserved to the Donor.

I have recited these Charters the more at large for that they apparently
discover by many reasons (which we shall set forth in the next Chapter) that
the Thanes possessed not their Thane-lands either by any feodal service or by
way of Tenure.

CHAP. X.
Observations upon the precedent Charters, showing that the Thane-lands or
Expedition were not feodal or did lie in Tenure.
THese Charters present unto us the general manner of granting and possessing
of Thane-land among the Saxons during the time of their Monarchy, 'till the
very coming of the Normans. And there is to be observed in them (as in other
before mentioned) what hereafter follows.

Thane has no direct relation to war.
First, That the word Thane which is here and usually interpreted Minister,
(that is an officer or servant, of thenian servire) notes nothing belonging
properly to the war, and is not therefore to be understood as Bracton fancieth
the word Barons to be quasi robur belli, or to import any matter either of
Feodal service or of Tenure.

No mention of tenere, etc.
Secondly, That (as we have formerly observed upon other Charters) so there is
not in any of these now produced, one word either of Tenure or of Feodal
signification, which presently after the Conquest became innumerable, as
brought in by the Conqueror. Yet well may it be, that Edward the Confessor
(having his education in Normandy) might (as travelers use to do) bring some
Norman words and manners into England.

What used instead of Tenere.
Thirdly, That instead of tenere and tenendum (by which the Norman feudists
implied a Clientary if not servile dependence, that the Tenant has upon the
Lord) the Saxons used habeat, possideat, fruatur, or perfruatur (and elsewhere
gaudeat) words of freedom and immunity. So likewise for tenementa (signifying
things holden of a superior proprietary) they used mansas, manentia, and
mansiones a manendo, (as places of abode) or casatas a casa, for a
dwelling house, otherwise called hyda, quasi tectum a tegendo, including under
these names all the lands that belonged thereunto. And those that dwelt upon
those mansas, etc. they called not tenentes (holders) as we do, but manentes,
as persons abiding there. All the foresaid words being of the
middle-age-dialect, not appropriated to the feodal language.

The occasion of granting Thane-lands.
Fourthly, In granting of feuds and feud lands, the consideration is allways
for matter de futuro, as pro homagio and servitio habendo. But here in granting
these Thane-lands, the consideration is for service past or present, signified
by the quality of the Thane, as fideli ministro meo, or pro placabili obsequio,
not only without reservation of any future service, but with express immunity
from all services: as, to use the words of the Charters themselves, 1. ut sint
libera vel immunia a servitute mundana. 2. Ab omni malorum obstaculo. 3.
Liberrima ab omni munduali obstaculo. 4. Liberrimum ab omni munduali obstaculo
in magnis and modicis. 5. Aeterna liberate jocundum. 6. Liberum ab omni
seculari gravedine. Such was the freedom of these Thane-lands, equal and no
less than that of the lands given in Franck-Almoigne by King Edgar in the last
cited Charter, which are there said to be Omni terrenae servitutis jugo liberae
imperpetuum.

Thane-lands alienated.
Fifthly, The Feodal lands might not be aliened without License: But the Thane
by the very words of his original Charter, might grant them cuicunque voluerit.

Thane-lands devised by Will.
Sixthly, A Feodal tenant or tenant by Knights-service (as we call him) could
not devise his land by Will before the statute of 32. Hen. VIII. though it were
with License of the Lord and of the King himself, (which law the Germans
themselves do hold even unto this day. And the Danes can yet devise no land by
Will (as I am informed) but the Thane might devise his Thane-land to whom he
would, as appears b^ the words of King Edward the Confessor in a Charter to
Thola, where he says, Possideat hanc meam regiam dona^^onem quamdiu vivat, and
post obitum suum cuicunque voluerit haeredi relinquat; excluding hereby all
title of Wardship and Feodal duties. To the same effect are the rest of the
Charters, and therewith agrees the privilege of a Thane before mentioned,
Thani lex est ut sit dignus rectitudine testamenti sui. As for that passage in
the Will of Brictrick the Saxon, where he seeks his Lord s consent that his
Will may stand, I conceive it to be in respect of some ^o^^land or custumary
land, which according to the use of that time he held at the will of his Lord,
and not in respect of any Thane-land. For though this Brictrick were a man of
great possessions, yet was he none of the chiefest sort of Than^s called the
King's Thanes, but as appears by his Will, an under-Thane belonging to
Aelfric, who was Earl of Mercia. And how far the privilege of these under or
lesser-Thanes extended, I cannot yet determine.

(...) g^^nted to Women.
Seventhly, If Thane-land were of the nature of lands holden by Knight Service,
then by the Feodal law of that time it could not transire a lancea ad fusum,
that is, it might not be granted to Women; for Women were not then, nor long
after capable of Feodal land. But the land here granted to Thola was
Thane-land, as appears by the very words of her Charter; for that it is
granted in aeternam haereditatem perpetualiter possidendam, which words (making
an estate of inheritance) were only proper to Thane-land otherwise called
Bocland; not to Folcland or Popular land, which was but at Will of the Lord for
years or for life.

(...) upon Thane-lands but what was expressed.
Eighthly, There could no tenure nor service lie upon the Thane-lands, other
than what was expressed in the Charters. For in the end of every of them there
was an horrible curse (which in those days was fearfully respected) laid by the
King himself upon all those that should violate the Charter, (either by adding
other encumbrances, or by diminishing the granted immunities.) So that it is
not to be supposed that there was any lurking Tenure, or matter of plus ultra
to impeach them. The curse begins in every of the Charters with these words,
Si quis autem, etc.

Expedition, repairing of (...)
Ninthly and lastly, Touching Expedition, and repairing of Castles and Bridges,
which the Saxons called Burghbote and Brugbote, though the two first of them be
wholly military, and the last serving as well for the passage of the King's
Army as for the trade and commerce of his people; yet were none of them either
marks of Tenure or of Feodal service, as appears by that we have formerly
showed, and by the testimony of these Charters, where (to use the words of Edw*
the Confessor in that to Thola) it is said that they are, Omnibus hominibus
communia, a common burden to all men, as belonging to the safety and sacred
anchor both of the Kingdom and Commonwealth. The Saxons therefore did not call
them services or Feodal duties, as things that lay upon the person of the
owner; but landirecta, rights that charged the very land whosoever did possess
it Church or Lay man. And these duties were ordinarily excepted in every
Charter, not for that they should otherwise be extinguished, but per
superabundantem cautelam, lest the general words precedent should be mistaken
to involve them and to release that which the King could not release. For though
Ethelbald by his Charter to the Monks of Croyland Ingul^. p. 851, 852.
did give the site of that Monastery, with the appendancies, etc. libera and
soluta ab omni onere seculari in perpetuam el^emosynam, yet in his Charter of
privileges granted to all Churches and Monasteries of his Kingdom, speaking of
the repairing of Castles and Bridges, he confesses and says, that Nulli
unquam relaxari possunt. And I suppose that the word Expedition was here
omitted by the negligence of the Scribe; for I never find it severed from
repairing of Castles and Bridges in any other Charter. And also though King
Ethelwulf by his memorable Charter of privileges (ratified by the great
Council of Winchester in the year 855.) did by express words free Sanctam
Ecclesiam, that is all the Churches and Monasteries of his Kingdom, ab
Expeditione and pontis extructione and arcis munitione Conc. Brit. in An. 855.
ex Ingulf. Malmesb. and al.
, yet the whole Clergy about the year 868. did notwithstanding voluntarily
assist his son Beorredus against the Danes with all the power they could, as
appears by the Charter of the same Beorredus.

CHAP. XI.
More touching the freedom of Thane-land out of Doomsday.
Thane-lands disposed of at the pleasure of the owner.
Though that which is delivered in these Charters be authentical and need no
farther proof, yet to convince broad spreading errors the more manifestly, it
will not be unnecessary to show what Doomsday it self relates to confirm it.
For whereas lands holden in Capite and by Knights-service, could not otherwise
be disposed than by license of the King or Superior Lord, Doomsday shows that
the Thane-lands might be used and disposed at the pleasure of the owner,
without impeachment of any other. For at Ebsa in Suthry under the title of Ric.
fill. Comitis Gisleberti, it says, Hanc terram tenuerunt novem Teigni and cum
ea poterant utere quo volebant. Plain Latin, but the sense is, That nine Thanes
held this land of Ebsam (in the time of Edward the Confessor) and might do with
it what they would. So at Est-Burnham in Buckinghamshire under the title of
Milo Crispin, Duo Teigni homines Brictrici hanc terram tenuerunt, and vendere
potuere: and here it seems that these Thanes were not the Kings Thanes, but
of the lesser sort; for that he calls them homines Brictrici. So in the same
Shire under the title of S. Petr. Westmon. it is said of the same Town of
Est-Burnham: Hoc manerium tres Treigni Tempore Regis Edwardi tenuerunt, and
vendere potuerunt.

Thane-land charged with a rent.
It there also appears that the Thane-land might be charged with a rent
issuing out of it, for it immediately follows, and tamen ipsi tres
reddiderunt quinque oras de consuetudine. And it might be restrained from
alienation, as where it is said in Doomsday, De ea (viz. Lega Pelton) sunt in
dominio duae hidae; una ex hiis fuit Tainland, non tamen poterat ab Ecclesia
separari. Where the word tamen implies, that although Thane-lands might
otherwise be alienated, yet this particularly could not. So likewise might it
be entailed upon a Family, as appears in the laws of Alured Cap. 37. But thus
Doomsday after the Conquest affirms the same that the Charters did before the
Conquest. And the words both in the one and the other, which show that the
Thane might sell or use this land as he would, do imply an estate of
inheritance independent of any Lord either feodal or superior, and was as even
the Alodium mentioned in the Chapter of Thanes; but whether it were descendable
only upon the eldest son, or dividable between all the sons as in Gavelkind, I
cannot say, but the formula of Alodium joined with Marculfus does divide it
between them all.

CHAP. XII.
The fruits of Feodal Tenures, and that they were not sound among the Saxons,
or not after our manner.
HItherto we have sought our Tenures among the Saxons, and have not found them,
though the Report Page 35.
tells us, It is most manifest that they were frequent and Page 36.
common in the times of the Saxons. We will now follow the direction of our
Savior Ma^^^. 1^. 33.
, and see if by the fruit we can find the tree. The Report says Page 33.
, (by question and answer) The fruits of the Tenure viz. in Capite and
Knights-service) what are they? but the (1) Profits of the lands. (2) Wardship.
(3) Livery. (4) Primier seisin. (5) Relief, mistaken to be an Heriot. (6) Fine
for alienation and the rest: Which rest it Page 36, 37.
supplyeth shortly after to be (7) Homage. (8) Fealty. (9) Escuage: Adding again
Relief and Wardship, instead whereof I out of a third passage Page 33.
do place (10) Escheats. And it concludes Page 36, 37.
that As all these tenures were common in those times, so were all the fruits of
them, etc. Which if it be true the question is determined; nay, I yield it, if
any one of them agreeing directly with our Tenures be found amongst them; some
show of Fealty and License to alien lands granted for a certain time, only
excepted, for avoiding captious disputation.

Their very names pretend no Saxon antiquity, but as the Ephramites bewrayed
their Tribe by their Language, so by their names these fruits discover
themselves to be of Norman progeny. And the Report does not give us one
instance or example of any of them in all the Saxon times. If it did, the words
before mentioned in the Charters to the Thanes, declaring that their land must
be libera ab omni seculari gravedine, etc. sweep all away at once as the
West-wind did the Grasshoppers in Egypt, and do make the Thane-lands to have the
privilege of Alodium (here before mentioned) to belong unto them, that is, to
be free from all tenure and service. It is true notwithstanding that both the
greater and lesser-Thanes might have, and had other lands (besides these that
were hereditary) of feudal nature and holden by military service (as in the
Charter of Oswald the Bishop shall after appear:) but they holding them like
Folcland only at the will of the Lord (whether King or other) or for certain
years, or at most for life or lives, their Tenure and Feuds determined with the
will of the Lord, the term of years or estate for life. And then could not any
of the fruits before spoken of, accrue unto the Lord that granted the land, for
that it forthwith reverted entirely into his own hands, and was to be kept and
disposed anew as pleased him.

It is apparent therefore by this general demonstration, that the fruits we
speak of, could not arise out of either of the Thane-lands, (were they
temporary or hereditary) if not happily fealty or some gratuity to the Lord for
license that the temporary Tenant might assign his interest or have it
enlarged, (things proper as well to Socage and Folcland as to Feudal.) But let
us examine all these fruits particularly, and see whether and how we find any
of them among the Saxons; and give me leave herein to produce them in such
order (though not logical) as the Report presents them to the Reader in their
several places.

CHAP. XIII.
No profit of Land by Wardship in the Saxons time.
Profits by Wardship.
AS for the profits of the land which the King has now during the minority of
a Ward, it is manifest that the Kings then had no such of the Thane-lands; for
that the Thane had this particular privilege, that when he died he might make
his Will of his own lands (as it formerly appears) and Chap. 8.
give them unto whom he would, which was never lawful after the coming of the
Normans, for any Baron or Tenant by Knight Service to do; till the statute 32.
Hen. VIII. Cap. 1. gave free liberty to all men to devise all Socage-land by
their last Will in writing, and no more than two parts only of land holden in
Capite or by Knight Service, least it should hinder the Lords too much of their
Feodal profits. And Socage-lands were therefore long before devisable in many
Buroughs, for that thereby the Lord sustained no such prejudice. But to
conclude this point in one word, it shall (I hope) be made manifest in the next
Chapter, that there were no Wardships amongst the Saxons, and thereupon it will
follow invincibly there could be then no profits of lands arising to the King
or Lords by title of Wardship.

CHAP. XIV.
No Wardship in England amongst the Saxons. Objections answered.
IN following the Report I must now speak de causa post causatum; of Wardship
after the Profits of land growing by it. This being the chiefest fruit of all
feodal servitudes, and the root from whence many branches of like grievances
take their original; the Report labors more to prove it to have been in use
among our Saxons, than it does in all the rest of them, and enforces me
thereby to the greater labor in examining it, and discovering the contrary.

The name Wardship.
Touching the name (Wardship) I confess it carries a Saxon sound, but from
Norman Godfathers, with whom Guard signifying the same that Ward does with us,
and they bringing this custom into England, our English Ancestors (as in a
multitude of other words) changed the Norman G. into a W. and so made Ward for
Guard, and thereof Wardship for Gardship. Yet to this day we call him that has
the custody of the ward, after the Norman manner his Guardian not his Warden.
But I find neither Ward, Wardship nor Warden, in this sense, in any Saxon Law,
Charter, or Manuscript, or any thing conducing to such signification: The proof
being in the affirmative lies on the other side, yet does not the Report
produce one single Case, Text, or Precedent, to maintain their assertion; but
like Pythagoras's Scholars, rests wholly upon Ipse dixit, such and such have
said it; and I am now turned over to those Authors.

Mr. Selden's judgment.
They have chosen a right good foreman (1 confess) Mr. Seldom, of whom I say as
she in Ovid, Nomine in Hectoreo pallida semper eram. But let us hear what he
affirms, according as the Report conceives him, where the words be thus. P.
37. Sect 160.
That Wardships were then (viz. in the Saxon's time) in use, and not brought in
by the Normans, as Mr. Cambden in his Britt. 179. nor by Henry III. as Randolph
Hygden, etc. would persuade. Vid. Selden's notes to Fort^scue, 51.* The Report
says Vide, and I say audi. Mr. Seldom to confute this opinion attributed to
Rand. Hygden uses these words. Neither is the custom of Wardship so new as R.
Hygden in his Polycronicon, or rather some others not understanding him,
ignorantly make it, by supposing the beginning of it here under Hen. III.
clearly Wardships were before or from the Normans at least. Thus Mr. Seldom.
There may be some amphiboly in the word before, as doubtful whether it shall
relate to the Normans or to Hen. III. but the occasion of his speech is to
confute the opinion of them that did attribute the beginning of Wardships to
Hen. III. saying, that clearly they were before, and though he determines not
how long before, yet he concludes that from the Normans at least, citing
Glanvill to show they were in use in Hen. II's time, and the Grand Custumer of
Normandy to fetch them higher than so from the Normans, who (by the opinion of
Berhault that writ the Commentary to that Custumary) did first bring them into
England. Mr. Seldom (God be thanked) is living to explain himself, and I find
(by chance) where he has done it fully. His words in the Titles of Honor be
thus, Par* 11. cap. 8. p. 301.
These kind of Military Fiess or Fees as we now have, were not till the Normans,
with whom the customs of Wardship in Chivalry (they began not under Hen. III.
as most ignorantly R. Hygden the monk of Chester and Polydore tells you) came
into England. And speaking by and by of Malcolm second King of Scotland, who
dyed about twenty two years before the Conquest, he says: But in this
Malcolme's time, Wardships were not at all in England. Thus, Mr. Seldom, whom
they so often press against me out of ambiguous places, is clearly with me.

Lambards opinion.
Their next Authority to prove Wardships to have been in use amongst the
Saxons, is (says the Report) that amongst the privileges granted by Edw. the
Confessor to the Cinque Ports we meet with this, That their heirs shall not be
in Ward. For this they cite Lambard's Perambulation of Kent, p. 101. but I
demand Oyer of the Record, and I verily persuade my self Null tiel Record, nor
in truth has Lambard averred that there is. Lambard's P. 123, and 124.
words be these, The privileges of these Ports being first granted by Edw. the
Confessor and William the Conqueror, and then confirmed and increased by
William Rufus, Hen. II. Rich. I. Hen. III. and King Edw. the first, be great,
etc. And in reciting some of these privileges, he tells us amongst the rest,
That they themselves (the Inhabitants of the Cinque Ports) be exempted from all
payments of Subsidies, and their Heirs freed from Wardship of body
notwithstanding any Tenure. He does not say that this is in the Charter of
Edward the Confessor, but that it is among the privileges granted by him and
William the Conqueror, and then confirmed and increased by the succeeding
Kings. Doubtless the word Subsidies here mentioned in this sense, was not in
use either in the Confessor or Conqueror's time, nor in many years after till
Taxes, Aids, and Tallages were grudged at and restrained. I am therefore
confident that this came in among the increased privileges afterward, and it
appears that Mr. Lambard was not persuaded that there was such a Charter of
the Confessor's time, and therefore waving it seeks the original of the
privileges of the Cinque Ports, no further than the Conqueror. Why then do we
father this upon the Confessor, especially seeing the Charter of Lib. intrat.
Tit. Challing. fol. 1156.
Anno 6. Edw. I. wherein all the Charters of the precedent Kings seem to be
mentioned, that of Edw. the Confessor is not spoken of.

Magna Charta.
The third assertion is, that in the customs of Kent, ( p. 37*
which are in Magna Charta of Tottil's Edition, and in Lambard's Perambulation)
there is a rule for the Wardship of the heir in Gavelkind, and that he shall
not be married by the Lord. And those customs say of themselves, that they were
devant le Conqueste, e en le Conqueste. The words in Lambard be devant le
Conqueste, e en le Conquest, e toutes hours ieskes en ca. That is, before the
Conquest and at the Conquest, and ever since till now: which word (now)
relates to the 2^. of Edw. I. there immediately before mentioned. And to save
the credit of the Author, must be favorably understood to be meant of such
customs, as were in use either before the Conquest, or at the Conquest, or at
any time since, in the disjunctive not in the aggregative. For if it be taken
conjunctively, then is it notoriously false, for some things mentioned in it
had their original under Hen. II. as the Grand Assize, and Justices of Eyer
Page 571.
, whereof that of Eyer was not instituted, till the Council (or Parliament as
we now call it) of Nottingham, An. Dom. 1176. viz. in the 22. or 23. of Hen.
II. And for that of the Grand Assize, it is expressly said in the customs, that
it was granted them by Hen. III P. 584.
. Many other things there be, as the Office of the Crowner, the manner of
Essoyning, Writ of Cessavit, etc. which I suppose was never heard of before the
Conquest. But if you mark it, the words in question, viz. devant le Conquest,
etc. stand in Lambard at a little more distance than the lines precedent, as if
himself conceived them not to belong unto the text of customs. And to clear the
doubt in the elder Edition Fol. 148.
published by Tottill 12. June 1556. no such thing is mentioned; but if it were,
there are such other differences in their copies as both their authorities may
be questioned, and I in the mean time well delivered from this objection. Let
us see what follows.

Wardship in Scotland.
Fourthly, For the antiquity of Wardships in England and Scotland. "See also
(says the Report Page 38.
) Hector Boet. lib. 2. Buchanan rerum Scot. lib. 6. and the laws of Malcome II.
which prove the antiquity of Wardships in Scotland and in England before the
Conquest P. 38.
. For in those times it is probable the laws of both Nations did not much
differ; as for the times after, it appears they did not, by comparing their
Regiam Majestatem with our Glanvil. Neither is the bare conjecture of Sir Henry
Spelman sufficient to take away the force of those laws, Vid. Spelman's
Glossary verbo Feudum. Upon all this (says the Report) they (the Justices of
Ireland) did conclude and proceed to sentence." With the sentence (as a sacred
thing) I will not meddle. But as touching that part of this argument which --
In nostros fabricata est machina muros -- I Am tied either to answer or to
submit. For Hector Boethius therefore, I confess Hector Boethius.
the place to be truly alleged, (and that hitherto has seldom happened) but
for the credit of that Author I wish Leland were alive to deliver the censure
he has left upon him with his own mouth: I forbear it. True it is, he relates
that Malcolm II. gave all his lands well nigh unto his Nobility in reward of
their service, and that they in thankfulness to support his dignity, regranted
unto him, Vardam, Desponsationem, and releviam al. relevatam, Wardship, and
Marriage of their Heirs within age, and Relief of those of full age. The
Paragraph there is long, but to the effect we spoke of. It is also true that
Buchanan does report the like, and since him Cameraris, and a little before
them all Johannes Major; but all their harping is from the sound of one string,
which in the Report is not left unstrain'd, i. e. the laws of Malcolme before
mentioned, where it is said, that ad montem placiti in Villa de Scona omnes
Barons concesserunt sibi Wardam, and Releviam de Haerede cujuscunque Baronis
defuncti ad sustentationem Domini Regis. Which, because they concern a noble
Kindom, and have been received as authentical by an ancient Parliament, I will
not presume to contradict it. But I humbly offer to the consideration of the
Learned of that Kingdom, and to those of ours and theirs that are conversant in
Antiquities, these particulars following.

The auth^ri^y of (...).
First, It being agreed (which the Scots affirm) that Malcolm II. began his
reign in the year 1004. (i. e. above 60. years before the Normans Conquered
England) how it comes to pass that Malcolm uses so many Norman words in his
Scottish Laws, and whether those words be found in any other monument there
before: for in England it was not so.

Secondly, Whether their Kings then had not only a Seal but magnum sigillum in
the custody of the Chancellor, and set-fees appointed for the use of it; for in
England it was not so, tho* Edward the Confessor had a Seal after Malcolm's
time.

Thirdly, Whether they had brevia clausa in cera, and other ordinary
instruments sealed cum magno sigillo, and fees appointed for it; for in England
it was not so.

Fourthly, Whether they had solemn presentations to Churches and Hospitals
under Seals in that manner; for this was long before the Council of Lateran.

Fifthly, Whether they had then the names of Barons, Seneschallus,
Constabularius, Mareschallus, (not in use in England in the time of the
Confessor) as appears, for the two latter, by the Appendix to the
Confessors laws Fol. 112. a.
; and for their Seneschallus called their Steward, Buchanan Lib. 7. f. 75. b.
says he was brought in by Malcolm III. into Scotland.

Sixthly, Whether the Norman Officers of Justiciarius, Vicecomes, Coronator,
Ballivus, etc. were then in use by any other proof than by or from these laws;
and sic de caeteris.

Many other things I pretermit, and take no exception to the frequent mention
of Pounds and Shillings, though I know they were scarce with them in Scotland; as
not abundant then in England, but paid in Truck and Cattle. The agreement of
the English and Scotch Laws.
But I admit that which the Report says, that in those times it is probable the
laws of both Nations did not much differ. As for the times after, it appears
they did not, by comparing their Regiam Majestatem with our Glanvil. They run
much (I confess) paribus vestigiis, and oftentimes totidem verbis, iisdem
paragraphis. Whether of them leads or follows the other, I dare not define, and
am loath to dispute. The Preface to the Regia Majestas shows it to be written
at the command of King David; whom Skeneus in his Annotations calls the
first, and says, he began to reign Anno 1124. i. e. 24. or 25. of Hen. I. And
it is certain that our Glanvil was not written till the time of Hen. II. who
began not to reign till 1154. so that if this be true, it must needs follow
that we took a great part of the model of our laws, or at least the expression
of them, from the Scots, (which our Ancestors never yet acknowledged). It may
perhaps fall out (upon better examination) that David I. may be mistaken for
David II. But for the part of Malcolm II's laws, which speak of Wardship,
Marriage and Relief in Scotland at that time, to have risen from their own
Nobility; Buchanan himself recedeth from that opinion, and concludes, Hun^
morem ab Anglis and Danis potius acceptum credo: quod in tota Anglia and part
Normanniae adhuc perseveret. And Demster himself, their greatest Antiquary,
ingeniously consesseth, that there were no Barons in Scotland till Malcolm III.
created them. And he might well take his precedent from the Conqueror, for he
lived all the time of the Conqueror, and about seven years after: so that if
there were no Barons in Scotland in the time of Malcolm II. as Demster
affirms, or the precedent taken out of England for Wardship, as Buchanan
believes: then could not this law be made in Malcolm II's. time, but seems
rather (by both their opinions) to be ascribed to Malcolm III. and that the
error has risen (as easily it may) in writing II. for III. But in the mean
time all this makes no proof against me.

CHAP. XV.
No Marriage of Wards.
Marriage of Wards.
AS for Marriage, it is here and in some other places mentioned by the Report,
but not a word any where to prove that it belonged to the Lord in the Saxon
time. I will help them with what I meet in the old MS. Book of Ramsey, Sect.
120. where it is said, that one Edwine son of Othulf gave five hides of land to
Archbishop Odo, Pro eo quod Regem Edredum inflexerat, ut ei liceret filiam
cujusdam viri Vlfi quem concupiverat, maritali sibi foedere copulare. Here it
appears that the King's License or good will was sought, but the reason
appears not. The good will of King Solomon was 2 Kings 2. 21.
sought that Abishag might be given to Adoniah for his wife, but not in respect
of Tenure in either case. It is an express law of King Canutus (Ll. 72.) ne
nyde man nather if ne maeden, etc. That no man should constrain either woman or
maid to marry otherwise than where they will, nor shall take any money for them,
unless by way of thankfulness some do give somewhat. If these passages carry
any show of Wardship, I must still let you know that Knights Fees were not at
this time descendable unto Women by the Feudal law, no nor long after, when
they were become hereditary in the masculine line, Ne a Lancea ad fusum
haereditas pertransiret, as you may see by Cujacius in feud. Lib. 1. Tit. 1.

When marriages came in.
The first law that I meet with touching Feudal marriages is in Magna Charta
Libertatum Hen. I. yet is there nothing spoken of marrying the heir male of the
Kings Tenant within age. And touching the female issue it is only provided,
that the King should be so far acquainted with their marriage, as that he might
be assured they should not marry with his enemies, lest the feuds or feifs
which were given for service against them, should by this occasion be
transferred to them. Hear the words of the Charter. Et si quis Baronum meorum,
vel aliorum hominum meorum siliam suam nuptui tradere voluerit, sive sororem
suam, sive neptem, sive cognatam, mecum inde loquatur; sed nec ego aliquid de
suo pro hac licentia accipiam, nec defendam ei quin eam det, excepto si eam
velit jungere meo inimico. Et si mortuo Barone vel alio homine meo, filia
haeres remanserit, and sine liberis fuerit, dotem suam and maritationem
habebit, and eam non dabo marito, nisi secundum velle suum, etc. Ordaining,
that the Wife shall be Guardian of the Childrens lands, or some near kinsman,
qui justus esse debet; and that other Lords observe the like courses touching
their Wards.

Thus among the Normans: but I don't find in all the Feodal law of these times,
any thing sounding to this purpose, nor any mention of Marriage or Wardship of
the body or lands. I take them therefore to have risen from the Normans a
little before their coming into England, but in a diverse manner, according to
the diversity of the places, and the moderate or covetous disposition of the
Lords. For it seems that though the profits of the land belonged wholly to the
Lord, and were therefore ordinarily so taken by him: yet some of the Lords
deducting only the charge of Education of the Ward, and just allowances,
restored him his lands at full age, with the surplusage upon account. And the
Grantee of a Wardship from the King, was in Normandy tied to do it, as
appears by the 215. Artic. of the reformed Customs; for otherwise they were
not Guardians properly and Tutores rei pupillaris, but fructuarii rather, and
suum promoventes commodum. See the Comment to that Article.

(...) marriage.
So in point of Feodal marriage, it seems that the Charter of Henry I. was
grounded upon the Norman Custom, which, tho it required the consent of the Lord
in tendering of Marriage to Women (for the reason aforesaid) yet did it not
permit either him or the kindred or friends (whom they called the parents) to
make it venal, or to take any thing for the same, as you may see by diverse
passages there, and by a case adjudged in the Comment to the 228. Article,
where the Tutor or Guardian and the Parents and Friends thus offending, are all
condemned to pay costs and damages. And note, that according to the Norman
custom Art. 228.
) the consent of the Parents, (viz. the next kindred and friends) was as
requisite as the consent of the Lord or Tutor, which, as I conceive, gave the
occasion of the words Si parents conquerantur, in the Statute of Merton Cap. 6.
, as in respect of the ancient right they had in consenting to the Marriage.

And insomuch as we don't find that the various usages touching Wardship and
Marriage, were composed into an uniform law till Magna Charta Henr. III. did
determine it, it may be conceived to have been the reason that Rand. Higden
before mentioned and our other Authors, did ascribe this part of our Feodal Law
to be introduced by Henry III. But it is manifest by Glanvil that it was in use
in Henry II's time: and by the Charter of Henry I. to have been so likewise
under William Rufus; yet is there nothing hitherto any way produced to bring it
from the Saxons, or to show it to have been in use amongst them.

CHAP. XVI.
No Livery, no Primer Seisin.
Praerog. Reg. cap. 3
IF the King's Tenant in capite or by Knight Service dies, the King shall have
his lands till the heir has done homage; which if he be of full age, he may do
presently: but if he be under age the land must continue in the King's hands
till his full age. And when either the one or the other sueth to have it out of
the King's hands, his obtaining it is called Livery, and the profits received
in the mean time by the King, are called his Primer Seisin. But neither of
these could be among the Saxons, for that their hereditary lands were not
Feodal, but libera ab omni gravedine, (as before we have showed.) And their
temporary lands could not be subject to it, for that their Estate extended no
farther then to a Franck Tenement. And neither the one or the other was then
tied to do Homage, as shall appear when we speak of Homage.

After the coming of the Normans they were presently afoot amongst us, even in
William Rufus's days, but uncertain and irregular; which was a certain note of
their novelty, and that Feuds hereditary were new begun. The great Charter of
Liberties granted by Henry I. implies as much: where to moderate them, the
King says thus, Si quis Baronum meorum seu Comitum sive aliorum qui de me
tenent, mortuus fuerit, haeres suus non redimet terram suam sicut faciebat
tempore fratris mei, sed legitima and justa relevatione relevabit eam.
Similiter and homines Baronum meorum justa and legitima relevatione relevabunt
terras suas de Dominis suis. I take this redeeming of the land out of the
King's hands, to be a Composition for his Primer Seisin, and for the Livery and
Relief, things uncertain at this time even in their Norman appellations, and
not likely therefore to be known unto the Saxons.

CHAP. XVII.
That Reliefs (whereon the Report most relyeth) were not in use among the
Saxons; nor like their Heriots.
No Reliefs among the Saxons.
OF all the Feodal profits alleged in the Report to be received by the Saxons,
it casts anchor chiefly on Reliefs, as a thing most evident and unanswerable:
the rest (save Wardship) it scarcely fortifieth with a breath besides the bare
assertion. This it says was common; and in pursuit thereof Page 36. and 37.
adds these words. For Reliefs, we have full testimony in the Reliefs of their
Earls and Thanes, for which see the laws of King Canutus, Cap. 68, and 69. the
laws of Edw. the Confessor, cap. de Heretochiis, and what out of the book of
Doomsday Coke has in his Instit. Sect. 103. Camden in Berkshire, Seldom in
Eadmer. 154. Great authorities; secumque Deos in praelia ducunt. We must not
meddle with them all at once, let us try them singly. The law cited out of
Canutus is in these words: And beon tha heregeata, Let the heriot (which was to
be paid after the death of great men) be according to their dignities. An
Earl's, eight Horses, (four sadled and four unsadled) four Helmets, four
Corslets, eight Spears and as many Shields, four Swords and two hundred marks
of Gold. The heriot of a Thane next to the King, four Horses (two sadled and
two unsadled) two Swords, four Spears, four Shields, one Helmet, one Corslet,
and fifty marks. Of the inferior or midling Thane, an Horse furnished and his
weapon, etc. Medmena mediocris.
And he that less has and less may, let his heriot be two pound. Here is speech
indeed of an heriot but none of Relief: I shall anon show the difference
between them, and then has this law nothing against me. Touching the law
alleged to be Edward the Confessor's, the words be these, Qui in bello ante
Dominum suum ceciderit (sit hoc in terra sit alibi) sint ei relevationes
condonatae, etc. Here I confess is mention of Reliefs, but I deny this to be
the law of Edward the Confessor: it is true that it is published by Lambard
among his received laws, but (if you mark it) in a differing letter as noting
it to be an addition. In an ancient MS. therefore (which I have) of those laws,
it is not sound, nor in the printed copy of Roger Hoveden, who wrote till the
third year of King John, that is 134. years after the Confessor's time: with
reverence therefore be it spoken, it is mistaken both in the Report and by my
Ld. Coke himself, whom it follows, if they say that these words were part of
the law of Edw. the Confessor, yea, the text it self makes..... of William the
younger called Rufus.

But to conceal no truth, it is delivered by Jornalensis Monachus in the very
same words, as a law of an elder King amongst us, than the Confessor; namely of
Canutus our Danish King, who in the 157. Chap. of his laws (speaking of one
slain in battle in the presence of his Lord) says expressly, Sint ei
relevationes condonatae. Now the game seems to be wonn; but stay a while, and
remember what I said before of the translations of our Saxon Laws and Charters
into Latin. The Saxons and the Danes (whose Language and Laws differed little
in those days) wrote their Laws only in their own tongue, and the translating
of them has begotten much variety and many controversies; we must therefore
resort to the original Saxon, where this passage is in the 75 th. Chap. of the
second part of his Laws in these words, and se man the aet tham sy^dung toforan
his hla^ord ^ealle, sy hit innan land, sy hit of land. beon herogeata
forgyfene: which is thus verbatim, The man that in a military Voyage is slain
before or in the presence of his Lord, be it upon land or off of land, let the
Heriots be forgiven him. He says not, let the Releifs, but let the Heriots be
forgiven him, and I deny not but this might be one of the Danish Laws which
Edward the Confessor took out of Canutus's Laws when he composed the Common Law
out of the West Saxon Law, Mercian Law, and Dane Law, if the copies of them
were extant; and it is very probable that William the Conqueror (or one of his
sons) did turn that Law of Heriots into this of Reliefs.

For that which my Lord Coke has out of Doomsday, is the same which Mr.
Cambden has in Barkshire touching all that County. Vt Tainus vel Miles Regis
Dominicus moriens, pro releviamento dimittebat Regi omnia arma sua, and Equum
unum cum sella, and alium sine sella; quod si essent canes vel accipitres,
praestabantur Releviamentum.
Regi, ut sivellet, acciperet. Here is releviamentum used in the Conquerour's
time, (which I doubt not,) but our Question is of it in the time of the Saxons.
That also cited by and out of Mr. Seldom is of the same nature, and one answer
therefore serves to all the three. Yet by way of corollary, I shall anon
discover another error of this sort, rising even from Doomsday it self and the
Normans possessing this Kingdom of the Saxons, but not well instructed in their
Laws and Customs: which is as follows.

CHAP. XVIII.
Difference between Heriots and Reliefs.
Heriots and Reliefs.
HEriots were usual among the latter Saxons: Reliefs among the elder Normans
before their coming into England. This according to the custom of the Feudal
Law, and other Nations: that ordained by Ludovicus al. Clodoveus King of France
about the year 511. to tame the Almans whom he then had brought to servitude. I
find it not in England till the Soveraigntie of the Danes. The first Laws
(which I find) that mention it, are those of Canutus before mentioned, who
perhaps for the assurance of his throne used this politic device to have all
the Armor of the Kingdom at his disposition in this manner, when he had
dismissed his Danish Army. But it falling so out as the Heriot being to be paid
at or after the death of the Old Tenant, and the Relief at or before the entry
of the new; the Normans in this did like our Ancestors the Saxons, who, because
our Christian Pascha or Passover fell out yearly to be celebrated about the
time of the Feast of their Idol. Easter, called our Passover by the name of
their Easter; so they seem to have conceived the Saxon heriot to be the same
that their Norman Relief was, and therefore translated the word heriot by
Releviamentum or Relevium, and raising the form of their Feudal Law in England,
drew the Saxon customs to cohere therewith as much as might be. But there is
great difference between Heriots and Reliefs; for Heriots were Militiae
apparatus, which the word signifies, and devised (as I said before) to keep
the conquered Nation in subjection, and to support the public strength and
military furniture of the Kingdom: the Reliefs for the private commodity of the
Lord, that he might not have inutilem proprietatem in the Seignory. The Heriots
were therefore properly paid in habiliments of war, the Reliefs usually in
money: The Heriot for the Tenant that died, and out of his goods Bracton fol
84. ^
; the Relief for the Tenant that succeeded and out of his purse. The Heriot
whether the son or heir enjoyed the land or not: the Relief by none but him
only that obtained the land in succession. The Heriot whether the land were
fallen into the Lord's hands or not: the Relief in old time not unless it were
fallen and lay destitute of a Tenant, whose taking of it up out of the Lord's
hands was in that sense called Relevium or Relevatio, a taking up of that was
fallen, according to the French word Relief. Bracton fol. 84. a. number. 1.
Bracton well observed the difference, saying, Fit quaedam praestatio quae non
dicitur Relevium sed quasi, sicut Heriotum quasi loco Relevii, and quod dari
debet aliquando ante sacramentum fidelitatis, aliquando post. Hotoman Verb.
Feudal.
says, Relevium dicitur honorarium (munus) quod novus Vassallus Patrono
introitus causa largitur; quasi morte alterius Vassalli vel alio quo casu
feudum ceciderit, quod jam a novo sublevetur. (Nov. Leo. 13. (...) nominat.)

I stand the longer herein, for that not only the Report but even Doomsday it
self and generally all the ancient Monkish writers, have confounded Heriots and
Releifs. Yet might I have saved all this labor, for nothing can make the
difference more manifest than that we often see both of them are together
issuing out of the same land. But when all is done, neither is Heriot nor
Releif any badge of land holden by Knight's-service or in Capite, for both of
them are found in lands of ordinary Socage. Yet I confess that Bracton says
Fol. 85. n. 8.
, de soccagio non datur Relevium, and a little before, de soccagio non competit
domino Capitali Custodia nec homagium: and ubi nulla Custodia, nullum Relevium,
sed e contra. But this serves my turn very well; for that they in the Report
having failed to prove that Releifs were in use in the Saxons time, (whereof
they affirmed they had full testimony) it now infers on my behalf that if
Releifs and Wardships were not in use among the Saxons, that then also Tenure
by Knight Service was not with them.

Besides all this, the Heriot was a certain duty, and settled by Law, the
Relief so various and uncertain, as the Lords exacted what they listed for it
when it fell into their hands; constraining the heir of the Tenant, as it were
to make a new purchase of their Feud; whereupon the Feudists called this Releif
not only Renovatio and Restauratio feudi, in Greek (...), turning or bringing
back of the Feud to the former condition or proper nature of it; but also
Redemptio a ransoming of it out of the Lord's hands. That it thus stood with us
in England by and by after the Conquest, appears by that we have showed before
out of the Magna Charta of Henry I.

CHAP. XIX.
No Fines for License of Alienation.
Fines for license of alienation.
TOuching Fines for License of Alienation, it is not said what kind of Tenants
among the Saxons did pay them, nor for what kind of land they were paid. The
Thane-land hereditary is apparently discharged thereof by the ordinary words of
their Charters before mentioned, where it is said, that the owners of lands may
give and bequeath them cuicunque voluerint, and that freely, ab omni munduali
obstaculo. Doomsday also (as we here showed) does testify as much, and so does
the very word Alodium, which the ancient Authors attribute to these lands. So
that the Thane-lands doubtless were free both from the Fine and License.

Folcland.
But as touching Folcland and land holden at will of the Lord, though continued
in ancient time to their children after the manner of Copy-holds; it is no
question but that they might both have License for aliening such lands, and
also pay consideration for it; as our Copyholders do at this day. I find (...)
Kent T^^. M^pham.
that one Brictrick in the time of King Etheldred about the year 984. bequeathed
legacies of good value unto his Lord's wife, to entreat her Husband that this
Brictrick's Will (whereby he had devised many lands and goods to Monasteries
and diverse men) might stand. And that Thola the widow of Vrke a Thane of Edward
the Confessor, obtained license from the same King Edward, that she might
devise both her lands and goods to the Monastery of Abbotsbury. But of what
nature these Licenses were, whether to alienate the land, or to make a Will, or
to give the land to Monasteries as in Mortmain, I cannot determine. If they
only intended alienation, then I understand them only of Lands holden
(according to the custom of the time) at will of the Lord, or Folcland. Yet in
that Thola's License was as well to bequeath her goods expressly as her lands;
the License seems to be given therefore to make a Will, which no man then
could do if not a Thane. (Quaere.) But howsoever it be expounded, it must not
be extended to the Thane-lands or land hereditary, for the reasons before
alleged.

And as touching Fines for License of Alienation after our manner (which the
Report suggesteth) they could not doubtless be in use among the Saxons; for
there are not found (as I suppose) here among us before the time of Edward I.
and not established afterward 'till 1. Edw. III. where the King grants that
from thenceforth lands holden in Chief, should not be seized as forfeited
(which formerly they were) for Alienation without License, but that a
reasonable Fine should be taken for the same. See the Statute*

CHAP. XX.
No Feodal Homage among the Saxons.
Feodal homage.
OUr word Man and homo in Latin, have for many ages in old time been used by
the German and Western Nations for a Servant or Vassal. And from thence
hominium and vassaticum, afterward homagium was likewise used for hominem
agere, to do the office or duty of a servant; (not to signify Manhood as some
Coke Instit. par. 1. Sect. 85. fol. 64. ^.
expound it,) and so also Vassalagium. But by little and little all these latter
words have been restrained, to note no more than our ceremonial homage
belonging properly unto Tenures; which I met not with among our Saxons, nor any
show thereof in former ages, unless we shall fancy that the Devil had it in his
eye when he offered to give unto our Savior all the Kingdoms of the world, if
he would fall down and worship him. For here he makes himself as Capital Lord,
our Savior as the Feodal Tenant: the Kingdoms of the world to be the Feud: the
falling (or kneeling) down to be the homage: and the worshipping of him
(consisting as the Feodists expound it in six rules of service) to be the
Fealty. Pardon me this idleness, but from such missemblances rise many errors.

Homage twofold.
Homage (as we understand it in our Law) is of two sorts: one more ancient than
the other called homagium ligeum, as due unto the King in respect of
Sovereignty, and so done (more Francico) to King Pipin by Tassilo Duke of
Bavaria about the year 756. The other homagium feodale or praediale, belonging
to every feodal Lord, and not begun in France 'till Feuds were there made
hereditary by Hugh Capet, nor in England till William the Conqueror did the
like, as before appears. The reason of it was to preserve the memory of the
Tenure and of the duty of the Tenant, by making every new Tenant at his entry
to recognize the interest of his Lord, lest that the Feud being now hereditary
and new heirs continually succeeding into it, they might by little and little
forget their duty, and substracting the services, deny at last the Tenure it
self. We see at this day frequent examples of it; for by neglecting of doing
homage and those services, Tenures usually are forgotten and so revolved to the
King by Ignoramus, to the great evil of their posterity that neglect it.
Neither Bocland nor Folcland subject to homage.


But the Saxons having only two kind of lands, Bocland and Folcland, neither of
them could be subject unto homage: for the Bocland (which belonged properly to
their greater Thanes) though it were hereditary, yet was it alodium and libera ab
omni seculari gravedine, as before is showed, and thereby free from homage. And
the Folcland being not otherwise granted by the King or his Thanes than at
will, or for years, or for life, the tenant of it was not to do any homage for
it. For Justice Littleton Tenures lib. 2. Cap. 1.. 90.
bids us note, that none shall do homage but such as have an estate in fee
simple or fee tail, etc. For (says he) it is a maxim in law, that he which
has an estate but for term of life, shall neither do homage nor take homage.

But admit the Saxons had the ceremony of doing homage among them, yet was it
not a certain mark of Knights-service: for it was usual also in Socage-Tenure.
And in elder ages, as well a personal duty as a praedial, that is done to
Princes and great Men, either by compulsion for subjection, or voluntary for
their protection, without receiving any feud or other grant of land or benefit
from them. And he or they which in this manner put themselves into the homage
of another for protection sake, were then called homines sui, and said
commendare se in manus ejus or commendare se illi, and were thereupon sometimes
called homines ejus commendati, and sometimes commendati without homines, as in
Doomsday often Norf. Terra Will. Ep. and Terra Fid. fill. Spirawi^.
. Though we have lost the meaning of the phrase, yet we use it even to this day.
Commend me unto such a man, which imports as much as (our new compliment
taken up from beyond the Seas) let him know that I am his servant. See the
quotations here annexed, and note, that though the Saxons did (as we at this day)
call their servants and followers homines suos, their men; yet we no where find
the word Tenure, or the ceremony of homage among them, nor any speech of doing
or of respiting homage.

CHAP. XXI.
What manner of Fealty among the Saxons.
All oath^ not fealty.
SO for Fealty: if we shall apply every oath sworn by Servants and Vassals (for
fidelity to their Lord) to belong unto Fealty, we may bring it from that which
Abraham imposed upon his servant, put thy hand under my thigh, and swear, etc.
For the Saxons abounded with oaths in this kind, following therein their
Ancestors the Germans, who, as Tacitus Germ.. 46.
says, took praecipuum Sacramentum, a principal oath to defend the Lord of the
Territory under whom they lived, and to ascribe their own valor to his glory.
So likewise the homines commendati before mentioned, yea, the famuli
ministeriales and household servants of Noble persons, were in ancient times and
within the memory of our fathers, sworn to be faithful to their Lords.

No Fealty but for a Fee.
These and such other were anciently the oaths of Fealty, but illud postremo
observandum says Bignonius (a learned Frenchman of the King's great Council)
fidelitatem hodie quidem feudi causa tantum praestari; showing farther that
Fealty was first made to Princes by the Commendati and Fideles, without any
feud given unto them, and that the Princes afterward did many times grant unto
them feuda vacantia, as to their servants: but whether the oath of fealty were
so brought in upon feodal tenants, or were in use before, he does not
determine. In the mean time it hereby appears, that fealty in those days was
personal as well as feodal or praedial, which imposes a necessity upon them of
the contrary part in the Report, that if they meet with fealty among the
Saxons, they must show it to be feodal and not personal; for otherwise it
maintains not their assertion. I will help them with a pattern of fealty in
those times, where Oswald Bishop of Worcester granting the lands of his
Bishopric to many and sundry persons for three lives, reserved a multitude of
services to be done by them, and bound them to swear, That as long as they held
those lands, they should continue in the commandments of the Bishop with all
subjection. I take this to be an oath of Fealty, but we must consider whether
it be personal or praedial. If personal, it nothing then concerns Tenures,
and consequently not our question. If praedial, then must it be inherent to the
land, which here it seems not to be, but to arise by way of contract. And
being praedial must either be feodal, as for land holden by Knight Service; or
Colonical as for lands in Socage. If we say it is feodal, then must there be
homage also as well as fealty, for homage is inseparable from a feud by
Knight Service: but the estates here granted by Oswald being no greater than
for life, the Grantees must not (as we have showed) either make or take homage.
And being lastly but Colonical or in Socage, it is no fruit of a Tenure in
Capite by Knight Service, nor belonging therefore to our question. So that if
fealty be found among the Saxons, yet can it not be found to be a fruit of
Knight Service in Capite, as the Report pretends it, See Fidelitas in my
Glossary.

CHAP. XXII.
No Escuage among the Saxons. What in the Empire.
(...).
THe word Scutagium and that of Escuage, is of such novelty beyond the Seas, as
I find it not among the feudists, no not among the French or Normans
themselves, much less among the Saxons. Yet I meet with an ancient law in the
Novella of Constantine Porphyrogenita (Emperor of Greece in the year 780.)
that gives a specimen of it, though not the name. (...) in Lib. 1. page 7.
Quaedam esse praedia militaria, quibus cohaereat onus Militiae, ita ut
possessorem necesse sit se ad militiam comparare domino indicante delectum: vel
si nolit aut non possit se ad delectum exhibere, certam eo nomine pecuniam
fisco dependere, quae feudorum omnium lex est, etc. This tells us, that there
were certain lands to which the burden of warfare was so adherent, that every
owner of them was tied upon summons made by his Lord to make his appearance
therein, or else to pay certain money by way of a Fine, as was common in all
cases of Feodal Tenures.

Summons in the Empire.
This has some show of our Escuage, and might well have taken that name from
the manner of summons used in the Empire; which was by erecting a post or
pillar, and hanging a Shield at the top thereof, an Herald proclaiming that all
who held in this manner should at such a day attend the Emperor in his voyage
to Rome, for taking the Crown of Italy or King of Romans; which the Ligurine
Poet thus expresses, Gunter. de Gest. Freder* I. Lib. 2* p 301.
-- Ligno suspenditur alte
Erecto Clypeus: tunc Praeco regius omnes
Convocat a dominis feudalia jura tenentes, etc.
as we have showed in our Glossary verbo Feudum. He uses Clypeus for a Shield,
instead of Scutum; and from this shield I say it might well be called
Scutagium, as also from the service performed in it cum hasta and scuto. Yet
this summons was not called Schiltbannum but Heribannum, that is indictio
exercitus, not indictio s^uti.

But to keep nearer the matter. First, our Saxons neither used the name nor the
rules of the Norman Escuage; for they called their going to war upon legal
summons, firdfare and utfare, in Latin Expeditionem and Profectionem. Secondly,
they were not tied to any definite time of abode, as for forty days or more or
less, but as the law says Cannt. Ll. ca. 10.
, sa a thon thearf sy for gemene^^^re neode, so as need shall require for
common necessity.

Thirdly, the mulct or forfeiture that the Tenant in Escuage incurred for not
going forth upon that summons, was uncertain among the Normans and us, 'till
the Parliament assigned it; but among the Saxons he that offended in Ferdwite,
that is, in not going forth in the Expedition, was certainly fined at 120
Cannt. Ll. ca. 12. and 13.
. Fourthly, whereas every Lord among us had the fine assess'd by Parliament of
his own Tenant for the Lands holden of himself; the King among the Saxons had
the fine aforesaid of every delinquent, whose Tenant or follower soever he
were, by all the Laws of the kingdom, that is to say, by the West Saxon Law, by
the Mercian, and by the Dane Law; though otherwise they differed Ibid. ca. 69.
in their Heriots, and many particular customs. So that to talk of Escuage among
the Saxons, is without all color or probability as I take it.

CHAP. XXIII.
No Feodal Escheate of Hereditary Lands among the Saxons.
Escheats.
EScheats (of Eschoeir in French) signifies things coming accidentally, as on
the by or by chance. The F^odists therefore call them Caduca (a cadendo) and
excadentias; the black book of the Exchequer Escaetas, excidentia and
excadentia: but among our Saxons I find no word to express them either properly
or paraphrastically. In our Law they be of two sorts, Regal Escheats and
Feodal. Regal are those obventions and forfeitures which belong generally to
Kings by the ancient right of their Crowns and supreme dignity. Thus King David
gave the lands of Mephibosheth accused of Treason, unto Ziba (though too
hastily.) Feodal are those which accrue to every Feodal Lord as well as to the
King, by reason of his Seignory, and of all the fruits of Tenure none so great
as this (if we may call it a fruit) where the feud or tree it self resulteth
back unto the Lord. Let us see therefore if we find any of these Feodal
Escheats among the Saxons.

Canutus's Law examined.
There is a shrewd text (I confess) in Canutus his Laws. Qui fugiet a domino
suo vel socio pro timiditate in expeditione navali vel terrestri, perdat omne
quod suum est, and suam ipsius vitam, and manus mittat dominus ad terram quam
ei dederat, and si terram haereditariam habeat, ipsa in manum Regis transeat.
Here is the appearance of a Tenure, of a Feud, of a Forfeiture, and of an
Escheat. The Tenure lies between the Lord and his fugitive Vassal, whom the
Saxons and Germans called his Man, we his Tenant. The Feud in the Land, quam
d^m^nus ^i dederat. The forfeiture, in fugiendo, in the Vassals running away.
And the Es^heat, in the Lord's seizing of the land: manus mittat dominus in
terram quam ei dederat, Let the Lord take back the estate which he gave in the
temporary feud: But for the hereditary land, he says, transeat (non redeat) in
manum Regis. All this is nothing in our case; for I declared in the beginning
that our question was fixed upon such feuds as the Law of England takes notice
of at this day, that is, of feuds after they were become hereditary and
perpetual, not of those mentioned by Gerardus Niger, which were temporary as at
will of the Lord, or for years, or for life, like them here intended by
Canutus. This very Law observes the difference, and discovers also that
feuds were not hereditary in his time, and therefore gives the feodal land,
being but a temporary estate, back unto the Lord (in whom the Reversion was by
inheritance) as a feodal right, but gives the hereditary Lands unto the King
as a Regal Escheat; for that there was no mean or intervenient Lord to claim
them by any feodal tenure, for that the hereditary lands among the Saxons
(otherwise called Bocland) were holden of no body, nor subject to any feodal
service, (as we have often declared) and could not therefore Escheat unto any
feodal Lord. The Kentish custom of the father to the Bough and the son to the
Plough, suggesteth as much, and shows also to have been the general use of
England, till the Conqueror introducing hereditary feuds, put upon us
therewith these greater feodal servitudes of Wardship, Marriage, Escheats, etc.
So that the hereditary lands not being feodal in the Saxon's time, nor the
feodal lands hereditary; there could then be no feodal Escheats among them. And
I take it to be considerable whether the land resumed by the Lord upon his
Vassal's running away, be properly an Escheat by the Law of Canutus, or rather
a penalty only imposed in this particular case.

CHAP. XXIV.
Thaneland and Reveland what: no marks of Tenure but distinctions of
Land-holders.
Thanelands.
THere is yet another assertion, rather showed than proved, (...) p. 34.
That the Thani majores or King's Thanes, held by personal service of the King's
person by Grand Serjanty or Knights-service in Capite. And the reason following
is, that the land so held was in those times called Thane-land, as land
Reveland.
holden in Socage was called Reveland: so frequently in Doomsday (...).
, Haec terra fuit terra Regis Edwardi Thainland, sed postea conversa est in
Reveland; Coke's Instit.. 117. Thus the Report discharges it self upon my Lord
Coke, whose words be these, It is to be observed that in the book of Doomsday,
land holden by Knights-service was called Thainland, and land holden by Socage
was called Reveland. I reverence the opinion of that famous Lawyer with
admiration, but I suppose he speaks not this ex tripode juridico. For it is
impossible, that it and that which is before delivered out of the very Charters
of the Saxon Kings themselves, should stand together, viz. That their
Thanelands should be liberae ab omni seculari gravedine, and yet be subject to
that which of all other was most grievous, viz. our Knights-service in Capite.
It may be answered, (as the Report Page 25. l. 2.
in another place delivers positively) That Tenure in Capite cannot be
transferred or extinct by release or grant; for it is an incident inseparably
annexed to the Crown. The answer were good if once they had made it appear that
both this Tenure and this Law were in force in the Saxons time. There is
nothing showed to prove that suggestion, and were it true I should desire no
better argument on my behalf than what the place it self brings with it. For
if Thaneland were converted into Reveland, and that Reveland signify
Socage-land, then it is as manifest as the Sun, that Tainland did not signify
land holden by Knights-service in Capite; for if it did, then could it not
decline into Socage-Tenure, as their own Maxim does demonstrate.

Coke's citation false
If there be a cloud before this Sun, I shall remove it also. My Lord Coke
citing this place out of Doomsday, notes in the margin Herefords^. but
delivers both the title and the text by halfs. The title is Hereford. Rex.
the text thus: Haec terra fuit tempore Edwardi Regis Tainland, sed postea
conversa est in Reveland. Et idem dicunt legati Regis quod ipsa terra and
census qui inde exit, furtim aufertur Regi. The very title discovers the
Tenure, for if it be Terra Regis, (as the word Rex declares it) then it is
plainly Ancient Demesne, and every Lawyer will tell us, that in ancient Demesne
there was no Tenure by Knights-service, but wholly in Socage. So that this
cloud now vanishes into the air, and our Tainland is clearly discovered to be
but Socage. I shall speak more of it afterward.

Sense of Doomsday.
But what construction shall we now find for the words in Doomsday, Tainland
conversa est in Reveland. (Hoc opus, hic labor est.) It is sufficient for me to
have quit my self of the objection, they must seek some new interpretation. Yet
will I help them what I can in that also: I suppose that the land which is here
said to have been Thaneland, T. E. R. and after converted into Tempore Edwardi
Regis.
Reveland: was such land as being reverted to the King after the death of his
Thane, who had it for life, was not since granted out to any by the King, but
rested in charge upon the account of the Reve or Bailiff of the Manor, who
(as it seems) being in this Lordship of Hereford, like the Reve in Chaucer, a
false brother, concealed the land from the Auditor and kept the profit of it to
himself; till the Surveiors, who are here called Legati Regis, discovered this
falsehood and presented to the King, that furtim aufertur Regi, as by the words
in the latter part of the paragraph (which my Lord Coke recites) appears.
Besides all this, why should the coming of these lands into the Reve's account,
alter the nature of the Tenure, seeing all men know that the Reves and Bailiffs
of Mannours govern and dispose the lands thereof, as well which are holden by
Knights-service as those in Socage.

The French Custumary
As for the old French MS. Custumary (which they affirm does mention Tenures by
Knights-service, long before the Saxons even in the time of the Britains;) I
doubt not but there may be such a passage in it; for the Law which they ascribe
to Edward the Confessor for proving Feuds to be in use in his time, affirms
also that the Laws, Dignities, Liberties, etc. of the City of London were at
that day the same which were in Old Great Troy. But as they in the Report wave
the one, so I take them both for Romances, and pass them over as not worth an
answer.

Having thus particularly answered every argument, inference and objection,
produced in the Report, to prove our Feuds and Form of Tenures to have been in
use amongst our Saxons; I shall now conclude that it neither was nor could be
so, unless we shall assume that our poor illiterate Saxons (in a corner of the
World) were the Authors of the Feodal Law, and gave the precedent thereof to
the Germans, Longobards, French, Italians, and the Empire. For in none of these
was it otherwise extant (till about the end of our Saxon Monarchy;) then by
such budds and branches as we formerly have expressed out of Caesar, Tacitus,
and some other.

CHAP. XXV.
How the Saxons held their Lands, and what obliged them to so many kinds of
Services.
IT comes now in question, how the Saxons held their lands, and what obliged
them to that multitude of services which lay upon them both in war and peace.

(...).
As for Tenures, I still say that they had not the name in use among them, yet
(like the Jews, the Greeks, the Romans, and other ancient Nations) a multitude
of services, whereof some were personal, and some praedial.

Personal (...).
Personal services were those which a man did for his person or personal
Estate, either generally to the King and Commonwealth in public occasions, as
in the Trinodi necessitate, etc. or particularly to his own Lord upon
particular agreement between them, like the Commendati before mentioned, and
some ministerial Officers and domestic servants.

Praedial (...).
Praedial service was that which was done after the same manner (to the King or
his Lord) for land only; and this was of three sorts, Alodial, Beneficiary, and
Colonical.

Alodial ^^^^ice.
Alodial service was that which the Greater Thanes and other who had Alodial
land (otherwise called Bocland, and as I take it Gavelkind and Hereditary land)
were tied to do pro bono publico to the King and Commonwealth, in respect of
those Lands; though by the Feudal law that kind of land was free from all Tenure
and Feodal service. I should not therefore use this solecism to call them
services, if the Dialect of our Law afforded me some other fit expression; but
the Saxons themselves termed them Land-rights not services, of which sort were
the Trinodis necessitas of Expedition, Burghbote and Brigbote, the guarding of
the sea and of the peace, attendance upon the King's summons for his Park or
Palace before expressed, and besides them all the Tribute of Danegelt, etc.

Beneficiary services.
Beneficiary services were those, which were done by the midling or lesser
Thanes to the King, and the greater Thanes either militarily in war, or
ministerially in peace, for those portions of Out-land, which being granted to
them temporarily (as at will of the Lord or for life or lives) were then called
Beneficia, but being extended after to perpetuity, they were named by the
Normans Feoda. The Creation, manner, variety, and multitude of them, you shall
see in the Charter of Bishop Oswald, by and by ensuing.

Colonical (...).
Colonical services were those which were done by the Ceorls and Socmen, (that
is, Husbandmen) to their Lords (the King and Thanes) of all sorts, for some
portions also of their Out-lands. These were after called feoda rustica beyond
the Seas, with us Socage-lands, and were holden at pleasure of their Lords
either by rendering part of the profits thereupon growing or reared, as victuals
especially, in Saxon called Feorms, etc. (whereof see the rates in the Laws of
King Ina, Chap. 70.) or by doing some works of Husbandry upon the Lord's
Inlands now called his Demeans, as Tillage, Carriage, Harvestworks, etc.

Among all these diversities of services, none comes so near to the nature of
Feuds and Tenures, as the Beneficiary do. Let us therefore consider them the
more seriously by that notable pattern of them left unto us from Bishop Oswald,
who dividing much of the land of his Church of Worcester into those kind of
portions, which after the Feodal word then in use he called Beneficia, granted
the same unto his Thanes and followers, not by the name of his milites or
tenentes, but of his fidos subditos, for the term of three lives (according to
the manner which they retain in those parts even to this day) and reserving to
his Church and successors not homagium and s^rvitium, the material words in
Tenure to create Knights-service in the Feodal Law, but the services mentioned
in his Charter secundum Conventionem cum eis factam and sponsionem suam, as the
very words are there expressly. But hear the Charter or rather Epistle as he
himself calls it, which the King confirmed and a Council. The Aranga or
preamble of it is a thankful acknowledgement of King Edgar's bounty and
goodness to him (the Bishop) and his Church; the conclusion (after the manner
of those times) a curse and heavy imprecation against all such as shall spoil
or violate the same. Both which being long and nothing to our purpose, I think
convenient here to pretermit. The rest is as follows under the title given it
in the Manuscript.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Charter whereby Oswald Bishop of Worcester disposed diverse lands of his
Church after the Feodal manner of that time, entitled, Indiculum libertatis de
Oswaldes-Lawes-Hundred.
DOmino meo charissimo Regi Anglorum Edgaro, ego Oswaldus Wigorniensis
Ecclesiae Episcopus, etc. Quare quomodo fidos mihi subditos telluribus quae
meae traditae sunt potestati per spatium temporis, trium hominum id est duorum
post se haeredum, condonarem, placuit tam mihi quam ipsis fautoribus and
consiliariis meis, cum ipsius Domini mei regis licentia and attestatione, ut
fratribus meis successoribus scil. Episcopis per Chirographi cautionem apertius
enuclearem, ut sciant quid ab eis extorquere just debeant secundum
conventionem cum eis factam, and sponsionem suam; unde and hanc Epistolam ob
cautelae causam componere studui, nequis malignae cupiditatis instinctu hoc
sequenti tempore mutare volens, abjurare a servitio Ecclesiae queat.

Haec itaque conventio cum eis facta est, ipso Domino meo Rege annuente, and
sua attestatione munificentae suae largitatem roborante and confirmante,
omnibusque ipsius regiminis sapientibus and principibus attestantibus and
consentientibus, hoc pacto eis terras Sanctae Ecclesiae sub me tenere concessi:
Hoc est ut omnis Equitandi lex ab eis impleatur, quae ad Equites pertinet, and
ut pleniter persolvant omnia quae ad jus ipsius Ecclesiae just competunt,
scil. ea quae Anglice dicuntur Ciricsceott and Toll, id est thelonium, and Tacc
id est swinseade, and caetera jura Ecclesiae, nisi Episcopus alicui eorum quid
pardonare voluerit, seseque quamdiu ipsas terras tenent in mandatis Pontificis
humiliter cum omni subjectione perseverare etiam jurejurando affirment.

Super haec etiam ad omnis industriae Episcopi indigentiam semet ipsos praesto
impendant, Equos praestent, ipsi Equitent, and ad totum piramiticum opus
Ecclesiae calcis atque ad Pontis aedificum ultro inveniantur parati. Sed and
Venationis sepem Domini Episcopi ultronei ad aedificandum repperiantur, suaque
quandocunque Domino Episcopo libuerit Venabula destinent Venatum.

Insuper ad multas alias indigentiae causas quibus opus est Domino Antistiti
saepe furnisci, sive ad suum servitium sive ad regale explendum: semper illius
Archiductoris dominatui and voluntati qui Episcopatui praesidet, propter
beneficium quod illis praestitum est, cum omni humilitate and subjectione
subditi fiant, secundum ipsius voluntatem, and terrarum quas quisque possidet
quantitatem.

Decurso autem praefati temporis curriculo, viz. duorum qui post eos qui eas
mode possident haeredum vitae spatio, in ipsius Antistitis sit arbitrio, quid
inde velit, and quomodo sui velle sit inde ita stet, sive ad suum opus eas
retinere si sic sibi utile judicaverit, sive eas alicui diutius praestare, si
sic sibi placuerit, velit, ita duntaxat ut semper Ecclesiae servitia pleniter
(ut praefati sumus) inde persolvantur. Ast si quid praefatorum delicti
praevaricantis causa defuerit jurum; praevaricationis delictum secundum quod
Praesulis jus est, emendet: aut illo quo antea potitus est dono and terra
careat.

Siquis vero Diabolo instigante, etc.
The import of the Charter.
The sum of all aforesaid is, that the Bishop's Tenant shall pay and do as
follows.

First, That they shall perform all duties that belong to Horsemen.

That they shall pay all things that are due unto the Church, and perform all
other rights that belong to it.

That they shall swear to be in all humble subjection at the command of the
Bishop, as long as they shall hold these lands of him.

That as often as the occasion of the Bishops shall so require, they shall
present themselves to be ready for it, and shall both furnish him with Horses
and ride themselves.

That of their own accord they shall be ready to perform all the work about the
Steeple of that Church, and for the building of Castles and Bridges.

That they shall readily help to fence in the Bishop's Parks, and to furnish
him with Hunting weapons, when he goes a hunting.

That in many other cases when the occasion of the Lord Bishop shall require,
whether it be for his own service or for the King's service, they shall in all
humbleness and subjection be obedient to the chief Captain or Leader of the
Bishopric, for the Or Fee granted.
benefit done unto them, and the quantity of land which every one of them
possesses.

That after the expiration of the three lives, the land shall return again to
the Bishopric.

That if there be any defect in performing the premises by reason that some
shall vary or break the agreement, the Delinquent shall make satisfaction
according to the justice of the Bishop, or shall forfeit the land which he had
of his gift.

I suppose that this was the common manner of grants and reservations in those
times, and that they were not made otherwise than for life or three lives, for
so I find them in the Abby-books. And I also suppose that they to whom these
lands were granted, were the Thani Episcopi and Thani Ecclesiae, spoken of in
Doomsday-book, and that the lands themselves were such as in the same book are
usually called Thain-lands, Ecclesiae, Episcopi and Abbatis.

But I see they were laden with many services which the lands of the King's
Thane, in respect of his dignity and person, were free from. Therefore when
this very Bishop by another Charter granted tres cassatas, three hydes of land
in Cungle, cuidam Ministro Regis, to one of the King's Thanes named Alfwold,
and to his Mother (if she survived) during their lives: he put no service upon
the King's Thane, but says plena glorietur liberate, excepta expeditione
rata, Pontis arcisve constructione: the common exception in grants unto the
Kings Thanes as before appears; and yet the services thereby excepted
belonged not either to the Bishop or the King himself, otherwise than pro bono
publico and common necessity.

After all this I beat still upon the old string, that here yet is nothing to
prove Wardship or Marriage, or (as the law then stood) a Tenure by
Knights-service: for we have made it manifest that Expedition and building of
Castles and Bridges were no Feodal services nor grew by Tenure. And as for
these that were tied to ride and go up and down with their Lord, Baraterius an
old Lib. de Fend. Cap. 1. p. 8.
Feudist says, that a Knights fee may be given so ut Vassallus in diebus
Festivis cum uxore Domini ad Ecclesiam vadat, and the feudal law it self
infers as much, Lib. 2. Tit. 3. But our Bracton speaking of our Law here in
England (de Invest. feud.) in his time touching such Tenants, calls them
Rodknights alias Radknights, Lib. 2. Cap. 35. nu. 6. ut siquis debeat equitare
cum Domino suo de Manerio in Manerium; and says not that it is Knight Service,
but that it is a Serjantie, and that although such sometimes do Homage, yet the
Lord shall not have Ward and Marriage. Admit notwithstanding that it were
Knight Service, and that the lands thus holden were Knights Fees during the
life of the Tenant, yet where is the Wardship, Marriage and Releif? Who shall
undergo these servitudes, since the Tenure and all the services are determined
with the life of the Tenant?

CHAP. XXVII.
Inducements to the Conclusion.
SEeing then that neither the greater Thanes nor the lesser Thanes among the
Saxons were subject to the rules of our Knight Service: upon whom then (if it
were in use among them) did it lie? For as touching the Clergy it is said in
the Laws of Edw. the Confessor, cap. 11. that the King and the people magis in
Ecclesiae confidebant Orationibus quam in Armorum defensionibus. And the Report
it self confesses (page 3. in pede) That the possessions of Bishops and Abbots
were first made subject to Knight Service in Capite by William the Conqueror in
the fourth year of his reign: for their lands were held in the times of the
Saxons, In pura and libera eleemosyna, free ab omni servitio seculari, etc.
Though this be not true in the latter part, (being strictly taken,) for no
doubt their lands were subject to the Trinodi necessitati, viz. Expeditioni,
pontis arcisque constructioni (as before appears,) yet comes it very fitly
to my purpose: for hereby it is evident that if the Trinodis necessitas made no
Tenure by Knight Service or in Capite in the Church Lands, then neither did it
in the Thane-lands (as before we have showed) and then much less in the land of
Churles and Husbandmen commonly called the Socmanni; for it is agreed on all
hands that their lands were holden no otherwise than by Socage. Therefore if
all Kent in the Saxon's time were Gavelkind, then could there be no Tenures by
Knight Service in all that County. For Glanvil (Lib. 7. c. 3.) tells us, That
where the inheritance is divideable among the sons, it is Socage: And his
reason is, because that where it is holden by Knight Service the Primogenitus
succedit in toto. This Kentish custom was ab initio the general Law of England,
and of all Nations, Jews, Prove. 17. 2
Greeks, Romans, and the rest, and so continues even till this day, where the
Feodal Law has not altered it; which first happened here in England, when the
Normans introducing their Feuds settled the whole inheritance of them upon the
eldest son, which the ancient Feodal Law it self did not (as we before have
noted) till Feuds were grown perpetual. The reason as I take it that begat this
alteration, was for that while the Feud did descend in Gavelkind to the Sons
and Nephews of the Feodatorie, the services were suspended till the Lord had
chosen which of the Sons he would have for his Tenant, and then it was
uncertain whether the party chosen would accept of the Feud or not; for
sometimes there might be reasons to refuse it.

To return where I left; it makes to the proof of all this that has been said,
and (for conclusion) seems to be unanswerable, that the old inheritance which
in the Saxons time belonged to the Crown, called in Doomsday Terra Regis, and
in the Law books Ancient Demesne, containing a great part of every County, had
not any Lands within it (or within any Manor thereof) holden by
Knight Service. For Fitz-Herbert Not. br. dr^it. case 13. D.
says, that Null terres sont ancient demesne forsque terres tenus en Socage. And
therefore if the Tenant in ancient Demesne will claim to hold of the Lord by
Knights-service, it is good cause to remove the Plea, because that no Lands
holden of a Manor which is ancient Demesne are holden by other services of the
Lord than by Socage: for the Tenants in ancient Demesne are called Socmanni,
that is to say, Tenants del carve, Angl. le plough. Thus far Fitz-Herbert. Now
if in the Manors of the King himself, there were then no Lands holden by
Knight Service throughout all England, it will then in all probability follow,
that there were none likewise among his Subjects in the Saxons time, and
consequently that our Feudal Law was not introduced before the Conquest. Mr.
Cambden by their own confession is of the same opinion; and Mr. Seldom himself,
whom they allege against me, is clearly with me; as before I have showed.

If these our three opinions avail nothing, we have yet a fourth to strengthen
Bracton.
us, great Bracton the most learned in our ancient Laws and Customs, that has
been in this Kingdom; who speaking of Forinsecum servitium as the Genus to
these Tenures, says, Lib. 2. cap. 16. Nu. 7. fol. 36. a. that it was called
regale servitium, quia spectat ad Dominum Regem, and non ad alium, and secundum
quod in Conquestu fuit adinventum. Here Bracton also refers the Invention to
the Conquest, but the Report waveth his opinion as well as ours,
notwithstanding his great knowledge, and that he lived nearer to the Conquest
by two third parts of the time than we do.

Black book of the Exchequer.
Well, there is yet an elder, and one that might see some that lived in the
Conqueror's time, the Author of the Black-book of the Chequer: who speaking of
the Saxon Laws and those of the Conqueror says, Cap. 16. fol. 16. b. Quasdam
reprobavit, quasdam autem approbans, illis transmarinas Neustriae (id est
Normanniae) leges quae ad regni pacem tuendam efficacissimae videbantur,
adjecit. What were those Neustrian Laws or what could they be (in all the books
of the Law) for preserving peace, save Military Tenures? And the Exchequer it
self, where the cognizance of all these Tenures lies, was brought in also by
the Conqueror.

But Ingulphus the Abbot of Croyland, lived long in the Conqueror's time, and
was one of his Domestics or Familiars, as he terms himself. And by him it
appears that the Conqueror not only generally dispossessed the Saxons and
gave their lands to his Normans and others, but changed also their manner of
conveyance, the form of their Charters, and the course of making Knights,
whereupon all the rules of Knight Service have since depended, See his words p.
901. For at that time Miles and per militiam tenens were all one by Glanvils
testimony, Lib. 7. ca. 3. p. 49.

But when all fails, I hope they will believe the Conqueror himself, who in a
Charter of his Laws and a great Council of the Kingdom, which we now call a
Parliament, published by Mr. Lambard, uses these words.

Statuimus and sirmiter praecipimus, ut omnes Comites, and Barons, and
Milites, and servientes, and universi liberi homines totius Regni nostri
praedicti, habeant and teneant se semper been in armis, and in Equis, ut decet
and oportet. Et quod sint semper prompti and parati ad servitium suum integrum
nobis explendum and peragendum, cum semper opus adfuerit, secundum quod nobis
debent de feodis and Tenementis suis de jure, facere, and sicut illis statuimus
per commune consilium totius regni nostri praedicti, and illis dedimus and
concessimus in feodis jure haereditatio. Hoc praeceptum non sit violatum ullo
modo super forisfacturam plenam.

Here the word statuimus, etc. shows that it was the Conqueror's institution,
and concessimus in feodis jure haereditario, implies that Feuds were not
hereditary before this grant. But there may lie the same objection against it
which my self made against the like in Edw. the Confessor's Laws, that it is in
a differing letter from the rest of the Text, and not found in the Copy left
unto us by Roger Hoveden. I acknowledge it, but I see that here every thing
agrees with the Manners, Laws, Time, and Idiom of the Conqueror. And I
conceive that it is fallen out as it did of old in the Councils of Nice and
Sardis, and many other too, several Councils to be joined together. For Hoveden
mentions his Copy to be Decretum in civitate Claudia, that is Gloucester: but
Lambard his, to be in civitate Londra, London: so that they seem two several
Constitutions made at several times and places, and here put together into one.
Howsoever it be, it is very observable; for it discovers that which elsewhere
we meet not with so perspicuously related, That the great dignities of Earls
and Barons or Ministerial Thanes, which before were arbitrable or but for life,
and those also of the lesser sort (which enjoyed the Knights Fees no otherwise
than in the same manner) were either now erected with us or made hereditary,
according to the testimony of the Feodal Law before recited. 'Till now
therefore there could no Wardship, Marriage, Releif, or other Feodal servitudes
(thereupon depending) be amongst us; nor could the word feodum be taken for
haereditas, the one being formerly contrary to the other. For Cujacius and the
Feudists, Feud. Lib. 2. Tit. 17. p. 166. make proprietas, alodium, and
haereditas to be all one in Feodal sense; and feodum to be contrary to them
all, as res alienae proprietatis, servituti obnoxia, and successionis
coercitae; and being until this time not hereditary but arbitrable.

The course being thus changed by the Conqueror, was presently pursued here in
England according to the Norman manner as appears in Doomsday, where it is
said, Habet -- in eodem Feudo de W. Comite Radulpho de Limes. 50 carucat*
terrae sicut fit in Normannia. He joyneth Normannia with Feudum, as to show us
whence it came, and where we should see the pattern of it.

Hydes disused.
The old Saxon manner of dividing the Kingdom by Hydes, and levying Soldiers
according to the Hydes, grew now out of use; and instead thereof the Kings wars
to be supplied by Knights Fees, the number whereof shortly after were
accounted, as Sprott the Monk of Canterbury relates, to 60215. and of them he
says 28115. were in the Clergies hand. The Normans also changed the name of an
Hyde of Land and called it Carrue a Plough land, and as it seems in erecting
and laying forth their Knight's Fees, assigned ordinarily two Carrues or Plough
land to a Knights Fee. For it is noted out of the Black Register of St.
Edmunds-Bury, that Will. the Conqueror gave to Baldwin then Abbot there,
octoginta carucatas terrae unde feodaret quadraginta Milites. And according to
the rate of so much land in those times, is a Knights Fee at this day valued in
the Law books but at five pounds.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Conclusion.
I Will wander no further in this argument; I suppose I may be bold (out of
that which is already said) to conclude that I was not mistaken in referring
the original of our Feuds in England to the Norman Conquest: and that my
conjecture does not cross the force of any Law. But now I come to an end, I
must discover a great mistaking committed by him that drew the Breviate for the
Reverend Judges; for he has made us all on both sides, like Pan in Ovid, to
towse a Reed-sheaf instead of Syrinx, or like Ixion to embrace a Cloud instead
of Juno, to labor much about a surmis'd assertion of his own, instead of that
which I delivered. The truth is, I have no where referred the original of Feuds
in England to the Norman Conquest. Nay, when I spoke of them, I said habentur
plurima, quae apprime huc conducunt in Anglo Saxonum nostrorum legibus, and
this I still affirm; but my words which he has much perverted are these,
Feodorum servitutes in Britanniam nostram primus invexit Gulielmus senior. It
was neither my words nor my meaning to say, that he first brought in either
Feuds or Military service in a general sense, but that he brought in the
Servitudes and Grievances of Feuds, viz. Wardship, Marriage, and such like,
which to this day were never known to other Nations that are governed by the
Feodal Law. There is great difference between servitia Militaria and servitutes
Militares: The one, Heroic, Noble and full of Glory, which might not therefore
be permitted in old time to any that was not born of free parents; no, not to a
King's son (as appears in Virgil,) wherein our Saxons also were very
cautelous, and accounted a Soldiers shield to be insigne libertatis: the
other, not ignoble only and servile, but derived even from very bondage. Let
not this offend: I will say no more.

30. Julii 1639.
FINIS.
Two Discourses:

I. Of the ancient GOVERNMENT of England.

II. Of PARLIAMENTS.

By Sir HENRY SPELMAN Knight.

Published from the Original Manuscripts.

Sapientia, and disciplina, and scientia Legum apud Deum: Dilectio and via
bonorum apud eum.

Wisdom, and knowledge, and understanding of the Law are of God: and Love and
good works come of him.

Ecclus. 11. 15. OF THE Ancient Government OF ENGLAND.
TO tell the Government of England under the old Saxon Laws, seems an Vtopia
to us present; strange and uncouth: yet can there be no period assigned,
wherein either the frame of those Laws was abolished, or this of ours
entertained; but as day and night creep insensibly one upon the other, so also
has this alteration grown upon us unsensibly, every age altering something,
and no age seeing more than what themselves are actors in, nor thinking it to
have been otherwise than as themselves discover it by the present. Like them of
China, who never travailing out of their own Country; think the whole world to
extend no further. As one therefore that has coasted a little further into
former times, I will offer unto you a rude Mapp thereof; not like those of the
exquisite Cosmographers of our later ages, but like them of old, when as
neither cross sails nor compass, were yet known to Navigators.

Our Saxons, though divided into many Kingdoms, yet were they all one in
effect, in Manners, Laws, and Language; so that the breaking of their
Government into many Kingdoms, or the reuniting of their Kingdoms into a
Monarchy, wrought little or no change amongst them touching Laws. For though we
talk of the West Saxon law, the Mercian law, and the Dane law, whereby the west
parts of England, the middle parts, and those of Norfolk, Suffolk, and the
north, were severally governed; yet held they all an uniformity in substance,
differing rather in their mulct than in their Canea, that is in the quantity of
Fines and Amercements, than in the course and frame of Justice.

Therefore, when all these Kingdoms grew into one Monarchy, as under Alured,
Ethelstane, Edgar, etc, this bred no notable innovation in any of them; for the
King had no new Law to impose upon his new Subjects, nor were his new Subjects
unacquainted with his form of Government; having always lived according to the
same. So that when Edward the Confessor came to take away these small
differences that were between these three Laws, he did it even in these fickle
and unconstant times without all tumult or contradiction; making that his
alteration famous rather by the new name, than by the new matter. For
abolishing the three particular names beforementioned, he now called it the
Common Law of England, for that no part of the Kingdom should henceforth be
governed by any particular Law, but all alike by a Common Law. But insomuch as
this Common Law is but the half Arch of the Government, tending only to the
Temporal part thereof, and not unto the Ecclesiastical; I cannot well present
the one without the other, and must therefore make a project of the whole Arch,
that so the strength and uniformity of both the parts may the better be
conceived.

As therefore each side of an Arch descends alike from the Coane or
top-point; so both the parts of that their Government was alike deduced from
the King, each of them holding correspondency one with the other (like two
loving Sisters) both in aspect, and in lineaments.

To begin with the right side or eldest Sister: the Estate Ecclesiastical was
first divided into Provinces: Every Province into many Bishoprics: Every
Bishopric into many Arch-Deaconries: Every Arch-Deaconry into diverse Deanries:
Every Deanery into many Parishes. And all these committed to their several
Governors; Parsons, Deans, Archdeacons, Bishops and Archbishops; who, as
subordinate one to the other, did not only execute the charge of these their
several portions: but were Accoumptant also for the same to their Superiors.

The Parson as ima species, was to hear and determine the breaches of God's
peace, of love, and charity, within his parish: to reprove the inordinate life
of his parishoners: and though he could not strike with the Ecclesiastical sword,
yet might he shake it against them by enjyoning notorious offenders to
contrition, repentance, satisfaction; and sometime by removing them from the
blessed Sacrament.

The Dean, to take cognizance of the life and conversation of the Parsons and
Clergymen of every Parish within his Deanery: to censure breach of
Church-peace, and to punish incontinent and infamous livers by excommunication,
penance, etc.

And because there could be no breach of the King's peace; but it must also
break the peace and unity of the Church; the Bishop's Dean, in whose Deanery the
peace was broken, had in some cases 10s. for his part of the mulct, or fine
thereof; as appears Ll. Ed. Confess. cap. 31.

The Archdeacon, drawing nearer to the Bishop, drew the more preeminence from
him, and was his coadjutor in the ordination of Clerks, having a
superintendent power over all Parochial Parsons within every Deanery of his
precinct.

The Bishop, as the greatest orb of the Diocese, had jurisdiction and coertion
through the same, in all Ecclesiastical causes, and on all persons; except
Monasteries exempted Can. Apost. ca 38
. And for this purpose had two general Synods in the year, wherein all the
Clergy of his Diocese assembled for determining matters touching the Church, as
well in faith, as in Government.

But the Archbishop (to bind up this golden faggot in the band of Union and
Conformity) Archi^pis. super 12 Epis^. Greg. Angu. Bed. So a Du^g 12. Com.
comprehended all the Bishops of his Province sub pallio suae plenitudinis, or
sub plenitudine potestatis; having supreme jurisdiction to visit and reform in
all their Diocesses whatsoever was defective or omitted. That by this means no
transgression might break through so many wards, but if it escaped the Sword of
Hasael, Jehu might slay it; or if it passed them both, yet Elisha might light
upon it.

This was the model of the Church policy; composed no doubt out of that
fundamental rule of Government prescribed by Jethro unto Moses: Appoint rulers
over thousands, over hundreds, over fifties, and over tens. According to the
steps whereof the State Temporal did likewise take her lineaments.

For the Temporal Government was likewise divided into Satrapies or Dukedoms,
which contained in them diverse Counties; the County diverse Lathes or Trithings;
every Trithing diverse Hundreds or Wapentakes; every Hundred diverse Towns or
Lordships, shortly after called Baronies. And the Government of all these were
committed to their several Heads; viz. Towns or Mannours to the Lords thereof,
whom the Saxons called Theings, after Barons; Hundreds to the Lords of the
Hundreds: Trithings or Lathes to their Trithingreves; Counties to their Earls
or Aldermen; and the larger Satrapies to their Dukes or chief Princes. All
which had subordinate Authority one under the other; and did within the
precinct of their own Territories minister justice unto their Subjects.

For the Theinge or Lord of the Town, (whom the Normans called a Baron) had of
old Jurisdiction over them of his own Town, (being as it were his Colony;) and
as Cornelius Tacitus says, did Agricolis suis jus dicere. For those whom we
now call Tenants, were in those ancient times but Husbandmen dwelling upon the
soil of the Lord, and manuring the same, on such conditions, as the Lord
assigned; or else such as were their followers in the wars, and had therefore
portions of ground appointed unto them in respect of that service; which
portion was thereupon called a Knights-fee, for that a servant in the war, whom
the Saxons called a Knight, had it allotted unto him as the fee, or wages of
his service. Neither at the first had they these their fees, but at the Lord's
pleasure, or for a time limited; and therefore both these kinds of Military and
Husbandmen dwelling upon the Town or Colony of the Lord, were (as in reason
they ought) under the censure and will of their Lord touching the lands they
ocucpy'd; who therefore set them laws and customs, how and in what manner they
should possess these their lands* and as any controversy rose about them, the
Lord assembling the rest of his followers, did by their opinion and assistance
judge it. Out of which usage, the Court-Barons took their beginning, and the
Lords of Towns and Mannours gained the privilege of holding plea and
jurisdiction within those their Territories over their Tenants and followers;
who thereupon are at this day called Sectatores, in French Suitres, of suivre
to follow. But the Saxons themselves called this jurisdiction sacha and soca,
signifying thereby Causarum actionem and libertatem judicandi; for sacha
signifies causa, in which sense we yet use it, as when we say, For God's sake;
and soca signifies liberty or privilege, as Cyri^socne, libertas Ecclesiae.
But by this manner the Lords of Towns (as ex con^^etudine Regni) came to have
jurisdiction over their Tenants and followers, and to hold plea of all things
touching land. But as touching cognizance in criminal matters, they had not
otherwise to meddle therewith than by the King's Charters. For as touching the
King's peace, every Hundred was divided into many Freeborgs or Tithings
consisting of ten men, which stood all bound one for the other, and did amongst
themselves punish small matters in their Court for that purpose, called the
Let; which was sometime granted over to the Lords of Mannours, and sometime
exercised by peculiar officers. But the greater things were also carried from
thence into the Hundred Courts; so that both the streams of Civil justice, and
of Criminal, did there meet, and were decided by the Hundreds, etc, as by
superior Judges both to the Court Baron, and Court Leet also.

Edward the Confessor (Ll. ca. 32.) says, that there were Justices over every
ten Freeborgs, called Deans, or Tienheofod, (that is, head of ten) which among
their Neighbors in Towns compounded matters of trespasses done in pastures,
Meadows, Corn, and other strifes rising among them. But the greater matters,
says he, were referred to superior Justices appointed over every ten of them,
whom we may call Centurions, Centenaries, or Hundradors, because they judged
over an hundred Freeborgs.

The Lord of the Hundred therefore had jurisdiction over all the Towns of the
Hundred, as well in Criminal matters, as in Civil; and they that failed of
their right in the Court Barons, Tithings, or Leets, might now prosecute it
here before the Lord of the Hundred, and his followers, called the Suitors of
the Hundred, which were the Lords and owners of lands within that Hundred: who
were tied to be there at every Court Ll. Edgar cap. 5.
; which as appears by the Laws of H. I. ca. 8. was to be holden twelve times
in the year, that is, once every month: Ll. H. I. cap. 9.
But especially a full appearance was required twice in the year; in memory
whereof the Suitors are at this day called at our Lady and Michaelmass Courts,
by the Steward of the Hundred.

These (as I said before) held piea of trespasses done in Pastures, Meadows,
Corn and such like, and of other strifes arising between Neighbor and
Neighbor, and (as by and by also shall be showed) of Criminal matters,
touching the very life of a man.

Decrevit tum porro Aluredus, etc. King Alured then further decreed, that every
Freeman should be settled in some Hundred and appointed to some Freeborg or
Tithing, (as did also Canutus Ll. par. 2. cap. 19.) and that the heads of these
Tithings or Freeborg (whom we now call Capitales plegii) should judge the
smaller matters (as in Leets, etc.) but should reserve the greater for the
Hundred Court; and those of most difficulty, to the Alderman and Sheriff in the
County Court, Lamb. voc. Centuria.

The order of which proceedings in the Hundred Court do there also appear out
of the Laws of King Ethelred made in a great Assembly at Vanatinge Cap. 4. In
singulis Centuriis Comitia sunto, etc. Let the Courts be holden in every
Hundred, and let twelve men of the elder sort together with the Reve (of the
Hundred) holding their hands upon some holy thing, take their oath that they
shall neither condemn any man that is innocent, nor quit him that is guilty.

And it seems by the Laws of Canutus, (par. 2. cap. 16. and 18.) That a man
was not to be delayed above three Court days from having his right: for if he
were, he might then resort to the County; and if he obtained it not there
within four Courts, then he might seek unto the King. And no doubt, but this
Law opened a great gap for the carrying of matters from the Hundred and County
Courts up to the King's Court.

The Jurisdiction also of this Court seems to be further abated by H. I. who,
though he established the ancient manner of holding it; yet pulled he from it
some principal parts thereof; as after shall appear in a Writ of his, touching
this and the County Court, directed to the Sheriff of Worcester, (MS. Co. pa.
inter 48. and 49.)

The Thrithingreve or Leidgreve (whom I take to be the same called in the Salic
Laws Tungimus; but doubt whether he or no, that in our Laws of H. I. is called
Thungrevius) was an officer that had authority over the third part of the
County, or three or more Hundreds, or Wapentakes; whose Territory was thereupon
called a Thrithing, otherwise a Leid or Lath; in which manner the County of
Kent is yet divided: and the Rapes in Sussex seem to answer the same: And
perhaps the Ridings also of Yorkshire; being now corruptly so called for
Tridings or Thrithings. Those things therefore that could not be determined in
the Hundred-Courts either for difficulty or miscarriage thereof; were from
thence brought unto the Trithing: where all the principal men of three or more
Hundreds being assembled, did debate and determine it: or if they could not,
did then send it up nnto the County Court to be there decided, as in
Parliament, by the whole body of the County.

This appears by the Laws of Edward the Confessor (Cap. 34.) where it is
said, Erant and aliae potestates super Wapentachia, quas vocabant thrithingas,
etc. that is, There were other Jurisdictions over Wapentakes (or Hundreds)
which they called Thrithings, because they contained a third part of the
Province (or County.) And those that governed these Thrithings, were thereupon
called Thrithingreves: before whom were brought all causes that could not be
determined in the Wapentakes or Hundreds.

Though I find no such division of our County of Norfolk; yet I see the use
thereof remained there, both till and after the times of the Conquest. For
William Rufus in a controversy of the Abbot of Ramsie's about the Town of
Holme in Norfolk, sent his Writ to H. Chamberlyn then Trithingreve, (as it
seems) over that part of the County, commanding him to assemble three
Hundreds and an half at a place called Fli^ham-burrough, (which to this day
bears that name, and is the site of the Hundred of Frebridge) there to
determine the said controversy: which Writ for reviewing of the ancient
customs of the Kingdom, I will here adjoin, as it stands in the book of
Ramsey Abbey, Sect. 197.

Willielmus Rex Angl. H. Camerario salutem: Fac convenire and consedere tres
Hundredos and dimidium apud Flicceham-Burgh propter terram illam de Holm quae
pertinet ad Ringstedam, and quam Abbas Ramesiae reclamat ad victum and vestitum
Monachorum suorum: Et si Abbas poterit ostendere ratione and testimonio
Comprovincialium, quod antecessor illius eandem terram habuerit eo die quo
pater meus fuit vivus and mortuus, tunc praecipio ut illam terram, and omnia
quae just pertinent ad Abbathiam suam pacifice and honorifice habeat. Test R.
Bigod apud Wind.

Out of which Writ I conjecture that this H. Camerarius to whom it was
directed, might be Trithingreve of that part of the County; the rather for that
the Writ names him not Vicecomes as in the next precedent it does another man,
viz. Will. Rex, O. Vicecomiti salutem, etc.

And that these three Hundreds and an half were to be Judges of the cause, it
appears by the words fac consedere, that is, cause them to sit down together.
For Magistrorum and Judicum est sedere, famulorum and Ministrorum stare.
Therefore it is said, Exodus 18. 13. Moses sat to judge the people, and the
people stood about him: whereupon Hugo also notes, Magistrorum est sedere.

To this purpose also is the Law of H. I. ca. 8. Si aliquis in Hundr^ agendorum
penuria (...)cum.
judicium, vel casu aliquo transferendum sit in d^us vel tres vel amplius
Hundredos respectetur justo fine claudendum. (Qu.) But it seems that these
Judges were sworn to do right, as well as those before mentioned in the Hundred
Court. And that our course now used for taking a Jury out of many Hundreds in
the County, for trial of a cause arising in one Hundred, took the beginning
from the trial in the Trithing, and that thereupon the Trithing Court grew out
of use.

The Alderman of the County, whom confusedly they call an Earl, was in parallel
equal with the Bishop, and therefore both their estimations valued alike in the
Laws of Ethelstane at eight thousand Thrymses. He was a man learned in the
Laws, and had the government of the whole Shire, and cognizance over all
inferior Courts and persons, both in civil matters and criminal. For which
purpose he held his ordinary Court by the Shreve, Ll. Edw. senior. ca. ult.
once every month: and there resorted as Suitors, and bound by duty, all the
Lords of Mannours, and principal men of the County, with the rest of the
Freeholders, who were not only assistants, but Judges with him of all matters
there depending, whether entered there originally, or coming thither by appeal
or provocation from the inferior Courts. Ll. Edw. senioris, cap. ult. Ic ille
that aelc geresa hebbe gemo^e, etc. I will that every Sheriff hold his Court
about every four weeks, and that he do right equally to every man, and make an
end of all Suites, under the pain before expressed.

As the Bishop had twice in the year two general Synods wherein all the Clergy
of his Diocese of all sorts were tied to resort for matters concerning the
Church; so also was there twice in the year a general assembly of all the Shire
for matters concerning the Commonwealth; wherein, without exception, all kind
of Estates were required to be present, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and so downward,
of the Laity; and especially the Bishop of that Diocese among the Clergy. For
in those days the Temporal Lords did often sit in Synod with the Bishops, and
the Bishops in like manner in the Courts of the Temporalty, and were therein
(as by and by shall appear) not only necessary, but principal Judges
themselves; Ll. Canuti Regis, par. 2. ca. 17. The Shyre-gemot (for so the
Saxons called this assembly of the whole Shire) shall be kept twice a year (and
oftener if need require) wherein the Bishop and the Alderman of the Shire shall
be present; the one to teach the Laws of God, the other the Law of the Land.

This great assembly was by the Laws of Ethelstan (ca. 20.) to be proclaimed or
published a sennight before hand; and every man tied thereupon to be present at
it, and in the mean time either to satisfy the wrong he had done to another,
or to undergo the penalty; which if he refused, all he had was presently to be
se^sed, and himself put to find sureties for his appearance to answer.

But because this notable assembly (otherwise called by the Authors of that
time Mallum and Placitum generale) was the supreme Court of County-Justice,
wherein all things of what sort soever were to be determined: we will take a
little scope in description thereof: Showing first more particularly, who were
bound to give their attendance here: Then, what lay in cognizance of this
Court: And thirdly, in what steps they proceeded to the determination of the
same. All which, because they cannot be more authentically delivered, then out
of the Law it self; I will even from thence report it as it stands in Ll. H.
I. ca. 8. Sicut antiqua fuerat institutione formatum, etc. As it was devised by
an ancient institution, and confirmed by true report, that the general pleas of
the Counties ought to be assembled in every Province of England at certain
places, and before certain Judges, at certain times thereto appointed; and that
none should be put to further trouble unless the King's own necessity, or the
common good of the Kingdom required it: Therefore the Bishops, Earls, Sheriffs,
Heretoches or Marshals of Armies, Trithingreves, Leidgreves, Lieutenants,
Hundredors, Aldermen, Magistrates, Reves, Barons, Vavasors, Thungreves and
other Lords of land, must be all diligently attending (at these Assemblies)
lest that the lewdness of offenders, the misdemeanor Gravionum (i. of Sheriffs)
and the ordinary corruption of Judges escaping unpunished, make a miserable
spoil of the people.

First, let the laws of true Christianity (which we call the Ecclesiastical) be
fully executed with due satisfaction; then let the pleas concerning the King be
dealt with; and lastly, those between party and party; and whomsoever the
Church-Synod shall find at variance, let them either make an accord between
them in love, or sequester them by their sentence of excommunication, etc.
Whereby it appears, that Ecclesiastical causes were at that time under the
cognizance of this Court. But I take them to be such Ecclesiastical causes, as
were grounded upon the Ecclesiastical laws made by the Kings themselves for the
government of the Church (for many such there were almost in every King's
time,) and not for matters rising out of the Roman Canons, which happily were
determinable only before the Bishop and his Ministers.

To proceed. Before they entered into any causes (as it is commanded in the
Laws of Canutus which we mentioned, par. 2. ca. 17.) the Bishop (to use the
term of our time which from hence takes the original) gave a solemn charge
unto the people touching Ecclesiastical matters; opening unto them the rights
and reverence of the Church, and their duty therein toward God and the King,
according to the word of God and Divinity. Then the Alderman in like manner
related unto them the Laws of the land, and their duty toward God, the King,
and Commonwealth, according to the rule and tenure thereof. Of all which,
because I find a notable precedent in a Synodal Edict made by Carolus Calvus
Emperor and King of France, (in Council. Carissiaco. An. Dom. 856.) I will here
add it, not to show that our Saxons took their form of government from the
French; but that both the French and they, as brethren descending from one
parent, the German, kept the rights and laws of their natural Country.

Episcopi quinque in suis parochiis, and Missi in illorum Missaticis,
Comitesque in eorum Comitatibus pariter placita teneant, quo omnes Reipub.
Ministri, and Vassi Dominici, omnesque quicunque vel quorumcunque homines in
iisdem parochiis and Comitatibus sine ulla personaram acceptione and
excusatione, aut dilatione conveniant, etc. That is, The Bishops in their
parishes (or Diocesses) and the Justices Itinerant or Aldermen in their
Circuits, and the Earls in their Counties, shall hold their pleas together:
whereunto all Ministers and Officers of the Commonwealth, all the King's
Barons and all other whatsoever they be, or whose Tenants soever they be within
the same parishes or Counties, without any respect of persons, excuse, or
delay, shall assemble together: And the Bishop of that parish or Diocese,
having briefly noted sentences touching the matter out of the Evangelists,
Apostles, and Prophets, shall read them to the people, and also the decrees
Apostolic, and Canons of the Church; and in open and plain terms shall
instruct them all, what manner, and how great a sin it is to violate or spoil
the Church, and what and how great penance, and what merciless and severe
punishment it requires; with other accustomed, necessary and profitable
admonishments. The Aldermen also, or Justices, shall note down such sentences
of law as they call to mind; and shall publish unto them the Constitutions of
us and our predecessors, Kings and Emperors, gathered together touching this
matter. And the Bishops by the Authority of God and the Apostles; and the
Aldermen or Justices, and Earls, under the penalty of the King's Laws; shall,
with all the care they can, prohibit every man of the Kingdom from making any
prey or spoil of the Church, etc.

OF PARLIAMENTS.
WHEN States are departed from their original Constitution, and that original
by tract of time worn out of memory; the succeeding Ages viewing what is past
by the present, conceive the former to have been like to that they live in, and
framing thereupon erroneous propositions, do likewise make thereon erroneous
inferences and Conclusions. I would not pry too boldly into this ark of
secrets: but having seen more Parliaments miscarry, yea suffer shipwreck,
within these sixteen years past, than in many hundred heretofore, I desire for
my understanding's sake to take a view of the beginning and nature of
Parliaments; not meddling with them of our time, (which may displease both
Court and Country,) but with those of old; which now are like the siege of
Troy, matters only of story and discourse.

Because none shall go beyond me in this argument, I will begin with the
foundation of Kingdoms, which of necessity must be more ancient than
Parliaments, for that a Parliament is the grand Council of the Kingdom
assembled at the commandment of the King, for advice in matters of State. Our
first labor is then, to see what this Grand-Council was originally.

It is confessed on all hands, that the King is universal Lord of his whole
Territories, and that no man possesses any part thereof, but derived from him
either mediately or immediately. This derivation thus proceeded. The King in
the beginning divided his whole territory into two parts, one to be manured by
his own Tenants and Husbandmen; then called Socmen. For the Kings of England
used in those days to stock their grounds themselves, like the Kings of Israel;
and by the profits thereof especially, to maintain their Hospitality, their
Court, and Estate; having in every Manor Officers and Servants for that
purpose. This part was Sacrum Patrimonium the inseparable inheritance of the
Crown, called in Doomsday Terra Regis, and in Law the Ancient Demaine. And
because it belonged to the husbandry of the King, all that manured or held any
part of this land, were said to be Tenants in Socage, and might not be drawn
into the wars; of which nature, as touching their Tenure, they continue at this
day.

The other part of his whole territory he portioned out to Military men; which
(though the other was the more profitable) yet this was always held for the more
honorable, and therefore so divided this among his Nobles and chief servants
and followers for supportation in his wars and Royal Estate. To some in greater
measure, to others in less, according to their merit and qualities. Provinces
to Dukes, Counties to Earls, Castles and Signiories unto Barons: rendering unto
him, not ex pacto vel condicto (for that was but cautela superabundans) but of
common right and by the Law of Nations (for so I may term the Feodal-law then
to be in our Western Orb) all Feodal duties and services due from the Donees
and their heirs, upon every gift, grant, and alienation; though no word were
spoken of them. It appears by the Feodal-law (from whence all that part of
our Common Law that concerns Tee and Tenures has original, and which our
Common Law also affirms;) that there was always due..... H^r^ is (...) it
(...) that (...) comes (...) ^^^ms (...) from (...).


Those that thus received their Territories from the King, were said to hold
them in Capite, for that the King is Caput Regni, and were thereupon called
Capitanei Regis and Capitanei Regni, otherwise Barons Regis, the King's men,
Tenants or Vassals: who having all the land divided amongst them, saving that
which the King reserved to himself as Sacrum Patrimonium, were also called
Pares Regni, and were always upon commandment about the person of the King, to
defend him and his Territories in war, and to counsel and advise him in peace,
either Judicially in matters of Law brought before the King in his Palace,
which in those days was the only place of Royal justice: or Politically in the
great affairs of the Kingdom. Hereupon, they were not only (...) Fran. ca. 27.
p. 216.
called Praetorianum consilium, as belonging to the King's Palace, but Magnum
concilium Regis, and Magnum concilium Regni. For that in those times, it
belonged only to them, to consult with the King on Statematters and matters of
the Kingdom; insomuch as no other in the Kingdom possessed any thing but under
them. And therefore, as in Despotical Government, the agreement or disagreement
of the Master of the Family concluded the menial and the whole Family; so the
agreement and disagreement of the chief Lord or him that held in Capite,
concluded all that depended on him or claimed under him, in any matter touching
his Fee or Tenure. To this purpose, seems that in the Ll. Edw. Conf. cap. 17.
Laws of Edward the Confessor, ratified by the Conqueror: Debet etiam Rex omnia
rite facere in regno, and per judicium proc^rum regni.

These great Lords, according to this Archetype of Government set them by the
King, divided their lands in like manner among their Tenants and followers.
First, they assigned a portion ad victum and vestitum suum, which they
committed over to their Socmen and Husbandmen, to furnish them with Corn,
Victuals, and Provision for Hospitality; and briefly, all things necessary to
their domestical and civil part of life. The residue they divided into as many
shares or portions as might well maintain so many Military men, whom then they
called their Knights, and thereupon the shares themselves Knights-fees, i. e.
stipendia militaria. And these Fees they granted over to each of their
principal followers, furnishing them with so many Knights for the wars.

These Grantees that received their Estates from the Barons or Capitanei and
not from the King, were called Valvasores (a degree above Knights,) and were
unto their Lords (the Capitanei or Barons Regis) as they the Capitanei were
unto the King: and did in like manner subdivide their lands among their Socmen
and Military followers, who in old time were called Valvasini; whom I take to
be the same at this day that are the Lords of every Manor, if not those
themselves that we call Knights, as owners of a Knights-Fee. For in this, the
Feodal-law it self is doubtful and various, as of a thing lost by Antiquity or
made uncertain by the differing manners of several Nations. Insomuch, that
Valvasores and Valvasini grew to be confounded, and both of them at last to be
out of use, and no other Military Tenures to be known amongst us, than tenere
p^r Baroniam, and tenere per feodum militare. But in a De tene^d. Comitatib.
Charter of Henr. I. it is said: Si exurgat Placitum de divisione Terrarum, si
interest Barons meos Dominicos, tractetur in Curia mea; and si inter
Vavassores duorum Dominorum, tractetur in Comitatu, etc. Where the Valvasores
were also, and the Barons themselves, Ll. Hen. I. cap. 8.
Suitors and Attendants. Bracton mentions them in Henry III's time, to be
(...) c. 8. (...) 4.
Viri magnae dignitatis. Nor was their memory clean gone in Richard II's days;
as appears by Chaucer. Yet do I not find in any of our ancient Laws or
Monuments, that they stood in any classick kind of Tenure, other than that we
may account the Baron, Vavasor, and Knight, to be (as our Lawyers at this day
term them) the Chief Lord, Mesne, and Tenant.

But herein the Feodal-law of our Country differed from that of Milan and other
parts. For there the Valvasini could invest (which we call infeosse) none under
them in fee, that is, to hold of them by Knights-service. And with us, every
Tenant Par aval might in infinitum, till the Statute of Quia Emptores Terrarum,
enfeoffe another by Knight Service, and to do all the services unto him, that
he did to his Mesne Lord. So that by this means, a line of Knights-services
might be created of a dozen, yea twenty Mean-Lords and Tenants, wherein every
of them might have his prochine Tenant obliged unto him in the duties and
services that his Lord Paramont, which held of the King, was to do and yield
unto the King himself for the same lands, viz.

Honor, Ward, Sustenance, Safety, Marriage, give keep Attendance, Relief,
Counsel to Aid, Defense of his Person, Tribute, Fidelity. Defense of his
Patrimony, All which in ancient time, while the Feodal-law flourished, were
well understood to be comprehended under the profession of Homage and the oath
of Fidelity, which every Feodal Tenant (or, as others call him, Vassal) usually
did unto his Lord.

Honor; Lit. Lib. 2. ca. 1.
promised by the Tenant upon his knees in doing Homage: which though it be the
greatest and most submiss service that a Freeman can do unto his Lord, yet the
profession of it to the meanest subject is as ample and submiss; yea, in the
very same words that to the King himself.

Attendance; Cujac. Constable. Lot. Feud. pa. 284.
to follow and attend him in the war at his own charge; and in peace with suite
of Court. Therefore Tacitus calls them Comites.

Defense of his person; for if he forsook his Lord being in danger, it was
forfeiture of life, land, and all he had.

Defense of his Signiory; that nothing of his lands, rents, or services, were
withholden or withdrawn.

Profit by Ward, Marriage, and Relief, as they fell.

Tribute by way of Aid; to make his eldest son a Knight; to marry his eldest
daughter, (...) Cujac. lib. 2. Feud. Tit. 7. pa. 133.
ransom himself being taken prisoner; yea, in some places to be an hostage for
his Lord.

Sustenance; Cujac. ibid.
that being fallen into poverty, (according to that in the Canon law spoken of a
Patron) Alatur egenus.

Counsel and Advice; in which respect the Tenant was bound ordinarily once in
every three weeks to come to his Lord's Court, and there as a Judge (with other
of his Peers) to censure the causes of his Signiory, and to direct his Lord, as
the cause occurrent did require, and always to keep his counsel. This to the
meanest Lord was in the nature of the King's Great Court or Counsel, called
afterward a Parlyment.

Fidelity; for to all these was the Tenant by Knights-service tied by his oath
of Fealty, swearing to be feal and leal: As the oath was at those times
interpreted Epist. Fulberti Epist. Cannot. and Can. 12. q. 5.
as well by Divines and Canonists, as by Feodists and Lawyers.

And as these were inherent to this Tenure of Common right; so was there many
other grievous exactions imposed by the Lords upon their Tenants; some by
custom of the Manor; some by Composition upon granting the Fee; and many by
Signioral Authority, as though the Lord besides his Legal Power, might do some
things (like the King) by Prerogative.

By Custom, Doomsd. Heref Lene.
when the Lord or Lady came into the Manor, the Bailiff was to present them 18
oras denar. and every of their servants 10s. with some sums of money as
gratuities, ut essent laeti animo.

That the Tenants should pay 32d. for every daughter they married Plac. Coron.
R. de Banco.
.

It was an ordinary custom, that Lords might take (not only of their Tenants,
but of all the Country thereabout) Victuals and all other necessaries for
furnishing their Castles; which how grievous it was, may well enough be
conceived, though the Statute that restrained it, did not testify it. So other
Lords took provision for their household and hospitality, within their Mannours.

By Composition; Bracton.
as to have their Tenants attend them with horse and man in their journies; whom
they called Road-knights. To present them yearly at times, Horses, Hawks, and
other things of profit and pleasure.

By Signioral Authority; as to lie and feast themselves and followers (called
Coshering) at their Tenants houses; and when any matter of extraordinary charge
fell upon them, then to extort the same amongst their Tenants; which the Irish,
about forty years since, of my own knowledge still continued, calling it
Cuttings, according to our old word Tallagium. But among us it was taken away
by the Magna Charta of King John.

I speak not of the innumerable Carriages, Angaries, and Vexations, with which
they otherwise harrowed if not plagued their Tenants. Yet must I not let that
pass, which every where was then in use, for Lords of Castles to imprison men
at pleasure, to hold and keep distresses there against common justice, and to
do many outrages all about them. Wherein the Lords of Mannours imitating them,
would also imprison their Tenants and followers; which Custom I saw also yet
not laid down in Ireland, forty years since. For a Meane-Lord would ordinarily
say upon offense taken against a Churl, etc. Take him and put him in bolts.

But let Matthew Paris, who lived long after many of these oppressions were
abolished, tell you the fashions of those times There is space (...) Quotat^^n,
in the ^rigina^; but what p^ace in Mat. Paris he refers to, I know not.
.

Every Lord having this authority over his Tenant, the Superior as
comprehending them all and holding in Capite, was tied to the King to see all
under his tenure to be of good Government, good behavior, and forthcoming
whenever they should be demanded to answer any misdemeanour. This appears
by the Laws of Edward the Confessor, where it is said, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi,
Comites, Barons, and omnes qui habuerint Sacam and Socam, etc. milites and
proprios servientes sc. dapiferos, pincernas, etc. sub suo friburgo habeant.
That is, sub sua fide-jussione de se been gerendo.

By reason whereof, whatsoever those their Lords agreed or disagreed unto in
matters of the State and Commonwealth, it did bind every of them their
inferiors. Unto whom they themselves might then also appoint Laws and
Ordinances in their own Courts. And this is that which Tacitus affirms to
have been the ancient manner of the Germans our Ancestors; Agricolis suis jus
dicere: where under the word Agricolis, he intends all them whom we call
Tenants.

Hence then it comes to pass, that in making Laws of the Kingdom, the common
people were not consulted with, but only the Barons and those which held in
Capite, who then were called Consilium Regni. And the common people being, as I
said, by way of tenure under one or other of them, did then by him that was
their chief Lord (as by their Tribune or Procurator, and as now by the Knights
of the Shire) consent or dissent in Law-making, and are not therefore named in
the title of any ancient Law.

Look Doomsday-book, and there ye shall see the whole Kingdom divided only
among the Barons and great Persons: and the whole Commons of the Kingdom
distributed and placed under some of them, though not by name, yet by number in
their several qualities.

Let us then see, how the practice of those ancient ages agreed with this
Theoreme.

King Ina Circ. An. 700. Ll. Inae Praef.
made his Laws by the advice of Kenred his father, and (as he says himself)
Heddis and Erkenwaldi Episcoporum meorum, and omnium Aldermannorum (i. e.
Procerum) meorum, and seniorum sapientum Regni mei, and multa aggregatione
servorum Dei, which is of Churchmen, as I take it.

Alured briefly, Circ. 880. in Praef.
Consilio sapientum meorum.

Edward the Elder proposes his Circ. 910. Ll. Praef. and ca. 1. 7.
Laws not as Senatus-consultum but as Edictum Principis; viz. Ego Edouardus Rex,
iis omnibus qui Reipub. praesunt, etiam atque etiam mando, ut, etc. And after
by the absolute words, Praecipio, Statuimus, Volo. Yet those wherein he and
Guthrun the Dane joined, are called Praef. Foed.
Senatus-consulta.

Ethelstane made his, Circ. 930. in Praef. Ll. and Epil.
Ex prudenti Vlfhelmae Archiepiscopi aliorumque Episcoporum suorum consilio,
nec-non omnium Optimatum and sapientum mandato suo congregatorum.

Edmund, in a great Assembly, Cir. 940. Ll. Praef.
Tam Ecclesiasticorum quam Laicorum, cui interfuerunt Oda and Wulstanus Archiep.
plurimique alii Episcopi.

Edgar, Circ. 970. in Praef.
In frequenti sapientum Senatu.

Ethelred, Circ. 1000. in Praef.
In sapientum Concilio.

Canuius says, Circ. 1025. in Praef. Ll. politic.
Sapientum adhibito Consilio per omnem Angliam observari praecipio.

As for Edward the Confessor, his Laws come not to us as they were composed by
himself, but as the Paragraphs of them were collected by the Conqueror, and
augmented afterward. In which collection, there is no mention made of the
manner of their Institution. But reciting of a passage of St. Austens touching
Tithes, it is spoken as of former time, that Haec concessa sunt a Rege,
Baronibus and populo; meaning, the several kinds of Tithes there mentioned. But
whether these words extend to a concession of them by Parliament (as we now call
it,) or by a voluntary contribution of them, yielded unto by the King, the
Barons, and the people, according to the Canons of the Church, I leave to
others to determine.

To come to times of the Conqueror; wherein Novus seclorum nascitur ordo; and
from whence, as from a new period, we must now take all our projections. The
great establishment of his own and of Edward the Confessor's Laws, is said in
the title to be that which Gulielmus Rex Anglorum cum Principibus suis
constituit post conquisitionem Angliae. Other Authors instead of Principibus
have Barons. And though all his Laws for the most part were ordained by his
Charter in his own name only, yet they seem to be made by the consent of the
Bishops and Barons. For in his Charter whereby he divides the Court-Christian
from the Temporal, he says thus -- Sciatis -- quod Episcopales Leges --
communi Concilio and consilio Archiepiscoporum meorum and caeterorum
Episcoporum and Abbatum, and omnium Principum regni mei emendandas judicavi.
And this seems to be that same Commune Concilium totius Regni, whereby he
made the Laws he speaks of in his Charter of the great Establishment
aforesaid.

William Rufus in An. 1094. calls Eadm. Will. II. p. 26.
Episcopos, Abbates cunctosque Regni Principes to a Council at Rochingheham, 5.
Id. Mar.

Henry I. de communi Concilio gentis Anglorum (says Matthew Paris) posuit
Dunelmensem Episcopum in vinculis. Where Gentis Anglorum might be extended to
such a Parliament as we use at this day, if the use of that time had born it.
But Eadmere speaking of a Great Counsel holden a little after at Lambith,
calls it Concilium Magnatum utriusque Ordinis, excluding plainly the Commons.
And to that effect are also all the other Councils of his time.

But our later Chroniclers following Lib. 11. pa. 188.
Polydore as it seems (for they cite no Author) do affirm that Henry I. in
the sixteenth year of his reign, held the first Parliament of the three Estates.
The truth whereof I have taken some pains to examine; but can find nothing to
make it good. Lib. 5. pa. 117.
Eadmerus who flourisht at that very time, writing particularly of this Council
or Assembly, says, XIII. Kal. Aprilis, factus est conventus Episcoporum,
Abbatum, and Principum totius Regni apud Serberiam, cogente eos illuc sanctione
Regis Henrici I. And among other causes handled there, he shows this to be
the principal, viz. That the King being to go into Normandy, and not knowing
how God might dispose of him, he desired that the succession might be confirmed
on his son William. Whereupon (says Eadmer) omnes Principes facti sunt homines
ipsius Willielmi, fide and Sacramento confirmati.

Florentius Wigorniensis, who lived at that time and died about two years
after, In An. 1116.
reports it to the same effect. Conventio Optimatum and Baronum totius Angliae
apud Sealesbiriam 14. Call. Apr. facta est* qui in praesentia Regis Henrici,
homagium filio suo Gulielmo fecerunt and fidelitatem ei juraverunt. Here is no
mention of the Commons; whom in likelihood they should not have pretermitted,
if they had been there assembled, contrary to the usual custom of those times.

Nor does any succeeding W. Nubrig. Malmesb. Rad. Nig. Sim. Dun. Rad. de Dicet.
Mat. Par. Mat. West. Ran. Cestr. Tho. Walsingh.
Author that I can find, once touch upon it. I conceive there might a mistaking
grow by Polydore or some other; for that many of the Commons, if not all, were
at this time generally sworn to Prince William, as well as the Barons were; and
as after in the year 1127. to Maud his daughter, Prince William being then
dead. But I no where find in all the Councils (or Parlaments if you so will
call them) of this time, any mention made of any other than the Bishops,
Barons, and great Persons of the Realm. And so likewise in the time of King
Stephen.

The first alteration that I meet with, is in the twenty second year of Hen.
II. where Benedict Abbas says, Circa festum S. Pauli venit Dominus Rex usque
ad Northampton, and magnum ibi celebravit Concilium de Statutis regni sui,
coram Episcopis, Comitibus, and Baronibus terrae suae, and per consilium
Militum and Hominum suorum. Here Militum and Hominum suorum extends beyond
the Barons, and agrees with the Charter of King John, as after shall appear.
Yet Hoveden speaking of this Council, does not mention them; but only terms
it Magnum Concilium.

But there hapn'd about this time a notable alteration in the Commonwealth.
For the great Lords and owners of Towns which before manured their lands by
Tenants at Will, began now generally to grant them Estates in fee, and thereby
to make a great multitude of Freeholders more than had been. Who by reason of
their several interests, and being not so absolutely tied unto their Lords as
in former time, began now to be a more eminent part in the Commonwealth, and
more to be respected therefore in making Laws, to bind them and their
Inheritance.

But the words Militum and Hominum suorum, imply such as held of the King in
Capite not per Baroniam, and therefore were no Barons; yet such as by right of
their Tenure ought to have some voice or Patron to speak for them in the
Councils of the Kingdom. For holding of the King, as the Barons did, they could
not be patronized under them. And doubtless they were not many at this time,
though much increased since the making of Domesdei*book; where those few that
were then, are mentioned. And it may be, the word Hominum, here does signify
those that served for Burrough-Towns holden of the King; for it must be
understood of Tenants not of Servants.

To grope no further in this darkness. The first certain light that I discover
for the form of our Parliaments at this day, is, that which rises forty years
after, in the Magna Charta of King John. The words whereof I will recite at
large, as they stand not only in Matthew Paris, but also in the Red-Book of the
Exchequer, with some little difference happening in the writing.

Et Civitas Londinensis habeat omnes antiquas libertates and liberas
consuetudines suas tam per terras quam per aquas.

Praeterea, volumus and concedimus, quod omnes aliae Civitates and Burgi, and
Villae, and Barons de quinque Portubus, and omnes Portus, habeant omnes
libertates, and omnes liberas consuetudines suas: Et ad habendum commune
Consilium Regni de Auxiliis assidendis (aliter quam in Viz. (...) redimendum
personam Regis, ad fil^um prim^genitum militem faciendum, and ad filiam
primogenitum semel maritand^^.
tribus casibus praedictis) and de Scutagiis assidendis; summoneri faciemus
Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Comites, and Majores Barons Regni
sigillatim per literas nostras. Et praeterea faciemus summoneri in generali per
Vice-Comites and Ballivos nostros, omnes alias qui in Capite tenent de nobis,
ad certum diem, scil. ad terminum 40. dierum ad minus, and ad certum locum; and
in omnibus literis summonitionis illius, causam summonitionis illius exponemus.
Et sic facta summonitione negotium procedat ad diem assignatum, secundum
consilium eorum qui praesentes fuerint, quamvis non omnes summoniti venerint.

Here is laid forth the Members, the Matter, and the Manner of summoning of a
Common Council of the Kingdom; which as it seems was not yet in the Records
of State called a Parliament.

The Members are of three sorts. First, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Earls, and the Greater Barons of the Kingdom, so called to distinguish them
from the Lesser Barons, which were the Lords of Mannours. Secondly, Those (here
before mentioned by Bened. Abbas to be called to Clarenden) that held of the
King in Capite; whom I take to be now the Knights of the Shire. And thirdly,
those of Cities, Buroughs, and Towns, called Burgesses, and the Barons of the
Cinque Ports.

The first sort are to appear personally, or by particular Proxies; for the
words as touching them are, Summoniri faciemus sigillatim: but as touching the
others, it is Summoniri faciemus generaliter, etc. not that all should come
confusedly, but that they should send their Advocates, which commonly are but
two, to speak for them. These the French in their Parliaments call Hottom.
Francog. ca. 27.
Ambasiatores, and Syndicos.

In the first rank, the Earls and greater Barons have their place in this
Council; for that they hold of the King in Capite by a Baronie* And the Bishops
and Abbots with them of the second rank: so likewise, for that it was declared
and ordained in the Council of Clarendon, that they should have their
possessions of the King as a Barony, and should be suitors, and sit in the
King's Court in judgments, as other Barons; till it came to the diminution of
Members, or matter of death. But this Council of Clarendon did rather affirm
than give them their privilege. For the Prelates of the Church were in all
ages the prime part of these great Councils. In the third rank, the Burgesses
and Barons of the Cinque Ports have their place; not so much in respect of
Tenure (for they were not conceived to be owners of lands) but for that in
Taxes and Tallages touching their goods and matter of Trade, they might have
some to speak for them, as well as other Members of the Kingdom.

But here then arises a question, how it comes to pass, that every poor
Borough of England, how little soever it be, (two excepted) have two to speak
for them in this great Council, when the greatest Counties have no more.

It seems that those of the Counties whom we call Knights, served not in
ancient time for all the Freeholders of the County, as at this day they do,
but were only chosen in the behalf of them that held of the King in Capite, and
were not Barons majores Barons of the Realm. For all Freeholders besides them
had their Lord Paramount (which held in capite to speak for them) as I have
showed before; and these only had no body, for that themselves held immediately
of the King. Therefore King John by his Charter did agree to summon them only
and no other Freeholders; howbeit those other Freeholders, because they could
not always be certainly distinguished from them that held in capite, (which
increased daily) grew by little and little to have voices in election of the
Knights of the Shire, and at last to be confirmed therein by the Stat. 7. Henr.
IV. and 8. Henr. VI. But to come to our question, why there are but two Knights
for a County? It may well seem to be, for that in those times of old there were
very few besides the Barons that held in capite, as appears by that we have
already spoken; and that two therefore might seem sufficient for these few, as
well as two for the greatest Buroughs or City of England, except London. And
it may be, that of the four which serve for London, two of them be for it as it
is a City, and two other as it is a County; though elsewhere it be not so.

But when two came first to be chosen or appointed for the rest of the Borough
or County, I cannot find. It seems by those Synods that were holden in the
times of the Saxon Kings, and by some after the Conquest, that great numbers of
the common people flowed thither Come Report. in Epist.
. For it is said in An. 1021. Cum quamplurimis gregariis militibus, ac cum
populi multitudine copiosa: And An. 1126. Innumeraque Cleri and populi
multitudine: and so likewise in An. 1138. and other Synods and Councils.

By what order or limitation, this innumera populi multitudo came to these
Assemblies, it appears not. Ad l. 2. Cod. de Legate. l. 10.
Bartol that famous Civilian, and Fra^^ogal. ca. 27. p. 15.
Hottoman according with him, thus expounds it in other places. Nota: quod
Praesides Provinciarum coadunant universale Parlamentum Provinciae: quod
intellige, non quod omnes de Provincia debent ad illud ire, sed de omnibus
Civitatibus deputantur Ambasiatores, qui Civitatem repraesentant. And Ad e^nd.
L.
Johan. de Platea likewise says: Vbi super aliquo providendum est, pro
utilitate totius Provinciae, debet congregari generale Concilium seu
Parlamentum: non quod omnes de Provincia vadant, sed de qualibet Civitate
aliqui Ambasiatores vel Syndici, qui totam Civitatem repraesentent. In quo
Concilio seu Parlamento petitur proponi sanum ac utile consilium.

But our Burgesses, as it seems, in time of old were not called to consult of
State matters; being unproper to their Education, otherwise than in matter of
Aid and Subsidy. For King John grants no more unto them, than ad habendum
commune consilium regni de auxiliis assid^ndis; if his Charter be so pointed
that this clause belong to that of the Liberties granted to them: which is very
doubtful, and seems rather to belong to that which follows; otherwise,
there are no words at all for calling them unto the great Councils, or
Parlaments (if you so will term them) of that time.

And yet further, it is to be noted, that this whole branch of his Charter,
touching the manner of his summoning a great Council, was not comprised in the
Articles (between him and his Barons) whereupon the Charter was grounded; but
gained from him, as it seems, afterward. And that may be a reason why it is
left out in the Magna Charta of Henry III. confirmed after by Edward I. in such
manner as now we have it. The Charter of these Articles, I have seen under his
own Seal.

After the death of King John, I find many of these great Councils holden, and
to be often named by the Authors of that time Colloquia, after the French word
Parliament; but no mention in any of them of Burgesses; saving that in An. Dom.
1225. Regis 10. it is said, that the King held his Christmas at Westminster,
Praesentibus clero and populo, cum Magnatibus regionis: and that the solemnity
being ended, Hugh de Burgo the King's Justice propounded to the Archbishop,
Bishops, Earls, Barons, and aliis universis, the losses the King had received
in France, requiring of them one XVth.

And in the year 1229. the King summoneth to Westminster Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, Templarios, Hospitalarios, Comites, Barons,
Ecclesiarum Rectores, and qui de se tenebant in capite; about the granting a
tenth to the Pope: wherein those that held in capite are called (as in Henr.
II.) to the Council of Clarendon, and as the Charter of King John purporteth;
but no mention is here made of Burgesses.

THE ORIGINAL OF THE FOUR TERMS Of the Year.

By Sir HENRY SPELMAN Knight.

Printed in the Year 1684. from a very uncorrect and imperfect Copy: Now,
Published from the Original Manuscript in the BODLEIAN Library.

Sir William Dugdale in his Origines Juridiciales, Chap. 32. page 89.
concerning this Treatise. I shall here briefly exhibit some particulars, which
I acknowledge to have gathered from an ample and most judicious discourse on
this Subject, written by the Learned Sir Henry Spelman Knight, in 1614. very
well worthy to be made public.

THE Occasion of this Discourse.
ABout forty two years since, diverse Gentlemen in London, studious of
Antiquities, framed themselves into a College or Society of Antiquaries,
appointing to meet every Friday weekly in the Term at a place agreed of, and
for Learning sake to confer upon some questions in that Faculty, and to sup
together. The place, after a meeting or two, became certain at Darby-house,
where the Herald's-Office is kept, and two Questions were propounded at every
meeting, to be handled at the next that followed; so that every man had a
sennight's respite to advise upon them, and then to deliver his opinion. That
which seemed most material, was by one of the company (chosen for the purpose)
to be entered in a book; that so it might remain unto posterity. The Society
increased daily: many persons of great worth, as well noble as other learned,
joining themselves unto it.

Thus it continued diverse years; but as all good uses commonly decline; so many
of the chief Supporters hereof either dying or withdrawing themselves from
London into the Country; this among the rest grew for twenty years to be
discontinu'd. But it then came again into the mind of diverse principal
Gentlemen to revive it; and for that purpose, upon the -- day of -- in the year
1614. there met at the same place Sir James Ley Knight, then Attorney of the
Court of Wards, since Earl of Marleborough and Lord Treasurer of England; Sir
Robert Cotton Knight and Baronett; Sir John Davies his Majesty's Attorney for
Ireland; Sir Richard St. George Knt. then Norrey, Mr. Hackwell the Queen's
Solicitor, Mr. Camden then Clarentieux, my self, and some others. Of these, the
Lord Treasurer, Sir Robert Cotton, Mr. Camden, and my self, had been of the
original Foundation; and to my knowledge were all then living of that sort,
saving Sir John Doderidge Knight, Justice of the King's Bench.

We held it sufficient for that time to revive the meeting, and only conceived
some rules of Government and limitation to be observed amongst us; whereof this
was one, That for avoid offense, we should neither meddle with matters of State
nor of Religion. And agreeing of two Questions for the next meeting, we chose
Mr. Hackwell to be our Register and the Convocator of our Assemblies for the
present; and supping together, so departed.

One of the Questions was, touching the Original of the Terms; about which, as
being obscure and generally mistaken, I bestowed some extraordinary pains; that
coming short of others in understanding, I might equal them if I could in
diligence.

But before our next meeting, we had notice that his Majesty took a little
mislike of our Society; not being enform'd, that we had resolved to decline all
matters of State. Yet hereupon we forbear to meet again, and so all our labors
lost. But mine lying by me, and having been often desired of me by some of my
Friends, I thought good upon a review and augmentation to let it creep abroad
in the form you see it, wishing it might be rectified by some better judgment.

SECT. I.
Of the Terms in general.
AS our Law books have nothing, to my knowledge, touching the original of the
Terms, so were it much better if our Chronicles had as little: For though it be
little they have in that kind, yet is that little very untrue, affirming that
William the Conqueror did first institute them. It is not worth the examining
who was Author of the error, but it seems Deinde constituit (Gulielmus
Conquestor) ut quatuor quotanis, etc. Lib. 1. p. 154. l. 16. etc.
Polydore Virgil (an Alien in our Commonwealth, and not well endenized in our
Antiquities) spread it first in Print. I purpose not to take it upon any man's
word: but, searching for the fountain, will, if I can, deduce them from thence,
beginning with their definition.

The Terms be certain portions of the year, in which only the King's Justices
hold plea in the high Temporal Courts of causes belonging to their
Jurisdiction, in the places thereto assigned, according to the ancient Rites
and Customs of the Kingdom.

The definition divides it self, and offers these parts to be considered.

1. The Names they bear. 2. The Original they come from. 3. The Time they
continue. 4. The Persons they are held by. 5. The Causes they deal with. 6. The
Place they are kept in. 7. The Rites they are performed with.
The parts minister matter for a Book at large, but my purpose upon the
occasion imposed, being to deal only with the Institution of the Terms; I will
travel no farther than the three first stages of my division, (that is)
touching their Name, their Original, and their Time of continuance.

SECT. II.
Of the Names of the Terms.
THe word Terminus is of the Greek (...), which signifies the Bound, End, or
Limit of a thing; here particularly of the time for Law matters. In the Civil
Law it also signifies a day set to the Defendant, and in that sense does Lib.
10. cap. 1. and 21. Lib. 3. Tract. 2. cap. 28. nu. 1.
Bracton, Glanvil, and others sometimes use it. Mat. Paris calls the
Sheriff's Turn, Terminum Vicecomitis, and in the addition to the MSS. Laws of
King Inas, Terminus is applied to the Hundred-Court; as also in a Charter of
Hen. I. prescribing the time of holding the Court. And we ordinarily use it for
any set portion of Time, as of Life, Years, Lease, etc.

The space between the Terms, is named Vacation, a Vacando, as being leisure
from Law business; by Latinists Justitium, a jure stando, because the Law is
now at a stop or stand.

The Civilians and Canonists call Term-time, Dies Juridicos Law-days; the
Vacation, Dies Feriales, days of leisure or intermission, Festival-days, as
being indeed sequestered from troublesome affairs of humane business, and
devoted properly to the service of God, and his Church. According to this, our
Saxon and Norman Ancestors divided the year also between God and the King,
calling those days and parts that were assigned to God, Dies pacis Ecclesiae,
the residue alloted to the King, Dies or tempus pacis Regis.

Divisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
Other names I find none anciently among us, nor the word Terminus to be
frequent till the age of Henry II. wherein Gervasius Tilburiensis, and
Ranulphus de Glanvilla (if those books be theirs) do continually use it for
Dies pacis Regis.

The ancient Romans, in like manner, divided their year between their Gods and
their Commonwealth; naming their Law-days or Term-time, Fastos, because their
Praetor or Judge might then Fari, that is speak freely; their Vacation, or days
of Intermission (as appointed to the service of their Gods) they called
Nefastos, for that the Praetor might ne fari, not speak in them judicially.
Ovid (Fastorum lib. 1.) thus expresses it: Ille Nefastus erat, per quem tria
verba silentur:
Fastus erat per quem lege licebat agi.
When that the three Judicial words
The Praetor might not use,
It was Nefastus: Fastus then,
When each man freely sues.


The three Judicial words were Do, Dico, Abdico; by the first he gave license
to cite partem ream, the Defendant; by the second he pronounced Sentence; and
by the third he granted Execution. This a latere.

The word Term has also other considerations; sometimes it is used for the
whole space, from the first Return to the end of the Term, including the day of
Return, Essoigne, Exception, etc. Sometimes and most commonly excluding these
from the first sitting of the Judges in full Court, (which is the first day for
Appearance) and this is called full Term by the Statute of 32. of Hen. VIII.
cap. 21. as though the part precedent were but Semi-Term, Puisne-Term, or
Introitus Termini. The words of the Statute are these, That Trinity-Term shall
begin the Monday next after Trinity-Sunday, for keeping the Essoignes, Profers,
Returns, and other ceremonies heretofore used, etc. And that the full Term of
the said Trinity-Term shall yearly for over begin the Friday next after Corpus
Christi day. Here the particulars I speak of are apparently set forth, and the
Term declared to begin at the first Return. By which reason it falls out that
the eight days wherein the Court of the Exchequer opens, at the beginning of
Michaelmass-Term, Hilary-Term and Easter, are to be accounted as parts of those
Terms, for that they fall within the first Return: the Exchequer having one
Return in every of them, more than the Courts of Common Law have, viz. Crastino
Sancti Michaelis, Octabis Hilarii, and Octabis or Clausum Paschae: And it
seems that Trinity-Term had Crastino Trinitatis in the self same manner,
before this Statute altered it.

SECT. III.
Of the Original of Terms or Law-days.
LAw-days or Dies Juridici, which we call Terms, are upon the matter, as
ancient as offenses and controversies: God himself held a kind of Term in
Paradise, when judicially he tried and condemned Adam, Eve, and the Serpent. In
all Nations, as soon as Government was settled, some time was appointed for
punishing offenses, redressing of wrongs, and determining of controversies; and
this time to every of those Nations was their Term. The Original therefore of
the Terms or Law-days, and the time appointed to them, are like the Signs of
Oblique Ascension in Astronomy, that rise together. I shall not need to speak
any more particularly of this point, but show it, as it farther offers it
self in our passage, when we treat of the time appointed to Term or Law-days,
which is the next and longest part of this our Discourse.

SECT. IV.
Of the Times assigned to Law-matters, called the Terms.
WE are now come to the great Arm of our Division, which spreads it self into
many branches, in handling whereof we shall fall, either necessarily or
accidentally, upon these points, viz.

1. Of Law-days among the Ancients, Jews, Greeks, etc.

2. Of those among the Romans using choice days.

3. Of those among the Primitive Christians using all alike.

4. How Sunday came to be exempted.

5. How other Festivals, and other Vacation days.

6. That our Terms took their Original from the Canon Law.

7. The Constitutions of our Saxon Kings; Edward the Elder, Guthrun the Dane,
and the Synod of Eanham under Ethelred, touching this matter.

8. The Constitutions of Canutus more particular.

9. The Constitutions of Edward the Confessor more material.

10. The Constitution of William the Conqueror: and of Law-days in Normandy.

11. What done by William Rufus, Henry I. Stephen, and Henry II.

12. Of Hiliary-Term according to those ancient Laws.

13. Of Easter-Term in like manner.

14. Of Trinity-Term and the long Vacation following; how it differs from the
other Vacations.

15. Of Michaelmass-Term.

16. Of the later Constitutions of the Terms by the Statutes of the 51. of Hen.
III. and 36. of Edw. III.

17. How Trinity-Term was altered by the 32. of Hen. VIII.

CHAP. I.
Of Law-days among the Ancients.
THe time allotted to Law-business seems to have been that from the beginning
amongst all, or most Nations, which was not particularly dedicated (as we said
before) to the service of God or some rites of Religion (...).
(for none that I read of, ordained them to be used confusedly.) Therefore
whilst Moses was yet under the Law of Nature, and before the positive Law was
given, he sacrificed and kept the holy Festival with Jethro his father-in-law
on the one day, but judged not the people till the day after. Some particular
instance (I know) may be given to the contrary, as I after shall mention, but
this seems then the general use.

(...).
The Greeks, who (as Josephus in his book against Appion witnesses) had much
of their ancient Rites from the Hebrews, held two of their (...) had about six
m^re or l^ss of them, so called because on them the Prytanean Magistrates might
hold Court.
Prytanean-days in every Month for civil matters, and the third only for their
Sacra.

Aeschines* in his Oration against C^esiphon, charge Demosthenes with writing
a Decree in the Senate, that the So called (...) where their business was to
sit only on things inanimate, as when a piece of stone, timber or iron, etc.
^ell ^n a man, ^f the (...) that ^^^ng it were not known, sentence was past on
that thing which s^ew him; and the Masters of this Court (...) see that thing
cast out of the Territories of Athens. See the Attick Antiq. l. 3. Chapter 3 sect;.
4.
Prytanean Magistrates might hold an Assembly upon the eighth day of the
approaching Month of The m^nth February, (...) as others would have it March,
when Sacrifices were most usually offered to the Goddess Diana, (...) cognomen
Diana, quod est, jaculis cervos figens.
Elaphebolion, when the holy Rites of Aesculapius were to be solemnized.

(...).
The Romans likewise (whether by instinct of nature or precedent) meddled not
with Law Causes during the times appointed to the worship of their Gods, as
appears by their Primitive Law of the twelve Tables, Feriis jurgia amovento,
and by the places before cited, as also this of the same Author, Post semel
exta Deo data sunt, licet omnia fari,
Verbaque honoratus libera Praetor habet.
When Sacrifices and holy Rites were done,
The Reverend Praetor then his Courts begun.


And Martial to the same purpose, Sacra damus ^estis ^ora judicialia ponunt.


To be short, it was so common a thing in those days of old, to exempt the
times of exercise of Religion from all worldly business; that the Barbarous
Nations, even our Angli, whilst they were yet in Germany, the Suevians
themselves, and others of those Northern parts would in no wise violate or
interrupt it. Tacitus says of them, that during this time of holy Rites, Non
bellum ineunt, non arma sumunt, clausum omne ferrum; pax and quies tun^ tantum
nota, tun^ tantum amata. Of our German Ancestors we shall speak more anon; our
old British are little to the purpose: they judged all Controversies by their
Priests the Druides, and to that end met but once a year, as De bello Gallico
lib. 6.
Caesar shows us by those of the Gauls.

Hist. C^^b p 54.
The later Britains (whom we now call the Wesh) in the Saxons time about the
year 900. had two Terms only for causes of Inheritance; the one beginning at
the ninth of November till the ninth of February; the other from the ninth of
May till the ninth of August. The rest of the year was counted time of
Vacation, for sowing in the Spring and Reaping in the Harvest.

CHAP. II.
Of Law-days amongst the Romans using choice days.
I Will therefore seek the Original of our Terms only from the Romans, as all
other Nations that have been subject to their Civil and Ecclesiastical Monarchy
do, and must.

The ancient Romans, whilst they were yet Heathens, did not, as we at this day,
use certain continued portions of the year for a legal decision of
Controversies, but out of a superstitious conceit that some days were ominous,
and more unlucky than others (according to that of the Egyptians,) they made
one day to be Fastus or Term-day, and another (as an Egyptian day) to be
Vacation or Nefastus: Seldom two Fasti, or Law-days together, yea, they
sometimes divided one and the same day in this manner, Qui modo Fastus erat,
mane Nefastus erat,
The afternoon was Term, the morning Holy Day.
Nor were all their Fasti applied to Judicature, but some of them to other
meetings and consultations of the Commonwealth; so that being divided into
three sorts, which they called Fastos proprie, Fastos Endotercisos, and Fastos
Comitiales, containing together 184. days, through all the Months of the year,
there remained not properly to the Praetor, as Judicial or Triverbial Days,
above 28. Whereas, we have in our Terms above 96. days in Court, besides the
Sundays and exempted Festivals falling in the Terms; which are twenty or there
about. Yet Sir De Rep. Angl. Lib. 3.
Thomas Smith counts it mavelous, that three Tribunals in one City in less
than the third part of the year, should rectify the wrongs of so large and
populous a Nation as this of England. But let us return where we left off.

CHAP. III.
Of Law-days among the first Christians, using all times alike.
TO beat down the Roman superstition touching observation of days, against
which St. Augustine and others wrote vehemently; the Christians at first used
all days alike for hearing of Causes, not sparing (as it seems) the Sunday it
self, thereby falling into another extremity. Yet had they some precedent for
it from Moses and the Jews. For Philo Judaeus Lib. 3.
in the life of Moses reports, that the cause of him that gathered sticks on
the Sabbath Day, was by a solemn Council of the Princes, Priests, and the whole
Multitude, examined and consulted of on the Sabbath Day. And the Talmudists,
who were best acquainted with the Jewish Customs, as also Galatinus the Hebrew
do report, that their Judges in the Council called Sanhedrim, sat on the
weekday from morning to night, in the Gates of the City; and on the
Sabbath Day and solemn Festivals, in the walls. So the whole year then seemed a
continual Term, no day exempt. And they that seek the Original of our modern
Laws among them, do but spend their time in vain; unless for some things
imposed on them by the Roman Emperors, when they became Subjects. How this
stood with the Levitical Law, or rather the Moral, I leave to others.

CHAP. IV.
How Sunday came to be exempted.
BUt for reformation of the abuse among Christians, in perverting the Lord's
day to the hearing of clamorous Litigants, it was ordained in the year of our
Redemption 517. by the Fathers assembled in Concilio Taraconensi, cap. 4. after
that, in Concilio Spalensi, cap. 2. and by Adrian Bishop of Rome in the
Decretal Cause. 15. quaest. 4. That, Capit. Car. and Lud. Can. 245.
Nullus Episcopus vel infra positus Die Dominico causas judicare [al.
ventilare] praesumat. No Bishop or inferior person presume to judge or try
causes on the Lord's day. For it appears by Epiphanius, that in his time (as
also many hundred years after) Bishops and Clergymen did hear and determine
causes, lest Christians, against the rule of the Apostle, should go to Law
under Heathens and Infidels. And it is said in the 1 st. Epistle of Clement (if
it were truly his) that S. Peter himself did so appoint it. Council. Tom. 1. p.
33.

This Canon of the Church for exempting Sunday, was by Theodosius fortified
with an Imperial Constitution, whilst we Britains were yet under the Roman
Government, L. Solis 13. Cod. Theod. de Exact.
Solis die, quem dominicum recte dixere majores, omnium omnino litium and
negotiorum quiescat intentio. Thus was Sunday redeemed from being a part of the
Term; but all other days by express words of the Canon were left to be Dies
Juridici, whether they were mean or great Festivals. For it thus follows in
the same place of the Cause. 15 quaest. 4. C. 1.
Decretals; Caeteris vero diebus, convenientibus personis, illa quae justa
sunt, habent licentiam judicandi, excepto criminali, (or as another Edition
reads it) exceptis criminalibus negotiis. The whole Canon is verbatim also
decreed in the Capitulars of the Emperors Lib. 6. Cap. 245 ^ Benedict. Levita.
Carolus and Ludovicus.

CHAP. V.
How other Festival and Vacation days were exempted.
NOw let us see how other Festivals and parts of the year were taken from the
Courts of Justice. The first Canon of note that I meet with to this purpose, is
that in Concilio Triburiensi ca. 26. in or about the year 895. Nullus Comes,
nullusque omnino secularis diebus Dominicis vel Sanctorum in Festis seu
Quadragesimae, aut jejuniorum, placitum habere, sed nec populum illo praesumat
cohercere.

After this, the Council of Bin. Tom. 3. Part 1. p. 616.
Meldis Cap. 77. took Easter-week, commonly called the Octaves, from Law
business; Pascae hebdomade feriandum, forensia negotia prohibentur. By this
example came the Octaves of Pentecost, St. Michael, the Epiphany, etc. to be
exempted, and principal Feasts to be honored with Octaves.

The next memorable Council to that of Tribury was the Council of Erpford in
Germany in the year 932. which though it were then but Provincial, yet being
after taken by Gratian into the body of the Canon Law, it became General, and
was imposed upon the whole Church. I will recite it at large, as it stands in
Council. Tom. 3. p. 1056.
Binius, for I take it to be one of the foundationstones to our Terms. Placita
secularia Dominicis vel aliis Festis diebus, seu etiam in quibus legitima
Jejunia celebrantur secundum Canonicam institutionem, minime fieri volumus.
Insuper quoque Gloriosissimus Rex [Francorum Henricus] ad augmentum Christianae
Religionis, (or as Can. 15. quaest. 4.
Gratian has it) [Sancta Synodus] decrevit ut nulla judiciaria potestas
licentiam habeat Christianos sua authoritate ad placitum bannire septem diebus
ante Natalem Domini, and a al. Septuagesima.
Quinquagesima usque ad Octavas Paschae, and septem diebus ante Nativitatem
Sancti Johannis Baptistae, quatenus adeundi Ecclesiam orationibusque vacandi
liberius habeatur facultas. But the Council of St. Medard extant first in Lib.
12. c. 20.
Burchard, and then in Can. 22. q. 5. Ca. 17.
Gratian enlarges these Vacations in this Manner, Decrevit Sancta Synodus, ut a
Quadragesima usque ad Octavam Paschae, and ab Adventu Domini usque ad Octavam
Epiphaniae, nec-non in Jejuniis quatuor temporum, and in Litaniis Majoribus,
and in diebus Dominicis, and in diebus Rogationum (nisi de concordia and
pacificatione) nullus supra sacra Evangelia jurare praesumat. The word [jurare]
here implies that they should not try Law-causes, or hold plea on these days,
as by the same phrase in other Laws shall by and by appear: which the Gloss
also upon this Canon makes manifest, saying, In his etiam diebus causae
exerceri non debent, citing the other Can. 15. q. 4. Ca. 1.
Canon here next before recited; but adding withal, that the Court and Custume
of Rome it self does not keep Vacation from Septuagesima, nor, as it seems,
in some other of the days. And this precedent we follow, when Septuagesima and
Sexagesima fall in the compass of Hilary-Term.

CHAP. VI.
That our Terms took their Original from the Canon Law.
THus we leave the Canon Law, and come home to our own Country, which out of
these, and such other foreign Constitutions (for many more there are) have
framed our Terms, not by choosing any set portion of the year for them (as
Polydore Virgil, and our Chroniclers ignorantly suggest) but by taking up such
times for that purpose, as the Church and common Necessity (for collecting the
fruits of the Earth) left undisposed of, as in that which follows plainly
shall appear.

CHAP. VII.
The Constitution of our Saxon Kings in this matter.
INas one of our ancient Saxon Kings, made a very strict Law against working on
Sunday Fif theo mon yrce on sunnan daeg. be his hlafordes haese. sy he freo.
Legum Cap. 4
If a Servant work on Sunday by his Master's command, let him be made free, etc.
.

Of Edw. the Elder and Guthrun.
And Legum Cap. 39.
Alured instituted many Festivals; but the first that prohibited Juridical
proceedings upon such days, was Edward the Elder and Guthrun the Dane, who in
the League between them, made about ten years before the Council of Erpford,
(that it may appear we took not all our light from thence) did thus ordain;
Ordel and athas syndon tocedon freols dagum. and rihtfaesten dagum; etc.

We forbid that Ordel and Oaths (So they called Law-tryals at that time) be
used upon Festival and lawful Fasting days, etc.



How far this Law extended, appears not particularly; no doubt to all
Festival and Fasting-days then imposed by the Roman Church, and such other
Provincial, as by our Kings and Clergy were here instituted. Those which by
Alured were appointed to be Festivals, are now by this Law made also days of
Vacation from Judicial Trials; yet seem they, for the most part, to be but
Semi-Festivals, as appointed only to freemen not to bondmen; for so his Leg.
Alur. cap. 39.
Law declares, viz. The twelve days of Christmas, the day wherein Christ
overcame the Devil, the Anniversary of St. Gregory, the seven days before
Easter, and the seven days after, the day of St. Peter and St. Paul, and the
whole week before St. Mary in Harvest, and the Feast Day of All Saints. But the
four Wednesdays in the four Ember weeks are remitted to Bondmen to bestow
their work in them as they thought good.

The Synod of Eanham.
To come to that which is more perspicuous; I find about 'Twas held between the
years 1006. and 1013. See the Author's Con. Britan. Tom. 1. page 510.
sixty years after, a Canon in our The word Synod here signifies more than
Council, not as it is usaally restrained to that of the Clergy (...).
Synod of Eanham, under King Ethelred in these words. First, touching Sunday,
Council. Eanham. Can. 15.
Dominicae solempnia diei cum summo honor magnopere celebranda sunt, nec
quicquam in eadem operis agatur servilis. Negotia quoque secularia
quaestionesque publicae in eadem deponantur die. Then commanding the Feast-days
of the B. Virgin, and of all the Apostles, the Can. 16.
Fast of the Ember days, and of the Can. 17.
Friday in every week to be duly kept; it proceeds thus, Can. 18.
Judicium quippe quod Anglice Ordeal dicitur, and juramenta vulgaria, festivis
temporibus and legitimis jejuniis; sed and ab Adventu Domini usque post Octabas
Epiphaniae, and a Septuagesima usque 15. dies post Pascha minime exerceantur:
sed sit his temporibus summa pax and concordia inter Christianos, sicut fieri
oportet. It is like there were some former Constitutions of our Church to this
purpose; but either mine eye has not light upon them, or my memory has
deceived me of them.

CHAP. VIII.
The Constitution of Canutus, more particular.
CAnutus succeeding shortly by his Danish sword in our English Kingdom, not
only retained but revived this former Constitution, adding, after the manner of
his zeal, two new Festival and Vacation days.

(...) leg. Cap. 17.
And e forheodath ordal and athas freols dagum. and ymbren dagum. and rite
faesten dagum; and fram Adventum domini oath se eahtotha dag agan sy ofer telfta
daeg* etc.

We forbid Ordal and Oaths on Feast-days and Ember-days, and in Lent, and set
fasting days, and from the Advent of our Lord till the eighth day after the
twelfth be past. And from Septuagesima till fifteen nights after Easter. And
the Sages have ordained that St. Edward's day shall be Festival over all
England on the fifteenth of the Kalends of April, and St. Dunstan's on the
fourteenth of the Kalends of June, and that all Christians (as right it is)
should keep them hallowed and in peace.

Canutus, following the Synod of Eanham, sets down in the Paragraph next
before this recited, which shall be Festival and which Fasting-days, appointing
both to be days of Vacation. Among the Fasting-days he names the Saints Eves
and the Fridays; but excepteth the Fridays when they happen to be
Festival-days, and those which come between Easter and Pentecost; as also those
between Midwinter (so they called the Nativity of our Lord) and Octabis
Epiphaniae. So that, at this time, some Fridays were Law-days and some were
not. Those in Easter Term, with the Eve of Philip and Jacob, were; and the rest
were not. The reason of this partiality (as I take it) was; they fasted not at
Christmas for joy of Christ's Nativity, nor between Easter and Whitsuntide,
for that Christ continued upon the Earth, from his Resurrection till his
Ascension; And Matthew. 9. 15. Mar. 2. 19.
the children of the wedding may not fast so long as the Bridegroom is with
them: Nor till Whitsuntide, for joy of the coming of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. IX.
The Constitution of Edward the Confessor most material.
SAint Edward the Confessor drew this Constitution of Canutus nearer to the
course of our time, as a Law, in these words: Leges Edw. Conf. cap. 9.
Ab Adventu Domini usque ad Octabas Epiphaniae pax Dei and sanctae Ecclesiae
per omne Regnum; similiter a Septuagesima usque ad Octabas Paschae; item ab
Ascensione Domini usque ad Octabas Pentecostes; item omnibus diebus quatuor
temporum; item omnibus Sabbatis ab hora nona, and tota die sequenti, usque ad
diem Lunae; item Vigiliis Sanctae Mariae, Sancti Michaelis, Sancti Johannis
Baptistae, Apostolorum omnium and Sanctorum quorum solennitates a Sacerdotibus
Dominicis ^nnunciantur diebus; and omnium Sanctorum in Kalendis Novembris,
semper ab hora nona Vigiliarum, and subsequenti solennitate: Item in Parochiis
in quibus dedicationis dies observatur; item Parochiis Ecclesiarum ubi propria
Festivitas Sancti celebratur, etc. The Rubric of this Law is, De temporibus
and diebus pacis Regis, intimating Termtime; and here in the Text the Vacations
are called Dies pacis Dei and sanctae Ecclesiae, as I Sect. 2.
said in he beginning. But pax Dei, pax Ecclesiae, and pax Regis, in other Laws
of Edward the Confessor, and elsewhere, have other significations also more
particular. Hora nona is here (as in all Authors of that time) intended for
three of the clock in the afternoon, being the ninth hour of the artificial
day; wherein the Saxons, as other parts of Europe, and our Ancestors of much
later time, followed the Judaical computation: perhaps till the invention and
use of Clocks gave a just occasion to alter it, for that they could not daily
vary for the unequal hours.

CHAP. X.
The Constitution of William the Conqueror.
THis Constitution of Edward the Confessor was amongst his other Laws
confirmed by William the Coquerour; as not only In Hen. II. page 600.
Hoveden and those ancient Authors testify, but by the Decree of the
Conqueror himself, in these words; Lamb. exord. Ll. Gul^el. Cod. MS.
Hoc quoque praecipio ut omnes habeant and teneant Leges Edwardi in omnibus
rebus, adauctis his quae constituimus ad utilitatem Anglorum. And in those
Auctions nothing is added, altered, or spoken, concerning any part of that
Constitution. Neither is it like, that the Conqueror did much innovate the
course of our Terms or Law-days, seeing he held them in his own Duchy of
Normandy, not far differing from the same manner, having received the Customs
of that his Country from this of ours, by the hand of Edward the Confessor; as
in the beginning of their old In descrip. Norman.
Custumary themselves do acknowledge. The words touching their Law-days or
Trials be these, under the Title De temporibus quibus leges non debent fieri:
Custum. Cap. 80.
Notandum autem est quod quaedam sunt tempora in quibus leges non debent fieri,
nec simplices, nec apertae, viz. omnia tempora in quibus matrimonia non possunt
celebrari. Ecclesia autem legibus apparentibus omnes dies Festivos prohibet,
and defendit, viz. ab hora nona die Jovis, usque ad ortum Solis die Lunae
sequenti, and omnes dies solennes novem lectionum and solennium jejuniorum, and
dedicationis Ecclesiae in qua duellum est deducendum. This Law does generally
inhibit all Judicial proceedings, during the times wherein Marriage is
forbidden, and particularly all trials by Battle, (which the French and our
Lib. 4. c. 1. Lib. 14 c. 1. 2.
Glanvil call Leges apparentes, alias apparibiles, vulgarly Loix Apparisans)
during the other times therein mentioned. And it is to be noted, that the
Emperor Frederick the Second in his Lib. 2. c. 31.
Neapolitan Constitutions includes the trials by Ordeal under Leges paribiles.
But touching the time wherein Marriage is forbidden; it agreed at that day with
Ll. Edw. Conf. c. 9.
the Vacations from Law-business, prescribed by Edward the Confessor: the
Church not thinking it reason, that men abstaining from litigation, should give
themselves to lust, Gloss. Can. 33. q. 4. ca. Non oportet in Quadrages.
and to feasting and dancing, (things incident to Marriage:) In which respect,
it also required that man and wife (as near as they could) should at these
times forbear the pleasure of their bed, and give themselves to devotion and
piety. For though covetous persons have since abused that godly Institution to
their profit, yet the Fathers that were Authors of it in Ilerdensi Concilio,
about 500. years after Christ, aimed at nothing, but merely sanctity. The times
of Marriage, prohibited according to the Constitution of the Church, were
these; Lindo. C^an. (...) ca. Omnia. v. So^empn. Decr. Great. de Feriis, ca.
Capellanus. Decr. Great. Can. 33. q. 4. ca. Non oportet ^ Septuag. B^l^th. de
Divin. O^^i^. ca. 65.
A prima Dominica Adventus, usque ad Octavas Epiphaniae exclusive: and a
Dominica Septuagesimae usque ad primam Dominicam post Pascha inclusive: and a
prima die Rogationum usque ad septimum diem festi Pentecostes inclusive. The
Law-Vacation, according to the prescription of Edward the Confessor, is, ab
Ascensione Domini usque ad octabis Pentecostes. But here, the Wedding-vacation
is three days before it, viz. a prima die Rogationum; which is according to the
Constitution De Feriis, ca. Capellanus. So that the Term-times, and Vacations,
of the English and Normans, were anciently all one; and our Ecclesiastical
Courts hold it so to this day. Of the Dies novem Lectionum before mentioned, we
shall speak anon.

CHAP. XI.
What done by William Rufus, Henry I. King Stephen, and Henry II.
AS for William Rufus, we read that he pulled many lands from the Church, but
not that he abridged the Vacation times assigned to it.

Henry I. upon view of former Constitutions, composed this Law under the Title,
De observatione temporis Leg. Hen. I. c. 62.
Leges faciendi, viz. ab Adventu Domini usque ad Octabis Epiphaniae, and a
Septuagesima usque ad 15. dies post Pascham, and Festis diebus, and quatuor
Temporum, and diebus Quadragesimalibus, and aliis legitimis Jejuniis, in diebus
Veneris, and vigiliis Sanctorum Apostolorum non est tempus leges faciendi, idem
vel jusjurandum (nisi primo fidelitate domini vel concordia) vel bellum, vel
ferri, vel aquae, vel leges exactionis tractari, sed sit in omnibus vera pax,
beata charitas, ad honorem omnipotentis Dei, etc. The Copies of these Laws is
much corrupted, and it appears by Florence Wigorn's Continuer, that the
Londoners refused them, and put Maud the Empress to an ignominious An. Dom.
1142.
flight when she pressed the observation of them. But in this particular branch
there is nothing not agreeable to some former Constitution. The word Bellum
here signifies Combats, which among our Saxons are not spoken of, and by those
of Ferri vel aquae, are meant Ordeal.

King Stephen by his Charter recited at Malmesbury, confirmed and established
by a Generality, Hist. Nov. lib. 1. page 179.
Bonas leges, and antiquas, and justas consuetudines.

Henry the II. expressly ratified the Laws of Edward the Confessor and William
the Conqueror, as In Hen. II. page 600.
Hoveden tells us, saying, That he did it by the advice of Ranulph Glanvil
then newly made Chief Justice of England; which seems to be true, for that
Lib. 2. Cap. 11.
Glanvil does accordingly make some of his Writs returnable in Octabis, or
Clauso Paschae, where the Laws of Edward the Confessor appoint the end of Lent
Vacation: And Dial. Scacc.
Gervasius Tilburiensis also mentions the same return. Yet the MSS. Laws of
Ca. 62.
Henry II. which remain in the Red-book of the Exchequer, following the Synod of
Eanham, extends Lent Vacation, a Septuagesima usque 15. dies post Pascha, and
lays out the whole frame of the year in this manner, under the Rubric De
observatione temporis leges faciendi, viz. Ab Adventu Domini usque ad Octabis
Epiphaniae, and a Septuagesima usque ad quindecim dies post Pascha, and festis
diebus, and quatuor temporum, and diebus Quadragesimalibus, and aliis legitimis
jejuniis in diebus Veneris and Vigiliis singulorum Apostolorum non est tempus
leges faciendi, idem vel jusjurandum nisi primo fidelitate Domini, vel
concordia, vel bellum, vel ferri, vel aquae, vel legis examinationis tractari.
Sed sit in omnibus vera pax (and) beata charitas ad honorem Omnipotentis, cujus
sapientia conditi sumus, nativitate provecti, morte redempti, consolatione
securi; and qui debtor est, persolvat ante vel induciet, donec dies isti
transeant, gaudiis and honestis voluptatibus instituti. Et si quis maleficium
inter manus habens, alicubi retinetur; ibi purgetur vel sordidetur si solum
inculpatio, plegiis si opus est datis, ubi justum fuerit terminanda revertatur.

CHAP. XII.
The Terms laid out according to these ancient Laws.
TO lay out now the bounds of the Terms according to these Canons and
Constitutions, especially that ancient Law of Edward the Confessor; it thus
appears, viz.

(...)
Hilary-Term began then certainly at Octabis Epiphaniae, that is the thirteenth
day of January, seven days before the first Return it now has, and nine days
before our Term begins; and ended at the Saturday next before Septuagesima,
which being moveable made this Term longer in some years than in others.
Florentius Wigorniensis, and Walsingham in his Hypodig. Neust. An. 1096. Malm.
p 124
Hypodigma Neustriae says, -- Anno 1096. In Octabis Epiphaniae apud
Sarisburiam Rex Gulielmus [Rufus] tenuit Consilium in quo jussit Gulielmi de
Anco in du^llo victi oculos eruere, and testiculos abscindere, and Dapiferum
illius Gulielmum de Alderi, filium amitae illius suspendi, etc. proceeding also
judicially against others. Though Walsingham calls this Consilium with an s, a
Counsel; and Wigorniensis Concilium with a c, an Assembly, (the word Term
perhaps not being in use under William Rufus;) yet it seems to be no other,
than an Assembly of the Barons, in the King's house or Court of State, (which
was then the ordinary place of Justice for crimes of this nature.) For the
Barons of the Land were at that time Judges of all causes, which we call Pleas
of the Crown, and of all other belonging to the Court of the King: The
proceeding also against these offenders seems merely Legal, and not
Parliamentary or ex arbitrio. For the trial was according to Law, by Battle;
and the judgment (after the manner of the time) by putting out the eyes and
mutilation of the privy members. As for putting men to death, I confess that it
was not at this time ordinary: For Ll. Gul. R. S^n. c. 19.
William the Conqueror had made a Law: Interdico nequis occidatur, vel
suspendatur pro aliqua culpa; sed eruantur oculi and abscindantur testiculi.
But as himself observed it not; so his Son made not nice in breaking of it. And
I think the Barons of that time did in many things, (especially crimes of
Treason) ex arbitrio judicare. Besides this, if it had been other than an
ordinary course of justice, they would not have called it Consilium or
Concilium simply; but magnum Concilium or commune Concilium Regni, as the
phrase then was for Parliaments. Lastly, though it had been a Parliament, yet
they could not, or at least they would not break the Constitutions of the
Church, by meddling with trials of crime and blood, in diebus pacis Ecclesiae:
and therefore we must conceive it to be done in Term-time, and diebus pacis
Regis, as the Canons alleged, and assigned it.

I meet also with a precedent to this purpose in De Gest. Freder. I. lib. 2. c.
72.
Radevicus under the year 1160. whereby it appears, that they began their Term
or Law-day likewise beyond the Seas at Octabis Epiphaniae. Curia (says he) quae
in Octavis Epiphaniae Papiae fuerat indicta, usque in sextam feriam proxime
ante caput jejunii (quia in destructione Cremae dominus Imperator detinebatur)
est dilata.

Cust ^^t. cap. (...).
The Norman Custumary shows also expressly, that this Term began at Octabis
Epiphaniae: in saying, that their Law-days began and went out with the times of
celebrating Marriage: which in this part of the year (as we showed before) came
in at Octab. Epiphaniae, and went out at Septuagesima, as it still does. And
the Court of the Arches does still hold the same beginning. The Exchequer also
being brought out of Normandy, seems to retain at this day the steps of the
Norman Custume. For in that it opens eight days before the beginning of the
Term, it opens upon the matter at Octabis Epiphaniae: By which it appears
that it was then no Vacation, and that the Term was begun at Octabis
Epiphaniae; whereby it is the likelyer also that it ended at Septuagesima, lest
beginning it, as we now do, it might fall out some years to have no Hilary-Term
at all, as shall anon appear. And this our ancient use of ending the Term at
Septuagesima is some inducement to think, the Council of Erpford is depraved,
and that the word there Quinquagesima should be Septuagesima, as the gloss
there reports it to be in some other place: And as well Gratian mistakes
this, as he has done the Council Council. Tom. 3.
it self, attributing it to Ephesus a City of Ionia, instead of Erpford a Town
in Germany; where Burchard before him, and Binius since, do now place it.

Mr. Ai^. Agard.
It comes here to my mind, what I have heard an old Chequer-man many years ago
report, that this Term and Trinity-Term were in ancient time either no Terms at
all, or but as relics of Michaelmass and Easter-Terms, rather than just Terms
of themselves: Some courses of the Chequer yet incline to it. And we were both
of the mind, that want of business (which no doubt in those days was very
little) by reason Suits were then for the most part determined in inferior
Courts, might be the cause thereof. But I since observe another cause, viz.
That Septuagesima or Church-time one while trod so near upon the heels of
Octabis Epiphaniae (I mean came so soon after it,) as it left not a whole week
for Hilary-Term; and again, another while, Trinity Sunday fell out so late in
the year, that the common necessity of Hay-seed and Harvest, made that Term
very little and unfrequented.

For insomuch as Easter (which is the Clavis, as well to shut up Hilary-Term,
as to open Trinity-Term) may, according to the general Council of Nice, holden
in the year 322. fall upon any day between the 21 st. of March exclusively,
which then was the Aequinoctium, and the 25. of April inclusively, (as the
farthest day that the Sunday following the Vernal Full-Moon can happen upon;)
Septuagesima may sometimes be upon the eighteenth of January, and then could
they in ancient time not have above four days Term, and we at this day no Term
at all, because we begin it not till the 23 d. of January, which may be six
days after Septuagesima, and within the time of Church-Vacation. But what
Hilary-Term has now lost at the beginning of it, it has gained at the latter
ending. Of Trinity-Term I shall speak more by and by.

CHAP. XIII.
Easter-Term.
EAster-Term, which now begins two days after Quindena Paschae, began then
as the Law of Edward the Confessor appointed it, at Octabis. This is verified
by Glanvil, who makes one of his Writs returnable thus; Rex etc. Summone per
bonos summonitores quatuor legales milites de vicineto de Stock, quod sint ad
Clausum Paschae coram me vel Justiciis meis apud Westmonasterium ad eligendum
supra sacramentum suum duodecim legales milites. But, as it began then nine
days sooner than it now does, so it ended six or seven days sooner, viz. before
the Vigil of Ascension; which I take to be the meaning of the Law of Edward the
Confessor, appointing the time from the Ascension (inclusive) to the Octaves
of Pentecost, with Ascension-Eve, to be dies pacis Ecclesiae, and Vacation.

CHAP. XIV.
Trinity-Term.
TRinity-Term therefore in those days began as it now does (in respect of the
Returns) at Octab. Pentecostes, which being always the day after (...) 32.
(...) VIII. (...) 21.
Trinity Sunday, is now by the Stat. of 32. of Hen. VIII. appointed to be
called Crastino Trinitatis. But it seems that the Stat. of 51. of Hen. III.
changed the beginning of this Term from Crastino Trinitatis, to Octabis
Trinitatis, and that therefore the Stat. of Hen. VIII. did no more in this
point than reduce it to the former original. As touching the end of this Term,
it seems also that the said Stat. of 51. Hen. III. assigned the same to be
within two or three days after Quindena Sancti Johannis, (which is about the
twelfth of July) for that Statute names no Return after.

But, for ought that hinders by the Canons, it is tanquam Terminus sine
Termino; for, there was no set Canon or Ecclesiastical Law (that I can find) to
abridge the continuance thereof till Michaelmass, unless the seven days next
before St. John Baptist, were (according to the Canon of Erpford) used as days
of intermission, when they fell after the Octaves of Pentecost as commonly they
do; though this year 1614. four of them fell within them: and except the
Ember-days meet after Holy-Rood; for Jejunia quatuor Temporum, as well by the
Laws of Canutus, and Edward the Confessor, as by all other almost before
recited, are either expressly or implicitly exempted from the days of Law. But
when Trinity Sunday fell near the feast of St. John Baptist, then was the first
part of this Term so thrust up between those days of the Church, that it was
very short; and the latter part being always fixed, did so hinder Hay-seed and
Harvest following, that either the course of it must be shortened, or it must
still usurp upon the time, allotted by nature to collect the fruits of the
earth.

For as Religion closed the Courts of Law in other parts of the year, so now
does public necessity stop the progress of them; following the Constitution of
C^d. de ^^ri^s, l 2. ca. 20. l. ^in. and ff. l. omnes dies.
Theodosius, thus decreeing; -- Omnes dies jubemus esse juridicos. Illos tamen
remanere feriarum dies fas est geminis mensibus; ad requiem laboris
indulgentior annus excepit: aestivis quoque fervoribus mitigandis, and
autumpnis fructibus decerpendis. This is also confirmed in the Tit. de F^^iis,
Ca. 5.
Canon Conquestus; and in Can. 15. quaest. 4.
Gratian with the Glosses upon them, to which I leave you. But it is of old
thus expressed by Silvarum (...).
Statius, as if it were ex jure Gentium: Certe jam Latiae non miscent jurgia
Leges,
Et pacem piger Annus habet, messesque reversae
Dimisere Forum: nec jam tibi turba r^orum
Vestibulo, querulique rogant exire Clientes.
The Latian Laws do no man now molest,
But grant this weary season peace and rest;
The Courts are stopped when Harvest comes about,
The Plaintiff or Defendant stirs not out.


So the Longobards (our brethren as touching Saxon original) appointed for
their Vintage a particular Vacation of thirty days, which Hist. L^ng^b. Lib. 3.
cap. 12.
Paulus Diaconus does thus mention: Proficiscentes autem eo ad villam, ut juxta
ritum imperialem triginta Wisegoth. Lib. 2. tit. 1. l. 11.
diebus ad vindemiam jocundaretur. So also the Western Goths (a branch of the
Northern Nations) ordained pro messivis feriis, a 15. Kal. Augusti, usque ad
15. Kal. Septembris, etc. observandas. Whereby it appears that this time was
not only a time of Vacation in those ancient days, but also of feasting and
merriment, for receiving the fruits of the earth; as at Nabal's and Absalom's
Sheep-shearing, and in diverse parts of England at this 1 Samuel 25. 4. 2 Samuel 13.
23.
day. So the Normans, whose Terms were once not so much differing from ours,
might not hold their Assizes or times of Law, but after Easter and Harvest;
(that is, after the times of holy Church and public necessity) as appears by
their Custumary. And forasmuch as the Swainmote or Swanimote (from the Saxon
saegn, i. e. a Country Clown or Freeholder, and mot or gemot Conventus) is a
Court of Freeholders within the Forest. See 3. Hen. VIII. ca. 8.
Swainmote-Courts are by the ancient Forest-laws appointed to be kept fifteen
days before Michaelmass; it seems to be intended that Harvest was then done,
or that in Forests little or no corn was then used to be sown.

But it is to be remembered, that this Vacation by reason of Harvest, Hayseed,
Vintage, etc. was not of so much solemnity as those in the other parts of the
year, and therefore called of the Civilians, Dies feriati minus solennes;
because they were not dedicated divino cultui, but humanae necessitati.
Therefore though Law business was prohibited on these days, to give ease and
freedom unto Suitors whilst they attended on the Storehouse of the
Commonwealth; yet was it not otherwise than that by consent of parties they
might proceed in this Vacation; whereof see the Lib. 2. cap. 21.
Decreta Gregorii. To this effect, in a MS. of the lives of the Abbots of St.
Albans, I meet with this precedent: That 4. Non. Aug. Anno Dom. 1328.
Indictione 11. Comparentibus judicialiter coram nobis Offic. Cur Eborum.
Commissario Generali in majore Ecclesia Eborum loco (...) pro Tribunali
sedentibus fratre Johanne de Redburne, (...) S. Albani, Ordinis S. Benedicti
Lincolniensis Dioeces. Procuratore, R^^g. Virorum Dominorum Abbatis and
Conventus ejusdem Monasterii verorum Patronorum Ecclesiae de Appleton in Rydale
Eborum. Dioc. Procuratorio pro eisdem ex una, ac Domino Waltero Flemengs
Rectore ejusdem Ecclesiae personaliter ex altera: Idem Dominus Walterus Rector,
tempore messium non obstante, ipsoque tunc in nobis ut in judice suo ad infra
scripta judicialiter consentiente, fatebatur se teneri dictis Dominis Abbati
and Conventui and eorum Monasterio in 14. libris argenti, nomine pensionis sex
marcarum annuarum eisdem Religiosis ab eo and dicta sua Ecclesia de tempore quo
Rector ejusdem Ecclesiae extitit, debit. and per eundem per idem tempus
subtractis.

CHAP. XV.
Of Michaelmass-Term according to the ancient Constitutions.
MIchaelmass-Term (as the Canons and Laws aforesaid leave it) was more
uncertain for the beginning than for the end. It appears by a Fine taken at
Norwich, 18. Hen. III. that the Term was then holden there, and began within
the Octaves of Saint Michael; for the Cyrograph of it is; Haec est finalis
concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud Norwicum, die Martis proximo post
festum Sancti Michaelis, anno regni Regis Henrici filii Regis Johannis 18.
coram Tho. de Mulet, Rob. de Lexint, Olivero, etc. I observe that the Tuesday
next after St. Michael can (at the farthest) be but the seventh day after it,
and yet it then must be a day within the Octaves; whereas the Term Before the
abbreviation by 16. Car. I. cap. 6.
now begins not till the third day after the Octaves. But Dial. lib. 2. cap.
2.
Gervasius Tilburiensis, who lived in Hen. II's time, has a Writ in these
words: -- N. Rex Anglorum, [illi vel illi] Vicecomiti Jalutem. Vide, sicut
teipsum and omnia tua diligis, quod sis ad Scaccarium [ibi vel ibi in Crastino
Sancti Michaelis, vel in Crastino Clausi Paschae] and habeas ibi tecum quicquid
debes de veteri firma and nova, and nominatim haec debita subscript. viz. etc.
By which it appears that the Term in the Exchequer, as touching Sheriffs and
Accomptants, and consequently in the other parts, began then as now it does,
saying that the Statute De Scaccario, 51. Hen. III. has since appointed, That
Sheriffs and Accomptants shall come to the Exchequer the Monday after the feast
of St. Michael, and the Monday after the Vtas of Easter But the A^signees to
ta^e ^^gnizance of weights and mea^ures, by the Statute of 14. Ed. 3. c. 12.
are notwithstanding (...) their Estreats ^endemaine d^ S. Mich^l, (...) morrow
after (...) Rastal, weights and measures.
. Which time, not being ferial or Church-days, is freely allowed to Term
business, if the Octaves of St. Michael had no privilege; of which hereafter.
It is to be noted that the Term in the Exchequer has one Return at the
beginning of every Term before the first Return in other Courts, excepting
Trinity-Term; viz. Crastino S. Michaelis, in Michaelmass-Term; Octabis S.
Hilarii, in Hilary-Term; and Octabis or Clausum Paschae, in Easter-Term. And it
seems, that Crastino Trinitatis was so likewise in Trinity-Term before the
Ca. 21.
Stat. 32. Hen. VIII. And these returns or the space of eight days, in which the
Exchequer is open before the full Term, (which now we commonly call the
beginning of the Term) are counted to be Term-time, as appears by the said
Statute, where it is thus enacted; That Trinity-Term shall begin the Monday
next after Trinity Sunday, for keeping of the Essoignes, Profers, Returns, and
other Ceremonies heretofore used, etc. And that the full Term of the said
Trinity-Term, shall yearly for ever begin the Friday Here seems to be something
wanting.
....

The end is certainly prefixed by the Canons and Laws aforesaid, that it may
not extend into Advent. And it holds still at that mark; saving that because
Advent Sunday is moveable, according to the Dominical letter, and may fall upon
any day between the twenty sixth of November and the fourth of December,
therefore the twenty eighth of November (as a middle period by reason of the
Feast and Eve of St. Andrew) has been appointed to it. Howbeit when Advent
Sunday falls on the twenty seventh of November, as sometimes it does, then is
the last day of the Term (contrary to the Canons and former Constitutions) held
in Advent, and consequently void, if custom help it not, or, for more security
the Statute of 3. Edw. I. ca. 48. where the Bishops, at the King's request,
admit Assizes and Inquests to be taken in Advent, as it after shall more
largely appear.

CHAP. XVI.
The later Constitutions of the Terms.
TO leave obscurity and come nearer the light, it seems by the Statutes of
51. Hen. III. called Dies communes in Banco, that the Terms did then either
begin and end as they do now, or that those Statutes did lay them out, and that
the Statute of 36. Edw. III. cap. 15. confirmed that use: For the Returns there
mentioned are neither other, more or fewer than at this day.

CHAP. XVII.
How Trinity-term was altered and shortened.
TRinity-Term is altered and shortened by the Statute of 32. Hen. VIII. chap.
21. which has ordained it quoad sessionem, to begin for ever the Friday after
Corpus Christi day, and to continue nineteen days; whereas in elder times it
began two or three days sooner. So that Corpus Christi day being a moveable
Feast, this Term cannot hold any certain station in the year, and therefore
this year 1614. it began on St. John Baptist's day, and the last year it ended
on his Eve. Hereupon, though by all the Canons of the Church and former Laws, the
Feast of St. John Baptist was a solemn day, and exempt from legal proceedings
in Courts of Justice; yet is it now no Vacation day, when Corpus Christi
falls (as it did this year 1614.) the very day before it: For that the
Statute has appointed the Term to begin the Friday next after Corpus Christi
day, which was the day next this year before St. John Baptist, and so the Term
must of necessity begin on Saint John Baptist's day. This deceived all the
Ptognosticators, who counting St. John Baptist for a grand day, and no day in
Court, appointed the Term in their Almanacks to begin the day after, and
consequently to hold a day longer; deceiving many by that their error.

But, the aforesaid Statute of 32. Hen. VIII. changed the whole frame of this
Term: For it made it begin sooner by a Return, viz. Crastino Sanctae
Trinitatis, and thereby brought Octabis Trinitatis, which before was the first
Return, to be the second, and Quindena Trinitatis which before was the second,
now to be the third; and instead of the three other Returns of Crastino
Octabis, and Quindena Sancti Johannis, it appointed that which before was no
Return, but now the fourth and last, called Tres Trinitatis.

The altering and abbreviation of this Term is declared by the preamble of the
Statute, to have risen out of two causes, one for health, in dismissing the
Concourse of people in that contagious time of the year; the other for wealth,
that the Subject might attend his Harvest, and gathering in the fruits of the
earth. But there seems to be a third also not mentioned in the Statute, and
that is, the uncertain station, length and Returns of the first part of this
Term, which, like an Excentrick, was one year near to St. John Baptist, another
year far removed from it; and thereby making the Term not only various, but one
year longer, and another shorter, according as Trinity Sunday (being the Clavis
to it) fell nearer or farther off from St. John Baptist. For if it fell betimes
in the year, then was this Term very long, and the two first Returns of Octabis
and Quindena Trinitatis might be past and gone a fortnight and more, before
Crastino Sancti Johannis could come in: And if it fell late, (as this year
1614. it did) then would Crastino Sancti Johannis be come and past, before
Octabis Trinitatis were gone out. So that many times one or two of the first
Returns of this Term (for ought that I can see) must in those days needs be
lost.

This chapter is inserted in the ^^^tion of 16^4
CHAP. XVIII.
How Michaelmass-Term was abbreviated by Act of Parliament, 16. Car. I. Cap. 6.
THe last place our Statute-book affords upon this Subject of the limits and
extent of the Terms, is the Stat. 16. Car. I. Chap. 6. entitled, An Act
concerning the limitation and abbreviation of Michaelmass-Term. For whereas by
former Statutes it does appear, that Michaelmass-Term did begin in Octabis
Sanctae Michaelis, that Statute appoints, that the first Return in this Term
shall ever hereafter be a die Sancti Michaelis in tres septimanas, so cutting
off no less than two Returns from the ancient beginning of this Term, viz.
Octabis Sancti Michaelis, and a die Sancti Michaelis in quindecim dies, and
consequently making the beginning of it fall a fortnight later than before.
Wherefore the first day in this Term will always be the twenty third day of
October, unless it happen to be Sunday, for then it must be deferred till the
day following; upon which account we find it accordingly placed on the twenty
fourth for the year 1681. This is all the alteration that Statute mentions, and
therefore for the end of Michaelmass-Term, I refer the Reader to what our
Author has said already in the 15 th. Chapter. It may not be amiss in pursuit
of our Author's method to set down the motives of making this abbreviation as
we find them reckoned up in the Preamble to that Statute. There we find, that
the old beginning of Michaelmass-term, was generally found to be very
inconvenient to his Majesty's subjects both Nobles and others. First, For the
keeping of Quarter Sessions next after the feast of St. Michael the Archangel;
Secondly, For keeping their Leets, Law-days and Court-Barons: Thirdly, For the
sowing of land with Winter-corn, the same being the chief time of all the year
for doing it; Fourthly, For the disposing, and setting in order of all their
Winter husbandry and business; Fifthly, For the receiving and paying of Rents;
Sixthly, Because in many parts of this Kingdom, especially the most Northern,
Harvest is seldom or never Inned till three weeks after the said Feast. All
which affairs they could before by no means attend, in regard of the necessity
of their coming to the said Term, so speedily after the feast of St. Michael
the Archangel, to appear upon Juries, and to follow their Causes and Suits in
the Law.

SECT. V.
Other Considerations concerning Term-time.
HAving thus laid out the frame of the Terms, both according to the Ancient and
Modern Constitutions, it remains that we speak something of other points
properly incident to this part of our division touching Term-time, viz.

1. Why the Courts sit not in the Afternoons.

2. Why not upon some whole days, as on Grand-days, double Feasts, and other
exempted days, and the reason of them.

3. Why some Law business may be done on days exempted.

4. Why the end of Michaelmass-Term is sometimes holden in Advent, and of
Hilary-Term in Septuagesima, Sexagesima, and Quinquagesima.

5. Why the Assizes are holden in Lent, and at times generally prohibited by
the Church.

6. Of Returns.

7. Of the Quarta dies post.

8. Why I have cited so much Canon, Civil, Feodal, and foreign Laws in this
discourse, with an excursion into the original of our Laws.

CHAP. I.
Why the High Courts sit not in the Afternoons.
IT is now to be considered, why the high Courts of Justice sit not in the
Afternoons. For it is said in Exodus, that Moses judged the Israelites Chap.
18. v. 14.
from Morning to Evening. And the Romans used the Afternoon as well as the
Forenoon, yea, many times the Afternoon and not the Forenoon, as upon the days
called Endotercismi or Intercisi, whereof the Forenoon was Nefastus or
Vacation, and the Afternoon Fastus or Law-day, as we showed in the beginning.
And the Civilians following that Law do so continue them amongst us in their
Term at this day. But our Ancestors and other the Northern Nations being more
prone to distemper and excess of diet (as the Canon Law notes of them) used
the Forenoon only, lest repletion should bring upon them drowsiness and
oppression of spirit; according to that of St. Jerome, Pinguis Venture non
gignit mentem tenuem. To confess the truth, our Saxons (as appears by Hist.
Lib. 6.
Huntington) were immeasurably given to drunkenness. And it is said in Cap. 10.
Ecclesiastes, Vae Terrae cujus Principes mane comedunt. Therefore to avoid the
inconvenience depending hereon, the Council of Nice ordained, that Judices non
nisi jejuni leges and judicia decernant. And in the Council of Salegunstad it
was after decreed, Vt lectio Nicaeni Concilii recitetur, which being done in
the words aforesaid, the same was likewise there confirmed. According to this,
in the Laws of Carolus Magnus the Emperor it is ordained, ( Tit. 52. cap. 4.
Logobard lib. 2.) Vt Judices jejuni causas audiant and discernant: and again in
the Lib. 3. Can. 38.
Capitulars Caroli and Lodovici, ne placitum Archaeol. verb. Comes cap. 1.. 15.
and alia Capit. Caroli. 4.
Comes habeat nisi jejunus. Where the word Comes, according to the phrase of
that time, is used for Judex, as elsewhere we have at large declared. To the
same effect is the Capitular ad Legem Salicam: and out of these and such other
Constitutions arises the rule of the Canon Law, that Quae a prandio fiunt
Consultationes, inter decreta non referuntur. Yet I find that Causes might be
heard and judged in the Afternoon; for in Capitulars lib. 2. Can. 33. and again
lib. 4. Can. 16. it is said, Causae viduarum, pupillorum and pauperum audiantur
and definiantur ante Meridiem, Regis vero and Potentium post Meridiem. Which
though it seem contradictory to the Constitutions aforesaid, yet I conceive them
to be thus reconcilable: that the Judges (sitting then but seldom) continued
their Courts both Forenoon and Afternoon, from Morning till Evening without
dinner or intermission, as at this day they may, and often do, upon great
Causes: though being risen and dining, they might not meet again; yet might they
not sit by night, or use candle light, De Offic. dele. Consuluit.
Quod de nocte non est honestum judicium exercere. And from these ancient Rites
of the Church and Empire is our Law derived, which prohibiteth our (...)
Jurours, being Judices de facto, to have meat, drink, fire or candlelight,
till they be agreed of their verdict.

It may be here demanded how it comes to pass, that our Judges after dinner do
take Assizes and Nisi prius in the Guild Hall of London, and in their Circuits?
I have yet no other answer but that ancient Institutions are discontinued often
by some custom grating in upon them, and changed often by some later
Constitution, of which kind the instances aforesaid seem to be. For Assizes
were ordained many ages after by Henry II. as appears by the Charter of Pat.
5. R. 2. part 2. m. 12.
Beverly, Glanvil and Radulphus Niger; and Nisi prius by 13. Edw. I. ca. 30.
Edward I. in the Statutes of Westminster 2. though I see not but in taking of
them the ancient course might have been continued, if haste would suffer it.

CHAP. II.
Why they sit not at all some days.
THough there be many days in the Terms, which by ancient Constitutions before
recited are exempted from Law-business, as those of the Apostles, etc. and that
the An. 5. and 6. Edv. 6. cap. 3.
Statute of Edw. VI. appointed many of them to be kept holy days, as dedicated,
not unto Saints, but unto divine worship, which we also at this day retain as
holy days: Yet do not the high Courts forbear sitting in any of them, saving on
the feast of the Purification, the Ascension, St. John Baptist, All Saints, and
the day after, (though not a feast) called All Souls. When the others lost their
privilege and came to be Term-days, I cannot find; it suffices that Custom
has repealed them by confession of the Tabien. v. Feriae. 10.
Canonists. Yet it seems to me, there is matter for it in the Constitutions of
our Church, under Islepe Archbishop of Canterbury, in the time of Edward III.
For though many ancient Laws and the Decretals of Tit. de Feriis, ca. Conquestus.
Gregory IX. had ordained Judicialem strepitum diebus conquiescere feriatis;
yet in a Synod then holden, wherein all the holy days are appointed and
particularly recited, no restraint of Judicature or Forensis strepitus is
imposed, but a cessation only ab universis servilibus operibus, etiam
Reipublicae utilibus. Which though it be in the phrase that God himself uses
touching many great Feasts, viz. Lev. 23. 21, 25.
Omne servile opus non facietis in iis, yet it is not in that wherein he
instituteth the seventh day to be the Sabbath, Exodus 20. 10. I^^m, Lev. 23. 3.
Non facies omne opus in eo, without servile, Thou shall do no manner of work
therein. Now the Act of Judicature, and of hearing and determining
Controversies is not opus servile, but honoratum and plane Regium, and so not
within the prohibition of this our Canon, which being the latter seems to
qualify all the former. Yea the Canonists and Casuists themselves not only
expound opus servile of corporal and mechanic labor, but admit twenty six
several cases, where (even in that very kind) dispensation lies against the
Canons, and by much more reason then, with this in question. It may be said
that this Canon consequently gives liberty to hold plea and Courts, upon other
Festivals in the Vacations. I confess that so it seems; but this Canon has
no power to alter the bounds and course of the Terms, which before were settled
by the Statutes of the Land, so that in that point it wrought nothing.

Why they sit on Rogation-days.
But here arises another question, how it chances that the Courts sit in
Easter-Term upon the Rogation-days, it being expressly forbidden by the Council
of Medard, and by the intention of diverse other Constitutions? It seems that
it never was so used in England, or at least not for many ages, especially
since Gregory IX. insomuch that among the days wherein he prohibiteth Forensem
strepitum, clamourous pleading, etc. he names them not. And though he did, yet
the Glossographers say, that a Nation may by Custom erect a Feast that is not
commanded by the Canons of the Church. Tabien. Feriae. 10.
Et eodem modo posset ex consuetudine introduci, quod aliqua quae sunt de
praecepto non essent de praecepto, sicut de tribus diebus Rogationum, etc. To
be short, I find no such privilege for them in our Courts, as that they should
be exempt from suits; though we admit them other Church rites and ceremonies.

Why on some festivals, and not on others.
We must now (if we can) show why the Courts, sitting upon so many Ferial and
holy days, do forbear to sit upon some others, which before I mentioned; the
Purification, Ascension, St. John Baptist, All Saints, etc. For in the Synod
under Islepe before mentioned, no prerogative is given to them above the rest,
that fall in the Terms; as namely, St. Mark and St. Philip and Jacob, when they
do fall in Easter-Term, St. Peter in Trinity-Term, Before the abbreviation, 16
Car. 1.
St. Luke and SS. Simon and Jude in Michaelmass-Term. It may be said, that,
although the Synod did only prohibit Opera servilia to be done on
Festival-days, as the offense most in use at that time; yet did it not give
license to do any Act that was formerly prohibited by any Law or Canon. And
therefore if by color thereof, or any former use (which is like enough) the
Courts did sit on lesser Festivals, yet they never did it on the greater, among
which as majoris cautelae gratia, those Opera servilia are there also
prohibited to be done on Easter Day, Pentecost, and the Sunday it self.

The difference of Festivals.
Let us then see which are the greater Feasts, and by what merit they obtain
the privilege, that the Courts of Justice sit not on them. As for Sunday, we
shall not need to speak of it, being canonized by God himself. As for Easter
and Whitsunday, they fall not in the Terms: yet I find a Parliament held, or at
least begun on Whitsunday. But touching Feasts in general, it is to be
understood, that the Canonists, and such as write Durandi lib. 7. c. 1. n. 31.
De Divinis Officiis, divide them into three sorts, viz. Festa in totum
duplicia, simpliciter duplicia, and semiduplicia. And they call them duplicia,
or double Feasts, for that all, or some parts of the service, on those days
were begun Voce Duplici, that is, by two singing-men; whereas on other days all
was done by one. Our Cathedral Churches do yet observe it: I mean not to stay
upon it: look the Durandi lib. 7. ca. 1.
Rationale; which Feasts were of every of these kinds. The ordinary Apostles
were of the last, and therefore our Courts made bold with them: But the
Purification, Ascension, St. John Baptist, with some others that fall not in
the Term, were of the first, and because of this and some other prerogatives
were also called Festa Majora, Festa Principalia, and dies novem Lectionum,
ordinarily, double Feasts, and Grand days. Mention is made of them in an Rast.
Excom. 5.
Ordinance 8. Edw. III. That Writs were ordained to the Bishops, to accurse all
and every of the perturbers of the Church, etc. every Sunday and double Feast,
etc. But we must needs show why they were called Dies novem Lectionum; for so
our old Pica de Sarum styleth them, and therein lies their greatest
privilege. After the Arian Heresy against the Trinity, was by the Fathers of
that time most powerfully confuted and suppressed, the Church in memory of that
most blessed victory, and for better establishing of the Orthodox Faith in that
point, did ordain, that upon diverse Festival-days in the year, a particular
Lesson touching the nature of the Trinity, besides the other eight, should be
read in their service, with rejoicing and thanksgiving to God for suppressing
that horrible Heresy: And for the greater solemnity, some Belethus Explicat.
ca. 158.
Bishop, or the chiefest Clergyman present, did perform that duty. Thus came
these days to their styles aforesaid, and to be honored with extraordinary
Music, Church Service, Robes, Apparel, Feasting, etc. with a particular
exemption from Law-Tryals amongst the Normans, who therefore kept them the more
respectively here in England: Festa enim Trinitatis (says Belethus) digniori
cultu sunt celebrandi.

(...)
In France they have two sorts of Grand days, both differing from ours: First,
they call them, Les Grand jours, wherein an extraordinary Sessions is holden in
any Circuit, by virtue of the King's Commission directed to certain Judges of
Parliament. Secondly, those in which the Peers of France hold once or twice a
year their Courts of Haught Justice; all other Courts being in the mean time
silent. See touching these, Loyseau De Seigneures.

(...)
To come back to England, and our own Grand days, I see some difference in
accounting of them: Durandus in the first Chapter of his seventh Book,
reckons the Purification, Ascension and St. John Baptist to be Grand days,
not mentioning All Saints; but both he in his 34th. Chapter, and Belethus in
his -- do call it Festum Maximum and Generale, being not only the Feast of
Apostles and Martyrs, but of the Trinity, Angels and Confessors, as Durandus
terms it. And that honor therefore and duty quod in singulis valet,
potentius valebit in conjunctis. As for the Feast of All Souls, neither
Durandus nor Belethus, nor any ancient of those times (for they lived almost
400. years since) do record it for a Festival. But our Countryman Walsingham
the Monk of St. Albans says, that Simon Archbishop of Canterbury in the year
1328. at a Provincial Council holden at London, did ordain, Quod die Parasceue
and in commemoratione Omnium Animarum ab omni servili opere cessaretur. Surely
he mistook it; for neither is it so mentioned in Lindewood, reciting that
Canon, nor in the ancient Copy of the Council it self, where the two Feasts
canonized by him are the Paresceue and the Conception of the Blessed Virgin.
Yet doubtless, whenever it was instituted it was a great Feast with us, though
no where else. For the old Breviarium Eboracensis Ecclesiae, does not only set
it down in the Calendar for a double Feast, but appoints after, the whole
service, with the nine Lessons for it, as a Feast of the Trinity. And though
neither the Statute of Edward VI. nor our Church at this day do receive it; yet
being formerly a Vacation day (as it seems) our Judges still forbear to sit
upon it, as not hitherto made a day in Courts, though deprived of Festival rites,
and therefore neither graced with Robes nor Feasting.

The Feast of St. Peter and St. (...)
The Feast also of St. Peter and Paul on the 29 th. of June was a double feast,
yet it is now become single, and our Judges sit upon it. I confess I have not
found the reason, unless that by Decanonizing St. Paul and so leaving St. Peter
single, we allow him no prerogative above the other Apostles, lest it should
give color for his Primacy; for to St. Paul, as one born out of time, we allow
no Festival, either in the Statute of Edward VI. or in the Almanacks and
Kalendars of our Church. And why St. Peter has it not is the more observable,
for that he not only is deprived of the ancient rights of his Apostleship,
contrary to the Canons (as the other are;) but also of the privilege given him
in that place by Pope Nicholas the 2 d. in a Bull to Edward the Confessor; and
being Patron of the Paroche and Dedication of Westminster, where the Terms are
kept, and where by the right of his day he was also privileged from Court
business.

Other Festivals I enquire not after, as of St. Dunstan and the rest that stand
rubricate in old Kalendars; they being either abrogated by old Canons of our
own Church, or the Statute of Edward VI. whereof I must note by the way that I
find it repealed by Queen Mary, but not revived by Queen Elizabeth or since It
seems that the S^atute of 5. and 6. of Edw. VI. Cap. 3. notwithstanding the
Reveal of it amongst a multitude of others by Queen Mary, Anno 1. Sessione 2.
Cap. 2. is revived again, though not by Queen Elizabeth, yet by 1. Jacobi Cap 25.
In these words; That an Act made in the first year of the Reign of Queen Mary,
entitled, an Act for the repeal of certain Statutes made in the time of King
Edw. VI. shall stand repealed. See Poulton too.
.

St. George's day.
I am carried from the brevity I intended, yet all this lies in my way; nor is
it out of it to speak a word of St. George's-day, which sometimes falls in
Easter-Term, and is kept in the Court Royal with great solemnity, but not in
the Courts Judicial. Though he stood before in the Calendar, and was the English
Patron of elder time, yet H. Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury gave him his
greatness, by Canonizing his day to be as a double Feast and Grand day, as well
among the Clergy as Laity; and that both the one and other repairing to their
Churches should celebrate it (as Christmass-day) free from servile-work, in
ardent prayers for safety of the King and Kingdom. The occasion of this
Constitution was, to excite King Henry the V. being upon his Expedition for
Normandy; and though this, among other holydays, was abolished by the Statute 5.
and 6. of Edw. VI. yet it being the Festival of the Knights of the Garter, it
was provided in the Statute, That the Knights might celebrate it on the 22 d.
23 d. and 24 th. of April. Other Feasts there were of this nature; as that of
St. Wenefred on the second of November, which is in effect no day of sitting,
but applied to the pricking of Sheriffs.

These are vanished, and in their room we have one new memorably day of
intermitting Court and Law business for a little in the morning, whilst the
Judges in their Robes go solemnly to the great Church at Westminster on the
fifth of November yearly, to give God thanks for our great delivery from the
Powder Treason, and hear a Sermon touching it; which done, they return to their
Benches. The Institution hereof is by Act of Parliament Jacobi, and it is of
the kind of those Ferial days, which being ordained by the Emperors, not by
the Popes, are in Canon and Civil Law called Dies Feriati repentini. I will go
no farther among the tedious subtilties of distinguishing of days; I have not
been matriculated in the Court of Rome: And I confess I neither do nor can
explain many objections and contrarieties that may be gathered in these
passages. Some Oedipus or Ariadne must help me out.

CHAP. III.
Why some Law business may be done on days exempted.
IN the mean time let us see, why some Law business may be done on days
exempted, and sometimes on Sunday it self, notwithstanding any thing before
mentioned.

For as in Term-time some days are exempted from Term business, and some
portion of the day from sitting in Courts; so in the Vacation-time and days
exempted, some Law business may be performed by express permission of the Canon
Law, according to that of the Virgil. Georg. lib. 1.
Poet in the Georgicks, Quippe etiam Festis quaedam exercere diebus
Fas and jura sinunt --
The Synod of Medard admits matters de pace and concordia, to be dispatched
both on holy days and on Sunday it self: the Laws of Hen. I. matters of Concord
and doing Fealty to the Lord: the decree of Gregory IX. cases of necessity and
doing piety, according to that of Lib. Ep.
Prosper, Non recto servat legalia Sabbata cultu,
Qui pietatis opus credit in his vetitum.


The rule is verified by our Savior's healing on the Sabbath. Out of these and
such other authorities of the Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, cited in the
Glosses, the Canonists have collected these Cases, wherein Judges may proceed
legally upon the days prohibited, or do the things herein following.

For matters of Conc. Medard. Can. 22. q. 5. ca. 17.
Peace and Concord, by reason whereof our Judges take the acknowledgement of
Fines, Statutes, Recognizances, etc. upon any day, even the Sabbath Day, (though
it were better then forborne, if necessity require it not.)

For suppressing of Traitors, Thieves, and notoriours Offenders, which may
otherwise trouble the peace of the Commonwealth, and endanger the Kingdom.

For manumission of Bondmen: a work of Piety.

For saving that which otherwise would perish: a work of Necessity.

For doing that, which time overslipt, cannot be done: As for making Appeals
within the time limited, etc.

For taking the benefit of a Witness that otherwise would be lost, as by Death,
or Departure.

For making the son sui Juris: as if, amongst us, the Lord should discharge his
Ward of Wardship. All which are expressed in these Verses; Haec faciunt causas
Festis tractare diebus,
Pax, Scelus admissum, Manumissio, Res peritura,
Terminus expirans, mora testis abesse volentis,
Cumque potestatis Patriae jus filius exit.


Or thus according to Panormitanus; Ratione Appellationis, Pacis, Necessitatis,
Celeritatis, Pietatis, Matrimonii, Latrocinii, and ubicunque in mora promptum
est periculum. So likewise by consent of parties upon Dies Feriati minus
solennes, viz. Harvest, Hay-seed, etc. as we have said before. And diverse
others there are, whereof see the Can. 15. q. 4.
Glosses in Gratian, and in the Chapter Conquestus; but especially the Title
Can. 5. lib. 2. Tit. 12.
De Feriis and Dilationibus in ff. from whence most of the premises are
deduced* and where also, by a Constitution of Trajan, Military business may be
done in diebus feriis, and at all times. Ibid. L. Div. Trajanus.
Rescripsit (says the Law) ferias tantum a forensibus negotiis dare
vacationem; ea tamen quae ad disciplinam militarem pertinerent, esse feriatis
diebus peragenda. Upon these reasons, the Admiral-Court is always open; for
that strangers and Merchants and sea*faring-men, must take the opportunity of
Tides and of Winds, and other necessities; and cannot without ruin or great
prejudice attend the solemnity of Courts and dilatory Pleadings.

The Marshal's Court also for Military matters, falls within the privilege
granted by Trajan: yet has it observed, as near as conveniently it may, the
Canons of the Church; as forbearing to assign battle in Quadragesima and
temporibus prohibitis. And so lately in the case between the Lo. Raye and Mr.
Ramesey.

So likewise the Chancery, being a Court of piety, is said to be always open:
but I take this to be understood as it is Officina brevium and Consistorium
aequi and boni; not where it is Praetorium Juris communis, and proceeds in
course of the Common Law.

As for the Star Chamber, it is in lieu of that which was in ancient time the
Counsel-chamber, and Specula Regni, the watchtower of the Kingdom: where the
Barons and other of the King's Counsel used to meet ad prospiciendam
fovendamque Remp. to discover, prevent, and suppress all dangers and enormities
occurrent, and to provide for the safety and good of the Kingdom. It was
necessary therefore that this Session should not only be daily open, but (as is
said of the house of Fame) Metam. Lib. 12.
Nocte dieque patens; for an evil may happen in the night that would be too
late to prevent in the morning. And therefore the Statute of H. 7. ca. 1. 21.
H. 8. ca. 20.
3. Henr. VII. and 21. Henr. VIII. enlarging the jurisdiction hereof, do not
circumscribe it either with Term-time or days of sitting.

CHAP. IV.
Why the end of Michaelmass-Term is sometimes holden in Advent; and of Hilary,
in Septuagesima, etc.
BUt the Terms sometimes extend themselves into the days of the Church which we
call Vacation; as when Advent Sunday chances on the 27 th. of November, then
Michaelmass-Term borrows the day after out of Advent; and when Septuagesima
follows suddenly upon the Purification, Hilary-Term not only usurpeth upon it
and Sexagesima, (which by the precedent of the Church of Rome here before
mentioned it may do,) but also upon Quinquagesima, Ash Wednesday, and
Quadragesima it self; for all which there is matter enough in one place or Aimo
1027. and 1190. Hoveden p. 663.
other already shown. Yet it is farther countenanced by the Statute of 3. Edw.
I. cap. 48. where it is thus provided; Forasmuch as it is great charity to do
right unto all men at all times (when need shall be;) by assent of all the
Prelates it was provided, that Assizes of Novel Disseisin, Mordauncester, and
Darrain Presentment, should be taken in Advent, Septuagesima and Lent, even as
well as Inquests may be taken, and that at the special request of the King made
unto the Bishops. Where it is to be noted, that Inquisitions might be taken
before this Statute within the days prohibited, or Church time, and that this
License extended but to the particularities therein mentioned.

CHAP. V.
Why Assizes be holden in Lent.
IT seems that by virtue of this Statute, or some other particular
dispensation from the Bishops, Assizes began first to be holden in Lent,
contrary to the Canons. I find in an ancient Manuscript of the Monastery Fol.
56. b.
of St. Albans a dispensation of this kind, thus entitled;

Licentia concess. Justic. Reg. de Assis. tenend. sacro tempore non obstante.
Pateat universis per praesentes nos Ricardum (miseratione divina) Abbatem
Monasterii Sancti Albani, licentiam and potestatem authoritate praesentium
dedisse dilecto nobis in Christo Domino Johanni Shardlow and sociis suis
Justic. Dom. Regis, Assisas apud Barnet (nostrae jurisdictionis exemptae) die
Lunae proximo ante Festum S. Ambrosii capiendi juxta formam, vim, and effectum
brevis Domini Regis inde iis directi. In cujus, etc. Anno Domini, etc.

Sub magno Sigillo.


Whether this was before or after the Statute, it appears not; it may seem
before; for that otherwise it needed not. But I find In Commiss. ejus.
Shardlow to be Justice of Oier in Pickering Forest, 17. Aug. An. 8. Edw. I. If
it were after, it seems the Writ to the Justices extended to somewhat out of
the Statute, and that this License was obtained in majorem cautelam. But to
conclude; hereby it appears that although we find not the reasons of things
done in ancient ages, yet nothing was done against the Rules of the Church
without special License and dispensation See in the Appendix, at the end of
this discourse, the Grants and Licenses of this kind made by the Archbishops,
and the Bishop ^f Norwich.
. The Feast of St. Ambrose mentioned in the License was on the fourth of April,
which commonly is about a week or two before Easter. And the Abbat of St.
Alban, having exempt jurisdiction within the Province of Canterbury, grants
this dispensation to hold Assizes in tempore sacro, as the Rubric explaineth
it, lest the words [nostrae jurisdictionis exemptae] might be applied to some
layick Franchise: I assure my self there are many of this kind, if they might
come to light. And as they granted License in times prohibited, so they
censured such as offended without License; as appears by the case of See my
Codex Ll. Antiq. An. 1184. b.
Sir Gilbert Plumpton An. 1184. who being to be hanged at Worcester upon the
Sunday for a Rape committed by him, the Bishop prohibited execution for that
day upon pain of Excommunication, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Returns.
OF the Returns I will not venture to speak much, but nothing at all of Essoine
and Exception-days, for that draws nearer to the faculty of Lawyers, wherein
I mean not to be too busy. The Returns are set days in every Term appointed to
the Sheriff, for certifying the Courts what he has done, in execution of the
Writs he received from them. And I take it, that in old time they were the
ordinary days set to the Defendants for Appearance, every one of them being a
sennight after another, to the end that the Defendant according to his distance
from the place where he was to appear, might have one, two, three, or more of
these Returns, that is, so many weeks for his Appearance, as he was Counties
off in distance from the Court where he was to appear. This is verified by the
Law of Leges Ethelredi Cap. 93.
Ethelred the Saxon King, in case of vouching upon Trover.

Gif he cenne ofer an scira. haebbe an ucena fyrrst; gif he cenne ofer ta
scira. haebbe ta ucena first; gif he cenne ofer iii. scira. haebbe iii. ucena
first; Ofer eal sa fela scira. sa he cenne. haebbe sa feala ucena fyrrt; i. e.

If the Vouchee dwell one Shire off, let him at first have one week; if two
Shires off, let him have two weeks; if three Shires off, let him have three
weeks; and for so many Shires as he dwells off, let him have so many weeks.

The Law of Cap. 41.
Henry the First is somewhat more particular; Qui residens est ad domum suam,
summoniri debet de placito quolibet cum testibus. Et si d^mi [non] est, idem
dicatur vel dapifero, vel denique familiae suae libere denuncietur (...) in
eodem Comitatu sit, inde ad septem dies terminum habeat; si in alia Schira ^it,
15. dierum terminum habeat; and si in tertio Comitatu sit, 3. Hebdomadae; (...)
quarto, quartae Hebdomadae; and ultra non procedit ubicunque fuerit in Anglia,
(...) competens eum detineat So^^ius.
soinius; s^ultra mare est 6. Hebdomadas habeat and unum diem ad accessum and
recessum maris, nisi vel occupatio servitii Regis, vel ipsius aegritudo, vel
tempestas, vel competens aliquod amplius respectet.

The Statute of 52. Henr. III. cap. 13.
Marlebridge cap. 12. sounds to this purpose; In Assisis autem ultimae
praesentationis and in placito Quare impedit de Ecclesiis vacantibus dentur
dies de Quindena in Quindenam, vel de tribus septimanis in tres septimanas,
prout locus fuerit propinquus vel remotus. And again, Cap. 26. Sed si vocatus,
etc. (ad warrantum coram Justiciar. itinerantibus) fuerit infra Comitatum, tunc
injungatur Vicecomiti, quod ipsum infra tertium diem vel quartum (secundum
locorum distantiam) faciat venire sicut in itinere Justiciar. fieri consuevit.
Et si extra Comitatum maneat, tunc rationabilem habeat Summonitionem 15. dierum
ad minus secundum discretionem Justiciar. and Legem Communem.

There was also another use of Returns, as appears by the Reformed Custumary
of Normandy, Artic. the 10 th. Some of them belonged to Pleas of Goods and
Chattels, which we call personal Actions, as those of Octab. Some to Pleas of
Land, and real Actions, as those of Quindena. Pleas of Goods and Chattels were
holden from Octabis to Octabis; Pleas of land not sooner than from Quindena to
Quindena. Null n'est tenu de respondere de son heretage en moindre tems que de
quinzaine in quinzaine. The more solemn Actions had the more solemn Returns, as
we see by the 51. Henr. III.
Stat. of dies communes in Banco, which I leave to my Masters of the Law.

I will not speak of the Returns particularly, more than that Octab. is
sometimes reckoned by seven days, sometimes by eight; by seven days, excluding
the Feast from which it is counted; by eight, including it. And the word is
borrowed from the Constitutions of the Church, where the seven days following
Easter were appointed to be Ferial-days (as we have showed before) in imitation
of the seven days Azymorum, following the Passover in Lev. 23. v. 6.
the Levitical Law. But in this manner Octab. Trinitatis always includes nine
days, reckoning Trinity-Sunday for one, by reason the just Octabis falls on
the Sunday following; which being no day in Court, puts off the Return till
the next day after, making Monday always taken for the Octab. unless you will
count these two days for no more than one, as the Statute de Anno Bissextili in
the like case has ordained, the superfluous day in the Leap-year (called
Intercalaris) and the day going next before, to be accounted but one day. It is
here to be noted, that although the Sundays and Grand-days be no days in Court,
yet they are numbered among the days of Return, according to the Civil Law,
Cod. de dilation. l. sive pars fol. 133.
Feriae autem, sive repentinae sive solennes sint, dilationum temporibus non
excipiantur, sed his quoque connumerentur.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Quarta dies post.
TOuching the Quarta dies post allowed to the Defendant for his Appearance
after the day of Return, it is derived from the ancient Saxon, Salique, French
and German Laws, where it was ordained, that the Plaintiff should per triduum
seu amplius adversarium expectare, usque ad occasum solis (which they called
Sol Satire,) as appears abundantly in their Laws, and in the Formular of
Marculfus, and Bignonius's notes upon the same. To Page 531.
which also may be added that which occurreth in Gratian Cap. Biduum vel Can. 2.
q. 6.
triduum. But the original proceeds from the ancient custom of the Germans
mentioned by Tacitus; Germanor. 480.
Illud ex liberate vitium quod non simul nec jussi convenient, sed and alter
and tertius dies cunctatione coeuntium absumitur. He says, ex liberate,
because that to come at a peremptory time was a note of Servitude, which the
Germans despised. It is very observable, that King Edw. III. calling a Great
Council in the fifteenth year of his Reign, wherein were assembled diverse
Bishops and twenty two Earls and Abbots; he appoints them by his Writ of
Summons to meet at London, die Mercurii proxime post festum translationis S.
Thomae Martyris proximo futura -- vel saltem infra tres dies ex tunc immediate
sequentes ad ultimam. The Writ carries the form, phrase, and style of a
Parliament-Writ; but in this point of triduum post differs from all others
that I have seen. Hear the Writ it self:

Rex Ven. in Christo R. eadem gratia Bathon. and Wellens. Episcopo salutem.
Quia super quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos and statum regni nostri
Angliae contigerit vobiscum and cum aliis Praelat. ac Magnatibus dicti regni
die Mercurii proximo post festum Translationis Sancti Thomae Martyris proxime
futuri apud London colloquium habere and tractatum: Vobis in fide and
dilectione, quibus nobis tenemini, mandamus firmiter injungentes quod
quibuscunque actionibus cessantibus, dictis die and loco, vel saltem infra tres
dies ex tunc immediate sequent. ad ultimam personaliter intersitis nobiscum,
and cum dictis Prelatis and Magnatibus super negotiis praedictis tractaturi,
vestrumque Consilium impensuri. Et hoc, sicut nos and honorem nostrum ac jurium
and dicti regni nostri commodum diligitis, nullo modo omittatis. Test Rege
apud Turrim London. XII. die Junii.

Per ipsum Regem.

Vide plus de Returnis, Ll. H. II. cap. 59.

CHAP. VIII.
Why I have used so much Canon and Foreign Law in this discourse, with an
excursion into the Original of our Law.
I Have used much Canon and some other Foreign Law in this discourse, yet, I
take it, not impertinently; for as these Western Nations are, for the most
part, deduced from the Germans, so in ancient times there was a great (...) and
affinity in their Laws: -- Facies non omnibus una,
Nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse sororum.


They that look into the Laws of our English Saxons, of the Saliques, French,
Almayns, Ripuarians, Bavarians, Longobards, and other German Nations, about
800. years since, shall easily find it. Out of them, and other Manners, Rites
and Customs of the Saxons and Germans is the first part and foundation of our
Laws, commonly called the Laws of Edward the Confessor, and Common Law. Two
other principal parts (as from two Pole-Stars) take their direction from the
Canon Law and the Law of our brethren the Longobards (descending of Saxon
lineage as well as we) called otherwise the Feodal-law, received generally
through all Europe. For in matters concerning the Church and Churchmen,
Advousons, Patronage, Presentations, Legitimation, Matrimony, Wills,
Testaments, Adultery, Defamation, Oaths, Perjury, Days of Law, Days of
Vacation, wager of Law, and many other things, it proceeded, sometimes wholly,
sometimes for the greater part, by the rules and precepts of the Canon Law. And
in matters touching Inheritance, Fees, Tenures by Knights-service, Rents,
Services, Wards, Marriage of Wards, Reliefs, Treason, Pleas of the Crown,
Escheats, dower of the third part, aids, fines, Felony, Forfeiture, Trial by
battle, Essoine, Warrantie, etc. from the Feodal Law chiefly; as those that
read the books of those Laws collected by Obertus and Gerardus may see
apparently. Though we and diverse other Nations (according as befitteth every one
in their particular respects) do in many things vary from them, which Obertus
confesses to be requisite, and to happen often among the Longobards
themselves. I do marvel many times, that my Lord Cook, adorning our Law with
so many flowers of Antiquity and foreign Learning; has not (as I suppose)
turned aside into this field, from whence so many roots of our Law, have of old
been taken and transplanted. I wish some worthy Lawyer would read them
diligently, and show the several heads from whence these of ours are taken.
They beyond the Seas are not only diligent but very curious in this kind; but
we are all for profit and Lucrando pane, taking what we find at Market, without
enquiring whence it came.

Another great portion of our Common Law is derived from the Civil Law, (unless
we will say that the Civil Law is derived from ours.) Dr. Cowel, who has
learnedly traveled in comparing and parallelling of them, affirms, that no
Law of any Christian Nation whatsoever, approaches nearer to the Civil Law
than this of ours. (His meaning is no Municipal Law.) Yet he says that all of
them generali hujus disciplinae aequitate temperantur, and quasi condiuntur.
Had he not said it, his book it self, entitled Institutiones Juris Anglicani
ad methodum and seriem Institutionum Imperialium compositae and digestae, would
demonstrate it: which Bracton also above 300. years before right well
understanding, not only cites the Digests and Books of Civil Law in many
places for warrant of our Common Law, but in handling our Law pursues the
method, phrase, and matter of Justinian's Institutes of Civil Law.

When and how these several parts were brought into our Common Law, is neither
easily nor definitively to be expressed. Those no doubt of Canon Law, by the
prevalency of the Clergy in their several Ages: those of the Feodal by military
Princes, at, and shortly after the Conquest. And those of Civil Law, by such of
our Reverend Judges and Sages of ancient time, as for Justice and knowledge
sake sought instruction thence, when they found no rule at home to guide their
judgments by. For I suppose they in those days judged many things, ex aequo
and bono, and that their judgments after (as Responsa Prudentium among the
Romans, and the Codex Theodosianus) became precedents of Law unto posterity.

As for the parts given unto Common Law out of the Constitutions of our Kings
since the Conquest, and before Magna Charta; I refer them (as they properly
belong) to our Statute Law, though our Lawyers do reckon them ordinarily for
common Law.

Among these various heads of our Law, I deduce none from the Scots; yet must I
confess that if those Laws of theirs, which they ascribe to Malcolm the Second,
who lived about sixty years before the Conquest, be of that antiquity, (which I
cannot but question) and that our book called Glanvil be wholly in effect and
verbatim for the greatest part taken out of the book of their Law, called
Regiam Majestatem, for they pretend that to be elder than our Glanvil; I must
(I say) ingenuously confess, that the greatest part or portion of our Law is
come from Scotland, which none I think versed either in story or antiquities
will or can admit.

To come therefore to the point; if my opinion be any thing* I think the
foundation of our Law to be laid by our German Ancestors, but built upon and
polished by materials taken from the Canon Law and Civil Law. And under the
capacious name of Germans, I not only intend our Saxons, but the ancient French
and Saliques; not excluding from that fraternity the Cimbrian Nations, i. e.
the Norwegians, Danes, and Normans. And let it not more mislike us to take our
Laws from the noble Germans, a prime and most potent people, than it did the
conquering Romans theirs from Greece, or the learned Grecians theirs from the
Hebrews.

Part of this paragraph seems to be crossed out in the original; but without it
the connection cannot be made good.
It is not credible that the Britains should be the Authors of them; or that
their Laws after so many transmutations of people and government, but
especially after the expulsion (in a manner) of their Nation, or at least of
their Nobility, Gentry and Freemen, the abolishing of their Language, and the
cessation of all commerce with them, and an hereditary hostility settled
between these Nations; that after all this (I say) they should remain or be
taken up by the conquering enemy, who scarcely suffered one Town in a County to
be called as they named it, or one British word almost, (that I yet have
learned) to creep into their Language. Admit that much of their servile and
base people remained behind them, pleased perhaps as well with their new Lords
as with their old; can we think that the Saxons should take either Laws or
Manners, or form of Government, from these base and servile people? I would not
blemish the least feather of the British honor; but I must follow the truth,
though it rubb upon the apple of their eye. What I have said, appears not only
by Bid, (Lib. 1. cap. 15.) but by their own Historians. Bid having spoken of
their most miserable extirpation throughout the whole Land, says, Itaque
nonnulli de miserandis reliquiis..... And the chiefest monument of British
Antiquity, (written in the British tongue, and brought about 500. years since
out of Britannia Armorica by Walter Archdeacon of Oxenford, and in those days
translated into Latin by Monumethensis) does report that in the days of
Cadualladur, the land was so afflicted with discord, sloth, pestilence and
famine, that Miserae (Britannorum) reliquiae patriam, factis agminibus,
diffugientes, transmarinas petebant regiones, cum ululatu magno sub velorum
funibus hoc modo cantantes; Dedisti nos tanquam oves escarum, in gentibus
dispersisti nos, etc. Ps. 43. 13. And Cadualladur himself there complains
fleeing into Armorica, whence he never returned, Incumbit [divinae] illius ergo
potestatis ultio, quae nos ex natali solo extirpat; quos nec olim Romani, nec
deinde Scotti, vel Picti, nec versutae proditiones exterminare quiverunt. And
the Author going on, shows, that the Land was so universally destitute of
British Inhabitants, that the Saxons (which were already seated here) informed
their Countrymen beyond Seas of these desolate Territories, inviting them to
come and possess them. Quod cum ipsis indicatum fuisset (says the Author)
nefandus populus ille, collecta innumerabili multitudine virorum and mulierum,
applicuit in partibus Northanhumbriae, and desolatas Provincias ab Albania (i.
e. Scotia) usque ad Cornubiam (Cornwall) inhabitavit. Non enim aderat habitator
qui prohiberet, praeter pauperculas Britonum reliquias quae superfuerant, quae
infra abdita nemorum in Gualiis commanebant. Ab illo tempore, potestas Britonum
in Insula cessavit, and Angli regnare coeperunt Here is this note in the margin
of the Original: that the Saxons, abjectio dominio Britonum, jam (...) Ca.
C^eperunt.
Their History of Cambria (written also in their own Welsh language, about 250.
years since, and translated into English by their Countryman and greatest
Antiquary Humf. Lhoyd) does acknowledge, that after Cadwallader's departure,
there remained none of his Nation, but certain poor Britains that lived by
roots in rocks and woods. And that the Saxons, Angles, and Juthes (that is to
say, Goths) being then called in by such of their Countrymen that were there
before, did come in great numbers; and dividing this Land into diverse
Territories and Kingdoms, did inhabit all the Cities, Towns, Castles, and
Villages, which the Britains had builded, rules, and inhabited, by the space of
1827. years. Let the Reader now judge, whether it be likely, that the
scrupulous Nation of the Saxons either did, or could by any probable means take
any Laws from the poor relics of the Britains.

In the original this paragraph seems to be crossed out; for what reason I know
not.
When the Romans conquered this Land, they neither removed the Inhabitants nor
brought any Foreigners upon them, other than (to govern and keep them in
obedience) some Legions of Soldiers and small Colonies. Yet that they made an
alteration of their Laws, we may see in the Scripture by the example of Judaea.
For though Pompey obtained the Kingdom there, rather by the confederacy with
Hyrcanus, than by right of Conquest, (and therefore suffered them to enjoy
their rites of Religion, with the liberties of most of their Cities;) yet it
being reduced into a Province (as this of ours was) their laws were so changed,
as by their own confession, John 18. 31. It was not lawful for them to put any
man to death. Therefore our Savior and the two Thieves were judged, and
suffered upon the cross after the Roman manner, not according to the laws of
the Jews, (for their law never inflicted the cross upon any offender) and the
punishment of blasphemy wherewith they charged Christ, was stoning; (In which
course, they once in a fury were about to put him to death, Joh. 10. 31.) and
the punishment of Theft a Quadruple Restitution, or bondage in default thereof.
As for the stoning of Stephen, it was not judicial but tumultuous, an act of
fury, and against Law: In which course they meant also to have murdered St.
Paul, had not Lysias prevented them, by sending him to his legal trial,
Caesar's judgment Seat. Wherein it is further to be observed, that even then,
offenses committed about the very judicial Law, and Religion it self, was also
under the cognizance of the Roman Judge. For even that self same cause, wherein
Paul stood accused before Festus (as Festus himself reports it) Acts 25. 19.
[was] Touching questions of their own Religion.

By this, we may conceive, how the Romans dealt with the Britains touching
their Laws; and the story of St. Alhan and St. Amphibalus somewhat shows it.
Where, according to the Roman manner, St. Alban was convened before the Roman
Judge by Soldiers not by civil Officers, and before his Execution whipped (as
Pilate used our Savior) and then delivered to the Soldiers to be beheaded.
Bed. Lib. 1. ca. 7.

Our Author has left us another account, How far the Britains and Saxons made
use of the Roman Laws; which we find in the printed Copy. It is also in the
Original MS. though crossed out, and that which we have printed put in its place.
But notwithstanding it appears that he designed this, as his last thoughts, for
the text; yet the other is of more moment than to be omitted. It is thus, By
this, we may conceive how the Romans dealt with the Britains touching their
Laws, and the story of St. Alban and Amphibalus somewhat shows it. But more
plainly Seneca speaking of Claudius the Emperor having conquered this Island:
-- Jussit and ipsum
Nova Romanae
Jura securis
Tremere Oceanum:
In Ocean Isle new Laws he set;
That from the Roman Axe were set.


And more plainly yet Herodianus (in Severo, p. 250.) speaking of Severus the
Emperor's going out of this Island: He left (says he) behind him, in the part
of the Island subject to the Romans, his youngest son Geta, to administer Law
and the Civil affairs thereof; and some of his ancient friends to be his
Counselors; taking his eldest son Antoninus for his wars against the
Barbarians. In averment of all this, it appears by Tacitus (Annal. Lib. 14.
p. 231.) and Dion Cassius ((...)) that the Romans here had in every Colony
their Curiam for justice, and their Cruces and Patibula for execution. In the
Colony of Camalodunum, says Tacitus, was heard sremitus in Curia and Suetonius
overcoming them, put them to patibula, ignes, cruces, Ibid. So that all
concurreth to the verifying of the old verse: Cernitis ignotos Latia sub Lege
Britannos.


But what Laws soever the Romans made in Britain, the Saxons doubtless swept
them all away with the Britains. There is this certain proof of it: Antoninus
made a Constitution, That all Nations under the Roman Empire should be called
Romans; and when the Northern people brake into th se lower parts of Europe,
and made their habitation there, the old Inhabitants (whom they expelled not
but lived mingled with) were still called Romans; as we see in the ancient Laws
of the Saliques, Burgundians, in Cass odorus and others; and their Laws
distinguished by the title of Lex Barbara and Lex Romana. But here in Britain,
after the Saxons had conquered, we never heard nor find, any mention of Lex
Romana, or of any Roman Inhabitant: Which shows that both it and the Laws of
the Britains were expelled and driven away together; or, that of the Romans
with the Romans, and that of the Britans with the Britans.


But what Laws soever the Romans used in Britain; the Saxons doubtless swept
them all away with the British Nation. Otherwise than that in composing Laws
for the government of their people, after they had received Christianity from
the Roman Clergy, they might perhaps (by their advice) take somewhat also from
the Roman Law. Which Beda seems to avouch, Lib. 2. ca. 5. speaking of the
acts of Ethelbert the first Christian Saxon King: Qui inter caetera bona quae
genti suae conferebat; etiam decreta illi judiciorum, juxta exempla Romanorum,
cum consilio sapientum constituit. What Beda meant by the words Juxta exempla
Romanorum, is not perspicuous. As, whether his meaning was, that he made
positive Decrees, as the Romans had done, for the government of his people? or,
that in making his Decrees, he took the sum and manner of them from the Romans?
This doubt we shall easily resolve, by that which follows in Bid himself:
Quae (decreta) conscripta Anglorum sermon, hactenus habentur and observantur
ab ea. In quibus primitus posuit, qualiter id emendare deberet, qui aliquid
rerum vel Ecclesiae, vel Episcopi, vel reliquorum ordinum furto auferret,
volens scil. tuitionem eis, quos and quorum doctrinam susceperat, praestare.
And to say truth, this that Bid here does mention touching the protection of
the Clergy, is the chiefest matter in them that he takes from the Romans, as
namely, from their Canons not from their Civil Law. For the secular part of
those his Decrees differ far from those of the Romans, as by the Saxon copy of
them (which I my self have to show) appears plainly. But to conclude this
point; whatsoever in them savoureth of the Roman law, be it Canon or Civil, it
doubtless was inserted by his Roman Clergy, being then a principal part of the
King's Council, (as the Clergy was afterward in all ages.) And of them chiefly,
I suppose that to be meant which Bid mentions, Cum consilio sapientum
constituit. We find among the Saxons, the example and the reason, why our
common Law was (...) an unwritten Law. They were originally a Grecian Colonie
coming out of Lacedaemon and the Territory of Sparta. Where Lycurgus being
sometime King and Author of their Law, among other of his Decrees he named
(...), ordained this for one, That their Laws should not be written, because he
would have every man to fix them in his memory: and for that purpose, made them
short and summary, after the manner of our maxims. This course, the Saxons,
and by their example the other German Nations held for many ages. The first of
the Northern Nations that altered it, were the Goths; who in the Era 504. i.
e. the year of Christ 466. under Euricus their King, set their Laws in writing:
Legum instituta scriptis habere caeperunt The Author's name is so obscurely
writ, that I cannot ^^ad it.
..... The Burgundians and Saliques a little before; but the Saxons themselves,
and the Angli, Werini and Frisii are not noted to have written Law, till the
time of Herald the Dane, about the year 994. So that our Saxons here in Britain
began to write some of their Laws before their brethren of Germany. For though
they reduced not the general manners and customs of their Country, whereby they
lived and were governed, into a written Volume, but left them still, as
Lycurgus his Rhetras, to common memory and tradition; yet many of their ancient
Kings after they had recieved Christianity, put their own Constitutions into
writing. So did the most ancient of them, Aethelbert King of Kent about the
year 680. if his Laws (whereof I have a MS. copy) were in his own days put in
writing. So did Inas King of the West Saxons.

What the Laws of the Britains were, remains at this day to be seen by a model
of them in an ancient Manuscript under the Title of The Laws of Hoel Dha, (that
is, Hoel the good;) nothing consonant to these of ours at this day, or those of
the Saxons in time past. But we find by the Red Book in the Exchequer, that the
Laws of Hen. I. did so concur in many things with them of the other Nations we
spoke of, that sometimes he not only cites the Salique Law, and the Ribuarian
or Belgique Law by name, but deduceth much of the Text verbatim from them. And
we find also a great multitude of words of Art, names of Offices, Officers and
Ministers in our Law, common in old time to the Germans, French, Saliques,
Longobards, and other Nations, as well as to our Saxons, Danes, and Normans;
but not one to my knowledge that rises from the British tongue, nor do we
retain any Law, Rite or Custom of the ancient Britains, which we received not
from the Saxons or Germans, as used also by them of old, before they came into
Britain.

For these few Greek words that are found in our Law, Chirographer and
Protonotary, (whereby some argue the antiquity of our Law to be from the
Druides, whom Caesar and Pliny report to have used the Greek tongue;) it is
doubtless, that they are come to us from the Civil Lawyers, and the one of them
being a Mongrel, half Greek and half Latin, could not descend from the Druides,
who had neither knowledge nor use of the Latin tongue.

They therefore that fetch our Laws from Brutus, Mulmutius, the Druides, or any
other Brutish or British Inhabitants here of old, affirming that in all the
times of these several Nations, (viz. Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes and
Normans) and of their Kings, this Realm was still ruled with the self same
customs that it is now (viz. in the time of King Henry VI.) governed withal;
do like them that make the Arcadians to be elder than the Moon, and the God
Terminus to be so fixed on the Capitoline-hill, as neither Mattocks nor Spades,
nor all the power of men nor of the other Gods, could remove him from the place
he stood in.

And thus I end.
APPENDIX.
Pat. 11. Hen. III. m. 13. REX universis Patentes literas inspecturis salutem.
Cum Venerabilis Pater S. Cant. Episcopus, auctoritate Domini Papae and fratrum
suorum, nobis gratiam de juramentis praestandis coram Justiciariis nostris de
Praecept. nostro Itiner. ab instanti Adventu Domini usque ad Vigiliam Sancti
Thomae Apostoli, and a principio Quadragesimae usque ad Dominicam qua cantatur
Isti sunt dies; duntaxat in rebus subscriptis; viz. in Assizis ultimae
praesentationis de morte Antecessor. novae diss. de magna Assiza, and de
Inquisitionibus quae de terra emergerint coram eisdem Justiciariis nostris vel
per judicium vel de consensu pertinent: Ita quod haec concessio hoc anno tantum
durabit usque ad diem Dominicam supradictam: Nos per literas nostras patentes
quas eidem Domino Archiepiscopo fieri fecimus, protestati sumus quod concessio
illa nobis ad praesens facta usque ad diem Dominicam supradictam, non trahetur
in consequentiam post eundem diem. Cum igitur supplicaverimus Ven. Patri IV.
Archiepiscopo Eboracensi de consimili gratia nobis concedenda de Juramentis
praestandis per totam Provinciam suam usque ad Terminum praedictum: Nos per has
literas nostras Patentes protestamur, quod dictus Archiepiscopus Ebor. per
totam Proviciam suam id de Juramentis praestandis (sicut praedictum est) nobis
duxerit concedendum, concessio ista ad praesens facta usque ad terminum
praedictum non trahetur in consequentiam post diem eundem. In cujus rei
testimonium eidem Domino Archiepiscopo Ebor. dedi has literas nostras Patentes
sigillo nostro signatas. Test meipso apud Westmonast. 11. Nov. Anno regni
nostri undecimo.

Claus. 11. H. III. m. 26. Rex dilectis and fidelibus suis Stephano de Segrave
and Roberto de Lexinton, and sociis suis Justic. Itinerantibus in Com. Warw.
Leic. Glouc. and Wigorn. Salutem. Sciatis quod Venerabilis Pater S. Cant.
Archiep. auctoritate Domini Papae, concessi quod juramenta praestentur coram
Justiciariis nostris Itinerant. ab instanti adventu little usque Vigiliam Sancti
Thomae Apostoli, and a principio Quadragesimae usque ad diem Dominicam qua
cantatur Isti sunt dies, viz. in Ass. ultimae praesentationis de morte
Antecessor. de magna Ass. and de Inquisitionibus quae emergerint de terris,
sicut before nobis constitit ex inspectione literarum Domini Cant. quas inde
vobis mittimus. Rogamus ut V. P. W. Ebor. Archiepiscopus quatenus concedens
juramenta in consimilibus causis praestari infra Provinciam suam usque ad
Praesat. Terminum, literas suas patentes consimiles literas Domini Cant. inde
habere faciat. Vt autem liberius and facilius hoc volet facere, misimus literas
nostras patentes, quales fieri fecimus Domino Cant. protestants quod post
terminum praefatum concessio praedicta ab eo nobis facta non poterit trahi in
observantiam. Vobis igitur mandamus, quod cum Archiepiscopus Ebor. hoc nobis
concesserit, and literas suas patentes nobis habere fecerit, Iter Justic.
nostr. in Comitat qui..... sunt jurisdictioni praedicti Archiepiscopi Ebor. and
aliis Comitat. subsint jurisdictioni Archiepiscopi Cantuar. usque ad praefatum
terminum, si opus fuerit, continuetis solita prudentia and solitudine. Quod non
dubitamus vos esse facturos negotiis nostris expediendis ad commodum and
honorem nostrum intendent. Dat. apud Westminster. 3. die Nov.

In custodia Franc. Bacon de Graies-Inn Armig. 1. Febr. An. 1633. Discreto Viro
Domino Tho. Weyland Illustr. Reg. Angl. Justic. Rogerus de Skerwing.
R. miseratione divina Norwic. Episcopus salutem and honoris augmentum. Cordis
nobis est ut omni tempore Justitia debitum and celerem sortiatur effectum. Hinc
est quod cum Ass. ultimae praesentationis super Ecclesiam de Kirkby omnium
Sanctorum inter Imann. quae fuit uxor Ric. de Thwait querentem, and Ricardum lc
Came defendentem, coram vobis sit arannata, ut intelliximus, Vobis auctoritate
praesentium permittimus quod non obstante instanti Quadragesima Assisam
praedictam inter parts praedictas etiamsi juramentum interveniat licite
capiatis: Valete. Dat. apud Buketon 11. Kal. Martii, ^o. Henr. III.
Anno Domini M. CC. LXXVI.

FINIS.
A SHORT APOLOGY For Archbishop ABBOT, Touching The death of PETER HAWKINS.

By an unknown Hand.

WITH A LARGE ANSWER To this APOLOGY, By Sir HENRY SPELMAN Knight.

As also, Several Letters relating to the same Fact: With a Copy of The
Dispensation for Irregularity, Granted to the Archbishop.

And a Treatise Of the Original of TESTAMENTS and WILLS, And of their PROBATS,
And to whom it anciently belonged.

By the said Sir HENRY SPELMAN Knight.

AN APOLOGY For Archbishop ABBOT, Touching The death of PETER HAWKINS the
Keeper, Wounded in the Park at Bramsil, July 24. 1621.
1. IT is certain that in foro conscientiae, this case may not only deservedly
produce a fear and trembling in him who was the accidental cause thereof; but
may justly make the tallest Cedar in Lebanon to shake, in recounting with his
inward man, what sin it is that has provoked God to permit such a rare and
unusual action to fall out by his hand: which makes him, for the time, to be
Fabula vulgi, and gives opportunity to the enemies of Religion of all kinds,
to rejoice, to speak their pleasure, to fill their Books and Libels, within the
Realm, and perhaps, beyond the Seas. And that, concerning his Calling as well
as his Person, not only for the present, but also in future ages; beside Grief
to his friends, and some Scandal to the weak, who do not rightly apprehend
things, but raise questions which few men can resolve. To all which may be
added, the interpretation of it by his Majesty, graciously or otherwise; and
the forfeiture, that in rigorus construction of Law may be put upon him,
although held for no great Delinquent; besides the providing for a Widow and
four Fatherless children. All which may pierce a heart that is not senseless;
and day and night yield him matter enough of troubled meditations.

2. And yet, lest he that intended no ill (much less to that person, a poor man
and a stranger to him) should be swallowed up with sorrow; he is not devoid of
some comfort, as that Consensus facit peccatum, and Voluntas facit reatum; and
where those concur not, misdemeanors are properly contra nullum Decalogi
praeceptum. And that when God, speaking of such casual death (Exodus 21. 13.)
uses these words, If a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him (the slain
man) into his hands; Divines collect thereupon, that it is not humanum but a
Deo, which no man's Providence can absolutely prevent. For what God will have
done, shall be; and no Creature may dare to set him to school in what manner,
or by what person he will have it performed. And Deuteronom. 19. 6, 10. God
putting the case of the man slain by the iron of his Neighbor's ax slipping
off, appoints Cities of Refuge, lest he should be slain also; who (as he
says) was not worthy of death: and again, that innoxius sanguis, innocent
blood be not shed in the Land. Where we may collect, that such cases are
foreseen and ordered by God himself; and that no Calling, no not that of the
Priest, is free from that which God will have accomplished; since he must
communem hominum subire sortem. Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum puto. And,
Quod cutque contingere potest, cuivis potest; although of all others, the
Priest should be most wary, what he attempt and how.

3. There is no Text in the Old Testament which directly distinguishes the
Priest from other men, in case of Blood; but there are examples (which may not
be apply d to Evil, for that were to pervert them) resolving one scruple which
is made. As Moses was no Priest, yet he gave down the Law; and he consecrated
Aaron the High Priest, notwithstanding the time was that he had kill d the
Egyptian. The Levites slew 3000. of the Israelites, after the Idolatry with
the golden Calf. Phineas, who was afterward the High Priest, slew the
Israelitish man with the Midianitish woman, and was blessed by God for it.
Samuel hewed Agag to pieces. Jehoiada the Priest commanded Athal^ah the Usurper
to be slain. The Machabees fought for their Country; and so took away the
lives of many a man. Paul was consenting to the death of Stephen. Peter,
(although rebuked for it) cut off the ear of Malchus. Josephus the Jew, of the
seed of the Priests, was Captain over Judah, and fought diverse times. Out of
all which, I do only make this collection; That the Priest s restraint from
blood, is not ex jure divino, but ex jure positivo; Pontificio soil. vel
Canoni^o, or Ecclesiastico, as we call it; out of caution, for purity, and
decency, and good congruity for so holy a Calling, which comes so near God,
and attends at his Altar.

4. See then in the Ecclesiastical Law, what Grace is afforded to him, who
against his will, has casually been the death of another. There is in the
Decretals, a title De homicidio voluntario vel casuali: concerning the latter
of which, there be many (...) 1695. ^app. 9. 13. 14. 15. 23.
Rescripts; which demonstrateth, that in human life such things do frequently
fall out. In these, there are five Chapters, Cap. Lator: Cap. Dilectis siliis:
Cap. Ex Litteris: Cap. Ex Litteris tuae: Cap. Joannes: Where the Rubric is,
Homicidium casuale non imputatur ei qui non fuit in culpa: and Homicidium
casuale non imputatur ei qui dedit operam rei licitae, nee fuit in culpa. And
there the Decision is evermore, that there is no Irregularity in promovendo, or
in promoto ad sacros ordines.

This is the more to be noted, because it is not the Ad ca. Lator.
Interpreters, but the body of the Law. And the Gloss thereupon has; Nota, quod
homicidium casu commissions, culpa non praecedente non est imputandum. And, Ad
cap. Johannes.
Sibi imputari non debet, quia fortuitos casus, qui praevideri non possunt, non
praevidit. And, De casu fortuito nullus tenetur, cum praevideri non possit. And
upon this the stream of the Canonists do run, as by a multitude of Books may be
showed: with whom our Lib. 3. Tr. ^ (...) 17.
Bracton, a great Civilian and Common Lawyer too; Homicidium casuale non
imputatur.

5. The two heads whereto the Law looks, freeing a man from blame, and
expressly from Irregularity, are; that the person by whom the Action is perform
d, do not dare operam rei illicitae, and that he use diligence of his part that
no hurt be committed. L. 5. ca. ^. ^a. 332.
Azorius the Jesuit says, Irregularitas, cum ob delictum constituitur, non
nisi ex lethali peccato contrahitur: nisi ex homicidio fiat quis irregularis,
eo quod det operam rei vetitae and interdictae; nam tunc quamvis homicidium
casu sequatur, ob culpam nostram levem vel levissimam, multorum est opinio
irregularitatem contrahi. E^ Burch. L. 6. ca. 22.
And Ivo in his Canons, some hundreds of years before him; Si duo fratres in
sylva arbores succiderint, and appropinquante casura unius arboris, frater
fratri dixerit Cave, and ille fugiens, in pressuram arboris inciderit, ac
mortuus fuerit, vivens frater innocens de sanguine germani dijudicatur. Now,
the ca^e at Bramsil, is within the compass of these two conditions. For the
party agent, was about no unlawful work: for what he did, was in the day, in
the presence of forty or fifty persons, the Lord Zouch, who was owner of the
Park, not only standing by, but inviting to Hunt and Shoot; and all persons in
the Field were called upon to stand far off, partly for avoiding harm, and
partly lest they should disturb the Game; and all in the Field performed what
was desired. And this course did the Lord Archbishop use to take, when or
wheresoever he did shoot; as all persons at any time present can witness: never
any man being more solicitous thereof, than he evermore was. And the morning
when the deed was done, the Keeper was twice warned to stay behind, and not to
run forward; but he carelessly did otherwise, when he that shot could take no
notice of his galloping in before the Bow; as may be seen by the Verdict of the
Coroner's Inquest.

6. This case at Bramsill is so favorable; that the strictest Writers of these
times, directly conclude, that if a Clergyman committing casuale homicidium be
about a forbidden and interdicted act, yet he is not irregular, if the
interdicted act be not therefore forbidden, because it may draw on Homicide.
And thereupon, inasmuch as Hunting is forbidden in a Clergyman, not in respect
of danger of Life, but for Decency, that he should not spend his time in
Exercises which may hinder him from the study fit for his Calling, or for other
such reasons; Irregularity follows not thereupon. And to this purpose,
writes at large L. 5. quaest. 1. ca. 9.
Soto, Covarruvias, and Suarez, who are great Canonists and Schoolmen. And if
this be true, (as out of great reason it may be so held) how much further is
the present case in question from Irregularitie.

7. But some go directly to the point, and say, that the Lord Archbishop did
navare operam rei illicitae, because he was on Hunting; for that was
interdicted to a Bishop by the Canon De Clerico Venatore; and so by a
consequent he must needs be Irregular. To which objection, see how many clear
and true answers there be. As first, that the Canon being taken out of the
Decrees, is by Gratian himself branded to be Palea, no better than Chaff.
Secondly, it is cited out of the fourth Council of Orleans; and there is no
such thing to be found, as the Gloss well observes. Thirdly, it forbids
Hunting cum canibus aut accipitribus; and none of these were at Bramsil. And if
you will enforce it by comparison or proportion, the rule of the Law is,
Favores sunt ampliandi, odia restringenda: Where mark, when Hunting with Dogs
or Hawks is forbidden, it is not for fear of Slaughter, for there is no such
danger in either of them. Fourthly, the Canon forbids Hunting voluptatis
causa, but not recreationis or valetudinis gratia, which the Books say is
permitted etiam Episcopo. Fifthly, the Canon has, Si saepius detentus fuerit,
if he make a Life or Occupation of it; which the world knows, is not the
Archbishop's case, but a little one time in the year, directed so by his
Physician, to avoid two diseases, whereunto he is subject, the Stone and the
Gout. Sixthly, it is clamosa venatio against which the Canon speaks, not
quieta or modesta, which the Canonists allow; and this whereof the question
arises, was most silent and quiet; saving that this accident, by the Keeper's
unadvised running in, has afterward made a noise over all the Country.

8. These Exceptions, as they naturally and without any enforcing, give answer
to this Objection of the Canon; so there is another thing that may stop the
mouth of all Gainsayers; if any Reason will content them. And that is, that by
the Stat. of Henr. VIII. 35. ca. 16. no Canon is in force in England, which was
not in use before that time, or is not contrary or derogatory to the Laws or
Statutes of this Realm, nor to the Prerogatives of the Royal Crown: of which
nature this is. For in Charta de Foresta, Archbishops and Bishops by name have
liberty to Hunt: and 13. Ric. II. cap. 13. a Clergyman who has 10l. by the
year, may keep greyhounds to hunt. And Linwood, who lived soon after that
time, and understood the Ecclesiastical Constitutions and the Laws of England
very well, in treating of Hunting, speaks against Clergymen using that
exercise unlawfully; as in places restrained or forbidden; but has not one
word against Hunting simply. And the Archbishop of Canterbury had formerly
more than twenty Parks and Chaces of his own, to use at his pleasure; and now
by Charter has freewarren in all his lands. And by ancient Record, the Bishop
of Rochester, at his death, was to render to the Archbishop of Canterbury his
Kennel of Hounds as a mortuary, whereof (as I am credibly informed) the Law
takes notice for the King Sede vacant, under the name of Muta canum and
Mulctura. To this may be added, the perpetuated use of Hunting by Bishops in
their Parks, continued to this day without scruple or question. As that most
Reverend man the Lord Archbishop Whitgyfte used in Hartlebury-park while he
lived at Worcester; in Ford-park in Kent; in the Park of the Lord Cobham, near
Canterbury; where, by the favor of that Lord, he killed twenty Bucks in one
journey; using Hounds, Greyhounds, or his Bow, at his pleasure, although he
never Shot well. And the same is credibly reported of the Lord Archbishop
Sands. And it is most true, that the Deans and Chapter of Winchester use it as
they please in their Franchise. To say nothing of Dr. Rennal, whose Hounds were
long famous throughout all England; and yet he was by profession a Canonist;
and knew well what induced Irregularity.

I will add two things more, which directly appertain to the Archbishop of
Canterbury. The one is, the famous Record, That at the Coronation of Queen
Eleanor, wife to Henr. III. the Earl of Arundel (who was by his place
Cup Bearer for that day) was enforced to serve by a Deputy, because he was
Excommunicated by the Archbishop, for taking up his Hounds coming into the
Earl's grounds to Hunt; where the Archbishop pleaded and alleged that it was
lawful for him to Hunt within any Forest of England, whenever he would. The
other, is that which is written of Archbishop Cranmer, in his life; where I
will cite the very words: Permiserat ei pater aucupium, venationem,
equitationem, etc. Quibus quidem, cum jam Archiepiscopus relaxare animum and
abducere se a rebus gravioribus vellet, ita utebatur, ut in famulatu suo non
fuerit quisquam qui in generosum equum salire ac tractare elegantius, aut aves
ferasque aucupio aut venatione insequi commodius intelligentiusque potuisset:
Saepe etiam, etsi oculis infirmis esset, arcum tendens, sagitta percussit
seram. Out of all which, and many more Records and Cases that are to be showed,
the Conclusion is clear, That howsoever the Canon may touch Bishops and
Clergymen beyond the Seas, it meddleth not with the Bishops of England, who by
favor of Princes and the State have Baronies annexed to their Sees. So that it
does arise out of true collection from these Heads, that there is no danger of
Irregularity in the Lord Archbishop's case, either toward himself or other
men. His Majesty's Princely Grace gives an end to all; and this he most humbly
craveth. For other things, God being appeased (as he hops that he is) he
dreadeth not the tongue or pen of any enemy: among whom, the Popes and
Cardinals have wilfully committed many poisonings, murders, and outrageous
acts; and yet they must believe that they are the head and chiefest members of
the Church.

AN ANSWER TO THE Foregoing Apology for Archbishop Abbot;
By Sir HENRY SPELMAN Knight.
TOuching the First, Second, and Third Sections: It may be that the Priests in
the old Law (whose Ministry was altogether in blood) were not prohibited but
that upon just occasion they might shed even the blood of man as well as of
beasts; and put on an Armor as well as an Ephod. For the Tabernacle was
covered with red Skins, to signify cruentum Seculum, cruentum Ministerium: and
Moses (whose hands were dipped in blood) was not forbidden to be the chief
Founder thereof. But when the Temple came to be built (which was the image of
the Church of Christ) then the hands of David, though they had fought the battles
of God, yet because they were seasoned with blood, they might not lay one stone
in that Foundation. Therefore, when the old Law and this bloody Priesthood were
grown to an end, and going out of the world, and that the Priests of the Gospel
were entering in their room into the world; our Savior commanded Peter to put
up his sword; for now, Arma horrentia Martis rejicienda; and stola candida
induenda fuit. Though then some Priests in the old Law and many thousand Levites
were Martial-men, yet for many hundred years in the time of the Gospel, I read
not of any: insomuch, that the succeeding ages desiring a Martial Saint, were
driven to suppose St. George. Whether therefore these Laws of the Church, which
at this day prohibit Clergymen to meddle with matters of blood, be merely ex
jure positivo, or ex divino mixto, I leave it to the determination of the
Reverend Divines.

4. Concerning the Cases alleged out of the Decretals: it is true that the
Rubric is, Homicidium casuale non imputatur ei qui non fuit in culpa; and
Homicidium casuale non imputatur ei qui dedit operam rei licitae, nec fuit in
culpa. And so likewise, is that alleged out of the Gloss thereupon, and out of
Bracton. But let us parallel the case in these with them, which are as
follows.

A. and P. two Clerks Sporting together, A. by chance threw P. down, who having
a knife by his side, the same happened to wound A. that he died. Pope Alexander
III. commanded the Bishop of Exeter in this case to admit P. to holy Orders;
for Sporting was lawful.

A sickly Chaplain being gotten upon an unruly Horse, and he checking him with
Bridle and Spur to stay him, the Horse brake his Bridle, cast his Master, and
running over a Woman coming by, killed a Child in her arms. This Chaplain was
admitted to holy Orders, for that neither in Will nor Act he committed
Homicide, but also did a lawful Act.

One being to unlade a Cart of Hay, looked round about to see if any were near,
and seeing none, threw a stack off the Cart, and having unladed it, a Boy was
after found dead with a little stripe in his face. This Priest after Canonical
purgation was admitted to his place.

A Monk helping to take a Bell down out of a Steeple, casually thrust down a
piece of timber, which bruised a Boy to death. The Monk is judged not incapable
of further Ecclesiastical Preferment, for that the business was necessary, and
the place not for ordinary resort.

A Priest tolling a Bell to Prayers, the same fell and killed a Boy. The Bishop
is commanded to suffer the Priest to execute his Function, for Nihil potuit
imputari, si casus omnes fortuitos non praevidit.

Though there be many points in all these cases (and more in some than others* to
excuse the Parties agent; yet will I meddle only with those two which are most
eminent, and offer d by the Apologist; that is, Animus or Intentio innocua, and
Actio legitima. Touching the Intent, none is so impious as to imagine that his
Lordship intended to hurt any man: yet is there this difference between his
intent and theirs in the cases alleged: they intended to hurt neither Man nor
Beast, he, tho not to hurt a Man, yet to kill a Beast: they, nihil saevum aut
non legitimum: he, legitimum quiddam sed tamen saevum. For there is a kind of
cruelty in the slaughter of every thing; and therefore in the old Law (Lev. 17.
13.) He that takes any beast or fowl by hunting that may be eaten; shall pour
out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust; that the cruelty appear not, as
^ take it. And in our Law, those that were exercised in slaughter of Beasts,
were not received to be tryers of the life of a Man. Much is to be said out of
Histories to this purpose.

But to come to the point whereon all depends, Whether the Action his
Lordship was now about, be lawful or not? The places of Azorius and Ivo are
truly cited; and I doubt them not to be Law: that is, to this effect, That it
works no Irregularity, where, in a lawful action a Clerk kills a Man
casually, having first used all diligence to prevent it. And it appears that
his Lordship did this so carefully, that all were continually called upon, not
only to stand off, but so far off as shows his Lordship to be very unskilful
in the use of his Bow; and may therefore touch him in Discretion for meddling
with so dangerous an Engine in so great an Assembly; and consequently produce
Irregularity even by the words of Azorius alleged to excuse him, though the
action be lawful: nam tunc quamvis homicidium casu sequatur, ob culpam nostram
levem vel levissimam, multorum est opinio Irregularitatem contrahi.

But not to fall from the tree by reaching at a twig; we will rest upon the
chief Station in the case, the Nature of the Action; which though it be
forbidden, yet according to Soto, Covarruvias and Suarez (as it is alleged)
induces not Irregularity when Homicide follows thereon, if it be not therefore
forbidden, because it may draw on Homicide: concluding, that though Hunting be
forbidden to a Clergyman, yet for that it is not forbidden in respect of
danger of Life, but for Decency, etc. Irregularity follows not thereupon. As
for Covarruvias and Suarez, I have them not; but Soto is not happily alleged.
For though he incline to that opinion (with Cajetan) yet he takes a a
distinction that wounds the Case in question; and that is, Venatione, quae
armis and telis fit, profecto siet Clericus irregularis: and this falls out
to be now the Case. For this Hunting was performed with a Cross-bow, a deadly
and a dangerous weapon, that has been the occasion of many bloody misfortunes.
But in a former passage, Soto also says, that Cajetan and Sylvester and
Doctores ^uris Canonici universalem regulam astruunt, quod omnis qui dat operam
rei illi^itae, quandocunque ex illa datione sequatur homicidium, fiat
irregularis. And Azpilcu^ta Navarrus says, that Cajetan in the other place
(and by consequence Sotus) is to be understood with a limitation, as meaning
Venationem passerum and perdi^um ad aucupis cantum, vel accipitris, sine armis
in provinciis -- non venationem ursorum, aprorum, and cervorum, quae armis
exercetur. Enchirid. cap. 27. Sect. 237. Wherein, the distinction he takes,
making a main difference between Venationem ludi^ram and Venationem Martiam,
concludes plainly, the Case in hand to have wrought Irregularity. And the
Apologist finding no sure ground in this Assertion, builds no otherwise upon
it, than if it be true as out of great reason (he says) it may be so held: and
passes from it to his chiefest place of refuge, showing that the Canon that
makes Hunting to be actio illicita does no way touch his Lordship.

First, for that upon the matter there is no such Canon: insomuch as Gratian
himself (that collected the Canons) brandeth this to be Palea and no better
than Chaff. It is true, he brandeth it with the term Palea, and was a worthy
Man; but noted generally to have mistaken many things, and some extremely. But
if that be the meaning of the word, his error seems very perspicuous, as
finding this Canon ascribed to the Council of Orleans and not finding it there,
he presently branded it, Palea. But the Canonists have many other opinions of
it, as to signify (...) antiqua; or of (...) rursum. John Andrea, Imota,
Alexandrinus and Jason, famous Professors, think this title to be put over the
heads of many Canons, to signify they were added by Protopalea a Cardinal,
since Gratian's time. And experience excludes the first interpretation of the
word, for that the Canons so entitled are very many, and not rejected as
spurii or palea. Besides, Burchard Bishop of Worms, who lived long before
Gratian, has this very Canon in his second Book, cap. 213. and there ascribed
(as it ought) to the Council of Meldis; as also by Ivo, part. 6. ca. 288. If
then it be any where in the Councils, it suffices; though the Collector mistook
the place, which is easily done: as even the Evangelist Matthew (ca. 27. 9.)
cites a place out of the Prophet Jeremy, which is not found there, but in
Zachariah.

It is apparent also that many Copies of Councils are unperfect, and want some
of the true Canons, as neglected or not finished by the Notary. But if need be,
this Canon has further warrant, even from the times almost of the primitive
Church. For in Council. Agathensi, of 35. Bishops in An. 435. ca. 55. it is
said, Sacerdotes and Levitae canibus ad venandum and accipitribus non utantur.
And in Council. Epaunensi, of 70. Bishops, in An. 492. So Carol. M. in Decreto
suo. Furnonens. Synod. Can. 8. Cabilonens. Can. 9. Cent. 9. Col. 302. l. 30.
Vt Episcopi venatores non sint, nec accipitres alant. The Capitularies also of
Ludovicus Imp. taking notice of it, about the year 820. prohibiteth Priests, ut
Venationes ferarum vel avium minime sectentur. Addit. 3. ca. 43. So that we
have no reason to account this Canon either supposititium or paleam; but rather
to be (as it is indeed) (...) antiquum or ex antiquis. According to which
sense, the Canons of like nature in the Laws of the Wisigoths or Western-Goths
are in every passage entitled by the very Latin word (not the Greek) Antiqua.
And Justinian himself seems to have had this Distinction in his eye, when he
called his later Constitutions (...), i. e. Novellas, that so they might be
marked from those of old, which Cedrinus in Justinian's life calls (...),
Leges antiquas.

His second Objection is, That it is cited out of the fourth Council of
Orleans, and it is not there. This we have already answered, and showed where
it is.

Thirdly, he says it forbids Hunting cum canibus and accipitribus, and none
of these were there. It is strange, a Keeper should go about to strike a Deer,
and not have his Lyme-hound to draw after him. But the Canon goes further,
Canes ad venandum, aut Accipitres, aut hujusmodi res habere non licet. Where
hujusmodi res seems to contain all instruments used in Hunting.

Fourthly, voluptatis causa; not recreationis or valetudinis, which the Books
say is permitted etiam Episcopo. What his Books say, I know not; but my Book
says thus: Dic breviter, quod venari causa voluptatis est mortale peccatum,
and in laico; sed venari causa necessitatis vel indigentiae corporis non est
mortale peccatum; in Clerico tamen potius prohibetur. But he adjoineth, In
venatione, potius delectatio quam actus attenditur. Atho. in Othob. fol. 114.
b. Neither is there here any mention of Recreatio, unless Delectatio and it be
all one (as commonly we use it) and then forbidden. Besides, what action or
recreation belonging to health is there, in letting off a Cross-bow; wherein
neither Head, Hand nor Foot, no, not the nimblest member of the Body (the Eye)
stirs all that while.

Fifthly, the Canon has, St saepius detentus fuerit, if he make a Life or
Occupation of it, which his Lordship did not. Burchard says detectus, and with
more reason: and I suppose his Lordship uses it very temperately: yet the
Apologist in his Fifth Section insinuates, that his Lordship does it often.

Sixthly, whereas he says that the Canon speaks against Clamosa venatio, not
quieta or modesta; I find no such word or distinction in the Canon: yet is
there no doubt, that if the Deer be not killed out of hand; but in recovering
him, there must be both Clamor and Venatio.

Thus he counts the mouth of the Canon to be stopped. Yet because it is good to
make sure work with so dangerous an object, now he sets Law upon Law, the
Common against the Canon or at least the Statute, which indeed has cracked a
great sort of Canons. That by the Statute of Henry VIII. 35. ca. 16. No Canon
is in force in England, which was not in use, or is contrary or derogatory to
the Laws or Statutes of this Realm, or to the Prerogatives of the Royal Crown.
Of which sort (he says) this is one, and gives his reasons: for in Charta de
Foresta Archbishops and Bishops by name have liberty to Hunt: and 13. Ric. II.
ca. 13. A Clergyman who has 10l. by the year, may keep Greyhounds to Hunt.

The name of Charta de Foresta (and also of Hunting) is, Clero lachrimabile
nomen. For the first breach that ever was made into the freedom of Clergymen,
and which gave passage to all that followed, rose from the occasion of
Clergy-mens Hunting in Forests: which Henry II. greatly discontented with,
never rested, till by assent of the Pope's Legate Hugo Petro-leonis, he
obtained a Law in the twenty first year of his reign, An. Dom. 1157. To convent
them therefore before secular Judges, and there to punish them.

But to our purpose: There is no contradiction (as I take it) between the Canon
de Clerico Venatore, and Charta or Statutum de Foresta. The Canon does say,
They shall not Hunt; and the Statute does not say they shall. The words of the
Statute ca. 17. are thus: An Archbishop, Bishop, Earl, or Baron coming to us
upon our command and passing through our Forest, Liccat ei capere unam bestiam
vel duas, per visum Forestarii, si praesens fuerit: sin autem, faciat cornare,
ne videatur furtum facere. Here is no word of Hunting; but that they may take a
Deer; and this they will say cannot be but either with Dogs or Engine, and so
consequently by Hunting. But the very words of Charta de Foresta seem to show,
that it was not meant, the Bishop should be an Huntsman, for that it admits
him not to have so much skill in Hunting as to wind an Horn, though that by no
Law or Canon be forbidden to him. And therefore says not, Corniat ipse, but
Faciat corniare, let him cause an Horn to be blown, etc. I conceive the meaning
to be, that the Bishops and Barons shall each of them take as they may; the
Barons by Hunting (if they will) in their own Persons; the Bishops as they may,
by the hands of their Officers and Servants. It is a common phrase in all old
Charters, that the Bishops shall have Sac and Soc, Toll and Team, etc. i. e.
cognizance of plea, suit of Court, toll, and such other customs: shall we
intend, that he must take these in his own Person? No; it was not Henry the
third's meaning, when he granted the Charter of the Forest, to break the Laws
of the Church: for at the same time in Magna Charta ca. 1. he grants, that
the Church shall have Omnia jura sua integra and libertates suas illaesas;
which could not possibly be, if by his Charter he changed the Canons of the
Church, especially in matters of Doctrine and Conscience: as, when the Church
teaches that a Clerk may not be a Huntsman, for him to say that he shall be.
Doubtless, if he would, the Clergy would not then accept it.

In the person of a Bishop there be three distinct Faculties: his Spiritual
Function, wherein he is a Bishop; his Legal Ability, wherein he is a Layman
and has liberty to contract, etc. and his Temporal Dignity, wherein he is a
Baron and Peer of the Realm, and participateth their privileges. I could put
cases wherein every of these may be seen severed from the other; but I should
then wander from my matter. Only, I present them thus Anatomy'd, that it may
appear what portion the Church had in them, what the Commonwealth, and what
the King; that so it may also the better appear how the Laws both of the Church
and Kingdom are to be applied unto them respectively.

When therefore the King granted Temporal lands unto them; though they took them
as Lay-Barons, and in their Temporal Capacity, yet might they not otherwise use
them than might stand with their Spiritual Function: no more than when he
granted Ecclesiastical possessions to a Layman, the Grantee might otherwise
use them than as a Layman. For example; it was a common thing in old time,
that the King granted Churches to Laymen, by the name of Ecclesiam de Dale and
Ecclesiam de Sale; yet it was never intended that the Grantee, though he had the
Churches to order and dispose, should (contrary to his Vocation) meddle with
the Divine Service, but present his Clerk only. So in like manner, when the
King granted to Clergymen, Chaces, Parks, and Warrens; it was not intended
that (contrary to the rules of their Profession and Laws of the Church) they
should or might become Hunters and Foresters.

My long stay upon this point, is a preparative to an answer to the next, which
is the Statute of Ric. II. being in the negative, That no Priest nor other
Clerk, not advanced to 10l. a year, shall have or keep any Greyhound, nor other
Dog to Hunt; nor they shall not use Ferrets, Hayes, Nets, Hare-pipes, nor
Cords, nor other Engines, for to take and destroy Deer, Hares, nor Conies, etc.
upon pain of one years imprisonment. The Statute (I say) is in the Negative,
and says that none under 10l. a year shall keep; but says not in the
Affirmative, That it shall be lawful for them that have 10l. a year to keep,
etc. I should therefore think, that this Statute does not discharge a Priest
(having 10l. a year and using Hunting) against the Canon Law: no more than the
Statute of Usury, forbidding a Man to take above 10l. loan for an 100l, gives
him liberty to take that 10l. or does discharge him against the Canons of Usury.

Touching his inference, that Linwood speaks not one word against Hunting
simply by Clergymen, but against their using it in places restrained; it is
true, for the Text of the Canon led him no further; being only De Clerico, de
Transgressione Forestae aut Parci alicujus diffamato, and made to no other
intent than to aggravate the censure of the Ecclesiastical Law, which before
was not sharp enough against Offenders in that kind. But Johannes de Athon (as
great a Canonist and somewhat elder, whom Linwood often cites and relyeth upon
as one well understanding the Ecclesiastical Constitutions and the Laws of
England) has apparently condemned it in the place by me recited. Yet is it to
be noted, that neither Athon nor Linwood intended to Gloss upon all the
Constitutions of the Church of England; but Athon only upon those of Otho and
Othobon; and Linwood (beginning where Athon left) upon those of Stephen
Archbishop of Canterbury and his Successors. There are therefore a great
number of Canons and Constitutions of the Church of England, which neither of
these Canonists have either meddled with or so much as touched: as also there
be many Statutes in force, which are no where mentioned in any of the
Abridgements. But Jo. de Burgo (another English Canonist and Chancellor of
Cambridge, who wrote in Richard the Second's time) takes notice of this Canon,
and that Hunting was thereby forbidden to our Clergymen, as appears in his
Pupilla Oculi part. 7. ca. 10. m (...) Cleric^r^m
.

To go on. The Apology says, That the Archbishop of Canterbury had formerly
more than twenty Parks and Chases, to use at his pleasure, and by Charter has
Free Warren in all his lands.

Habutsse, lugubre: it seems the Wisdom of the latter times (the more p^ty*
dissented from the former; yet did not the former approve that Bishops should
use them at their pleasure, but as the Laws and Canons of the Church permitted.
For as they had many Parks and Warrens; so had they many Castles and
Fortresses, and might for their safety dwell in them: but as they might not be
Soldiers in the one, so might they not be Huntsmen in the other. In like sort,
the Abbat and Monks of St. Alban's (as Mat. Paris reports the case in An.
1240. pa. 205.) had Free Warren at St. Alban's, etc. by grant of the Kings, and
recovered damages against many that entered into the same and Hunted: for the
having of it was lawful, as appears in the Clementines Tit. de Statu Monast..
Porro a Venatoribus. But it is there expressly forbidden, that either they
should Hunt in it themselves, or be present when others do Hunt, or that they
should keep Canes venaticos aut infra monasteria seu domus quas inhabitant, aut
eorum clausuras, pa. 207. Radulphus de Diceto in An. 1189. says, That the
Bishops of that time affected to get into their hands Comitatus,
Vice-Comitatus, vel Castellarias; Counties, Sheriffwicks, and Constable-ships
of Castles; but shall we think they either did or might use them in their own
Persons, as, with Banners displayed to lead forth the Soldiers of their
County, or with Sword and Target to defend the walls of their Castles, or with
a white wand to collect the King's Revenues, etc. It is true, that Walter
Bishop of Durham, having bought the County of Northumberland of William the
Conqueror, would needs sit himself in the County Court; but he paid dearly for
it: for his Countrymen furiously slew him, even sitting there. Matt. Paris in
An. 1075. So Hugh Bishop of Coventry exercised the Sheriff's place, but was
excommunicate for it, as contra dignitatem Episc. and so acknowledged his
error. Dicet. in An. 1190.

But every one will say, It was a common thing in old time for Bishops to be
Judges in secular Courts. I confess it; and think it godly and lawful as it was
used at the first. For the Bishop and the Earl sat together in the
County Court: the Bishop as Chancellor, to deliver Dei rectum and populum
do^ere; the Earl as Secular Judge, to deliver rectum seculi and populum
coercere; as is manifest by the Laws of King Edgar and others. But when the
Bishops began to supply both places, and to be mere Judges of Secular Courts,
then were they prohibited by many Canons. And therefore Roger Bishop of
Salisbury being importuned by the King to be his Justice; would by no means
accept it, till he had obtained Dispensation, not only from his Metropolitan
the Archbishop of Canterbury, but from the Pope himself, as Dicetus affirms
in An. 1190. and no doubt but others of wisdom did the like. In those things
therefore that Bishops did against Canons, we must take no example to follow
them: for though their public actions be manifest, yet their dispensations and
matter of excuse is for the most part secret. Neither does every thing done
against a Canon produce Irregularity, if some criminous mischance follow not
thereon.

For the Record that relates that the Bishop of Rochester was at his death to
render to the Archbishop of Canterbury his kennel of Hounds as a mortuary, and
that the Law takes notice of it for the King sede vacant, under the name of
Muta canum and Mulctura: I must (as they say in the Law) demand Oyer of the
Record; we shall otherwise spend many words in vain. But that Dogs should be
given for a Mortuary is against all likelihood. For a Mortuary, is as an
offering given (by him that dies) unto the Church, in recompense of his Tithes
forgotten; and it is a plain Text, Deuter. 28. 18. Non offeres mercedem
prostibuli, nec pretium canis in domo Domini. But if there be no other word to
signify a kennel of Hounds, than Muta canum and Mulctura, the exposition may be
doubtful, though it come somewhat near it. Freder. II. Emp. in the Prologue to
his second Book de Venatione, speaking of an Hawks-mue, says, Domicula quae
dicitur Muta; following the Italian Vulgar, which comes a mutando, because the
Hawk does there change her coat. And for the affinity between Dogs and Hawks,
it may be (...) transferred to a Dog-kennel; and whether to the Hounds
themselves or no, it is not much material. For, no doubt, they that may have
Parks and Warrens, may have Dogs and Hounds for Hunting: but every body that
may have Hounds may not use them themselves, as appears by that which I said
before out of the Clementines, and by the opinion of Justice Brudnel, with the
rest of the Judges, 12. Henr. VIII. fol. 5. where it is said, a man may keep
Hounds notwithstanding the Statute of 13. Ric. II. but he must not Hunt; as he
may keep Apparel of Cloth of Gold, notwithstanding the Statute of Apparel, but
he must not wear it. Besides, Religious persons in ancient times were driven to
have Dog-kennels for the King's Hounds: for Rad. Niger in An...... says, that
King Henry II. Abbates, hypodromos and canum custodes fecit.

After all this, his Lordship is defended with the perpetual use of Hunting by
Bishops in their Parks; and by the particular examples of some eminent men his
Predecessors, and others. This point of use and example I have in a manner
answered before; speaking, as it fell in my way, of Bishops being secular
Judges. One line serves to level at them both: yet for further and more
perspicuous resolution of the matter, see both the example and the use censured
in the Decret. 34. Distinct. ca. 1. by Pope Nicholas, ad Albinum Archiepisc.
alias Aluinum. Quemadmodum relatione fidelium nostris auribus intimatum est,
quod Lanfredus Episcopus, qui and juvenis esse dicitur, venationi sit deditus;
quod vitium plurimos etiam de Clericali Catalogo, genere duntaxat Germanos and
Gallos irreverenter implicat, Verum iste (si ita est ut audivimus) merito
juvenis dicitur, qui juvenilibus desideriis occupatus, nulla gravitate
constringitur. Et infra: Nam (ut Beatus dicit Hieronymus) Venatorem nunquam
legimus sanctum. Then blaming him also for being too familiar with his
daughter, he says, Oportet ergo fraternitatem tuam Synodale cum Episcopis and
Suffraganeis tuis convocare Concilium, and hunc salutaribus colloquiis
Episcopum convenire, atque illi pastorali authoritate praecipere quatenus ab
omnium bestiarum vel volucrum venatione penitus alienus existat: or (in short)
to Excommunicate him.

Here he shows Hunting to be used both by a Bishop and by a multitude of
Clerks, (plurimos.) But neither the Person and Dignity of the one, not the
multitude nor frequent use in the other, makes the Pope to abstain from
condemning it. Howbeit, they whose example the Apologist alleges, little
respected (as I think) the whole Volume of Canons.

Touching the Record of the Earl of Arundel's Excommunication for taking up the
Archbishop of Canterbury's Hounds coming into the Earl's grounds to Hunt; and
the Archbishop's pleading That it was lawful for him to Hunt in any Forest of
England whenever he would, we must (as we before said) pray Oyer of the
Record; for parols font plea, and their certainty appears not here, nor what
became of the issue: which, though it fell out to be found for the Archbishop,
yet perhaps it discharged him not against the Canon. And well might he be as
bold with the Canon, as he was with the Law. For it is directly against the Law
both of England and France, to Excommunicate a Peer of the Realm without the
King's assent: and therefore Henry III. was sore offended with the Archbishop
for this Excommunication; (and the Bishops of London and Norwich were called in
question for the like in Henry the Second s time; as Matthew Paris reports,
pa. 99.) But because his case sways the cause to the ground; I must dwell a
little the longer upon it, to show what became of it. The truth is, it was
ended by comprise in the Chapel at Slyndon upon Friday after the Circumcision
of our Lord, 1258. that is, 43. Henr. III. in this manner: quod idem
Archiepiscopus and successores sui semel in quolibet anno and non plus, cum
transierint per dictam Forestam (i. e. de Arundel cum una lesia de sex
leporariis sine aliis canibus and sine arcu habeant unum cursum in eundo and
alium in redeundo; ita quod si capiant unam feram, illam habebunt; si nihil
capiant in illo cursu, nihil habebunt. Si vero capiant plus quam unam feram,
Archiepiscopi qui pro tempore fuerint, habeant quam elegerint, and residuum
habeant dictus Dominus Johannes and haeredes ejus, etc. Then is it further
awarded, that the said Earl, his Heirs, and Assigns, shall yearly for ever pay
unto the said Archbishop and his Successors, 13. Bucks and 13. Does, (captas
de fermysun as the Record says) at times there appointed. And then follows
this close, which makes all plain; Et actum est express in^^r parts de
praecepto and ordinatione dictorum Arbitratorum, quod dictae parts procurabunt
confirmationem Domini Papae and Domini Regis super praesenti confirmatione.

By this Record it appears, that neither the Earl could make this grant
without License from the King, (for that all Forests are the Kings, and no
Subject can have them otherwise than in custody) nor the Archbishop could
safely use the privilege of Hunting without dispensation from the Pope: and
tho ^yet find not where the one was obtained from the Pope, yet I find where
the other was granted from the King; and namely from Edward the First in the 2
d. year of his Reign; where all the award and composition beforesaid, is (by
way of Inspeximus) recited and confirmed. But the composition for the Bucks and
Does, was after in Edw. the third's time released by the Archbishop Simon
Islip, having taken for the same 240. marks; as witness Antiqq. Britann. ca. 55.

And it seems further by this Record, that the Archbishops of Canterbury had
not at that time dispensation from the Pope, to Hunt where they listed in any
Forest of England; for then should he not have needed special Dispensation in
this case. But howsoever the Dispensation or Confirmation was hereupon obtain;
it is apparent that it stretched no further than to Hunt with Greyhounds; for
the Bow is expressly forbidden and excepted.

It may be, some will extend the word Confirmation, to be meant of some right
of Hunting, which the Archbishop (upon this arbitrament) was to disinherit his
Church of: which I leave to the judgment of Lawyers. For it may contain both;
though I never saw any precedent of the Popes in that kind for so small a matter:
but of the other kind, we have before made mention of one to Roger Bishop of
Salisbury, and a multitude of others are to be produc d.

Again, if they have a Dispensation for Hunting, yet it has some limitation
either for the place or the manner; which his Lordship (if he justify under
that) must show particularly.

To come now at last to to the last point of the Apology, drawn from the
particular example of Archbishop Cranmer; who, in the description of his Life
(Britannicarum Antiqq. ca. 68.) is set forth to Hunt, Shoot, and Ride a (...).
great or stirring Horse with notable activity, even when he was Archbishop,
and in the words recited by the Apologist. But these be To Ride, Shoot and
Hunt, be the three Martial Qualities, whereby the Rutil in the ninth Book of
V^g^^, proves his Contrymen to be good Soldiers: V^na^^ invigilant pu^ri,
sylv^sque ^atigant.
Flectere lud^s eq^^s, and spicula vendere cern^^.



Exercises of War, not of Religion; fit for Barons not for Bishops; who in
ancient time, following the example of our Savior and his Apostles, walked on
foot, as appears by Bid, Eccl. Hist. l. 3. ca. 14. and lib. 4. ca. 3. and
beginning to Ride, Vid. Malm. p. 214. l. 93. Balaeus Cent. 1. ca. 74. in
Append. citat. Magdeburgg. Cent. 7. ca. 7. col. 204.
used here in England Mares, as Bede also witnesses, lib. 2. ca. 13. in other
places Mules, not Horses; for Bellum haec armenta minantur, as not only the
Poet says, but as the Scripture also, Prove. 21. ult. Equus paratur ad diem
belli. And such belike, did this Archbishop Cranmer mount upon and manage, as
the words imply, ut in famulatu suo non fuerit quisquam qui in generosum equum
salire, ac tractare elegantius -- potuisset. Besides, the shooting here
mentioned seems not to be the long-bowe, which stirs the body and is
profitable to health, but that deadly Engine (which imagines mischief as a
law) the Cross-bowe, whose force a man cannot mitigate as in other weapons, and
is properly numbered amongst the instruments of War; and therefore by a
multitude of Canons prohibited to Clergymen, so that they may not use them
Pos^unt tamen Clerici arma portare ^x causa justa, utputa si transeat per loca
periculosa, ad terrorem latronum, licet non debent perc^tere. Pupil. Oc. par.
7. ca. 10. I. ubi Libri citantur alii.
pro justitia exercenda (as appears by the Constit. of Othob. Tit.) de
Clericis arma portan. nor equitantes per loca periculosa, as it is in the Gloss
upon the Decret. of Gratian p. 992. where the Text is, Clerici arma portantes
and usurarii excommunicentur. But I have gone the length of my tedder, I mean
as far as the Apology leads me; and therefore now manum de tabula.

The case of this Reverend and most Worthy Person deserves great commiseration
and tender handling: for who can prevent such unexpected casualties? Yet may
the consequence prove so mischievous both to himself and those that are to
receive their Consecration from him, as of necessity it must be carefully
looked into and provided for. Let me remember an ancient precedent, even in one
of his own Predecessors, Stigand, Archbishop of Canterbury in the time of the
Conquest, who, because he had not Canonically received his Consecration, but
from the hands of Pope Benedict (who stood Excommunicate and sacris
interdictus) was not only deprived himself by authority of a Council, but also
the Bishops and Abbots which had taken their Consecration from him. Therefore
the Bishops of Wells and Hereford foreseeing that evil; to make all clear,
fetch their Consecration at Rome from Pope Nicholas: Vitabant enim (says Flor.
Wigorn. in An. 1070.) V. Malm. de Gest. Pontif. l. 1. pa. 204. l. 50.
a Stigando qui tunc Archiepiscopatui Doroberniae praesidebat, ordinari: quia
noverant illum non Canonice Pallium suscepisse. It is good to follow the
counsel of Gratian in the like matter: Consultius est in hujusmodi dubio
abstinere quam celebrare, ca. 24. 1716.

But because we are fallen into a case, wherein perhaps some extraordinary
Consecration may be required; let me also relate a strange Consecration used in
the entrance of the Reign of Chron. pa. 44. col. a.
Henry I. An. 1100. where Eadmere a Monk of Canterbury being elected by the
Clergy and People of Scotland to be Bishop of St. Andrews, with the great good
liking of King Alexander and the Nobility. Yet by reason of some
discontentments the same King had conceived against the Archbishop of York,
within whose Province Scotland then was, he would by no means agree that
Eadmere should take his Consecration from that Archbishop; and after much
consultation how then it might otherwise be performed, it was at last agreed,
that the Staff of the Bishopric should be solemnly laid upon the Altar, and
that Eadmere taking it from thence, should receive it as delivered him from God
himself: which accordingly was done. This calls to my mind another of like
nature, somewhat more ancient: where Wulstan, the good Bishop of Worcester,
both resigned his Bishopric by laying the Staff thereof upon the shrine of St.
Edward the Confessor (by the agreement of a Council holden under Lanfranc) and
in like manner received the same again from thence, in the presence of King
William, the Archbishop Lanfranc, and many others; not without some miracle,
as Matthew Paris writes it in An. 1095. These as (...).

And thus, in this matter of Shooting, If I have done as the Proverb says,
Shot like a Gentleman, that is fair, tho far off, it suffices. I humbly crave
pardon.

19. October. 1621. Recep. Apolog. ^5. October. praeced.
SOME Letters and Instruments, Concerning The killing of Hawkins by Archbishop
ABBOT.
A Letter written by his Majesty to the Lord Keeper, the Bishops of London,
Winton, Rochester, St. David's, and Exeter, Sir Henry Hobart Knight. Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, Mr. Justice Dodderidge, Sir Henry Martin, and Mr. Doctor
Steward, or any six of them, whereof the Lord Keeper, the Bishops of London,
Winton, and St. David's, to be four.
IT is not unknown unto you what happened this last Summer unfortunately to our
Right Trusty and our Right Well-beloved Counselor the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury; who Shooting at a Deer with a Cross-bow in Bramsil-park, did with
that shoot casually give the Keeper a wound, whereof he died. Which accident,
tho it might have happened to any other man, yet because his Eminent Rank and
Function in the Church, has (as we are informed) ministered occasion of some
doubts, as making the Case different in his Person, in respect of the Scandal
(as is supposed:) We therefore being desirous (as it is fit We should) to be
satisfied therein, and reposing especial Trust in your Learning and Judgment;
have made choice of you to inform Us concerning the nature of this Case: And do
therefore require you to take it presently into your consideration, and the
Scandal that may have risen thereupon: And to certify Us, what in your
Judgments the same may amount unto, either to an Irregularity or otherwise.
And lastly, what means may be found to redress the same (if need be) of all
which points We shall expect to hear your Reports, with what diligence and
expedition you possibly may. Dated at Theobalds 3. Oct. 1621.

A Letter from the Lord Keeper to Archbishop Abbot, intimating the Reception
of his Majesty's Letter.
May it please your Grace.
MY Lord of Winchester, my Lord Hobart, Sir John Dodderidge, Dr. Martin, and my
self, having met this afternoon about a Letter sent unto us (together with some
others) under his Majesty's Signet; and finding the Contents thereof to require
from us some information of the nature of an unfortunate Act, which does referr
unto your Grace: We thought our selves tied in all justice and respect, to send
your Grace (as I do here enclosed) a copy of his Majesty's Letter: And to let
your Grace understand, that we are ready to receive from your Grace (in
writing) all the qualifying circumstance, of the Fact (if any such there be)
omitted in this Letter; that we may be better grounded to deliver our Opinions
(as is desired) concerning the nature of this unlucky accident. And we have
appointed two of the clock in the afternoon upon Saturday next, to be the time;
and this College of Westminster, to be the place of our meeting, to receive
what information of the Fact, your Grace shall (...) unto us, And ceasing to be
further troublesome, I shall (...)

Your Grace's poor Friend Jo. Lane. and C. S.
Westminst. Coll. (...) of October 162^.
The Archbishop's Answer.
My very good Lords,
I Thank you for sending me the Copy of his Majesty's Letter, which concerns
the ^nhappy (...) that befell me in Hampshire. I here enclosed send unto your
(...) a ^opy of the Verdict given up by the Jurors unto the Coroner: as also a
(...) of some circumstances of this Fact, which are not expressed in that
Verdict. (...) the first* being already upon Oath, it needs not (as I
conceive, under your Lor^s^^^ (favor) any further verification: And for the
other, such of the particular^ a^ are not included in the Verdict, there are in
readiness those who will testi^i^ the ^ame. And for the better expedition of
the whole business, if your (...) all on^^ (...) what are the special points in
Law to be insisted upon; I will, (...) ^ll, (...) sp^^^, cause my Council to be
ready to attend you: by whom I desire to give your Lordships satisfaction. And
so commending my Love and Service to your Lordships, and forbearing to be
further troublesome, I rest

Your Lordships very loving Friend Cant.
Lambeth, Oct. 13. 1621.
A Note of my Lord Keepers at the bottom of the Letter.
To this Letter we answered, that we had no Warrant to hear Counsel; no^ could
we in justice hear any, unless the credit of the Church and honor of the King,
had their Council likewise on the other side.

Jo. Linc. and C. S.

The opinion of the Bishops and others to whom the consideration of Archbishop
Abbot*s Case was referred; in a Letter to his Majesty.
May ^t please your Majesty.
WHereas we received a command from your Majesty under your Royal (...) to
deliver our opinions unto your Majesty, whether an Irregularity or (...) might
ar^se by this unfortunate Act, which God permitted to come to pass by ^h^ ^and
of the most Reverend Father in God the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, ^^ooting
in a Cross-bowe at a Deer in Bramsil-park; as also of the cure and (...) the
same Irregularity, in case it should be so adjudgd. (...) do in all (...)
humility return this account unto your Majesty:

(...) the first,

(...) be contracted by this Act, in the person of my Lord (...) gr^ater part
of our number could assent or agree: Because (...) and (...) themselves are so
general and so ready to entertain distinctions and limitations, the Doctors and
Glosses so differing, inferences and disputes so peculiar to every man's
conceit and apprehension, authorities of Canonists and Casuists so opposite in
this very Case in hand; that we could not return unto your Majesty any
unanimous resolution or opinion in the same.

For the second,

Whether any Scandal may arise out of this Act? We are of opinion, a Scandal
may be taken by the weak at home and the malicious abroad; though most of us
believe there was no Scandal given by the said Right Reverend Father.

For the third,

We are all agreed, not only that a Restitution or Dispensation may be granted
by your Majesty, either immediately under the Great Seal, or (which most of us
in all humility represent unto your Majesty) by the hands of some Clergymen,
Delegated by your Majesty for that purpose, or what other way your Majesty
shall be pleased to extend that favor. But withal, we are of opinion, that it
is most sitting for the said Reverend Father, both in regard of his Person and
the honor of the Church, to sue unto your most Gracious Majesty for the said
Dispensation in majorem cautelam, si qua forte sit Irregularitas. All which,
craving pardon for our weakness, we do in all humbleness submit to the decision
of your Majesty's most profound and incomparable Wisdom.

Jo. Linc. elect. C. S.
Geo. London. -- La. Winton. -- Jo. Roffens.
Guil. Menevens. elect. -- Valen. Exon. elect.
Henr. Hobart.
Jo. Doddridge. H. Marten. Ny. Stywarde.
Cir. di. 10. Nov. 1621.
DISPENSATIO CUM GEORGIO Archiepiscopo CANTUARIENSI, Super IRREGULARITATE.
REverendissimo in Christo Patri Georgio Providentia Divina Cantuariensi
Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, Johannes Lincoln.
Georgius London. Lancelotus Winton. Samuel Norwicens. Thomas Coven. and Lich.
Arthurus Bathon. and Wellen. Nicolaus Eliensis and Georgius Cicestrensis
permissione divina respective Episcopi de Provincia Cantuar. Salutem and
gratiam in Domino sempiternam. Recipimus Literas Commissionales a Serenissimo
in Christo Principe ac Domino nostro domino Jacobo Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Rege, fidei defensore, etc. sub magno sigillo Angliae
confectas and nobis directas; quarum tenor sequitur in haec verba: Jacobus Dei
gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, fidei defensor, etc.
Reverendo in Christo Patri and perdilecto and perquam fideli Consiliario nostro
Johanni Episcopo Lincoln. Custodi magni sigilli nostri Angliae, ac Reverendo in
Christo Patri Georgio Episcopo London. ac Reverendo in Christo Patri ac
perdilecto and perquam fideli Consiliario nostro Lanceloto Episcopo Winton.
necnon Reverendis in Christo patribus Samueli Norwicen. Thomae Coven. and
Lichen. Nicholao Elien. Arthuro Bathon. and Wellen. and Georgio Cicestren.
respective Episcopis* Salutem and gratiam.

Humili nobis supplicatione exposuit Reverendissimus in Christo Pater,
perdilectus and per fidelis Consiliarius noster Georgius Cantuar.
Archiepiscopus, quod cum nuper in parco quodam vocato Bramzil-park apud Bramzil
in Comitatu nostro Southamton. per honorandum virum ejusdem parci dominum
rogatus and invitatus damam sagitta figere destinaret, debita adhibita
diligentia ne quid inde periculi cuiquam eveniret; forte tamen accidit ut
sagitta ab eo emissa and in feram directa, in quendam Petrum Hawkins adhunc
Parci praedicti Custodem, improvide and temere se periculo ictus sagittae
exponentem, and per locum ubi a praefato Archiepiscopo conspici non potuit cum
imp^tu transcurrentem incideret, eique brachiam sauciaret; ex quo quidem
vuln^re* ^ra unius horae spacium expiraba^: and quamvis propter hujusmodi
homicidium casuale, nulla praefati Archiepiscopi culpa sed ipsius occisi
temeritate contig^ns, idem Reverendissimus Pater bona fretus conscientia, se
nullam omnino irregularitatem incurrisse, persuasissimum habeat; provida tamen
animi circumspec^ione, and ut omnis infirmorum mentibus scrupulus eximatur,
secum a nobis super omni and omnimoda irregularitate and irregularitatis nota
aut suspicione, si quam praemissorum ratione contraxisse forsitan aliquibus
videri possit, ad cautelam and ex superabundanti dispensari humiliter
supplicavit: Sciatis igitur quod nos petitionis hujusmodi vim and ^fficaciam
reg^o animo and pro affectu ponderantes, and de veritate praemissorum solicita
indagatione certiores facti, and ut piam Reverendissimi Patris intention^m ^ac
in re s^quamur, and ad abundatiorem cautelam, persidelis Consiliarii nostri
(...) ^ue de E^cl^si^ and Republica m^r^^i Prae^ulis statum, famam, and
dignitatem, nostri etiam patrocinii minime teneri and firmare dignoscamur, ad
praesentem venimus dispositionem: Vobisque vel aliquibus sex vestrum, quorum
vos praefat. Johannem Lincoln. Georgium London. Lancelotum Winton. and Samuelem
Norwicen. respective Episcopos, quatuor esse volumus, de quorum etiam side,
judicio, and industria plurimum confidimus, mandamus and de gratia nostra
speciali and ex auctoritate nostra regia suprema and Ecclesiastica qua
fungimur, pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris damus and plenam
concedimus facultatem and potestatem per praesentes, quatenus vos vel aliqui
sex vestrum; quorum vos praefatos, Johannem Lincoln. Georgium London.
Lancelotum Winton. and Samuelem Norwicen. respective Episcopos, quatuor esse
volumus, cum praefato Reverendissimo Patre super omni and omnimod. juris vel
facti defectu, censura, sive poena aliqua Canonica and Ecclesiastica,
praesertim vero Irregularitate omni seu Irregularitatis nota (si quae forsitan
ratione praemissorum contracta fuit) vel quibusdam contracta esse videantur,
utque in susceptis Ordinibus and Jurisdictionibus secundum concreditam sibi
ratione Ordinis and Archiepiscopatus sui potestatem libere ministrare, frui,
exercere, and gaudere valeat, ad majorem cautelam dispensetis, ac caetera omnia
and singula quae ad statum, commodum, and honorem praefati Reverendissimi
Patris conservandum and corroborandum in hoc part necessaria fuerint seu
quomodolibet opportuna faciatis, and dispensationem hujusmodi, caeteraque sic
ut praefertur per vos aut aliquos sex vestrum, quorum vos praefatas, Johannem
Lincoln. Georgium London. Lancelotum Winton. and Samuelem Norwicen. respective
Episcopos, quatuor esse volumus, facienda in debita juris forma concepta, and
inscripta, reducta, sigillisque vestris seu sigillo aliquo authentico munita,
praefato Archiopiscopo tradere non differatis. Quam quidem Dispensationem,
caeteraque sic ut praefertur per vos aut aliquos sex vestrum, quorum vos
praefatos, Johannem Lincoln. Georgium London. Lancelotum Winton. and Samuelem
Norwicen. respective Episcopos, quatuor esse volumus, pagenda sub magno insuper
sigillo nostro Angliae confirmari volumus, and super hiis praefati magni
sigilli nostri Custodi aliisque Cancellariae nostrae ministris quibuscunque
express mandamus, and plenam tenore praesentium concedimus potestatem. Test
meipso apud Westmon. vicesimo secundo die Novembris, Anno regni nostri Angliae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae, decimo nono and Scotiae LV. Secundum tenorem and
exigentiam Literarum Commissionalium praerecitatarum, and ad eximendum omnem
scrupulum ab infirmorum mentibus, si quis forsitan sit aut fuerit in ea part
conceptus. Nos praedicti, Johannes Lincoln. Georgius London. Lancelotus Winton.
Samuel Norwicen. Thomas Coven. and Lichfeld. Arthurus Bathon. and Wellen.
Richardus Elien. and Georgius Cicestrens. respective Episcopi, nomine primitus
invocato ac Deum patrem oculis solum habentes, and considerantes atque pro
certo habentes quod dicta venatio cui per te data erat opera, quando dictum
casuale homicidium (te nihil tale suspicante) accidebat, erat modesta, decens,
and quieta, and quod debita per se adhibita erat diligentia in dicta venatione
ad praecavendum ne quid periculi alicui inde eveniret, Tecum praefato Georgio
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi super omni Irregularitate and Irregularitatis nota,
si quam forsitan ratione casualis homicidii sive mortis praefati Petri Hawkins
incurristi vel aliquibus incurrisse videaris ad omnem and qualemcunque juris
effectum dispensamus; teque praefatum Georgium Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem ac
personam tuam ab omnibus and singulis inhabilitatibus, suspensionibus,
irregularitatibus, aliisque poenis, impedimentis, censuris, and coercionibus
quibuscunque Ecclesiasticis sive Canonicis (si quam forsitan ratione
praemissorum aut eorum alicujus incurristi aut aliquibus incurrisse videaris)
ad omnem and qualemcunque juris effectum liberamus ac tenore praesentium pro
liberato haberi decernimus and pronunciamus: quemque defectum, labem, notam,
sive maculam, (si quam forsitan ratione praemissorum aut eorum alicujus
contraxisti aut aliquibus contraxisse videaris, penitus abolemus ac pro
abolitis haberi decernimus and pronunciamus: Teque etiam praefatum Georgium
Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem ex superabundanti and ad majorem cautelam,
rehabilitamus and restituimus ad omnem and qualemcunque juris effectum: Et ut
in susceptis Ordinibus and Archiepiscopatu praedicto, ac in omnibus and
singulis jurisdictionibus, privilegiis, praeeminentiis, praerogativis,
dignitatibus, alque aliis rebus quibuscunque, aliqu^ modo ad dictum
Archiepiscopatum spectantibus and pertinentibus libere ministrare valeas,
concedimus and indulgemus, perinde ac si praedictum casuale homicidium
commissum non fuisset; Canonibus, Legibus, Decretis, Ordinationibus, and
Constitutionibus Ecclesiasticis quibuscunque contrariis (si quae sint in ca
part contraria) in aliquo non obstantibus. In cujus rei testimonium, sigilla
nostra Episcopalia hisce praesentibus apponi fecimus. Dat. duodecimo die
Decembris, Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo vicesimo primo.

Test Rege apud Westmon. 24. die Decembris Anno Regni Regis Jacobi, etc. XIX.
and Scotiae quinquagesimo quinto.
Of the ORIGINAL OF TESTAMENTS and WILLS, 17. June 1633.
And of their PROBATE, To whom it anciently belonged.
THE word Testament or any other for a last Will, is not found in all the
Scripture before Christ's time. And though it be common in the vulgar
Translation, yet St. Jerome notes, that it is according to the Hebrew to
signify Pactum or F^dus, and so the Geneva Translation expresses it.

Although therefore there be many passages in the Old Testament which seem to be
meant of Wills, and so expounded by Interpreters: As where it is said that
Achitophel 1 put his house in order and hanged himself. And where Hezekiah
Kings 15. 1.
is commanded from God to put his house in order for he should die. Yet there
appears no Law nor form of Wills; and the declarations that Jacob, Moses,
Joshua, David, etc. made at the times of their death were matter of consolation
and counsel, effata novissima or ultima elogia Cod. de Testam. 1. 30.
, but not Testaments as we use the word.

Sigonius in his book of Jewish Antiquities makes no mention of their Wills,
nor do I yet find any in Josephus. It is true, that S. Paul makes express
mention of them, but not till the Romans had conquered the Jews, and imposed
their Law upon them. Then S. Paul speaks of them according to the Roman Law,
not Judaical. Of all this I desire further advertisement.

It is observed that the ancient Greeks, who (as Josephus testifies) fetched
their Laws from the Jews, had not any.

Tacitus reports of the Germans in his time, which was about 80. years after
Christ, Successores sui cuique liberi and nullum testamentum. Si liberi non
sunt, proximus gradus in possessione, fratres, patruus, avunculus with their
descendants according to our Law.

It is therefore very probable, that our Saxon Ancestors, coming out of
Germany, observed for a long time the custom of their Country, and that they
had not the use of making Wills; as neither had their brethren the Normans.

The custom therefore of making Wills among the German and Northern Nations was
taken up by little and little from the Romans in some places after one manner,
in some after another, as it is to be seen in France it self.

When the Roman Emperors grew potent in Germany, and the German Princes came to
be Emperors, the Germans generally forsook their ancient custom spoken of by
Tacitus, and received the Roman Law.

The rest of the Angli that remained in Germany and came not over into England,
made a Law L. Angl. tit. 13. de potestate testandi p. 485.
about the year of our Lord 900. That it should be lawful for a Freeman to
dispose his inheritance by Will as he pleased. 2 Samuel 17. 23.


The Normans kept the old custom Cust. ref^rm. d^ Norman. Art. 414.
in part, and left it in the other part. They suffered him that had neither wife
nor children (if he were twenty year old) to make a Will and bequeath his
moveable goods as he listed, either to or from his kindred. So likewise if he
Art. 420.
were married and his wife dead.

Having children Art. 418.
he could dispose but of a third part. And so might man or woman of 16. years
old. But land which they (according to the Civilians) called immovable goods,
no man Art. 415.
amongst them might dispose of by his Will.

In some other parts of France Gloss. ad Art. 412.
as in Champain, they disposed both moveable and immovable, that is, goods and
lands, according to the Civil Law.

The Civil Law custom they called Lex Romana, the other Lex Barbara.

Our Saxon Ancestors by direction of their Clergy, who chiefly affected the
Roman manners, seem also to have observed the Civil Law in making of Wills both
in substance for disposing Lands and Goods, and much in the form and ceremony
of making and publishing the same.

As Carolus Magnus Engolism. in vita Carol. p. 31.
in France disposed the Lands of his great dominions between his three sons,
Lewis, Pepin, and Charles, by his last Will. So by his example King Ethelwulfus
Testam. Alfredi in Angl. Norm. p. 22.
here divided his Lands by his Will between his three sons, Aethelbald,
Aethelred, and Aelfred.

King Aelfred Testam. praedict.
in the like manner disposed both his Lands and Goods by his Will now extant.
And many other Saxons Lib. Rams.. 130.
by their Wills in writing, bequeathed Lands and Goods with their Bodies unto
Monasteries. That herein they followed the Civil Law is manifest by the Saxon
Will of Birtrick Lamb. Itin. Cantiae. p. 492.
and Elf^uith his wife, made about the year 980. (according to the manner of
that time) by them both jointly.

First it seems to be made in calatis Comitiis Instit. de test. ord.. sed ut.
, that is, in an assembly called together for that purpose. Then whereas the
Civil Law Ibid.. sed cum.
requires necessarily VII. witnesses, here were a dozen, least it might be
defective in that one was a woman, and Ibid.. Testes autem.
some other under age or Bondmen.

The disposition of Lands as well as of Goods, is by the Civil Law, and
therefore the course is more solemn. Which also this well observes both for
disposing Land and Goods and also for the solemnity of the course. But most
evidently it appears to be according to the Civil Law, in that the man and
his wife join both together in it, which was neither in use nor resolved to be
good till the Novel Constitution Constit. Novell. lib. ix. tit. 4.
of Theodosius and Valentinian did authorize it.

After this Constitution that kind of Testament became so common, that
Marculfus Formul lib. 11. cap. 17.
, who lived about the year 660. has left unto us an especial formula or
precedent of it as it was then in use in France. And says in it, that it was
ut Romanae Legis decrevit authoritas. And concludes it with an imprecation or
curse against such as should violate it, as does also the Will of Birtrick.

With the like solemnity of witnesses (eight in number besides a Lady) did
Elfere another Saxon before Birtrick, bequeath the Town or Land of Snodland to
the Church of S. Andrews.

Of the Probate of Wills or Testaments.
After the Will was thus composed, the Roman use ff. de Tab. exhib. L. Si quis.
was to have the Testator and Witnesses to subscribe it, then binding it up
close with thread, to seal it with their Seals, which upon producing of it they
or many of them were to view and acknowledge before the Praetor or Judge. And
then Paul. Sent. lib. iv. tit. 6. Bign. p. 566.
rupto lino the thread being cut, it was opened and published, and copies of it
delivered to the parties under a Public Seal, the Original remaining in the
public Register.

The ancient manner of opening, publishing, or as we call it, proving of Wills
before the Magister Census, is described by Gloss. Cod. de Testam. L. 18.
John Fabri. But nearer to our purpose is that in the Formulae of Marculfus
Lib. 11. cap. 37. and 38.
of a Will proved in a City or Corporation before the Magistrate there, or of a
Town before the Defensor Plebis.

For a Will by the Civil Law and the use of our neighbor Nations, might be
proved before diverse Officers and in diverse places.

We already mentioned the Praetor, but ff. fo. 168. Cod. Instit. de Testam.
lib. 23. f. 554.
Justiman the Emperor ordained that in Rome none should be opened save by the
Magister Census. In the Provinces by a Constitution of Theodosius, Cod. Theod.
lib. 8.
the Rectores Provinciarum, and where the access to them was uneasy, there
Donations and Wills made in Cities and Corporations might be exhibited and
proved before Magistratus Municipales the Magistrates there; in other Towns
before the Defensor Plebis. According to these two last are the formulae of
Marculfus and another in Brissonius.

From these Constitutions of the Emperors, grew the various manner of Probate
of Wills amongst us in ancient time.

With the Magister Census being proper only to the City of Rome we have nothing
to do. But as we were once a Province of the Empire, so our Ancestors received
and held the manner of Provinces. For the Rectores Provinciarum, which with us
were the Earls of the Counties, had the cognizance or Probation of Wills as
shall by and by appear. So also had diverse of our Magistratus Municipales,
Magistrates of Cities and Corporations: As that which I am best acquainted with
my Neighbors of Lenn Episcopi, now Kings Lynn in Norfolk. And instead of the
Defensores Plebis in an ordinary Town, the Lord of the Town or Manor both had,
and has that privilege with us in diverse places.

All this while there is no mention of any Ecclesiastical Person, which we must
now look into.

The fourth Council Cap. VIII.
of Carthage ordained, that Episcopus tuitionem testamentorum non suscipiat, and
this Canon Gratian has taken into the Body of the Canon Law, whereto the Gloss
says: Tuitionem, id est, apertionem, sc. coram eo non apperiantur, sed coram
Magistro Census. C. de testam. L. Consulta. And though it adds vel dicatur quod
non sit advocatus ad tuendum testamentum, yet that seems an idle
interpretation: for though Epiphanius makes mention that Bishops in old time
judged Causes, yet it was never known that they pleaded Causes. But it is
apparent, that the Clergymen in those days took upon them to prove Wills even
in Justinian's time, who flourished An. Dom. 530. And therefore he prohibited
Cod. de testam. Lib. 23 fol. 354.
them not only by a Constitution, but also by a mulct of 50. pound weight of
Gold, saying Absurdum est namque si promiscuis actibus rerum turbentur officia,
and alii creditum alius subtrahat; ac praecipue Clericis ut D. L. 5. de
Episcopi and Cleri repetita.
Clericis quibus opprobrium est, si peritos se velint disceptationum esse
forensium ostendere.

But here we see that the Clergy even in those days, had set their foot upon
the business, and I suppose that since that time they never pulled it wholly
out again. It is like the Eastern Nations adhering to the Empire did observe
it. But the Western being torn from it by the Northern Nations Saxons, Goths
and Normans, took and left as they thought good.

Re^^ardus King of the Western Goths about the year 594. though he Wi^^goth.
(...) 11. (...) v. ^. 12.
retained the manner of the Civil Law in making Wills, yet he ordained that they
should be publish*d by a Priest as formerly they had been.

His succ^ssor Chindavin^us about An. 650. making a Law about a Military Will
ordained, Wis^go^h. (...) 11. (...) v. L. 13.
that it should be examined by the Bishop and Earl, and ratified by the hand of
a Priest and the Earl.

As the Northern Nations I speak of the Goths, the Saxons, and Normans, were of
Neighbor and affinity in their Habitation, Language, and Original, so were
they also in their Laws and Manners.

Therefore as the Goths trusted to their Priests with the passing of Wills, so
did the Normans, their Custom and Law la Coust. ref^r. Art. 412.
was that Tout testament doit estre pass par devant le Cure, ou Vicaire,
notaire ou tabellion en la presence de daux temotn^s idoines d^ XX. ans
accomplis and non legataires. That all Testaments shall pass before the Curate
or Vicar, etc. where the Commentary Verb. Notaire o^ Tab^ll^^n.
notes, that it must be the Curate or Vicar of the same Parish, where the
Testator dwells. And that Notary has been adjudged to be a Notary Apostolic
or Ecclesiastical. So that the business was then with them wholly in the hands
of the Clergy.

This ancient Norman use lives to this day in many Towns of England. The
Parson of Castle Rising in Norfolk has the Probat of Testaments in that Town.
And so has the Parson of Rydon, and the Parson of North-Wotton in North-Wotton.

To go back to our Saxon Ancestors. I see they held a kind of (...) or
similitude of Laws with their brethren the Goths and Normans. And though I find
no positive constitution among them in this point, yet ab actis and judicatis
(the supporters of the Common Law it self) we may perceive what their Custom
and Law was.

Elf^re who lived before the year 960. having made his Will (...) ^ir^r. Iti^.
Can^ p ^96.
, did afterward publish the same before Odo the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Elfsy the Priest of Croydon, and many other.

Birtrick and his wife in no long time after declared Ibid. p. 492.
their Will at Mepham before Elfstane Bishop of Rochester, Wine the Priest, and
diverse other. See a MS. Law LL. Alur. c. 37.
of King Alured the Great, who flourished An. 880. De eo qu^ terram
testam^ntalem habet, quam ei par^ntes sui dimiserunt: ponimus ne illam extra
cognationem suam ^^ttere possit, si scriptum intersit testamenti, and testes
quod ^orum prohibitto fuerit, qui ha^c imprimis acquisiverint and ipsorum qui
dederint ei n^ hoc possit, and hoc in Regis and Episcopi testimonio recitetur
coram parentela sua.

It is said in the Civil Law Cod. de testam. (...) 352.
that the declaration of a Testament before the Prince omnium Testamentorum
solennitatem superat. Here the Bishop is joined with the King in cognizance of
the Testament by the copulative and, but Mr. Lambard (though I confess it agrees
not with the Saxon) makes it in the disjunctive, coram Rege aut Episcopo, as
if it might be before either of them. The Saxon (...) Alu^. ^. ^7.
is on Cyninges and bisceopes geitnysse, in R^gis and Episcopi testimonio. Be it
one or the other it comes much to a reckning, for the presence of the King was
then represented in the County by the person of the Earl of the County, as it
is this day in his Bench by the person of his Judges. And the Earl and Bishop
sitting together in the Court of the County did (as if the King and the Bishop
had been there) hear jointly, not only the causes of Wills spoken of in this
Law, wherein the Bishop had special interest, but other also that came before
them: And therefore in those days the extent of the Earl's County and the
Bishop's Diocese had but one limit.

To this purpose is the Law Edg. LL. Secul.
of King Edgar Cap. 5. and the like of Canutus Canut. LL. Secul. cap. 17. MS.
Cap. 17. Comitatus bis in anno congregatur nisi plus necesse sit, and in illo
Comitatu sint Episcopus and Comes qui ostendant populo and justitiam Dei and
rectitudines seculi. The Saxon is, and thaere beon thaere scyre biscop and se
Ealdorman. Let the shire Bishop be there and the Alderman, so then they called
the Earl.

Thus both Ecclesiastical and Secular Causes were both decided in the County
Court, where, by the Canons of the Church the Ecclesiastical Causes were first
determined, and then the Secular. And many Laws and Constitutions Longob. lib.
11. tit. 53. Capitular. lib. IV. tit. 71.
there be to keep good correspondency between the Bishop and the Earl or
Alderman.

And as both kind of justice were administered in the County Court, so were they
also in the Hundred Court; in which course they continued in both Courts 'till
the very time of the Conquest, as it seems, and almost all his time after.

But about the eighteenth year of his Regn, by a Common Council of the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Princes of the Kingdom, (which we now call a
Parliament) he ordained, as appears in a Charter Inter privil. Eccl. Lincoln.
indulta and a Ric. II. per inspex. confirm. anno ejus 2do. Chapter 2. m. 2. n. 4.
of his then granted to Remigius Bishop of Lincoln, Vt nullus Episcopus vel
Archidiaconus de legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundred placita teneat, nec
causam quae ad regimen animarum pertinet ad judicium secularium omnium
adducant, sed quicunque secundum Episcopales leges de quacunque causa vel culpa
interpellatus fuerit, ad locum quem ad hoc Episcopus ei elegerit and
nominaverit veniat, ibique de causa vel culpa sua respondeat and non secundum
Hundred, sed secundum Canones and Episcopales leges, rectum Deo and Episcopo
suo faciat, etc.

What ensued upon this, and how the Bishop and Earl divided their Causes and
Jurisdiction appears not; That of Wills belonged either wholly to the Earl
(as Rector Provinciae) by the Constitution of Theodosius, or as much to the
Earl as to the Bishop, by the Laws of King Edgar and Canutus. But the
subsequent use must inform us what was then done upon it. And thereby it
seems that all went wholly to the Bishop and Clergy, and that the Saxon
custom was changed, and the Norman introduced: And that the name of Court
Christian or Ecclesiastical, sprung not up or was heard of till after this
division.

For now the devising of Lands by Will after the Saxon manner was left, and the
goods themselves could not be bequeathed, but according to the use of Normandy.
A third part must remain to the wife, a third part to the heir (or children)
and a third part the husband might dispose by his Will. The Norman manner
appears at large by their Custumary, and the English at that time briefly
touched by Glanvil Lib. VII. cap. 5.
.

But let the Will and the matter thereof be what it would. It seems the
Insinuation, Probate, and Cognizance of it, belonged generally now unto the
Bishop and Clergy, though I must confess it be hard to find manifest proof
thereof in those ancient days of the Conqueror and his Sons.

We must therefore discover as we can, and very material (in my understanding)
to that purpose is the testimony which I find in the ancient Laws Reg. Maj.
lib. 1. cap. 2.. 1.
of Scotland, composed by the commandment of David their King, who lived long in
the time of King Henry I. Son of the Conqueror, and of King Stephen the
Conqueror Grandchild. For those Laws have that similitude with ours of that
time delivered by Glanvil, as that in effect they be much what the same,
mutatis mutandis, etc. and very often totidem verbis with Glanvil.

It is there said under the title De causis ad Ecclesiam spectantibus, etc.
Pla^^tum de dotibus, and de testamentis ad forum Ecclesiasticum pertinet. Dower
was then thought to belong to the Ecclesiastical Court, because it was a
dependency of Marriages, which does belong to that Court. And the Rule was, Qui
est Judex in principali est Judex in acc^ssorio. But to our purpose it is
plain, that Testaments were then de ^ure Ecclesiastico in Scotland, and
doubtless even then also in England.

For not long after (in Henry II's time) Glanvil Lib. VII. ^ap. 7. Mag^. Cart.
Hen* I. ^ap. 9.
himself does testify as much, saying, that where the Testator names no
Executor, his next of kin possunt se ad hoc faciendum ingerere, and might have
a Writ to the Sheriff (in the form there recited) against them, that detained
any of the Goods: and then adds, si quis autem Auctoritate hujus Brevis
conventus dixerit contra Testamentum, soil. quod non suit rationabiliter
factum, vel quod res petita non fuerit, ita ut dicitur legata, tun^ quidem
placitum illud in Curia Christianitatis audiri debet and terminari, etc.

At this time Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was grown to that exorbitant height
and latitude, that they neither doubted to convent the King himself to their
Synod, as Henry Bishop of Winchester and Legate did King Stephen to the Synod
of Winchester, nor to put him to corporal punishment under the name of
penance, as the Monks of Canterbury did King Henry II. by whipping him. In
ordinary matters therefore, no doubt but they extended their jurisdiction very
far. Yet all this while was not the decretum Gratiani come into the World.

In Henry III. time, Bracton expresses Wills and Testaments to belong to the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as Glanvil had done before in Henry II. and the
Scottish Laws in Henry I. time. Si de testamento oriatur contentio in foro
Ecclesiastico debet placitum terminari, quia de causa testamentaria (sicut nec
de causa matrimoniali) Curia Regis non se intromittit, etc.

I am now come to the lists of the modern Common Law, and I dare venture no
further.

FINIS.
ICENIA: SIVE NORFOLCIAE Descriptio Topographica.

Ab HENRICO SPELMANNO Equ. Aur.

ICENIA.
Icenorum nomina.
ICeni nostri, quibus nixi sunt initiis, and unde nomen asciverint; nec
proditum reor a veteribus, nec rimatum feliciter a recentioribus. Caesar
(hospes) Cenimagnos vocat: Ptolemaeus (altero velut orb dissitus) Simenos:
Tacitus, Praefecti Britanniae gener, and diuturnus in Gallia Belgica
magistratus, certiusque igitur insequendus, Icenos. Mitto, qui Tigenos; sine
dubio perperam.

Icenorum derivatio.
Non a Rege aliquo nuncupatos, cum Camdeno censeo: sed nec ut ille a forma
loci, quam Britanni (inquit) Iken, id est, cuneum vocant. Certe Ptolomaei
tabula and comperta ratio, quadrangulam potius justam, quam cuneatam faciunt.
Mallem ego ab Ise fluvio celeberrimo, Britannis Ichen, totam regionem brachiis
long divaricatis transeuntem, deducendos. Sic apud Asiaticos, Indi ab Indo;
apud Graecos, Maeones a Maeonia; apud Scythas, Alani ab Alano; apud Germanos,
Alsati ab Alsa; apud Gallos, Sequani a Sequana, fluminibus. Sic in ipsa Anglia,
Derbienses a Derwent; Lancastrenses a Lan, alias Lon fluvio, ut ipse agnoscit
Camdenus Page 554. a. and 754. b.
noster; Northumbrenses ab Humbro; and Wiltoniae Comitatus a Guillo, i. e. Willo
fluvio, ut perhibet Wigorniensis. Nec obest (s) in (c) migratio, cum in voce
conservetur sonus, and Ptolemaeo litera, quam alii tamen in (g) mutant. Soliti
autem sunt Britanni pro Graeco s, chapter ponere, ut Ichen pro (...), Soch pro
(...), i. e. sue, Buch pro (...) i. e. bove.

Ise fluvius unde dictus.
Fluvii nomen ab Ise, alias Iside, gentium Dea, sortitum videatur. Priscis,
quippe in more fuit, sylvas, montes, fluvios Numinibus consecrare, eorumque
appellare nominibus. Britannos vero prae Diis aliis Cererem and Proserpinam,
(quae and Isis dicitur) inferna coluisse numina Strabo perhibet. Hinc
infernales sui ritus, and nocturna sacra. Nox diem ducit; and per noctes,
dierum seriem; per lunas, mensium; per hyemes, annorum numerant. Sic hodie a
Seven-night pro VII. diebus; a Fort-night, quasi fourteen-night, pro XIV.
diebus dicimus. Et majores nostri XX. XXX. Xl. Winters, pro totidem annis
recitabant. Hyemem autem ideo consecrabant infernalibus, quod rerum semina sub
hoc tempore ab eisdem existimabant conservari. Hinc and in fluviis nostris
celeberrimis, crebrum Isis nomen, alias caelibis, ut Brigantum Isis; Isis
Icenorum; and Isis Dobunorum: alias conjugis, ut Tham-isis, Is-urium, and
hujusmodi.

Iceniae termini
Sed Iceniae videamus terminos; quibus includit Camdenus Norfolciam,
Suffolciam, Cantabrigiae Comitatum, and Huntingtoniae. Quod ut non probetur
facile, ita sat difficile est ad refellendum. Ptolemaeus Simenos ponit inter
Catieuchlanos and Metarim aestum, versus Boream; Trinobantes versus Austrum;
Dobunos and Coritanos versus Occidentem; and Germanicum Oceanum versus
Orientem. Sed quibus hi destituuntur invicem finibus, non exponit. Camdenus
Coritanos locat, ubi Ptolemaeus inversis sedibus Catieuchlanos; mediterraneos
scil. ubi hic maritimos, and e contra. Auctorem non laudat; propter viri tamen
eminentiam inficias non ibo; ne crassa versans caligine, falsis illudar
imaginibus. Haud tamen censeam priscos illos Britanniae populos adeo certis and
definitis limitibus disterminatos, cum Scriptores Antiqui tractum potius quo
versati sunt obscuriores populi, quam tractuum limits designaverint. Et qui
fieri possit, ut hod^^rnis Comitatuum finibus dividerent^^ olim B^^^anni
veteres, cum Comitatus ipsi a Saxonibus postea, and plerunque ab Aluredo non
ultra (...) anni^, dim^tati sint? Reor equidem priscarum gentium terminos,
(...) barbararum, instar magni aestuarii, nunc expansiores fuisse, nunc
contractio^^^, juxta potentiam and deliquium suorum Principum. Sic Londinum
ipsum, tot^^s Insulae Metropolin, alias a veteribus in Essexia, alias in
Middl^s^xia vidimus collocatam.

Eversa Britannia, divisaque a victoribus Romany in quinque ditiones citra
vallum quod instituit Hadrianus, restituitque postmodum Severus Imperator
(sell. in Britanniam primam, Britanniam secundam, ^laviam Caesariensem,
Valentiam, and maximam Caesariensem) cessit Icenorum hic tractus (ut Camdeno
pla^ui^) in ^laviam Caesariensem. Celebre vero Antiquitatis monumentum, quod
Notitia utriusque Imp^rii nuncupatur, in -- Vi^ariorum Britanniarum Insulam
ponens; Britanniam secundam locat (consulto dixeris, an fortu^^o) ubi
Ptolemaeus Trinobantes and Simenos.

Sed ejectis tandem Britannis, cum reliquiis Romanorum, descendit Flaviae
nomen, pariter and Iceniae ad inferos, vocaturque a Saxonibus tractus iste
East-Angle i. Anglia Orientalis, quod gens Anglorum cum Saxonibus e Germania
venientium, suam hic obtinuislent sedem, part alia circa Humbrum incolente.
Quibus tamen limitibus claudebatur, cum nec adhuc in Comitatus distincta ^sset
insula, satis videatur ambigendum, dimensionem licet satis habeamus explicatam.
In antiquissima enim descriptione omnium praediarum, ex Australi part Humbri
fluminis, East-Engl perhibetur 30000. hidas demetiri. Hidam Beda familiam
vocat, and vulgus alias pro 100. and 120. acris terrae aestimavit. Nec semper
tamen definite; sed Normanni postea caru^atam appellarunt, Scriptores medii
seculi coloniam, and Romani olim villam rusticam.

Cum ^^^o Aluredus, Rex (sine invidia dixerim) inter Principes optimos
laudatissimus, Angliam totam ad priscam Germanorum politiam in Shiras, quas
plerique Comitatus; Centurias (quas hundreda jam and wapentachia) and Decanias
(quas Fri^ergas vulgo and Tithingas appellamus) divisisset; concluditur
East-Anglorum ditio trium Shirarum extensione, Norfolciae, Suffolciae, and
Cantabrigiae. Non dico, Comitatuum, quod ad unum omnes sub hoc seculo
pertinuer^ Comitatum; siquidem ut ad unum Episcopatum. Comitatus enim plures
saepe obtinuit shiras, and iisdem quibus Episcopatus finiebatur terminis; quod
Episcopus and Comes simul considentes, populo jus dicerent; hic humanum ille
vero divinum.

Haec, pulsis Britannis, inter advenas Saxones conditio fuit; donec erectam in
Monarchiam Aluredus, Angliam totam in certas portiones dissecuit; quae a facto,
Shires hodie asque appellantur. Qua partitione, licet antiquos Britannorum
limits in quibusdam observasse non est dubium; in aliis tamen longius
discessisse certum est. Ideoque -- Sectiones Britannicis respondere non
credendae sunt. Deposita autem controversia (ut certa nostro argumento s^^na
statuatu^) concedamus hodiernos Norfolciae, Suffolciae, Cantabrigiae, and
Huntingtoniae tractus, Icenorum ambitu contineri.

Redacta heptarchia in Monarchiam, Canutus Magnus Angliae, Daniae, Norwegiae,
aliarumque gentium Borealium Rex, Monarchiam hanc in Tetrarchiae speciem
disposuit, viz. West-Saxoniae regimen, sibimet; East-Angliam (cujus duces
Vlfkettelum patrem and Athelwardum filium in Essenduni praelio trucidavera^*
quaeque ja^^ Norsol^iam and Suffolciam complecti dicitur) Turkillo Comiti;
M^rciam seu partem Mediterraneam, Edrico principi perfido; and Northumbriam,
Henrico designavit.

Sic sit East-Anglia, Anglo-dania; and cum novo populo novas suscipit leges,
quae a conditoribus Dene-la(...), i. e. lex Danorum, appellatus. Prioribus
igitur duabus (i. e. ^est-Saxon-lag and Mereen-lag) accedens, jam tertia (...)
constituit, e quibus cum Edvardus Confessor unam ex omnibus deduxisset,
Communemque inde appellasset; Gulielmus I. a Danis and Norwegis oriundus,
Danorum illam profundiorem and honestiorem aliis fuisse contendens, eam omnino
suscitaverat, si vehementissimis Magnatum deprecationibus non fuisset
remoratus. Ab hoc vero tempore ita claruerunt Norfolcienses pietatis studio and
splendidis ingeniis; ut hinc in legum scientia primas obtinentes, quolibet
aevo, regni tribunalia scientissimis judicibus, subsellia argutissimis
Jurisconsultis ornarunt: illinc rerum coelestium ardore conciti plus minus jam
700. Ecclesias in hoc tractu, and ultro 70. coenobia (quot in simili spatio
nusquam invenies) condiderunt. Vivit sat honest ipsa plebecula; cujus tamen
rusticitatem famoso derisit carmine (quod aliquando vidimus) sub Johannis Regis
exitu Monachus quidam Petroburgensis, sic exordiens: Bal. 261.
Edictum exiit Augusto Caesare
Qui mittens nuncios jussit describere
Mundi provincias summo cum opere.


Erat vero tunc quidam familiaris ejus Norfolcianus, Jo. de S. Omero, cujus
nominis familia in Well juxta Wisbech sedem habuit, and foemina haerede ad
Beaupreos transiit. Ille monachi vesaniam indignatus, patrias edit vindicias,
numeros reddens numeris, and rhythmos rhythmis: opusculum inscribit
Norfolcianae descriptionis impugnationem. Sic inchoatur. Edictum fingitur
factum a Caesare.

Sub Rege autem Johanne Walsing. Ypod. in An. 1215. p. 462.
novas suscepisse periclitabatur Norfolcia and Suffolcia incolas. Has enim
provincias ipse, ut dicebat, per Chartam suam Hugoni de Bones dederat, qui cum
60. millia armatorum in auxilium ejus comparasset, una omnes a pelago sunt
absorpti, and cadaver Hugonis cum mersorum multitudine tam foeminarum and
infantium quam virorum, Gernemutae ejectum. Multitudo aerem ipsum inficiens
morbum and pestem provincialibus intulit; quos ut viva statuerat extinguere,
and seeds hic sibi perpetuas comparare, voti quodammodo compos efficitur.

De Cael^ and Solo.
E quatuor his Regiunculis; mediterraneae sunt omnino Huntingtoniensis and
Cantabrigiensis: maritimae, pro dimidio, Norfolcia and Suffolcia. Coelum
omnibus velut unum, mite satis and tenue; sed maritimis refrigerantius. Solum
unicuique proprium; sed mediterrane is pinguius. Huntingtonia pascuis aptior;
Cantabrigia Cereri; Suffolcia lacte scatet and caseo; Norfolcia vellere est
nobilior. Mediterraneae tantum ex humo vivunt. Maritimae autem, cum Thetim
habent vicinam, penu praeterea illic funguntur ditissima. Huntingtonia, leviter
montana est: Cantabrigia, tota campestris: Suffolcia, sylvis consita:
Norfolcia, omnium particeps.

Singularum fines in paludibus coeunt; ubi commune omnibus flumen unum est,
amplum, piscosum, and navigationi commodissimum. Ousam dicunt; sed corrupt (ut
mihi videtur) pro Isidem. E paludibus damnum saepe omnes ferunt; lucrum tamen
annuo non exiguum; praeter ingentem vim piscium and aquatilium. Fluvius iste
mediterraneis multis regiunculis tanquam via lactea est; qua merces and alia
vitae necessaria copiose inferunt and deferunt: ejusque in ostio, instar
clavis, Lenna sedet. Aliud flumen celebre Huntingtonia non habet, nec
Cantabrigia: habent vere tum Suffolcia; tum Norfolcia, quae and caeteras,
rivulorum multitudine, antecellit. Succedit proxima Suffolcia. Indigere videtur
Cantabrigia; sed magis tamen Huntingtonia. Metallum nulla effodit, nec
carbones: ne structiles quidem lapides; si non Norfolcia. Eliensis insula in
paludibus sedet; contineturque sub Cantabrigiae appellatione.

Marslandia
Marslandia (quae ex nomine cognoscitur, palustre solum) 30000. metit^ jugera,
inter VII. villas distributa. Aggere cingitur elatiori, ab Australi plaga
recentium undarum impetum, a Boreali marinarum, cohibente. Eoum latus fortius
rodit Isis fluvius; Occiduum, furens a Vulturno aestuarium. Incolis hinc
perpetua formido and periculum; sed in aggere communis salus and fiducia.
Singulas tamen villas singuli claudunt aggeres alii, ne submersa una pereant
caetera. Bis sub nostra memoria generale passae sunt diluvium, Aquarum dulcium
An. Dom. 15 --; salsarum, An. 1613. qua (ut mihi inter alios regio diplomate
designatos) pagensium juramento innotuit, damnum supra 42000. libras illatum
esse. Aggerem quippe non ut alias trajecit pelagus; sed transiliit altius toto
pede; quod ne indies faciat miraculo prohibetur and divina misericordia. Plin.
l. 11. cap. 97.
Octogenis enim cubitis supra Britanniam intumescere aestus, Pythias
Massiliensis auctor est. O bone Deus, qui mare nobis ut Israelitis olim, murum
dedit in perpetuum suae bonitatis testimonium!

Solum hie omnino pingue, sed robustum: pascuis igitur atque pecore laetum,
magis quam in Cerere. Fossis and elicibus quibus centum and undeni incumbunt
latericii pontes and ponticuli vermiculatim dissectum; cum ad educendum
inimicum imb^em, tum ad inducendum expetitum. Fontem enim nullum habet neque
rivulum: n^^ talpam alit nec soricam.

W^l^^k^. W^lt^n^. W^lpole.
In Marslandiae part extima, versus Occidentem, sitae sunt, Walsoka, id est,
immunitas juxta aggerem: Waltona, id est, villa ad aggerem: and Walpola, quod
est, gurges prope aggerem, Wall enim a vallo ductum, aggerem significat, and
per translationem, murum. Pertinebant olim priores duae ad Abbatem Ramesiensem.
Waltona scilicet, ex dono Albredae viduae Eustachii de Scelleia sub Henrico I.
Walpola vero ad Ecclesiam Eliensem, natalitiis clara S. Goderici heremitae,
cujus vitam and miracula Parisiensis M. Pa^is* in anno 1170
plurime decantavit.

T^^^ington S Ma^ies.
In viciniis jacent Terrington and St. Mary's; hoc familiae Chervillorum qui de
Capra-villa olim dicebantur, and pro crista capram emblema nominis detulere
antiquum patrimonium. Sed defunctis nuper Henrico Cheruil Equite, and filia
sua, in Cobbarum scribitur haereditatem. Illud Howardorum, qui hoc olim tractu
maxim claruere, vetus seeds, and ad ingentia conservatrix felicissima.
Splendida etiam hic Ecclesia cujus aliquando Rector Edmundus Gundevill,
Collegium sui nominis exstruxit Cantabrigiae sub An. Dom. 1348.

Tylney.
Adjacet Tylney, veteris utique Tilneiorum familiae radix; quae per filiam and
haeredem Frederici Tilney Equitis amplissimi, in Howardianam stirpem tertio
hinc seculo confluens, auctiorem eam multo reddidit. Hic se expandit
Tylney-Smeeth.
insignis area, quae a planicie nuncupatur Tylney-Smeeth, pinguis adeo and
luxurians ut Paduana pascua videatur superasse. Cum enim VII. villarum majora
animalia quotidie recipit compascentia; oves tamen praeterea plus minus 30000.
alere perhibetur; nulla excedens extensione bis mill passus. Tuentur eum
indigenae velut aras and focos, fabellamque recitant longa petitam vetustate de
Hikifrico (nescio quo) Haii illius instar in Scotorum Chronicis qui civium
suorum dedignatus fuga, aratrum quod agebat, solvit; arreptoque temone
furibundus insiliit in hosts, victoriamque ademit exultantibus. Sic cum de
agri istius finibus acriter olim dimicatum esset inter fundi dominum and
villarum incolas, nec valerent hi adversus eum consistere; cedentibus occurrit
Hikifrikus, axemque excutiens a curru quem agebat, eo vice gladii usus; rota,
clypei; invasores repulit ad ipsos quibus nunc funguntur terminos. Ostendunt in
coemiterio Tilniensi, sepulchrum sui pugilis, axem cum rota insculptum exhibens.

Wigenhall.
Nec procul Wigenhall, antiquae etiam cognomen stirpis. Magna hujus pars ante
aliquot secula ita aquis opprimebatur, ut neglecta generaliter occupantibus
permitteretur. Multi igitur seeds sibi illic elaborantes, totam pene in aridum
redegerunt; metuentesque jam tum ejici, in obsequium potentiorum se tradidere,
censum and tenuram patrocinii causa agnoscentes; ut antiqua refert Inquisitio.

Wisebeach.
Extra aggeris partem illam, quam the Podike vocant, soil. inter Isidem fluvium
and municipium Eliensis Episcopi, quod a situ in Occidentali glarea Wisebeach
dicitur (Wise enim Saxonice, ut in Wisegothorum nomine, Occidentale sonat) Well
habetur, id est puteus. Cum enim circumclusa jam Marslandia, aquarum
impediretur dilatatio, huc se recipientes ut in puteum, superficiem late
opprimebant. Nobilissima fit interea piscatura, quam Ailwinus Dux East-Angliae,
and totius Angliae Aldermannus, cognatus Regis Edgari, and Fundator Coenobii
Ramesiensis (circiter An. Dom. 970.) eidem coenobio contulit, cum mansis and
toftis piscatorum, (ut verbis utar Sect. 124.
Ramesiensis Codicis.) Mansit (ut videtur) sub eadem condition, usque ad
aetatem Regis Gulielmi I. qui Ecclesiae illi confirmans praedia, Concedo (
Sect. 174.
inquit) in Wells 20. homines piscatores, singulis annis 60. milliaria
anguillarum (i. e. singulis Monachis singula milliaria) ibidem reddentes.
Emersit postea in villam celebrem, partim in Insula Eliensi, partim in
Norfolcia (fluvio dividente) sitam; foro, nundinis, and uberrimis privilegiis
sub Abbatibus Ramesiae honestatam, dimidiique hundredi fretam dignitate.

Beaupreovum
Hic and Beau-preovum seu de Bello prato, seeds opulenta; praesertim cum
excisis Monasteriis Ramesiense hic dominium comparassent: quod cum reliquo suo
patrimonio Edmundus Beaupre Dorotheae transtulit, quam ex Winteri aliquando
suscepit conjuge. Nuptaque ea viro insigni Roberto Bell, qui Capitalis Baro
Scaccarii effectus est, a nepote ex filio corundem Roberto Bell, splendidi
ingenii Equite, possidetur.

Tydd
Haud procul, in Lincolniensi tractu (nam confinia lambens, memorabile quod
occurrit non praeteream) Tydd conspicitur. Vicus pauper, sed cujus aliquando
Rector (quem Personam vocant) Nicolaus Breakespeare a Roma in Norwegiam missus,
eam praedicando ad fidem convertit Christianam: and ab Eugenio [III.] Albanus
ideo constitutus est Episcopus Cardinalis; creatusque est ipse post Eugenium
[and Anastasium] An. Dom. 1154. Papa Hadrianus IV. Consulum hic ademit
potestatem; quae orbem olim, urbem hactenus administrasset; sibi retinens and
successoribus. Copiosissime in hoc and palustri reliqua regione, [effoditur]
fomes terrea; quae (a Torff, antiquo Rege Danico, ut..... prodit inventore)
torff, etiam hodie appellantur; and Latin Turbae a crassioris labii
forensibus. Mallem vero a Sax. tyrf quod cespitem notat, (V. Gloss. nost.) ni
inventorem a re inventa dictum opinatus fueris.

Isis (...).
Jam in Norfolciae continentem transeundus est undosus noster Plemmyrium, h. e.
Isis fluvius; qui semper equidem non est transeundus. Cum enim in duobus
aequinoctiis maxim tumeant marini aestus, and potissimum (ut Plinius notat)
sub Autumnali plenilunio; hunc interdum e mari praevolat adeo insanus undae
cumulus, qui se fluvii undis obviis non apponit, sed earum superficiem ita
rapide superlabitur, ut velocitate equitantem superet, and furore quaelibet
occurrentia mergat and evertat. Venientem fugiunt naviculae, and ipsa aquatica
volatilia cum ingenti strepitu. Fluvii accolae hoc a feritate the Eagar
nuncupant, Matthaeus Parisiensis (si recte intellexerim) Hygram: aliud reor
quam Graecorum (...), sed non aliud quam undarum ingens cumulus, quem e lato
collectum mari in angustias fluvii subdito detrudit aestus. In latiori enim
ejus part non ita saevit. Taceo copiosam fluvii piscaturam; de eo tamen dicam,
ut de Pergusa lacu Sect. 174.
Ovidius -- Non illo plura Caister
Carmina cygnorum labentibus audit in undis.


Clacklose Cent.
Trajecto Iside, in Centuriam Clacklose pervenitur; quae cum multis in eadem
villis ad Ramesiense olim spectabat Monasterium; hodie ad amplissimum 3 Met. l.
5.
Equitem Johannem Har^; velut unum illius Abbatiae coh^r^dum. Ad ponti^ (...)
transitum primum obest Downham-market, a montano sita nomen habens* down en^m
mons est, ham habitatio: sed in membranis Regiis Downeham-hithe, i. e. portus,
appellatur. Mercatum illis antiquissimum; nam ab (...) ^15.
Edwardo Confessore confirmatum reperi. Aspicit prope in aequali situ Domini sui
aedes (...)
amplas and exim^as, annum circiter 15 --. a Nicholao Hare, Jurisperito ad
Stow-Bardolfe extructas, sed lat^fundiis ^gregie ditatas beneficio Hugonis
Hare, juris item peri^i and fratris Nicolai, qui coelebs excedens, 40000. lib.
and eo amplius dicto Joanni ex Ricardo fratre pronepoti, and tantundem Hugo^,
Dommo Colera^^ in Hibernia ex Johanne fratre nepoti, testamento dedit; me in
eodem supravisore inter alios descripto.

(...)
Copiosissime in palustri hic tractu effodiuntur focales cespites, quos Turffs
appellant, Danorum nobis beneficium. A Torfo enim ipsorum Rege (qui floruit
Chron. Lindenbrog de R^gib Da^
An. Dom. --) inventos referunt; nomenque tenuisse inventoris.

Sub^st Wallington, quod ^ Coningesbeis cum uxore transiit ad Franciscum Gaudy,
Capitalem nuper Civilium Placitorum Justitiarium, qui congesta h^^^ plurima
dominia, nepti suae e filia Comiti Warwici desponsatae, transmisit omnia.
^iliam aut^m duxerat Gulielmus Hatton, Cancellarii ^ sorore nepos.

(...)
Paulum hinc in Euro-notum ad paludum marginem, sita est West-Deerham villula,
cunis memoranda Huberti Walter, filii Harvei Walter, and fratris Theobaldi
Walter, Hiberniae pincernae, a quo illustrissima Pincernarum familia *quam
Butl^r vocant) and Ormondiae Comites (ut testatur Wa^^us i^ Woney perg.
Charta Fundationis Coenob^^ de Woney in Hibernia) originem ducunt. Hic Hubertus
sub Ranulpho de Glanvilla, illustri illo totius Angliae Justitiario enutritus,
evasit Archiepiscopus Cantuariae, Cancellarius Regis Ricardi I. Legatus papae
Celest^i (...)
IV. and tot^us etiam Angliae Justitiarius. Miraberis tot in unum collatos
Magistratus, praesertim si recte intellexeris quanti sub hoc seculo munus
fuerit Justitiarii, potestate scil. omnes regni Magistratus, dignitate omnes
superantis proceres. Post Regem, primus universam complectebatur solus rem
judiciariam; Officium Capitalis Justitiarii regii tribunalis, Capitalis
Justitiarii Civilium Placitorum, Capitalis Baronis Scaccarii, and in plerisque
Magistri Pup^llorum. Disposuit de Thesauro Regis, and in regni arduis elato
peragebat omnia supercilio. In absentia Regis (quae sub istis seculis crebro
accidit) regni custos and Pro-rex salutatur. Tantos edidit villa haec obscura
partus; qui tamen coactus est ab Innocentio IV. fasces istos seculares
deponere, and aratro Christi totus indulgere. Ad cunarum vero decus, Coenobium
in West-Deereham condidit: acceptique memor beneficii, instituit, ut pro anima
Ranulphi de Glanvilla, patroni sui, preces hic perpetuo funderentur. Sed
descriptis ab Henrico VIII. in fiscum Monasteriis, Thomas Deereham ut a nomine
^edem compararet, anno 33. ejusdem Regis hoc mercatus est; possidetque hod^e
post cr^bram haeredum mutationem, e quinto filio nepos ejus homonymus, Equ^s
probus.

(...)
Progredienti mox occurrit Ox^burgh, dictum (ut suspicor) pro Ouse-burgh, quod
ad Isem fluvium, quem Ouse appellant, sit appositum. Sic Oxeforde, pro
Ouse-forde. Nomen antiquitatem loquitur and eminentiam. Urbes enim quas
Britanni ^strias, Saxones nostri and German^ Burghs vocant (ut and recte notat
Littletonu^^ a (...), pro turri. Haud tamen aio, Burgos apud nos omnes, ^^^sse
ol^^ urbes: nam vox alias munimen quodlibet, and interdum montem no^at, a
(...), ab assurgendo in altum [instar turris.] Oxburgus igitur, si clarum
aliquando oppidum non exstiterit, locum tamen munitum fuisse non est
dubitandum. Hoc idem generaliter statuo de villis omnibus, in quorum nomine
burgh deprehenditur. Seeds antique fuit Weilandorum; e qua familia Thomas
W^ilandus, Capitalis Justitiarius civilium Placitorum, 18. Edw. I. in exilium
mittitur a Parliamento. Postea venit ad Tuddenhamos, and deinde (haeredis eorum
nuptiis) ad Bedingfeildos, claros aliquando in aula Regia, and florentes hodie
latifundiis. Duxerat quippe Edmundus Bedingfeildus sororem Thomae Tuddenhami
Equitis amplissimi; and ex regni vicissitudine fortunarum suarum dispendium
metuentes, pactum ineunt obsignatis tabulis, quod Bedingfeildus signa
sequeretur Edouardi IV. Tuddenhamus vero Henrici VI. and si belli alea Edouardo
cederet, Bedingfeildus gratiam Regis Tuddenhamo compararet; sin e contra
Tuddenhamus id praestaret Bedingfeildo. Victoriam autem obtinente Edouardo IV.
Bedingfeildus a Rege impetrat Tuddenhami patrimonium, sed Tuddenhamus ipse
capite plectitur; clam hoc omne; nam utrique aliter capitale.

Hinc processit versus Oxburgum, quarto distantem lapide; velut burgos
conjunctura fossa alia hodie locis aliquibus complanata; at Centuriam
Clacklose, qua a fluviis non cingebatur, muniens and disterminans. Transiens
autem juxta Bicham-well, appellatur Bicham-dich; and devenit terminus
Libertatum Bicham-ditch. Newmarket-ditch
Ramesiensis Ecclesiae ex part Clacklos (ut Newmarket-dich libertatum S.
Ethelredae ad coenobium S. Edmundi Buriensis pertinentium.) Sic enim Charta
Henr. I. Sect. 215. Sciatis me concessisse and confirmasse Ecclesiae S.
Benedict. de Ramesia, etc. Socam, sacam -- and omnes libertates and omnia
placita ad coronam meam pertinentia apud Bancastre and Ringsted and apud
Clacos-hundred and dimid. cum 64. Socomannis ad hundredum pertinentibus,
scilicet infra Bicham-dich and apud forum de Dunham, quod pertinet ad
Winebodesham. Socomanni dicti sunt coloni, qui domino suo rem expediunt
frumentariam: and cum in coenobio Ramesiensi 60. essent Monachi, qui totidem
anguillarum vescerentur milliariis, ut in Well supra memoravimus, hic singuli
singulis suppeditantur Socomannis, cererem ministrantibus, quatuor Abbati
reservatis.

Swafham
Quinto hinc lapide, in acclivi solo Swafham conspicitur; mercatu nobilis, quem
a Rege..... obtinuit. Aerem exhibet a laudatissimo medico laudatissimum.
Splendidam item Ecclesiam, cujus insulam borealem pedaneus condidit aginator.

Castle-Acre.
Descenditur hinc ad Castle-Acre, i. e. castellum in agro; quod e resurgente
monte late prospicit adjacentia. Prisca hic seeds altera Comitum Warrenniae;
quorum antecessor Willelmus de Warrenna forestarius Regis Gulielmi
Conquestoris, and Gulielmus de Albeneiaco pincerna ejus, sorts adeo luculentas
in Occidua tulerunt Norfolciae part, cum Normannis divideretur, ut nulla pene
villa quae ab Episcopo aliquo vel Monasterio non possideretur, quin in alterius
eorum ditionem cessit. Testantur hoc antiqui Libri Feodales, qui alterutrum
faciunt cujusque pene villae capitalem Dominum. Ad radicem castelli (quod
rudera tantum nunc ostendit) Gulielmus de Warenna Comes Surregiae, An. Dom.
1090. condidit Prioratum in honorem beatae Virginis Mariae, cellam vero futuram
statuit Lewensi Monasterio, quod in Sussexia pater ejus Gulielmus instituerat.
Hic me monet locus, ut cum prudentia junctam [eorum] pietatem memorem, qui non
minus animae saluti quam corporis consulentes, spiritualibus se militibus
contra hosts spirituales, aeque ac secularibus contra seculares munierunt. Vix
enim reperitur primaria seeds alicujus magnatis, quae castello suo non
subjunxit coenobium.

West-acre. Nar.
Claruit and contiguis West-acre eximio Monasterio. Castelli pomoerium and
utriusque moenia Monasterii perlabitur fluviolus elegans, Nar (quod aliis
commune est nomen) mihi ut videtur appellatus. Nam in procursu statim occurrit
Narford villula, quasi Narris vadum; and subinde Narburgh, quasi Narford.
burgus seu castrum ad Narrem: cui belle convenit quod in Ligurinis canitur,
Gunther. l. 4. p. 337.
Meliori subdita Caelo
Castra locat, gelidas vicini Naris ad undas.
dictum de Narnia, oppido Italiae, cui Nar fluvius interluens nomen indidit;
and Tyberi conjungitur: exemploque monitus ego, villas has nostras Narniam
advadum, and Narniam ad burgum appellabo.

(...)
Quod de Narburgh prodiderunt incerti senes, ego posteris non refundam. Nec his
fidem mendicabo, quae Johannes Bramis Thetfordensis Monachus, circa aevum
Henrici IV. (ut scriptura Codicis mihi suggerit) in historia Waldei Regis hujus
tractus, decantavit. Saepe tamen ejus nititur auctoritate Jo. Catus, in
Antiquitate Cantabrigiensis Academiae, and ab eodem succrevisse lumen mihi
aliquando, non negaverim. Laborare cum fateor Normannorum and Gallorum vitio,
quo Romani suos deturparunt, fictitia veris commiscentes.

Nerburgum resert, civitatem fuisse sub aevo Uter Pendragonis, qui Rex
Britanniae floruit An. Dom. 500. Comiti cuidam Okenardo subditam. Eam a Waldeo
fortiter obsessam, defendisse strenue septem mensibus Okenardum; noctuque saepe
exsilientem hostium multos interfecisse: and Florentium quendam Waldeo
dilectissimum truculenter vulnerasse; Waldeum facto gravius irritantem: qui
vindictae acriter jam incumbens, Okenardum ad extremas adegit angustias.
Fractum igitur, a Seneschallo suo admonitum fuisse ut se fugae traderet: St
enim (inquit Senescallus) te Rex Waldeus in manibus poterit habere, te ut
latronem faciet interire. Igitur cum Rex supervenerit, fugies de civitate ista,
and nos castellum istud custodiemus, mittemusque ad Waldeum, and vitam nobis
and membra obtinebimus ab eo, priusquam trademus illud in manus illius.
Okenardus igitur, nocte superveniente, equo ascenso, egressus est; venit and
Londonias ad Uther, etc. Senescallus autem de salute pactus, civitatem reddit,
and Waldens protinus delevit eam. Haec and plura Brainis. Rerum illic antique
gestarum, testimonium adfert ipse locus. Sepimentum vetus militare, ubi (si
forte uspiam) castellum Okenardi. Saxones burgum vocant, and a Narburgo usque
ad Oxburgum velut burgos conjunctura protenta olim fossa militaris, hodie licet
locis aliquot complanata. Add quod dum Clemens Spelman Eques, 30. abhinc
annis, hortum novum sub radice burgi moliretur, multa humana ossa cum armorum
partibus aliquot sunt effossa.

Long autem ante Normannorum adventum, inducto aratro; illud civitatis
exhalavit dignitatem. De ea enim, ut de villula rusticana, sic Liber Angliae
Censualis, qui Domesdei appellatur, sub Titulis Norff. Roger. and Hundred. de
Grenehow: Nereburgh tenuit Aelwius tempore Regis Edwardi Confessoris, modo R.
Vicarius terrae pro Manerio. Tunc [erant ibidem] 38. villani, and post 28. modo
similiter. Tunc and semper 10. Bordarii; modo tres. Tunc and post in dominio 3.
carucatas [terrae;] modo 2. Aelwius iste videtur fuisse Danus, ut plerique sub
hoc aevo Norfolcienses; ejectus autem a Rogero supradicto, puta Bigoto
Normanno, cui amplam in hoc tractu partem Gulielmus Conquestor elargitus est.
R. vicarius terrae (uti censeo) fuit Robertus, aut Rogerus de Narburgh, qui
Rogeri vice hoc manerio fruitur, and splendidae Narburgorum familiae (qui a
Bigotis ipsum acceperunt, ut castrum suum Norwicense feodali jure tuerentur)
initium dedit. Deficiente vero sub Henrico VI. prole mascula Ela filia Gulielmi
de Narburgh Shouldamo primum, and secundis nuptiis Henrico Spelman collocatur,
e quorum filio juniori Johanne Spelman, secundo Justitiario Regii tribunalis,
valde (ut Fitz-herbert testatur) perito in lege, Johannes atnepos Narburgo
potitur.

(...) Sh^^ldham.
A Narburgh crebra ludens vertigine, ad Marham and Pentney, claram utramque suo
Monialium coenobio tendit fluviolus. Deinde ad Shouldham coenobio item ornatam,
and exhausta propemodum antiqua familia Shouldhamorum, aquilam Wormgey (...)
auream in coelo ceruleo gestantium. Mox allabitur Wormgey and Middleton,
castello and coenobio Monialium aliquando insignem, ad Barons de Scales, and
postea ad Comites Oxoniae ex nuptiis spectantem. Illam castello item and
coenobio decoratam, and a [Willielmo] de Warrenna primo Comite Surriae, ad
Bardolphos clarissimos Barons deductum.

Jam ad Lennum properans Narra fluvius, domino suo Isidi conjungitur* qui
Congunum fluvium ex part alia suscipiens, insignem in compitis stationem
oppido insigni expedivit. Dici autem Len (nam corrupt Lyn) a Britannico Len
^hyn pro stagno aut diffusis aquis, si vox eo traheretur (ut Camdenus voluit)
non assentior. Saxonicum plane existimo, and alias praedium, alias feodum
significare. Sic apud Germanos hodie Fanelhen, praedium feu feodum Baronis; and
Len-Episcopi idem plane quod praedium Episcopi. Contrahitur etiam vox Saxonibus
nostris non tam praedium significare, quam praedium Ecclesiasticum; quod in
aliarum villarum nominibus saepius deprehenderis, and Britannis ipsis (si hoc
malueris) omnino similiter. Illis enim (si mihi non imponant) Ter-llen
significat terram Ecclesiae, vel Ecclesiasticorum. Labitur and vir optimus pede
altero. Nam hoc dictum opinatur Lennum Episcopi; illud in adversa ripa, (vulgo
Old-Len) Lennum Regis: cum Len-Regis idem sit a tempore Henrici VIII. quod
eausque Len Episcopi. Permutante enim Rege cum Episcopo Norwicensi Monasterium
S. Benedicti de Hulmo, and terras plurimas, pro terris and dominiis Episcopatus
sui; Len inter alia ad Regem transiit, and jam inde nomen (ut oportuit) in Lenn
Regis commutavit. Glauci forte and Diomedis permutatio; recte vero si ariolar,
sol eatenus alium non vidit Lenni dominum quam Episcopum East-Anglorum. Illic
primarium ejus municipium, illic seeds altera, illic cuneum. Hoc in Mint-len,
illa in contiguo Gey-wood. Magnam illic and primariam Ecclesiam S. Margaretae
dicatam sub Gulielmo Rufo struxit Herbertus de Losinga, qui Episcopatum
transtulit de Thetfordia in Norwicum. Praetoem dedit Rex Johannes; a Joanne
Graio, Episcopo Norwicensi, Villae domino (cum Regem hic lautissime excepisset)
exoratus. Regis tamen non Officialem fore sed Episcopi; jurandumque novum
Quaere de hoc (Spelmanni nota.)
quotannis in curia seu praetorio Episcopi Gaywodensi, ubi aulam and egregiam
molem Praesul iste suscitabat. Episcopo igitur in omnibus subaudiens, homo
Episcopi nuncupatus est. Largitur Rex praeterea splendida privilegia, and a
latere (ut ferunt) gladium suum; sed quo nomen ejus magis celebrant quam in
aliis omnibus munificentiis, cyphum ex argento egregium, interius deauratum,
and exterius encausto (quod miraberis) insolito, costisque ex auro solido
illustratum. Piaculum ducunt merum non lectissimum ex hoc haurire: and hauriunt
quidem, non libant; caduntque interea cypho plures quam ipso gladio (Dicam cum
Martiali: Hic Scyphus est in quo misceri jussit amicis
Largius Rex Johannes filtus Henrici II. ut Achilles a Martiale Aeacides
dicitur, quia ab Ae^^o oriundus. Matt. lib. ^. Epigr. 4.
Henricides, and bibit ipse merum)
quem ostendunt hodie, and a latere Regis Johannis traditum perhibent, Majori
praeferendum: ego vero ut credam non adducor. Non enim Regis fuit, sed Episcopi
municipium; nec Majorem statuit Rex Johannes sed Praepositum, quem Henricus
III. in Majorem commutavit, cum Lenni cives in Insula Eliensi parts ejus
contra pr^scriptos Barons, fidelius multo quam feliciter [tuebantur] and in
Charta Regis Johannis qua id privilegii concederetur, nulla gladii mentio.
Certe Henrici VIII. donum fuit, cum villam consecutus esset ab Episcopo. Novis
enim eam ornans privilegiis, and Burgenses mutavit in Aldermannos; and gladium,
(expressis in Charta verbis) Majori concessit praeferendum. Testatur ipsius
gladii in capulo inscriptio.

Dominium villae cum censu, vectigali and theolonio ad Episcopos spectabat; sed
theolonii tertiam partem Comites Arundelii jure castri sui de Risinge
vendicabant. Hanc cum aliquando Rogerus de Monte alto, Baro eximius, and jam
castri dominus a Lennensibus postulasset; moeniis atque carcere interclusum
tenent, donec relaxasset jus suum, juramentoque confirmasset, se nunquam super
hoc aut inficias iturum, aut apud Regem conquesturum. Longae extant rei ambages
in Fisci schedis, Anno..... Edw. II. Sed and in ipsum municipii sui dominum,
Norwicensem Episcopum, cervicem adeo erexerunt, ut jura aliquot quae super eis
habuit dominii ratione, pauperibus Risingae Burgensibus (velut in ludibrium and
conculcationem) elocavit. Incentivum prodere videtur haec Charta; quam ab alia
pariter denotanda supposuimus:

W. Dei gratia Episcopus Norwicensis, dilectis and fidelibus suis Johanni de
Bedeford. Gilb. fill. Warin. and omnibus aliis probis hominibus suis Lenn.
Excepto Eadmundo de Wasingham Majore nostro and fautoribus suis, salutem and
Dei benedictionem. Sciatis quod cum nuper in die Sti. Stephani venissent ad nos
apud Norwicum dictum Eadmundus Angerus de Rising and quatuor alii Burgenses tam
ex part nostra quam ex part sua, villam nostram de Lenn peterent ad firmam
sicut prius; Nos habito cum pluribus viris sapientibus consilio, tandem
optulimus eis ut ipsi Eadmundus Angerus and duo alii ditiores villae reciperent
villam illam ad firmam, viz. tali modo quod neminem talliarent, nec pauperes
gravarent, nec alicui injuriam facerent. Quod quidem penitus refutaverunt, and
Willielmum de Pinkebek ut Ballivum nostrum receperunt cum gratiarum action. Et
super hoc audivimus, quod (nescimus quorum ducti consilio) ipsum Willielmum ut
Ballivum admittere recusantes ingressum Domorum nostrarum and Bothae nostrae
denegaverunt eidem. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod in fide qua nobis tenemini,
eidem Willielmo and Ballivo nostro sitis intendentes, and eidem ingressum and
seisinam domorum nostrarum, Gwyldhallae, and Bothae nostrae habere faciatis
sine omni dilatione, ut fidelitatem and discretionem vestram merito debeamus
commendare. Datum apud Thefford III. Kalend. Januar. Pontisicatus nostri anno
IV.

Esculentis and poculentis ita a natura accommodatum, ut penarium Cereris atque
Bacchi videatur. Ex part enim ejus Orientali tanta incumbit vis frumenti,
ovium, cuniculorum, and campestrium alatilium; and ex part Occidentali, casei,
butyri, boum, cygnorum, and palustrium volatilium; in viciniis, piscium hinc
marinorum illinc sluvialium and recentium; ut vix in tota Britannia, forte and
Europa, in consimili circuitu tanta habeatur eduliorum diversorum copia.

(...).
Lenno per Gaywodiam (de qua diximus) exeunti Ashwicken-Thoresbei prostat,
domicilium dixerim an latibulum, nescio; sed splendido cinctum patrimonio,
domino satis dispari dominatum.

In recto quem faciunt angulo Isis and Congunus fluvii, e palustri solo
assurgit, (...).
nomen inde deferens, Rising; and egesto ex immani fossae colle arduo in gyrum
dato, castro insuper coronatur. Fossae species Gothica est, ut Procopius docet,
Normannisque ideo usitata, genus a Gothis deducentibus. Licet enim Saxones
castra sua, gyrata etiam fossa circumscripserint, angustiori tamen usi sunt,
and minus depressa, sed majoris plerumque circumferentiae; qua and hos Romani
superabant. Romani autem (ut Polybius refert and Vegetius) in oblongum, si
pateretur locus, castrametebantur quadrum, fossaque 16. tantum muniebant pedum,
praetenta anteriori lateri fossa alia quam loricam appellabant. Formam infra
videris, cum de Brancaster tractaverimus. Ex his quae diximus, uniuscujusque
populi, Romani, Saxonis, Dani, and Normanni deprehendas munimentum.

Romanos apud Risinge aliquid habuisse praesidii, and loci monet opportunitas,
littus procul nudum, portum juxta celebrem despicientis; and effossus in
vicinia nummus Constantini magni inde pridem ad me allatus.

Castri exterior fabrica, Norwicensem exprimit; tecto pariter and intestinis
spoliata. Tribus in muro firmata turribus, quas trium maneriorum domini, viz.
de Hunstanton, Wutton, and Ridon, feodali obsequio tuebantur. Municipium adeo
vetus, ut originem ejus nesciant archiva Regia. Praetore gaudet, and binis olim
in hebdomade mercatis; nundinisque in anno quolibet 15. dierum. Ab anno.....
duos misit ad Comitia regni Procuratores, quos Burgenses vocant. Vetus fuit
Albeniorum, Comitum Arundeliae possessio, and in divisione amplissimi eorum
patrimonii inter sorores Hugonis Comitis, in portionem cessit Roberti de Monte
alto, Baronis limitanei. Robertus de Monte alto, qui..... Reliqua desiderantur.
Prisas hic vocat, jus capiendi annonam in villis circumjacentibus ad
sustentationem castri, precium intra 40. dies reddentibus, ut Stat. An. 3. Edw.
I. definitum est.

Congham.
Ad orientalem Risingae limitem (Mantua me miserum nimium vicina Cremonae)
Congham adest, nomen a Conguno quem emittit fluviolo auspicata. Hic pars maxima
nostri patrimonii, quam obtinuit olim Gulielmus Rusteng, qui sub Comite
Arundeliae militans in terra sancta tempore Richardi I. Miles factus est ab
eodem Comite, prout etiam -- de Ingolsthorpe, and Andreas de Sharneburne. Hoc
quippe seculo dominis licuit capitalibus clientes suos milites instituere,
etiam Episcopis and Abbatibus. Sed Abbatibus prohibetur in Concilio [ Vid.
Eadmer. l. 3. and Malmesb. Lib. 1. de Gest. Pontif.
Londinensi sub Anselmo Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, An. 1102.]

Ad Mallingham hinc proceditur, quam Robertus Mordant Prothonotarius Civilium
Placitorum sub Henrico VIII. nuptiis tulit Barbarae, filiae and haeredis
Johannis le Strange jurisconsulti, easdemque transmisit ad Pronepotem. Rougham


Huc se adjungit Rougham, ab aevo Richardi II. Yelvertonorum seeds, e quibus
Willielmus sub Henrico VI. Christophorus sub Elizabetha, and Henricus hodie,
Justitiarii claruere; hoc est, (ut avum taceam, qui and jurisconsultus fuit)
filius pater, and tritavus. Sed Christophorus and Henricus in Northamptoniae
consederunt Comitatu.

Descripsi ante aliquot annos in Norfolciae tabula geographica circulum,
duodecem habentem in semidiametro mill passus. Centrum posui in campis
Roughamiae, deprehendique sub illius ambitu fuisse 24. Monasteria, totidemque
minorum nobilium domicilia. Simul in vigore omnia, cum ferale illud exiit de
excindendis monasteriis Senatus-consultum. Domicilia ab iisdem familiis vel
eatenus (puta 90. post excidium annos) possideri. Monasteria vero, ter, quater,
quinquies, dominos cum familiis eructasse, nec reperiri hodie Monasterii sedem,
quamvis uberem and amaenam unamquamque (nam, ut Abel, pinguia Deo sacrificabant
majores nostri) qua una eademque familia nobilis est gavisa. Duas excipio,
quarum altera non dum tertiam, altera ne secundam transiit generationem. Sed
nec haec familiae alicujus habitatio; nec illa a gravissimis infortuniis unquam
libera. Par in reliquis observatio; ut intelligas non inanes fuisse multiplices
illas maledictiones raptoribus istorum a veteribus imprecatas; nominis vel
familiae exstirpationem, patrimonii effusionem, lites and jurgia diuturna,
infortunia saepe gravissima, saepe etiam capitale excidium. Numerosa praesto
sunt exempla; sed hic aliud institutum.

Babbingley.
Sed recurrendum mihi est in occidentem ad Borealem, quem faciunt Isis and
Congunus, angulum. Illic Babbingley, ubi S. Felix East-Anglorum Apostolus,
circiter An. Dom. 630. a Dunmocco applicans, incolas imbuit Christiana fide,
primamque hujus tractus Ecclesiam condidit, quae a posteris ejus dicata
patrocinio, hodie S. Felicis appellatur. Rei memoriam etiam praedicant
adjacentes Flitcham
montes, Christianorum dicti, the Christian-hills; and in vicinia Flitcham,
quasi Felix-ham, i. e. Felicis villa seu habitatio. Haec Coenobio ornabatur
Monialium, quod ejus fundator Cellam statuit, ad Abbatiam S. Mariae
Walsinghamiae pertinentem; dictaque ipsa est S. Maria de Fontibus, quod ab
Orient fontes ostendit aprico interdum meatu, interdum subterraneo ludentes.

Habetur hic in campis quadrata area and leni conclusa fossa Mallobergium, quod
incolae Flitcham-burgh nuncupant. Ibi olim, ut in Praetorio conveniri soliti
sunt Centumvirales judices (the Freeholders vocant) cum istius Centuriae seu
Hundredi, tum and aliarum ad lites in Centuria emergentes dirimendas. Sic enim
in Brevi quodam Gulielmi Rufi. Willielmus Rex Anglorum H. Camerario salutem.
Facias convenire and considere tres Hundredos and dimidium apud Flicceham-burch
propter terram illam de Holme, etc. Huc etiam convenire olim solebant
Centenarii, ad Dominum Hundredi eligendum: and ex prisci moris vestigia huc
annuatim hodie indicuntur Centenarii seu Hundredarii obsequium domino Hundredi
(quem Sectam Hundredi vocant) praestituri.

Progredienti versus Boream, Appleton, ubi splendidas aedes non ita pridem
exstruxit Edouardus Paston; and Sandringham, ubi ab aevo Edw. III. Cobbarum
succrevit familia, a laeva praeteritis ad Sharneburne descenditur. Hic Thokus
quidam loci Dominus, a S. Felice conversus and baptizatus, secundam extruxit
Ecclesiam, quam in honorem SS. Petri and Pauli Felix dedicavit. (...).
Parvam siquidem, and (pro ratione illius aevi) ligneam; unde longo tempore
Stock-chappel appellata est. Thoki deinceps haeres ex multis suscepta
nepotibus, Edwino cuidam Dano Angliam venienti cum Canuto Rege An. Dom. 1014.
desponsata est; Edwino Rex Canutus Snetesham dedit, and multa praedia de quibus
postea, Sherburnamque uxoris patrimonium confirmavit. Hic ille omnibus pace
atque otio fruitur, donec a Normannis ejectus est ex omnibus. Will. Conq. non
^mres s^d pleresque Anglos e^haereda^it. Lib. Rams. Sect. 155. (Nota Spelmanni*)
Distribuente enim inter Commilitones Angliam Gulielmo Conquestore, and parts
hic amplissimas Gulielmo de Albeneio, and Gulielmo de Warrenna concedente,
ejecerunt illi quotquot vellent, and Edwinum pariter expulerunt. Conqueruntur
pulsi and ejecti apud Regem, and (ut verbis utar MS. Cod^cis) dixerunt ei quod
nunquam ante conquestum, nec in conquestu, nec post, fuerunt contra ipsum Regem
in consilio vel auxilio, sed tenuerunt se in pace; and hoc parati fuerint
probare quomodo ipse Rex vellet ordinare. Per quod idem Rex fecit inquiri per
totam Angliam.

Possedit praeterea Thokus quicquid jacet ab Occidente Sharnburniae, versus
mare; deditque totum Ingulpho cuidam cum filia unica in matrimonium, qui de
nomine suo villam ibi condidit Ingolsthorpe, ut refert MS. Liber cui fidem
cedo, licet ego dictam putassem ab Ingol fluviolo, qui hic mare ingreditur.

Ad fontem Ingolis habetur Netesham, i. e. villa vaccaria, hodie Snetsham, quam
(ut diximus) Canutus dedit Edwino Dano; sed eripuit illi Gulielmus de Albeney
Normannus; suaeque prosapiae Comitibus Arundeliae permansit, donee ex nuptiis
unius haeredum ad Monte-altos transiit, and ab his per stirpem regiam ad duces
Lancastriae. Nobile dominium and splendidis ornatum privilegiis; sed inter
ignobiles jampridem distractum.

Dedit etiam Canutus Edwino Dano planiciem ex part Orientali Sneteshamiae, ad
senos incultam mill passus. Illic Edwinus in lapideo colle, quem seculi illius
Latinastri Hogum pecosum appellabant, Stanehow condidit.

Sedgeford
A vado hic prope arundineo nomen ascivit Sedgeford, Ecclesiae S. Trinitatis
Norwici olim collata: sed possessio nuper Johannis le Strange, cujus ego filiam
primogenitam in matrimonium duxi; patrimonium vero (qua per fas aut nefas) sub
puellarum abrasit socer infantia; suam inde pinguescens sobolem. Injuriae,
longae sunt ambages. Transeo.

Sedgfordia exeunti exurgit Promontorium S. Edmundi Regis and Martyris
nobilissimi; qui ab Offa Rege East-Anglorum in regni adoptatus successionem,
splendido navium and ministrorum apparatu, a Germania, huc in portum vicinum
appulit, cui nomen eo tempore fuit Maiden-boure, i. e. thalamus virginis. Quis
autem hic esset locus magna me tenuit dubitatio. Portum de Hecham exilem and
obscurum censeo; nec Burneham satis laudabilem ad splendidum excipiendum
navigium, quamvis naves illius seculi satis agnosco tenues. Lennum igitur in
considerationem veniens, prae caeteris arridet; tum quod portus sit tractus
istius eminentior, tum quod S. Margaretae virginis sacrarium esset and
thalamus. Hanc enim Lennenses ex antiquo Divam coluere tutelarem; templi ejus
custodes sunt, and in honorem ejus tria capita draconis, quem illa cruce armata
triumphasse dicitur, singulo in ore singulis sauciata crucibus, pro insignibus
gestant. Habeturque Emblema Virginis in sigillo suo publico, draconem cruce
vulnerantis and conculcantis, cum hac circumscriptione Stat Margareta, draco
fugit, in cruce laeta.


Sanctus vero Edmundus a Maidenbore non long progressus, villam condidit
regalem Hunstanstone; quod Johannes Stow p. 76.
Pringtonus dulcedinem and potentiam interpretatur; moratusque illic per annum
pene, Psalterium Davidis in Saxonico idiomate memoriter sategit recitare. Liber
ipse a clientibus suis Monachis Buriensibus in ipsius honorem religiose
custodiebatur, usque ad excidium Monasteriorum. Ab Hunstantonia perrexit
Athelburgum, regnique anno 16. martyrio coronatus, Divorum ascribitur collegio;
and in vertice Promontorii Hunstantoniensis capella splendida honorabatur.

Pervenit deinceps haec villa Regia ad Alfricum, sub Canuto Rege Elmamensem
Episcopum; qui eandem, cum Holme adjacente vicula (cujus Ecclesiam struxit Hen.
Nottingham) Monasterio S. Edmundi Buriensis dono dedit. Sed deducta postea sub
ingressu Normannorum, ad Albeneios jure feodali Extran^is vulgo le Strange
ceditur, ob praesidium a 2. militibus faciendum in castro de Risinge. Long
itaque mansit apud Barons le Strange de Knoken; sed a Johanne Barone An. 9.
Edw. I. confertur in Hamonem fratrem suum de se and haeredibus suis tenendum
per ser. -- E cujus prosapia illic hodie floret Hamo le Strange Equ. priscam
familiam avitis ornans virtutibus, and (quod magis in precio) facultatum
accessione.

Cerere (ut Hiblen melle, croco Tmolum invidere taceam) luxuriat pars haec
maritima, praesertim hordeo, ex quo vinum conficiunt Britannicum, vitis
aemulum; Saxonibus antiquis bier (quod proprie hordeum significat) appellatum.
(...) Graecis, qui hoc adeo capiebantur latice, ut in honorem ejus Byrtorum seu
hordeaceorum festum instituere, a Constantinopolitanis usque ad Anastasium Imp.
qui hoc sustulit, celebratum. Festum (inquam) sustulit Imperator Anastasius,
laticis desiderium omnes non tollent Imperatores. At number Saxonibus Beire in
usu? Bryton (inquam) seu potus hordeaceus, quem alio nomine eale, and a
dulcedine Soth-eale appellabant: non noster iste lupulatus: nam cum hordeo
lupulus ante medium regni Henrici VIII. nuptias non inierat. Ex illa vero die
summo in honor lupulatum Bryton; quod (ut Graeci) Numen colimus, salutisque
praedicamus donatorem. O funestam and infelicem salutem! Prima enim quae hic
unquam pota fuit, in excidium transiit totius gentis. Cum Hengistum Saxonem ad
auxilium induxisset Rex Britannus Vortiger, and hospes hospitem mutuis se
exciperet convivationibus, Roena Hengisti filia pernoctanti apud patrem Regi
propinans ait, Was-hale. Rex loquelam non intelligens, quid dixisset, quaerit a
circumstantibus; Responsum est potare eam salutem Regi; qui rei captus
novitate, blanditias colit cum virgin, and brevi in uxorem ducit. Illa patris
erudita technis, Proceres regni ad convivium vocat, ubi ex insidiis trucidantur
omnes, and ad Saxones translatum regnum.

Hic Branodunum (a Brano non procul fluvio, and duno pro monte) vulgo
Brancaster, i. e. castrum ad Branum; pelagus a sinistris late spectat; a
dextris longius ericeta.

Recipiente se in orientem littore, Branodunum vetus, hodie Brancaster, ericeta
longius, pontem juxta despiciens, Romani castri vallum exhibet, ad mensuram a
Caesare datam (Bell. Gall. lib. 2.) Castra in altitudinem pedum 12. vallo,
fossaque duodeviginti pedum munire jubet. ^ormam castri cum singulis suis
dimens^on^^^s, ut ^omanam Vide Veget. l. 3. c. 3. and Stewec. f. 259.
plane agnoscas apposuimus. [In Codice MS. Sp^l^anni spatium va^uum relinquitur;
ipsa castri figura desideratur.]

Castri dimensiones ipsum ostendunt non tumultuarium fuisse, aut in transitu
factum, sed legitimum and stativum, ad custodiam insuper totius littoris
Borealis contra Saxonum irruptiones (quibus adeo expositum fuit ut Littus
Saxonicum appellaretur) destinatum. E^ nomen a Bran seu Brun and Burn fluviolo,
and duno pro monte; quod etiam, ut berig and burg Saxonibus, oppidum alias
significat. Bran vero and Brun confundi videas in Leofrici Anglo-Saxonis
cognomine, qui alias Dominus de Brane, alias de Burn appellatus est, pater
scilicet Herewardi. Stationem hic habuit sub Comite Littoris Saxonic^
Praepositus equitum Dalmatarum cum sua vexillatione.

Sed illud quaero, quorum tempore coeperit hoc Litus Saxonicum appellari,
ejusque Praefectus, Comes Litoris Saxoni^i. Ferunt, inde nomen quod hic Comes
litus tueretur contra Saxones. Qui autem hoc? Number Britanniam infestarunt
Saxones, Romany dominantibus. Certe non reperi. Pro derelicto autem habuerunt
An. Dom. 446. cum ab Aetio Consule opem contra Scotos and Pictos, Valentiniano
III. imperante, implorantes non (...) vero ante annum 449. non appellunt, nec
tum quidem a V^^tigerno haud accersiti and Britannis. Ante hoc igitur tempus
non videtur Saxonicum L^tus appellari. Quid ergo in Imperiorum notitia tanto
proponuntur fastu Romani Magistratus in Britannia, Vicarius Britanniarum, Dux
Britanniae, Comes Britanniae, Comes litor^s Saxonici, etc. cum insigni
Praefectorum, Officialium, and ministrorum cat^rva, and apparatu? Suspicor; ut
in Provinciale Ecclesiarum in Romana Cancellaria, Patriarchae, Archiepiscopi,
Episcopi Suffraganei, hodie numerantur sub infidelibus; ut floruerunt olim sub
Christianis. ^oc autem posito, male convenit ut Romani nomine uterentur sua
ditione non enato: Provinciale siquidem priscas retinuit appellationes. Celebre
igitur monumentum Notitiam Imperii, de cujus origin and antiquitate crebro
contenditur, siquido constat sub exitu Valentiniani III. concinnatum fuisse,
non exutis omnino Romanorum reliquiis, sed turgescente indies alluvione
Saxonum; litus jam ideo nuncupari Saxonicum, and Praefectum ejus, Comitem
Litoris Saxonici, qui sub Valentiniano I. superioribus paucis annis (Marcelino
test) Comes maritimi tractus appellatus est. Haec ad ambiguum enucleandum; ad
me redeo.

Pinguntur huic Comiti in Notitia pro insignibus oppida IX. quibus praesidebat
in Insula (puta Britanniae) cum nominibus ascriptis: soil. unum in Sussexia; 5.
in Cantio; 1. in Essexia; and 2. in Norfolcia, Branodunum, viz. and (de quo
postea) Garienum. Merebant sub eo una legio, quae hoc tempore 1000. fere
continebat pedites: seni Numeri forte 1200. pedites: and 2. ordines equitum, i.
e. Dalmatarum, qui praesidinm hic agebant; and Stablesianorum, qui ad ostium
Garieni, numero simul 200. vel hunc circiter. Sic tota ejus militia per 9.
oppida seu stationes disposita, continebat plus minus 2200. pedites, and 200.
equites. Dalmatae vero hi dicti sunt, quod e part S^lavoniae quam Dalmatiam
tunc appellabant, conscriberentur. Eorum insignia praebet,
ut vides, O^id. Ve^illa^. Comita. cap. 27.
Notitia: colores vero ex antiquis MSS. sic expressit Pancirollus. Praeferunt
(inquit) in alba parma duplicem argenteum globum, quorum primum minorem sex
virides munitiones circumstant; alter 7. acutas cuspides emittit. Supra est
quadrata tabella, quae unam legem duplici orbi Romano dari insinuat;
prominentes mucrones caedem hostibus nunciant.

Eruuntur hic saepe Romana numisinata; ad me etiam nonnulla delata, cum duobus
aliquando vasculis aeneis seu capedunculis. Regiam autem villam ipsam (sic enim
olim appellatam reperiri, and regalibus imbutam hodie privilegiis) Coenobio S.
Benedicti Ramesiensi dedit Vulfgiva Comitissa, uxor Ailwini East-Anglorum
Ducis, and totius Angliae Aldermannus (id est, Justitiarius) qui opulentissimum
Ramesiae Monasterium fundavit sub An. Dom. 973.

Burnham
Brani ostio septemplex innititur Burnham; nomen inde (si Britannorum Bran, cum
Saxonum Brun, Prun, and Burn confunderim) etiam deferens. Hoc autem isti pro
torrente dixerunt: sed Gunterus (Austriades) ubi de Hayl-prun oppido Imperiali
loquitur, hayl salutem exponit; prun vero fontem: eoque sensu, Fontem (inquit)
liquere salutis. Portu claret and mercato; aliquando etiam Prioratu.

Obtinuerunt hic olim e Warreniorum dono splendidum Calthorpii beneficium,
dominorumque una symbolum auro and cyaneo tessellatum, quod trajectu distinctum
armelino hodie gestant in clypeo; ut pro more veteris illius seculi patronum
enuncient feodalem. Sic ut diximus Sharnburni Albeneiorum: and moris typum
exhibuisse videtur apud It. Came. l. 1. cap. 12.
Giraldum Cambrensem, sub Henrico I. Giraldus de Windesora, Constabularius
Penbrochiensis, qui XV. armigeris arma Dominorum suorum cum feodis dedit,
ipsosque statim militari cingulo decoravit. Habetur sub Edw. III. in quatuor
illis armigeris pugnacissimi Baronis de Audeley recentius testimonium, sed nos
aliud agimus. Transiit haec haereditas superiori seculo cum filia Philippi
Calthorp Equitis ad Parkeros, a gente Baronum de Morley propagatos.

Egeruntur hic secundum littus crebri monticuli; Saxonum and Danorum
proculdubio sepulturae, (nam de Germanis Tacitus Page 133.
, Sepulchrum (inquit) cespes erigit) an and Romanorum, fossione dignoscendum.
Hi mortui, cineres in urna condidere, aggestis desuper cespitibus; ut in
exequiis Mezentii prodit Virgilius. Illi non cineres, sed cadaver integrum
colle opprimebant. Tria vero exhibentur observanda. Primum, tractum hunc qui
jam Cer^ris videatur thalamus, incultum tunc fuisse; nam in arvis sepelire
mortuos, Gentium prohibuit superstitio; ut apud Ciceronem legas in fine Libri
3. de legibus. Secundum, Paganorum and Gentilium haec fuisse monumenta;
Christiani enim more Judaeorum in fossa occultabant mortuos, licet a Saxonico
berig, quod montem notat, nos hodie to bury dicimus, quasi monte tegere, ut
Latini etiam tumulare. Tertium, Scenam hic fuisse Martis, clientumque ejus
caemiterium, qui Branoduni and pro portu patriae ad castra juxta Creake and
Holkham contra Danos militantes* occubuere. In campis enim de Creake haud
Creake Holkham.
procul a Coenobio, amplum erigitur sepimentum militare, Saxonici operis; a quo
decurrens via regia, blood-gate, id est, sanguinea via, nuncupatur; cruenti
illic proelii testimonium. Habetur and his partibus Ebuli herbae copia; Ebulum.
quam velut e Danorum exortam sanguine, incolae Dane-blood vocant.

Habentur and per loca in depresso littore arenarum tractus, marinos cohibentes
fluctus, the Meals a farinae pulverisve similitudine (nam vox utrumque The
Meals Miles, seu Mules.

Walsingham.


sonat a Suevico and Germanico Mul pro pulvere) appellati.

Quarto a mare lapide, depressius in valle sedet Walsingham, illustri olim
coenobio in honorem beatae Mariae Virginis celebrata. Penetrale illic parentum
religione augustissimum, ad effigiem capellae Nazareth in terra Sancta, ubi
Gabriel Angelus Deiparam Virginem salutavit. Conditum a Richolde vidua nobili,
villae Domina, supra 400. annis ante excidium Monasteriorum cum in visione
tertio ad hoc excitata esset ab ipsa diva, exemplum (ut ferunt) aedificii
demonstrante, and miraculo postea fabricam erigente. Multos illic divinae
potestatis radios effulfisse perhibent; sanatas omnes morborum species, nec
obticent mortuos suscitatos. Hinc ab omni nostri orbis angulo celebris ad Divam
Virginem Walsinghamiensem (Parathalassam vocat Erasmus) peregrinatio. Nec a
vesana tantum plebecula, sed ad ipsis regni atque Sacerdotii potestatibus.
Obtinuit fama celebris, me adhuc puero, Regem Angliae Henricum VIII. nudis
pedibus a Bashamia ad praesentiam Virginis perrexisse; conceptisque votis,
monile peringentis precii obtulisse. Forte ut leniret Divam, quam exciso cum
coenobio Penetrali, extorrem brevi relegaturus erat. In ea quippe miram
deprehendit bonitatis indolem, exigui memorem beneficii, and ingentium (ut
numen decet) obliviosam injuriarum. Moriens igitur huic legavit testamento
animam, si legatam recte collocaverint Executores; qui in alio, quod sciam,
nihilo implerunt ejus testamentum. Beatissimae virginis imaginem Chels^iae
delatam flammis dedit Monasteriorum excisor Cromwellius, Anno 30. ejusdem
Henrici. Holl. p. 971.

Relicta Walsinghamia, and villis in confinio croceos anhelantibus odores,
(...).
Bashamiae sub illo tempore aedes condidit istius tractus illustrissimus
Gulielmus Fermer, eques potens; e cujus jam familia ad Calthorpos nuptiis
transiturae sunt.

(...).
Adjacet Fakenham, mercatorium, quod in sexto a mari lapide salinam olim
praebuisse (ut testatur Liber Angliae Censualis) mirum opinaberis.

(...).
Illic ad Occidentem Rayneham, cujus sub Edw. IV. and Hen. VII. dominus suit
Rogerus Townesend Eques primo Regiarum causarum (quem Attornatum vocant)
Procurator, postmodum Civilium Placitorum Justitiarius. Ejus abnepos, homonymus
animae and fortunae dives facultatibus, avitas seeds non tam novis aedibus,
quam nova aedificandi fabrica magnifice illustravit.

Wissingset.
Nec procul Wissingset; quod Herbertus Bozun Normannus sub Gulielmo I. emeriti
nomine suscipiens, longa nepotum serie, in hodiernum transfudit sobolem.

Mil^h^m.
Et in proximis Mileham, si non alio, cunis memorabile Edwardi Coke, summi
nuper Angliae Justitiarii, Legum officinae conditoris, and quod ruptis ilibus
fateantur aemuli, jurisprudentiae nostrae coryphaeus. Praedicabat miri quidpiam
ejus genitura; matrem ita subdito juxta focum intercipiens, ut in thalamum cui
suberat non moveretur. Locum ipsum ipse mihimet demonstravit.

Elmham.
Late hic ad Hieri ramum borealem distendit alas nobile dominium Elmham, quod
usque patrum nostrorum memoriam secularem nunquam agnovit possessorem.
Gentilium enim aevo Flaminis perhibetur habitatio, conversisque ad fidem a
Felice Sigeberto Rege and Anglis Orientalibus in Episcopi transiit patrimonium,
cujus seeds Dunwici fuit. Cum vero tres illic successissent a Felice Praesules;
graveque videretur tantam plebem unius credi moderamini; divisa est parochia
inter duos, relictaque alteri Suffolcia cum Dunwico civitate, alter sortitus
est Norfolciam cum Elmhamia. Sederunt hic deinceps ante An. Dom. 1088. viginti
tres Episcopi, a sede Elmhamenses nuncupati.

Castellum praebuit in egesto colle, cui se recepisse dicitur Episcopus
Norwicensis, cum excommunicationem, quam Innocentius IX. in Joannem Regem
promulgaverat, edixisset, Regemque merito accendisset. A castello per cuniculum
subterraneum in Ecclesiam itur ad altar; ubi sancti olim Episcopi jejuniis and
assiduis orationibus incumbentes, Deum clam mortalibus invocabant. Ecclesiam
condidit sub Gulielmo Juniore Herbertus de Losinga, primus Norwicensis
Episcopus; vel collapsam potius a fundamentis credideris excitasse: sedem enim
Episcopalem tot annis Ecclesia caruisse, nemo cogiter. Traditur hoc dominium
cum reliquo Episcopatus patrimonio in permutationem, ut praefati sumus, Henrico
Regi VIII. a Richardo Nix, Episcopo caeco, ut e laqueo quem inciderat semet
liberaret. Rex acceptum D. Cromwello contulit funestum donum. Securi enim hic
adimitur, and effuso postea integro patrimonio, pronepos ejus D. Coko ipsum
venundavit, aerumnarum satis exin conscio.

Gressenhall.
Ad australem Hieri ramum Gressenhall assidet, nobilis olim Fstotevillorum
habitatio, and clientes multos in obsequium habens militare per Foliotos ad
Tho. Hastings, Baronis de Abergavenni fratrem, transiit. Ejus ortus a nepotibus
Edwardus Hastinge (cum in hastiludio occisus esset An. Dom...... Laurentius
Hastings Comes Pembrochiae) titulum Baronis de Hasting, and sine discerniculo
insignia, coccineam scil. manicam in clypeo aureo, sibimet assumpsit.
Gravissimas ideo lites cum de Gray Ruthino Barone legitimo e foemina haerede,
tum in Curiis Civilibus tum in militari, per annos plurimos incredibili
tuebatur pervicacia: nec victus demum and incarceratus succubuit, nec
moriturus. Desiit vero ejus familia in Hugone Hasting; haereditate ad Extraneos
and Brownos per filias transeunte.

Nec silentio praetereundae Cley and Blackney, portus non inhospitales,
adversis Euripi incumbentes faucibus: eo autem prior clarior, quod nautae ejus
Walsing. Ypod. p. 566.
An. Dom. 1406. filium and haeredem Regis Scotorum, foederis causa ad Galliae
Regem navigantem, interceperunt and Henrico IV. Regi Angliae munus aptatis^imum
exhibuerunt.

Melton.
Jam in Boream reclinantibus, ad initium Buri fluminis habetur Melton,
Constabulariorum aliquando seeds, and ex nuptiis ad Astleios veniere.....
edidit qui in illustri sub Henrico VI. duello..... Gallum in Gallia coram
Gallis vicit, laborantemque famam suam emancipavit.

Heydon.
Burus tenui hinc procurrens filo, a dextra Heydon linquit, aliquando
mercatorium.

Sall.
Et Sall, ubi elegans Ecclesia, a Brusio (qua ex insculptis insignibus
conjectare licet) villae domino and patrono, circa aetatem Henrici VI. condita.
Cancella vero aeque elegans a quodam Gulielmo Wode, Rectore Ecclesiae and
Decretorum Baccala^reo a fundamentis struitur An. Dom. 1440. A Brusiis vero ad
Townsendos, etc. --

Repham
Tria hic vicina mercatoria; Repham, tribus splendidis in uno coemiterio
Ecclesiis splendidum; sed una jam diruta: Caston, ubi manus aenea (rationem non
teneo) praefertur Dominii Senescallo: and qua Burus ponte jungitur* Ailesham,
quod Ducatus Lancastriae apud nos praetorium est. Mirum hic in jure nostro;
Manerium a manerio, and per virgam teneri ad voluntatem domini, and per copiam
rotulorum Curiae concedi; Manerium scilicet de Sextons de manerio de Ailesham.
Loquor in forensi dialecto: sed qui nescierit ipsa feoda militaria tenta olim
fuisse and per virgam and ad voluntatem domini, legate si placeat quae de feodis
in nostro Archaeologo disseruimus.

Blickling.
A laeva Blickling, Bolannorum aliquando seeds, e quibus orti sunt Thomas
Bolen, Comes Wiltsh^riae, and Anna Bolen uxor Regis Henrici VIII. optimae
Principis Divae Elizabethae matter, natalitium hic sortita. Cadente in fatum
Jacobo Bolen avunculo Reginae Elizabethae, Blicklinga ex nuptiis ejus filiae
and haeredis, ad Joannem Clear pervenit: cujus e filio nepos Edwardus, Ordinis
S. Michaelis eques, eam vendidit Henrico Hobart I quiti, summo plebei
Tribunalis Justitiario; qui aedes veteres insigni auctas impendio, familiae
suae stationem posuit nobilissimam.

Wichingham.
Ab austro, non praeteream Wichingham, clarum olim Wichinghamiorum familia; e
qua sub Edw. III. floruit clarissimus nominis illius Jurisconsultus; and
Bretonum, non minus insigne celeberrimo illo Episcopo Herefordensi, qui sub
Edw. I. Pandectum Juris nostri Regii concinnavit; quam facinore Joannis Breton
sub Henrico III. vulgatissimo. Godofredus de Millers, Eques genere and militia
clarus, concubitum ambit filiae Joannis Breton. Illa, patre consulto, noctem
pangit, qua cubiculum Virginis eques clanculum subrepit; Captus vero ex
insidiis gravissime primum vulneratur, deinde flagris caesus acerbissime per
distentos ad trabem pedes tollitur, mortemque ardentius imprecanti abscisis
membris virilibus, mutilatus est. Mat. Par. An. 1248.
Accidit and eodem tempore dapsili c^idam Clerico simile infortunium; sed
commotus hisce Rex praeconia per provincias edixit voce, ne quis praesumat,
nisi pro conjuge, adulterum membris mutilare genitalibus.

Trans Burum in conspectu Blicklingae, pare velut distantia, habentur Calthorp,
dictum a frigore; and Erpingham; viculae tenues and jam obscurae, sed felix
utraque e celebris and antiquae familiae natalitiis. Illa Calthorpiorum,
propaginem late distendentium; haec Epingamiorum fortiter dimicantium: e quibus
unus fuit e XV. viris qui Henricum Ducem Lancastriae ab exilio ad regni
molimina redeuntem, comitatus est: and qui Henrico V. in Agencortensi proelio
fortissime dimicaturus, rudem ejecit, ineundae pugnae tesseram auspicatissimam.

Baningham*
Hic a latere Baningham, ubi Rex Henricus I. 5. marcatus terrae dedi^ Gerardo
Tasard tenendum de eo per Serjantiam balastriae (ut inquiunt schedae) i. e.
arcubalistae.

Baningham.
Reflector paululum in occasum ad Berningham, a Berninghamis per Hethersetos ad
Pagravos ducta: e quibus Johannes Pagrave Jurisconsultus aedificium recoluit
and filio dimisit.

Baconsthorp.
Et Baconsthorp, ubi a Johanne Heidon Jurisconsulto sub Henrico VI. potenter
excrescens Heidonorum familia, jam in deliquium regressa est.

Gresham.
Adjacet Gresham, nomen faciens ditissima exinde prosapiae; quod Thomas
Gresham, Praetor Londinensis, and Regalis (ut vocant) excambii conditor,
florere incoepit.

^^lbirg.
Hinc in boream mari vicinior habetur Felbrig; nomen and sedem praestans
vetustae and effaetae familiae Felbriggorum; e qua D. Simon de Felbrig, Eques
inter nostrates celeberrimus connubio potitur Margaretae, filiae Ducis Thasae,
Regis Bohemiae nepotis, e qua Alanam filiam and haeredem suscitavit, nuptam
Gulielmo Tyndall, patri Thomae Tyndall, qui genuit Gulielmum Tyndall, ad
creationem Arthuri Principis Walliae balteo cinctum militari, and jure
Margaretae proaviae suae, haeredem regni Bohemiae denuntiatum. Sic Heraldorum
nostrorum fasti; sic me puero fama celebris.

Cromer. Gimmingham.
Jam ad litus reversus, Cromer mercatorium Neptuno contritum inimico praetereo;
Gimminghamiam accedens, Ducatus apud nos Lancastriae sedem primariam. Ingens
illic aula columnis distincta, quarum ea olim ratio fuit, ut supra columnam
suae conditioni designatam nemo ascenderet. Retinetur and prisci moris
consuetudo: a colonis manerii quos Socmannos olim, hodie Ten^ntes in Soccagio
vocamus, non tam censum pecuniarium quam opera rustica, and ad victum
vestitumque pertinentia repetere. Moris ut Romany insoliti, Tacitus meminit
Cisalpinis omnibus in usu. Nobis vero mutavit primus Rex Henricus II.

Bronholm.
Nec procul in crepidine Promontorii Bronholmensis, Coenobiolum aliquando S.
Sepulchri, a G. Glanvilla censu pauperi constitutum; sed ex cruce quae illic
colebatur, auctius indies and per quam celebre. Liceat dicere de hac, quid
proditum. Factam sine dubio (ut asseritur) de ipsa cruce in qua pependit
Dominus noster; ad longitudinem pene humanae manus, cum duplici ligno per
transversum. Ferri solitam inter alias Reliquias a Patriarcha and Episcopis
ante Baldewinum Imperatorem Constantinopolitanum (Flandriae prius Comitem) in
aciem progressurum contra Crucis inimicos; neglectaque fortuito semel
aliquando, caesum cum exercitu Imperatorem. Erat tunc Constantinopoli,
Capellanus quidam Anglicus Divina inter alios celebrans in Capella Imperatoria,
and reliquiarum agens custodiam; qui cum omnia desperata videret and
perturbata, reliquias and pretiosa multa clam surripiens, Angliam venit; and
quaedam Monacho S. Albani vendidit, quae Parisius Mat. Par. An. 1223. in Henr*
III. p. 307.
fatetur, magna illic fuisse veneratione cum haec ipse scriberet, id est, An.
Dom. 1223. Crucem vero nullis cederet Capellanus; qui and ipsum and duos filios
suos parvulos in ordinem non susciperent Monachatus. Repudiata condition a
divitibus multis Monasteriis, ut fraudem suspicantibus; ad Bronholmiae devenit
Prioratum, aedificiis and inopia jam tum laborantem. Pacta vero illic
condition Prior and Fratres suscipiunt Crucem, and in honestissimo Oratorii
sui loco magna cum reverentia and laetitia collocant. Subsequitur mox
miraculorum ingens fama, and non solum ex tota Anglia sed e longinquis
regionibus huc concurritur. Coenobitis interea luculentus quaestus. Hujus
meminit sub exitu quarti abhinc seculi Fol. 17. Col. c.
Galfridus Chaucer in Praepositi lasciva Fabula: And with the fall out of her
sleep she braide,
Help holy Cross of Bromholme she said.


Paston. Waxham.
Hic in littore una sedent Paston and Pastoni, Villa tenuis, gens ditissima.

Legendo a Pastona littus occurrit Waxham, seeds Woodhousiorum familiae, ortu
and insignibus ab illa Kimberleae discrepantis; sed clarae pariter. Hic
Gulielmus Woodhouse Eques, Jacobo Regi nuper in facetiis, and familiae
corruentis suscitator, primum apud nos instituit decipulum Anatarium, peregrino
nomine a ^oye, i. e. cors, seu cavea nuncupatum. Stagnum siquidem valde latum
est, sed part una arundinibus septa, in angustiam porrectum. In hac angustia,
nutriuntur indies anates aliquot proditionis causa mansuefactae, quae totam
regionem circumvolantes, sui generis volatilia redeuntes ducunt catervatim in
stagni latitudinem. Apparente jam tum caute in extremitate latitudinis stagni
cane subdolo ad hoc edocto, secedunt volatilia remotius angustiam versus,
prementeque adhuc cane, sed a long, and in aquam alias semet immergendo alias
furtim efferendo, capescunt tandem ipsam angustiam. Palam nunc exultat canis;
eoque viso, sidunt aves proditoriae, and dum in alas se conjiciunt advenae,
retibus obruuntur anatarii.

Praedantur anno uno in hujusmodi decipulo, tot quot vaeniant aves mill
coronatis Gallicis, and (ut audivimus) multo supra; in vicinorum grave admodum
praejudicium, qui hoc modo and aucupii coercentur voluptate and mensarum
pristino supplemento. Germanis igitur superioribus capitale perhibetur, hoc
erigere.

Ad meridiem Walsham, and Worsted.

Cowshil.
Buri in margin, Cowshil est, cui inter privilegia indulsit Henricus III. ut
servus qui hic per annum manserit, exiret liber.

Frekenham.
In adversa ripa Frekenham-hill, ubi Turnus Vice-Comitis toti annuatim
indicitur Comitatui.

Crostwick
Vicinum Crostwick obtinet. Crassorum seeds, vulgo le Gross, equestris sub
Henrico III. familiae.

Sprowston.
Nec long Sprowston, aedificiis a Joanne Corbet Jurisconsulto (Norwicensibus
oriundo) adornatum, praediisque auctum a Milone Equite aurato, filio ejus: jam
cum Milonis pronepote in tutela Regis est.

Redeo ad Burum, qui depressas saepe planicies superfluens, nobiles multas
edidit piscaturas, and Percarum genus celeberrimum. Memorabile est quod
Randworth.
ab accolis accepi: Ranworthae aliquando 120. modios piscium, duobus
circumclusorum retibus, depraedari.

Ludham.
E regione sedet Ludham, ubi aedes non Episcopales, sed Episcopi Norwicensis in
rure unicae. Officinam fuisse dicuntur agriculturae Abbatis S. Benedicti de
Hulmo, vulgo Grangiam.

Subest in palude tremula ruderum ejusdem Abbatiae moles ingens, quae ex
insculptis insignibus sculpturam prodit recentiorem. Fundavit tamen eam Rex
Canutus in honorem S. Benedicti, cujus ut apud Anglos ordo vetustissimus, S.
Benne^*
ita and regula gratissima and frequentissima. Tanta eam admiratione amplexus
est fortissimus Monachatus propugnator Rex Eadgarus, ut cum Monasterio S.
Aethelredae Eliensis, Lib. Eliens. page 4.
quod instaurabat Wintoniae Episcopus Ethelwoldus, 40. hydas terrae apud Hatfeld
elargitus esset; nobile manerium de Sudburne addidit in Coronidem, sub
condition quod Ethelwoldus regulam S. Benedicti de Latino in Anglicum
transmutaret.

Acle.
Festinans jam Burus ad Hueri confluvium, Acleam a dextris praeterlabitur, quam
Ead^othus filius Goderici Abbatiae S. Benedicti Ramesiensis dedit.

Flegg.
A sinistris Flegg peninsula frumento dives and ubertate soli, primam excepisse
videtur Danorum coloniam; tum quod portui cui appulerunt, sit vicinior,
natur^^que munita beneficio; tum quod exiguo suo ambitu 13. villas comprehendit
in by desinentes, voce Danica and villam seu habitationem significante. Hinc
nos hodie a B^-law dicimus, quod villa quaepiam sibi constituerit; seriptorib^^
Dani^^s Bi-laginem, a by pro villa, and lage, quo nos (ut solemus* g in ^
mutamus, pro lege.

Yarmouth nee verum Garianonum, nec a vero alienum est. Seeds enim utrique ad
ost^um fluvii Garienis, qui and utrique nomen indidit. Huic vero a canali
vetere, illi a recentiore. Ambo autem in illo littoris spatio, quo An. Dom.
499. (...) Stow p. 158.
495. Cerdicus Saxo cum Cinrico filio ejus and 5. navibus portum ingrediens,
Britannos profligavit obvios, portuique nomen, Cerdicis oram, ut Aethelwerdus
refert, dereliquit. Sub quarto inde lustro, Stuff and Wuthger pariter
saevientes, hanc diripiunt regionis partem.

Ambo autem in illo littoris spatio, quo sub Comite littoris Saxonici
praesidium agebant Stablesiani equites; qui proprie suberant Magistro equitum
in occidente Duces limitanei (Panc. p. 86. b.) Sed ut alii Magistrorum milites,
alus Ducibus and Comitibus limitaneis merebantur: sic hi sub nostro. Erant vero
sub hujus nomine vexillationes aliae plures, ut Stablesiani primi, secundi,
tertii, Africani, Italicani, etc. sed an ab aliquo eorum nostri deferendi sint,
an per se Britannicani appellandi, aliis linquo. Dicti omnes a loco unde orti
sunt: and forte legendum putat Pancirollus p. 87. a. Stabaliani; qui fuere
Galliae
populi. Stablesianorum symbolum nescio an omnium, vel little tantum, qui in
Occidente sub Magistro Equitum militabantur, sic in Notitia Impp. describitur,
and a Pancirollo qui in MSS. depictum vidit, enarratur, fol. 135.

E veteris Garianoni exequiis succrevit novum, and ut maritum uxor fluvium
sequitur exulantem. Longo tamen ut videtur intervallo. In appulsu enim Saxonum
nulla hujus vel alterius mentio: sed in ipsa ora velut nuda and anonyma
Cerdericus conscendisse fertur; nomenque inde, ut Aethelwerdus meminit,
Cerdericshore imposuisse.

Ut Venetiae in arenis maris Adriatici sedem sibi e ruinis Aquilegii eluctatae
sunt; sic nova haec Jermutha nostra e deliquio vetustioris originem sumpsit and
incrementum. Sita est enim in lacinia terrae, quae olim arenarum moles suit; ab
Orient, salso mari; ab Occidente, fluvio salso (vel ut Isthmus) latitudine
interclusa; longitudine, 2000. passus non excedens. Quod miraberis tamen, aquis
abique dulcibus exuperans. Mare exhibet Xerxianae classi satis fidam stationem,
fluvius portum tutum proebet, qui 600. naves aequore suscipiat languescenti.
Ora igitur Cerdici olim, and Saxonibus excip^endis commodissime exposita.
Arenam obruisse fluvius dicitur usque ad Canuti Regis tempora, Annum circiter
1008. Cedente vero tunc mari, and arenis indies latius atque firmius semet
efferentibus; convenient illic sub Edouardo Confessore and ingressu
Normannorum, non tantum Norwicenses and vicini plurimi de Norfolcia
Suffolciaque; sed Portuenses ipsi qui hoe aevo soli habebantur Angliae
piscatores, Galli, Belgae, aliique peregrini artem exercentes piscatoriam.
Halecum enim nobilissima hic Europae piscatura and Septembris exitu (quem cum
Danis igitur Fish-month appellemus) per totos plerumque 40. dies, quod immunium
illic hodie nundinarum spatium est; primumque papiliones and tuguria contra
Jovem inimicum, sed ex licentia Regum, honestiora statim domicilia and ad
fastum protinus exaedisicant. Tempore Gulielmi Rufi, Gulielmus Herbert
Norwicensis Episcopus, (de Losinga, id est, mendax cognominatus) Capellam in
hac arena condidit pro salute animarum illic appellentium: and post paucos
annos, non long a Capella, Ecclesiam perillustrem S. Nicolao dicatam,
piscatorum vero ditata^ oblationibus and dotatam. Hinc statio illa, Roda, (i.
e. statio) S. Nicolai appellatur. Novae jam villae Rex Henricus I. anno regnis
sui 9. Magistratum imponit, Regia functum authoritate, quem (de more
Normannorum) le Provost, i. e. Praepositum appellabant. Et cum hoc sub
regimine, centenos floruisset annos, Joannes Rex 18. Mar. regni sui 9. villam
in Burgum, homines in Burgenses constituit, de Jermuth nuncupandos: and Burgum
ipsum Burgensibus dunisit ad firmam (ut loquuntur) feodi in perpetuum. Ex
concessione Henrici III. se muro claudunt and fossato, 100. jugera
continentibus, A. D. 1230. and in An. 1240. gubernatur Burgus per Balivos suos.

Edouardus I. and II. aquam illic nomine honestarunt Portus Jermuth, Tronumque
and sigillum dictum Coquet pro oneratione and exoneratione navium instituerunt.
Edouardus III. (qui hinc maris cognoscatur Dominus) Burgo locum in alto mari
distantem 7. Leucas, vocatumque Kirkeley Road univit in perpetuum; opibusque
and potentia sic tunc Jermutha floruit, ut An. Dom. 1350. dicti regni 25. ad
Caleti obsidionem 43. emisit naves and 1075. nautas; quod a nullo portu Angliae
factum est si Fowensem excipias, qui licet quatuor naves plures exhibuit,
nautas tamen 305. pauciores; Londinum ipsi 25. tantum naves and 419. [nautas]
exhibente. Frequentia populi ex hoc dignoscitur, quod paulo ante in uno anno
1341. 7000. peste rapiuntur; cum sub initio Jacobi Regis 5000. tantum illic
aestimarentur. Possidet quod sciam nullas hodie hoc (ut alia) municipium
possessiones; sed instar filiorum Aeoli atque Thetidis (ut in Inquisitione 10.
Henr. III. compertum est) maria and 4. ventos. Repetit quod deseruit mare; and
cum aliquando Isthmus, quo situm est oppidum, ad sextum protenderetur lapidem,
hodie in secundo terminatur; and ne vicinius proruat ingenti cohibetur.....
quae singulis annis, 560l. [f. resarcitur.]

Retia illic Piscatoria Londinum a Jermutha, i. e. 100. mill. porriguntur; quod
cum in Parliamento 35. Elizabethae palam audissem affirmatum, and ut certiar
fierem, sciolum convenissem; respondit, Compertum fuisse, suffectura ea ad
totum spatium inter Jermutham and Belgiam occupandum, dum ab una navi ad
alteram (piscatorum more) jungerentur. Mirabiles quidem in nostris auribus; sed
aestimata alias legimus ad 50000. libras Anglicanas.

Veterem Garrianoni sedem oblivioni tradidit alveum destituens fluvius,
sedisque and fluvii incerta vestigia. Videntur eam duo vendicare; Burghcastle
in agro Suffolciano, quod meridionali fluvii lateri hodie incumbit; and a
Boreali 4. distans mill passus Castor villula. Romanam ostendunt ambo speciem;
illud quadrilateram oblongam castrametationem muro coronatam, sed remotiorem a
mari and loco paludibus and angustiis ita impedito, ut equestribus male
conveniat turmis; haec in ipso litore, muri etiam and muniminis rudera prodens,
campestri loco equitumque discursioni litoris praesidio quod huic Comiti, huic
Equitatui demandatum fuit, commodissimo. Interiora enim and Mediterranea Comes
alius tuebatur, peditumque magis cohortibus quam turmis Equitum. Garianonum
igitur Castorem pono, Camdeno licet Burgh arrisit. Conducit in sententiam
nostram, Castor, nomen a Romany sumptum, praesertim cum in tota Anglia, nihil
(quod sciam) hujus nominis reperietur non Romanum. Convenit and ipse locus,
arenarum oppilationi and diversioni fluminis oportunior, ornithiis and
Euro-Aquilone imperantibus.

Orientem solemn ulterius non videt Norfolcia: remeandum igitur ad Occidentem. E
Yermutha exeuntes statim recipit Burgh-castle, ad Hieri marginem, sed in
Suffolcia collocatum, quo nos igitur non commorabimur. Situm tamen dabimus and
effigiem, ut Romanam fuisse intelligas: sed an Stablesianorum equitum statio,
cum fluminibus and palustri impediretur solo, licet in acclivi castrum, non est
verisimile. Si autem Cnoberi urbs fuit, and Monasterium (de quo Beda l. 13. c.
19.) a Judaeis postea habitatum tradunt incolae, and fidem auget, ejus ducens
ad introitum via antiqua, Judaeorum hodie appellata. Tenebat aliquando hoc
castrum Radulfus filius Rogeri de Burgo per Serjantiam; quam cum dimisisset
Gilberto de Weseham, and ille Regi Henrico III. eandem dedidisset, Rex 20.
Aprilis, regni sui 20. coenobio S. Andreae de Bromholme, cum omnibus
adjacentiis conferebat.

Ad Hieri cum Wavenio coitum, tertio a Yermutha miliari, e paludibus (...)
vix se erigit Reedham villula, Barneorum seeds, ab arundineo situ nuncupata,
sed miraculoso Lothbroci nobilis Dani appulsu aeque celebris, at infelix.
Lugubrem suscitabo narrationem. Lothbrocus hic a stirpe regia, cum duos
genuisset filios, Hinguarem atque Hubbam, and solus aliquando in navicula, aves
per vicinas Daniae insulas, cum accipitre depraedaretur, correptus est subita
tempestate per maris latitudinem, and in Hieri ostium usque Reedham deportatur.
Peregrinum incolae (ut invenerant) solum cum accipitre Eadmundo Regi
East-Auglorum, cujus ad decimum inde lapidem erat Castor Regia, detulerunt.
Formam and fortunam viri Rex miratur, vultuque and moribus adeo serenis
excipit, ut Lothbrocus subito patriae desiderio non teneretur. Capitur and
aulicorum studiis, praesertim venatorio; quo ut fiat peritior, Berno se
adjungit venatori Regio, Magistrumque sic brevi superat; ut invidia percitus,
hunc ille inter nemora seductum clam peremerit. Desiderato Lothbroco, canis
quem alerat leporarius interfecti corpus vigil tuebatur, sed coactus fame alias
atque alias Aulam petit: observatusque a ministris Regis, subsequentes ducit ad
interfecti corpus. Bernus sceleris reus agitur, and judicio Curiae, Regis
Lothbroci imponitur naviculae, solus and sine omni instrumento nautico;
fluctibusque and ventis creditus, Daniam fato advectus est. Cognita illic
navicula, tormentis arguitur de Lothbroci nece; and se ut liberet, interfectum
mentitur ab Eadmundo Rege East-Anglorum. Saevissimam jurant Hingar and Hubba
ultionem, collectoque 20000. armatorum exercitu, ductore Berno, totam
East-Angliam ex improviso diripiunt. Eadmundum Regem brevi capiunt, flagris
caedunt, confossumque deinde sagittis, and gladio detruncatum, inter Divos
referendum excarnificant. Sic cum Rege animam efflavit regnum East-Anglorum,
An. gratiae, 870. die. 12. Calend. Decembris, quae Eadmundo hactenus celebratur
in Calendario.

Ex his videtur Reedham villam hanc parvam, magna Yarmutha antiquiorem esse.
Nam si habitatoribus frueretur Yermutha, cum Lothbrocus huc appulsus est, opem
proculdubio clamore implorasset, attritusque fame and itinere, ulterius non
perrexisset in fluvio. Decurrit hinc fluviolus ad Romanam alteram munitionem,
sed an Ventam illam Icenorum, qua nihil olim apud nos illustrius, ego subito
non definiam. Mirum enim videatur and inconsultum, magni celebrisque populi
metropolim ad ignobilem collocari fluvium, cum in viciniis ipsis haberetur
aliud nobilissimum.

Hinc inter Waveney and Hierum nihil quod sciam memorabile, donec sub (...)
10. pene lapide ad Hales venieris; ubi Jacobus Hobart, Henrici VII. Attornatus
pluribus familiis initium dedit.

Haileston
Pari distantia Waveneium occupat mercatorium Haileston. Inde in Septentrionem
Shelton
rediens, per Shelton, quod antiquos suae appellationis dominos nuper Tasburg.
exuit, ad Tasburg itur.

(...)
In Wenti and Hieri commissura, and Wento magis quam Hiero Norwich assidet. A
north dictum quod boreale, and wic quod castellum, vicum, portum, sinum seu
anfractum fluvialem, Saxonibus nostris significabat. Convenit igitur,
quamcunque elegeris significationem; sed non aeque omnis. Si de sinu dixeris,
urbs non in sinu fluvii sed in dorso ponitur, nec ad partem quidem borealem sed
occiduam magis, unde and West-wich potius quam Norwich diceretur. Saxo ipse
Alfricus nostras, Wic exponit de castello, and huc nihil accommodatius. Effecit
enim ipsa ratio, ut Castellum boreale diceretur; cum ad tertium inde milliare
versus ipsum Austrum, aliud haberetur castrum regium, quod, extinctum hodie,
Caster tamen appellatur.

(...)
S^ a castro igitur nomen urbis, castrum nomine proculdubio est antiquius; and
forte ipsa urbe, quod in ejus habeatur meditullio. Sic Roma Capitolium. Licet
enim fossam propter formam orbicularem and immanem amplitudinem, Danorum
censeam vel Normannorum opus, arcem utique Normannorum; castrum tamen ab
antiquiori seculo illic exstitisse, and nomen suggerit, and Charta quaedam
Henrici I. qua enixius ab Harvaeo, primo Eliensi Episcopo [rogatus,] Ecclesiam
illam liberam facit de jugo servitutis, and custodia, quam castello Norwici
debebat. Imponi non poterat ista servitus, dum ab Episcopis, Monachis aut
Monialibus possiderentur terrae Ecclesiae, si prius non fuisset debita; ideoque
debitam fuisse dum in secularium exstiterunt manibus (i. e. Tomberti Australium
Gerviorum Principis, qui Aethelredae uxori suae, primae Eliensis Monasterii
fundatrici, circiter An. Dom. 677. eas dedit) necesse est. In Ecclesiasticorum
enim dum erant possessione, magis (inquiunt LL. Edw. Confess.) in Ecclesiae
confidebant orationibus, quam in armorum defensionibus. Ca. 11.

Amplum etiam fuisse Norwici castrum ante Normannorum ingressum, ex eo liquet,
quod in Domesdei legitur Ibidem LXXXI. mansurae vacuae in occupatione castelli.

Nobile etiam tune fuisse videtur hoc Norwici castrum, and velut totius
Icenorum Provinciae metropolis, cui insignis ille Geruiorum Princeps, and tam
insignis Insulae illius pars (si non tota) deservirent. Primo etiam ad
East-Anglorum Reges, postea Praesides, quos alias Aldermannos, alias Duces,
alias Comites appellabant, pertinuisse. In instauratione igitur Monasterii,
Aetheldreda fratris sui Adulphi Regis East-Anglorum opem implorat: and in
translatione Monachorum inde Betrichswordiam, sub Canuto Rege, An. Dom. 1020.
idem facit Leofinus Abbas a Turchillo Comite.

Quonam olim frueretur nomine, non me torqueo. Proculdubio vel Saxonico Noric;
vel (quod Camdenus cedit) Britannico Caer Guntum; vel (ut Lhuydus habet) Caer
guynt. In Historiis (fateor) raro occurrit vox alterutra: rarius quippe ipsae
historiae. Caer Guntum vero quasi Wentopolis, i. e. civitas ad Guntum fluvium
(quem Saxones more suo G. in W. mutantes, Wentum pro Wuntum dicunt, Romani
Ventam.) Diceretur aeque and Hieropolis, ab Hiero fluvio. Sed quaeritur an haec
Venta illa Icenorum apud veteres and Antoninum? Negaveris forte and
affirmaveris in aequilibrio.

Cossey.
A Norwico per adversum flumen ad Cossey remigatur; ubi junior sed clara
Jerneghamiorum familia sedem obtinet luculentam; primogenita illa quae ad
Somerle-town in Lothingland Suffolciae non pridem flourit, jam extincta.

Bouthorpe.
Prope hic ad Austrum, Wenti sinum alium videas Norwicensi similam: cujus cum
in dorso pendeat, ut Norwicus, villula, non a sinu nomen habet, sed a dorso,
Bouthorpe, quasi a bout, i. ambitu, and thorpe, villula.

Intwood.

Kettringham.


Ab hoc sinu per Intwood quod Greshamos excussit nuper, ad Kettringham
contenditur, Heveninghamorum sedem, numerosum Equitum seriem proferentium.

Windham.
Late hic in centuria (quae a 4. montibus, ubi convocari solet, nuncupatur
Forehow) distendit alas Wimundham, vulgo Windham. Albeneiorum, Comitumque
Arundeliae, eorumque haeredum, subinde ab ingressu Normannorum opulenta
possessio, donec a Knevettis ad Henricum Hobart, Capitalem Justitiarium
Civilium Placitorum, venditione devenit. Coenobio claruit Nigrorum Monachorum,
a Gulielmo de Albeneio pincerna Regis Henrici I. condito, Sanctoque Albano
primitus ascripto: coenobium vero, crebris Albeneiorum, Comitumque aliquot
Arundeliae sepulturis; ubi de Fundatore hoc Epitaphium Hunc Pincerna locum
fundavit, and hic jacet; illa
Quae dedit huic domui, jam sine fine tenet.


Hengham
Huic radios Hengham porrigit; ubi Rex Aethelstanus 60. Hydas, i. e. carucatas
terrae Aethelwoldo dedit, Episcopo Wintoniensi, qui easdem cum Eadgaro Rege mox
post annum 970. commutavit pro 40. hydis and dimidio in Insula Ely and
adjacentibus; cum jurisdictione and immunitate 7. Centuriarum and dimidiae,
quae hodie S. Aethelred s Liberty appellatur. Mercatorium est, and suos habuit
Barons; sed clarius nomen a Radulpho de Hengham.

Kymb^^ly.
A dextris Kimberley egregiis adornatur Woodhousorum aedibus, a Johanne
Woodhouse equite nascentium.

A^^ilburgh
A sinistris dum in meridiem tend^^us, merito nos moratur Attilburgh; ut
sopitam ejus dignitatem suscitemus. Atque id in primis moneo: Nusquam occurrit
appellatio burgi, nihil innuens antiqui inuniminis; puta urbem, castrum,
turrim, vallum, sepimentum^e militare: majori autem, qua apud nos frequenter
deprehenditur, Castrum; Vrbem, Civitatem. Recte igitur Littletonus, Quae hodie
(inquit) civitates, olim dicebantur burgi. Nec pro civitate, alia pro veteres
nostros Saxonas seu recentes Germanos appellatio. Perhibetur celebri fama
Attilburgum non solum fuisse civitatem, sed and aliquando Regiam and Provinciae
Metropolim. Famae non deest antiquae paginae testimonium* si Joanni de Bramis
(Waldei Historiae ante 200. annos authori) stet, (quod penitus non faciam.)
Refert Joh. Bramis, Atlynge quendam, Norfolciae Regem (qui sub..... Christi
seculo floruit) in defensionem suam eam condidisse adversus Rond, Thetfordiae
Regem, muro etiam cinxisse atque fossa, and quatuor portis, quatuor turres
addidisse. Ductum insuper a conditore nomen. De auctoris fide non digladiabor.
Monachus fuit Thetfordiensis, and historiam transtulisse refert, tum ex
exemplari Gallico, tum and Anglico, verbis laborante utroque interdum exoletis:
sed and Gallicum, pro genio seculi and illius populi multa invexisse.

(...).
In confiniis Attilburgi, villulam optimam (sic Besthorp sonat) proavorum sedem
habitat eques primarius -- Et jam in tractum pervenitur, sylvis divitem atque
pascuis, quo primas obtinet Boccinum, oppidum vetus, ad Bu^k^nham*
I^idem fluvium (ut Lelandus ponit) situm; and nunc Buckenham, non a fagis (ut
Camdeno visum) quae in tota hac Provincia nusquam (quod sciam) reperiuntur, sed
a cervorum copia (quibus ut circumfusa n^mora olim abundarent, ita neque hodie
destituta sunt) nomen habet. Nam hos item Dani atque Saxones Bucken vocant.
Pinguior autem ista Comitatus portio, cum villis plurimis adjacentibus, and
officio Pincernae Regii, Gulielmo Albeneio a Conquestore data perhibetur,
castrumque ille Buckenhamiae condidisse; cum tamen in excisenda patria nostra
inter Normannos nulla ejus mentio fiat in libro Censuali, qui Domesdei
nuncupatur. Quandocunque autem facta fuerit haec donatio; certum est and fieri
aliquando, crevisseque ejus posteros in Comites Arundeliae; sed deficiente sub
Henrico III. haerede masculo, insignis haec haereditas inter foeminas
dispartita est: cessitque jam castellum de Buckenham cum nobilissimo mancrio
Wimondham inter alia multa per Tatsallos, Calios, Cliftonos, ad Knevettorum
prosapiam, e qua hodie Philippus Knivet Baronetti gaudet novo titulo; sed
patrimonium vetus adeo labefactavit, ut vix Buckenham cum castello r^maneant
integre.

Keninghal (...).
Inter villas plurimas quas Keninghal hic trahit in suam ditionem, subest ad
Austrum Garbusham, alias Garbelsham, and Garbolisham, quod Wilfricus Abbas
sextus Eliensis, antequam Ecclesia illa in Episcopatum eveheretur, Gudmundo
fratri suo inter alia cessit, ad vitae spacium. Sed direpta interea a Normannis
Anglia, Hugo de Munford miles Normannicus, haec and caetera cum a Gudmundo tum
a Monasterio in perpetuum abrasit. Cito vero transiit Garbulsham *ut videtur)
ad dominos villae Keninghal, cujus in vestibulo jacet. Amplum enim hoc, and
seeds olim potentissimorum Baronum.

Lopham (...).
Hic limen Norfolciae tuetur Lopham e cujus latere velut ab eodem alvo
enascentes discordes fratres, Isis minor and Waveney, fluvii, contrariis alveis
hic per Dille in orient Garienum petit, ille per Thetforde in Occidente Lennum
Regis; suo ambitu totum Norfolciae australe Hemisphaerium complectentes.

Thetford
Thetfordiam (antique Tedford) dici a supposititio fluminis nomine Thet vel
Sit, vix assentior. Saxonibus liquido sonat vadum populi, theod enim populus,
ord vadum. Fuisse tamen Antonini Sitomagum non inficior; male licet de
intervallo convenit a Venta Icenorum; vetustamque admodum, ut caetera omnia in
magus (quod urbem sonat) desinentia. In antiquae tabulae fragmentis Simomagus,
alias Sinomagus; quod utrumque mihi Icenorum urbem velut primariam olim, and
metropolin tractus istius fuisse suggerit. Prior enim vox Simomagus Ptolemaeo
quadrat, qui Icenos vocat Simenos: and vox posterior Sinomagus dicit qu.
Icenomagus. Nec Caesari dissonat, qui Icenos (juxta Camdeni lectionem) Cenos
vocat, ut alii Hispanos, Spanos. In historiis autem non omnino sonuit Sitomagus
nomen; nec ante Saxones recentiores Tedford ipsum; nec Jo. Brami Monacho
adhibueris aurem de Rondo quodam strenuo istius urbis Rege, vicinisque
infestissimo, memoranti. Floruisse eum refert Vortigerni seculo, torpentibus
and cedentibus jam Romany, grassantibus Pictis and Scotis, enervatis
Britannis, Saxonibusque cumulatim irruentibus. Sic ut de Britannia jam dicamus,
ut de Israel olim, Nullus jam Rex in Israel. Occupanti enim omnia jam ceduntur,
and ubique tot Toparchae, (quos Scriptores veteres appellabant Reges) quot
tyranni, munita possidentes oppida vel territoria. Praedones siquidem non
Reges; de quibus recte Porphyrius impius apud Ninnium; Britannia fertilis
provincia tyrannorum. Brit. pa. 36. Fertur and ex historia anonyma fuisse olim
scholasticorum studium Thetfordiae (Caius, p. 148. and fidem astruit ipse Beda,
lib. 3. c. 18. de Sigeberto ita loquens: Patriam reversus, ubi regno potitus
est, mox ea quae in Galliis been disposita videt, imitari cupiens, instituit
scholam, in qua pueri literis erudirentur. Nollem fraudi esse Cantabrigiae,
quae locum hunc ad suam trahit Academiam; priorem tamen agnoscit ipse Caius --
Egregia olim schola e plebeis; cum per aliquot secula ex edicto Gregoriano
prohiberentur Angli gymnasia celebrare propter Arianam and Pelagianam haeresim,
aliosque quosdam Britannorum errores. V. Caium.

Veteres urbis aerumnas hodie praedicant fossae vicinae militares, egestumque
plurimo cespite propugnaculum; Danorum potius quam Saxonum opus: proculdubio
non Romanorum, qui nec tanta elatione nec tam exiguo ambitu castra metabantur.
Hanc, e Northymbria regressi (Anno circiter 870.) Hungar and Hubba, Danorum
occupant conductores truculentissimi. Quibus dum congreditur Orientalis nostrae
Angliae Rex piissimus Eadmundus, in fugam est coactus, obsessusque in castello
de Foamingham, demum capitur, sagittisque, arbori alligatus, transfixus, and
truncatus capite: decerptumque deinceps regnum ejus ad Occidentales Saxones est
delatum. (Vid. Holl. and Hunt.)

Sub ingressu Normannorum, Arfastus, Capellanus Gulielmi I. and jam tractus
hujus Pontifex, Episcopalem sedem ab Helmhamia transtulit Thetfordiam quod ab
antiquo municipium esset Episcopatus sui, and jam cautum esset Concilio, ut
Episcopi seeds suas non in villis, sed in urbibus collocarent. Secundus vero
successor ejus, Herbertus de Losinga, Norwicum detulit. Apud Episcopos tamen
Norwicenses annos totos 500. mansit Thetfordiae dominium. Cum vero sub Henrico
VIII. Ricardus Nixus Episcopus incidit in crimen diminutae Regiae potestatis
(quod Praemunire vocant) bonisque omnibus and perpetuo carcere mulctandus
esset; gratiam ut redintigraret, universa Episcopatus praedia (viz. 30. vel
supra, eximia maneria) in Regis patrimonium transcripsit: acceptis (Glauci and
Diomedis permutatione) Abbatia S. Benedicti de Hulmo cum suis, aliisque
nonnullis praediis. Quae ut certius, annecterentur Episcopatui, decreto
Parlamentario anni 27. Henr. VIII. sancitum est, ut Episcopus Norwicensis
semper Abbas S. Benedicti de Hulmo habeatur, and e contra Abbas S. Benedicti de
Hulmo semper utique Episcopus Norwicensis: Sic unus hodie nobis Abbas. Sed
quoniam mentionem fecimus tantae cladis nobilissimi istius Episcopatus, casum
referam, quo Regi tam obnoxious fit Episcopus.

Anno 25. Henrici VIII. Regiarum causarum Procurator Billam quam vocant de
Praemunire exhibuit in Banco Regis versus Episcopum Norwicensem (nomine
Richardum Nix) tune in custodia Marescalli existentem. Billa quae di^itur
Indictamenti, suit hujusmodi. Quod in villa Thetfordiae in Comitatu Norfolciae,
ultra hominum memoriam, consuetudo extiterat; ut causa omnes ^^^l^siasticae in
eadem emergentes villa, coram Decano villae ejusdem, qui ibidem peculiar^m
habuit jurisdictionem, terminarentur: and quod nullus extra dictam villam in
placitum traheretur in aliquam aliam Curiam Christianam pro causis
Ecclesiasti^is, nisi coram eodem Decano: and si aliquis contra dictam
consuetudinem tractus esset in placitum coram aliquo alio judice Ecclesiastico,
and hoc praesentatum for^t coram Majori ejusdem villae, delinquens ille
forisfaceret VI. sol. VII. den. Et quod quidam N. sectam prosequebatur in
consistorio dicti I piscopi, pro re exorta infra dictam villam Thetfordiae, and
praesentatum hoc fuit coram Majore, and quod ipse pro delicto isto forisfaceret
VI. sol. VIII. den. Ob hoc Episcopus Majorem citat generaliter pro salute
animae ad comparendum coram semetipso in aedibus suis Hoxomi^, in Comitatu
Suffolciae: and apparente eo, tanquam per libellum, questus ^st ore-tenus de
praedi^ta materia, injunxitque eidem sub poena excommunicationis, ut quod
praesentatum fuit, adnihilaret. Episcopus petit at Consilium ^ruditum (sic
Advocatos vocant) sibi assignaretur: and hi assecunt ^^m id quod praesentatum
fuit, tum and ipsam consuetudinem vacnam (...) propterea non posse dici contra
coronam and dignitatem regiam; nec (...) tractum esse ad Episcopum ad aliud
examen: quod in nulla Curia exa^^ari deberet. 2^. Curia Episcopi non
intelligitur fore inf^a Stat. 16. Ric. II. sed in Curia Romana aut alibi, debet
intelligi, extra regnum.

Sed resolutum fuit per Fitz James Capitalem Justitiarium and totam Curiam;
quod, sitne consuetudo, sive id quod praesentatum est legitimum vel non; res,
temporalis est and a lege communi determinabilis, non in Curia spirituali: and
Episcopum igitur incidisse in crimen de Praemunire.

2^. Quod verbum alibi, extendit tum ad Curias Episcopi, tum and alias Curias
^cclesiasticas infra regnum, and saepius ita judicatum esse per Curiam. Tune
Episcopus indictamentum confessus est, and super hoc, Port secundus
Justi^iar^^s judicium versus eum protulit: quod esset extra protectionem Regis,
and quod bona and catalla ejus Regi essent forisfacta, corpusque ejus car^^ri
mancipandum ^squ^quo placu^rit Regi.

De Episcopatu plura aliquot. Eum instituit S. Felix Burgundus, adductus a
Sigeberto, East-Anglorum Regum primo Christiano; ut populo suo Apostolus sor^t.
Sedem posuit Dunmoci in Suffolcia. Sed post tertium succ^ssor^m divisus est
Episcopatus in duas di^^ces^s: alt^ra cum 11. Episcopis Dunwi^i permanente,
altera cum 12. Elmhamiae in Norfolcia collocata. Direpta jam a Danis tota
regione, diu vacua ^^^sit utraque dioecesis; sed coal^sc^nt^ sub Edwino Rege,
Anno scilic^t 955. sede Elmhamiae fruuntur 12. alii Episcopi. Hic Arfastus vero
dec^^us tertius, Thetfordiam transtulit sub Guli^lmo I. and qui post alterum
successit ei Herbert^s de Losinga, Norwicum usque; ubi praediis (ut di^imus)
antiquis viduata; hodie novis fruitur. Tenu^runt autem Episcopi veteres
Baroniam suam, 5. melitum s^odis; quibus jam Regi devolutis, quaero quonam
fulcimine Baronia nititur, and quonam titulo Parliamentaria ingreditur
Episcopus Comitia?

Inter caetera Nobilitatis monumenta; celebris olim fuit haec urbecula solio
Regum East-Anglorum, Episcopali Cathedra, and octo praeterea Monaster^s, quod
ne^ in primaria ulla reperitur civitate, nec in tantillo ambitu, n^ ipsomet
Londmo; adeo ut vel nostram dixeris (...), vel ex merito Mona^^opolin. In
responsion^ vero quam dedit Norfolciae Vice-Com^s Brevi Regis Edouardi I. anno
regni ejus 9. emanenti, quo se fieri certior^m Rex p^aecepit, Quot civitates,
burgi, and villae essent in hoc Comitatu* unica ^an^um memoratur civitas,
Norwicus scilicet; and duo pariter burgi, h. e. Jaremutha magna and villa
Lenn-Episcopi: nulla de Thetfordia mentione, quantacunque celebri vetustate.
Proculdubio quod jam burgi tantum essent habiti, qui Procuratores in regni
emitterent Comitia seu Parliamenta: and Thetfordiensibus non indulta est haec
gratia ante annum -- quatenus e schedis liqueat Parliamentariis.

Inter Coenobitas qui hic floruere, Joannes Bramis Waldei historiam e veteribus
Anglico and Gallico exemplaribus latin concinnavit, quod in MS. Codice
Collegii Corporis Christi Cantabrigiae sic exponitur, De Thetford Monachis
Bramis edidit ista Joannes.
Nec taceam nobile illud monumentum nostrum, quod a senorum dierum creatione,
Hexameron (cum illo S. Ambrosii) inscribitur, a Monacho etiam Thetfordiensi,
300. hinc annis (ut scriptura suadeat) conditum perhiberi. Carmine, fateor,
satis impolito, and pro genio seculi, leonino; egregia vero solertia and amplo
volumine, rerumque cognitione multiplicium (ne Bartassus primus dicatur hunc
induisse cothurnum) refertissimum. Addam Prologi ejus exordium; ut nostrum
sciat Manuscriptum, qui in similem Codicem in ciderit: Omnia disponens, nusquam
metam sibi ponens
Virtus divina, stabilis manet absque ruina.
Sacrum pneuma quidem, genitor genitus, Deus id^m
Fons, vitae munus, numero sine, trinus and unus, etc.


Breclys.
A Thetfordia in Boream redeunti velut ad septimum lapidem, Breclis occurrit,
exoletae Breclesiorum familiae seeds, quam sub Anglo-Normannorum seculo,
Willielmus de Warenna, Comes Sussexiae and Surriae, Thomae dedit filio
Godfridi, filio Alberti Francigenae, cum pluribus aliis Burnhamiae,
Grimstoniae, etc. praediis, quae per faemineam haeredem ad Cumptonos aliosque
transiere. Tulit nobilis olim haec familia in feodali clypeo dominorum suorum
Comitum de Warenna Symbolum, cianeo color in distinctionem in nigrum verso:
hoc est, aream tessellatam (cheque vocant) ex auro and nigro; ut de Calthorpis
utique supra memoravimus.

Ellingham.

Woodrising.


Haud procul Ellingham: and hic a latere Woodrising, Southwellorum amplissimae
samiliae (e qua Ricardus Reginae Mariae e consiliis claruit) speciosa pariter
and spatiosa habitatio.

Carbrook
Huic se adjungit Carbrooke, ubi militum S. Joannis Hierosolymitani Prioratus
fuit, plurimis per hanc provinciam ditatus praediis and clientibus feodalibus.
Qui cum amplissimis illius ordinis gauderent privilegiis, crucis symbolum
domibus suis vicatim apponebant, ut sic ab aliis eorum innotesceret immunitas.
Hoc autem cum multi alii olim factitarent, ut sub iisdem delitescerent
immunitatibus, statutum An. 13. Edw. I. Westminster. 2. ca. 13. ut praedia illa
quibus falso appingerentur ejusmodi cruces, in domini feodalis transirent
patrimonium.

Watton.

Merton.


Hinc per Watton mercatorium, ad Merton itur; quod a lacu nomen habet; decus
autem a splendidis aedibus, quas illic nuper exstruxit Gulielmus Gray,
probitate and prosapia eques splendidus.

Northwold.

Methwold.

Hockwold.


Habentur in hoc tractu Northwold, Methwold, and Hocwold, i. e. -- aquilonaris,
medius, and angularis, quod in sinu Isidis velut angulo concluditur. Northwold
vero 12. aestimatum hydis, in illa permutatione de qua supra diximus, cessit
Rex Eadgarus Episcopo Wintoniensi, qui hoc statim contulit Eliensi Monasterio.
Methwold ad Ducatum Lancastriae pertinens, cuniculos alit laudatissimos, cui ex
constitutione Leoffini Abbatis tempore Canuti Regis, obsonium reddebat annuatim
duorum mensium: ut vicinum Feltwell, Fel^well.
Munfordorum antiquae and equestris familiae habitatio, quae an ab Hugone de
Monte forti, qui cum Gulielmo I. Angliam est ingressus, plurimaque praedia
tractu hoc invaserat, dicant qui rimantur stemmata: confundi enim saepius
animadverto nomina: and in Charta libertatum Angliae ab Henrico I. concessa,
inter testes venit Rob. de Mundforde, ut in rubro libro Scaccarii habetur,
Parisio autem Rob. de Monteforti.

Haec ruris pars, ut occidentis reliqua pascendis ovibus magnopere exponitur.
Pleraeque villae aut unum, aut duo, aut tria, interdum quatuor vel quinque
millia nutriunt: ut intelligas Proceres Angliae apud Edw. I. de vectigali lanis
imposito conquerentes, consulto affirmasse opum regni dimidium in lanis
consistere. Dignum est vel nosse leges quibus lanigerum hoc pecus apud nos
regitur: nam alibi non reperiuntur. Gregem instituere solius fuit domini villae
seu manerii, numerum and species ovium, stationesque designare: ubi locorum,
and quo modo quibusque legibus cum in hyeme, tum in aestate pascerentur. Hyeme
vero, non suas tantum, sed aliorum omnium terras stationem illam per semestre
pascere. Caulas item erigere and circumducere sive stercorationis causa, sive
alterius beneficii. Nihil horum alteri licitum, ne vel ovem unicam in alodio
suo hic sustinere. Stationem istam the Shepes course vocant; libertatem
erigendi caulas, fouldage and Saxonice fal^-^ocne, stercorationem Tath; and
hyemalem pastionem Shack appellant..... Reliqua desiderantur.

FINIS.
COMITES MARESCALLI ANGLIAE.

ET DE MILITE DISSERTATIO.

Ab HENRICO SPELMANNO Equ. Aur.

Comitum MARESCALLORUM ANGLIAE CATALOGUS.
QUIS sub Gulielmo Conquestore sit donandus Marescalli titulo, nemo (reor)
certus affirmaverit. Non recepta enim videtur adhuc illa vox a Scriptoribus
nostris: and, si qui novisse se id Officium arbitrentur; adeo dissonis
tradidere vocibus, ut Lectorem relegant dubitantem. Mentionem quippe faciunt de
Hunt. 351. l. 5^.
Praeposito Regalis Exercitus, de Principe Militiae, de Magistro Militum,
Magistro Equitum, Tribuno Militum, Tribuno rei militaris, Tribuno Exercitus,
etc. Sed cujus hi erant conditionis, Constabulariine an Marescalli, iidem an
diversi Officiales, ductorumve tertium genus aliquod and in se distinctum
alias, non definiunt.

RADULPHUS DE WACEIO, apud Gulielmum l. 6. ^. 4.
Gemeticensem, Gulielmi Conquestoris pueri adhuc Tutor, constituitur and
Princeps militiae Normannorum, and in mox sequenti capite altero Magister
Militum appellatur.

GULIELMUS vero filius OSBERNI, qui prae aliis omnibus Conquestorem excitavit
ad Anglorum excidium, exercitusque ejus partem tertiam duxit; in Lib. MS.
Coenobii de Bello, Tribunus Militum nuncupatus est, and alias Tribunus Normanni
Exercitus: Quod de Marescalli munere (fateor) intelligatur. Huntingtonio, (page
367.) Dapifer Ducis. Sed Eboracensis Fecialis (nescio qua authoritate fretus,
and in hoc a Vincentio, suo mastice, minime postulatus) express refert,
Gulielmum Conquestorem in Anno Dom. 1068. id est regni sui 1. vel. 2. Gulielmum
filium Osberni, ob eximiam in militia navatam operam, and Comitem Herefordiae
and Marescallum Senescallumque Angliae constituisse. Certe, non redarguam, eum
fuisse Marescallum; Angliam autem tunc venisse in titulos Marescalli,
Constabularii, aut Senescalli non assentiar* Occubuisse vero dicitur Osbernus
An. Dom. 1072. i. e. 5. vel 6. Conquestoris.

HUGO GRANTESMALE a Fecialibus nostris in rimandis Genealogiis sub Conquestore
inscribitur Marescallus. Sic in Genealogia Vice-Comitis Montecute: quo nixa
fulciminae, non ariolor. Et in Genealogia Gulielmidum, quos Fitz-Williams
appellamus; stirpis Protoplastum ponunt G. Fitz-Williams sub Gulielmo
Conquestore Com. Marescallum Angliae.

Henr. I
JOHANNES MARESCALLUS. Suggerere se videtur istiusmodi quispiam in Testatione
Brevis cujusdam Regis Henrici I. quod in Registro Veteri Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Norwicensis legitur, numero XV. H. Rex Anglorum, Rogero Costard and Brumam fill.
Waring, and Edwardo salutem. Praecipio, etc. quod Monachi de Norwic, etc. T.
Johanne Mar. (lego Marescallo) apud Theotford.

Steph
GILBERTUS (a forti arcu cognominatus Strangbow) secundus filius Gilberti
Comitis Clare, creatus fuit Comes Palatinus Penbrochiae ann^ ^. Regis Stephani,
and Marescallus fuit Palatii Regis; obiitque An. 14. Regis ^tephani. Sepelitur
in Abbatia Tinternae. [Quaere: nam hic in petitione Margaretae filiae
primogenitae and cohaeredis Thomae de Brotherton Comitis Norfolc. exhibita, in
coronatione Ric. II. dicitur fungi officio Marescalciae in Coronatione Henrici
II. ut post aliquot in Marescalcia Henrici de Percy latius patebit.]

Henr. II.
RICARDUS DE HU^EZ sub hoc tempore, viz. sub Henrico II. dicitur in Chron.
Abbatiae de Bello, Tribunus Regis.

RICHARDUS COMES PEMBROCHIAE, and Striguliae, etc. fortissimus Regni Lemstriae
apud Hibernicos subactor, Dominus Marescallus and saevissimus teneri atque
unici filii exenterator, quod ab hostibus oppressus in patrium confugit
praesidium. Sepultus Kilkenniae An. 11^6. Dubliniam a Sidneio Prorege
transfertur, monumentoque donatus in Ecclesia S. --,dislectum praebet a latere
filium, ut aliquando vidimus.

WILLIELMUS MARESCALLUS REGIS, filius Johannis, and Gilberti nepos, accipiens
in uxorem ex tutelari dono Regis Richardi I. Isabellam filiam and haeredem
dicti Richardi Comitis Penbrochiae, a Johanne Rege in die suae coronationis
Penbrochiae Comes instituitur, and Marescallus Angliae, ut quidam perhibent
Quaere, Nam (...) in Comitibus Penbrochiae, ait de Richardo praedicto: Hujus
(...) Isabella (...) dictum (...) (^^ quod ejus majores fuissent hereditaris
Marescalli Palatii (...)) maritum codem [Comitata Palatin^ (...) Quasi Majores
istius Willielimi, non Isabellae axoris suae fuissent (...) [Nota Spelmanni.]
. Mihi autem non videtur hoc gavisus titulo. Nam Mat. Paris Auctor coaetaneus,
eum omni laudum genere prosequitur, magnumque appellat Marescallum, sed (quod
memini) non Angliae, verum Regis, Marescallum. Erat praeterea Custos Regis and
Regni, necnon summus Angliae Justitiarius; ubi plura quaepiam de illo
annotavimus. Placeat hic tamen repetitum ejus Epitaphium: Sum quem Saturnum
sibi sensit Hibernia, Solemn
Anglia, Mercurium Normannia, Gallia Martem.
Obiit An. 1219. 4. Henr. III. and sepultus est in Novo Templo 17. Kal. Apr.
relicti^, praeter 5. filias, totidem filiis, qui in Marescalciam caeterasque
dignitates succedentes omnes, omnes sine sobole excesserunt, viz.

4 Henr. III
WILLIELMUS MARESCALLUS, qui secundi nuptiis Eleanoram duxit filiam Regis
Johannis. Obiit 6. Apr. 1231. 15. Henr. III.

^^ Hen. III.
RICARDUS MARESCALLUS secundus filius, Anglicarum libertatum audacissimus
assertor (ut habet Matthaeus Parisiensis) in Hibernia fortiter occubuit, 18.
Henr. III.

^^ Henr. III.
GILBERTUS MARESCALLUS tertius filius (Clericali titulo primum addictus) duxit
Margaretam sororem Will. Regis Scotiae, and in hastiludio Hartfordiae ab
effraenato sui ipsius equo interficitur 5. Kal. Julii, An. Dom. 1241. 25. Henr.
III. Mat. Paris. hunc Comitem Marescallum ibidem vocat (pa. 546.) Sepelitur in
Novo Templo Londoniis. Stow in An. 25. Henr. III. Dom. 1241.

^^ Henr. III.
WALTERUS Comes MARESCALLUS (quartus filius) viam universae carnis ingressus
est pridu Nonas Decembris aut ut alii volunt) octavo Calend. Decembris, etc.
^nquit Pari^ius in An. Dom. 1245. pa. 665.) id est 29. (vel ut alii volunt) 3^.
Henr. III.

^ H^nr III
ANSELMUS Comes MARESCALLUS, quintus filius Willielmi Magni Marescalli, obiit
22. Decembr. id est 18. (ut quidam perhibent) post fratrem die, quinis suis
sororibus haereditatem cedens herciscendam.

^^ H^nr III
ROGERUS BIGOT, quartus Comes Norfolciae illius cognominis, hoc deinceps modo
in Marescalciam successit. Hugo Bigot pater ejus, Comes Norsolciae, vel (ut
Parisius habet) Orientalium Anglorum; duxit Matildem primogenitam dictarum
cohaeredum, and obiit Anno 9. Henr. III. Domini nostri 1225. (ut refert
Parisius pa. 313.) omnibus uxoris suae fratribus jam tunc viventibus; and
Marescallus ideo jure uxoris (ut quidam innuit) non potui^ salutari. Extincto
autem Anselmo fratrum novissimo, Anno 29. vel 30. Henr. III. divisaque anno 31.
inter sorores immensa ejus haereditate, Marescalcia Angliae (cum Manerio de
Hemsted in Comitatu Berceriae, cui e tenura id incumbit officium, and
latifundiis annui simul valoris 1120. librarum) in Matildis cessit portionem.
Marescalciam in eodem statim anno, cum illius Virga dignitatis, filio suo
Rogero supradicto contulisse dicitur. Mat. Par. in An. 1246. qui 30. and 31.
Henr. III. Eodem (inquit) anno, multiplicatis intercessionibus, concessa est
Marescalcia cum officio and honor, Comiti Rogero Bigod, ratione Comitissae
filiae Comitis Magni Willielmi Marescalli primogenitae uxoris suae. Cave:
legendum videtur matris suae: nam Hugo pater ejus filiam duxit primogenitam
Willielmi Magni Marescalli, ut supra declaravimus; ipse vero Isabellam filiam
Willielmi Regis Scotiae, and in hastiludio conquassus expiravit sine prole, An.
1269. Stowus Anno 1246. Parisium secutus, Rogerum duxisse ait filiam
Marescalli: perperam.

53. vel 54. Henr. III.
ROGERUS BIGOT, ex Hugone fratre Justitiario Angliae Rogeri nepos in Norfolciae
Comitatum and Marescalciam Angliae succedebat.

1. Edw. I.
Hic cum Regi Edouardi I. in auxilium Comitis Flandriae profecturo militiam
contumacius detrectasset; Regem postmodum ad gratiam ejus redintegrandam,
haeredem scripsit; sponte tamen an coactus, non satis liquidum. Sunt enim qui
obaeratum eum ferunt fratri suo Johanni, expertemque liberorum eidem cedere
post dies suos patrimonium statuisse. Fratre vero nimia deposcente debitum
importunitate, indignantem convenisse cum Rege Anno 1301. hunc and leniret,
illum ut perderet. Regi patrimonium cum Marescalcia transcribendum. Ea tamen
condition, quod appositis annui valoris mill marcarum praediis, Rex ei
Norfolciae Comitatum and Marescalciam Angliae ad terminum vitae suae
concederet; necnon and soboli, si futura contigeret; Regi alioquin remansuram:
and debita Rex praeterea solveret. Pactum alii impositum perhibent. Comes vero
intra quadriennium moritur sine prole An. 1305. 1. penultimo vel antepenultimo
Regis; praeteritoque fratre, pacta ad Regem deferuntur. Walsinghamus hunc non
semel Comitem Marescallum nuncupat, (pa. 72. l. 42. and 73. l. 37.) ut
Matthaeus Parisiensis Gilbertum Comitem Marescallum; and Willielmus Marescallus
appellatus erat Comes, tempore Henr. II. non tamen cinctus fuit gladio
Comitatus Striguil. donec Rex Johannes hoc ei praestitit in Coronatione sua:
sic and Gaufridus Fitz-Peter gladio Comitatus Essexiensis (Vid. Hovd. pa. 793.
l. 52.) Cum tamen Comitis titulum ex concessione Principis nondum assecuti
essent Marescalli; exemplo Tribunorum scholarum in Jure Civili, Tribunus
Militum (qui nunc Marescallus dicitur) nomen and honorem Comitis signavit.
(Vid. Cod. Tit. de Comitibus and Tribunis; and P. Tribuni scholarum.)

1. Edw. II.
ROBERTUS DE CLIFFORD: cui Rex Edw. II. anno regni 1. officium contulit
Marescalciae Angliae; ut patet Pat. p. 2. m. 19.

1. Edw. II.
NICOLAUS DE SEGRAVE eodem constitutus anno, durante Regis beneplacito. Pat. p.
2. m. 22.

9. Edw. II.
THOMAS DE BROTHERTON, quintus filius Edouardi I. and secundo natus toro,
creatus est Comes Norfolciae ab Edouardo II. fratre suo ex part patris, 16.
Dec. anno 6. dicti Edouardi II. and Marescallus Angliae 10. Febr. anno ejusdem
9. Tenend. dignitatem primam, sibi and haeredibus suis de corpore suo, etc.
alteram, sibi and haeredibus Masculis de corpore suo legitime procreatis; ut
testatur Charta Regia eandem concedens in haec verba -- Dilecto and fideli
nostro Thomae de Brotherton Comiti Norfolk. fratri nostro charissimo
Marescalciam Angliae cum omnibus ad Marescalciam illam pertinentibus. Habendum
and tenendum sibi and haeredibus masculis de corpore suo legitime procreatis,
etc. faciendo inde nobis and haeredibus nostris servicia quae progenitoribus
nostris inde debebantur, antequam eadem Marescalcia ad manus Domini E. quondam
Regis Angliae patris nostri, per donationem and remissionem Rogeri le Bygod
quondam Comitis Norff. and Marescalli Angliae d^venit, etc. Dat. per manum
nostram apud Lincoln. 10. die Febr. anno regni nostri nono. Obiit hic Thomas
anno duodecimo Edw. III. Gratiae 1338. relicta sobole, Edouardo, Margareta, and
Alicia.

(...) III.
EDOUARDUS Comes Norfolciae and Marescallus Angliae, pupillari moritur in
custodia; trans^unte ad sorores patrimonio.

WILLI^^M^S MONTACUTE. Vincent. pa. 340.

(...) III.
THOMAS BEAUCHAMP decimus quartus Comes Warwic. Anno 1337. qui respicit Annum
11. and initium 12. Edwardi tertii, factus est (inquit Yorckus, pa. 577.)
Marescallus Angliae ab Edouardi III. durante placito. Obiit 34. ^jusd. Edward^*
[Vide: nam hoc non convenit cum ultimis supra.] (Spelm.)

(...) III.
ROGERUS MORTIMER Comes Marchiae 11. Marescallus erat Angliae 34. Edw. III. ut
patet Original. 34. Ed. III. Rot. 16.

(...) III
THOMAS BE^UCHAMP Comes Warwicensis, ad placitum. Dat. 16. October. 4^. Edw. III.
Pat. p. 2. m. 16.

(...) III
EDMUNDUS MORTIMER, Comes Marchiae, sub annis novissimis Edwardi III. Angliae
fru^tur Marescalcia; sed quo nixus jure, nondum reperi. Anno vero Domini 1376.
Regis Edw. III. 50. jussus a Johanne Duce Lancastriae (qui jam torpente sen^o
Rege primas obtinuit) ut tuendae Calisiae gratia in parts cederet
transmarinas; veritus machinationis quidpiam sibi impendere, Marescalc^^ virgam
cum officio Duci reddidit. Is laetanter hanc accipiens, ^am protinus familiari
suo Henrico de Percy (quem Hotspur appellabant) tradidit. Stow. ibid. --
Dicitur Marescallus Angliae in Commissione in Casu judicandi inter Thomam Moore
and Rad. Basset concessa Guidoni Brian and Richardo Stafford, anno 48. Edw.
III. Pat. p. 2. m. 20. dors.

(...) III
HENRICUS PERCY sic ut diximus Marescallus salutatur anno 50. Edw. III. jam tum
languescentis and anno proximo morientis.

(...) II
HENRICUS DE PERCY non de jure, sed ^ Regis beneplacito designatus est in
Coronatione Richardi secundi, Marescallus Angliae; pendente tunc de jure
controversia. Margareta quippe filia primogenita and haeres altera dicti Thomae
Comitis Norfolciae in Processu facto ad istius Regis Coronationem, petitionem
hanc exhibuit. A tres honor Seigneur le Roi de Castele and de L^on Duc de
Lancastre and Seneschall d* Engleterre, supply Margarete file and h^^re Thomas
de Brotherton nadgairs Count de Norff. and Marescall d' Engl^terre d estre
acceptee al Office de Marescalcie ore al Coronement nostre Seigneur le Roy,
come a son droit heritage apres la mort le dit Thomas son Piere, fesant l'
Office per son Depute, come Gilbert Mar^schall Count de Strogoile fist al
Coronement le Roy Henry second. C^st assauoire d^ p^ser debatz en meson le Roy
au jour de Coronement, and ^ fair liveree des h^rbergages, and de garder les
oesses del chamber l^ Roy, pernant de chescun Baron and Count ^at^z Chiualer a
c^l jour, un palfrey one une selle.

Sup^r quo (inquiunt membranae Regiae) audita petitione praedicta, dictum fuit
pro Domino Rege i^idem: quod officium illud in persona Domini Regis in feodo
remansit, ad assignandum and contulendum cuicunque ipsi Regi placeret: and
super hoc auditis tam pro Domino Rege quam pro praefata Comitissa pluribus
rationibus and allegationibus in hac part, pro ^o quod videbatur Curiae, quod
sinalis discussio negotii praedictis, propter temporis brevitatem, ante
Coronationem praedictam fieri non potuit; Henricus de Percy ex assensu and
praecepto ipsius Regis assignatus fuit ad officium praedictum faciendum,
percipiendo feoda debita and consueta, salvo jure cujuslibet, and sic idem
Henricus officium illud perfecit. Hac scilicet vice; non diuturnus Marescallus.

Sed quaere, quo Margareta nitebatur titulo, cum officium patri suo and
haeredibus de corpore suo tantum masculis ut supra patet) conferretur?

^ Ric. II.
JO. FITZ-A^AN Dominus Maltravers. --

3. Ric. II
THO. HO^LAND --

^. Ric. II.
Sub ultima medietate Junii, cum Rex Gulielmum Walworth Praetorem ^ondinensem
Equ. auratum constituit, creavit etiam (inquit Stowus) super monte versus
Iseldoune Comites Marescallum and Penb. (pa. 463.) (Quaere, quis hic fuit?)

9. Ric. II
THOMAS Dominus de MOUBRAY, filius (and post mortem Johannis fratris sui)
haeres Elizabethae utriusque little matris, filiae and haeredis Johannis Domini
Segrave and Margaretae praedictae Ducissae Norfolciae, filiae and haeredis Tho.
de Brotherton praedicti; creatus est a Ric. II. anno regni sui 6. Comes
Nottingham. Et cum huc usque, Domini tantum Marescalli in Chartis Regiis
nuncuparentur, iste Sed in libro Feodario, sacto 20. Ed. III. Tit. Hund. de
Frebriggs, sic legitur: Prior de Massingham tenet m^ Massingham 4tam part^m
feodi Militis de Comit^ Marescallo. -- p. 26. [Spelman.]
primus per chartam ejusdem Regis, dat. 12. Jan. regni 9. titulo investitus est
COMITIS MARESCALLI ANGLIAE, tenendum sibi and haeredibus masculis de corpore
suo exeuntibus. Anno deinceps 21. ejusdem Regis, evectus est in aviae
dignitatem, Ducem scil. Norfolciae: sed haud multo post in exilium relegatus,
Venetiis obiit, An. 1400. 1. Henrici IV. suscitavit prolem, Thomam, Johannem,
Isabellam, and Margaretam, omnes Marescalciae functos dignitate, vel in
seipsis, vel in sobole.

21. Ric II.
THOMAS HOLLAND Comes Cantii, filius Thomae Holland Comitis Cantii, and fratris
uterini Regis Ricardi II. ab eodem Rege anno regni sui 21. creatus est Dux
Surriae: and ad cognoscendum de lite militari jam tum exorta inter Henricum
Ducem Herefordiae, Appellantem; and Thomam Moubray Ducem Norfolciae Comitem
Marescallum Angliae, partem ream; mox itemque factus est hac vice Marescallus
Angliae, Aumarliense Duce tunc agente Constabulario. York, page 9. 284. and
528. Hol. 493. b. 40. 494. b. 30.

22. Ric. II.
JO. MONTAGUE Comes Sarisburiensis.

1. Henr. IV.
THOMAS MOUBRAY, mortuo in exilio patre, Dux Norfolciae and Comes Marescallus
Angliae salutatur. Sexto vero anno Henrici IV. capite mulctatus, sine prole
excessit.

1. Henr. IV.
RADULPHUS NEVILL Comes Westmerland. 21. Ric. II. and Richmundiae 1. Henr. IV.
fuit Comes Marescallus Angliae. Obiit 4. Henry VI. 1425. York. -- Vincent. pa.
340.

6. Henr. IV.
THO. ERPINGHAM Commissarius ad exequendum officium Marescalli Angliae. Pat. p.
1. m. 30.

1. Henr. V.
JOHANNES MOWBRAY, Thomae senioris secundus filius restituitur Comes Nottingham
and Comes Marescallus Angliae, anno primo Henrici V. and deinceps anno tertio
Henrici VI. Dux Norfolciae in Parliamento restitutus est. Obiit Anno Domini
1432. ut York dicit pa. 391. vel An. 1434. ut dicit pa. 347. Vid. Vincent. ibid.

11. Henr. VI.
JOHANNES MOWBRAY filius dicti Johannis, Dux Norfolciae and Comes Marescallus
Angliae, fato cessit anno primo Edwardi IV. Domini nostri 1461.

THOMAS HOLLAND, Marescallus Angliae, durante minore aetate dicti Johannis;
factus anno 11. Henrici sexti. Pat. p. 1. m. 20.

1. Edw. IV.
JOHANNES MOWBRAY, vivente patre suo, creatus est ab Henrico VI. Comes Warren.
and Surriae, eidemque morienti successit Dux Norfolciae and Comes Marescallus
Angliae. Interiit An. Dom. 1475. 15. Edw. IV. unica suscepta filia and haerede,
Anna nomine.

RICARDUS Dux EBORACENSIS secundus filius Regis Edouardi IV. duxit praedictam
Annam, filiam and haeredem ultimi Johannis Mowbray, and jure ejus, fuit Comes
Marescallus Angliae, quod haec dignitas ad foeminas transiit haeredes de
corpore Thomae Mowbray; non autem Dux Norfolciae, quod haec tantum masculis
cedebatur. Iste Dux Ricardus cum fratre suo Rege Edouardi V. a Ricardo Duce
Glocestriae avunculo eorum, nefandissima in Turri Londinensi morte obruitur,
An. Dom. 1483. nullaque suscitata prole, ipsa etiam Anna extinguitur.

1. Rich. III.
GULIELMUS Dominus BERKELEY, filius Jacobi Domini Berkeley and Isabellae uxoris
suae, filiae Thomae Domini Mowbray Ducis Norfolciae, primi Comitis Marescalli
Angliae; anno 1. Ric. III. factus est Comes Nottingham and Comes Marescallus
Angliae; and 4. Henrici VII. Marchio de Berkeley. Exhalavit sine prole, anno 7.
ejusdem Regis Henrici.

JOHANNES HOWARD Eques Auratus (filius Roberti Howard Equitis Aurati and
Margaretae uxoris suae, filiae and demum cohaeredis Thomae Mowbray senioris
Ducis Norfolciae and primi Comitis Marescalli Angliae, utpote consanguineus and
alter haeredum dictae Annae Ducissae Eboracensis;) constitutus est a Richardo
III. Dux Norfolciae and Comes Marescallus Angliae: proque Rege suo fortiter
dimicans in Bosworthensi praelio, una cum eodem, votis and fato conjunctus,
interfectus est. Extincto autem ad hunc modum, Ducatus ejus Norfolciae and
Marescalcia Angliae ad fiscum rediguntur; filiusque ejus and haeres Thomas
Howard *qui a Richardo III. eodem tempore factus est Surregiae Comes, quo and
pater Dux Norfolciae) licet jure gentium and naturae, domini sui Regis and
patris signa insecutus esset, a victore tamen Rege Henrico VII. arce
Londoniensi mancipatus coercetur; sed nullo interea Marescalciae designato.

THO. HOWARD tertius Dux.

THO. HOWARD, heroes fortissimus (quem ut verbo non transeam Virtuti Sacrum
prohibet) creatus est Surriae Comes a Richardo III. cum and Joh. pater ejus in
Ducem promovetur Norfolciae. Ipsis vero Rege and patre in Bosworthi praelio
corruentibus; hic inter medias acies virtute dextrae sospes emicuit. Captus
autem a Victore Rege Henrico septimo, in arcem Londinensem detruditur: sed ob
eximiam probitatem, prudentiam, and fortitudinem, ab eodem Henrico post
triennium evocatur; and ad debellandum hosts suos in praelia Lincolnense, --
and Bambregense emissus, omnia adeo strenue gessit, ut in tractu Boreali tam ad
compescendos Provinciales quam ad Scotos conterendos, Vicarius Regis
designatur. Hoc ut auspicatius exequeretur, in ipso utriusque regni limine se
constituit; Anglis a tergo clypeum tutelarem, Scotis a front gladium
formidabilem. Contritis his, and pacatis illis, ad Regem gratus (...) Hen^. VII.
regreditur. Fit Angliae Thesaurarius and ad paternam dignitatem Comitis
Marescalli Angliae restituitur. Rex moritur; succedit filius ejus Henricus
VIII. qui in Galliam, cum illustri exercitu proficiscens, Nobilitatem pene
omnem una abducit. Veteris autem hostis memor, Comitem denuo praeficit cum
armatis copiis tractui Boreali; ut quae in absentia sua moliretur Scotus,
praesto oppugnaret. Rex Scotiae Jacobus quartus, ansam ex absentia Regis
tempestive comprehendendam ratus, Angliam cum ingenti exercitu ingreditur.
Occurrit Comes in limite: pugnatur acerrime. Ruit Scotorum exercitus atque una
Rex ipse, 2. Episcopi, 11. Comites, 17. Barons, 400. Equites aurati, minoris
autem Nobilitatis and gregariae multitudinis 17000. cadentibus interea
quamplurimis Anglorum. Captis deinde Scotorum castris, cum machinis pyreis and
suppellectili bellico, firmatisque omnibus ad regionis pacem conducentibus,
Londinum regreditur; reversoque e Gallia Regi Henrico inimici (licet fratris
conjugalis) cadaver and opima spolia pacis and victoriae symbola proponebat.
Laetus Rex e duplici palma; illa quam a Gallis ipsemet feliciter, ista quam a
Scotis Comes fortissime detulit; Comiti reddit Ducatum Norfolciae; latifundia
confert: and ut ipse pariter and nepotes de tanta victoria triumpharent,
Emblema clypei interfecti Regis in diagonio clypei Howardotum gerendum perpetuo
designavit.

Pace inter Reges Angliae and Franciae composita, delegatur jam hic idem Dux
Norfolciae in Franciam, cum Maria sorore Regis Henrici, Regi Franciae Ludovico
desponsanda. Et transeuntibus deinde Rege and Regina Angliae in Aquitania, ad
salutandum Regem and Reginam Franciae; hic totius Angliae Prorex constituitur,
and Mariae tutor Principis infantulae. Tandem a Curia and Consiliis Regis per
licentiam secedens octogenarius, residuo vitae pie ac placide exacto, in castro
suo Framingamiae migravit ad Dominum.

(...) ^I*
EDOUARDUS SEIMOUR Dux Somersetensis, a nepote suo Rege Edouardo VI. and
Thesaurarius factus est and Marescallus Angliae; bellum jam adversus Scotos sub
initio Regis suscepturus; Thoma Duce Norfolciae, priori Marescallo, Turri
interea coercito.

JOHANNES DUDLEY Dux Northumbriae.

Maria.
THOMAS HOWARD in avitos Majorum titulos a Regina Maria post deliquium
suscitatus, quartus Dux Norfolciae hujus nominis Comes Marescallus Angliae
efficitur. Nuptias vero ambiens Mariae Reginae Scotiae, cum a Regina Elizabetha
prohiberetur, fataliter recidit.

GEORGIUS TALBOT, Comes Salopiae, qui in proscriptione Thomae Ducis Norfolciae
novissimi, functus est officio magni Seneschalli Angliae; post sublatum eundem,
Marescalli insignitur munere.

ROBERTUS D' EUREUX, Comes Essexiae and Augiae, Vice-Comes Bourchier, multisque
praeterea illustris dignitatibus. Populi ab ephebis desiderium fuit, etiam
Aulae, and ipsius aliquando Reginae Elizabethae. In Hispaniam missus cum
exercitu, and una Carolus Howard Baro Effinghamiae magnus Angliae Admiralius,
imperio pares, Caletem diripiunt, spoliumque ingens referentes, hic
Nottinghamiae Comitatu, ille Comitiva Marescalcia Angliae ad vitae terminum
insignitur. Altero post haec anno, Comes Essexius in Hiberniam Prorex
delegatur, ad Tironensium motus compescendos. Re vero parum integre
administrata, Reginae contrahit indignationem, quam ut mulceat, propere
advolat: sed desperata spe, ad arma provocat; and ausis decidens, mulctatur
capite, 25. Feb. 1600. Eliz. 42. Sic ad fiscum rediit Marescalcia.

THOMAS HOWARD e filio nepos Thomae ultimi Ducis Norfolciae (Comes Arundeliae
and Surregiae, Comitumque omnium Anglorum Proto-Comes.
Britannicorum Primicerius; Baroniarum onustus titulis, Eques Periscelidis,
Regiae Majestati a Consiliis, etc. heroes natus ad ornamentum Reipublicae,
veteris exemplar prudentiae and Romanae gravitatis;) donatus fuit avita Comitis
Marescalli Angliae dignitate and virga aurea, a Jacobo Rege, ad vitae terminum
possidenda.

DE MILITE DISSERTATIO.
MILES a mill, ut perhibent; nec probo, nec corrigo. Is autem est, qui in
militiam legitime conscribitur: sed transfertur nomen ad Civiles aliquot
Magistratus, officiales, ministros, famulos; de quibus dicemus, cum Militares
absolverimus. Conscriptio duplex, Pl^b^^a, seu Gregaria; and Honoraria. De
Gregario milite, plurimis licet honestato privilegiis in Jure Caesareo, nos hic
non agimus. Honoratus est, qui honoraria aliqua solennitate in ordinem
ascribitur Militarem.

Ejus multiplex in appellatio. Brito in Synonimis: Miles, Eques, Tyro,
Tyrunculus, atque Quirites,
Atque Neoptolemus novus est regnator in illis.
Valla and plures alii Decurionem nuncupari volunt: and addantur pari licent^a
Equitum Romanorum antiqua nomina: Celeres, sub Romulo and Regibus, a celeritate
in praelio: Flexumines, a flectendis equis milita^^bus; qui and postmodum
Trossuli, quod sine peditum auxilio Trossulum, urbem in Tuscia, cepissent.
Adjiciatur and recentius e Feudistis subvavasor; ab Anglo-Saxonibus Thanus, and
quod Thanum (vernaculumque nostrum knight) Latin sonat, Minister. De prioribus
dicant Academici; nos de reliquis suo loco. Nostra autem sic annectentur ad
illa Britonis: Flexumines, Celeres, Decurio, Trossulus olim,
Nuperius Thanus, Subvavasor, atque Minister.
Miles vero, a militantibus in genere: Eques, a specie; quod equo merebat.
Valla tamen. Miles (inquit) proprie qui pedibus militat, dicitur, Eques, qu^
equo. Et dum Militis nomen perperam his impositum causatur quos dignatione
afficimus, eos mavult Decuriones nuncupari; quod Duarenus nomen atque alii ad
Majores item Villarum transferentes, vocem destituunt certa signicatione.
Vallae tamen approbat Bebellius in Commentariis de abusione Linguae, and multa
congerit adversus Interpretes qui hos appellant Milites: ut Tiraquellus item
Vir doctissimus in Consuetud. Picta. Tit. 1^.. ult. Gloss. 2.

Tyro, miles novitus; cujus tamen est (ut docet Cicero, Tuse. 2.) far labor^m
and vulnus contemnere.

Tyrunculus, tyro rudior.
Quirites; eur, non teneo: nullius enim ordinis suit; sed commune Romanorum
nomen, a Quirino, i. e. Romulo. Sed Quirinus ipse, a quiris, Hastam *Sabinorum
lingua) significante tanquam hastatus dicitur: Ovid. Fast. Hasta, Quiris,
priscis est dicta Sabinis.
Quirites igitur dicantur Milites nostri, velut Marti^ and hastat^. Certissimum
est, vocem receptam est 600. hinc annis pro Milite honorato; Ingulphumque
Saxonem ideo dixisse Quiritem degenerem ut Virgilius, degenerem Neoptolemum)
pro Milite non legitimo.

Neoptolemus enim a (...), i. e. novus and (...) alias (...) bellum; quasi
(...) novus bellator seu miles novitius; Pyrrhoque Achillis filio ideo
impositum nomen, quod ad Trojanum bellum (a knight) id est, puer venerat.

Et Equiti adjungi solet Aurati Epitheton; non ab aureis Equitum Romanorum
annulis, ut multi suspicantur; sed ab auratis calcaribus quibus insignitur
denuo (ut inferius dicemus) Eques hic noster. Franciscus enim Philelphus, qui
floruit Anno 1480. (Eques ipsemet auratus) appellationem primus comperit; ut in
Lib. Epistolar. 24. ca. 1. ad Albertum Parrisium profitetur. In hoc autem magis
videatur necessarium, quod apud Gallos, insigniores utique Magistratus (ut
Loysaeus mihi Auctor est) Chevaliers; apud Neapolitanos, sui quique Nobiles (ut
Amiratus perhibet) Cavallieri, (id utrisque est Equites) appellentur; licet
Equestrem non obtinuerint institutionem. Sed hos pariter auratos forsitan
appellaverint. (Qu.)

Ferunt etiam nonnulli (mihi nescio an imponentes) Imperatorem aliquoties
eruditionis and id generis causarum Equites instituere, qui non habentur
Milites honorati: ut item Comites inferioris gradus, de quibus diximus in suo
loco: and Professores similiter Juris Civilis dici Equites Auratos cum 20.
annos in eodem studio emensi fuerint. Sed haec ego per transennam, de exoticis.

Militem nostrum seu Equitem Auratum a Romano Equite non deducimus. Ille totus
olim ad Militiam fabricatus est; hic ad rem Civilem pariter; and sub
Consulibus, ex opulentia non virtute. Quicunque enim 400. valebat Sestertia, i.
e. monetae nostrae veteris Sterlingorum 3000. novae 6000. more and jure Civium
Romanorum in Equestrem ordinem conscribendus fuit. Propinquior videtur, qui sub
Imperatoribus baltheo cinctus est militari: hic vero tunc cultus non tam
dignitatis fuit, quam cujusque militis Symbolum. Adeo ut discinctus pro ignavo
dicitur and exuto militia, and inter poenas militares graviores habita. Virilis
etiam toga non ad classem aliquam, sed adultos omnes pariter attinebat. Ad
Germanos provoco, ut cum suos nobis in plerisque mores porrexerint, in hoc
etiam auctores fiant. Martis autem sic adibant limina. Arma sumere (inquit
Tacitus) non ante cuiquam moris, quam civitas suffecturum probaverit. Tum in
ipso Concilio, vel Principum aliquis, vel pater, vel propinquus, Scuto
frameaque juvenem ornat. Haec apud illos toga; hic primus Juventae honos: ante
hoc Domus pars videntur, mox Reipublicae. Locum non intelligo de Ignobili; sed
de eo cujus foret and Consiliis adesse Principum, and de rebus tractare
publicis. Cum enim dixisset Tacitus in praecedentibus: Germanos nihil agere non
armatos; subjungit illico, sed arma sumere, etc. ut citavimus.

Ecce igitur Germani militis instituendi formulam. Primo, expetenda and
expectanda Civium approbatio: Secundo, Consilii sententia: Tertio, symbolorum
collator, qui est vel Princeps aliquis vel Magistratus honoris causa, vel pater
aut propinquus mancipationis gratia. Quarto, symbolorum (id est scuti and
frameae) collatio. Sic quinto, exultans telis Concilio egreditur Miles
legitimus. Eques autem, non pedes: nam scutum and framea sunt Equitis armatura,
and plane integra, non peditis; ut superius ipse docet Tacitus: Eques quidem
(inquit) scuto frameaque contentus est: pedites and missilia spargunt, pluraque
singuli. Hinc Tyroni istiusmodi duplex appellatio: Miles, a genere; Eques, a
specie. Latin utimur utroque vocabulo; sed in vulgari Idiomate Galli, Itali,
Hispani speciem tenent, sc. Chevalier, Cavalliere, Cavallero, a Latinoram
Caballo. Germani, Kitter, a ritten equitare. Angli vero priscum secuti
Saxonicum, knighte dicimus, quasi famulum seu ministrum militiae. Saepe
conspicitur antiquae Institutionis specimen in sigillis Anglo-Normannorum usque
ad aetatem --, ubi Eques exhibetur, scutum ad pectus, frameam gestans ab humero
dextro. Et originis vestigium in conferendis Feodis militaribus; quae alias
hastae traditione, alias baculi velut hastae, in jure feodali transferuntur.
Solebant enim Magnates latifundia sua in portiones dispartiri (quae feoda
vocant) ad alendum singulos milites; easdemque ob servitium and subsidium in
bello clientibus suis hoc modo concedere; adjuncto insuper annulo, ad notandum
(reor) fidelitatis Sacramentum, quo Vassallus Domino ratione feodi tenebatur.
Admissos sic in Militiam suam suos milites appellabant; etiamsi nunquam in
militiam progrederentur sed Vicarios mitterent. Hujusmodi fuisse eos censeo, de
quibus in priscis nostris Annalibus Anglicanis saepe legitur, talem venisse
tali expeditione cum 100. vel 200. Knights in comitatu suo. Quidam male
intelligunt de Equitibus auratis; quidam verisimilius de Militibus gravis
armaturae, quos Gallli homes de arms appelant. Tuo utere judicio. Hi vero non
videntur olim aliquando prioribus illis inferiores, cum and in domini sui
militiam baculi and annuli ceremonia admitterentur; tum and patrimonium una
acciperent variis nobilitatum Privilegiis (ut supra videas in Feodum) quo
militarem dignitatem splendidius tuerentur. Hoc enim patrimonium, Feodum Nobile
dicebatur; quod ad Nobiles solum, non ad rusticos, non ad Burgenses vel
opifices transmigraret. Galli igitur Milites antiquos dividunt in Chevaliers,
Bannerets, and Bacheliers: Cujacius exponit, Equites, Mello Equites, and
Vasellos sive Vasallos: nisi malis (inquit) a Buccellariis ducere; quod equidem
non probo. Teneat potius primam sententiam, Bacheliers idem esse quod
Vassallos, i. e. Milites feodales; non quod meam tueatur assertionem, sed quod
ipsa res hoc loquitur, Bacularios seu Bacillarios non minus dici a Baculo seu
Bacillo feodali; quam Banneretti, a bannerio; Equites ab equo; feodalibus.

Qui igitur fit, ut caeteri Equites (nam hi etiam equo merebant) feoda non
dotati, Bacularii nuncupentur? Forte baculo etiam velut hasta in militiam
aliquando admitterentur; vel ex errore natum, pauciores in plurimorum transisse
appellationem, differentia ab Auctoribus non been observata. Nam Germanis
utique multos dici censeo Fanlchen, i. e. Vexilliferos, qui vexillo non
suscipiunt hodie dignitatem. (Quaere.)

Cum autem Militis instituendi ratio, alia non esset, quam honoraria Candidati
seu tyronis in militiam (ut praefati sumus) susceptio: praestari solita est
apud omnes populos vel armorum aliquid conferendo, vel Ceremoniam aliquam ad
militiam pertinentem adhibendo.

Romani, sub Imperio, Cingulo usi sunt militari.

Germani Veteres (ut supra declaravimus) scuto and framea.

Longobardi arma integra largiuntur. Sic Turismodus Rex Alboinum, Regis Audoini
filium, Turismodi filii sui armis insignibus donat. Paul. Diac. Longob. 1. ca.
16.

Salici, Baln^o usi sunt; cum aliquo genere Armorum, and ritu sacro. Baln^o
scil. ut purgati intelligerentur a spurcitie corporis and animae. Du Tillet p.
431. etc.

Anglo-Saxones gladium ad altar consecratum a Candidati collo suspendunt.

De Aetate Militari.
AETas Militaris, quae Romany Virilis dicitur, in exitu anni 16. pueritiae
apud ipsos habita est; togamque ideo virilem (ut Germani olim Arma militaria)
non sine Religionis ceremonia concedebant; ut mox videbitur. De Germanorum
ritu, copiose admodum ex ipso Tacito in praecedentibus. Apud recentiores,
Carolus Magnus Ludovicum filium suum Thegan in Vi^^ L^^*
jam appellentem adolescentiae tempora, ense accinxit. Aluredus nepotem suum
Aethelstanum Malmesb* de Reg. l. 2
puerum adhuc praemature militem fecit. Henricus I. Gaufridum Comitis
Andegaviae filium, Jo Moyn. Hist. Norm. lib. 1.
adolescentiae primaevo flore vernantem, quindecim annorum armis induit. Quid
plura? Legitima hinc aetas militaris apud nos habetur annus decimus-quintus;
nec auxilium igitur ad faciendum filium suum Militem quisquam a subditis
deposcat feodalis Dominus, ne quidem Rex. Valet tamen junior factus. Rex
Edourdus VI. anno aetatis decimo; Henricus VI. quinto* Prandens olim aliquando
Dubliniae juvenis apud D. Proregem Hiberniae, vidi tenerum quendam
adolescentulum prae Militibus aliquot antiquis accumbentem; nuntiatumque mihi
est, ni memoria meretrix, eundem ipsum fuisse quem Prorex alius e sacro font
susceperat, and in cunis statim Militem fecerat, dum apud Patrem infantuli
fortuito hospitaretur. Facto perhibet authoritatem, quod in Juris nostri
legitur Annalibus. Audivi (inquit Thirning Justitiarius 7. Henr. IV. fol. 8.)
magnatem quendam, filium quem susceperat, ad sacrum deportasse fontem,
arreptoque statim gladio, baptizatum, Militem fecisse, Anglice hoc adjiciens,
Probus si poteris esto Miles, Armiger vero nunquam fueris. ^ec mirum hoc in
secularibus ministeriis; cum in ipsis Ecclesiasticis, Hugo filius Hereberti
Comitis admodum juvenis parvulus, Flodoard. Remens. Hist. lib. 4. ca. 20.
qui nec adhuc quinquennii tempus explesse videbatur, in amplissimum Remensem
Episcopus electus esset. Quantulacunque autem aetate factus est quispiam Miles,
liber evadit a Domini feodalis potestate quoad Corporis sui ditionem, quam
Custodiam vocant. Et peti videtur mihi ratio a majoribus nostris Germanis, quam
expressit De Germ. Mor.
Tacitus: Ante hoc, Domus pars videtur; mox Reipublicae.

De Evocatis ad Militiam suscipiendam.
ANtiqui Juris est, ut in Regia Coronatione aliisque nonunquam solennibus, Rex
Breve suum unicuique Vice-Comiti mittat; praecipiens, ut submoneat omnes in
Comitatu suo, qui censu funguntur militari and non sunt milites, quod tali die
ad Regis se praesentiam sistant, militarem suscepturi dignitatem. Census hic
sub Normannicis nostris Regibus, 5. libris aestimatur; sub Henrico III. december
primo, deinde quindecim. Sub Edv. I. viginti: Hodie, quadraginta. Excipiuntur
tamen ab hac angaria in Stat. -- Edw. I. qui vel morbo diuturno, vel aere
alieno, vel prole laborant numerosa. Brevis haec est forma: Rex Vice-Comiti
Norfolciae Salutem. Praecipimus, etc.


Proclamatur and de more per Comitatum: sed venientibus and non venientibus a
Carolo Rege evocatis sors plerumque eadem. Nesciebant enim qui venerunt, ubi
suam exhiberent praesentiam, eandemve facerent Recordari. Opinantur quidam
coram Baronibus in Scaccario, quidam apud Comitem Marescallum, quidam apud
magnum Camerarium Angliae; and dum caligant singuli, deviant omnes. Tandem enim
definiri perhibent, in Cancellaria Registrandam. Verba autem Brevis sunt, coram
Regis praesentia; and dum Regium sic opperiuntur otium atque bene-placitum,
facultatum partem non exiguam, forte etiam and aevi minuant. Vice-Comites autem
Summonitorum nomina Baronibus exhibent Scaccarii, hi vi^issim Commissionariis a
Rege delegatis, ad componendum statuendumque de animadversione pecuniaria, in
evocatos (velut contumaciae reos) sigillatim imponendae; quam si (gravem licet)
non admiserint, vel subterfugiendo detrectaverint, e terrarum suarum usu
fructibus (quos Exitus vocant) Barons Scaccarii Regi addicunt. Primo termino
40s. secundo 4l. tertio 8l. quarto 12l. quinto 16l. atque ita pro arbitrio
assurgentes.

Fuit retroactis seculis animadversio a Commissariis imposita, satis levis; sed
hodie gravis admodum: Tenuis enim fortunae viri, olim 20. 30. 40. solidis
plectebantur: hodie, libris totidem; Et ditiores nonnulli ducentis, trecentis,
quadringentis.

De Modo creandi Militem honoratum: and primum de cingulo Militari.
CUm in creando Milite maxim olim esset necessarium officium Cinguli; de
cingulo quidpiam praelibandum. Ejus triplex genus: Civil, zona; Militare,
baltheus; Mixtum, cingulum indefinite. Hinc Varro zonam inter vestimenta
refert; baltheum inter arma. Cingulum utrisque convenit, and est tam dignitatis
and magistratus, quam militiae symbolum; and a Trojanis seculis honorarium, ut
Homero passim.

Romani Veteres Equitem honoratum instituebant equo and annulo aureo a Censore
datis: Inferiores, Milites qui a Caesaris erant Comitatu, cingulo donabant, quo
a caeteris innotescerent Militibus. Fuit autem hoc e corio atque inde Baltheus
nuncupatum: nam balgh and beltz Germanis pellem significat; ut item (quod Galli
dicunt pro baltheo) baudeier, l in u and t in d mutatis. Romanum enim nihil
censeo genuine quod per th scribitur. Huc autem id Propertii lib. 4. Eleg. 11.

Praebebant caesi baltea lenta Boves.
Balthei seu Cinguli militaris officium fuit, Munire, Ornare, Distinguere,
Legionem notare, and Arma sustinere.

1. Munire; ideo late compositum, aliasque bullis, alias laminis (ne
distringeretur) firmatum. Virgil. Aen. lib. 12. -- Humero cum apparuit ingens
Baltheus, and notis fulserunt cingula bullis
Pallantis pueri. -- Humero (inquit) ut alibi:
Tum lateri atque humeris Tegeaeum subligat ensem.


2. Ornare; pro fastu militari and lateris dignitate, auro, gemmis, and insigni
opere. -- Virgil. Aen. 9.

-- Rhamnetis and aurea Bullis
Cingula --
Passim Homerus; and supra modum Odyss. XI. sed inferiores intuere.
Luithprandus Hist. Lib. 4. ca. 5. Boso mirae longitudinis and latitudinis
habebat balteum, qui multarum and preciosarum splendebat nitore gemmarum.

3. Distinguere: alias personas, ut Atridarum apud Homerum aurea balthea:
Hectoris, puniceus: Diomedis, discolor. Alias Dignitates and Magistratus: ut in
Vet. Epigramm. Val. Probi Annot.

Aulica quippe Comes rexi patrimonia clarus,
Et mea patricio fulserunt cingula cultu.
Hinc in Epilogo Edicti Theoderici Regis Italiae, cingulum pro Magistratu
ponitur. Nec cujuslibet dignitatis, aut substantiae, aut potentiae, aut
cinguli, aut honoris persona; contra haec -- esse veniendum. Et apud Suidam,
(...), i. e. Cingulum tropice pro facultate (seu authoritate) capitur, quod
cincti ad rem gerendam sunt expeditiores. Inde crebro in Canonibus, Judex
cinctus. Erat namque Cingulum tam Palatinae quam Armatae militiae insigne. Ideo
apud Cassiodorum and Jurisconsultos pro Magistratu dicitur and ejusdem
administratione. Variar. lib. 6. formul. 12. otiosi cinguli honor praecincta
dignitas, i. e. Magistratus citra molestiam dignitas. Et Imperator inferius
Judices admonens de laudabiliter se gerendo: Grave (inquit) pondus invidiae
est, splendere cinguli claritate, and morum lampade non lucere.

4. Legionem notare: Isidorus Origin. lib. 19. ca. 33. Baltheus cingulum
militare est dictus, propter quod ex eo signa dependent ad demonstrandam
Legionis militaris summam, id est, sex millium sexcentorum; ex quo numero and
ipsi constituunt.

5. Arma sustinere: Ensem and Clypeum; and singular singularem; de quibus
multa Homerus, qui and de Thoracis baltheo meminit, Ajacemque Hectori baltheum
cum ense dedisse, Iliad. 7. Sidonius Arvernorum Episcopus, qui floruit An. Dom.
470. suo aevo hos cultus attribuit, in Panegyr. ad Anthem. Aug. Car. 2. Pectora
bis cingunt zonae. -- Et supra,
Bullis hostilibus asper
Applicat a laeva fulgentem balteus ensem,
Inseritur clypeo victrix manus, etc.


Romany siquidem frequens, ut pluribus obiter hic inferius. De recentioribus
etiam Bartholinus Austriad. lib. 9.

Et mos gemmato mucronem annectere balteo.
Sic a veterimis seculis ad nostram aetatem (qua maxim floret) perductum vides
cingendi hunc morem: de quo dicam ut Martialis, de Parazomio: Militiae decus
hoc and grati nomen honoris,
Arma Tribunitium cingere digna latus.
Hinc Cingulum velut militiae dignitatumque compendium, in eisdem conferendis
optatissimum.

Frisones, cum cinctura gladii colaphum impingunt: and hoc a Carolo Magno eorum
Praesidi concessnm ferunt in quadam Constitutione; ubi de Militibus agens: Eis
gladium (inquit) circumcingat; and dato eisdem, sicut consuetudinis est, manu
colapho, sic milites faciat, eisdemque firmiter injungendo praecipiat, ut
deinceps more militum sacri Imperii aut regni Franciae, armati incedant -- Qui
Frisones signum suae militiae a dicta Potestate (i. e. Praeside) recipere
debent; in quo Corona Imperialis, in signum suae libertatis a nobis concessa,
debeat esse depicta. Ex Francis. Mennenio Tit. ha. 112.

Anglorum erat consuetudo, (non ingressis adhuc Normannis) quod qui Militiae
legitime consecrandus esset, vespera praecedente diem suae consecrationis, ad
Episcopum vel Abbatem, vel Monachum, vel Sacerdotem aliquem, contritus and
compunctus de omnibus suis peccatis, confessionem faceret; and absolutus,
orationibus and devotionibus, and afflictionibus deditus, in Ecclesia
pernoctaret in crastino quoque Missam auditurus, gladium super altar offerret,
and post Evangelium Sacerdos benedictum gladium collo Militis cum benedictione
imponeret: and communicatis ad eandem Missam sacris Christi mysteriis, denuo
miles legitimus permaneret. Haec Ingulphus Saxo, p. 901.

Sic fortissimus Herewardus (qui Normannis tantam facessivit operam) Miles
factus est. Hanc tamen consecrandi Militis consuetudinem aspernati sunt
Normanni, nec Militem legitimum talem tenebant, (inquit Ingulphus) sed socordem
Equitem and Quiritem degenerem. Et quorsum, obsecro? Number quod ab Ecclesiasticis
acceperint dignitatem, non a Viris Militaribus? Certe Gulielmus Rufus (qui
postea Rex evasit) non a patre suo Gulielmo I. Rege Angliae, sed a Lanfranco
Archiepiscopo Cantuariae, in vita patris, Miles factus est, ut Malmesburiensis
and Parisius testantur. Number quod ab Altari susceptum gladium? Prequens inter
ipsos Anglo-Normannos ritus sub Henrico II. ut perspicue refert Auctor
coaetaneus Petrus Blesensis, Epist. 94. Sed and hodie (inquit) tyrones, enses
suos recipient de altari. Et rationem adjungit, ut profiteantur se filios
Ecclefiae, atque ad honorem Sacerdotii, ad tuitionem pauperum, ad vindictam
malefactorum, and patriae liberationem, gladium accepisse. Quomodo tuebantur
Professionem? Male, (ut hodie) quod pluribus Blesensis. Number denique, quod in
Ecclesia pernoctarent vigilantes and paenitentes? Sospitavit equidem and pius
hic usus ad Edouardi I. saeculum, ut e Florilego deinceps videris.

Carolus Magnus, An. 791. Ludovicum filium suum jam appellentem adolescentiae
tempora Ranespurgi ense accingit. Theganus Episc. Trever. de Vita Lud. Pii,
page 166.

Ludovicus ipse Imperator jam factus filium suum Carolum [Calvum] armis
virilibus, id est, ense cinxit, corona Regali insignivit, etc. Idem page 271.
and Aimoin. lib. 5. ca. 17.

Alfredus Rex Anglorum Aethelstanum suum e filio nepotem puerum adhuc
praemature militem fecit, donatum chlamide coccinea, gemmato baltheo, ense
Saxonico cum vagina aurea. Malm. Gest. Reg. lib. II. ca. 6. pa. 49.

Henricus III. Anno 1252. ad Natale Domini, baltheo (inquit Parisius) apud
Eboracum donavit militari [Alexandrum] Regem Scotiae, and cum eo Tyrones fecit*
20. Qui omnes vestibus pretiosis and ^xcogitatis, sicut in tam celebri
tyrocinio de^uit, ornabantur, page 802. Intelligo, a Rege datis; nam sic idem
Auctor in Anno --.

Et cum legati nepotem cingeret, 30. lib. annuatim redditas ei dedit
haereditario, and cuidam alii censum pariter opulentum, page 530.

Edwardus I. ter centum simul preciosis donat vestibus, nec dignitatem tamen
confert, donec in Templo nocte peregissent vigilias, ut e Florilego videmus.
Pluries citaturus sum locum; semel habeatis integrum.

Ad augmentandum igitur (inquit) 1 profectionem suam in Scotiam, fecit Rex per
Angliam public 2 proclamari, ut quotquot 3 tenerentur fieri Milites 4
successione paterna, and qui haberent 5 unde militarent, adessent apud
Westmonasterium in festo Pentecostes, 6 admissuri singuli omnem ornatum
militarem praeter Equitaturam, de Regia 7 Garderoba. Confluentibus itaque 8
300. juvenibus, 9 filiis Comitum, Baronum, and Militum, distribuebantur 10
purpura, byssus, syndones, cyclades auro textae, effluentissime prout cuique
competebat. Et quia Palatium Regale etsi amplum, tamen ad tot occurrentium
turbam angustum fuit, apud 11 Novum Templum Londini, succisis lignis pomiferis,
prostratis muris, erexerunt 12 papiliones and tentoria, quo tyrones deauratis
vestibus se singuli decorarent. Ipsa quoque nocte in 13 Templo praedicti
Tyrones, quotquot poterat capere locus ille, suas vigilias faciebant. Sed 14
Princeps Walliae, praecepto Regis patris sui cum 15 praecelsis tyronibus fecit
vigilias suas in Ecclesia Westmonasteriensi. -- Die autem 16 crastina, 17
cinxit 18 Rex filium 19 baltheo militari in 20 Palatio suo, and 21 dedit ei
Ducatum Aquitaniae. Princeps ergo factus 22 Miles, perrexit in 23 Ecclesiam
Westmon. ut 24 consocios suos militari gloria venustaret. -- Princeps autem
propter turbam comprimentem non secus sed supra 25 magnum Altar, divisa turba
per 26 dextrarios bellicosos, socios suos 27 cinxit. Mat. Westminster. An. 1309. pa.
458.

Sine ut hic breviter notem adnotanda.
1 Profectionem] Quam sub quindena S. Johannis sequenti Rex iniit; and multis
in Scotia truculenter gestis, Carleoli obiit anno proximo, i. e. 1307.

2 Proclamari] Non in forma juris per Breve Regium Vice-Comitibus directum, ut
non venientes mulctarentur; aut non venientes and non obtinentes dignitatem,
finem, i. e. animadversionem Regi solverent pecuniariam.

3 Tenerentur] Tenebantur olim omnes liberi homines militare.

4 Successione paterna] Ergo filius and haeres Militis, qui patri successurus
erat in haereditate, ex jure Miles etiam faciendus erat.

5 Vnde militarent] Licet ex patre milite non esset oriundus; tamen si haberet
unde se in militia sustineret, suscipere tenebatur dignitatem. Et hoc quidem
olim fuisse videtur praedium 5. lib. sub ingressu Normannorum.

6 Pentecostes] Unum e tribus majoribus Festis, quibus prisci Reges prodire
solebant coronati; convocatisque regni Magnatibus, de arduis consulere and
statuere.

7 Admissuri] Suscepturi.

8 Garderoba] Vestiarium. Graecis inferioribus (...) a vest Germanorum Roch.

[Reliqua pars Commentarii desideratur.]

Galli praeter Cingulum seu Baltheum, gladium adhibent and aurata calcaria,
nihil sacri interposito. Bartholin. Austriad. 9. pa. 643.

Et mos gemmato mucronem annectere baltheo.
Recentiores plerique nullum tradunt symbolum; sed gladio delibant alii
scapulas and pectus Candidati, alii humerum velut percutientes tangunt,
dicentesque sois Chevalier, au nom de Dieu, gladium apponunt osculandum. Qui
humerum feriunt, colaphum impingentium tenent rationem; candidato velut
interminantes, ut deinceps nunquam ictum ferat inultus. Vidi aliquando senem
Ephaebo filio sic primum porrigentem gladium. Sed hoc Gentilium more, non
Christianorum; e quibus ictus olim aliquando miles, respondit, Non verbera
tulissem, si non essem Christianus.

Qui olim fiebant Milites.
FIebant olim Milites ex solis militibus vel militiae Candidatis; non servis
quantumvis eximiis, non colonis, non rusticis, non burgensibus, non
mercatoribus, vel togatis.

Non Servis. Hinc Regis filium carpit Virgilius Aen. -- Quorum primaevus
Helenor,
Maeonio Regi quem serva Licimnia furtim
Sustulerat, vetitisque ad Trojam miserat armis.


Vetitis (inquit) armis: quod Helenor licet Regis filius, ex serva tamen natus,
servus esset: servisque jure militari vetitum fuit arma far. Sic Mercatoribus
atque Rusticis, sub quorum appellatione burgenses veniunt, and coloni, L. Julia
de vi publica, and Constitutione Frederici Imp. lib. 5. Feud. Togatis; quod in
scholis suam habuere militiam, suas dignitates. A Veterum enim moribus alienum
fuit, ad Gradus provocare suae professioni non competentes. Doctorum primus,
quos invenerim, in Militiae dignitatem conscriptus est Bartholus de Saxoferrato
Jurisconsultus celeberrimus; qui and cum dignitate Leonem accepit pro
insignibus.

Inter classes Vrbicas, omnium apud nos primus militari cingulo donatus est a
Ric. II. Praetor Londinensis, non servati tantum civis sed regni causa, cum
egregium proditorem inter copias coram Rege exultantem pugione occidisset;
successoribus facto hanc obtinens dignitatem, pugionemque inscribi clypeo
civitatis.

Sunt and qui -- aevo -- primum ferunt Justitiariorum Angliae Militis donatum
titulo. Sed decipiuntur proculdubio; ut copiose viderint in Catalogis nostris
Justitiariorum; licet and me alterius interdum nitentem fide non errasse alias
haud asseruero. Sub Rege -- omnes plerumque Justitiarios Tribunales Milites
salutabant. Henricus VIII. selectos tantum aliquot. Regina Elizabetha (tenax
nimium in conferendis honoribus) vix unum atque alterum, praeter summos.
Jacobus Rex cataractas aperuit Dignitatum, obrepentibus interea (ne asperius
dicam) plurimis ignobilibus. Quippe cum in tota Anglia vix 300. reperisset
Milites, ipsos statim ter tribus auxit centenariis. Mirum nostro aevo, antiquis
vero satis assuetum. Henricus III. nuptias sororis suae cum Alexandro Rege
Scotiae mill celebravit Militibus. Sed refert Paulus Aemilius, Philippum
Pulchrum Regem Franciae in praelium contra Edouardum III. Regem Angliae, ter
mill descendisse Militibus, baltheo militari (ut ejus utar verbis) virtutis
causa donatis.

Qui possunt Militem facere.
EOrum fuit Militem facere, quorum fuit Feodum dare. Nam qui feodum dabat,
Militem constituit, and patrimonium insuper adjecit quo aleretur. Minus igitur
est, Militem facere, quam and facere and alere. Qui Feudum dare possunt,
exprimit Liber 1. de Feudis, Cap. 1. Feudum (inquit) dare possunt,
Archiepiscopus, Episcopus, Abbas, Abbatissa, Praepositus; si antiquitus
consuetudo eorum fuerit, feudum dare. Dux, Marchio, and Comes similiter, feudum
dare possunt, qui Regni vel Regis Capitanei dicuntur. Addit and Valvasores, sed
minuta plenitudine. Videamus autem an hi milites utique facerent.

Ab Archiepiscopo: Lanfrancus Archiepiscopus Cantuariae, Gulielmum Rufum quem
nutriverat, Militem fecit, patre adhuc vivente; uti referunt Malmesburiensis
and Parisius, hic in Anno 1087. pa. 13. ille pa. 120.

Sic Goslariae, per concessionem Archiepiscopi (Bremensis) primum se Rex (puta
Henr. III. Imp.) arma bellica succinxit. Lambert. Schafnab. in Chro. T. 313.

Ab Episcopo: Annals Dominicanorum Colmariens. in Anno 1298. Venerabilis
(inquiunt) Dominus de Leichtenberg Argent. Episcopus, fecerat hoc anno ante
Festum S. Michaelis Milites; quos omnes vestivit ad minus triplici vestimento;
soil. Tunica preciosa, Surgotum nobili vario, Suchornam cum vario precioso. En
in uno priscus hic ritus alius; cum dignitate vestimenta largiri. Sic Henricus
III. apud Parisium. Et quidem triplicia: quod ex prisca Romanorum consuetudine
ad Equites spectabat; Pediti enim simplex, duplex Centurioni, triplex Equiti
dabatur.

Sic in Ecclesia S. Dionysii, die Dominica per manus Episcoporum armis
accingitur Ludovicus Pius Imperator, qui paulo anterius arma deponere and ante
altar ponere coactus est. Thegan. in Vit. ejus pagg. 250. and 253.

Ab Abbate: Sic apud Ingulphum Saxonem, Herewardus cum aliquot aliis cohortis
suae tyronibus, a Brando Abbate Burgi S. Petri patruo suo (sub An. 1068. id
est, 2. Gulielm. I.) more Anglico, quem dedignati sunt Normanni, Miles factus
est. Morem expressit Stowus in Annalibus Vernaculis sub Gulielmo I. Anno 1061.
Herewardus Anglo-Saxo sub An. 1068. (i. e. 2. Gulielmi I.) patruelem suum
Abbatem Petroburgensem adit; confessusque and absolutus, noctem totam in
Ecclesia vigilans, orans, and jejunans transigit. Mane gladium affert super
Altari, quem (finito Evangelio) consecratum, Abbas a collo Herewardi suspendit;
benedictumque ipsum and sacra imbutum Eucharistia, Militem dimisit jam
legitimum. Abbatibus vero Milites facere prohibuit Synodus Londinensis sub
Anselmo Archiep. Cant. An. 1102. Cap. 17. quod apud Eadmerum videas lib. 3. and
Malmesb. lib. 1. de gest. Pontif.

De Abbatissa and Praeposito, non habeo quod proferam. Forte quod antiquitus
consuetudo little fuerit, feudum dare (ut Lex ait) aut non omnino, aut quid^m
parcius. Viro autem a muliere suscepisse decus Militiae, probrum videretur.

Praeter hos Ecclesiasticos, qui Feodum dare potuerunt, Sacerdoti etiam licuit
inter Anglo-Saxones Militem facere. Sic enim Ingulphus: Post Evangelium
Sacerdos benedictum gladium collo Militis eum benedictione componeret, etc. ut
supra.

Haec de Ecclesiasticorum Militibus; quorum gesta Feodalia and privata multo
accuratius olim mandabantur literis, quam Laicorum Procerum. Nemo vero
opinabitur, Proceres Seculares, quibus totus in Bello genius, minus valuisse in
militaribus dignitatibus conferendis, quam Magnates Ecclesiae, belli inimicos.

Ducem Burgundiae, celeberrimum instituisse ordinem Militum aurei velleris,
nemo non novit. Et ducem Britanniae suos creasse Milites, inferiu*patebit.

Marchiones, qui aliud non sunt quam Comites limitanei, Comites vero primarii
ordinis, parem sine dubio (si non supra) cum Comitibus potestatem habuerunt.

Ad montem, qui castro de Jews supereminet, se applicant (Barons) ubi
ordinatis alis and arcubalistis atque peditibus been dispositis, Gilbertum
Comitem Gloverniae Comes Leycestriae Simon armis militaribus decoravit.
Breviar. de Bello. (Sed hoc forte, ut a Principe Militiae.)

In Veteri MS. Codice familiae Sharneburnorum, legimus, quod in Militia Terrae
Sanctae, aevo Regis Ricardi I. Will. de Rustings and Alan de Sharnburne facti
sunt Milites de manu Comitis Arundel. tertii. Et Andreas de Sharnburn similiter
tempore Regis Johannis, de manu Willielmi Comitis Arundel. IV. Et ne Comites
hoc fecisse a Rege delegatos cogites; Giraldus Cambrensis in Itinerario
Cambriae (Ca. 12.) refert, 15. Armigeros (tempore Henrici I.) cingulo militari
donatos and armis Dominorum suorum decoratos a Constabulario Castri de Pembrock
primipilo Arnulphi de Montgomery. Licuit forte milites suos Feodales hac
insignire dignitate, non alienos. (Quaere.)

Sic in An. Gratiae 1306. cum Ducem sibi constituissent Scoti Gulielmum Waleys;
militiae (inquit Walsinghamus, in Edw. I.) donatus est cingulo a quodam Comite
regionis illius.

Creabantur and a Civibus Belcarii, and in Provincia, (Joh. Tilius de Reb.
Gall. lib. 2. ca. de Equitib. pa. 180.)

Poterat and Miles (ut quidam asserunt) eum Militem facere, qui a Patre natus
est Milite; quod haec dignitas ad talem pertinuisse habita est tam ex jure quam
ex gratia; ut ex eo liqueat quod Edouardus I. proclamari fecit per totam
Angliam, ut quotquot tenerentur fieri Milites successione paterna, and qui
haberent unde militarent; adessent gradum suscepturi.

Sic Alexander Rex Scotiae, licet ab Henrico III. Rege Angliae armis cingeretur
militaribus, potuisset tamen (inquit pa. 803.) ipsa arma suscipere a quovis
Principe Catholico, vel ab aliquo Nobilium suorum.

Franciscus I. Galliae Rex equestre baltheum and ensem accepit a Petro Baiardo
copiarum Praefecto in pugna Marigniana apud Insubres, 17. Kal. Octobr. An.
1515. Chopp. de Doman. lib. 3. Tit. 26. Sect. 13. pa. 574. in med.

Ferdinandus Rex Portugalliae praelium initurus anno 1382. ab Edmundo Comite
Cantabrigiae Anglo, in proprio suo regno factus est Miles.

Henricus VI. Rex Angliae in festo Pentecostes An. 1424. regni 4. miles factus
est a Duce Bedfordiae subdito suo, Galliae Regente; cum jam vitae and regni
annum quartum ageret. Hollinsh. eo anno.

Ludovicus XI. quum ille Remis induta purpura Francici Imperii habenas
capesseret, a Philippo Burgundiorum Duce ad hoc rogato Eques cingitur, 18. Call.
Sept. An. 1461. Chopp. Doman. lib. 3. Tit. 26. nu. 13. pa. 574.

Historia de Offa primo, qui strenuitate sua Angliae maximam partem subegit:
cui simillimus fuit secundus Offa.
Proceres consulunt Regi (Offae I.) ut filium suum moribus and aetate ad hoc
maturum, militari cingulo faciat insigniri, ut ad bellum procedens hostibus
suis horrori fieret and formidini. Rex celebri ad hoc condicto die, cum
solempni and regia pompa gladio filium suum accinxit; adjunctis vero tyrocinio
suo strenuis adolescentibus generosis, quos Rex ad decus and gloriam filii sui
[armis] Militaribus indui fecit and honorari. fol. 3. a.

Militem autem a non Milite faciendum negarunt Veteres, quamvis a Rege. Cum
igitur Ferdinandus Rex Portugalliae An. 1382. in procinctu aciei, viginti
quatuor vel eo supra, armis imbuisset militaribus; nunciatumque ei esset,
minime illos fore Milites, quod Rex ipse nondum Miles cingeretur; cincturam
protinus ab Edmundo Comite Cantabrigiae (qui in acie versabatur) auspicatus,
caeteros omnes redintegravit Milites. -- Disserao^ que por elle nao^ sero feito
Cavalleiro post que ret foset, nao^ podia fazer Cavalleirs. Eutamo armon
Cavalleiro o Cond^ Aymon de Camburg v fez el rei de novo o^ mesmos Cavalleiros
que tintra feitos o outros. 1382. Chron. de Portug. reform. peto Duarto Nun ez
do hao^ na vida del Fernando. hoio 226.

Et licet justa ev^neat ratio, ut inferior semper omnem a superiore referat
dignitatem; minor a majore: supremae tamen potestatis Principi, qui culminis
sui territorium securus non egrediatur, necessario competit, ut non solum ab
inferiore consequatur hunc honorem, sed a subdito etiam suo and vassallo.

Hodie creandi Militis Privilegium apud supremae Potestatis Principes
tantummodo retinetur; and his omnibus aeque competit, cujuscunque fuerint
gradus aut fastigii. Majores tamen habentnr Milites, qui a Majore constituuntur
Principe; and laudatior consuetudo quae antiquior. Danorum Reges (ut mihi
auctor est Crantzius) ante -- (qui patrum nostrorum memoria floruit) crearunt
neminem. Nec Romani (ut dicitur) Pontifices, ante Paulum III. qui Nicolaum de
Ponte Senatorem Venetum primarium statuit. Quid Dux ipse Venetus, nondum
reperi: nec Belgarum Ordines hoc aggressos. Successores vero Pontifices, suos
quinque Milites non tantum fecerunt; sed coacta pecunia (ut Sansouinus refert)
ordinis alicujus clientelares, suo de nomine nuncupatos: Milites seil. S.
Petri, S. Pauli; Milites -- Julii, Pii, Lauretanos, etc.

Morem denique Imperatores Turcici amplexi sunt, ex quo Selnnus truculentus
ille Gentilem Belinum egregium pictorem (Constantinopolim accersitum, ut aulam
Regiam depingeret) torque and codicillo Militiae donavit. Quaeritur autem an
legitimus hic Miles? Sunt enim qui negant: and mihi quidem videtur legitimus
(ut Juliani olim Milites) sed in militiam conscribi Turcicam, non Christianam.
De Principe Excommunicato dignitatem conferente, pariter judi^andum Canonicis.

Judices sub Equitum Appellatione censeri: scil. Equites esse Palatinos.
APud Romanos, Judices omnes qui non erant Senatores, ex Equitibus legebantur,
and equestribus igitur innotuerunt symbolis, annulo, Equo, and angusto clavo.
In Equitum vero appellatione non sunt cogniti vulgariter, quod minor haec
dignitas sub majori illa delituit. Tametsi Judicum non Equitum nomina ferrent
(inquit (...) 2. ^a. 29.
Alexand. ab Alex.) tamen Equestris fuisse ordinis, and inter Equites --,haud
dubium est. Qui in Provinciam itaque sub Impp. missus est Judex; militum more
alias chlamyde donabatur, ut apud Cassiodorum videas lib. 6. Variar. ca. 21.
alias gladio instruebatur, ut lib. 7. ca. 1. in formula Comitivae Provinciae:
Gladio (inquit) bellico rebus paratis accingitur: Sed addit inferius; Arma ista
juris sunt, non furoris contra noxios instituta, ut plus pavor corrigat quam
paena consumat -- Civilis est pavor iste, non bellicus, etc. Haec apud Romanos;
and passim similiter. Cum enim populis omnis Borealis (ad exemplum Germanorum)
nihil facerent non armati; Magistratus omnis and potestas Judiciaria penes
militares retinebatur, ut in Wisegothorum LL. lib. 2. Tit. 2. ca. 26.
animadvertas, and in caeteris pluries antiquis legibus. Divisus enim tune
populus in militares and agricolas: his autem illos jus dixisse, clarum est ex
Tacito.

Cinguntur ^g^tur Judices, ne non Milites haberentur; sed Palatini non
Castren^^s: quos sie distinguit vetus quidam apud Balbum: Miles pungit Equum,
sed Judex judicat aequum:
Intellige; Miles castrensis pungit equum; sed Miles forensis seu Palatinus, i.
e. Judex, judicat aequum.

De Palatino Milite sic Fulbertus Carnotensis in Hymno Paschali Resp.. 1. pa.
204.

Ipsum canendo supplices
Regem precemur milites,
Vt in suo clarissimo
Nos ordinet palatio.
Hinc and Judex, Miles justitiae nuncupatur: quod nostro tempore (inquit
Balbus) potest esse una dictio composita, and tunc pertinet ad quoddam officium
reddendi justitiam. Sed quando sunt duae parts, Miles Justitiae dicitur
quicunque est Miles justus. Conradi igitur Faburiens. vocabulo dicatur Miles
Justicus, ut sic a justo distinguatur. Videtur Froissardus lib. 1. ca. 177.
hunc Militem Justitiae, Chevalier de Loix, Militem juris, appellare. De tribus
locutus Militibus, quos Chevaliers vocat: don't les deux (inquit) estoient d'
arms, and le tiers de loix: les deux Chevaliers d' arms estoient Monsieur
Robert le Clermont gentil and noble grandement; l' autre le Signeur de Constan:
le Chevalier de loix estoit Monsieur Simon de Bussy, quem Gulielmus de Nanges
ejus aequalis dicit fuisse Conseiller au grand Conseil, i. e. a consiliis
Privati Consilii Regis, and primus Praeses Parliamenti. (E Carolo Loyseau pa.
130.)

Dicuntur and Juris isti Milites apud Auctorem de la Romant de la Rose,
Chivaliers de la lecture, Milites lectionis.

Qui veultu pur la foy defendre,
Quelque Chevalerie emprendre,
Ou soit d' arms, ou soit de lectures,
Ou aultres convenables cures.
De Loco and tempore Creationis.
LOcus quo facti sunt olim Milites non solum solennis fuit propter rei
dignitatem; sed etiam sacer: templum, Ecclesia, capella; and in istis pars
praecipua, coram Altari. Prementeque aliquando turba (ut in Edouardi I. illis
de quibus diximus) super ipsum Altar. Exemplis scatent, quae narravimus.

Tantae etiam solennitati dabatur utique solenne Tempus. Ludovicus Pius Imp. ab
Episcopis cingitur die Dominica in Ecclesia S. Dionysii. Thegan. pagg. 250. and
253. Sed ad multorum cincturam statuebatur e grandioribus festum aliquod, quo
ad Aulam confluentibus regni Magnatibus prodire Rex solebat fastu regio
coronatus public, ut in Natali Domini, Paschate, and Pentecoste. Sic Henric.
I. Gaufridum generum suum cum coaevis in festo Pentecostes Rothomagi auctoravit.

Henricus III. Alexandrum Regem Scotiae and 20. alios ad Natale Domini, Eboraci.

Edouardus I. Edouardum filium suum primogenitum and 300. alios ad festum etiam
Pentecostes, ut praedicitur.

Praeter haec, and insignes Vestimentorum Apparatus, lautissimis amicos
excipiebant Conviviis; ludisque Equestribus and Mavortiis tyrocinii coronabant
festivitatem. Unde Vetus illa Lex, ut auxilium Domino Vassalli suggerant ad
sumptus obeundos in filium primogenitum faciendo Militem.

Contra morem igitur antiquum est, quod hodie nonnulli jactant, se creari in
procinctu vel sub dio Milites; alios scioli vellicantes, qui in Regia (sub
tapete, aiunt) constituti sunt. Sed horum est manu praestare potius quam mente;
Mart quam Minerva; Veritas e praemissis liquet.

De Auxilio quod diximus suggerendo, illud apud nos observandum est, ut
poscatur solummodo ad filium primogenitum Militem faciendum; haud tamen
antequam aetatis annum 15. exegerit. Nec tum (ut olim aliquando) ad libitum
Domini; sed modo and quantitate constitutis: hoc est, 20. sol. sterlingorum de
quolibet feodo militari, and tantundem pariter de quolibet 20. libratu praedii
rustici, quod Soccage vocant. Haec, Statuto Westminster. 1. ca. 35. An. 3. Edw. I. Et
iisdem Rex conclusus est limitibus, Stat. An. 25. Edw. III. cap. 11.

De Censu Militari.
OLim ingens fuit turba Militum, ut ex eo liqueat, quod Militaris census
(feodum vocant) centenis tantum solidis aestimaretur: tum vero quod hujusmodi
feodorum sexaginta millia supra in Anglia numerata fuerint, licet singula
singulis non conferrentur. Patrimonia vero fuisse videantur justorum Militum
sub illis seculis. Vetus enim jus nostrum alios non agnovit Milites, cum
relevium Comitis 100. libris; relevium Baronis, 100. marcis; and relevium
Militis, 100. solidis, definiverit: id est, juxta unius Anni valorem sui feodi
exemplo quod in Lib. de Feudis reperitur. Et videtur insuper ad Militiae
apparatum tunc evocari, quotquot liberi and ingenue tenentes, de praediis,
centum annuatim numerabant solidos.

Crescente vero rerum pretio, Henricus III. evocari tantum jubet, qui 10.
libratas terrae habebant, ut Parisu utar verbis in An. Dom. 1256. Anno 37.
regni ejus, qui 15. libratas terrae possidebant. Chron. Hollinsh. pa. 248. col.
1. Edouardus I. anno suo primo, hos qui 20. libratis gaudebant. Stat. de Milib.

Henricus VIII. regni sui 25. illos solum qui 40. libras de censu praediali
percipiunt. Stow. pa. 946.

Modus Exauctorandi Militem; quod Degradare mincupatur.
DEgradatur Miles, ademptis per ignominiam judicialiter suae dignitatis
symbolis: ut caeteri omnes gradu quolibet insigniti. Ut enim ascribi in
militiam nemo potuit non legitime; sic nec solvi a militia. Solutionem autem
Missionem vocabant Romani; and haec erat triplex, honesta, causaria, and
ignominiosa. ff. de his qui no. infa. l. 2.. ignominae.

Honesta, cum miles consueta stipendia meruisset; quae erant in Praetorianis
Cohortibus, annorum 16. in aliis, 20. Tacit. Annal. lib. 1. and L. a. de
Veteran. Cod. Theod. and Cod. Just. l. 9. Veteran. fol. 474. d.

Causaria, quae propter valetudinem a laboribus Militiae solvit. ff. de his qui
no. infa. l. 2.. ignominiae.

Ignominiosa, quae in ignominiam Militis facta est; and duplex suit. 1. Cum is
qui mitteret, adjiceret nominatim ignominiae causa se mittere: semper enim
(inquit Lex) deb^t addere cur Miles mittatur. 2. Sed si eum exauctoraverit, id
est, insignia militaria detraxerit, inter insames efficit, licet non addidisset
ignominiae causa se eum exauctorasse. (ibid. fol. 80. b. V.. seq. de insamis
quid. etc.) Hoc illud Missionis genus est, cui nos jam incumbimus; dabimusque
igitur celebre Exemplum ejus ex Herodiano de Severo Imperatore; Praetorianos
omnes Milites qui Pertinacem Imp. trucidaverant, pro Tribunali in campo
sedente, recingendos exauctorandosque decernente. Post latam sententiam, E
vestigio (inquit Herodianus) Milites Illirici concurrunt; Praetoriamsque breves
illos gladios detrabunt, quos auro argentoque ornatos in usum pompae suspensos
habebant. Tum zonis, vestituque, and caeteris militiae insignibus per vim
ablatis, nudos ad unum exauctoratosque dimiserunt. In Severo Sect. 1. pa. 223.
To. 11. Ignominiae causa missis neque in urbe, neque alibi ubi Imperator est,
morari licet. (ff. de his qui not. intam.. Miles. fol. 80.) Inde Aemilius
Macer, qui ignominia missus est, neque Romae, neque in sacro Comitatu agere
potest. (In l. milites.. ignominiosa, ff. de re milit.)

Hinc exauctorandi nostri Militis Aurati caeremonia. Auctorari autem dicitur,
cum quis ad aliquid faciendum obligatur, ut miles ad militiam, etc. Exauctorari
hic igitur est, ab obligatione militari solutum esse: quae solutio and
dignitatem tollit, and annexa Privilegia. Vulgo dicitur Degradatio, quia gradum
tollit. Fit igitur omnis Exauctoratio seu Degradatio, auferendo per ignominiam
judicialiter ipsa eadem insignia, quibus collata est dignitas vel gradus; cum
in secularibus tum in Ecclesiasticis; ut sigillatim ostenderem, si prolixitatis
non puderet. Sequemur igitur quod in Thesi est; and omissis Romanorum exemplis,
recentiora quaedam proferemus.

Memorabilis est prae caeteris omnibus male-sana illa Exauctoratio Ludovici Pii
Imperatoris Christianissimi ab Episcopis An. Dom. 917. Compendii perpetrata:
Longa est injuria, longae ambages; quas in Auctoribus illius seculi, and
nominatim in Libello; qui Tegano subjungitur, Exauctoratio Ludovici Pii
nuncupato, fuse legas. Coegerunt autem mitissimum Principem (ut recentius Angli
Ricardum II.) reatuum quos imposuerant articulis subscribere, poenitentiamque
cum tristissima confessione profiteri. Post hanc Confessionem (inquit Auctor)
Chartulam suorum reatuum, and Confessionis, ob futuram memoriam Sacerdotibus
tradidit, quam ipsi super Altar posuerunt: ac deinde cingulum Militiae
deposuit and super Altar collocavit, and habitu seculi se exuens, habitum
Poenitentis per impositionem manuum Episcoporum accepit; ut post tantam
talemque poenitentiam, nemo ultra ad militiam secularem redeat. p. 147. and
seq. Vides hanc Exauctorationem retrograde fieri eisdem vestigiis quibus sub
hoc seculo ipsa facta est Militis (ut loquuntur) Creatio seu auctoratio. A
Viris Ecclesiasticis, in Ecclesia, coram Altari, praemissis confessione and
poenitentia, solutione cinguli militaris, ejusdemque repositione super Altar
unde in Auctoratione desumptum fuit; exuto etiam demum seculari, hoc est
militari, habitu, ut nunquam postea ad militiam esset redeundum.

Haec de morbo illius tempestatis: recolitur tamen Imperator denuo and cingulo
militari ab ipsis Episcopis (ut supra diximus) and omnibus aliis suis
insignibus.

Exauctoratur and circa hoc tempus, paulo anterius, Odo quidam Ludovici
familiaris, armis scil. ablatis, ipsoque in exilium deportato. Vit. Lud. Pii,
p. 238.

Notandum autem est, sub voce Cingulum, intelligenda arma omnia, and ipsam
militandi facultatem: eoque sensu in Historiis, Conciliis, and Jure Caesareo
passim occurrere cingulum tollere, amittere, perdere, and hujusmodi.

Accedo ad viciniora, and nostratia. Andreas Harkela Miles Auratus and Comes
Carliolensis, sub An. Dom. 1323. seu 17. Edw. II. reus agitur coram Gausrido de
Scrope summo Justitiario Regii Tribunalis (ut quidam perhibent,) vel Antonio de
Lucy (qui eum comprehenderat) ut alii referunt; recte coram utroque, de re
Anglorum Scoto prodenda. Cumque lata esset sententia, ut spoliatus tam Comitiva
dignitate quam Militari, morte pro more Traditoris afficeretur: statutus est ad
repagulum Tribunalis, ocre^s, calcaribus, pellito collobio, vestibusque aliis
Comitivis indutus. Prodiens tunc, ex mandato Antonii, ribaldus quidam, calcaria
primum ab Harcleae calcibus detruncat; fractoque super capite ejus Comitivo
gladio, quem in custodiam tutelamque Comitatus Rex ei praebuerat, vestibus
spoliat and cingulo militari. Spoliatum denique sic alloquitur Antonius.
Ribaldus jam efficeris and tu ipse Andreas, qui nuper Miles fueras and vir
dignitatis. Proditionem vero suspendio lues, tractus, evisceratus, and
intestinis crematis, quadrifariam dissectus, capiteque minutus, etc. Codex
Vernac. MS. Ca. 195.

Specimen aliud habes a Radulpho de Gray, qui cum fidem Regi Edouardo IV.
juratam fefellisset; captusque postea, in Castello Bamburgensi supremam
subiturus esset sententiam; Comes Worcestriae Constabularius Angliae pro
Tribunali sedens, reum his affatur: Radulphe, statuerat Rex tuae proditionis
ergo, ut calcaria tibi juxta ipsos calcaneos ab archimagiro (quem praesto hic
vides praecinctum lint^o, and instructum cultro) discuterentur. Adsunt etiam ex
mandato Regis (ut ipse hic vides) Rex Armorum and Heraldi alii cum tunica
insignium tuorum militarium, quam a corpore tuo dilacerantes avellerent, ut tam
nobilitatis tuae and insignium Gentilitiorum spoliareris, quam dignitatis tuae
militaris. En and alia tunica tuorum armorum reverso ordine depictorum, qua ad
supplicium raptus induereris, tanquam ex jure ad te pertinente. Degradationem
tamen tuam a militari dignitate, armorumque and Nobilitatis tuae ademptionem
remisit and pepercit tibi Rex; little memor, quae praeclarus avus tuus in causa
illustrissimorum praedecessorum ipsius Regis passus est. Lato tandem judicio,
ad supplicium tractus est truncatusque capite, ut Stowus refert: sed ut
Fabianus, tractus, suspensus, and quadripartitus, An. Dom. 1464. Regis 4.

Consedente pro Tribunali regio in aula Westminster. D. Thoma Howard Comite Arundelio
summo Angliae Comite Marescallo, auream ferente muneris sui virgam, adjunctis a
dextra and a sinistra -- Franciscus a ministro ad repagulum Curiae adducitur,
and part interiori super scamno collocatur e regione D. Marescalli; stans and
vestitu quo solet palliatus, sed ocreis and calcaribus auratis indutus,
gladioque cinctus qui per Baltheum coriaceum a dextro humero ad sinistrum
dependebat latus. Facto silentio legebatur public ab Heraldo libellus, reatum
suum and sententiam inferioris conclavis Parlamentarii continens. Quo finito,
corrigia calcariorum ejus discidit --; arreptaque calcaria projiciebat in
aulam: deinde discidit baltheum, curavitque ut gladi^s in terram caderet: quia
in militaribus Exercitiis lateri ignominiae sit, si qua pars armorum ad terram
ceciderit; ideoque Heraldorum juris est.

FINIS.
HISTORIA FAMILIAE DE SHARNBURN.

E veteri MS. recensuit D. HENRICUS SPELMANNUS.

HEN. SPELMANNUS Lectori. Non vulgar vides Monumentum; forte videbis
Haud duo praeterea talia, siqua vides.
No vulgar Monument you see, scarce two
The like you will find, if any one you do.
HISTORIA FAMILIAE DE SHARNBURN.
LOngo tempore post adventum Saxonum Paganorum in Angliam, Thokus qui fuit
Paganus Dominus de integra villa de Shenebruina, and habuit unam filiam, quam
dedit cuidam homini strenuo vocato Ingolf; and cum ea dedit ei totam terram and
mariscum quod ipse habuit versus occidentem praedictae villae de Shenebruina
usque mare, ubi ipse Ingolf quandam villam fecit, and vocavit illam nomine suo
Ingolfestorp. Et Sanctus Foelix quando venit de Burgundia per consilium Honorii
Archiepiscopi Cantuar. applicuit in partibus Estanglorum quae postea dicta fuit
Norfolchia and Suffolchia, and convertit ad fidem Eorpwaldum Regem illius
patriae and baptizavit eum, viz. An. Dom......

Et postea per licentiam praedicti Eorpwaldi Regis ivit per mare versus parts
Babynglee, and convertit ad fidem Dominum and omnes homines illius terrae, and
fecit ibidem aedificari unam Ecclesiam, quae fuit prima Ecclesia illius partis
Norff. Et deinde ivit ad Shenebruinam and baptizavit praedictum Thokum, and
omnes homines suos, and praecepit ei ut ipse faceret ibi unam Ecclesiam, and
fecit ibi unam parvam Ecclesiam de Meremio, quae vocabatur per longum tempus le
Stoke Chapel, and postea fuit dedicata per praedictum Sanctum Foelicem in
honorem Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and sic fuit illa Ecclesia in Shenebruina
secunda Ecclesia illius partis Norff. and ita fuit praedictus Thokus effectus
Christianus, and tota vita sua fuit Shenebruina, and haeredes ejus similiter
post eum fuerunt Domini ejusdem villae usque Canutus Rex Danorum conquestus
fuit Angliam. Quo tempore quaedam puella de progeny praedicti Thoki, and
haeres sua linealiter descendendo fuit Domina de integra villa de Shenebruina
Nota
praedicta, quae desponsata fuit cuidam Edwyno, qui venit in Angliam cum
praedicto Canuto Rege Daniae, ut patet in sequenti. Edwinus Dacus venit de
Dacia (i. e. Denmark) in Angliam cum Canuto Rege Danorum Anno Domini millesimo
XIV. quando ipse Canutus debellavit cum Edredo Rege Angliae, and post mortem
Edredi ipse Canutus pluries pugnavit cum Rege Edmundo Ironsyde filio praedicti
Edredi, and ad ultimum concordati fuerunt, ita quod praedictus Edmundus haberet
totam Angliam ex part Australi Thamysiae, and praedictus Canutus haberet aliam
partem Angliae ex part Boriali praedictae Thamysiae, quo tempore idem Canutus
dedit praedicto Edwyno villam de Neteshamia integram cum toto dominio integro
and plures alias terras in Commit. Norff. Et similiter dedit ei unam planiciem
non cultam sed vastatam, versus Orientem a praedicta villa per sex miliaria
Anglicana, ubi idem Edwynus invenit quendam collem, (...)
illam Stonhogia, quae postea vocabatur Stanhowe. Et postea ipse Edwynus
desponsavit quandam puellam, quae fuit Domina de integra villa de Shenebruina;
and cito postquam desponsabat illam ipse cepit praedictam villam, quam habuit
cum uxore sua de Canuto Rege, tenendam de ipso insimul cum donationibus, quas
illi prius dederat; and sic fuit ipse Edwynus Dominus integre de praedictis
villis, and obtinuit omnia praedicta in pace quousque Willielmus Bastardus Dux
Normannorum cepit Angliam super Haraldum Regem, qui coronatus Westminster. An. Dom.
millesimo LXVI. Et post coronationem ipse dedit diversas terras in Anglia
diversis hominibus, qui secum venerunt in auxilio ad Angliam conquirendam.
Inter quas dedit Willielmo de Albeney Pincernae suo, and Willielmo de Warennia
forestario suo diversas terras, and dominationes in Commit. Norff. and alibi in
Anglia: and praedicti Willielmus Pincerna, and Willielmus de Warennia, and
omnes alii qui venerunt cum praedicto Conquestore ejecerunt diversos homines
infra dominationes suas omnibus de terris, and dominationibus suis; inter quos
praedicti Willielmus Pincerna, and Willielmus de Warennia ejecerunt praedictum
Edwynum de praedictis duabus villis, and omnibus aliis Edwynus, and alii quidam
qui ejecti fuerunt abierunt ad Conquestorem, and dixerunt ei, quod nunquam ante
conquestum suum, nec in conquestu suo, nec post fuerunt contra ipsum Regem in
consilio and auxilio, sed tenuerunt se in pace, and hoc parati fuerunt probare,
quomodo ipse Rex vellet ordinare, propter quod idem Rex fecit inquirendum per
totam Angliam, si ita fuit, quod quidem probatum fuit; propter quod idem Rex
praecepit ut omnes illi qui sic tenuerunt se in pace in forma Drenges; super
quod idem Rex ad sectam praedicti Edwyni mandavit praedictis Willielmo
Pincernae, and Willielmo de Warrenia quod ipsi deliberarent praedicto Edwyno
omnes terras, and dominationes suas ex quibus ejecerunt eum, qui inde nihil
voluerunt facere; sed praedictus Willielmus Pincerna dedit eidem Edwyno unum
messuagium, CCC. acras terras, and tres faldas in Snetesham, qui inantea
vocabatur Netesham tenendas de eodem Willielmo Pincerna per certa servitia and
retinuit ad opus suum and opus Willielmi de Warrenna residuum praedictae villae
de Snetsham, unde ipsi feoffaverunt alios de hominibus suis qui secum venerunt
de Normannia. Et praedictus Willielmus de Warrenna dedit similiter eidem Edwyno
unum messuagium, CCCC. acras terrae, and quatuor faldas in Sharnebourne cum
dominio ejusdem villae quae inantea vocabatur Shenebruina tenendas per certa
servitia de cadem Willielmo de Warrenna, and retinuit ad opus suum residuum
ejusdem villae de Sharneburn cum advocatione Ecclesiae, unde ipse feoffavit
alios de hominibus suis qui secum de Normannia venerunt. Et post istas
dominationes factas praedicto Edwyno per praedictos Willielmum Pincernam, and
Willielmum de Warrenna, Dominus Rad. de ^or^neys qui similiter venit in Angliam
cum praedicto Conquestore, Suthm. cum membris in Commit. Norff. cepit praedictum
Edwynum, and ipsum incarceravit, perque longum tempus in prisona detinuit,
quousque idem Edwynus evasit per noctem extra prisonam, and abiit praedicto
Willielmo Pincernae, and fecit ei querimoniam de injuria sibi facta, and
supplicavit ^i ut ipse posset tenere de illo praedictam villam de Stanhowe, qui
noluit, sed ipse cum Willielmo de Warrenna ceperunt praedictam villam de
Stanhowe, in manibus suis and praedictus Willielmus Pincerna dedit praedicto
Edwyno unum messuagium, CCCC. acras terrae and quatuor faldas in praedicta
villa de Stanhowe tenendas de eo per servicium XLd. per annum, and Stanhowe cum
advocatione Ecclesiae retinuit ad opus suum and ad opus Willielmi de Warrenna
qui inde feoffaverunt alios de hominibus suis qui secum venerunt de Normannia,
ut supradictum est. Et postea idem Willielmus Pincerna mandavit in Normandiam
pro una filia Bastarda sua, quam ibi procreavit ante adventum suum in Angliam
and illam dedit A^^euro filio praedicti Edwyni, and per hoc fuit idem Edwynus
in pace tota sua post multas tribulationes suas tempore praedicti Regis
Willielmi Conquestoris. De quo Asceurus, ut supradictum est, qui desponsavit
filiam Willielmi Asceurus
Pincernae bastardam, ut supradictum est, and tenuit totam haereditatem suam in
pace post mortem praedicti Edwyni patris sui, and obiit in senectute sua in
ultimis annis regni Regis Stephani. Et ipse Asceurus procreavit de uxore sua
praedicta tres filios and plures filias, and ipse Asceurus divisit praedictis
tribus filiis suis totam haereditatem suam. De quibus Galfredus filius
praedicti Primus ^iliu^ (...).
Asceuri primogenitus desponsavit Etheldredam filiam Rogeri de Dersyngham, and
ipsa fuit pulcherrima domina, quia inantea ipsa desponsabatur Domina Fulconi de
Sharneburn, and similiter post mortem praedicti Galfredi illa Domina
desponsabatur Domino Rogero Rustengs, ut patet alibi, and iste Galfredus suit
Capitalis Etheldreda obiit die Sancti Cuthberti tempore Regis Johannis.

Secundus filius Asceuri and eju^ ^^itus.
Ricardus secundus filius praedicti Asceuri desponsavit Amiciam filiam..... de
Lynnea veteri in partibus Mershlandiae ex part occidentali Ripae, and cum illa
habuit ibi magnam haereditatem, de quibus Robertus, qui vendidit totam
haereditatem, quam habuit in partibus Mershlandiae antecessoribus Jacobi
Baynard; de Ricardus, de quo Robertus, de quo Petrus, de quo Sabina and
Petronella, and plures filii and filiae, and praedicta Sabina desponsata fuit
Johanni filio Philippi Pynchom de Castle-Rising, and praedicta Petronella nupta
suit Johanni filio Radulphi Panton de Dockyngs.

Tertius filius praedicti Asceuri.
Robertus tertius filius praedicti Asceuri obtinuit multa beneficia
Ecclesiastica in diversis locis cum Decanatu Lenniae, and habuit tres filias.
Unde prima filia desponsabatur cuidam Willielmo filio Radulphi de Snetesham,
and secunda filia nupta fuit cuidam Hamundo de Snetesham; and tertia filia
nupta fuit cuidam Waltero de Snetesham. Et de praedictis Willielmo filio
Radulphi, and uxore sua filia praedicti Roberti filii Asceuri exivit Radulphus,
and plures filii and filiae, de Radulpho secundo exivit Willielmus, de quo
quaedam puella quae nupta fuit Galfredo de Say de Dersyngham, de quibus
Galfredus de Say, qui vendidit totam haereditatem, quae ei descendebat post
mortem Matris suae, cuidam Hervio Vnderburg de Bennham and aliis hominibus de
Snetesham, and de praedictis Hamundo and uxore sua secunda filia praedicti
Roberti filii Asceuri exivit Galfredus, de quo Alanus, de quo Galfredus, de quo
Wymerus, de quo Robertus Wymer, qui vendidit totam haereditatem suam in
Snetesham, Sharneburn, and Dockyng Domino Johanni de Ingoldesthorp and aliis
hominibus. Et de praedictis Asceuri exivit Galfredus, de quo Galfredus, de quo
Johannes, qui vendidit totam haereditatem suam in Stanhowe Andreae de
Sharnebourne secundo and totam haereditatem suam in Snetesham, and Sharneburne
vendidit aliis diversis hominibus de quo Thomas Bulwer de Snetesham.

Modo dicendum est de Etheldreda quae fuit uxor Galfredi filii Asceuri; Rogerus
de Dersyngham fuit quidem homo dives ex nobili progeny and habuit unum filium,
qui vocabatur Robertus de Dersyngham post mortem patris sui, and unam filiam
pulcherrimam quae vocabatur Etheldreda, and Dominus Fulco de Sharnebourn in
equitando versus Lennam vidit illam stantem juxta viam in Dersyngham, Primus
ma^^tus Etheldredae, and (...) ^^itus.
cum ea multam pecuniam promittendo, dictus Dominus Fulco ipsam desponsavit and
ex eadem Etheldreda procreavit dominum Eudonem de Scharnburn, and plures filios
and filias. Et de ipso Eudone exivit Galfredus and plures filii and filiae, and
idem Galfredus desponsavit Rosamundam filiam Will. filii Roberti de
Ingoldsthorp Thomae de Ingoldstorp senioris, de quibus Will. and plures filii
and filiae, de quo Galfredus and plures filii and filiae, de quo Willielmus,
Thomas and Johannes and duae filiae, and praedicti Willielmus, Thomas and
Johannes obierunt, and praedictus Willielmus post mortem filiorum suorum dedit
domino (...).
Andreae de Sharneburn quarto totam haereditatem suam. Et post mortem praedicti
domini Fulconis praedicta domina Etheldreda desponsabatur Galfrido filio
Asceuri, ut supradictum est, qui ex ea procreavit tres filios and quatuor
filias, (...).
ut patet inferiu^. Et post mortem praedicti Galfredi filii Asceuri praedicta
domina Etheldreda desponsabatur tertio domino Rogero de Rusteyng, qui fuit
Capitalis Senescallis Willielmi Comitis Arundelliae tertii, and idem Rogerus
antequam desponsavit praedictam Etheldredam factus fuit Miles in terra Sancta
de Jerusalem tempore Regis Ricardi de manu praedicti domini Willielmi Comitis
tertii. Et post reditum suum de Jerusalem ipse desponsavit praedictam
Etheldredam, ut supradictum est, qui ex ea procreavit dominum Willielmum and
plures filios and filias. It de ipso Willielmo exivit dominus Willielmus
secundus, and dominus Rogerus Rusteyngus Rector Ecclesiae de Ingoldsthorp and
Freyngz. Et de ipso Willielmo secundo exivit Willielmus tertius and quatuor
filiae, videlicet. Milicentia prima filia, quae desponsata fuit domino
Reginaldo de Sancto Martino fundatore Canonicorum de Hempton. Alicia secunda
filia desponsata fuit domino Waltero de Wygenhall. Margareta tertia filia
desponsata fuit domino Johanni de Vvedale. Beatrix quarta filia desponsata fuit
Gilberto de Tuckwell. ^t praedicta domina Etheldreda post mortem praedicti
domini Rogeri viri sui nunquam fuit desponsata, and ipsa vixit sola ad totam
vitam suam sine viro. Et obiit die Sancti Cuthberti tempore Regis Johannis.

(...).
Modo dicendum est de filiis and filiabus Galfredi filii Asceuri and praedictae
Etheldredae uxoris suae. Dominus Alanus fuit primus filius praedictorum
Galfredi and Etheldredae, and factus fuit miles in terra Sancta de Jerusalem
tempore Regis Ricardi de manu Comitis Willielmi Arundellii tertii, eo tempore
quo dominus Rogerus Rusteyng secundus fuit miles, and cum eodem Alano fuit
ibidem tune temporis Petrus frater praedicti Alani. Et idem dominus Alanus in
tota vita sua non habuit uxorem nec exitum, nisi unum filium bastardum, qui
vocabatur Robertus de Sharneburn, and aliquando Robertus filius Alani de
Sharneburn communiter Robertus de Hall; and idem dominus Alanus obiit tertio
die Junii (...)
tempore Regis Ricardi. Dominus Andreas secundus filius praedictorum Galfredi,
and Etheldredae factus fuit miles in terra Sancta de Jerusalem tempore Regis
Johannis de manu Willielmi Comitis Arundelliae quarti. Et post reditum suum de
terra Sancta ipse desponsavit Susannam filiam domini Benedicti de Ang^ivilla,
domini de Westnewton, Suyton and Herlyngs, and cum praedicta Susanna ipse
habuit totam tertiam partem totius haereditatis praedicti Benedicti, sed nullum
exitum habuerunt inter ipsos, propter quod ipse non tenuit praedictam tertiam
partem nisi ad totam vitam praedictae Susannae; and post mortem ipsius Susannae
idem dominus de Andreas desponsavit Aliciam quae fuit uxor Sylvestris de
Risinges, sed nullum exitum habuerunt inter ipsos. Et praedicta domina A^^cia
super vixit praedictum dominum Andream virum suum, and ibidem dominus Andreas
obiit die Sancti Alphegi Episcopi, Anno Dom. millesimo CC. XLIX. and Regni
Regis Henrici filii Regis Johannis XXXIV. Et sepultus est apud Sharneburn in
Capella coram Altarem Beatae Mariae, prope (...)
parietem Australem. Petrus tertius filius praedictorum Galfredi and Etheldredae
in redeundo de terra Sancta de Jerusalem cum domino Alano fratre suo remansit
retro praedictum Alanum in Francia cum quodam magno Domino (...)
praedictus Petrus incipiebat amare, and illa consentiente eidem Petro * and
tempore praedicti amoris pater puellae praedictae obiit, and sic illa puella
remansit sola, and sine consilio nisi de matre sua. Quo tempore dictus dominus
Andreas de Sharneburn frater praedicti Petri, antequam ipse factus fuit miles,
ivit in terram Sanctam de Jerusalem, cum Willielmo Comite Arundelliae quarto,
and venit in illa part Franciae ubi praedictus Petrus remansit, and fecit
ipsum ^re secum in terram Sanctam, and post reversionem praedicti Andreae idem
Petrus remansit cum praedicta puella and matre sua. Quo tempore ipsa puella
fuit praegnans per praedictum Petrum, and peperit unam filiam, and in secundo
anno postquam praedicta puella fuit deliberata de filia sua praedicta, idem
Petrus audivit dicere, quod Susanna, quae fuit uxor praedicti Andreae fratris
sui, fuit Petro, Modo scio been, quod quam citius venies ad hospitium habebis
me in oblivione, and tibi capies aliam uxorem; and idem Petrus dixit quod non,
and hoc affirmabat per juramentum and fidem suam dando, and tunc illa dixit
tali condition expectabo te per septem annos, ita quod non capiam maritum nec
ullum virum donec praedicti septem anni erunt elapsi. Et tunc idem Petrus
rediit in Angliam, and Andreas desponsavit Aliciam, quae fuit uxor Sylvestri de
Rysinge, qui receperunt praedictum Petrum letanter, and cum magno gaudio: and
post pusillum idem dominus Andreas and Alicia uxor ejus dixerunt eidem Petro,
ut ipse desponsaret Ceciliam filiam praedictorum Sylvestri and Aliciae, and
ipse nullo modo voluit consentire, nec concedere, propter quod idem dominus
Andreas multum irascebatur versus praedictum Petrum, and dixit ei, si nollet
ipsam Ceciliam desponsare quod nunquam deberet esse haeres suus post mortem
suam. Et quia praedictus Petrus been sciebat, quod praedictus dominus Andreas
and domina Alicia nunquam habuerunt haeredem de corporibus eorum, and ipse
timuit quod idem dominus Andreas in ira sua ipsum dishaeredaret, ipse
desponsavit praedictam Ceciliam Snetesham, and terram suam in eadem villa de
Snetesham. Et praedictus Petrus genuit de praedicta Cecilia quinque filios and
unam filiam, ut patet inferius. Et praedictus Petrus post mortem praedictae
Ceciliae rediit in Franciam ad praedictam puellam, quam ipse prius amabat, and
quam citius ipsa puella ipsum vidit dixit ei, quod ipse fregisset conventionem
quam ipse secerat, quia septem anni fuerunt translati multo tempore elapso; and
dixit, Sharnburn, and Sharnburn coram Altari Beatae Mariae, juxta dominum
Andream fratrem suam ex part boreali.

Prima filia Galfredi and Etheldredae, and ejus exitus.
Prima filia praedictorum Galfredi and Etheldredae vocata Matildis desponsata
fuit domino Nicholao filio Radulphi Dockyng, item dominus Ricardus de Senges,
dominus de Berwick, dedit plures terras in Dockyng, and alibi in maritagio cum
praedicta Matilde, de quibus dominus Ricardus, de quo dominus Nicholaus, de quo
Ricardus qui vendidit totam haereditatem domino Johanni Lovel seniori, and
aliis diversis hominibus de quo Nicholaus of Hall, pauper manens apud Norwic.

Galfredi and Etheldredae vocata..... desponsata (...)
suit domino Alano filio Robert^ de Ingoldsthorp, de quibus dominus Thomas qui
vocabatur (...) Thomas, de quo dominus Thomas qui suit Vice-Comes Norff. de ^uo
(...) Johannes, qui suit ad Baneram in guerra cum Edwardo Rege (...) de ^^o
dominus Thomas, de quo dominus Johannes, de quo dominus (...) Ingoldsthorp.

(...)
(...) praedictorum Galfredi and Etheldredae vocata..... desponsata suit (...)
Nicholao de Testes, de quibus dominus Rogerus, de quo Thomas, (...) patre suo,
de quo Rogerus ultimus.

Galfredi and Etheldredae vocata Isabella desponsata (...)
suit..... de quibus Matildis, quae desponsata suit Albino de Stamford manenti
in (...) de quibus Johannes Aubyn de Hillyngton, and Ricardus Aubyn D^^anus de
He^^am.

Modo dicendum est de domina Alicia, quae fuit uxor domini Andreae de (...) de
primo viro suo, domina Alicia, antequam ipsa desponsabatur domino Andrew de
Sharnburn, desponsata suit Sylvestro de Rysings cuidam homini diviti multas
habens terras in Rysings, West-Newton and alibi, de quibus Cecilia quae
desponsata fuit Petro de Sharnburn, ut patet superius, and quaedam alia filia
quae desponsata suit Thom^e Sorel de Oldlynne seniori. Et unus filius qui
vocabatur Willielmus Sylvestre, de quo Andreas Sylvestras manens in Congham, de
quo Cecilia quae desponsata fuit Willielmo Attechirch de Wulfurton seniori, and
Alicia quae desponsata fuit Adae A^ary de Sharnburn seniori. Et praedicta
domina Alicia fieri fecit Cancellam de Sharnburn, and sepulta est in eadem
Cancella, and ipsa obut tertio Idus Sept. Anno Dom. millesimo CC. LX. and Regni
Regis Henrici filii Johannis XLV. Et Cecilia quae suit uxor Petri de Sharnburn
obiit XI. Call. Oct. Modo dicendum est de exitu Petri de Sharnburn, (...)
and Ceciliae uxoris ejus. Johannes filius praedictorum Petri and Ceciliae
primogenitus obiit sine haerede de se procreato vivente patre suo, vid. VII.
Idus Nov. Andreas secundus filius praedictorum Petri and Ceciliae vivente patre
suo desponsavit Emmam sororem Magistri Godofredi de Toftes Rys, quondam
Rectoris (...)
de Hunstanston, de quibus exivit una filia ut patet inferius, and praedicta
Emma obiit III. Call. Oct. and sepulta est in Coemeterio Ecclesiae de Sharnburn,
ex part Australi Capellae prope parietem. Et post mortem praedictae Emmae idem
Andreas desponsavit Christianam filiam domini Alani le Gross de Wodenorton de
quibus exivit unus filius, and duae filiae, ut patet inferius. Et praedictus
Andreas obiit VII. Kal. Julii, An. Dom. millesimo CC. LXXXII. Regni Regis
Edwardi filii Regis Henrici X. Et sepultus fuit in Capella Ecclesiae de
Sharnburn, ad caput domini Andreae sub pariete Australi. Et praedicta
Christiana post mortem praedicti Andreae desponsata fuit Edmundo filio domini
Johannis de Gylham de Dersyngham, and vixit per longum tempus post mortem
praedicti Edmundi; videlicet usque festum Sancti Lucae Evangelistae, An. Dom.
millesimo CCC. XXXVI. and Regni Regis Edwardi tertii post conquestum decimo.
(...)
Walterus tertius filius praedictorum Petri and Ceciliae fuit Armiger, cum
domino Thoma Rostelyn seniori nobili homine and probo tota vita ipsius domini
Thomae, and cum ipso fuit ad bellum de Jews and Evesham ex part Regis
Henrici, and Edwardi filii sui, and postea idem Walterus fuit cum praedicto
domino Thoma in terra Sancta de Jerusalem, in ultimis annis praedicti Henrici
Regis in societate Walterus post reditum suum de terra Sancta procreavit de
Juliana filia Adae Rydout senioris unum filium, and tres filias Bastardas, ut
patet inferius, and postea per longum tempus ipse per cohortationem
Ecclesiasticam desponsavit praedictum Julianam, contra voluntatem suam, quia
ipse Walterus amabat filiam praedicti domini Thomae, quae desponsata fuit
domino Roberto Turtevill, and post mortem ejusdem domini Roberti ipsa debuit
desponsari praedicto Waltero, sed perturbata fuit per praedictam Julianam, and
post mortem ejusdem Julianae ipse vixit solus sine muliere usque in ultimis
diebus vitae suae. Et quando Edwardus Rex primus post Conquestorem cepit crucem
eundo in terram Sanctam, ipse Walterus cepit crucem, and signatus fuit in carne
super humerum dextrum, sed non fecit peregrinationem dictam in vita sua, quia
Rex non fecit. Et postea in ultimo anno vitae suae Margeriam filiam Stephani de
Geyton, and ex ea procreavit unum filium, ut patet inferius. Et eadem Margeria
supervixit praedictum Walterum* per longum tempus, and praedictus Walterus
obiit pridie Call. Octobris, Anno Dom. millesimo CCC. VII. and Regni Regis
Edwardi filii Regis Edwardi primo, and sepultus est extra Capellam de
Sharnburn, ad caput orientale. Et praedicta Margeria obiit in pestilencia,
videlicet die Sabbati Idus Junii Anno Dom. millesimo CC. XLIX. and sepulta est
ad ostium australe Ecclesiae de Sharnburn.

Quartus filius Petri, and Ceciliae.
Philippus quartus filius praedictorum Petri and Ceciliae, fuit Armiger cum
domino Hugone Peche, and cum ipso fuit ad bellum de Jews, and Evesham contra
Regem and Edwardum filium suum, and postea in Insula de Ely cum praedicto
Hugone, propter quod ipse Philippus exulabatur ex Anglia, and obiit in Francia
ad villam, quae dicitur Sancta Maria de Pertico, and ibi duxit uxorem, and
suscitavit prolem, and ibi fuit tota vita sua.

Quintus filius Petri, and Ceciliae.
Robertus quintus filius praedictorum Petri and Ceciliae, fuit Armiger cum
domino Johanne de la Hay, and cum co fuit ad bellum de Jews, and Evesham
contra Regem, and Edwardum filium suum, and in Insula de Ely cum praedicto
domino Johanne, unde postea habuit pacem Regis, and venit ad hospitium ad
Andream

Filia Petri and Ceciliae.
Alicia filia praedictorum Petri and Ceciliae desponsata fuit Galfredo
Curtemanche seniori filio Galfredi Capellani filii Briani de Snetesham, and
antequam desponsabatur decepta fuit, ita quod fuit praegnans de praedicto
Galfredo, and habuit Galfredus Curtemanche junior, de quo Robertus..... Et post
matrimonium illa habuit tres filios and unam filiam, videlicet Andreas qui
obiit sine haeredibus, Robertus, Johannes and Johanna, quae nupta fuit apud
Shuldham. De Roberto secundo filio in matrimonio exivit Willielmus
Thesaurizarius Commit. de Warwick. and sex filiae, videlicet Alicia,..... Alicia
desponsata fuit Rogero de London Civi Coventriae, Beatrix, and Oliva desponsata
Willielmo Bishop de Sharnburn, and Johanna..... Et praedictus Petrus Bastardi
praedicti Petri.
de Sharnburn, habuit plures filios and filias Bastardos, quorum nomina
ignorantur nisi de tribus filiabus, videlicet Etheldreda, Christiana, and
Juliana, quae Galfredo Rydout seniori, de quo Galfredus, Juliana.

Et praedictus Petrus post mortem Ceciliae uxoris suae, and domini Andreae
fratris sui factus fuit miles in senectute sua de manu Hugonis de Aubeny,
Pincernae ultimi Comitis de integro Comitatu Arundelliae.

Modo dicendum est de exitu Andreae de Sharnburn secundi.

Prima filia Andreae secundi.
Andreas de Sharnburn secundus de Emma prima uxore sua habuit unam filiam, quae
vocabatur Alicia, quae habuit totam haereditatem praedicti Andreae patris sui
post mortem fratris sui junioris. Et praedicta Alicia primo desponsabatur
Jacobo Styward de Hulmo juxta mare, and secundo Ricardo de Gernestone Burgensi
Lenniae, and non habuit exitum de praedictis viris suis; sed obiit Lenniam in
Ecclesia Sanctae Margaretae, in uno Archo ex part Australi. Et idem Andreas
secundus de Christiana secunda uxore sua habuit unum filium, and duas filias,
videlicet Andreas tertius qui non fuit nisi de duobus annis vivente Filius
Andreae secundi.
patre suo, and non vixit post mortem patris sui, nisi duobus annis and dimidio,
and sic obiit sine haerede de corpore suo procreato, III. Non. Dec. An. Dom.
millesimo CCC. LXXXIV. and Regni Regis Edwardi filii Regis Henrici XIII.
incipiente, and sepultus fuit in Capella ad pedes patris sui extra parietem.
Secunda filia Andreae secundi.
Cecilia filia praedictorum Andreae and Christinae, obiit sine haerede in
puerili aetate sua cito, post mortem patris sui, vivente fratre suo supradicto.
Christiana filia predictorum Andreae and Christinae, obiit sine haerede in
puerili Tertia filia Andreae secundi*
aetate sua, vivente patre suo.

Bastardus Andrea^ (...).
Et praedictus Andreas secundus, antequam ipse habuit ullam uxorem, genuit unum
filium Bastardum, vocatum Johannem qui multum fuit probus and validus, and qui
fuit Armiger cum domino Johanne Ingoldsthorp seniori, and obiit cito post
mortem praedicti Andreae patris sui sine haerede.

Modo dicendum est de exitu Walt. de Sharnburn, tam ante matrimonium quam post
matrimonium. Walt. de Sharnburn ante matrimonium contractum inter ipsum and
Julianam primam uxorem suam genuit unum filium Bastardum nomine Petrum, qui
obiit ultra mare post mortem patris sui, videlicet ad Natales Domini, An. Dom.
millesimo CCC. XVII. and nunquam postea reversus est in patriam, nec habuit
uxorem, nec suscitavit prolem. Et similiter idem Walterus genuit de praedicta
Juliana, tres filias Bastardas ante matrimonium praedictum, videl. Rosa quae
desponsata fuit Adae Aymles de Holkam, de quibus Walterus..... Margareta, quae
nunquam habuit virum, sed unum filium Bastardum vocatum Walterum.

Agnes quae similiter nunquam habuit virum, sed unum filium Bastardum vocatum
Petrum, de quo Hugo. Et idem Walterus de Sharnburn de Margeria Andream quartum,
qui natus fuit VI. Kal. Nov. An. Dom. millesimo CCC. VII. videlicet per quinque
dies ante obitum patris sui and anno aetatis ejus XII. desponsavit Emmam filiam
Willielmi Gosselyn de Snetesham Capitalis Seneschalli domini Roberti de Monte
alto, domini de Castello de Rising and Seneschalli Cestriae anno aetatis
praedictae Emmae sexto, videl. die Dominica in Octab. Epiphaniae, An. Dom.
millesimo CCC. XIX. and postea ipse nutritus fuit cum praedicto domino Roberto,
and domina Emma uxore ejus. Et postquam ipse Andreas fuit plenae aetatis genuit
de praedicta Emma uxore sua plures filios and filias, ut patet inferius, and
eodem tempore ipse fuit Armiger, cum domino Thoma de Brotherton Commit. Norff.
and cum pluribus aliis dominis de Norff. in guerris Scociae, Gasconiae, and
Franciae, quousque idem Andreas die Mercurii pridie Non. Junii, An. Dom.
millesimo CCC. XLVI. cepit peregrinationem suam versus terram Sanctam de
Jerusalem, and in Societate praedicti Andreae fuit Mauritius de Dersyngham, and
Rodes, cum fratre Roberto Saleyns probo milite hospitalario and Mariscallo
hospitalis Sancti Johannis de Jerusalem in praedicta Insula de Rodes, and cum
praedictus Andreas fuit in partibus illis Rex Angliae devicit Francos apud
Cressy, and cepit per obsidionem villam de Caleys. Et tam cito quam ipse
Andreas venit ad Insulam de Cipro, remansit cum domino Arnaldo Vicecount de
Caremayne, qui ipsum Andream and Armandum de Aspays de villa Sanctae Mariae
Podiensis, fecit milites apud Sanctum sepulchrum in Ecclesia de Jerusalem, die
Sabbati XVI. Kal. Martii, An. Dom. millesimo CCC. XLVIII. in praesentia
Vicecomitis Nerbome, and aliorum proborum and nobilium militum de Francia,
Catelonia, and Alemannia, and ipse Andreas and Mauritius fuerunt apud Sanctam
Catherinam, and in Egypto toto tempore pestilentiae

Modo dicendum est de exitu domini Andreae de Sharnburn quarti, and dominae
Emmae uxoris suae. Andreas quintus filius praedictorum Andreae and Emmae non
vixit nisi per v. dies. Item alius Andreas filius secundus praedictorum Andreae
and Emmae uxoris suae, qui dictus fuit quintus Andreas natus fuit die Lunae IV.
Idus Augusti, An. Dom. millesimo CCC. XXVII. and ipse fuit Armiger ad bellum de
Cressy, and in obsidione de Caleys, cum Commit. de Warwick, tunc temporis
Marescallo Angliae, and ipse fuit ultra cum praedicto Comite usque Lancastriae
Seneschallo Angliae, and cum ipso Duce fuit in Britannia ad obsidionem
Civitatis Redonis, ubi ipse perculsus fuit de una petra minus grossa in capite
suo super bacenetum, unde ipse languebat post ea per unum annum post obsidionem
peractam quousque diem suam clausit extremum, and obut die Sabbati Non. Julii,
An. Dom. millesimo CCG. LVIII. anno aetatis ejus XXXI. and sepultus est in
Capella juxta Andream secundum.

Emma prima filia praedictorum Andreae and Emmae uxoris ejus nata fuit die
Lunae IV. Kal. Aug. An. Dom. millesimo CCC. XXVIII. and desponsata fuit Johanni
de la Rokele de Wymondham, die Lunae IX. Kal. Dec. An. Dom. millesimo CCC.
XLIX. Redonis in Britannia, ubi ipse Johannes obiit die Jovis VII. Kal. Feb.
An. Dom. millesimo CCC. LVI. and sepultus est ibidem in suburgo in Ecclesia
Sancti Stephani Prothomartiris ad Altar Beatae Mariae virginis juxta crucem ex
part Boreali. Et praedictus Johannes procreavit de praedicta Emma uxore sua
duos filios and duas filias, videlicet Thomas natus die Sabbati in festo Sancti
Barnabae, An. Dom. millesimo CCC. LI. Johannes qui non vixit nisi per dimidium
annum. Agnes nata......

Willielmus tertius filius praedictorum Andreae and Emmae, non vixit nisi per
Johannes quartus filius praedictorum Andreae and Emmae non vixit nisi per
dimidium annum. Alicia secunda filia praedictorum Andreae and Emmae, nata fuit
die Sabbati V. Kal. Nov. An. Dom. millesimo CCC. XXXV. and obiit in pestilencia
An. Dom. millesimo CCC. XLIX. and sepulta est apud Snetesham, in Capella ex
part Boreali Ecclesiae. Robertus quintus filius praedictorum Andreae and
Emmae, natus fuit die Veneris VI. Kal. Jan. An. Dom. millesimo CCC. XXXVI. and
obiit in eadem pestilencia, An. Dom. millesimo CCC. XLIX. and sepultus est
juxta praedictam Aliciam sororem suam. Item alius Willielmus filius sextus
praedictorum Andreae and Emmae, natus fuit die Lunae XI. Kal. Junii, An. Dom.
millesimo CCC. XXXIX.

Margareta tertia filia praedictorum Andreae and Emmae, nata fuit die Jovis
VII. Snetesham, juxta praedictum Robertum fratrem suum. Agnes quarta filia
praedictorum Andreae and Emmae, nata fuit die Dominica III. Non. Maii, An. Dom.
millesimo CCC. XLII. and obiit in pestilencia supradicta, and sepulta
Margaretam sororem suam.

Beata quinta filia praedictorum Andreae and Emmae, non vixit nisi per unum
annum and quarterium. Katherina sexta filia praedictorum Andreae and Emmae,
nata fuit die Mercurii VIII. Kal. Junii, An. Dom. CCC. XLV.

Christiana septima filia praedictorum Andreae and Emmae, nata fuit die Lunae
VIII. Kal. October. An. Dom. millesimo CCC. XLVII.

Walterus septimus filius praedictorum Andreae and Emmae, natus fuit die
Veneris, III. Id. Mar. An. Dom. millesimo CCC. LIVE. finiente.

Haec manu nupera inserta sum.
Modo dicendum est de exitu Willielmi filii praedictorum Andreae and

Willielmus habuit exitum de se legitime procreatum duas filias Claritiam and
Margeriam. Claritia fuit desponsata Johanni Toly, and idem Johannes Toly, and
Claritia habuerunt exitum de se legitime procreatum unam filiam nomine
Margaretam, quae modo desponsata est Ricardo Elliswyke, and praedicta Margeria
altera filiarum praedicti Willielmi de Sharnburn desponsata fuit Willielmo
Champeneys, and habuerunt exitus; modo iidem Willielmus Champeneys, and
Margeria and exitus eorum mortui sunt.

Item memorandum, quod Ric. Elliswyke Armiger, desponsavit Margaretam Toly
filiam and haeredem Johan. Toly Armigeri de Sharnburn, An. Dom. millesimo CCCC.
IV. and anno Regni Regis Henrici quinti quartodecimo genuit filium primogenitum
nomine Thomam Elliswyke, also nomine Thomam Sharnburn; praedictus Thomas
Sharnburn genuit Johannem Sharnburn primogenitum ex Jomena uxore sua, etc. ut
sequitur.

Item Robertus filius secundus praedictorum Ricardi and Margaretae, obiit sine
Nicholaus filius tertius praedictorum Ricardi and Margaretae fuit Hedham. Item
Margareta primogenita filia desponsata fiut Roberto Carwell generoso, and ex ea
genuit Robertum Carwell, and idem Robertus Carwell junior desponsavit Elianoram
Pynkebek, etc.

Item Thomas Sharnburn primus filius praedictorum Ricardi and Margaretae
desponsavit Jomonam Cherneys, servientem cum domina Margareta Regina Angliae,
and ex ea genuit Johannem Sharnburnum primum filium: and praedictus Thomas
Sharnburn, fuit hostiarius camerae, cum domina Margereta Regina Angliae, and
praedicta Jomona fuit domicell..... camerae cum domina Margereta Regina
Angliae, and obiit IV. die Febr. An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LVIII. and sepulta
est in Ecclesia Apostolorum Petri and Pauli in Sharnburn, in australi part sub
fenestra in Capella ejusdem.

Johannes primus filius praedictorum Thomae and Jomonae, natus fuit VIII. die
Julii. An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. XLIV.

Edwardus secundus filius praedictorum Thomae and Jomonae, natus fuit VIII.
Kal. Junii, and obiit in juvenili aetate septendecem annorum, and sepultus
Londoniae in pestilencia.

Thomas tertius filius praedictorum Thomae and Jomonae, natus fuit tertio Non.
Augusti, and obiit in puerili aetate, and sepultus est in Ecclesia Apostolorum
Petri and Pauli de Sharnburn.

Abhinc manu recentiore continuatur Code^ MS.
Margareta prima and ultima filia praedictorum Thomae and Jomonae, nata fuit
XI. Kal. Sept. and obiit in juvenili aetate, and sepulta est in Ecclesia
Sanctae Margaretae Virginis and Martyris de Lynn Episcopi, An. Dom. millesimo
CCCC. XLVIII.

Antonius quartus filius praedictorum Thomae and Jomonae, natus fuit pridie
Kal. Feb. and obiit in magna pestilencia cum magno sudore, anno aetatis suae
vicesimo sexto, An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXXV. and primo Regni Regis Henrici
septimi, and sepultus est Londoniae.

Johannes Sharnburn primus filius and haeres praedictorum Thomae and Jomanae
desponsavit Annam unam haeredum and filiam domini Johannis Curson militis, and
Johannae uxoris ejus de Billingsford Non. Feb. An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXI.
and anno XII. Regni Regis Edwardi quarti, and ex ea genuit duos filios and octo
filias, ut patet inferius.

Johanna prima filia praedictorum Johannis and Annae, nata fuit III. Kal. Apr.
An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXIII. Anno XIV. Regni Regis Edwardi quarti. Et
habuit ante matrimonium Robertum Sharnburn, and postea nupta fuit Gervasio
Kelfull de Sharnburn.

Henricus primus filius praedictorum Johannis and Annae, natus fuit die
dominica in festo Sancti Georgii Martyris, An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXIV.

Margareta secunda filia praedictorum Johannis and Annae, nata fuit IX. Kal.
Aug. An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXV. Anno Edwardi IV. XVI. and obiit juvenis.
Thomas secundus filius praedictorum Johannis and Annae, natus fuit Idibus Sept.
An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXVI. anno Regis Edwardi IV. XVII.

Jomona tertia filia praedictorum Johannis and Annae, nata fuit XVII. Kal. Jan.
An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXVII. Anno Regni Edwardi IV. XVIII. and sepulta est
in Sharnburn.

Anna quarta filia praedictorum Johannis and Annae, nata fuit Kal. Mar. An.
Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXVIII. Anno Regis Edwardi IV. XIX. and fuit monacha
professa in Commit. Norff. and obiit ibidem.

Elizabetha quinta filia praedictorum Johannis and Annae, nata fuit primo die
Jan. An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXX. anno Regni Edwardi quarti XXI. obiit in
juventute, and sepulta est in Sharnburn.

Elizabetha sexta filia praedictorum Johannis and Annae, nata fuit XVI. Kal.
Dec. An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXXI. and Regni Edwardi quarti XXII. Et postea
nupta fuit Edmundo Poget de Honingham in Commit. Norff. generoso.

Alicia septima filia praedictorum Johannis and Annae, nata fuit III. Idus Nov.
An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXXIV. anno secundo Regis Ricardi tertii.

Agnes octava filia praedictorum Johannis and Annae, nata fuit duodecimo Kal.
Feb. An. Dom. millesimo CCCC. LXXXVII. Anno Regis Henrici VII. III. and vixit
quatuor diebus, and sepulta est in Sharnburn.

Modo dicendum est de Henrico Sharnburn, primo filio and haerede praedicti
Johannis Sharnburn, and Annae uxoris suae. Qui Henricus cepit in uxorem
Elizabetham filiam, domini Ricardi Lewis milite in Commit. Essex. and habuit ex
ea exitum Thomam Sharnburn, de quo postea, and duos alios filios qui obierunt
in infantia sua. Hic Henricus fuit vir fortis and validus multumque versatus
inter Aulicos tempore Henrici octavi, qui quidem Rex ipsum Henr. Sharnburn
singulari quadam gratia and favore amplectens, primo fecit eum militem, deinde
le Provost Marshall, and postea Vice-Admirallum Angliae, misitque cum ad mare
navi viris and armis fortiter munita, ut perpulsaret, and a finibus nostris
perfugaret piratos and praedones praecipue ex Gallica gente, qui eo tempore
plurimum praedabantur in oris Angliae. In quo negotio viriliter quidem ipse
Henr. se gerebat quamvis sibi inutiliter successerit. Nam post multa a se
praeclare ac valide gesta tandem forte incidit in Admirallum Franciae, cum quo
ferocissime and crudelissime habuit pugnam, in qua plurimi ex utraque part
occisi fuerunt, quorum percipuus erat ipse dominus Henricus Sharnburn, and sic
finierunt dies ejus. Praedictus autem Thomas Sharnburn filius and haeres dicti
domini Henr. Sharnburn, jam tunc aetate XVIII. annorum erat cum patre suo in
navi in praedicta pugna, ubi ingens and insolitus bombardarum sonitus aures
suas ita obtudit, ut semper postea per totam vitam surdus remanserit. Serviebat
tamen Illustrissimae Principi dominae Mariae filiae primogenitae Regis Henrici
VIII. and ex ejus familia elegit sibi uxorem nomine Elizabetham Atwell unam ex
ancillis dictae principis, ex qua procreavit unum filium and duas filias, qui
omnes in infantia aut puerili aetate mortui sunt. Ipsa autem Elizabetha uxor
dicti Thomae Sharnburn, in partu unius dictorum liberorum spiritum spiravit
extremum XIII. die Feb. Anno Regis Henrici VIII. XXX. and sepultus est apud
Sharnburn. Sed praedictus Thomas brevi tempore post accepit aliam conjugem
nomine Blitham Brampton, filiam Johannis Brampton de Brampton in Commit. Norff.
Armigeri, quae peperit sibi quinque filios and duas filias, quorum primus erat
Christopherus Sharnburn qui natus fuit XII. die Oct. Anno Regni Henr. VIII. XXX
V. An. Dom. 1542. de quo postea.

Secundus erat Antonius Sharnburn qui obiit eodem die quo natus fuit, viz.
XXIV. Feb. anno Regis Henrici VIII. XXXV. 1543.

Tertius erat Dorothea Sharnburn quae nata fuit XX. die Nov. anno Henrici VIII.
XXXVII. 1545. Quae Dorothea primo nupta fuit Johanni Plumstede de Plumstede in
Commit. Norff. generoso, and post mortem dicti Thomae nupsit cuidam Roberto
Nichols, and habuit exitum ex utroque marito.

Quartus erat Henr. Sharnburn qui natus fuit IV. die Apr. anno Regis Edwardi
VI. primo An. Dom. 1547. Quintus erat Thomas Sharnburn qui natus fuit XXIII.
die Sept. Edwardi VI. secundo, qui obiit infantulus in Ingoldsthorp apud
nutricem suam.

Sextus autem fuit Anna Sharnburn quae nata erat III. die November. anno Edwardi
VI. tertio obiit in infantia apud Dersyngham, cum nutrice sua. Septimus erat
Antonius Sharnburn, qui ortns fuit XX. die Mar. anno Regni Edwardi VI. quinto
An. Dom. 155^. qui obiit etiam tertio die Jan. An. Dom. 16^4. anno aetatis suae
LIII. and quia celibatam degebat vitam nullum ex se (...) exitum. Praedictus
autem Thomas Sharnburn pater praedictorum liberorum in senectute sua saepe, and
vehementer gravabatur ex dolor lapidis in ^enibus and vesica, qui morbus ita
vires suas naturales debilitavit and mortem approximavit, ut XXII. die Mar. An.
Dom. 1559. diem clausit extremum. Et sepultus est in Capella Ecclesiae de
Sharnburn, atque praedicta Blitha uxor ejus supervixit eum, and habuit sibi pro
termino vitae suae totum manerium de Sharnburn, nupsitque cuidam Lanceloto
Smalperd generoso, cum quo degebat pluribus annis and supervixit eum per december
annos, ita ut omnes dies ipsius Blithae possunt computari ad octoginta, and sex
vel septem annos, obiit autem primo die Nov. An. Dom. 1602. and sepulta est in
Capella Ecclesiae de Sharnburn, loco ubi Thomas Sharnburn maritus suus sepultus
fuit.

Modo dicendum est de Christophero Sharnburn, primo filio praedictorum Thomae
and Blithae, qui postquam ad virilem aetatem pervenerat duxit in uxorem Annam
Veere, ex progeny Commit. Oxon. and consanguineam Thomae Ducis Norff. ex qua
procreavit Franciscum Sharnburn, de quo postea. Et praedictus Christopherus
obiit sexto die Julii, An. Dom. 1576. anno aetatis suae tricesimo quarto, and
sepultus in inferiori part Capellae Ecclesiae de Sharnb^rn prope parietem.

FINIS.
A DIALOGUE Concerning the COIN of the KINGDOM: Particularly, What great
Treasures were exhausted from England, by the usurped Supremacy of Rome.
Viandante. Selvaggio. VIand. It wants the beginning.
..... God amend them: But to return to the point that led us into this
digression, The excessive price of Meat; I pray let us now leave foreign
Countries, to look a little into our own; and tell me what you think to be the
cause, that the prices of things do so far exceed the proportion of ancient
times. For I have seen in an old Evidence, that a good Cow was in those days
sold for ten or twelve shillings; and at this day, I dare say such an one will
cost thirty or forty shillings, and so likewise of other things.


Selv. How sore soever Victualers, Innkeepers, Taverns, and such like, gripe
their Guests and Travelers; yet it is worth the examining whether the prices
of things be in any notable excess greater than in ancient times they have
been. For if we consider the value of the shilling then, with the value of the
shilling now; we shall find that their shilling was in value three of ours. For
then, out of an ounce of Silver they coined but sive groats, and after (because
money was scarce in the Land) the King caused ten groats to be made of an ounce.
So that by this means there grew to be twice as much money in the Land as was
before, and yet never the more of Silver. After, in the 36. of Henr. VIII. it
was enhaunc'd to four shillings the ounce; and now lastly unto five. So that
now our five shillings neither weighs nor is more worth in Silver, than their
sive groats of ancient time. And then it follows by necessary consequence,
that the Cow that you speak of to be sold for ten shillings, may now be well
worth thirty shillings, and yet no difference at all in their prices. For
admit, that the custom used in the time of the Conqueror, and since also, (as
appears by Doomsday-book, etc.) had continued until this day; to receive and
pay all sums of money according unto the weight and touch, without respect of
the Stamp or Coin; then was the price of your ten shilling Cow six ounces of
Silver, and ours of thirty shillings is so likewise, and not one penny more; and
sic de caeteris. But admit again, that the Queen's Majesty should reduce her
Coin to the former Rate of sive groats to the ounce, do you think that things
would then be sold for so many shillings or pounds, as they now be? I warrant
you, No. Then is it the unstable value of our former Coins, that so much
deceives a great number. For look into such things as have always retained an
uniform content, and you shall find little difference between our and the
former times, in giving one of those things for another. For at this day, you
may buy a Cow for as few Sheep as you could then, and a Horse for as few Cows.
The Land that was then let (with us in Norfolk for 8d. or 10d. the acre, and
now for eight groats or three shillings, was in those days also let for a
coumbe of Barley, and yet will not now be hired at so great a Rate.


Viand. You have answered me beyond my expectation; but yet not fully satisfied
me. For though I allow you these proportions, yet there remains a great
diversity. For I have read, that in old time, a quarter of Wheat was sold at
London for 2s. a fat Ox for a noble, a fat Sheep for 6d. or 8d. half a dozen of
Pigeons for a penny, a fat Goose for 2d. a Pig for a penny, and other things
after that Rate. And yet I grant that a Man in letting or selling his Land for
Corn, Cattle, and such like, or ware for ware, might in those days have as much
as he can get now.


Selv. The time you speak of was about the 10th. of Edw. III. and the like has
been at other times also. And when the cause hereof is well considered, you
shall find another right good reason, why things should be sold for more money
now, than they were then, and yet no whit at all dearer; and that is, the
plenty and abundance of plate and money, which at this day is to be found in
England, more than ever was in time past. For it is not our Commodities that be
grown dearer, but Gold and Silver are become more common and of less estimation
than they were wont. Insomuch, that whereas Plate was dainty in Great-men's
Houses, it ruffleth now even at the meanest Tables; and money is so little
respected, as we will give great store thereof 1 Kings chapter 10. ver. 21.
for a small Commodity. Like as in the days of Solomon, Silver was so plentiful,
as it was nothing esteemed: no, it was holden so base a metal, as Solomon
would not make one vessel thereof, no, not for his own service, much less for
the Temple of God. Yet afterward it became so scarce, as when 2 Chronicles. chapter 24.
Joash undertook to repair the Temple, he was driven to tax the people for it,
that thereby he might have wherewith to pay the workmen, and whereon to make
the holy Vessels. So, King Edw. III. having with effusion of much Treasure
ended his Scottish Wars, and determined to begin afresh with France, practiced
such means to recover money to supply these charges, as he got so much into his
hands, that Writers report, it was very scant and hard to be come by, through
the whole Realm. And hereupon proceeded the cheapness that you speak of; Men
were constrained to give a great deal of ware for a little money, because they
could have no other chaffer for their Commodities. But from these particular
Contingents, you must not raise general Consequents: for in that sort, I can
show unto you, that things were much dearer before the time you speak of, than
they are now. As in 22. Edw. I. a quarter of Wheat was sold for 30s. So in the
time of Richard I. all things were so exceeding dear for three or four years
together, that a quarter of Wheat was then sold for 18^. 8^. a strange price,
if you consider the alay of money then current; and this was almost 400. years
ago. Also in the year 1289. (Edw. I. 17.) Wheat was ordinarily sold for 2s.
the bushel, and continued at that price almost forty years together; rising
oftentimes to 10s. the bushel, and sometimes to a mark and above, as in the
year 1317. and in these days, other things bare price accordingly. I could put
you many Examples more, if these sufficed not: but sure I am of mind, that all
occurrents rightly weighed, things be little or nothing dearer than in ancient
time.


Viand. You say sore unto me, if you make it apparent that money were so
plentiful as you affirm it. For my own part, I am sure, I have little enough.


Selv. And I too: but that is not the matter: For what store of sap soever the
tree has, yet many spriggs and leaves do wither away for want thereof. The
great ones have it, I warrant you; and that ultra modum; but to our matter. Two
things are the causes thereof: It is brought in more plentifully than in
ancient times, and carried out more sparingly. Brought in more plentifully, in
respect of greater traffic that we have had within these latter years, even to
all places in the World; by which we have uttered our own Commodities at the
dearest; and fetched the foreign from the original places, which with far
greater charge we were wont to buy at second hand.


Viand. Yea, marry, Sir: the less we have of some of that trafficking, the
better (I think) for England. For by this means, they carry from us our good
Corn, Wool, Cloth, Copper, Lead, Tinn, and such like rich Commodities, and the
sustenance of our Country; and return us for them excess of Lawn, Camrick,
Plums, Spice, Suckets, and other lascivious trumpery, whereby effeminate
delicacie is crept in amongst us, and our warlike reputation put in peril to be
lost. This kind of traffic may well be termed Glauci and Diomedis permutatio.
Does the wealth and money you speak of, come into England by this means?


Selv. Nothing less. There be other good merchandise enough; as Pitch, Tar,
Iron, Copper, Deal, Madder, Woad, Cutchaneale, and such like; and yet those you
speak of, are in some measure necessary. But by our traffic into foreign
Countries, though we many times bring home light and frivolous toys, yet they are
often accompanied with Gold and Silver, both in Coin and Bullion. Besides, you
know that the Treasure (according to my capacity) is infinite, which in these
later years has been unshipp'd in England.


Viand. True; but goes it not out as merrily (think you) as it comes in? or
not so fast, as it did in times past?


Selv. That is the other point to be considered of; and, I know by certain
speeches uttered in the last Parliament, that her Majesty's occasions to
disperse it, are exceeding great and urgent: yet a principal part thereof
runs (as in a circle) up and down the Land. And though she sends much beyond
the Seas, for entertainment of her Bands and Garrisons, and executing of her
other Royal purposes; yet does she therein but as all her Renowned Progenitors
have done before her: For neither England, nor any other Realm in Europe, have
ever wanted this kind of issue. But the reasons that make me think that our
wealth should continue with us better now than in times past it has done; are,
for that the Roman-coffers are not now glutted (as they have been) with
English-treasure continually flowing into them. For it is a world to consider
the huge stocks of money, that those cozening Prelates have heretofore extorted
out of her Majesty's Kingdoms, by their Antichristian and usurpt Supremacy.
As, by Pope Innocent constraining King John to redeem his Crown at his hands,
and to take it for ever in farm, for the yearly rent of 1000. marks, to be paid
to him and his Successors: By causing Henry III. to maintain his wars against
Frederick the Emperor and Conrade King of Sicil: By drawing from our Kings many
contributions and benevolences: By laying upon their Subjects, as well temporal
as spiritual, tenths and taxes, in most ravenous manner, and that very often.
(So that in the time of Henry III. the Realm was by such an extreme tax
mightily impoverished, as our Chronicles witness; as also at many other times
since and before. For when the Pope was disposed to use money, he would tax our
people as if they had been his natural Subjects; by many Congratulations of the
Clergy, as 11000. marks at one pull to Pope Innocent IV. by private
Remembrances from single Bishops, as 9500. marks from the Archbishop of York
to Pope Clement V. in An. 34. or 35. Edw. I. and from diverse of them jointly
6000. marks to the foresaid Innocent.) By their rich Revenue of the
First Fruits and Tenths, as well of the Archbishopricks, as of all other
Spiritual Livings; now reannext unto the Crown by the Parliament, in the first
of her Majesty: By Installing, Consecrating, and Confirming Bishops: By dealing
Benefices: By appellations to the Church of Rome: By giving definitive
Sentences: By distributing heavenly Grace: By granting Pardons and Faculties:
By dispensations of Marriages, Oaths, and such like: By selling their blessed
trumpery, and many such other things that I cannot reckon, whereof that
merchandising Prelate knows full well how to make a Commodity: according to
the saying of Mantuan; -- Venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria sacra, Coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est Venale, Deusque.


All this considered, and that the sums of money by them received before the
time of Henry VIII, were (according to the value of our Coin at this day) three
times as much, as before is showed; you must needs confess that the fat of the
Land larded the Roman dishes, whilst our selves teer'd upon the lean-bones.
Besides, it must not be forgotten, that one tenth granted to the Pope,
impoverisht the Realm more than ten unto the King. For what the King had, was
at length returned again among the Subjects, little thereof going out of the
Land: (much like the lifeblood, which though it shifteth in diverse parts, yet
still continues it self within the body.) But whatsoever came into St. Peter's
pouch, was locked up with the infernal key; Et, ab infernis nulla est redemptio.
England might lick her lips after that; it came no more among her people. Thus,
we were made the Bees of Holy-Church; suffered to work and store our hives as
well as we could; but when they waxed any thing weighty, his Legates were sent
to drive them and fetch away the honey. Yea, if his Holiness were sharp set
indeed, he would not stick to use a trick of Husbandry, rather burn the Bees
than want the honey. I may tell you too, his Legates and Nuncio's were ever
trim fellows at licking of the hive; as in our Chronicles you may read
abundantly.


Viand. You have made the matter so plain, that I must needs grant that our
treasure goes not out of the Land in any comparable measure, as it did in
times past. For as you say, though these actions of the Low Countries, France,
Portugal, and other places, has somewhat sucked us; yet I consider that we
have ever had such a vent, even in the several days of our Kings, as in the
time of Queen Mary, King Edw. VI. King Henry VIII. etc.


Selv. Their occasions indeed are best known unto us, because many men living
were witnesses thereof. But I will recite unto you cursorily somewhat of the
rest, that you may the better be satisfied that it is no novelty in England.
And for to begin with Henry II. what store of treasure (think you) was by him
and his wasteful sons (whereof two, namely Henry and John were Kings as well as
himself) daily carried into France, Flanders, Saxony, Sicil, Castile, the
Holy Land, and other places; sometime about their wars and turbulent affairs,
other some time for Royal expense about meeting, feasting, and entertaining the
French King, the Pope, foreign Princes, and such other occasions, the
particular whereof were too long to recite. But we may well think, that England
must needs sweat for it in those days, to feed the riotous hands of three
several Kings, spending so much of their time on the other side the Seas, as
they did. The like was done by Richard I. about his ransom Chron. fol. 126.
and business with the Emperor and Leopold Duke of Austria, about his wars in
France and the Holy Land, where it is said, that by estimation he spent more in
one month, than any of his predecessors ever did in a whole year.

By Henry III. about the affected Kingdom of Sicil, and his wars in Gascoigne,
and other parts of France, and in bounty to strangers. He at one 22^. 620.
time sent into France, at the direction of the Poictovins, 30. barrels of
Starling Coin, for payment of foreign Soldiers; and at another time, these his
wasteful expenses being cast up, the sum amounted to 950000. marks, which
after the rate of our allay, increases to --

By Edw. I. about his Actions of Guien, Gascoigne, France, Flanders, and the
Conquest of Scotland, and the striking of a League with Adolph the Emperor, Guy
Earl of Flanders, John Duke of Brabant, Henry Earl of Bar, Albert Duke of
Austria, and others, against the French King, and Earl Jo. of Henault his
partaker.

By Edw. III. about his Victories and designs in France and elsewhere; which
exhausted so much treasure, as little or none almost remained in the Land; as
before is showed.

By Henry IV. about the stirs of Britain, and in supportation of the
confederate faction of Orleance.

By Henry V. about his Royal Conquest of France.

By Edw. IV. in aiding the Duke of Burgundy, and in revenging himself upon the
King of France.

By Henry VII. about his wars in France; in annoying the Flemings; in assisting
the Duke of Savoy, and Maximilian King of the Romans.

I need not speak of Henry VIII. whose foreign Expenses as they were exceeding
great, so they are sufficiently known to most men. Neither have I more than
lightly run over the rest; who, besides these that I have spoken of, had many
other foreign charges of great burden and much importance, and yet not so much
as once touched by me; as Marriage of their Children with foreign Princes,
Treaties of Peace between their Neighbors, Congratulations, Embassages, and
such like.


Viand. But what moves you to let slip King John, Edward II. Richard II. Henry
VI. and Richard III.


Selv. Not for that they were free from foreign Expenses, which is not
possible; for it oppressed them all: but for that most of them omitted such
necessary charge, as in policy they ought to have undergone, both for
strengthening themselves with Friends, and weakening their suspected Enemies;
such as, when occasion served, were like to do them damage. For if Edw. III.
had not by this means fortified himself with the alliance and friendship of the
noble Knight Sir John of Henault, the Dukes of Brabant and Gelderland, the
Archbishop of Colein, the Marquess Gul^ck, Sir Arnold de Baquetien, the Lord
Walkenbargh and others; and also greatly impai^'d the power of the French King,
by winning the Flemings from the obedience of the Earl of Flanders (his assured
friend), and by procuring the stay of much of the aid by him expected out of
the Empire, Scotland, and other places; he had not only failed in his French
attempts, but also put his Kingdom of England in hazard by the Scots, who were
sure of all the help and backing, that France could any way afford them. So,
had it not been for the aid and friendship of the French King, the Earls of
Bullogne, St. Paul, the Gascoines, and other foreigners; Henry III. had been
bereaved of his Kingdom by his own Subjects; which, notwithstanding he held
with great difficulty. So the rest likewise. But on the contrary part, the
others whom you named, neglecting this right precious (though costly) ground
work; not only wanted it when need required; but with the ruin of their
People, State, and Kingdom, lost their Crown and dearest lives, by the infernal
hands of cursed Murderers; their rebellious Subjects getting once the better
hand.


Viand. But Edw. II. used means also to have procured the amity and assistance
of diverse foreigners, as the Duke of Britain, the Lord Biskey, the Lady Biskey
(Governess of the King of Castile and Leon) James King of Arragon, and others.
And Rich. II. sought the like of the hands of the French King; and so the rest
likewise of others.


Selv. True: not examining the dependencies of time present, they imagined in
their prosperity that things to come would ever have good success; and
therefore deferred still the doing of it, till extreme necessity compelled them
to it: and then their Estates being utterly desperate and ruinated, no man
willingly would lend them aid or ear. Knowing, that when the fury of the
disease has once possessed the vital places, it is then too late to apply
Physic. This reason made the Princes you speak of, to refuse King Edward II.
And as for Richard II. when the French King saw how he was entangled and
overladen with dangerous Rebellions and Divisions of his Nobles and Commons at
home; war in Scotland, Flanders, Spain, Portugal, Ireland; sending forces
against the Infidels; releiving the expelled King of Armenia; and many other
such turbulent affairs: he then thought (and truly) that there was more to be
gotten by being his Enemy than his Friend; and taking advantage of that
opportunity, defied him also, and warred upon him. So that King Richard, wholly
void of aid and hope, fell into the hands of his proud Barons, and lost both
Crown and Life. In like miserable sort stood the case with Henry VI. For being
once descended to the lowest exigent, who almost durst relieve him or any of
the rest; for fear (as our Proverb says) of pulling an old house upon his own
head! Whereas, if in their flourishing estate, they had employed their treasure
to encounter future perils being yet afar off, they had (no doubt) securely
held their Crowns, and perhaps without much business illuded all the practices
of their Enemies drawing nearer. Had Richard II. at the time when being in
France, he bestowed the value of 10000l. in gifts upon the fickle French King,
stayed there and employed the other 300000. and odd marks (by him also wasted
at that bravery) in gaining the amity of his neighbor Princes, to serve his
turn when need should be; it is not unlikely but afterward it might have saved
all the rest. For it is a good rule that is taught us in the art of Fencing, to
break the blow or thrust that might endanger us, as far from our Bodies as we
can. For, as I said before, when things be drawn to the last period, the time
of help is past, according to the saying of Hecuba to her betrayed husband,
being about to arm himself. -- Quae men's tam dira, miserrime conjux,
Impulit his cingi telis? aut quo ruis? (inquit)
Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis
Tempus eget; non si ipse meus nunc afforet Hector.


Most Royal therefore are the Providence and Expenses of her Excellent Majesty;
who (as it were with Linceus eyes) looking into the lowest secrets of the
practices of her Enemies, has not only for these 36. years utterly cancelled
and made them frustrate; but foreseeing also what mighty consequences may
depend on mean beginnings, omitteth no diligence to defeat them whilst they are
yet in the shell; or so to environ the mark whereat they are levelled, as being
hatched, they shall be able to perform nothing. Knowing it to be far greater
wisdom to preserve the body, (whilst it is sound) from all infirmities, than by
admitting a dangerous disease, to gain the credit of an excellent cure. And
though money be the Blood wherein the Life of all Commonwealths, as in a nest, is
cherisht; yet nature teaches that to preserve health and cure an impostumate
disease, we ought to let blood out, and that sometimes in great abundance. And,
as Themistocles said, Pecunia nervus belli, (money is also the sinews of war;)
and look how necessary Peace is in a Commonwealth, so necessary is War to
beget Peace; for Peace is Belli filia, (the daughter of war.) But to return to
our matter: lest we fare like the unskilful hounds, that undertake a fresh
hare, when they have hunted the first till she be almost spent.

It appears by that that has been said, that a main Port by which our
treasure has been vented from us heretofore, is now shut (God be thanked) and
that instead thereof no new is opened. So that thereby our store must needs
remain better by us than it has, and we by consequence must be the richer. It
is also to be added, that whereas in former times, much of the treasure that
came into the land was buried up in superstitious employments, as about Images,
Shrines, Tabernacles, Copes, Vestiments, Altar-cloaths, Crucifixes,
Candlesticks, etc. by means whereof, the Commonwealth became no whit richer,
than if that part so employed, had never come within the Land: Now we do not
only retain that Idolatrous charge still in our purses, (which makes us much
the wealthier) but the rest also (which for many hundred years together was so
employed) is now to our greater enrichment returned again amongst us, by
dissolution of these Popish Ceremonies.


Viand. You may also reckon the money given to maintenance of Priests, Monkery,
Lights, Obits, Anniversaries, and all the plate and treasure of the Clergy at
that time, to be of the same sort.


Selv. Chron. fol. 292. b. 50.
That did Edward the first well consider: and therefore to the end that he
might dig it out of the grave, and bring it abroad again among the people that
had need thereof; he suffered the matter to be so handled by one of his
Treasurers, that certain Captains appointed to work the feat, placing their
Soldiers in every quarter through the Realm, made search at one time (in July
at three of the clock in the afternoon) for all such money, were it hid or laid
up in hallowed places; and taking the same away, brought it unto the King; who
dissembling the matter (as he that stood in need) excused the act done by his
Treasurer, and thought it no offense, but rather a good work. Besides all this,
there is yet another means whereby the Treasure of our Land must needs be much
increased: and that is by diverse good Laws and Statutes, made both for causing
it to be brought into the Realm, and also for containing it within the lists of
the same, when it is come. And that is by the Stat. 14. Edw. III. whereby it
was enacted, that every man (denizen or stranger) that should transport any
wool out of the Land, should find sufficient sureties to bring again unto the
King's Exchange, for every sack of wool transported, plates of Silver to the
value of two marks.

And by the Statute of 3. Henry V. (confirmed and quickened by 32. Hen. VI.)
which provided, that every Merchant-stranger, buying wool in England, not
coming to the Staple to be sold, shall bring to the Master of the Mint of the
Tower of London, of every sack, one ounce of Bullion of Gold: and in the same
manner, of three pieces of Tin, one ounce of Bullion of Gold, or the value in
Bullion of Silver, upon pain of forfeiture of the same Woolls and Tin, or the
value thereof, to the King.

It is provided also for containing of money within the Land, that all
Merchant-strangers shall employ all the money received by them within this
Realm, upon the Merchandise and Commodities of this Realm, (deducting their
reasonable expenses;) and that they shall give sufficient surety for doing
hereof, and the trespasser to forfeit and be punished grievously, as in the
Statutes is contained; 3. Hen. VII. affirming and enlarging, 14. Edw. IV. and
many other of like effect. And by 4. Hen. VII. that no man dwelling in England,
shall pay or deliver wittingly to any Merchant or other born out of the King's
obedience, for any Merchandise or Wares, or in any other wise, any Gold coined,
Plate, Vessels, Bullion, Jewels of Gold or Silver, upon pain of forfeiture
thereof. And by 14. Edw. IV. (affirmed by 4. Hen. VII. and for a time continued
by 1. and 3. Henry VIII. with a mitigation of the bloody penalty) all men,
except such as had the King's License, or were dispensed with by those
Statutes, were utterly inhibited from carrying out of the Realm any manner of
Coin, plate, vessel, massy Bullion, jewels of Gold or Silver. Which Law, and
many other of the like effect, though they continue not now in force, yet the
fruit thereof remains to us still, as Children enriched by their Fathers
sparings.

Besides, it is not altogether to be passed in silence, that our treasure is
somewhat increased by the Gold and Silver tried out of our own Mines here in
England. Which, though it be little or nothing, in respect that in this latter
age we have wimbl'd even into the bowels of Plutus's Treasury (the Western
Indies,) yet is it so much, as our Historiographers, both new and ancient, have
thought it worth the noting; and all our Kings from time to time have made
especial account of; as well appears by a multitude of Leases thereof granted
by them to many noble Personages, extant in the Checquer Records; and also by
the process and argument of the Earl of Northumberland's Case concerning a
Copper-mine, 10. Eliz. which in Plowden's Commentaries is at large reported.
But be it little or great, Many littles (as our Adage says) make a great, and
continual accession amasseth at length to a mighty thing; as is well seen in
the Hill Testacchio in Rome, which standing in a plain, and being about half a
mile in compass, and exceeding in height any Tower in the Town-wall, is said to
have been made of the shards of the potts wherein the tribute-mony was brought
to Rome; or as pleases rather the more Learned sort, of broken potts thrown
out of the VII. College of Potters, built by Numa Pompilius. But be it the one
or other, the semblance serves my turn, and there is an end.


THE PLACES or DWELLINGS OF THE ARCHBISHOPS and BISHOPS of this Realm, Now or
of former times; in which Houses their several Owners have Ordinary
Jurisdiction, and be as parcel of their Diocese, as is recited in the Stat. of
33. Hen. VIII. ca. 31. although they be situate within the precinct of another
Bishop's Diocese.
Canterbury
1. THe Lords Archbishops of CANTERBURY of long time enjoyed and do enjoy
Lambeth-house; as appears in Historia Cantuariensium Archiepiscoporum, set
forth (as is thought) by Dr. Ackworth in the Lord Archbishop Parker's time.
The which house was never severed from the Lord Archbishop's See of
Canterbury, since the annexion thereof to that See.

Rochester.
2. The house at Lambeth-marsh, commonly called Carlisle-house, was the Bishop
of ROCHESTER'S Palace until about 26. Hen. VIII. as appears in the foresaid
Historia Cantuariensis, and also in the Act of Parliament of 22. Hen. VIII. ca.
9. made against poisoning; whereby it does appear that the house of John Bishop
of Rochester was at Lambeth-marsh. But afterward, about An. 27. Hen. VIII. or
after, the same (being some ways the Kings) was conveyed to Robert Aldridge
Bishop of CARLISLE and his Successors, in Carlisle.
exchange for his houses near Ivie-bridge, (now the Earl of Worcester and
Salisbury's) and other houses there toward the Street, and of a yearly Rent of
16l. or thereabouts, out of those houses given to the Bishop of Carlisle and his
Successors, for those houses formerly called Carlile-place. But the said Bishop
Aldridge leas'd the house of Lambeth-marsh for some small and not valuable
Rent, for diverse years yet enduring.

Rochester.
3. The Bishop of ROCHESTER had given for his Palace to dwell in, certain
houses lately called Rochester-house near adjoining to Winchester-place, and
sometime (as it is reported) parcel of the possessions of the Priory of St.
Swithins in Winchester; but that place is lately divided into several little
dwellings.

Winchester.
4 WINCHESTER- Place, with the liberty of the Prison of the Clynke and Bancke,
belonged and does belong to the Bishop of Winchester; and the house was in Edw.
the Sixth's time, conveyed to the Marquess of Northampton, who builded the
gallery there: but in Queen Mary's time, the same was restored to that See,
where it so continues.

York.
5. The Lord Archbishop of YORK'S house was the White Hall, much enlarged and
reedify'd by the Cardinal Wolsey then Archbishop of York; as by the Arms
remaining in wood, stone, and glass, in sundry places of that house, may
appear. And after the said Cardinals conviction of Praemunire, and Death, the
same was made parcel of the King's Palace at Westminster, by purchase from the
Archbishop of York, as appears by the Stat. of 28. Hen. VIII. ca. 12. But
afterward, until anno 2. or 3. of Queen Mary, the Archbishop of York had no
other dewlling place near London, in right of his See or by reason of his
Archbishopric, but the house at Battersey; and then Queen Mary gave to
Archbishop Heath and his Successors, the late Duke of Suffolk's house, called
Suffolk-place in Southwark, which the Archbishop of York (by confirmation of
the Dean and Chapter there) shortly after sold away to others, and purchased to
his See York-place, where the Lord Chancellor remains, together with the
houses adjoining to the Street. Which house was sometime the Bishop of
Norwich's Place; and the same, Norwich
among all or the greatest part of the possessions of the Sea of Norwich, about
an. 27. Hen. VIII. were conveyed to the King by a private Act of Parliament, in
recompense of the union of the Monastery of St. Bennets, and the possessions
thereof to that Bishopric; being of far better value than the ancient Lands of
the Bishopric of Norwich assured to the King, as is recited in the Statute of
32. Hen. VIII. ca. 47. whereby the Bishop of Norwich is made Collector of the
Tenths of his Diocese, as other Bishops were; being formerly freed thereof by
the said private Statute of 27. Hen. VIII. Which said now York-place, by Hen.
VIII. was conveyed in fee to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk; and after the
death of the said Duke's sons, the coheirs of the Duke's sons sold the same to
the said Archbishop Heath and his Successors.

Norwich.
6. But the Bishop of NORWICH was limited by the said private Act of 27. Henry
VIII. to enjoy perpetually in succession, a Prebend in the Free-Chappel of St.
Stephens at Westminster, after dissolved by the Statute of Dissolution of
Colleges and Free-Chappels 1. Ed. VI. and the house thereto belonging in
Chanon-row, whereof then was incumbent one Knight; but the house is said to be
Leas'd for some small Rent by the Bishop of Norwich to Sir John Thinn Knight in
Edw. the Sixth's time, for many years enduring. And that the house now called
York-place, was belonging to the Bishop of Norwich, is proved by a Case 21.
Edw. IV. fol. 73. in a Presentment against the Bishop of Norwich in the King's
Bench, for annoyance of a way inter hospitium Episcopi Norwicensis and
Dunelmensis, in parochia Sancti Martini in Campis.

Durham.
7. DURHAM-HOUSE (as appears in that Case) was the Bishop of Durham's house;
and Bishop Tonstal about the 26 th. of Hen. VIII. conveyed the same to the King
in Fee: and King Henry VIII. in recompense thereof, granted to the Sea of
Durham Coldharborrowe, and certain other houses in London. And after, Edw. VI.
about an. 2. granted Durham-house to the Lady Elizabeth his Sister for life, or
until she be otherwise advanced. After, the Bishopric of Durham, by a private
Statute not printed, of 7. Edw. VI. was dissolved, and all the possessions
thereof given to King Edw. VI. who shortly after conveyed in Fee the said
Bishop's late house at Coldharborrowe, and other houses in London, to Francis
Earl of Shrewsbury and his heirs. And after, the 2d. Mariae ca. 3. The Stat. of
7. Edw. VI. for dissolving that Bishopric is repealed; but the Mansion House
of Coldharborrowe and other Tenements in London, so granted to the said Earl,
be confirmed. And the Bishop, by that Act, prays a recompense from the Queen
at his charge. Whereupon, Queen Mary, about anno V. or VI. of her reign,
grants to the said Bishop of Durham, her reversion of Durham-place in
succession; which coming into possession by the death of Queen Elizabeth, the
late Bishop of Durham (now Lord Archbishop of York) entered into and enjoyed
the same in the right of his See, by opinion of the chief Justices of the Land,
referred by the King, being opposed by Sir Walter Rawleigh; as likewise does
the now Bishop of Durham.

Lichfeild.
8. The Bishop of LICHFEILD and COVENTRY (of old called the Bishop of Chester,
before the new erection of the new Bishopric of Chester) had his Place where
Somerset House is builded.

Worcester. Landaff.
9. 10. As likewise the Bishops of WORCESTER and LANDAFF, had there sometime a
house; as Stow in his Book of Survey of London says. But the said three
Bishops Places, together with a Parish Church called Straunde-Church, and the
greatest Inn of Chancery called Straunde-Inn, belonging to the Middle Temple,
were defaced without recompense to any of the said three last mentioned
Bishops, Parish Church, or Inn of Chancery: Other than to the Bishop of
WORCESTER; who had in respect of his former house, a house in the White Friars,
which he enjoys.

Bath and Wells.
11. Arondell-house (now the Lord Admiral's) was the Bishop of BATH and
WELLS'S; and was assured, in Edw. VI. time, to Admiral Seymer; and is now quite
severed from that Bishopric without recompense.

Exeter.
12. Likewise, the Bishop of EXETER'S Place, after called Paget, Leicester and
Essex-house, of the several Owners of the same. And it is thought the Bishop of
Exeter has likewise no recompense for the same, of any other house in or near
London.

Sarum.
13. The Bishop of SARUM'S Place, (now called Dorset-house, before called
Sackvile-house, and of former time Salisbury Court, being in long Lease made by
Bishop Capon, who was Bishop there in Hen. VIII. Edw. VI. and Queen Mary's
time) was exchanged temp. Reginae Elizabethae, by the great Learned Reverend
Father Bishop Jewel, for recompense of good value in Lands in his Diocese, or
elsewhere in the West Country.

St. David's.
14. The Bishop of St. DAVID'S Place, was near adjoining to Bridewell, upon the
ditch that runs to Fleet-bridge into the Thames; and was granted in Fee-farm
for a Mark Rent (temp. Edw. VI.) to Dr. Hewick the Physician; under which
purchase the same is now enjoyed.

Hereford.
15. The Bishop of HEREFORD'S Place (as Stow in his Survey of London, page 357.
says) is in the Parish of St. Mary de Monte alto or Mount-halt in London; of
which Bishops Patronage the said Church also is; which Place is in the tenure
of the Bishop of Hereford or his Tenants.

London Ely
16. 17. The Bishop of LONDON'S Place at Paul's, was never severed from the
Bishop's possession. And likewise ELY Place, from the Bishop of that See; other
than such part thereof, as the late Lord Chancellor Hatton had by Lease for
many years, from the late Bishop Cox.

Bangor.
18. The Bishop of BANGOR'S house is, or lately was, Mr. Aleworth's house in
Shoe-lane, by a Lease from the Bishop of that See, temp. Edw. VI. yiedling some
Rose, or other small or not valuable Rent.

Lincoln.
19. The Bishop of LINCOLN'S Place, was Southampton-house in Holborn, conveyed
temp. Edw. VI. to the Lord Writoheseley (then Lord Chancellor) in fee, for
which the Bishop has no other house in or near London, as is thought.

Chichester.
20. The Bishop of CHICHESTERS Place (or Palace, as Matthew Paris in his
Chronicle calls it, reciting the story of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury
visiting St. Bartholomews) did at that time lie in that house which was in
Chancery Lane; where Sir Richard Read sometime a Master of the Chancery, and
Mr. Atkinson the Counselor at Law and others, dwelt and dwell in; and is said
to be in Lease from the Bishop's Predecessors for diverse years. What the Rents
reserved yearly be, the Lease will show the same.

S Asaph
21. The Bishop of St. ASAPH never had Place at or near London, that I can
learn of; neither in the valuation of the Sea (where all his Possession; and
Jurisdictions be valued in the First-fruit-office) is there mention of any such
Place; neither does the now Bishop of that See know the same.

Isle of Man
22. The Bishop of the ISLE OF MAN (called Sodorensis Episcopus) although the
same be an ancient Bishopric, yet was he never Lord of the Parliament of
England; having no Chapter or other Clergy, but only an Archdeacon and all the
Incumbents of the several Parishes of that Isle: And before the said Statute of
33. Hen. VIII. was neither a Suffragan of the Province of

(...) Were wont in former times to ride on Mares or Mules. 119. Prohibited to
take cognizance of Wills. 129. Blackney Harbor. 151. Blicking. 151. The birth
place of Q. Anna Bullen. ibid.
Bocland, what. 12. Not subject to Homage. 35.
Bondmen, anciently not valued or rated. 15. Reputed only as part of their
Master's substance. 11* 15.
Boors, who. 14. Bouthorpe. 157. Bramsil. 108, 109. Brancaster. 147, 148.
Breakspear (Nich.) converted Norway. 139. Made Cardinal and Pope. ibid.
Breclys. 161. Brennus a Britain invades Greece. 3. His attendants. ibid.
Brictrick a Saxon Thane. 22. Britains, none of 'em remaining after
Cadwallador's departure. 100. Their Laws altered by the Romans. 101.
Bronholm. 152. Brotherton (Tho.) Earl of Norfolk and Earl Marshal of England.
167. When he died. 168.
Buckenham. 158. Burg-Castle. 155. Burghesses, of old, not called to consult of
State-matters. 64, 65. Burghbote and Brugbote. 17, 22, 40. Burnham in Norfolk.
149. Burnham-East in Com. Bucks. 23. By, what it signifies. 3. 154. Bylaws. 3,
154.
C
Cadwallader Prince of the Britains, fled into Armorica. 100. Calthorp. 151.
King Canutus, how he published his Laws. 61. His Constitution touching
Festivals. 79.
Capet (Hugh) usurpt the Kingdom of France. 5 He grants his Nobility a
perpetual enjoyment of their Feuds and Honors. ibid. and 14.
Capitales plagii. 52. Capitanei Regis and regni. 58. Caput feodi, aut
Capitaneus feodi. 11. Carbrook. 161. Carolus Calvus Emperor and King of
France, his Synodical Edict. 54, 55. Carolus Magnus or Charlemaigne, divided
his Territories between his three Sons. 128. Castle-acre. 141. Castle-rising in
Norfolk, the Parson has the Probate of Wills in that Town. 130. Caston. 151.
Castor. 155, 156. Ceorls, who. 12. Of two sorts. 14. The chiefest part of their
profits redounded to their Lords. ibid. Their service no bondage. ibid. Their
valuation and privileges. ibid. Not capable of a Knights Fee. ibid.
Champain in France. 128. Chancery-Court. 94. Charta de Foresta. 109, 114.
Charter, the first by whom made and where kept. 8. Saxon Charters usually writ
in that Language. ibid.
Charters of Thane-lands granted by several Kings. 19, 20. Chichley (Henr.)
Archbishop of Canterbury canonized St. George's day. 93. The occasion of that
Constitution ibid.
Chindavintus King of the western Goths, his Law concerning Wills. 130.
Cingulum, quo sensu accipiendum. 185. Cinque Ports, privileges granted to them
by King Edward the Confessor, etc. 26. Clacklose-Hundred. 139. Clergymen
forbidden to use hunting, 109, 112, 113. and seq. When they took upon them to
prove Wills. 129. Prohibited by Justinian to meddle with those matters. ibid.
Cley*harbour. 151. De Clifford (Rob.) Marshal of England. 167. K. Canute's
Charter of donation to the Thane Orc. 20. Coin of England, in Q. Elisabeth's
time. 203, etc. Colloquia. 65. Comites, who, and why so called. 3. Commendati.
35. Congham. 145. Conradus Salicus made a Constitution touching Feuds. 4, 5.
Consecration, a strange one of Eadmer a Monk of Canterbury. 119. Consilium
regni. 60. Controversies, among the ancient Britains, by whom judged. 74.
Conveyance of lands, how made by the Saxons. 8. Cosshering, what. 60. Cossey.
157. Counties in England. 5. County-Courts how often kept. 54. Were proclaimed
a sennight beforehand. ib. Earl's County and Bishop's Diocese had but one
limit. 130, 131. Ecclesiastical and Secular causes there decided. 131.
Court Baron. 4. Its Original. 51.
Court Leet. 51. Sometimes granted to the Lords of Mannours. ibid.
Court-Christian or Ecclesiastical, when it sprung up. 131, 132. High Courts of
Justice, why they sit not in the Afternoons. 89, 90. Why they sit not all some
days. 90, 91. Why they sit on the Rogation days. ibid. Why on some Festivals
and not on others. 91 The Admiralty-Court, why always open. 94. Chancery-Court
said to be always open. ib.
Cowshil. 153. Creak. 149. Cromer. 152. Crostwick. 153. Crowner's Office, not
before the Conquest. 27.
D
Dane-blood. 149. Dane-law. 45. Danes, not capable of devising lands by will.
22 David I. King of Scotland and Earl of Huntingdon. 11, 131. Dean, his Office
and Functions. 50. The privileges of a Bishop's Dean. ibid.
Deerham (West) 140. Defensor Plebis. 129. Degradatio Militis. 185. Deira, a
Province. 13. Demains or Demesne, what. 12. Ancient Demesnes had not any lands
by Knight Service. 44, 57.
D'Evreux (Robert) Earl of Essex, Viscount Bourchier, etc. 171. Sent into Spain
with an army. ibid. Stormed Cadiz. ibid. Created Marshal of England. ibid. Made
Lord Deputy of Ireland. ibid. When beheaded. ibid.
Dies juridici. 72, 73. Dies feriales. 72. Dies pacis Ecclesiae. ibid. 79. 82.
Dies pacis Regis. ibib. and 82. Dies novem Lectionum. 91. Dies feriati
repentini. 93. Dower, why judged to belong to the Ecclesiastical Court. 132.
Downham. 140. Druides, who. 74. The sole Judges of controversies among the old
Britains. 74. Supposed to have used the Greek tongue. 103 Had no knowledge of
the Latin. ibid.
Dudley (John) Duke of Northumberland and Earl Marshal of England. 170.
E
Eadmere a Monk of Canterbury made Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland. 119.
King Eadwigus's Charter of Thane-lands granted to Aelswine. 19. Earl Marshals
of England. 169, 170, 171. Earl of a County; see Alderman Earldoms not
hereditary in ancient times. 13. Earldoms in France. ibid. and 14. Earls among
the Saxons. 13, 14. Earl no title of dignity anciently. 13. Their Office
depended on the King's pleasure. ibid. An Earls Heriot. 31.
Easter-Term, how limited anciently. 83. Easter-week, when exempted from Law
business. 76. Ebsam in Surrey. 23. King Edgar's Charter of donation of certain
Thane-lands. 19. Another Charter granted by him to the Monastery of Hide near
Winchester. 20. By whose advice his Laws were made. 61.
King Edward the elder, how he proposed his Laws. 61. The first that prohibited
Law business on Festivals 77.
King Edward the Confessor's Charter of donation to Thola. 20. Several
privileges granted to the Cinque Ports. 26. His Laws by whom collected. 61.
His Constitution touching Festivals. 79.
Edward Earl of Norfolk and Marshal of England. 168. Dyed in his minority. ibid.
Edwin, son of Othulf, gave certain lands to Archbishop Odo. 29. Elfere a
Saxon bequeathed Snodland to the Church of St. Andrews. 128. Published his Will
before Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. 130.
Elfstane Bishop of Rochester. 130. Elfsy Priest of Croyden. 130. Ellingham.
161. Elmham. 150. Erpingham. 151. Erpingham (Tho.) Commissioner for executing
the Office of Earl Marshal of England. 169. Escheats, the signification of the
word. 37. No feodal Escheats among the Saxons. 37, 38.
Escuage, what in the Empire. 36. Neither its name nor rules used by the
Saxons. 37.
Essoyning, the manner of it not in use before the Conquest. 27. King
Ethelbald's Charter to the Monks of Croyland. 22. Ethelbert the first Christian
King of the Saxons. 8. He causes his Laws to be put in writing. ibid. He took
somewhat from the Roman law. 102
Etheldreda daughter of K. Alfred, her dowry. 8. King Etheldred ordained every
eight Hides of land to find a man for the naval Expedition. 17. His Charter of
donation to Aethelwold. 19. Another Charter granted by him to his Thane
Sealwyne. ibid.
King Ethelstane, whom he consulted in making his Laws. 61. King Ethelwulfs
Charter of privileges. 23. He divided his lands by Will among his three sons.
128.
Euricus King of the Goths. 102. Exauctoratio Militis. 185. Expeditio, what it
signifies in Latin. 17.
F
Fakenham. 150. Fasti, or Law days among the Romans, why so nam d. 72. Seldom
two Fasti together. 75. Fasti proprie. ibid. Fasti intercisi. ibid. Fasti
Comitiales. ibid. All the Fasti not applied to Judicature. ibid.
Fealty, the definition of it. 35. No Fealty but for a fee. 36. What manner of
Fealty among the Saxons. ibid.
Felbrig. 152. Felewell. 161. Feodal words, none among the Saxons. 7, 8, 9.
Feorme what it signifies in the Saxon tongue. 15 Ferdwite. 37. Festa majora,
vel principalia. 91. Festivals, how exempted from Law days. 76. The differences
of them. 91. The Festivals of St. Peter and Paul. 92. Of St. George. 93. Of
Gunpowder Treason. ibid.
A Feud, what it is. 1. Its general and particular definition. 2. Feuds among
the Jews. ibid. Among the Gauls. 3, Their original. 4. Made perpetual and
hereditary. 5. When and how they became so. ibid. Especially in England. ibid.
The difference between them and Benefices. 6, 9. The great growth of them.
ibid. No proper Feuds before the Conquest. ibid.
Feudal-law generally received in every Kingdom. 5. Its youth, infancy, and
full age. 9. Where it had its original. ibid.
Feudatarii. 9. Feudum militare and nobile. 4. Rusticum and ignobile. ibid.
Feuda majora and regalia. ibid. The word Feudum or Feodum not used in K.
Beorredus's days. 9.
Fideles, who. 4. Fidelity, what. 59. Fines for License of alienation. 33. The
Thane-lands free from them. ibid. Not in use among the Saxons. 34.
Fitz-Alan (Jo.) Lord Maltravers, Marshal of England. 168. Fitz-Osborn (Will.)
Lord Marshal to King William the Conqueror. 165. Flegg. 154. Flitcham. 145.
Flitchamburrough. 52, 145. Folcland, what. 12. Not alienated without license.
33, 34. Free from homage. 35.
Ford-Park. 110. Forests, belong to the King alone. 118. Subjects can have 'em
only in custody. ibid.
Fouldage. 162. Franc-almoin. 2, 7. Frank-tenements. 12. Freeborgs or Tithings.
51. Frekenham. 153.
G
Garbulsham. 158. Gavelkind what, and why so called. 12. Observed throughout
all Kent. 43. At first the general Law of all Nations. ibid.
Germans, their Customs and Tenures carried into several Countries. 5. They
received the Roman Law. 127.
Gey-wood. 143. Gilbert, the third son of William the King's Marshal. 166. Made
Marshal of England. ibid. Killed in a Tournament. ibid.
Gimmingham. 152. Goths, carry the German Laws into Spain, Greece, etc. 5. They
were the first that put their Laws in writing. 102. Trusted Priests with the
passing of wills. 130
Government; the ancient Government of England. 49. etc. 53. Grand-days in
France and England. 92. Grand Serjeanty. 2. Grantesmale (Hugh) Marshal under K.
William I. 165. Greeks, from whom they had much of their ancient Rites. 74,
127. Gresham. 152. Gressenhall. 150. Gray (Rad. de) exauctoratur. 185. Guthrun
the Dane. 61, 77.
H
Hales. 156. Harkela (Andr. de) exauctoratur. 185. Harleston. ibid.
Hartlebury-park. 110. Hawkins *Pet) Keeper of Bramsil-park wounded by
Archbishop Abbot. 109, etc. Hengham. 157. King Henry I. imprisoned the Bishop
of Durham. 62. His Constitution about Festivals and Lawdays. 81.
King Henry II. ratified the Laws of Edw. the Confess. and Will. the
Conqueror. 81. Henry Bishop of Winchester convened K. Stephen to his Synod.
132. Heribannum, what. 17. Heriots paid after the death of great Men. 31, 32 To
whom forgiven. 32. The difference between them and Reliefs. 32, 33. By whom,
and when first ordained. 32. What the word Heriot signifies. ibid. Heriots and
Reliefs issuing out of the same lands. 33. No badge of lands held by
Knight Service. ibid.
Heydon. 151. High Courts: see, Court of Justice. Hikifricus Pugil quidam
Norfolciensis. 138. Hilary-Term, its ancient bounds. 82, 83. The end of it
sometimes held in Septuagesima. 95.
Hockwold. 161. Holkham. 149. Holland (Tho) Marshal of England. 168. Holland
(Tho.) Earl of Kent Duke of Norfolk. 169. Made Earl Marshal of England. ibid.
Holland (Tho.) Farl Marshal of England during the minority of John Mowbray.
165. Holme in Norfolk 147, 152 Homage, by whom first instituted. 5. Feodal
homage. 34. Of two sorts, ibid. When begun in France and England. ibid. The
reason of it. 34, 35. Who are to do it. 35. Usual in Soccage-tenure. 35. As
well a personal as a praedial duty. ibid.
Homines commendati. 35. Hominium and homagium, what. 34. Homagium ligeum. ibid
Feodale aut praediale. ibid.
Hoveden *Roger) when he wrote. 31. Howard (Sir John) Knight. created Duke of
Norfolk and Earl Marshal of England. 17^. Slain in Bosworth-field. ibid.
Howard (Tho.) the son of the former, Earl of Surrey. 170. Imprisoned in the
Tower. ibid. Defeated the Scotch under K. Henry VII. ibid Made Lord Treasurer
of England and restored to his fathers dignities. ibid. Killed James IV. K. of
Scotland in battle. ib. Sent Ambassador into France. ibid. Made Viceroy of
England. ibid. Where he died. ibid.
Howard (Tho.) the fourth Duke of Norfolk of that name, and Earl Marshal of
England. 1^1 Howard (Tho.) the Grandson of the former Earl of Arundel and
Surrey. ibid. The first Earl of England. ibid. Made Earl Marshal for life. ibid.
Hugh Bishop of Coventry exercised the Sheriffs place. 116. Excommunicated.
ibid.
De Hum^z (Richard) Tribunus Regis or Marshal to King Henry II. 166.
Hundradors. 51. Hundreds, their original. 50. Hundred Courts. 51.
Hunting forbidden to Clergymen. 109, 112, 113, 114, 115. Hydes, what. 17.
When disused. 4^.

I
Ibreneys (Rad. de) 190. Iceni. 135. Eorum nomina and derivatio. ibid.
Icenia. 135. Ejusdem termini. ibid. Coelum and solum. 13^.
Ina King of the West Saxons adjusted the quantity of Rent for every
Plough-land. 15. By whose advice he made his Laws. 61. Made a strict Law
against working on Sundays. 57.
Ingolsthorp. 146. Inland, what. 12. Intwood. 157. K. John's Magna Charta. 63.
John Marshal to King Henry* I. 165. Irregularity of Clergymen, wherein it
consists. 109, 112. Ise fluvius unde dictus. 135. Ejusdem aestus. 139.
Islepe (Sim) Archbishop of Canterbury. 90. Jury taken out of several Hundreds
in a County. 53. Jurours prohibited to have meat, etc. till agreed of their
Verdict. 89.
Jus Gentium. 2. Justices of Evre when instituted. 27. Justinian the Emperor,
when he flourished. 129. He prohibited Clergymen to take cognizance of Wills.
ibid.
Justitium, what* 72.
K
Keninghall. 158. Kent, the custom of Gavelkind in that County. 43. Kettringham
15^. The King the fountain of all Feuds and Tenures. 1^. The King to have his
Tenants lands till the heir has done homage. 3^. The King universal Lord of his
whole Territories. 37. Anciently granted Churches to Laymen. 115
Knight, what among the Saxons. 51, 58. Why there are but two Knights of the
Shire for a County? 64.
Knight's-fees. 3, 4, 51, 58. When introduced. 45. The number of them. ibid.
The value of a Knights-fee. ibid.
Knight Service 2, 7. Kymberley. 158.
S
Sacha and Soca, what in the Saxon tongue. 51. Saliques bring the German feodal
Rights into France. 5. Sall in Norfolk. 151. Sandringham. 146. Sanhadrim, when
and where the Judges of it sat. 75. Satrapies among the Saxons. 50. Saxons the
first planters of the German Rites in Great Britain. 5. Their Charters
translated. 7. The manner of making their conveyances. 8 Distinction of persons
among them. 11. How many degrees of Honor they had. 16. How they held their
lands. 40. What obliged 'em to so many kinds of services. ibid. Saxons very
much given to drunkenness. 89. When they took possession of England. 100. They
swept away the Roman Laws there. 101 Yet took somewhat from them. 102. Why
their Laws were not at first put in writing. ibid. When they had written Laws.
ibid. The use of wills unknown to the ancient Saxons. 127. Our Saxons observed
the Civil Law in their wills. 128.
Scutagium. 36, 37. Sedgeford. 146. Segrave (Nicholas) Marshal of England. 167.
Seignory, wherein it consists. 2. Services, how many sorts of 'em upon lands.
17. Personal services. 40. Praedial. ibid. Alodial. ibid. Beneficiary. ibid.
Colonical. ibid.
Servitia militaria, what. 46. The difference between them and Servitutes
militares. ibid*
Seymour (Edward) Duke of Somerset, Nephew of King Edw. VI. 169. Made Lord
Treasurer and Earl Marshal of England. ibid.
Shardlow (Joh) Justice of Oyer, had a license to hear causes on a Festival.
95, 96. Sharnburn* 146. History of the Family. 189, etc.
Shelton. 156. Shouldham. 142. Shyre gemot, what. 53. Signioral authority,
what. 6^. Snetsham. 146, 189, 190, etc. Socage. 3, 7, 33, 43. Socmen. 1^, 15,
57. Sprowston. 153. Stanchow. 146, 19^. Star*chamber Court. 94, 95. Stigand
Archbishop of Canterbury deposed. 119. Stock-Chappel. 146. Stow-Bardolfe. 140.
Strangbow Gilb) Earl of Pembroke and Marshal of the King's Palace. 165. Suitors
of the Hundred. 51. When and by whom called at this day. ibid.
Summons, the manner of it in the Empire. 36. Sunday, how exempted from Law
Suits. 76. Sustenance, what. 59. Swasham. 141. Swainmote-Courts. 85. Syndici,
who. 63, 64. Synod of Eanham, when held. 78.
T
Talbot (George) Earl of Shrewsbury. 171. Executed the Office of Lord High
Steward of England. ibid.
Tallagium. 60. Tasburg. 156. Tassilo Duke of Bavaria did homage to King Pipin.
34. Tenant*lands of how many sorts. 4. Tenants by Knight Service. 4. Tenant in
capite. 10. Tenant in menalty. ibid. Tenant Paraval. ibid. Tenant's land or the
Tenancy. 12. Tenants what they were in ancient time. 51. Tenants in Socage. 57.
Tenants forced to pay a fine upon the marriage of a Daughter. 60. To furnish
their Lords with provisions. ibid. To present them with gratuities. ibid.
Tenure in capite. 2. By Knight Service. 4, 7. The Original of Tenures. 4.
Tenure in Socage. 4, 7. Tenures for Life. ibid. What tenures were in use among
the Saxons. 7. When first used. ibid. No tenures in capite among the Saxons.
10. Tenure in capite of two sorts. ibid. The fruits of feodal tenures. 24. The
name of tenures not used by the Saxons. 40.
Terminus, what it signifies. 71. When the word became frequent. ibid. Terms,
their definition and etymology. 71. Several acceptations of the word. 70. Full
term and Puisne term. ibid. The Original of Terms* 73, and 77. Two Terms among
the Welsh. 74. The Terms laid out according to the ancient Laws. 82. The
ancient bounds of Hilary-Term. 82, 83. Of Easter-Term. 83. Of Trinity-Term. 84,
85. Of Michaelmass-Term. 85, 86. How Trinity Term was altered. 87.
Michaelmass-Term, how abbreviated. 88. Why the Terms are sometime extended into
the Vacation. 95.
Terra Regis. 57. Terrae testamentales. 12. Terrington. 138. Tertium denarium.
14. Testaments and last wills not in use among the ancient Hebrews. 127. Not
found in Scripture before Christ's time. ibid. Expressly mentioned by St. Paul,
ibid. Not used by the Saxons or Normans. ibid. The custom of making wills from
whom taken up. ibid. How many witnesses to a will required by the Civil Law.
128.
Thane or Theoden, who. 10, 11. Their several kinds. 16. Not properly a title
of Dignity. ibid. The Etymology of their name. ibid. The quality of their
Persons. ibid. The nature of their Land. 17. The word Thane has no relation to
war. 21. A Thane's Heriot. 31.
Thane-lands, not subject to feodal service. 18. Charters of Thane-lands
granted by Saxon Kings. 19, 20. The occasion of granting them. 21. Thane-lands
alienated. ibid. Devised by will. 22. Granted to women. ibid. No service upon
'em but what was expressed. ibid. Dispos d of at the pleasure of the owner. 23.
Charged with a Rent. ibid. Might be restrained from alienation. ibid.
Thane-lands and Reveland, what. 38.
Thani majores and minores. 16. Thani Regis. ibid.
Theinge. 50. His jurisdiction. ibid.
Theowes and Esnes, who. 11. Thetford. 158. Thokus Dominus de Sharnburn. 189.
Thola the widow of Ore, had a grant of certain lands of K. Edw. the Confessor.
20. Obtained a License to devise her Lands and Goods. 34.
Thrimsa, what. 15. Thrithingreves, or Leidgerev^s, their Office and Authority.
52. What causes were usually brought before 'em. ibid.
Tribunus militum, rei militaris aut exercitus. 165. Tribute. 59. Trimarcesia.
what. 3. Trinity-term, its ancient bounds. 84, 85. How it was altered and
shortened. 87.
Trinodis necessitas. 17, 43. Trithings or Lathes. 50. Why so called. 52.
Turfs, why so called. 139, 140. Tydd. 139. Tylney. 138. Tylney-smeeth. ibid.
V
Vacation, what. 72. A particular Vacation appointed by the Longobards. 84.
Valvasini. 58. Valvasor. 16, 17, 58. Vassalagium, what. 34. Vassalli. 3, 9.
Venatio clamosa, quieta, aut modesta. 109, 114. Villanus, what it signifies in
Latin. 14.
W
De Waceio (Radulphus) Princeps militiae Normannorum. 165. Wallington. 14^.
Walpole. 138. Walsham. 153. Walsingham. 149. Walsoke. 138. Walter Archdeacon
of Oxenford. 100. Walter Bishop of Durham bought Northumberland. 116. Sat
himself in the County Court. ibid. By whom killed. ibid.
Walter Marshal of England, the fourth son of William the King's Marshal. 166.
When he died. ibid.
Walton. 138. Walworth (Sir Will*) Lord Mayor of London. 168. Wapentakes. 50.
Watton. 161. Waxham. 153. Wardship, no profits arising from it in the Saxons
time. 25. The original of its name. ibid. Wardship in Scotland. 27.
Warenna (Guil. de) 19^. Were, or Weregild, what. 15. West-acre. 141. West-
Saxon-Law* 49. Wic, what it signifies in the Saxon tongue. 156. Wichingham.
151. Wigenhall. 138. William the Conqueror transferred his Country customs into
Ireland. 5. Makes Feuds and Tenures hereditary there. ibid. Privileges granted
by him to the Cinque Ports. 26. Gave certain lands to Baldwin Abbot of St.
Edmund s-bury 45. His Laws made by the consent of the Bishops and Barons. 61.
His Constitution concerning Festivals and Law*days. 8^. Made a Law that no man
should be put to death for any crime. 82.
Laws of Scotland, Reg. Maj. 131 Laws (Saxon) in the King's Library, MS. 17.
Lind. Cland. Despons. 80. Littleton (Justice) 6. His Tenures. 35.
Longobard-laws. 89, 131. Loyseau de Seigneurs. 13, 92. Ludovici Pii
Exauctoratio. 185. Vita. 185.
Lyndwood. 109.
M
Major (Joh.) 27. An ancient Manuscript of Saxon Laws in the King's Library.
17. Marculphus. 9, 128, 129. Matthew Paris. 11, 62, 71, 116, 118, 12^, 138,
151, 152, 166, 167. Merula. 5.
N
Neapolitan and Sicilian Constitutions. 10, 80. Norman Customs* 30, 80. Novella
of Constantine Porphyrogenneta. 36.
O
Osbertus. 99. Oswald Bishop of Worcester. 4
P
Pancirollus. 148, 154 Pasquier. 13. Paulus Diaconus. 84. Pausanias. 3. Philo
Judaeus. 75. Placita Coronae. 60. de Platea (Joh.) 64. Plinius. 138. Polydorus
Virgilius. 62, 71. Prosper. 93.
R
Radevicus de Gest. Frid. I. 82. Radulphus Niger. 90, 117. Ramsey-Abbey MS 29,
53, 128, 139, 140, 146. Rastal. 86.
S
Seldom. 26. Sigonius. 127. Skeneus. 28. Smith (Sir Tho.) 6, 75. Soto. 109,
112. Spelman's Glossary. 1, 3, 12, 15 Codex legum. 96.
Spelmans Concilia Britannica. 8, 17, 18, 23. Sprott, a Monk of Canterbury. 45.
Statius. 84. Stow. 147, 154, 168, 186, 213. Suarez. 109. Suecus (Gravius) 3.
Synod of Eanham. 78.
T
Tabienus. 90, 91. Tacitus. 3, 4, 15, 35, 51, 59, 74, 127, 149.
V
Vegetius. 147. Vincent. 168, 169. Virgilius. 93.
W
Walsingham Hypodigma Neustriae. 82, 92, 151, 167. Waraeus. 140. K. William
I's. Laws. 82, 84. William of Malmsbury. 119, 145.
Y
York Herald. 168, 169.
FINIS.

