THE Ld Bishop of Rochester's DISCOURSE TO His Clergy, etc.

A DISCOURSE Made by the Ld Bishop OF ROCHESTER TO THE Clergy of his Diocese,
AT His Visitation in the Year 1695.

Published at their Request.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Edw. Jones, MDCXCVI.

A DISCOURSE MADE BY The Ld Bishop of Rochester TO THE CLERGY, etc.
I Can scarce think it worth my while, or yours, (my good Brethren,) that I
should now spend much time in any long general Exhortation, to your Diligent
and Conscientious performing the Duties incumbent on you, as you are the
Ministers of GOD, duly called according to the Will of of our Lord Christ, and
the Order of this Excellent Church of England.

Did I find, there were here any absolute need to use many Words, toward the
exciting your Care in the several Administrations of your Holy Calling; yet, I
am persuaded, I my self might well spare my own Labor, and your Patience, on
this Subject; since all that kind of wholesome Advice has been already so very
sufficiently, and so much better given you, in Arguments deduced out of the
Holy Scriptures, and most fitly applied to this Purpose, by the venerable
Compilers of our Public Liturgy, in the Forms appointed for the Ordering of
Deacons and Priests.

There, you know, this Work has been so wisely, and so fully, long ago, done to
a Bishop's hands; there all the Parts of your weighty Office are so judiciously
laid before you; the high Dignity, and great Importance of it, toward the
Salvation of Mankind, is so substantially urged; the blessed Fruits, and
everlasting Rewards of well-attending it, and the extreme Dangers of neglecting
it, are so justly amplified; the Necessity of adorning your Doctrine by an
innocent, virtuous, and pious Life of your own, toward the rendering it
efficacious on the Lives of others, is so pathetically enforced; that, I am
confident, the very best Charge, a Bishop could give to his Clergy, were to
recommend seriously to all their Memories, as I now do most affectionately to
yours, those very same Questions and Answers, those very same Promises and
Vows, as you ought to esteem them, wherewith every one of you did most
solemnly charge his Conscience, at the time of your Admission into Holy Orders.

I profess, I cannot, nor, I believe, can the the Wit of Man, invent any more
proper Method of Instruction to Men in your Circumstances, from a Man in mine,
than to exhort you all to a continual Recollection of, and Meditation upon,
those many and great Obligations, you then seemed voluntarily and cheerfully to
lay on your selves.

Whence there could not but ensue (by GOD's Blessing,) a firm Resolution in
your Minds to endeavor the performance of them, and a Holy Perseverance in
those Endeavors, and in Conclusion, the happy Effects of all on your selves,
and the Flocks committed to you: That by thus Meditating on these Things, and
giving your selves wholly to them, your profiting may appear to all; and that
by taking heed to your selves, and your Doctrines, and continuing in them, you
may both save your selves, and those that hear you.

Wherefore seeing that, which else had been a Bishop's proper Business in such
Meetings as this, I hope, is, or may be so easily shortened for me, by you your
selves, by your having recourse to a Rule so well known, and so obvious to you,
in a Book, which ought scarce ever to be out of your hands; I shall the rather,
at this time, purposely omit the prescribing you many Admonitions, touching the
matter and substance of the Duties of your Sacred Function. Instead of them, I
shall only offer you some few familiar Considerations, which may serve as so
many friendly and brotherly Advices, concerning, chiefly, the Manner and Way of
performing some of the principal Offices of your Ministry.

And, I trust in GOD, that if these Advices shall be as carefully examined,
and, if you find them useful, as industriously observed by you, as they are
honestly intended by me, they may, in some sort, enable you to do laudably, and
with Commendation, the same Things, which, I hope, you already do, without just
Exception.

Only, in this place, let me premise once for all, that whatever Instructions I
shall now give you, I intend them not only as Directions to you, but especially
to my self. As indeed, in all Matters, that come under Deliberation, he ought
to be esteemed no good Counselor, who is very ready and eager in giving, but
averse from receiving the same Counsel, as far as it may be also proper for
himself.

The first Advice I presume to set before your view, shall relate to the Manner
of doing your part, in all the ordinary Offices of the Public Liturgy.

As to that, it is my earnest Request, that you would take very much Care, and
use extraordinary Intention of Mind, to perfect your selves in a true, just,
sensible, accurate becoming way of Reading, and administering them as you have
occasion.

A Suggestion, which some perhaps, at first hearing, may think to be but of a
slight and ordinary Concernment: Yet, if I am not much deceived, it will be
found of exceeding Moment and Consequence in its Practice; and of singular
Usefulness toward the raising of Devotion in any Congregation piously
inclined: When your weekly, or rather daily labors of this kind shall be thus
performed* I mean, not with a mere formal or artificial, but with such a grave,
unaffected Delivery of the Words, as (if the defect be not in our selves,)
will, indeed, naturally flow from a right and serious considering of their
Sense.

I pray therefore, take my Mind a-right in this particular. I do not only mean,
that you should be very punctual in reading the Common Prayer Book, as the Law
requires; that is, not only to do it constantly, and entirely in each part,
without any maiming, adding to, or altering of it, that so Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, may be made, by you, for all Men:
For Kings, and for all that are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty.

If you do not so, you are liable to a Legal Punishment and Censure. But my aim
now is, not merely to prevent that, or to provide only against your breaking
the Law. What I intend is something higher, and more excellent; something, that
you cannot be punished for, though you do it not; but, if you shall do it in any
reasonable Perfection, it will redound to the unspeakable Benefit of your
Congregations.

The purpose then of this my plain Motion to you is, in short, to beseech you
all to employ much serious Pains, in practicing the public and private Reading
of all your Offices, as the Use of any of them shall occur, distinctly,
gravely, affectionately, fervently; so as every where to give them all that
Vigor, Life and Spirit, whereof they are capable: Which certainly is as great
as in any human Writings whatsoever; if we be not wanting to them in the
Repetition.

The Truth is, whatever some may imagine to the contrary, such a complete and
consummate Faculty of reading the Common Prayer, Quam nequeo monstrare, and
sentio tantum, is of so great difficulty, as well as use, that I am fully
convinced, it very well deserves to have some place among our constant Studies;
at least in the first Initiation into our Ministry, if not throughout the whole
course of it.

I could heartily wish, it were altogether needless for me to lay so much
stress on this Advice as I do. Yet, I hope, I may do it without Offense; since
it is not with design of censuring any particular Men's Failings or
Deficiencies, but only for the public Good; that we may all strive to attain
not only to a Mediocrity, but to an Excellency in this kind: Which, in my small
Judgment, can never be done, unless we shall make this Duty a Business by it
self, and assign it a special Place among our other Ecclesiastical Studies.

It cannot be denied, but the Church it self has provided for this with all
imaginable Circumspection; having solemnly enjoined every Clergyman, besides
the Times of his public Ministry, to read some very considerable Parts of his
Office, once a day, at least, to himself, except he shall be excused by
indispensable Business.

By which wise Injunction, though, no doubt, the Church intended primarily to
produce and increase, in the Minds of all its Ministers, a frame of Spirit
perpetually serious and devout: Yet, if that be also accompanied with a
proportionable Regard to the Manner, as well as to the Matter of our Public
Prayers, this other Advantage of well-reading, what is so often to be read,
will follow of course, and by necessary Consequence.

It seems indeed to me, that the very way of performing all the outward Acts of
Religion, has so wonderful an Influence toward obtaining the inward Effects of
it, on our Hearts and Consciences, that I cannot but think, we can never be too
laborious in preparing and exercising our Thoughts, and even our very Voices,
in private, for a public Service of so great Importance.

It Is true, we generally value and esteem Preaching, as our great Privilege and
Honor. And so far we are in the right. But we are not so, if we look on the
reading of Prayers only as our Task and Burden; and, as such, shall be willing
to get rid of it altogether, or to get through it in any undecent Manner, with
such Heaviness or Precipitation, as, in any Affairs of worldly Interest, we
would never be content with.

A preposterous Custom, which, if due Care be not taken, may be very
prejudicial and mischievous to our Church, by quenching the Spirit of Devotion
in our own People, and giving occasion to our Adversaries to throw Scorn and
Contempt on our otherwise-incomparable Liturgy.

Consider, I pray you, How can we expect that others should revere, or esteem
it according to its true worth, if we our selves will not keep it so much in
Countenance, as to afford it a fair Reading? If we will not do it so much
common Justice as to contribute, as much as lies in our Power, that it may have
an impartial Hearing, equal, at least to any other Divine Ordinance? If we
shall refuse to lay as much weight on those Devotions, which our whole Church
has enjoined us to pour out before the Throne of Grace, for the People, as we
do on those Discourses, which we make, on our own Heads, to the People?

Wherefore, I say again, this very commendable Skill of devout and decent
Reading the Holy Offices of the Church, is so far from being a perfunctory or
superficial Work, a mean or vulgar Accomplishment, or a subordinate lower
Administration, only fit for a Curate; that it deserves to be placed among your
Ministerial Endowments of greater Superiority and Praeeminence; as being one of
the most powerful Instruments of the Holy Spirit of GOD, to raise and command
Men's Hearts and Affections: of the Holy true Spirit of GOD, I say; which, though
in our inward Ejaculations, or private Supplications toward Heaven, it often
helps our Infirmities, and makes Intercession for us with Groanings that
cannot be uttered; Yet, in the public Worship, is most frequently pleased to
operate by such Words, and Sounds, as are expressed with the best Utterance.

So that now, with a just Assurance, I may assert this to be a very proper
Qualification of a Parochial Minister; that he has attained to an habitual
Faculty of setting forth the public Prayers to all their due Advantage, by
pronouncing them leasurably, fitly, warmly, decently; with such an Authority in
the Speaker, as is, in some degree, suitable to the Authority of what is spoken.

Thus much I may safely say, that the Reader of the Prayers; if he does his
part, in the manner I have mentioned, by such a vigorous, effectual, fervent
Delivery of the Words and Conceptions, put into his Mouth by the Church it
self, may give a new enlivening Breath, a new Soul, as it were, to every
Prayer, every Petition in it: He may quicken and animate those Confessions,
Intercessions and Thanksgivings, which, when read coldly, and indifferently,
with irreligious Carlesness, or ignorant Flatness, will seem to some to be but
a dead Letter: He may make every Hymn, every Psalm, every Lesson, Epistle and
Gospel, to become well nigh a new Sermon; at least he may give, to the old
standing Text of the Bible, a very good clear Exposition, even by his very way
of reading it to the Congregation.

This, upon Experience, you will find to be apparently true. For if, as is
usually observed by Men of Learning, in printed Books, the very accurate and
critical pointing of the Copy is one of the best kinds of good new Commentaries
on any old Author; how much more, in all the Offices of Devotion, would that,
which consists not only in good Pointing, and observing all due Stops, but in
so much more besides, I mean a good, distinct, forcible, yet easy, and
unforced reading of every Prayer, and Portion of the Holy Scriptures; how much
more would all this really serve for a good new Paraphrase and Illustration of
every Sentence in them!

It is indeed almost incredible, how quite another thing the daily morning and
evening Prayers will appear; what new Figures and Beauties, and hidden
Treasures of sacred Eloquence, they will continually discover, when thus
pronounced; how much apter they will be to kindle in us, and our Auditors, all
manner of Heavenly Affections, of Spiritual Grief, and Contrition, of Love and
Gratitude, of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; When the
Harmony of the Tongue shall be tuned, as it were, to the Harmony of the Matter;
When the Zeal of the Reader shall keep Company with his Voice; and his Voice
shall be adapted to, and varied together with every Sense and Expression; When
by long Use, and Imitation of the best Masters, or the best we can come at, we
shall know familiarly how to give every Word and Sentence its due poise; Where
to lay a greater or smaller weight on every Clause, according to its natural or
spiritual Force; where to be quicker or more vehement, where slower and more
sedate; how to observe equally all Pauses and Distances; how to avoid
Monotonies on the one hand, and immoderate Elevations and Depressions on the
other; Yet, where to use the same Tones, where to rise or fall in the right
place: When, I say, the Reader shall be thoroughly expert and versed in
practicing these, and many more such natural Decencies of Pronouncing; though
they may seem but light, and petty things, taken singly, and a part, yet all
together, in their full united Power, they will be found to have an admirable
Concurrence toward the creating, augmenting, well tempering, and
well-governing of Devotion.

Had I time, it were easy to exemplify this, in every Office of our Church.
Give me leave only to mention one Instance within the compass of my own
Knowledge, which perhaps may not be unworthy your special remarking: Though I
doubt not but many of you have met with several Examples of the like nature.

It was immediately after the Happy Restoration of King Charles the Second,
when, together with the Rights of the Crown, and the English Liberties, the
Church, and the Liturgy, were also newly restored; that a noted Ringleader of
Schism in the former times, was to be buried in one of the principal Churches
of London. The Minister of the Parish, being a wise and regular Conformist, and
he was afterward an eminent Bishop in our Church, well knew how averse the
Friends and Relations of the Deceased had always been to the Common Prayer;
Which, by hearing it so often called a low Rudiment, a beggarly Element, and
Carnal Ordinance, they were brought to contemn to that degree, that they
shunned all occasions of being acquainted with it.

Wherefore, in order to the Interment of their Friend, in some sort, to their
Satisfaction, yet so as not to betray his own Trust, he used this honest Method
to undeceive them. Before the day appointed for the Funeral, he was at the
pains to learn the whole Office of Burial by Heart. And then, the time being
come there being a great Concourse of Men of the same Phanatical Principles,
when the Company heard all delivered by him without Book, with a free
Readiness, and profound Gravity, and unaffected composure of Voice, Looks, and
Gestures, and a very powerful Emphasis in every part; as indeed his Talent was
excellent that way; they were strangely surprised and affected: Professing,
they had never heard a more suitable Exhortation, or a more edifying Exercise,
even from the very best and most precious Men of their own Persuasion.

But they were afterward much more surprised and confounded, when the same
Person, who had officiated, assured the principal Men among them, that not one
Period of all he had spoken was his own; and convinced them by ocular
Demonstration, how all was taken Word for Word out of the very Office ordained
for that purpose, in the poor contemptible Book of Common Prayer.

Whence he most reasonably inferred, how much their ill grounded Prejudice, and
mistaken Zeal, had deluded them, that they should admire the same Discourse,
when they thought it an unprepared, unpremeditated, Rapture: which they would
have abominated, had they known it to be only a set Form prescribed by
Authority.

And from the same Observation, we also may as justly infer, that all the
Coldness and Dulnes, which too many, such abused and wanton Spirits, have
complained they find in set Forms, is not really in the Forms themselves; in
ours it is far otherwise. If there be any color for the Complaint, that can
only proceed from a cold, flat, supine, insipid manner of repeating them.

Upon the whole Matter it is most certain, that, in the public Worship of GOD,
nothing can be more grave, or moving, more lofty, or Divine, either in the
confessing, petitioning, or praising part, than where the Thoughts and
Expressions are strictly weighed, and prudently reduced into standing
unalterable Forms: Provided also, those very Forms be not pronounced in a
formal way; but that they be assisted, inflamed, inspired, as I may say, with
such a present Ardour, and sprightly Zeal in reading them, as will always make
them seem to be extempore: Extempore, I mean, in the new, ready, vehement
manner of their Pronunciation; but set Forms still, in the solid Ripeness of
the Sense, and the due Choice, and deliberate ordering of their Phrases and
Figures; Which are the peculiar Advantages of set Forms: And therefore, so
spoken, they will, in all Reason, produce a far more real, unfeigned, and
durable Devotion, than all the other meerextempore, raw, and indigested
Effusions ought to pretend to.

I should crave your pardon, that I have dwelt so long on this first Head of
Advice. But it appeared to me so very material, that I could not hastily pass
it over: Especially since what I have now said on this Subject, may concern in
common all your public Ministrations, and is equally applicable, not only to
the well-performing the daily morning and evening Prayers throughout the Year,
both of ordinary Days and Sundays, and extraordinary Fasts and Festivals; but
also to the Offices of Baptism, Matrimony, and the Holy Communion; and indeed
to every other part of our established Liturgy: In all which, as the Reader
officiates better or worse, so most usually is their Benefit and Efficacy more
or less on the Minds of the Hearers.

Nay, I will now make bold to go farther, to apply the Usefulness of this
Counsel, not only to the Praying Part, but also to another Part of your Office,
I am next to consider, which is that of Preaching.

I am verily persuaded, that the Sermons preached every Sunday in this one
Kingdom, by the Church of England Clergy in this Age, are more excellent
Compositions of that kind, than have been delivered, in the same space of time,
throughout the whole Christian World besides.

Only let me take the Freedom to suggest, that perhaps it would add much, though
not to the solid and substantial Part of such Discourses, yet to their just
popularity, and more general Acceptance, and to the greater Edification of our
Hearers, if we would universally addict our selves a little more to this Study
of Pronunciation: By which Advantages alone of the Freedom, and life of their
Elocution, we know the Preachers of some other Nations do seem to reign and
triumph in the Pulpit, whilst their Sermons, as far as we can judge by those
we have of them in Print* are not comparable to the English.

An Observation, which, methinks, may rouse our Preachers to out do them in
this kind of Perfection also: I mean, in a natural, comely, modest, yet
undaunted force of Pronunciation: Not such as is full of over-Action, and
mimical Gesticulations; which, though some Parties may admire for a time, and
to serve a Turn, yet the serious Temper of our Nation will never long approve
or admit of. But I intend such a steady composed, severe, decent, lively, and
apposite managing your Voices and Gestures in the Pulpit, as is best
accommodated to the Gravity and Solidity of the English Genius, and is also
agreeable, as much as may be, to the Simplicity, Power, and height of the
Message you bring from Heaven.

The next great Duty then of your Priestly Office, which comes in our way,
being that of Preaching, I shall begin with one short Admonition, which, I
confess, I am almost ashamed to give; and yet it may be very expedient, that it
should be given; not, I declare, as a Correction to any of you here present,
for any thing past, but only in regard to the future, and for the sake of those
who as yet are less experienced Preachers, and young timorous Beginners.

The Caution, in plain Terms, is this, that every Person, who undertakes this
great Employment, should make it a master of Religion and and Conscience, to
preach nothing but what is the Product of his own Study, and of his own
Composing.

I would not be mistaken, as if I should hereby condemn the Reading of the
Homilies; which were composed by the Wisdom and Piety of former Times, and have
been ever-since allowed, nay recommended, by our Church, in some Places, and
upon some Necessities to be used. I am so far from doing so, that I rather wish
from my Heart we were furnished with a larger Stock of such learned plain, and
orthodox Discourses.

There can be no manner of hurt, nay there is very great reason, that, upon
some urgent Occasions, a Preacher should have liberty to take something out of
that public Treasury, which was laid up for that end, and has the Stamp of
Authority upon it to make it current. My Purpose is only to dissuade you from
all unjust Rapine of this kind, from all underhand dealing with the private
Stores of particular Persons.

As to that, I dare avouch, it is far better and more advisable, even for the
rawest Practiser, to exhibit but very mean Things of his own, at first, than to
flourish it in the best of other Men's Sense and Oratory. For he, who does never
so ordinarily at first, provided it be from himself, may, and will do better,
and better in time, by GOD's Assistance, through fervent Prayer, and
indefatigable. Attention to reading, and hearing, and practicing to preach.
Whereas this sordid borrowing, this shameful, I had almost said, sacrilegious
purloining from other Men's Labors, is an utter irreconcilable Enemy to all
manner of Growth and Improvement in Divine Learning, or Eloquence.

I will not now insist on the meaness of Spirit, and perpetual fear, that must
attend the Consciousness of this Guilt, lest it should be, some time or other,
discovered; or on the shame and contempt that often happens to such Pilferers
upon the Discovery. But besides all this, in Truth, when once Men have indulged
themselves in this easy, but despicable and shuffling Commerce, they seldom or
never give it over; nay, at last, they can very hardly give it over if they
would.

Thence will succeed such a visible decay of Parts, such a neglect of all
serious Studies, such a desuetude, and unaptness for regular thinking, such
Emptiness of Invention and Memory, such a Diffidence of their own Style,
Understanding and Judgment; that they, who at first made bold with others
Sermons, perhaps merely out of Idleness, will at length be forced to do it out
of Necessity* It will unavoidably happen to this kind of Thieves, as most
commonly it does to all others; they steal so long in their Youth, and Strength
of Age, because they will not work, that in their old Age, they are compelled
to steal on, because they cannot work.

But enough, or too much of this. I know to whom I speak; to those, who, for
ought I could ever observe, or hear, do not only Preach, but themselves compose
what they Preach. Yet I thought it became me to give this Intimation, seeing,
in my own small Experience, I have been forced to deny Orders to some Persons,
because I found them peccant in this very Crime. I was at first exceedingly
amazed to hear them produce most excellent Sermons, whilst I found their Gifts
of Nature, and Abilities of Learning, and Knowledge, were far from being
passable. But my Wonder was soon over, when I manifestly discovered, that
nothing but their Ignorance was their own, their Sermons belonging of right to
their Betters.

Now then, my Brethren, that we may come into the Way again, after this
unwelcome Digression, in making our Sermons, great regard ought to be had to
the Words, and to the Matter; great to both, though not equally great to both.

Your Words and Style should be simple, expressive, weighty, authoritative: And
therefore, though not without some true Art, yet not very artificial; and rather
void of all Ornament, than over-adorn'd; but as much Scriptural as may be
without Affectation; and as easy, familiar, and intelligible as possible. And
Perspicuity is always possible. Nay it is almost impossible, that ones Words
should not be perspicuous, when his Thoughts are clear, and untroubled, and the
Thing to be spoken of is thoroughly understood. When the Matter is well
invented, digested, and ordered in the Mind, it very rarely happens, but the
fittest and most expressive Words will occur to the Fancy and Tongue of the
Speaker. Verba non invita sequentur.

Next, since your Matter must, of course, be either Doctrinal or Practical;
where it shall be merely Doctrinal, there it may suffice for your common
Auditories, and, in good Truth, for all other, from the lowest to the very
highest, that it be plain, sound, substantial, ancient, catholic; seldom or
never curiously drawn out into the fine Threads of Dispute and Speculation, or,
as the Apostle terms them, Oppositions of Science falsely so called.

It were indeed, much to be wished, that the agitating of all manner of
Controversies could be utterly excluded from the great Work of saving Souls,
which is your special Work. Yet, because in times so degenerate from the
Primitive Purity, and in this militant State of the Christian Church, it cannot
be expected, that you should teach aptly, or oppose Schism and Heresy solidly,
without touching sometimes, and entering upon some Walks of Controversies;
Certainly the best way, in these inevitable Cases, is never to meddle with such
obscure Subtilties, out of Spiritual Pride or Ostentation, but merely out of
Necessity; and then only with the most necessary Parts of them; and then also
that you be ever sure to keep close to the Form of sound Words used in the
Church, and to contain your selves within the known Bounds of Scripture
Determinations, in every controverted Point, to deliver the Faith to your
People, as it was once deliverd to the Saints.

As little a Lover then as I am of Controversial Divinity in the Pulpit, yet I
cannot be faithful to you, or to our Mother the Church of England, if I do not
recommend two sorts of it to be seriously studied by you: But I must still say,
rather to be studied than preached; though preached too upon reasonable Occasions.

The first kind is that of the Controversies between us and the Church of Rome.
For we are not yet so exempt from Fear on that Quarter, that we should securely
lay aside, and suffer to rust on the Walls, those very Arms, which, to the
immortal praise of the Parochial Clergy, were so successfully managed by them,
during the last great Crisis of danger from the Popish Interest.

I the rather mention these, because they are still almost in every Man's hands;
and perhaps a judicious sum, and full Epitome, collected out of them all,
would be as useful a Body of Controversies on those Questions, as any is yet
extant.

Wherefore, that you may preserve your own, and the Souls under your Care, from
Infection, and be able to convince Gainsayers, I exhort you all, according to
your several Stations and Opportunities, to be still conversant and prepared in
those very same Arguments against the Papists: Yet, let me say also, not only
now in those.

For there is another sort of Controversies, or rather blasphemous Doctrines,
revived in this Age, and which seem, indeed, to be the most cherished and
darling Tenants of the loose and Antichristian part of the Age; I mean those
execrable Opinions against the Incarnation and Eternal Godhead of our Savior,
the Satisfaction of his Meritorious Sufferings, and Death, and the very Being
of the Ever-blessed Trinity: Which being all of them the peculiar and
distinguishing Foundations of Christianity, whatever they, who so directly
oppose them, may at first pretend, yet they cannot but really tend to the
Destruction of the Primitive Faith in Christ, and the Introduction of another
Religion, new, and therefore abominable.

Wherefore, to maintain no less than the main Fundamental Points of our pure
and Undefiled Religion, you are now most zealously to apply your Thoughts to
the serious Study of those Divine Mysteries. Yet, if you please to take my
Judgment, after you shall be never so well furnished with Weapons defensive, or
offensive, of this nature, you should very rerely brandish, or so much as show
them in your ordinary Pulpits; never but when you cannot avoid it without
betraying, or deserting the Orthodox Truth. And whenever you shall produce any
of them in such Auditories, even then, it were best done in a calm, positive,
and didactical, rather than in a sharp, wrangling, or contentious way. But
always take along with you, what I said before, to wade no farther in them, in
your popular Sermons, than as the Scripture Light primitively expounded shall
plainly lead you.

This may suffice, at present, touching the doctrinal and speculative part of
your Preaching. As to the other, which is the Practical, in that I need not
forewarn you to proceed with such reserve, or restraint. In the greatest
abundance of that, if managed with any tolerable Prudence, there can hardly be
any manner of excess. Most assuredly the less controversial, and the more
practical your Pulpit Discourses are, the better they must be, and the more
profitable.

Now, my dear Brethren, the Subject of this part of your Sermons, being, as you
cannot but know, so comprehensive and vast, as to take in the whole compass of
all our Spiritual and Moral Duties; I say of Moral also; For, let none be
deceived, Moral Preaching is of mavelous use wherever it is subservient to
the inspired Doctrine of Christianity, and does not strive to justle that,
which is its Principal, quite out of the Pulpit: But, I say, the Matter of your
practical Preaching being in it self so large, as to extend to all the Precepts
and Promises. both of the Law, and the Gospel; to all the Temptations and
Corruptions of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; whereof the one ought to be
the eternal Argument of your Exhortations, the other of your Reproofs and
Admonitions: Here it is especially, that I would beseech you all, with a
Brotherly Tenderness, and oblige you, with a Fatherly Authority, to lay out the
whole stress, and bent of your Souls, to draw all your Studies, all your
Learning, Human or Divine, all your Eloquence, all your Affections, all your
Zeal this way: This being the great Work you have chosen for the Business of
your whole Lives, and for which we all were so peculiarly dedicated to the
Service of GOD, and his Church: And let me add, this being the great Purpose,
for which all Scripture seems to have been given by Inspiration of GOD: That it
may be profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction. There is the chief
end of all the Doctrine you are to teach. But what follows? For Instruction in
Righteousness; that the Man of GOD may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every
good Work. There is the great Design of all the Practice you are to enforce.

I have dispatched what I thought proper now to say on this Head of Preaching,
unless you will suffer me to name one very obvious Caution; which yet I cannot
think to be ever the less necessary, for being so very obvious.

The Caution is, that in all your Sermons, where you have Occasion to praise
any Virtue, or dispraise any Vice; in all your Commendations of what is bad;
you would always separate the good Person from the good Thing, and always
distinguish the Sinner from the Sin: That is, That you would never put any one
Virtue, never any one Vice, you are to deal with in the Pulpit, into the Habit
or Countenance of any one Member of your Congregations, so that they may be
known thereby: In a word, that you would utterly shun, and abhor all Personal
Flatteries of the Good; and all Personal Reflections on the wicked.

As to the first of these Extremes, that of Flattery, I need only mention it
here. That is seldom thought worthy of such plain Country Congregations, as
yours generally are: 'Twere well, if it were as much excluded out of all other
Religious Assemblies of better Quality.

It is indeed great pity, that such glosing and deceitful Language should at
last, in any measure, take Sanctuary in the Church; when it had been so long,
in all Ages, by common Consent of wise and good Men, judged fit to be banished
out of all other wellconstituted Societies. Has it not been always found, by
Experience, that a flattering Tongue is so far from increasing the Virtues of
the Good, and the Great, that it rather serves to deprave the real Worth they
might have before? So that, as the Psalmist says, the Men who flatter with
their Tongue, have not only no Faithfulness in their Mouth, but their very
Throat is an open Sepulcher. But, above all, it is most unbecoming the Pulpit;
where Men would seem to speak as from GOD, and with Authority, which nothing
can more debase or prostitute than Flattery.

As to the other Excess, that of secret Reflections, and malicious Insinuations
against, or open Defamations of Persons, I would absolutely dissuade you from
the very Shadow, and Suspicion of it. I would entreat you all, in the Bowels of
our Lord Christ, that you would never, on any Occasion, or Accident, not even
on the greatest Provocation, do that Affront to the Honor and Modesty of the
Pulpit, as to make it a Place for any Rudeness, or Scurrility whatsoever.
Surely nothing can be more disgraceful to the Reputation of your Profession, or
more destructive to Edification, or more unbeseeming the Gravity and Charity of
a Church-of-England Divine, than to make an Ordinance so sacred; and the Word
of GOD handled in it, become instrumental to your own private Passions,
Animosities, or Revenges.

I am now arrived at the next great Duty of your Holy Office, which is that of
Catechizing; not so much to recommend to you the Duty it self; though I might do
that most earnestly and vehemently, and with some kind of Episcopal
Expostulation and Reprehension, if any where it should be totally neglected.
But that I would not here so much as suppose.

I cannot doubt but we are all of one Mind, touching the inexpressible
Advantages of this Ordinance in general; we especially who have lived in these
Times. We cannot but be abundantly convinced of it by a woeful and dear-bought
Experience: Since it is evident, that the far greater part of the monstrous
Looseness of Opinions, and profane Enormity of Manners, which overwhelmed the
whole face of the last Age, and has too much descended on this, did remarkably
proceed from the notorious defect, or universal Omission of Orthodox
Catechizing, during the Calamities and Confusions of the great Rebellion.

Wherefore, touching the imminent Necessity of restoring, or, I may well hope
rather, among you, of continuing this first part of Christian Discipline, I
make sure account we are all agreed.

The only Thing, to be debated, is the Manner, how this Holy Exercise may be so
put in use, that the blessed Ends, which, I am assured, we all aim at alike,
may be attained.

Without all Controversy then, the first Practice of your regular Catechizing,
in all your Churches, ought to be in the very same Order, and on the same
Materials, which the Church Catechism has traced out, and the Law has enjoined.

I would therefore desire you all to begin, or rather encourage you to go on,
plainly and literally in that way, with a strict Consinement of your
Catechumens, as they may be called, to that very compendious Introduction; to
have your Youth thoroughly versed, and instructed perfectly in all the Questions
and Answers there prescribed. This ought by no means to be left undone in the
smallest or poorest of your Country Cures; where the highest Capacities are not
at first above, and the lowest can scarce be below, this kind of plain
Information.

But in greater Towns, where the Youth are somewhat better educated, and so
should be more capable of Improvement, there, supposing still you never omit
the other more simple way, you may, by degrees, with a sober, and discreet
Pace, proceed farther; I will not say, by enlarging the Foundations, but by
raising the Building higher on the same compass of Ground.

And this I have known done with very remarkable Fruit, and Benefit to the
Learners, in a familiar Method, whereof I will only trace out to you the
imperfect Draught* which, by Time and Custom, you may easily advance, and
complete. The Method is this, That to every Article, and every Clause of it, in
the Church Catechism, after they have learnt them by Heart, you should annex,
at first, some such Texts of Scripture, as may suffice to prove the Matter
contained in them, and do it in the fewest Words, and clearest to the Purpose.
These Texts you should induce your young Disciples to repeat often, and
perfectly without Book, together with each Article, and should begin to let
them understand, by a very brief Exposition, how evidently each Scripture
proves each Article.

Then, by degrees, after they shall be made intimately acquainted with that
first Set of Texts, you may more securely add other Quotations out of the
Bible, somewhat larger, but still tending to the same Purpose; and when you
have explained them, in the like manner, but more copiously, you may cause
those also to be learnt as exactly, and repeated as readily as the former. And
the same Course you may begin, and go through with again, still adding more
Texts, and more distinctly dividing the Parts, and Members of the several
Articles, as often as you shall find it practicable, or convenient.

Thus, whilst you do not over-burden tender Minds, but softly instill these
Instructions into them, Drop after Drop, the Children, you have undertaken in
this way, so very little out of the common Rode, and many also of riper Years,
who shall be present, and attentive, will, beyond their own, and even your
first Expectation, come to have treasured up, almost unawares, in their Minds,
a little Body, as it were, of Orthodox Divinity: which cannot but be all
Orthodox, all Primitive, as being, without mixture, purely collected out of the
Holy Scriptures.

With the Scriptures, by this means, their Memories will unperceivably be
filled; yet not so as only to fit them to cant with unseasonably, in common
Discourse, but so as to instruct or confirm their Judgments, and teach them to
apply properly, what they shall there read, to every part of a sober Christians
Belief, or practical Duty.

In this great Article of Catechizing, I would offer one honest Direction more.
It is, that you should not so much aim in it at the length of the Exercise, or
at the perpetual changing of your Thoughts and Expressions, as at the sound
Bottom, on which you build your Discourse, and the solid, unmovable Ground of
each Doctrine, whereon you fix your Explanations; though your Performance each
time be the shorter, so it be not unreasonably short, and though your Words, and
Phrases, may happen frequently to be the same, and repeated more than once.

In truth, I would, if I durst, offer some such Advice also as to your
Preaching. But I know the common Vogue is against my real Opinion in this
Matter. And therefore I must handle this point the more tenderly.

It is indeed a very great Burden, that the Humor of the People, and our own
too, in some measure, has laid on our Profession: Such as, I think, no other
Calling, or Way of Life, were ever willing to lay on themselves; no, nor any
other Nation, that I know of, has exacted in so high a degree, from their
Clergy; that you should twice or once a week, at least, always present your
Auditories with new Sermons; and those also to be composed with the Care and
Accuracy, almost of Elaborate, and Complete Treatises.

Whereas I am sure, in the business of Catechizing, and most probably, the same
will be found true in Preaching also, that a sound, substantial,
well-collected, and well-woven Provision, of Plain, Instructive, Godly, and
Devout Discourses, altered, and increased, according to the Teachers growing
Abilities, and used over, and over, though in the same Desks, or Pulpits, would
be more edifying, and sink deeper into the Minds, and Consciences of the
Hearers, than all the greatest Afluence, and Redundance of new Words, and
Phrases multiplied, or interchanged, which the most fanciful, copious
Catechist, or Preacher can devise.

I have known some very learned and pious Men, and excellent Preachers, and
zealous Lovers of our Church, and Country; whose Welfare and Prosperity they
wisely judged to be inseparably joined; I say I have known these Persons
affectionately declare their Wishes that some such Order, as this I shall
subjoin, were observed by the greatest part, if not by all our Parochial
Ministers.

That, on the very entering into their Ministry, or at any time afterward, if
they have not done it before, they would set themselves to draw out the general
Lineaments, and larger Members of a whole Years, or perhaps a two Years Course
of Catechisms, and Sermons: following therein the annual Method of our Churches
Devotions, or any other Scheme they shall approve, and form to themselves;
provided it comprizes all the main Points of Christian Doctrine, and Practice.

That on this Stock they should set up; and, in the first, and second Year,
begin to fill up the void Spaces, and lay the first Colors, toward the
finishing, as well as their Sufficiency will then allow; still collecting, and
conveying all the Streams of their useful Reading and Learning into those
common Receptacles and Channels; and so successively Preaching them on, as the
Year turns round.

That ever after, in the whole Progress of their Ministry, they should still be
adding to, or cutting off from, or polishing those first imperfect Ideas;
altering the Method, and Shape of the whole, if needful; enforcing, or
increasing the Arguments, Illustrations, and Amplisications, if Wanting;
inserting new Doctrines before-unobserved, making new practical Inferences
before-untouched, as their Judgments, or Light, or Experience shall improve;
but especially, still drawing more, and more, over all, a new beautiful Skin,
and the lovely Features of Scripture Language: And then, without Scruple, or
Disguise, should preach them again, and again, so corrected, augmented, and in
some part renewed.

And I have heard these very wise Persons, some of them most excellent Fathers
of our Church, often conclude, that, by this, or some such Method, any
Preacher, though of no extraordinary-bright Endowments at first, yet of an honest
Mind, clear Sense, unwearied Industry, and judicious Learning, would, in
process of time, in all likelihood, have by him in store, a complete, domestic,
Course of sound, well-compacted, affecting Sermons; that, by GOD's Blessing,
might with the just Advantages of Delivery, be of far greater use to his
Conscientious Hearers, than all that pompous Novelty, and counterfeit Variety,
which some others may boast of.

I say counterfeit Variety. For so indeed it is often, upon trial, found to be.
And now I have faithfully told you the Opinion of those Great Men, I will
presume, under so safe a Shelter, to disclose my own Thoughts in this Business;
yet still with all deference, and candor toward any, who may differ from me
in this Particular.

We have lived in an Age, when the two Gifts, as they are wont to be called, of
Extempore Praying, and Extempore Preaching, have been more pretended to, and
magnified, than, I believe, they ever were before, or, I hope, ever will be
again, in this Church and Nation. Yet, for all I could ever learn, or observe,
the most sudden Readiness, and most profuse Exuberancy, in either of these
Ways, has been only Extempore in Show and Appearance, and very frequently but a
cunningly-dissembled Change of the very same Matter, and Words often repeated,
though not in the same order.

As to that of Extempore Praying, which therefore too many mistake for Praying
by the Spirit; it is manifest, that the most exercised, and most redundant
Faculty, in that kind, is, in reality, only Praying by the Fancy, or, the
Memory, not by the Spirit. They do but vary, and remove the Scripture Style,
and Language, or their own, into as many Places, and Shapes, and Figures, as
they can. And though they have acquired never so plentiful a Stock of them, yet
still the same Phrases, and Expressions, do so often come about again, that the
Disguise may quickly be seen through, by any attentive and intelligent Hearer.
So that, in plain terms, they who think themselves most skilful in this Art, do
really, all the while, only pray in set Forms disorderly set, and never ranged
into a certain Method. For which Cause, though they may not seem to be set Forms
to their deluded Auditors, yet they are so in themselves; and the very Persons
who use them most variously, and most artificially, cannot but know them to be
so.

This, my Brethren, seems to be all the great Mystery of the so much boasted
Power of Extempore Praying. And why may not the like be affirmed, in great
measure, of Extempore Preaching, which has so near an Affinity with the other?
Is not this also, at the Bottom, only a more crafty Management of the same
Phrases and Observations, the same Doctrines, and Applications, which they had
before provided, and composed, and reserved in their Memories?

Do but hear the most voluble Masters in this way, once or twice, or perhaps
oftener, as far as their Changes shall reach, and at first, no doubt, you will
be inclined to wonder at the strange Agility of their Imaginations, and compass
of their Inventions, and Nimbleness of their Utterance. But if you shall attend
them calmly, and constantly, the Vizour will be quickly pulled off, though they
manage it never so dexterously: You will at last find, they only walk forward,
and backward, and round about: One, it may be, in a larger Labyrinth than
another; but in a Labyrinth still; through the same Turnings and Windings
again, and again, and, for the most part, guided by the same clue.

The Explanations, perhaps, of their Texts, the Connexions, and Transitions of
the Parts, and some sudden Glosses, and Descants, and Flights of Fancy* may
seem new to you. But the material Points of Doctrine, and the common Places, to
which, upon any Loss, or Necessity, they have recourse, these they frequently
repeat, and apply, to several Subjects, with very little Alterations in the
Substance, oftentimes not in the Words. These are the constant Paths, which
they scruple not to walk over, and over again, 'till, if you follow them very
close, you may perceive, amidst all their Extempore Pretensions, they often
tread in the same Rounds 'till they have trodden them bare enough.

But, GOD be thanked, the Church of England neither requires, nor stands in
need of any such raptural (if I may so call it) or Enthusiastical Spirit of
Preaching. Here the more advised, and modest, the more deliberate and prepared
the Preacher is, the better he is furnished, by GOD's Grace, to deliver
effectually our Churches solid Sense, its fixed Precepts, its unalterable
Doctrines. Our Church pretends not to enter into Men's Judgments; merely by the
Affections; much less by the Passions to overthrow their Judgments. The Door,
which that strives first to open, is of the Understanding, and Conscience: It
is content, if by them, a Passage shall be made into the Affections.

I have detained you the longer on this Argument, because I am perfectly
convinced, that although one, or two Preachers in an Age, or perhaps some few
more, Men of extraordinary Parts, Assurance of Mind, and Volubility of Tongue,
may, by long use, make a remarkable Blaze, for a time, in this sudden,
unstudied Way: Yet, if it should ever become the general Custom of the whole
English Clergy, it would produce little more than Ignorance and Confidence in
many of our Preachers, and tempt many of the Laity, who presume themselves to
be equally gifted, to think they had an equal Right to the Ministry.

But what need I say any more of this Matter? It is confessed on all hands,
that if an Extempore kind of Preaching had been universally put in use among
us, from the beginning of our Reformation, the whole Church of Christ had been
much impoverished thereby, had been deprived of the best Treasury of Sermons,
that ever it was enriched with, since the Apostles, and their Successors, and
the primitive Fathers Times.

There is still behind one solemn Duty more, belonging to all of us, wherein I
would willingly suggest one serious Word of Counsel: And it concerns the Office
of Visiting the Sick. I would not doubt, but herein you generally do your
Parts, diligently, piously, and prudently. But there are some Things in this,
as well as in the others beforementioned, touching the Manner of doing it,
whereof the Observation may be of a peculiar and signal Benefit to your selves,
as well as to your Spiritual Patients.

If you please to consult the Rubricks relating to this Office, you will find,
you are more left to your own Liberty in this, than, I think, in any of the
rest. For this Duty of Friendship, and Charity, being supposed to be more in
private, the Rule it self in the Liturgy seems to give way to, nay to direct
some occasional Admonitions, and Exhortations, to which I do not remember, it
does equally empower you in any of the rest, out of the Pulpit.

Wherefore, to prepare your Thoughts, and to replenish your Minds thoroughly for
this Work not only of Ministerial Duty, but of Compassion, and Brotherly Love,
you shall not only do well to furnish your Memories, with a plentiful Store of
pious, moving, affectionate Expressions, out of the Book of Psalms, and other
practical and devotional Parts of the Holy Scriptures first; and, next to them,
out of our own Liturgy; and all these to be casually used, as shall be most
proper: But principally I would persuade you, to have some good, sound Body of
Casuistical Divinity, of your own studying I mean, to be always at hand, that
is, in your Hearts, as well as Heads.

You can scarce imagine, unless you have tried it, as, I hope, some of you
have, of what unspeakable Use this Divine Science of Cases of Conscience will
be to you upon any sudden, unforeseen Emergency in such Ghostly Visits.

Indeed the being a sound, and well-experienced Casuist is also a most
excellent Qualification, toward all the other Ends of your Ministerial Office;
there being no kind of Skill, or Proficiency in all your Theological Studies,
that more becomes a Divine of the Church of England; whose highest Spiritual
Art is to speak directly from his own Conscience to the Consciences of those
under his Pastoral Care: and this at all times; but most especially when they
are on their Sick-Beds: When Men's Consciences are usually most awakened, most
managable, most truly tender, and capable of the best Impressions.

So that I say it again, and can never say it too often, one of the most
necessary Provisions, and Instruments of your sacred Armory, which you are
always to carry about with you, in your own Souls, (for there it is best
lodged; thence it will be drawn forth, on all Occasions, with the quickest
Expedition,) is such a firm Sense, and general Scheme of the primitive,
incorrupt, practical, Casuistical Divinity: Such as, on the one side, is purged
from the Spiritual Crafts, and Equivocations of the Jesuits, and, on the other,
is freed from the Narrowness and Sourness of Enthusiasm.

I told you even now, it highly concerned you all to be well stocked with
plenty of good Matter for present Use, in the Visitation of the Sick; and that
for your own Sakes as much as theirs. And, in truth, so it is. A Clergyman
can, no way better, have his own Affections, and Passions regulated, tempered,
softened, mortified, sanctified, than by frequently performing this Office in a
right Godly manner.

By thus often seeing Death before our Eyes, in all its ghastly Shapes, we
cannot, if it be not the Fault of our own Insensibility, but be the better
accustomed, and made skilful to teach the whole, and the healthful, how to
prepare to meet that King of Terrors. By these Spiritual Anatomies of the
Dying, (if I may be allowed to use so bold a Metaphor,) we cannot but be made
more expert in discerning the inward Frames and Constitutions of the Living,
and to apply the properest Remedies to the Diseases of their Souls.

And, to instance now only in one Duty of such a faithful Spiritual Physician,
that of relieving and refreshing the Conscience thoroughly searched and purged,
and of comforting and restoring the true Penitent, What, I beseech you, can be
a more God-like Work among Men, than for us to be humbly serviceable in that,
which GOD owns to be His Work, to be skilled in not breaking the bruised Reed,
and not quenching the Smoking Flax? To be instrumental in performing our Lords
own Office, under the Parable of the good Samaritan, in binding up the wounded
Spirit, and pouring Wine, and Oil into it?

What can more adorn your Evangelical Ministry, than a soft, melting,
compassionate, Fellow-feeling, merciful Habit, and Disposition of Mind, and, as
the Scripture styles it, the Ornament of a meek Spirit? Or, Where can such a
blessed Temper be more seasonably practiced, or sooner learned and increased,
than in the Chambers of sick and dying Persons?

Now, my dear Brethren, having all along insisted, that, for the furnishing and
enriching your Minds with Spiritual Knowledge, toward the due performing
these, and all other Offices of your Holy Profession, you should make the Holy
Scriptures the principal Subject, and indeed the only final Center of all your
Studies; that your Doctrine should never swerve from that unerring Rule; your
very Words, Language, and Style, should every where taste of, and overflow with
those living, and inexhaustible Streams of Truth, and Godliness; it may be
expected, that, for the Sake only of the younger Divines among you, I should
add a Word or two, touching the Manner, and Method, of your studying these
sacred Writings. It is indeed a Business too large to be drawn within the
narrow compass of the Conclusion of such a Discourse. But since a true, at
least a competent Understanding of this Blessed Book, ought to be the
Beginning, and End of all our Spiritual Studies; and because I may speak to
some, whose Circumstances in this World are not so plentiful, as to enable them
to purchase large Libraries; yet their Industry is by no means to be
discouraged, nor their Zeal, in pursuing this Holy Skill, abated; I will open
to you my own simple Apprehensions in this Matter, with Submission still to
better Judgments.

My Opinion is, That although, without question, all manner of Secular, or
Ecclesiastical Learning, can never be more usefully employed, than in this
search, and is all little enough for it, and too little to complete it; yet,
when all is done, the Scripture it self is the best Expositor, the best
Commentator on it self.

It is apparent, that the whole New Testament is so to the whole Old Testament;
that being the real Light of the others figurative Darkness, and Mysteries; the
very Consummation of the others Prophecies, and Shadows of good Things to come.
But I will also aver, that every Part, every Book, every Sentence almost, both
of the Old and the New Testament, well-compared, and judiciously set one over
against the other, in their right View, and Reflection, cannot but prove, by
GOD's Blessing, an inestimable Explanation of each other: If a due and accurate
Care, I say, be taken to interpret their difficult Texts, by others of their
own, that are easier; and to collate their Words, Phrases, and Sense, that may
seem dark, or doubtful in some Places, with the same, or the like in other
Places, where they are clearer and more intelligible.

I cannot forbear, as I go along, to declare my Meaning a little fuller in this
Matter, by one special Instance. For, consider, I pray, how is it possible for
any, the most learned, or sagacious Student in Divinity, to conceive the true,
and genuine Sense of the Eloquent and Divine Epistle to the Hebrews, except he
has been also thoroughly conversant in the Writings of Moses? Or where can there
be found a clearer, a more Spiritual, and more illustrious Commentary on the
whole Ritual Part of the Pentateuch, than the Epistle to the Hebrews?

The like also may be proved of all other Portions of the Holy Book of GOD. And
indeed to manifest, what mutual Brightness, and Splendour, the Scripture gives
to and takes from it self, by comparing its several Parts, I need only urge the
frequent Practice of our Savior himself, and the inspired Penmen of the
Gospel, in thus expounding the Old Law by the New, and the New by the Old.

So that now I may with greater Freedom propound my humble Conceptions in this
Matter; That where Multitudes of Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, Histories are
wanting, (which are all very beneficial Helps, where they can be had, but,
where they cannot be come at,) if a Clergyman shall resort immediately to the
Fountain it self, first, and always imploring the Assistance of that Divine
Spirit, by which the Scriptures were written, and then, with a sincere Love of
the Truth, and Resolution to live according to it, without which GOD will
neither hear our Prayers, nor bless our Endeavors; and also with an humble
Heart, a devout Mind, and unquenchable Fervor of Spirit, and a right unbiased
Judgment; joined with a sufficient Skill in the Original Languages, and in
those other Introductory Studies; which no Man in Holy Orders, if it be not the
Bishop's Fault, as well as his own, can possibly be altogether to seek in: And
if withal he shall be assisted with some of the ancient, and some few of the
modern sound, and Orthodox Commentaries; he will, in all human Probability, by
an incessant, daily, and nightly meditating upon, and revolving in his Mind,
the Divine Text it self, become, in time, though not perhaps, as Apollos is said
to have been, Eloquent, and Mighty in the Scriptures, yet a Workman that
needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth.

The more to encourage your Studies in this Method, if you shall be
necessitated to it, give me leave to present you with one Example of a great
Divine, and Bishop, in the Time of King Charles the First, who was one of the
most Eminent Confessors then, and survived those Calamities, to die in Peace
and Tranquillity, several Years after the Return of King Charles the Second.

In the common Persecution, which then happened to the whole Episcopal Order,
this Reverend Person was exposed to a more than ordinary Degree of popular
Malice, and Rage; so that, without ever being once brought to his Trial, he was
closely imprisoned in the Tower, for almost twenty Years, and was not only
despoiled of his annual Revenue, and Personal Estate, in the first Fury of the
Civil Wars; but was also plundered of most of the Collections of his former
Labors, and a very considerable Library.

Wherefore, being thus laid up in Prison, without any prospect of Liberty,
having also a numerous Family to maintain, so that he was not able, in any
sort, to repair the Loss of his Books, and Papers, he betook himself to this
course of Study. Well-knowing, that he could have no faithfuller Companion for
his Solitude, nor surer Consolation in his Afflictions, than the Holy
Scriptures, he applied himself to them immediately, with little other help, but
what he had within himself, and the best Prints of the Originals in the Learned
Tongues, and their Translations in the Learned, and Modern, in both which he
was a great Master.

Thus however he firmly, and vigorously proceeded so far in the single Study of
the Scriptures, that long before his Enlargement, he had composed a great Mass
of Annotations on diverse Parts of the Bible. What is become of them, I know
not. If they are either imbezill'd, or suppressed, no doubt, it is to the great
Damage of the Church; since the Native Thoughts of a Great Man are generally,
at least, as good as the most Artificial.

Perhaps you will say, he might be able to do all this by the Strength of his
Memory, and the Variety of Learning he had laid up in it beforehand: And I
make no doubt but those were an exceeding great Assistance to him.

But what was very remarkable, and for which I am bold to produce him as an
Instance worthy your Imitation in this Particular, I know, he was often heard
to profess solemnly, that in all his former Studies, and various Reading, and
Observations, he had never met with a more useful Guide, or a surer
Interpreter, to direct his Paths in the dark Places of the lively Oracles, to
give Information to his Understanding in the obscure Passages, or Satisfaction
to his Conscience in the experimental Truths of them, than when he was thus
driven by Necessity, to the assiduous Contemplation of the Scripture alone, and
to weigh it by it self, as it were, in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

Had I not been already so tedious, there is one Particular behind, on which I
ought most justly to have expatiated, which now I can only name; And it is that
touching the Manner of your Conversation; that it be such, as may render you
Vessels, not only sanctified, but meet for your Masters Use, and, as St. Paul
also adds, Vessels of Honor.

I would therefore recommend to Men of your Character, not only the Innocence,
and Sincerity, but (as much as human Frailties will allow,) the Comeliness, and
the Amiableness of every Word, and Action of your Lives: That you especially
would not only strive to follow whatsoever Things are true, or honest, or just,
but moreover whatsoever Things are pure and lovely, and of good Report; that
you would think on these Things, not only if there be any Virtue, but if there
be any Praise of Virtue.

From you, my Brethren, it may well be expected* that your Behavior should not
only be unblameable, but, if I may be permitted so to say, something more than
strictly unblameable, and that not only to those within, but also toward them
who as yet are without; that you should not only keep your Minds clean, your
Hands unpolluted, your Tongues well-governed, your whole Course of Life
spotless, and upright, and your Consciences undefiled, but also your
Consciences void of Offense, and that toward Men, as well as toward GOD: That
you may be not only exemplary in your Families, in your Parishes, in the
Neighboring Country, in the whole Church of GOD, to the Gentry, to the Laity,
to your Brethren of the Clergy, to the Commonalty of our Communion, for your
Justice, Modesty, Sobriety, Prudence, Quietness, and Obedience to Superiors;
but that you would exercise, and extend all these Virtues, and also your
Humility, Long-suffering, good Will, good Wishes, Condescension, and
Affability, even beyond the Church it self, to the very Enemies of it: That
toward all Men you would sweeten the Gravity of your Behavior, and soften the
Strictness of your Conversation, with the Gentleness, and Suavity of your
Manners: That you would take special Care, as never to be obstinately in the
wrong, so, when you are sure you are in the right, even then never to be too
rigidly, austerely, or morosely in the right: That by all reasonable Respects,
mild and winning Converse, and not only by a ready Return, but by a cheerful
Prevention of all Christian good Offices; and even by making your very
Oppositions, and Contentions with those, that differ from you, if you shall
happen to be forced to any, as humane and friendly, and easy to be entreated,
as possible; by all this you may do your part to put to silence the Ignorance
of foolish and unreasonable Men. Who knows but you may convert, and gain some
of them? Who knows, but by your thus following not only Righteousness, and
Faith, but Peace and Charity; by your being not only apt to teach, but gentle
to all Men, and patient, in Meekness instructing those that oppose themselves;
who knows, but by these Means GOD peradventure will give the fiercest
Adversaries of our Church Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth? Most
certainly by these Means, or by no other, in all human Probability.

I cannot now enlarge, as I would, on this most necessary and seasonable
Argument. But unquestionably by thus keeping your selves free from haughty
Censoriousness, and untractable Peevishness, and sullen Darkness of Life, and
Manners; And by excelling in the contrary Virtues, you will, in the best way,
teach and convince all that dissent from you, how unworthy such a Pharisaical
Garb, and Disposition is of the true Christian Liberty, or Severity.

In short, by such a grave, sedate, decent, charitable Course, and Color of
your whole Lives, you will do your selves, and especially the Church of England
most Right. For our Church it self, wherever she is set in a true Light, cannot
but be found to be most of this sweet, meek, and truly pacific Temper, of any
Church in the Christian World.

I conclude therefore. Whoever among her Sons, and Members, much more among her
Teachers, and Fathers, as you, and we are, shall not do their utmost, to attain
to this gentle, obliging, charming Manner of Conversation, which our Church
prescribes toward all Men, Adversaries as well as Friends, I must repeat what
our Blessed Savior said to his Disciples, on the like Occasion, they know not
what Spirit they are of.

There is one or two short Requests more I am to make you, which chiefly
respect me, as your unworthy Bishop; and then I shall give ease to your
Patience.

One is to entreat, that you would be exceeding watchful, and indeed
religiously serupulous, for whom you give Certificates and Testimonials. For
what some of you, perhaps out of good Nature, or good Neighborhood, or an
Easiness, and not being able to resist Importunity, may at first think to be
only a Matter of Form, is not so to me. I have scarce any other way possible of
being rightly informed, from without, of the good Lives, or sufficient
Endowments of the Persons, but only by yours, and the like Testimonies. The Law
of the Land appoints that Method to me, and almost confines me to it. Whereas,
if you make this to be only a Business of private Favor, or Partiality, not of
public Judgment, and Conscience, I may chance to be led into very mischievous,
and sometimes irreparable Mistakes; only by that, which you may esteem but as a
piece of Bashfulness, and good Breeding: I may be induced to lay Hands on the
ignorant, and unworthy, merely by the Authority of your Names, the subscribing
of which you might think to be only an Office of common Humanity and Modesty.

My next and last Request to you, at this time, shall concern your Curates.
This it may suffice only to intimate to you. I know, I need not spend many
Words on it in this Assembly; because there is but a very small inconsiderable
Number of Pluralists in my Diocese. I am persuaded, they will be found upon
Inquiry the fewest of any in (...).

I cannot but say, I could be very well content there were more: Especially if
all, so qualified, would be rigorously true to the Church, in their Choice of
Substitutes, where they cannot always reside themselves.

For, as I will frankly own, I never yet heard an invincible Objection, against
the prudent Allowance, and moderate Use of Pluralities; but only some plausible
popular ones against the Abuse of them; which we are as much offended with as
any others can be: So, I verily believe, were this Legal Indulgence to the
Clergy so carefully observed every where, as, among diverse other good Ends of
it, to furnish us with a Race of painful, learned, Godly Curates; who, by this
way of Probation, may make, and show themselves worthy to be promoted to a
higher Charge; there Pluralities would be so far from being a Scandal, or
Prejudice, that they would conduce to the Strength, and Defense, as well as
they do to the Ease, and Ornament of the Church of England.

The great Obligation then I am to lay upon you; you, I mean, whom it does at
present concern, is this, That you would be very unmovably faithful to me, to
your selves, and to the whole Church of GOD, in the Persons, whom, on just
Occasions, you shall offer to me to be your Curates.

I do not only intend, that you should never Own, or Patronize any, as your
Curates, who really are not so, that, under that Color, by false Titles, they
may slip into Holy Orders. But I speak of such Instances where you really have
need of, and the Law allows you to have Curates. In such Cases, it is my
earnest Entreaty, that you would not only keep all the Legal Times of your own
Residence, and Hospitality; and not only afford your Curates a liberal
Maintenance in your Absence; Liberal, I mean, not only for their own
Livelihood, but for their continuing some kind of Hospitality too, to the Poor
at least: But that you, you especially, who are of greater Age, and Experience,
would watch over your Curates as your Fellow Laborers, your Friends, your
Probationers; for whose Improvement, in Divine Learning, Godly Conversation,
and Abilities of Teaching, you* or I, must be answerable to the Great Shepherd
of our Souls.

But it is high time to dismiss you. I beseech Almighty GOD to assist, and
prosper all your Labors, to His Glory, and your own Comfort in the Great Day
of Account. Toward the obtaining which Blessed Ends, you can never think of
any better* or indeed of any other Means, than by living up* in your private
Conversation, to the Religion you profess, and teach others; and, in your
public Office, by defending and supporting the Church established by Law in
this Kingdom.

A Religion, and a Church, that well deserves all this at your hands; being in
its Faith most Primitive, in its Orders most Apostolical; in its Discipline
most Moderate; in its Charity most Diffusive; in its Devotions most Spiritual
as to the Substance; most decent as to the Circumstances. In few Words, in its
Interests it is inviolably united with the Laws and Rights, with the
Well-Being, I had almost said with the Being, of the English Nation and
Government: In its Principles, it is irreconcilable with the Interests of
Popery, and the only impregnable Defense against its Return into this Land:
Which, it is much to be lamented, that the Dissenters will not see, and are
therefore Dissenters, since it is evident, the Papists themselves have always
seen it but too well.

What then remains? but that as Christians, as Englishmen, as Churchmen, we
should all make it our principal, our only great Concern, and pray to GOD the
Father of Mercies, that all others of our Character, throughout the Nation,
would make it theirs; to represent to the World the true Excellencies of such a
Religion, and such a Church, by our Doctrine and Example, with Industry, and
Vigilance, with Stedfastness, and Courage, in Meekness of Wisdom, and with Zeal
according to Knowledge.

And if we shall all, in this Manner, devote our selves to this Work, we may
then be assured, that the same Promise, which our Lord Christ, in some of his
last Words on Earth, made to his whole Church, will be eminently made good to
this, the purest part of it in these latter Ages of Christianity, that He
himself will be always with it even to the End of the World. Amen.

FINIS.

