The Conviction of Worldly-Vanity: OR, THE WANDERING PRODIGAL, And his RETURN:
IN TWO PARTS.

PART I.

Containing his debate with himself about his setting forward in search of the
Palace of Worldly Felicity; his harkening to the Advice of Folly, and
submitting himself, to her Conduct; the manner of her furnishing him out; of
the Progress he made, and the various Adventures he met with by the way: As
also the Entainment he found at his Arrival, and his Riotous Living there; With
his Description of the Vices Reigning therein.

PART II.

Giving a full Account of his Miraculous Escape from the Palace of Worldly
Felicity: Of the glorious Prospect he had of the Celestial City, And of the
Progress he made toward it, under the Conduct of Divine Grace: With the manner
of his Proceeding, and the several Occurrences he met with by the way: His
Arrival at the Palace of Virtue and True Felicity, and his Joyful Reception
there: His Excellent Description thereof, and of the Divine and Moral Virtues
which he found therein.

Both Pleasant and Profitable. Delivered under the Similitude of A Wandering
Youth.

London, Printed by G. L. for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in
the Poultrey. 1687.

Price Bound One Shilling.

Licensed,

November 27th. 1686. Robert Midgley

TO THE READER.
MAN is naturally an Inquisitive Creature, continually hankering after
Novelties; and tho for the most part a mere Stranger at home, regardless of the
Geography of his own Breast (the worst and most deplorable Ignorance!) would
yet seem Acquainted with all the World besides.

How Solicitous are we about the Af^^irs of Hungary! How Curious to un^^rstand
the Rarities of China! The Situation of Grand Cairo! The Magnificence of the
Mogul! And uncertain Tales of Prester John! But in the mean time, how supinely
negligent in managing our Domestic Talents, or improving our Understandings in
things of real use! How careless to Rescue our Cap^ivated Minds from the
Assaults of lewd Passions, the Scandal of Folly, and Tyran^y of Vice! How
wretchedly Remiss, or ^ather wholly Averse, from doing That which is the main
Errand we are sent into the World upon, viz. The Gloxifying our Creator, and
securing our Eternal Interests!

In Complaisance to this wandering-deprayed- Green-Sickness-Appetite of
Mankind, a multitude of Books of Travels into remote Regions have been
published in several Languages, and greedily bought up and perused: The
Relation of such various difficult Adventures, the description of Places, Modes
and Customs, new uncouth and far different from their own, being very
Grateful, and in some respects not altogether Unprofitable to the Readers.

Nay, so far is this Itch of Curiosity indulged, that not only True Histori^ or
such as pretend so to be, but Carloads of Romances, (whose Authors profess them
to be mere Idea's of Fancy, Coined on purpose to Divert and Amuse) are with
Applause entertained; whence too many People of either Sex, spend their most
precious Minutes upon the Exploits of imaginary Knighss: Errant, Enchanted
Castles, Monsters, Gyants^ and all the Riff-Raff of Amadis of Gaul, and the
seven Champions; or the more resin'd and sublimated Follies of the Grand Cyrus,
Cassandra, Astraea, etc. Not only to the loss of irretrievable Time, but
further Hazards; For in these kind of Writings, the Passion of sensual Love
being displayed with the highest Advantages, and (as it were exposed Naked) in
the most soft and delicate Expressions, it is difficult for such as read them,
not to be Singed with that wanton Flame; or preserve their Hearts free from
being Infected with the like Amarous Idaea's; by which means a Thousand young
Men and Women have been inveigled and undone.

Physicians instub born Diseases, which they cannot directly Master, advise to
change them by Art into some that are more mild and tractable: Since therefore
we cannot hope altogether to Cure this Fanciful Humor in Man, it will not be
amiss to try, if we can by a little Address, husband and employ it to wholesome
Use. To this purpose I here present thee, Courteous Reader, with a small Book
of Travels, but great in its Subject and Design; an Expedition more Glorious
than Jason's to Colchos for the Folden Fleece; or that of Columbus for
discovery of a New World: In short, A Voyage to the Holy Land, such as every
Mortal must of necessity undertake and go through with, or else be
everlastingly Miserable.

Here are the Two Roads of all flesh, graphically described; The one Broad,
Smooth, and Plain, as the Treacherous Ocean before it is Ruffled with a Storm,
and all the way down hill, bestrow'd with a Thousand Baits and Allurements,
always full of Jolly Company, but ending in the Dead Sea, or Lake of Perdition
and Destruction: The other, that turns off short on the Right hand, through the
Temple of Virtue, leading to that of Glory, the Passage Strait and Craggy,
beset with Thorns and Briars, Waylaid by Wolves, Foxes, Bears, Tigers, and all
sorts of Beasts of Prey; Lonesome, Unfrequented, and seeming Melancholy, were
it not for the still Music of the Bird of Paradise, which Chears up the
fainting Traveler, with its refreshing Notes; and a Beam of Light from the Son
of Righteousness, that directs his trembling Steps, till it Conducts him in the
End, to the Royal Palace of Endless Felicity.

Though the Discourse be throughout Allegorical, be assured here is nothing
Romantic, nothing Fictitious; but all Real, Substantial, and Important. It Is
said of those feigned Histories before mentioned, that they inspire such as
peruse them, with ardent desires of Imitation; I wish this serious Parable may
have the like Effect, to caution and deter thee from the pernicious Tract of
Vanity, and excite and encourage thy endeavors in the pursuit of Virtue,
Religion and Piety; which will be thy best Antidote in an infectious Season; A
seserious Godly Conversation and Practice, being an excellent Preservative
against Error of Doctrine. Keep the Heart right, and there is no great danger
of the Brain; whereas on the contrary, a loose Profane Life, and False
Opinions, like Ice and Water, do naturally beget each other.

It Is delivered in a homely plain Fami^lar style, that it might be serviceable
to the meanest Apprehensions; on whose Memories and Affections perhaps this
mode of writing may be more taking, and make deeper Impressions, then more
learned Treatises, nakedly laid down by way of Precept and Positive
Instructions.

This, Reader, whoever thou be, remember, That thou art or have been that very
Prodigal here intended in the first Part, And if thou do not amend thy
Course, and Return with him in the Second, thou must for Ever have thy Portion
with the Devil and his Angel, in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone.
To avoid which Dreadful Sentence on any poor Soul, If this mean Essay may, by
the Divine Blessing, prove any way instrumental, It will Superabundantly Reward
the pains taken in Compiling it, by

Thy Christian Friend and Servant, J. S.

The CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS.
PART I.
CHap. 1. The Introduction. Page 1. Chap. 2. How the Wandering Prodigal being
resolved to set forward to the Palace of Worldly Felicity, Folly (by the help
of Evil-will) provides him Clothes, Armor, Horse, and other Necessaries after
a strange manner; (...) Description thereof, with an Excellent Discourse of the
Uncertainty of Man's Life; and in what manner he proceeded. Page 10. Chap. 3.
How on the Way to the Palace of Worldly Felicity, he was Entertained by Folly,
with a Discourse of many of her Exploits in the World, etc. Page 29. Chap. 4.
How standing doubtful at the parting of two Ways, which to take, Voluptuousness
counseled him to take the Broad Left-hand-way, etc. Page 36. Chap. 5. How
Wisdom (with many persuasions) Entreated him to Enter at the strait Gate; and
how by the Counsel of Folly, he refused her Advice, etc. Page 44. Chap. 6. How
at the Persuasion of Folly, he took the Broad-way, leading to the Palace of
Worldly Felicity, rejecting the Counsel of Lady Wisdom; and how she threatened
him at parting, and what else happened. Page 53. Chap. 7. How in the Company of
Folly and Voluptuousness he Rid to the Palace of Worldly Felicity; and in what
manner he was Received and Entertained; with some Observatious thereon, etc.
Page 58. Chap. 8. Of his farther Entertainment and Progress in the Palace of
Worldly Felicity; and how (amongst other things) he had a Prospect of the
Tempter in his Deluding shape; and at Night was Entertained by Lust, etc. Page
69. Chap. 9. He Discourses of other Recreations in the Palace, and how he was
carried by Voluptuousness and Folly to Visit the seven Towers, and desoribes
the Wonders he saw there, with other things; as also a Prospect of its
Situation, etc. Page 79. Chap. 10. He is Entertained in a spacious
Banqueting House, and declares what Entertainment he met wiih there; as also
what further Promise Voluptuousness made him, etc. Page 101 Chap. 11. A
Description of his Fearful Dream, and how thereupon he became Pensive; his
Excellent Reflections on the Estate of a Sinful and Voluptuous Life: Yet
continues his former course, etc. Page 106. Chap. 12. How Riding to Recreate
himself in the Forest of Conscious-guilt, he suddenly perceived the Ruin of
the Palace of Worldly Felicity, sinking into the Gulf of confusion; and finds
himself in a Wretched and Miserable Estate: Reflects upon his past Life, and
becomes a True Penitent. Page 117.
PART II.
CHap. 1. He is Rescued from the miserable Condition he was in, by Divine
Grace; has a Prospect and Description of the Celestial City, and of the Joy he
conceived thereat, etc. Page 1. Chap. 2. After a true sense of his Sin, he
resolved to Travel toward the Celestial City; and of the difficulty he met
with at his setting out; how he Entered the Strait gate, where he met
Evangelist, and the Comfort he gave him. Page 11. Chap. 3. How having Entered
the Value of Humility, he came to the House of Repentance, and how he was there
Entertained; with Admonitions and Extolling the Divine Goodness. Page 20. Chap.
4. He is affrighted by the Terror of Conscience, but is at the earnest
Intercession of Sorrow for Sin, spared at the Command of Divine Grace; and
crying out against Presumption, is humbled under a Sense of Sin. Page 27. Chap.
5. Remembrance opens her Book, and Reads him a Comfortable Lecture, mostly
containing God's gracious Promises of Mercy and Forgiveness to True Penitents;
and thereby allays his Fears. Page 32. Chap. 6. He acknowledges his wonderful
Change, is Assaulted by Discouragement, resists him, and puts him to flight; he
goes from the School of Repentance, is like to run into the Path of Error, but
is prevented by Understanding, and conveyed to his House, with other matters of
Note. Page 37. Chap. 7. Understanding gives him Cordial Advice, and prepares
him to proceed to the House of Religion; and how after sound Counsel he went on
his way, and what else befell him. Page 44. Chap. 8. How he came to the House
of Religion (being enticed in the way to turn aside by Hypocrisy and others)
and of the Entertainment he found there; the good Instructions he received,
with many other matters. Page 47 Chap. 9. Being well Instructed, he passes on
to the Palace of True Felicity, des^r^ it, and is there Entertained with great
Joy, and has from thence a full Prospect of the Co^lestial City. Chap. 10. He
gives a Description of Virtue, together with her Noble Qualities, the means
whereby she Operates in the Soul of Man, and why to be desired. Page 59. Chap.
11. He gives a brief Account of Faith, so far as is warrantable; to what end
she serves, and the especial Marks of her Appearance, etc. as also of Hope and
Charity. Page 62. Chap. 12. He gives a Description of Prudence, Justice,
Fortitude and Temperance, excellently Representing them in their several
Capacities, Motions and Operations, etc. Page 69. Chap. 13. He is brought to
Perseverance, by whom and Understanding, he is further Instructed; He is
Recommended to her by Divine Grace; and has a Prospect of the Celestial City
from the Tower of Faith, whore he continues in Expectation. Page 73.
THE WANDERING PRODIGAL.
PART I.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
BEing Entered upon the Stage of this World, to Act my Part in the Scene of a
Short and Uncertain Life, compared (by the Wise and Learned) to things of the
least Duration and Moment, viz. Grass, the Flower of the Field, Smoke, a
Shadow, a Vapor, etc. And having spent my Nonage, or the Morning of my Days,
in pursuing Things lighter than Vanity; in following (with Toil and Weariness)
Recreations and Pleasures that created Trouble in the Aquirement, Folly in the
Possession, and a Reluctance (if not a Loathing) in the Enjoyment; I began to
consider with my self, That Man was made to a nobler end, and furnished with
larger desires, then to content himself with such Airy Trifles: Man, thought I,
Endu'd with an Immortal Soul, Inspired with Reason, and made capable of
Immortality hereafter, ought not (like the Bruit, whose life, when at a period,
mingles with the common Air, and renders him no more) to drown himself in
Sensuality, or be satisfied with things that yield no true Content, no real
Pleasure, no sincere Delight; and therefore giving my Imaginations scope, they
wandered over spaces immeasurable, and ruminated on various matters, but could
fix on nothing permanent. I had heard indeed, Psalm. 16.11. Psalm. 87, 3.
of the Land of True Felicity, where unspeakable Joys and Pleasures for
overmore are found; I had heard very Glorious things spoken of it, but found my
Understanding so clouded and darkened with the overshadowing of present matters,
that I knew not readily how to set forward to that desired Region; and the more
I paused, the more I found my self at a loss; which made me sometimes conclude I
was in the case of one that is newly awaked from a Dream, who all on a sudden
grasp^ the flying Air, and for a while remains in doubt whether those seeming
Pleasures or fantastic Forms that flattered his Slumbers, were real, or only
the effects of a roving Fancy. Thus puzzled and confounded, like one that is
lost in a Pathless Wilderness, and fears to advance or retreat, as not knowing
by which to be most or least Entangled, I still ^ood musing. When in this
con^^usion, Folly, (with whom I a little before supposed I had shaken hands,
and well hoped I had shaken off) came slyly behind me, and whispering me in the
Ear, suggested, Tha^ being in the prime and strength of my days, full of
Sprightful Blood and (...) Vigor, I ought not to leave the World, who courted
me with her miles, met me with her Favors, and ^rew'd my way with Pleasures
and Delights; who enforced her utmost Charms to please me, and exposed her
gaudy Beauties in their greatest Luster to tempt me, to woo and invite me t^
take Pleasure in her: I ought not (she said) to leave her, to seek I knew not
what, to run through Hazards and Dangers, Hardships and Extremities, to find
out Pleasures I knew not where, but rather to content my self in the possession
of such things as I had and might further experience: Nay further (continued
she) of such things as yet you are a stranger to: For truly my Son (said she)
there are many Pastime^ and Recreations that the World ca^ afford; nay will
afford you, if you prove not so ungrateful as to forsake her who has had such
Care of you, who ha^ so often laid you in her Bosom, and lulled you in her
Arms, nourished yo^ from your Infancy, and spread her down Softness to invite
and charm swee^ Slumber to your Eyes: Can you thin^ that I, who am so Ancient,
would tak^ all this pains to follow and (...) to this, if you were not a Son
that ^ entirely dote upon, though you have been so unkind as to go about (for ^
know not what reason) unnaturally t^ banish me your Company? Do you think (said
she) that I that am Ancient as Time, I who saw the first Man in Paradise, and
Obliged him to hearken to my Advice, have not had long Experience of things,
and consequently know what best will suit your Years? Come, come, (continued
she) you must, you shall lay by these Doubts, these Scruples, and return with
me to your kind Mistress: O, do but think with what Smiles she will receive you,
what new invented Pleasures, what Pastimes, with what Delights she will please
your Senses! nothing she will think too much, no Expense nor Cost too great.

Folly having uttered these Words with the most winning Eloquence and smoothest
Oratory, my former Thoughts began to vanish, or at least my Resolution, to
search out The Land of True Felicity, began to stagger; such Power and Force
had this bewitching Charmer to darken my Understanding, so that now I ^egan to
frame in my Mind nothing ^ut Worldly-Pleasures, Pastimes, and Recreations,
which taking the ^pportunity of such an unexpected Advantage, failed not to
Unite themselves with my Desires, and Insinuate into a Familiarity more then
ever with my Will and Affections, so that by over-powring my Reason, they soon
gained the Fortress; and now wholly submitting my self to the Conduct of Folly,
I run into Extravagance and Excess of Worldly-Delights, foolishly imagining to
find therein something that I might call True Felicity; notwithstanding I had
formerly (...) the Opinion of him, who by Experience found them to be no other
them Vanity and Vexation of Spirit; Eccles. 2.17.
and at that very Juncture, heard or fancied I heard a Voice sounding in my
Ears, Col. 3.2.
viz. Set your Heart on things above, and not on things below: But now Folly
prevailed to that Degree, that ^ Esteemed nothing better then her^ Council, and
became so far Enamored with her, that I not onl^ Listened to all she said
abroad, bu^ Resolved to take her into my House, or Heart, that she might be
always at Hand to Negotiate between me^ and the World; for now my Sense^ being
altogether Stupefied, I hoped by her Assistance to procure what ever might
contribute to my Felicity; but in the sequel found my self strangely mistaken,
as all those must ^xpect to do, who depending on Folly for Advice, put their
trust in ^^d rely upon Riches, Worldly-D^lights, Pleasures, Honors the Arm of
Flesh, or overwhelm them^^lves in the depth of S^nsuality. ^ or as well may Men
imagine to ^atch Fish by Angling in the Air, or ^ccessfully pursue their Game
with ^ounds in the Ocean, as to expect True Felicity in those things wherein it
is not, was not, nor ever will be; Mat. 7.16.
^or who can expect Grapes on Thorns, or Figgs on Thistles? Who can expect that
those things which are Momen^ary and perishing in themselves, ^ould satisfy an
Immortal-Soul, should fill and satiate the Mind of Man, for whose Desi^es the
Earth is ^uch too strait? Nor is there any ^ing less then the Center of Eternal
^clicity, that is able to render that ^atisfaction; nothing but the Abundance
of Gods House can satisfy, etc. Psalm. 36.8.
^or if we consider the World at best, Deuteronomy. 29.18.
^t's Honey is mingled with Gall, Wine mingled with Wormwood, even it is seeming
Pleasures carry a Sting in themselves, and are frequently mingled with
bitterness, as Hunger, Thirst, Heat and Cold, Weariness, Toit, Perplexity,
Vexation, Anger, Hatred, Envy, Disdain, Distrust, Flattery, Deceit,
Intemperance, and the like; who are Linked, as in a Chain, to their Contraries,
although not easily discerned by those who^ Folly blinds and deceives with a
fal^ Glass of Seeming-good. As t^^ Wise Man says when she sits to ca^
Passengers who go right on their way: Whose is Simple, let him turn (...)
hither; and as for him that wanter Understanding, she says to him Stolen
Waters are sweet, Prove. 9.15, 16, 17, 18.
and Brea^ Eaten its Secret is pleasant; but (...) knows not that the Dead
are ther^ and that her Guests are in the depth ^ Hell; he is deluded by her
Flatter^ and foresees not the danger of runnin^ rashly on in the ways of
Wickedne^^ till he is too frequently past Recovery, and must be Irreparably
lo^^ unless Wisdom (who is a Queen (...) great Command and Power) Resc^^ him,
by opening his Eyes, and i^^ lightning his Understanding by putting Holy Fear
into his Heart, and Teaching him her ways; wherefore, Happy is the Man that
finds Wisdom, Prove. 3.13.
^he Man that gets Understanding. But leaving her a while, I shall proceed
to tell what Progress (by the Advice and Direction of Folly) I ^ndertook, and
what befell me on ^e way, etc. as it falls in order (...) the Ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. II. How the Wandering Prodiga^ being resolved to set forward to the
Palace of Worldly Felicity, Folly (by the help of Evil^ will) provides him
Clothes, Ar^mor, Horse, and other Necessaries after a strange manner; his
D^scription thereof, with an exce^lent Discourse of the Vcertainty of Man's
Life; and in wha^ manner he proceeded.
Folly having Reconell'd me to the World, and Indulged me with trifling and
momentary pleasures, I found my self uneasy; for yet methought I had not met
wit^ what I desired; and being Ambiti^ ous of Novelty, and possessed with a^
Itching mind, of seeing strang^ Places and Things, Incited thereto^ by Reading
and Considering the Travels and Adventures of many, wh^ are styled Heroes,
spurred on b^ Pride and Vainglory, whom Folly had ^ately brought to my House,
and made ^y Intimate Acquaintance, nothing ^ould serve my turn, but Imust set
^orward in like manner as others had ^one; but to what intent or purpose, ^
could scarcely give my self any sa^iafaction; wherefore I resolved to ^nsult
Folly,; And to her, taking a ^onvenient Opportunity, I opened (...) Purpose,
and began with weak ^rguments, to Enforce the little Rea^n I had for such an
Undertaking: ^ut she Interrupting me, told me, that without any more trouble,
she highly approved of my Resolution, and that nothing could better please ^er,
then that I had put it by such ^n Vndertakeing, into her Power to ^ive me a
full Prospect of the Palace ^f Worldly Felicity, whose varioty (...) the
Buildings, Rare Devices, No^^^ Entertainments, and Magnificent ^^ghts, with
many other things of (...) mean Romp and Grandeur: She ex^^ll'd me to the
Skies; But above (...) excelled me for my Wit and Judg^ent, Courage and Brave
Resolution; ^ll by the help of Vainglory, She ^ff'd: me up so that degree,
that I came wise in my own conceit. Prove. 26.12.
Nor (said she) shall you go unprovided or alone, but Referring the care of all
to me, I shall so well furnish you, that nothing necessary for this Undertaking
shall be wanting: And hereupon she made a further Vow, to accompany me in all
my Undertakings of this kind, giving me to understand that she had accompanied
many in this Journey, and that to their no small satisfaction; for knowing all
the Places, and being well known is many of them, She doubted not to procure me
such entertainment as none that had been there before me had, or few who should
come after were likely to find. These Promises of Folly being made with such
earnest Expressions and Protestations, and with such an Innocent Look, I
concluded my self a happy man that I had got so kind a Guide, especially such
an one as was so well acquainted with the World, by whose means I was to find
such High Entertainment: So that I leaped for Joy, and hugged my self in such
security, that now ^ doubted not to possess what ever my blinded desires could
form: And though I took Evil for Good, Darkness for Light, Isa. 5.20.
and Falshhood for Truth; yet at that time I was so Obstinate, that I would not
consult the saying of the Wise Man, (viz.) There is Counsel, and he that takes
good Advice, shall not repent him hereafter; altogether forgetting it is
forbiden to take counsel of Fools, because such as is the Counselor, such must
needs the Counsel be: Nor is it consistent with Reason, Prove. 16.22.
but that the Counsel of a Fool must be F^lly: For as well may a River Run
backward, or Nature do her Work preposterously, as Wisdom and Folly cohabit
together: for as Solomon says, Prove. 14.8.
The Wisdom of the Prudent is to understand his way, but the Folly of Fools is
deceit: And again, Prove. 15.14.
The bea^t of him that has understanding seeks Knowledge, but the Mouth of a
Fool feeds (...) Foolishness. And as nothing is better then Good Counsel, so
nothing is more destructive than that which is Evil; for by that, Great and
Flourishing Kingdoms are often brought to misery and desolation, Sacred things
Poluted and Profaned, Cities Sacked and left in Flames, Laws subverted, and all
manner of Villainy committed, all manner of V^ce exalted, and Virtue trodan
under and oppressed. Yet at that time these things came not into my Head, for
being Intent upon my Journey, I left all to the managements of Folly, who
according to her Discretion, was wondrous busy in providing me Horse, Arm^,
Armor, and other necessaries. Now it so happened that Folly had a Kinsman of
hers called Evil will, who was an (...), and upon occasion could furnish such
Rash Travelers as my self, who were Recommended to him by Her, with all
materials; this Man she made acquainted with my design, who not only seemed to
approve it, but promised me whatever should be conceived necessary or
convenient, contenting himself to take Folly for his Ray Mistress; and so
giving my self no further trouble on that Occasion, I took my Leave till the
next Morning, but could o^carcely sleep for thinking of my Journey; and when I
did sleep, I Dreamed of nothing else; such deep Impressions had the words of
Fllay made both in my Mind and Fancy. All Night long methought nothing but
Pleasant Gardens, Stately Buildings, Beautiful Women, Hounds pursuing their
Game, Hawks flying in the Air, Horse-Racing, Running-matches, Dice, Cards,
Bowls, Banquets, Carousings, and the like, presenting themselves to my Eyes and
Taste; and to my Ears, Charming Voices and Melodious Strains. In fine, All my
Senses were delighted beyond degree such Power has Folly over the Imaginations
of those she makes her Slaves, and lulls into a fond Security.

Night being past over in the Effects of a fantastic Fancy, no sooner began
the Sun to shine in my Face, but Folly and Evil-Will (who was ever ready to
take the advantage of doing an Evil Turn,) entered my Chamber laden with the
Trumpery she had provided for my use: As a Shirt of Lasciviousness, a Doublet
of Lewd Desires, Hose of Vain Pleasures, and a Cap of Pride and Vainglory, a
Croslet of Inconstan^y, and a Steel Coat of Ignoran^^, Can^lets of Idleness,
and Vmbraces of tinency a Gorget of Luxury, and a Head piece of Lightness, a
Bucklet of Arrogance, and a Girdle of Intemperance, a Sword of Violence and
Rebellion, and a Lance called hope of long Life; then a Horse being the only
thing wanting, Folly called to Vanity her Principal Groom, to bring out the
Horse called Timerity or Rashness; and having placed each thing in order, Folly
gently raised me from my Bed of soft Delights, and Saluting me with an Amorot^
Ki^ with a Charming Tongue said in a Whispering Tone, See see, my Joy, your
trusty Handmaid is returned to Crown your Wishes with all you can desire;
therefore rise, my gentle dearest Love, my tender Happiness and chiefest Care,
and accept the Present I make thee. At these words, shaking off Drousiness, I
made her a return of thanks, and told her that I had not only now, but would
likewise for the future, cast all my care upon her, and live supinele, since I
had found her Diligence so great, and attended with so much Expedition, that I
could no: choose but wonder how she had brought to pass so great an Undertaking
in so short a time.

To this, Folly smilingly replye'd, I am ever Industrious in serving those that
confide in me, and am restless till I accomplish whatever is in my Power; and
thereupon she singled out what she had procured, that she ^ight the better put
them on in Order; and first, my Shirt of Lascivi^usness, which suddenly
wrought a trange Alteration in me, for no soo^^er was it over me, but I could
not endure to be roughly handled, but coveted Delicacy and gaudy Attire, ^oft
Couches and downey Repose, coveting and desiring nothing more ^hen unlawful
Love and forbiden Enjoyments. Then she put on my Doublet of Loud Desires, which
altogether palled my Fancy as to Sa^red things, and rendered me sitting or any
base and unseemly Enterprise; and the better to render me utterly insensible of
any thing that was Virtuous, she put on my Mose of Vain Pleasure, and fastened
them with Points of Vanity, which put me upon many Extravagances, too ^edious,
or at least, not convenient to be Recited: And now, least ^ should faint by the
way, she called Ill-government my Cook, to prepare a Breakfast of what Eart^
Air, or Sea would afford; which b^ her direction he contrived at so Lavish and
Profuse a Rate, that the Epicurean Luxury was not to b^ Compared there with;
and whilst ^ was Pampering my self to inflam^ or increase my youthful Blood,
there^ by to stir up lustful Desires and concupiscential Imaginations. Bolly
stil^ urging me to Eat and to Drink (...) Excess, I had Leisure somewhat more
seriously to ask her a few questions; my drift being, if possible, t^ know her
Original, and how she had managed her affairs from time to time: To which she
was 10th to return an Answer as to particulars, but I urging her to give a
brief Account, for indeed all her exploits might fill the Largest of Volumns,
and tire an Age of men to write them, she said, She stood in doubt whether her
first Exploit, from whence she Dated her being, was in Heavener on Earth:
Whether in Prompting or Persuading the Aspiring Angels to Rebel, against their
Creator, by which Da^ing and Unsuccessful Attempt, They lost the seat of Bliss
and Hap^yness, and Changed the glorious ^ealms of Light for Seats of Woe,
^arkness and Despair; or on Man a Paradise, who by her Counsel dis^beyed his
Maker, defaced his ^age lively Impressed on him, un^ing himself and his
Posterity; ^t of these she rather believed the ^mer, but however from Man's Fall
^e might be confident, and from ^at time (she said) she had been sel^^m Idle;
but on the contrary, Active, Strong and Vigorous, never ^^ck nor fearing Death
so long as Mankind lasts, for though Fools ^ie, yet she had by experience ^ound
that whilst succeeding Gene^^tions supply the Vacancy, she should not want a
Stock to live on, till Time was swallowed in Eternity

She would have proceeded, but ^ being desirous to be as Expeditious (...) my
Journey as it was possible, and not caring to lose any time, ^^treated her that
I might hear the ^^st on our way to the Palace of Worldly Felicity; For, said
I, b^ such an Entertainment the way wi^ seem much the shorter: she lik'^ my
motion, and quickly gave co^ sent. And by this time Breakfa^ being ended, I
prepared to put o^ my Armor; which swelled me wit^ so much Pride and Folly,
that ^ forgot Heaven and Heavenly things and Atheist-like, Laughed at
Immotality, ascribing all to Fate an^ Chance; So that being Blinded an^
Stupefied with Ignorance and Sel^ conceit, I followed my own va^ Inclinations,
saying and doing wha^ I pleased, or such things as seem'^ good in mine own
Eyes; forgetting That the way of Sinners is Paved wit^ Stones, but at the end
thereof is Hell^ Darkness and Pains; Eccles. 2.10. Psalm. 61.12.
and that Go^ Rewards every Man according to h^ Work. Nor what the Apostle
say^ Look what a Man Sows, that sha^ he also Reap; Call. 6.7, 8,
he that Sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh Reap Corruption. etc. For
these things were justle^ out of my Head and Heart b^ Darling-Lusts and
Crouding-Iniqui^ties, that left no thought of any thing that was good; So
wretche^ (...) the Man that gives himself up to ^e Ruled and Guided by Folly;
so ^uch he Degenerates, that he is not ^^ting to bear the Name or Cogni^^nce of
Man, but rather that of ^^uit, which in it is kind surpasses ^^m: For all
Creatures (Man Excep^^d) perform the End and Office for ^^ich they were
Created, and ^^tinue in their pristine Estate of ^^tive Innocence, as not being
^^bled, by reason of their Irratio^^ty, to discern between Good and ^^il, and
consequently are left ^^cusable; but, Psalm. 49.20.
Man that knows, ^^d will not consider, is like the Beast ^^t perishes, and
far more unhappy ^^en he; For when the Beast dies, he ^^verts to Dust, and is
no more; but (...) for Man, Eccles. ^.9.
God will bring him to ^^dgment.

And now as I was saying, Folly beginning to put on my Armor, observed this
Method: First she put on my Steel-Coat of Ignorance, and (...) Croslet of
Inconstancy, where^^on I became not only forgetful of ^^od things, but likewise
variable ^^d inconstant as the Wind, conti^^ally Altering and Changing, not
Caring or Regarding what I sai^ or did; being altogether one (...) them of whom
St. Paul speaks, Romans 1.21, 22.
vi^ Because that when they knew God, the Glorified him not as God, neither w^^
they Thankful, but became Vain (...) their Imagirtations, and their fool^
Hearts were Darkened; profess^^ themselves to be Wise, they becau^^ Fools. Then
she put on my Umb^^ces of Arrogance, by which mea^ I ^rew Cateless and
Presumption undertaking to do and perfo^ things that were too Mighty for (...)
which I neither understood, nor (...) able to fulfill; yet I Proudly boas^ great
Things, and lifted my self (...) in Conceit above my Fellows. Th^^ on went my
Gorget of Glutton which prompted me to commit (...) cleanness; for filled with
Wine a^^ sumptuous Fare above measure, t^^ boiling Blood inflamed my Vei^^ and
prompted me to strange desire^ For as the Poet has it, Ceres and Bacchus are to
Venus Friends,
For charged with them, Mankind to Leudness tends.


Now so it came to pass, that over ^hese she stripped Presumption; the which,
though it swelled me to a ^onsterous Bulk, I could little or nothing perceive,
and being Wise in ^^y own Conceit, what others told ^^e, I was far from
believing; though ^^me of them, and those none of the ^eanest, seeing I was not
to be ^eclaim'd, dealt plainly with me, ^^d said to each other, Prove. 26.12.
viz. There (...) more hopes of a Fool, then of him: and the better to secure
these, on ^ent my Girdle of Intemperance, which made me Launch out beyond
^asure, by letting loose the Reins (...) Letehery, and all other fleshly Lusts
and Affections; and to this ^he fastened my Sword of Violence and ^bellion, so
that putting my Confi^^nce therein, I spared not to Rebel ^^ainst Heaven and
Earth, by ^^ansgressing the Laws of God and (...), and Violating the sacred
Vows of my Baptism, without Reluctance or Regret; so that it might justly be
said, whilst I lived, I was dead in Sins and Trespasses. Ephesians. 2.1.
Then on my Head, she placed a Helmet of Wantonness, decked with the gaudy
Plumes of a Roving and Restle^ Fancy, and an Evil Imagination, whereby I might
Contemn or Brave my Superiors. Next to these came the Gantlets of Idleness,
which being on, I took Pride, and began to Glory in the sufficiency of my
Riches and other Abilities, especially in my Wisdom and Strength; when indeed I
had neither; and rathe^ then want something to Brag of, i^ Boasted as a Glory,
what was indeed ^ my Shame, as my Drunkenness ^ Debauchery, and other Vices an^
In^i^mities, So apt is Man, when void of Grace and True Wisdom^ to abuse
himself, when he think^ what he does, resounds to his Credit^ And of such as
these the Prophet Hosea speaks, Hos. 4.7.
when he says, I will turn their Glory into Shame. Then that I might not Blush
at the Commission of any known Sin, she ca^ about my Neck the Buckler of
I^pudence, so that I bogled at nothing, ^^ut set my Face like a Flint against
^^ose that Reproved me: And now ^^thing wanted, but my Horse ^^meritie, and my
Lance, called, ^^e Hope of long Life, which were ^^ewise at Hand, little
considering ^^e Danger of the one, and the ^^ncertainty of the other: As for
(...) latter, upon which all my Hopes ^^pended, if I had considered and
^^sulted Wisdom, I should have and by Comparison, That the World being as one
continued ^^orm, Men rise up like Bubbles in ^^eir several Generations,
descending a Jove Pluvio, from God and ^^e Dew of Heaven, from a Tear ^^d Drop
of Man, from Nature and ^^ovidence; and some of these in^^ntly sink into the
Deluge of their ^^t Parents, and are obscured in a ^^et of Water, having no
other business in the World, then to be Born, that they might be able to ^ie;
others float up and down two (...) three turns, and suddenly disap^^ar, giving
place to others; and ^^ey that Live longest upon the ^^ce of the Waters, are in
Perpetual motion, and restless, till being crushed with a greater drop of a
Cloud, they sink into flatness, and are no more visible to mortal Eyes: So is
every Man born in Vanity and Sin; he comes up like a Mushroom, that in a Night
thrusts its Head into the Air, and before the falling Sun it droops and dies;
some of them without any other Intrest in the Affairs of the World, then that
they made their Parents a little glad, and very sorrowful; others ride longer
in the Storm, it may be till seven years of Vanity be expired, and then the
Sur^ perad venture shines hot upon their Heads, and they fall into the shades
below, into the coverture of Death, Darkness and the Grave, where they are
laid up till the Resurrection a but if the Bubble stand a bigger Shock and
escape Innumerable Danger that threaten it, then the young man dances Empty and
Gay, shining like a Doves neck, or the Image of a Rainbow, which has no
substance but only the representation of Co^ours, and so dances out the gayety
o^ his Youth, being all the while in ^ Storm; and the reason why he endures, is
because a ^greater drop falls not on him to crush him, or that he sink not
under the pressure of a Load of Indigested Meat, or be quenched by a disorderly
Surfeit, or by the effects of a prevalent Humor; wherefore to preserve a Man
alive in the midst of so many and so various Hazards and Chances, is as great a
Miracle as to Create him; ^o raise him out of Nothing, and to preserve him from
falling into Nothing, are equal Issues of Almighty Power: And therefore the
Sages of the World have contended for words most Properly or Emblema^ically
signifying the shortness of Man's Life; Homer calls it a Leaf, the ^he smallest
part of a weak and fading Plant; Pindar calls it the Dream of ^ Shadow; and
another, the Dream ^f the Shadow of Smoke: but to conclude, St. James, James
4.14.
Inspired by a more Excellent Spirit, says That our Life is but a Vapor. But
these Considerations, as I said, were justled out of my Head, as indeed they
are out of the Heads of too many in the World, ^ho put far away the Evil Day;
Amo^ 6.3
Wherefore mounting my Horse Temerity, and taking my Lance in my hand, Folly
likewise mounted in an Airey Garb (which much exposed her to the Wind, and
seemed to most that beheld it lighter then Vanity) upon a Jennet called
Simplicity; and Evil-will trudged it on foot, as our Attendant, and so we set
forward at a venture.

CHAP. III. How on the way to the Palace of Worldly Felicity, Folly
entertained him with a Discourse of many of her Exploits in the World, etc.
YOu cannot but Imagine that being Accouter'd and Accompa^^ed as I was, that, I
thought my self ^^mething, when I was Nothing; Gal. 6.3
and ^^gan to cast great things in my thoughts, being no less Possessed with
Pride and Haughtiness of mind, then Nebuchadnezar, when he boasted of ^s
Magnificent Structure, saying, Dan. 30.
Is (...) this great Babel, which I have Built (...) the House of the Kingdom,
and for the Honor of my Majesty? Nor indeed did I altogether desist from
framing Castles in the Air, Folly had so besotted my Reason and blinded my
Understanding.

By this time the Road being som^^ at Winding, we had lost sight (...) my
House, and I calling to mind the Promise of Folly, renewed my rerequest,
Entreating her that she would proceed to give me a further account of her
managing Affairs, to rehearse what People she had Governed, how they were Ruled,
Conducted, and Councel'd: To which she made the followign Reply.

My Exploits (said she) are so many, and Managements so great, that neither my
Memory nor my Tongue can contain nor render an Account thereof; but of such as
do Occur, I shall give a brief Account. You have heard how Angels and Man
Embraced my Counsel, though they came off Losers, by being unsuccessful in
their Attempts, as what could they less expect in undertaking matters of so
high and mysterious a quality and consequence? I counseled Cain, Adam's first
born, (...) 4.4, 5, 8, 11.
when he saw his Sacrifice (which he offered up without Faith) unsuccessful, to
Remove his Brother Abel, (who found Acceptance) out of the way by Murdering
him; for which he entailed Gods Wrath and Displeasure upon himself and his
Posterity. I caused the Ancient Giants t^ fill the Earth with Violence, Gen
6.11.
and t^ corrupt their ways before their Maker, which Incensed him to send a
De^uge, and destroy all but Eight Persons; (...) Lulled them likewise into a
security ^^hilst the Ark was Building, that so ^^ey might make no Provision for
their ^^fety. I Counseled Ham the Son of ^^oah the Patriarch, after the
dread^ul Inundation, Genesis 9 22, 25,
to despise his Fathers ^akedness, whereby he Incurred a ^urse upon himself and
his Posterity. Counseled the Children of the East, ^^der the Mighty Nimrod,
Genesis 11.
to build (...) Ridiculous Tower upon the Plains of ^hinar, for which
Vainglorious At^^mpt to get themselves a Name, their ^anguage was Confounded,
and they ^^atered to the Ends of the Earth; and being so scater'd, I taught
them to ^^rget their Maker, Romans 1.25.
and Worship the Creature instead of the Creator I Coun^^lled the People of
Sodom to commit ^^natural Folly, Genesis 19
for which themselves and their City were Consumed with Fire. I Counseled
Lot's Wife to disobey in Looking Back, for which she was turned into a Pillar
of Salt; Genesis 19.26, 33, 35
and I (...) was that caused his Daughters to make him Drunk and Commit Incest
^ith him. Genesis 39 7.
I Counseled Joseph's Mi^ress to Attempt his Chastity. I Counseled Pharaoh to
Oppress the Children of Israel in the Land of Goshen, Exo. 1.11, 16.
an^ vainly attempt to hinder their Increas^ by destroying their Male Children;
an^ overcome by my Persuasion, notwithstanding the many Judgments th^^ might
have deterred him fre^ striving against Heaven, he rash^ pursued them into the
Red Sea, Exodus 14.27.28,
where he and all the Memphian Cavalry we^ over whelmed by the Returning Wav^ I
Counseled the Israelites to murm^ against their Superior, and to da^^ about
the Calf in Horeb, Exodus 32.6, 27, 28.
for which many of them fell by the Sword, Earth^ quake and Pestilence. Numb.
22.6, 12.
I Cause^ Balack to send for Balaam to curse the Israelites, when on the
contrary he was forced to Bless them. I Caused Acha^ to conceal the Wedg, Josh.
7.20 21.25.
etc. for which (...) lost his Life. I Caused Sisera to seck for safety in the
Tent of Jael, Judge. 4.18 19, 20, 21.
where he lost his Life. I caused Holofernis to drown himself in Wine and
Lustfu^ Thoughts, 1 Samuel 2.12.
whilst he gave Judith a^ opportunity to take ^is Head. I Counseled Ely 's
Sons to commit those Wickednesses and Abominations, for which Incensing Gods
Displeasure against them, 2 Samuel 4.11,
they fell in Battle. I Counselle^ ^^e Philistians to send for Sampson, (...)
order to make them Pastime, when ^^eaning on the Pillars of the House, (...)
pulled it about their Ears, Judge. 16.25, 30.
and ^^ew more of his Enemies at his Death ^^en he had done in his Lifetime. 1 Samuel 15.9.
I ^^aused Saul to spare Agag and his ^^ocks, for which disobedience the
^^ngdom of Israel was Rent from him (...) his Posterity. By my Advice he (...)
to Enquire of the Estate of his Affairs at the Oracle of Hell, 1 Samuel 28 7.
and the (...) Day fell on his Sword at Gil^^a. I Counseled David to commit
F^lly with Uriah 's Wife, 2 Samuel 11 3, 4 and 15 13. and 13.14.
for which he was Obliged to fly before his Son Absalom. I Counseled Amnon to
defile Thamar his Sister, for which he Lost (...) Life. I caused Jeroboam to
set up Calves in Dan and Bethel. 1 Kins. 12.18, 29.
I caused Haman to procure a Decree for the Destruction of the Jews, Esth. 3.12
13.
which fell upon himself and his House. I Caused Ahab to covet Naboth 's
Vineyard and Jesabel to cause it is Possessor to be Slain, 1 Kings 21
for which she and her Posterity were Rooted out. Jonah. 1.3.
I Caused Jonah to disobey his Maker, by foolishly attempting to fly from him
who is every where, for which he suffered a three Days Imprisonment in the
Whales Belly. I caused the Servants of Darius (...) procure Daniel 's being
cast into the Den of Lions, Dan. 6.7.
which turned to theirs their Wives and Childrens Destruction. I counseled the
two Elders to attempt the Chastity of Susanna, and ^^terwards accuse her of
Adultery, wh^^ turned to their own Disgrace and Ru^ine. Mat. 14.7.
I caused Herod to make that ra^^ Vow, by the means of which John t^^ Baptist
lost his Head. Mat. 26.47.
I counsell^^ Judas to betray his Master, and th^^ to Hang himself. Acts 5.1,
2, 3.
I caused Ananias a^^ Saphira to Be-ly themselves, for whi^^ they lost their
Lives.

Folly having proceeded thus fa^ in declaring her Tragical Adventures, I was so
terrified with the Thought^ of them, that I found my self Obliged to entreat
her that she wou^^ Desist; for I had enough of this kin^^ of Discourse to
Create in me (...) Dislke of her further Conduct, lea^ she should show me some
such slipe^ Trick, as she had done to others^ yet much a do had I to Perswad^
her to give over; for when he^ Hand was in, she would have ru^ over
Ten-thousand other Stories^ mentioned as well in Civil as Sacred History; in
which it seems, she was a Party or Counselor. But omit^^ng them, as I said,
at my entreaty, (...) began to question her how far it (...) as to the Palace
of Worldly-Felicity, ^hither we were going; and also, that I might not be
altogether a ^^ranger when I came thither, that (...) would give me a further
Description of it, then yet I had heard from any Hand; which she promised to
(...): But just as she was about to ^^gin, we came to a place where the way
parted.

CHAP. IV. How, standing Doubtful at t^^ parting of two Ways, which (...) take,
Voluptuousness Cou^^ sell'd him to take the Bro^^ Left-hand-Way, etc.
WHether of the two Ways (...) take at the first Sight, (...) found Folly, by
her pausing was a^^ loss, and that which made her mo^^ carefully consider (if
Folly may ev^^ be said to do so) was because th^^ the Sun grew Low, and drew
neart^^ it is Setting: Now whilst she wa^^ Musing (which was not long) I ha^^
opportunity to Discover that t^^ Right-hand-Way was exceedi^^ Narrow, enclosed
with Threatni^^ Rocks and Precipices; as also full (...) Mountains, which
hanging over, (...) a manner met each other, so that a Noonday they cast a
sullen Shade besides, it was mostly over-grow with Thorns and full of Clumper
that made it seem Unpleasant to ^^ravelers, especially such as took ^^olly for
their Guide. When on ^^he other Hand, the Way was Broad, ^^een and Smooth,
Bordered on ^^her side with pleasant Rivers and ^^reading Trees, that cast a
fragrant ^^nell, Enameled with Flowers of ^^vers kinds; and this Way Folly ^^on
Pitched upon: Nor was my Horse less Resolute (which appeared by his Flouncing
and Floundering when I attempted Rein him in) then she, to Carry me that way;
nay, indeed my Inclinations were not Uncomplyant; yet Remembering what Stories
my Guide had told me, I was not altogether without some doubt, that I might
meet with ^^oughs, Quagmires, Snares, or something of the like nature; and the
rather, because I fancied at the same time I heard a Voice, saying, Mat. 7.13,
14.
Enter ye in at the straight Gate, for wide is the Gate and broad is the Way,
that leads to Destruction, and many there ^^ that go in thereat; but straight
is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that ^^^deth unto Life, and few there be
(...) find it. This made me a little startle, and the more because I foun^
something Checking me within, as I attempted to go forward toward the green
way, and suggested the Danger on this manner, Heb. 12.25.
viz. See that y^ Refuse not him that Speaks; for if the escaped not who
Refused him who Spo^ on Earth, how much more shall n^ thou escape, if thou
turnest from hi^ that Speaks in Heaven: Thou a^ the Man that have Refused his
Couns^ and would have none of his Advice thou art Running from the Ways
(...) Peace, Prove. 1.24, 25.
even almost to the hazar^ of thy Eternal Welfare.

This notwithstanding, Folly, w^^ began to deride my Fears, and pr^^ mise me a
Thousand Felicities whipped on my Horse (who was (...) himself too free) began a
little (...) cool my Courage, and make (...) more apprehensive of Danger; an^
the rather (which was a great wonder) because I at that time perceiv'^ no body
upon the Road, though the prints of Innumerable Foot-step^ appeared, especially
of such as ha^gon forward, yet but a small number in Comparison of those that
ha^ returned. But so it happened, tha^ whilst Folly and I were in some De^^te
about the matter, I espied at a ^stance two Ladies coming toward ^^e place of
Parley; which did not a ^^tle Rejoice me, for I thought now ^ ^ight enquire
something, that one ^^y or other might turn to my Ad^^^tage; but my Eye was most
upon (...) that came down the broad Way, and that for two Reasons: First
because she was Nearest: And Secondly because she was exceeding Gay, being
Clothed in Purple and Scarlet, ^^broyder'd with Gold, and studded over with
Pearls and Gems of inestimable Value; her Locks, that waved in careless
Ringlets in the Wind, dang^^^^ upon her rising Breasts, which ^^^m'd two Hills
of driven Snow; her Hands seemed Wax cast in the choi^est Mould, and to her
Lineaments of Body, for Neatness and Shape, nothing that I had seen might be in
my Eyes Comparable; her Brows bent Archwise, like a Bow; her Forehead, on which
the Curling Amber flowed, seemed Alablaster, and her Eyes two Sears or Orient
Diamonds; her Nose was comely, bending by degrees from it is Foundation, or it is
Rise; and in her Cheeks the Roses and Lilies strove for Mastery; her Lips, that
blushed with Rubies, enclosed Transparent Pearls; and her smooth Chin seemed
polished Ivory; the Horse she Rid on, I must confess was Dark, yet of the
largest Size, and trapp'd with Silver, proudly Neighing, and seeming by his
proud and lofty Bounds to scorn the Ground that Bore him: This Sight I beheld
with some Delight, and for a time wondered what it meant, especially that so
great a Personage should come without Attendance; but long my wonder lasted
not, before I was convinced she came to meet me, and congratulate my Arrival;
having (as I afterward understood by Folly) changed her Name, the better to
deceive me, from Worldly-Pleasures, who was my former Mistress, to that of the
Lady Voluptuousness, by some called Excess of Pleasure, Riot, Dalliance, and a
hundred other Names; but I had scarce leisure to make any further Observations,
before she Accosted me in this manner, her Eyes sparkling Love and Lascivious
Desires:

O my Lovly Youth (said she) how happy am I made this Day, that I have found
you thus Attired, thus bent, and thus resolved; the Sight's so pleasing,
nothing could have pleased me more; I heard indeed of your approach by your
Servant Evil-Will, who ran before to bring me tidings: Therefore came I forth
to meet thee, and deligently to seek thy Face, Pro. 15, 16, 17, 18 19, 20.
and I have found thee; I have decked my Bed with Tapestry, with carved Work,
with fine Linen of Egypt; I have Perfumed my Bed with Myrrh, Aloes and
Cinnamon: Come, let us take our fill of Love till the Morning, let us Solace our
selves with Loves; for the Good Man is not at home, he is gone a long Journey,
he has taken a bag of Money with him and will come home at the day appointed.
Upon this, pausing a while with an amorous Leer and winning Gesture, casting an
Eye with half a Face, the better to ensnare my Affections, after she had
whispered with Folly, she thus proceeded: I perceive (said she) by your
Attendant Folly, my Dear and Affectionate Kinswoman, that you are in doubt of
your way; Alas how could you in the Gayety of all your Youth and Blooming
Glory, harbor such a Scruple, when so great a disproportion is evident. Think
you, or at least can ^ enter into your Imagination, that you craggy Path,
encompassed with threatening Dangers on every side, into which whomsoever
enters, must be sure to meet with Wearyness, Toil, Watchings, Fastings,
Mortifications, and find it (beside what appears at a distance) hung with
Sighs, and overflowed with Tears, Ecchoing Groans from every Rock, and strewn
with Hands, Eyes and Feet, which Pilgrims by reason of the Thorny Way, have
been obliged to leave behind them; besides, he that enters there, must leave
behind him that which he most esteems, the dearest, nearest, and greatest
Sollace of Life, that is, Mat. 11.25. Mark 8.35. Luke 8.24.
Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Brethren, Sisters, Yea, and what is dearest of
al^ to him, his own Life; and all this to take up a Cross. Consider again, and
think by the Pleasantness of this Left-hand-way, by the Gayety and Gaudiness
that already offers, what the rest may be; have not you heard of Soft Repose,
Pastimes, Recreations, Tuneful Voices, and Melodious Sounds, with Charming
Ladies, whose quaint ^evices to please their Lovers, Create ^ach hour a
Thousand Transports, ^^sides the other Recreations that ^ntervene, in Reciting
which, my Tongue ^ould faulter, and your Patience tire. ^ut let it suffice that
I am come to be ^our Guide and Governess, and leaving (...) Folly and Me the
Conduct and Disposal of your Affairs, you shall not ^nly instantly arrive at
the Palace of Worldly Felicity, but there be enter^ain'd beyond your Wish: And
with that, She caught me, and kissed me with ^n Impudent Face. But overcome
with the Dread of the one, and the Allurements of the other, I knew not at that
time that she had cast down many Wounded, Prove. 7.26.27.
nor that many strong Men have been slain by her, neither that hers is the way
to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death.

CHAP V. How Wisdom with many Persuasions Entreated him to enter at the Strait
Gate; and how by the Counsel of Folly, he Refused her Advice, etc.
SO it happened, that before I had time to reply, or she to proceed, the other
Lady came up, in whose Countenance Wisdom and Virtue were lively Portrayed;
Modesty, Chastity, Sobriety, and Gravity sat on her Face; her Garb was Comely
and Neat, though Plain; notwithstanding which, it seems she is the Kings
Daughter, Psalm. 45.
and is all Glorious within, for in that her Beauty consists; At her approach,
the other gave somewhat back, as being dashed with the presence of so noble a
Lady; when with a Look that darted sweetness and cordial Love, Number. 22.23.
she thus began:

Because (said she) thy ways are Perverse before me, therefore came I out to
withstand thee: Know thou continued she) wretched Man, to whom ^ou have
harkned? What Siren it is that Attempts to Charm thee into security ^ith her
deluding Voice? Know thou ^^at her Footsteps tend to Hell, Prove 7.27.
that ^er ways (how pleasant soever they ^ay seem) Lead to Death and
De^ruction? Consider how thou have ^lready Rebelled against the King of Heaven,
thy Lord and Maker, dally'd ^ith, him, and even Provoked his ^atience and long
Suffering: how has ^e born with thee, and with an Eye of ^bservation beheld thy
youthful Follies ^^d Vanities? How often have I (in his Name) wooed thee that
thou would ^urne away from Iniquity? How ^ften won'd I have turned thine
Eyes from beholding Vanity, and yet thou ^as^ pursued thine own vain
Imaginati^^s, and hate to be Reformed, blindly Rushing on like a Horse upon a
charged Spear; Prove 22. and 23 Ver.
going like an Ox to the ^laughter, or a Fool to the correction of the Stocks;
as a Bird hastes ^o the Snare, and knows not that ^ is for his Life.
Consider then, at ^ast in this thy Day, Luke 13.24.
before it be too ^ate, and enter in at the straight ^ate; for I say unto you
Many shall strive to enter in, and shall not (...) able: for those that attempt
it without my assistance, will find it altogethe^ Impossible, What is it you
can ask, (...) this Flaterer Promise, that I am (...) able to give? She indeed
may Prom^ fair, but all her Gifts and seems Pleasures are but gilded Baits,
thi^ Lighter then Vanity, and prove b^ terness in the End: Sam 2.26.
What if the w^ I would lead you seem at first hard a^ difficult? It will (when
you are p^ that difficulty) seem Pleasant and Ea^ And then consider the Reward
that t^ King, whose Kingdom is not of the World, will give you, Johu 18.36.
viz. a Crow^ of Life, an Exceeding weight (...) Glory, Rev. 2.20 2 Cor 4.17.
etc. Consider again, that I a^ the Daughter of the King, who cond^scend to
Invite you to prepare a Weddi^^ Garment, that you may come to t^^ Marriage
Supper; and can you deny (...) If you doubt that I am able to man those that
take my Counsel truly happ^ Consider what the Wisest of Men (...) Testified of
me, Prove 3.13 14 15 16 17 18.
viz. Happy is (...) man that finds Wisdom, and (...) man that gets
Understandin^ for the Merchandise of it, is bett^^ then the Merchandise of
Silver, a^^ ^he gain thereof then sine Gold: she ^ more prec^ous then Rubies,
and ^^l the things thou can desire are ^ot to be compared unto her: Length
^f days is in her Right Hand, and ^ her Lest hand Riches and Ho^our: her Ways
are Ways of Plea^ntness, and all her Paths are Peace; ^e is the way of Life to
them that ^y holy upon her, and happy is very one that retains her. If this ^
true, what can you more expect? That greater Felicity can you desire? And yet
you see I bear not this Testi^ony of my self.

At this discourse I could not but ^and amazed; but when I considered ^e
difficulty of the way she inten^ed to lead me, and that it was a ^ath
frequented but by a few, I fell ^to a trembling fit, through ^e disorders of
humane Frailty; and being a little Recovered, I took ^eart, and told her what
the other ^ady had said concerning it.

I cannot deny (said she) but the way ^ard and difficult, especially at the
(...) out; but then consider ^in, the Reward will abundantly compence the
Labor: What Husbandman can expect to Reap Corn^ where he has not sowed it? Or
who i^ so mad to Imagine he can have Perfec Felicity, and come to the
Possession (...) those things which are laid up for the Righteous, things That
the Eye hat^ not seen, 1 Cor 2.9.
the Ear heard, neithe^ has it entered into the Heart ^ Man to conceive them,
without ^ Sow in this Life his Field of a goo^ Concience, with Virtue, good
Deed^ Faith, Hope, Charity, Prudence Patience, and all other Virtues a^^
Graces? The Harvest of which is on^^ Expected, or ought to be Expected i^ the
other Life. For though the Husbandman sometimes fails of the fruit of his
Labor, yet those that sow in the Spirit, ^al. 6.8.
shall of the Spirit reap Eve^ lasting Life: Rev 14.13.
Those that Die in the Lord shall Rest from their Labou^ and their Works shall
follow them.

The Lady having said thus much none of which I was able to deny ^ contradict,
I began to give serio^ attention; which the lady Volupt^ ousness perceiving,
and fearing ^ lose me, whispered to Folly w^ thereupon began to beckon me o^
but being desirous to know furth^ that the Lady I discoursed with ^as (though I
could give a shrewd ^uess at her Name) I addressed my ^lf in this wise, Madam
(said I) if without offense I may speak, let me ^ntreat you to tell me your
Name. To which, without any hesitation, she ^ply'd:

I am one (said she) greatly in fa^ur with the Highest, much acquain^d with
Saints, all in all with Angels, and highest in Esteem with all Good ^en;
without me nothing is done in ^eaven, nor without me can any thing ^e well done
on Earth; and in either ^ingdom I am known by the name of ^isdom, Virtue, true
Felicity, and ^warder of those that hearken ^ me and obey my Counsel, Prove.
2.13.
to ^alk in the ways of Truth and ^prightness; I stop the mouths of ^lse
Prophets, and false Teachers, ^overn Kingdoms and Families in the ^storder; I
am a Companion to the ^vers of Learning and True Piety, (...) a Husband to
chaste Wives, Wid^^s, and Virgins: I reward my ^^ends in Prosperity with
Holiness, ^^d in Adversity with Sound Coun^^ and Advice; Ministering unto them
Food, Lodging, Clothes, Pat^ence, Strength, and all other convenient
Necessaries; and enable them t^^ bear their Afflictions: and no less m^^ you
expect, if in time you contract^ true Friendship with me, and the thought, thou
walk through t^^ Valley of the Shadow of Death, Psalm. 23.4.
tho^^ need'st not fear any Evil, for I wi^^ be with thee.

This Familiarity emboldened me^^ enquire into the Estate and manne^ of those
she termed her Friends, (...) such as had contracted a strict Friendship with
her; Whereupon, My Friend^ (said she) are such as when they ar^ Afflicted, Pray;
when Merry, (...) Psalms, Jam. 5.13.
Hymns, and Spiritual So^^^ and rather choose to Fast, (...) giv^ themselves up
to Excess: They conside^ the night is far spent, and the Day^ Retribution is at
hand, therefore the^ walk honestly as in the Day, not (...) Rioting and
Drunkenness; not (...) Chambring, Romans 13.12.13.
and wantonness, but p^^ on the Lord Jesus, not caring for the Flesh to fulfill
the Lusts thereof: Fai^ counsels them, Charity enflameth the^ Justice and
Uprightness is their Rule^ whereby they square their Actions These are they
that cheerfully submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man for Gods sake; 1.
Pet. 2.13
These are they that Reverence and Obey those that are set over them in Power
and Authority, not for wrath, Romans 13.5.
but for Conscience sake, and Live in perfect Charity with all Men; and to
these, though Sorrow may last for a Night, Hebr. 12.14.
yet Joy undoubtedly comes in the Morning; Psalm. 30.5.
though their Bodies set in the shades of Death, yet their Fames shall Live for
the example of others, and their Souls shall ever remain Immortal like unto the
Estate of Angels, Hebr. 12.23.
and are known in Heaven by the name ^^ the Spirits of just Men made ^^rfect.

These Excellent Discourses and Admonitions succeeding each other, began to
make an impression upon my mind, to that degree, that now my fears of the way
began (like the shade or thin mist of twilight) to fade and vanish, and I was
almost come to a Resolution to follow the advice of this Excellent lady,
whatever Difficulties or Dangers might threaten or oppose me; Which
Voluptuousness (who all this while had narrowly marked my Speech and Gesture,)
perceiving by the alteration of my Countenance, and fearing I would go over to
her she termed her mortal Enemy, commanded Folly to use her utmost Diligence to
prevent it.

CHAP VI. How at the Persuasion of Folly, he took the Broad way Leading to the
Palace of Worldly Felicity, Rejecting the Counsel of Lady Wisdom, and how she
threatened him at parting, and what else happened.
FOlly having Received her Charge from Dame Voluptuousness, or Worldly
Pleasure, for (as I said) by both these and many other names she went, as
Opportunity and Business required; she came up to me, and pulling me by my Coat
of Ignorance, desired to speak a few words with me; to which, in my Simplicity,
I consented, though Wisdom strictly forbade it; and having the freedom of my
Ear, she so far Insinuated (but in an Evil hour) into my wavering Affections,
that I was contented to put it to her Arbitrament which of these I should
follow; which Road, or whose advice I should take; who not a little glad to
have gained so much upon me, thus began:

I am Right Joyful, my Lovely Youth, (said she) that you submit your self in
this case to my Counsel; therefore I will assuredly advise you to what I think
is most convenient for your advantage; you have heard what these Ladies have
offered, how on either side they have Wooed and Courted you: Now for my part, I
am for Ease, Pleasure, and a short way to Felicity, in which this Lady
(pointing to Voluptuousness) in my Judgment can best conduct you; nay you may
take it on my word, who am very well acquainted with her, and no doubt, you
will find such delights as must needs be suitable to your Youthful Years, such
Recreations as will leave you no place for Repentance: As for the other Lady,
who calls her self Wisdom, Virtue, and I know not what, (for in truth I am
little acquainted with her) you may perceive by her discourse, she intends
nothing else, if you follow her, but to lead you a tedious Pilgrimage all your
Life Long, through rough and uneasy ways, and often in stead of a Pleasant
Inn, that should be well furnished with where^ithall to Recreate and Refresh
you, ^e will Lodge you in a House of Mourn^ng, where your Drink will be Tears,
^our Food Sobbs, and your Music ^ighs and Groans: and though she ^omises you
fair now, yet when she has ^t you far from Home, amongst Rocks, ^ountains,
Wildernesses, and Craggy ^ays, If you never so little displease ^er by
Complaining or Drawing^ack, she will leave you desolate and ^orlorn, void of
help, or comfort, there (...) become a Prey to Savages, or the Wild Beasts of
the Forests; and if it ^o happen you escape these, yet to live Desolate, and
wander in the Region of Uncertain Hope, which borders upon the gloomy Land of
Despair: Wherefore I advise you to consider, and not suffer her to train you
into these Dangers, but rather to take the offer ^f this Lady my Friend and
Acquaintance; for the performance of whose Promise, I will become Surety, and
bear the blame if she fail in ought. Or ^f the Entertainment please you not,
where is the danger, I pray you, when being so near your own House, you may
return at Leisure, without being Obliged to scale shattered Mountains, Rock^
and Precipices? Then give this Lady your hand, and stand no longer doubtful.

Now whilst I stood amazed an^ confounded in my self, Folly put m^ hand into
that of the Lady Voluptuousness, who drawing me forward whilst Folly pushed
behind, force^ me in a manner into the broad way^ which my Horse Temerity
perceiving, fell a Running at such a Rate^ that I could not stay him; thoug^
indeed I did not much strive to d^ it, so great a Power had Folly over me.

The Lady Wisdom, otherwise Virtue, observing what had passed, observing that
her wholesome Counsels and Advice were Slighted, and Rejected and that I had
Plunge^ my self headlong into the ways of Ruin and Destruction, she changed
her Lovely Countenance into Terror, and with a contracted Frown, Prove. 24, 25,
26, 27, 28.29.
Sounded these Dreadful Words in my Ears, viz. Because I have called, and you
Refused; I have Stretched ou^ wy Hand, and no man Regarded; but ye have set at
naught all my Counsel, and would have none of my Reproof; I I will mock when
your Fear comes; when your Fear comes as Desolation, and your Destruction
comes as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes upon you; then you
shall call upon me, but I will not Answer; you shall seck me early, but shall
not find me; for that ye hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the
Lord. And thereupon she estranged her self, and vanished from my Sight.

O that these Words had Sunk into my Heart!
That Sacred Zeal had sent his Flaming Dart.
To Fire my Soul! That so I might have viewed
What Life I shunned, what Death I then Pursued
CHAP VII. How in the company of Folly and Voluptuousness he Rid to the Palace
of Worldly Felicity, and in what manner h^ was Received and Entertained; with
some Observations thereon, etc.
HAving (as I said) lost the sight of Lady Wisdom, and passed a considerable
part of the Broad way, cheered by Folly and Voluptuousness, the one with
Counsel and by the other with kind and pleasing words, I began to forget what
had passed at the parting of the way, and found my self like those whom Fables
report to have been Enchanted; nothing seeming more delightful then my
Company, and nothing pleasanter then their Discourse. Now as the Sun gave half
its Light to us, and half to the Antipodes (that is, just as it was setting)
Voluptuousness gave me a Prospect of the Palace of Worldly Felicity, which at
a distance seemed very Stately and Magnificent, ^nd^ on that Prospect I feasted
my Eyes, till Evil-will (who had been ^ent before to give notice of our coming)
met us, who with a low Reverence, though with an Envious and Ill-favored Look,
told us that Diverse Ladies of the Palace were in a Readiness to Receive us,
which message he had no sooner performed, but he fell in our Rear, making
Mouths and wry Faces, for Joy that he had been Instrumental in my setting
forward to a place where he well knew, that without the Assistance of Gods
Grace, I was sure to be Lost.

We had no sooner turned the Corner, or the winding of the way that bear's
directly upon the Palace, but I perceived the Ladies, who had placed
themselves at the entrance of the Palace^ whose Names were Embroidered upon
their Vestments, which were exceeding rich; nor did they themselves seem less
Beautiful at a distance; and foremost of these, I discovered Lust,
Prodigallity, Lasciviousness, Wantonness, Ambition, Pride, of the Heart,
Gallantry, Bravery, Drunkenness, Luxury, with many others; all of them seeming
very Joyful at my Approach, and read^ advanced in their order to welcom^ me,
and do me Service, all of them, as soon as Folly had discovered m^ Face by
taking off my Helmet, saluted me with the kindest and winning Endearments
Imaginable, each in a Soft and Amorous Tone, crynig Welcome, my Love, my Life,
my Joy; welcome to the Palace and Repose of Worldly Felicity; striving all they
could to exceed in Courtesy, and every one wishing to have most of my Company,
and enjoy me oftenest: then sped forward Ambition and Prodigallity, and taking
me by the Hands, led me on (as in State) whilst Bravery went before to make the
way. As for Lasciviousness and the rest, they fell in order to the best
advantage: Folly who for that time served as a Herald, every where Proclaiming
my arrival; Luke 15, 13.
So that we entered the gate as in Triumph: which put me in mind of the
Prodigal's Son going from his Fathers House into a far Country; but at that
time Puffed up with Presumption and Vainglory, I looked not to the Latter End
of his Progress, nor what befell him when all his Substance failed him, though
(as by the sequel you will find) being in the End driven to the like Distress,
I bethought my self what advantages I had lost in pursuing Vanity, and by the
good motions of the Spirit, came to a Resolution of Returning to my Fathers
House. But of that hereafter.

The Gates we entered were exceeding large, and the Palace as bigg in
proportion; affording as much plenty as can be Imagined under the Sun, which
did not a little increase my wonder: whereupon Voluptuousness whispered me in
the Ear, saying It could be no less, seeing she kept open House for all Comers
and Goers all the Year long, at any Time or Hour, either Day or Night, And when
I had well viewed the outward Court, which was paved with Marble and
Alablaster, and enclosed with Cloisters, over which were Chambers of E^oney and
Cedar, supported with Pillars of Ivory and Tressels of Gold, Enameled with
precious Stones (for so they seemed to me at that time, so much Folly had
blinded me; But afterward I understood they were mere delusions, the work of
Enchantment) having viewed these, I say, I was led into a spacious Hall, which
to me seemed the fairest that ever I beheld; for though by this time it was
Night in that part of the Palace at which I entered, for it had many Gates,
but this the Chief, yet for the number of Light ^ that were continually
burning, Darkness was put to flight, unless in the secret places of Retirement;
John 13.19,
for there they choose Darkness rather then Light; and the Reason, as I since
understand, was because their Deeds were Evil. Here I beheld all the Tables
spread with every Variety; Oderiferous Spices, Balms and Gums, perfuming the
Air; Music of all Instruments Melodiously Sounding, Charming Voices and
Charming Ladies, with the Joviallest Crew, methought, that ever I had seen; and
now I thought my self in Paradise, nor did I Repent the advice I had taken, nor
of the paths I trod.

Having in this place made many Observations too tedious to be Re^ted, Lust
came with her Atten^ants and disarmed me; after which, ^ith a tender Embrace,
she sweetly ^issed me, and told me, That that Night I should take my Repose in
her Arms, on a Bed of Down Perfumed with ^ragrant Spices, and de^k't with fine
^innen of Egypt, Cannopy'd with Gold, and studded over with Gems. When ^aving
by this means heightened my Fancy, she ordered Bravery, or rather Pride, (who
had attended me at my setting out, but left me at the cross Way, and got
thither before me) to give me such things to put on as he ^aw convenient, to
prevent my ^atching Cold; whereupon he ^rought me a Crimson Gown lined with
costly Furrs, Embroidered with Gold, and Precious Stones, and pla^ed on my Head
a Cap of Peacok's Feathers, telling me that being thus Invested, I must not
only despise, contemn and trample on, as much as in me lay, my Inferiors and
Equals, but lift my self in Lofty ^maginations above my Superiors; making
such Instructions as I should from Time to Time receieve from a waiting
Gentlewoman, called the Pride of Life, my Rule.

Being thus Habited, over my closer Habilliments, Lady Voluptuouness came, and
taking me by the Hand, placed me in a stately Chai^ at the upper end of a
Table, pu^posely spread for my Accomodat^ on, and furnished beyond wha^ Luxury
her self could form, eve^ in Imagination; who then sat e^ my Left Hand, whilst
Drunkennes^ took place on the Right, and she her self sat opposite to me, that
she might have a better prospect of my Physiognomy, commanding her Servitures
to load me with the mo^ delicate Dainties, and ply me with the choicest Wine,
whilst innumerable Voices (but from whence the^ proceeded I knew not) invaded
m^ Ear; and amongst the rest, I distinctly heard the following Lines.

SONG.
Now welcome, welcome, welcome, Gallants all,
Into the World's large and delicio^ Hall:
Here worldly Pleasures do in height abound,
Here, here, what Worldings seek, is to be found;
Here without fear or further care, each Guest,
May both securely and supinely rest;
Or drown in Pleasures, Pleasures of all kind,
Such as they love, such as they wish to find:
Both Young and Old may here with Joys be Crowned,
And in Excess of Pleasures may abound;
The Miser or the Prodigal may meet
Equal Alurements, that make haste to greet
Their kind Pursuers, and with Eager Arms,
Bewitch their Reason, like Circean Charms.
This and many more were Echoed by Tuneful Voices; and indeed, our Service and
Attendance was very sumptuous, our Meats were well ordered, our Cooks wonderful
handy and neat in the performance of their part, our Butlers bountiful even to
lavishness, our Waiters vigilant and dexterous in giving their attendance, our
Music excellent, and Singers melodious: In fine, every Officer strove to
exceed in delicacy and expedition: There was Feeding, Drinking, pleasant
Parlying Discourse of Love and Business, Contrivances, Policies and
Machinations, the Affairs of Kingdoms, and Provinces; Drunk or half Drunk, was
held a goodly Game; Ribauldry was our Recreation, and as for Knavery of all
kinds, it was not wantting, as occasion served to prove it is Force and
Dexterity.

Supper being ended, Lady Wantonness came to me, and with an^ amorous Tone and
wanton Glance, required me to Dance, as she had done many besides me; and after
that Lust, who had before as good as bargained for my Company, used many
Arguments to convince me, that it was not convenient to lie alone, when I might
have a soft and tempting Bedfellow; but being weary with the many vain
Recreations I had pursued in the Palace; but especially by reason of my
Journey, (...) was not behind-hand in using as ^^any Argument, to Excuse it for
^^at Night; as being not only de^^ous to take my Rest, but also to ^^use a
little on what had befallen ^^e since my setting out from my ^wn House;
wherefore Requiring ^ go to Bed, Lady Lasciviousness ^ad me to my Chamber,
which was ^^rnish'd in the best manner, with ^hat-ever I could wish: As
Tape^ries, Embroyderies, fine Linen, ^carlet, Velvets, Purples, Silver, ^old,
Spices and Perfumes, and what ^se might serve to heighten my Fan^^ and create
new Wonder. Being ^ Bed, Voluptuousness came in, and ^aving sweetly Kissed me,
bid me ^rewel till the Morning, in these ^ords, Sleep, sleep, my Love, and give
Digestion way;
That when the early Lark calls on the day,
Arising from Repose, you may renew
Those Sweets you tasted, and fresh Joys pursue.


Being left to my self, I could scarcely Sleep for thinking of wha^ was past;
and when I chanced to^ Slumber, nothing but Dreams an^ strange Imaginations
filled my Hea^ insomuch, that I now began to wi^ for the Morning.

CHAP. VIII. ^f his further Entertainment and Progress in the Palace of
Worldly-Felicity; and how amongst other things, he had a Prospect of the
Tempter in his Deluding shape, and at Night was Entertained by Lust, etc.
WHen Aurora had Unfolded her Purple Gates, and gave ^^e Firey Horses of the
Sun free ^cope to mount the Eastern Skies, ^iving me a more perfect sight of
^^e places Magnificence; Lascivi^usness entered my Chamber in a ^ose and wanton
Dress, her Breasts ^aked, and her Hair slowing on her ^houlders; and having
bidden me ^ good morrow, she Invited me to Rise; whereto, without any Reply, ^
willingly prepared my self, as being desirous to see more of the Pal^ace, and
have more of the Jovial Company I found in it; So being up, she lead me into a
withdrawin^ Room, where for Privateness sak^ Luxury and Ebriety had prepared m^
a costly Breakfast; and there^ whilst I was Feeding and Carousi^ at a Lavish
rate, Voluptuousness a^ Lust, with some other of their Attendants, Entered; who
sweetly ^luting me, rendered me their Goo^ morrow, and bid me pursue n^ Riot:
The which, whilst I was d^ing, methought I heard a dread^ Sound behind me,
Isa. 5.11.
of, Woe unto the^ says the Lord, that Rise up Earl^ that they may follow
Strong Drink, and^ This made me start, and suddain^ turn about to see from
whence ^ proceeded; but Ambition, w^^ stood at my Elbow at that very l^ stant,
clapping on my Head t^ Cap of Curiosity, it filled it with ^ many
Proclamations, that the thoughts of what I had heard, either altogether
vanished, or lost (...) much of their impression, that the^ were but little
regarded; and no^ nothing but the desire of seein^ strange things, and variety
of wh^^ the place afforded, could at a^ please me; whereupon Voluptuoness
Reading my Mind through my Looks and Gesture, promised me whatever of that kind
was in her power; and so leading me into her Wardrobe, cast over me a Mantle of
Gold, Embroidered with Gems, and seeded with Pearls, and gave me in my Hand a
Staff, which was called by her, The Staff of Trust and Confidence, which I
found to be no other then a broken Reed: And when I had been pleased a while
with beholding all the Pomp and Gallantrey, she told me, That seeing I had
Resigned my self to her Care and Conduct, she would show me what, but few of
those that dwelt in the Palace of Worldly Felicity, though they had many of
them desired it, had the opportunity of beholding, till they had ^ass'd through
a gloomy Postern long and dark commonly called Sepultum, ^r the Grave, which
leads into the ^ast Region of Eternity. Upon this ^ thanked her for the Favor,
before I understood what it was she ^ntended or meant thereby; and so without
delay, she introduced me into the largest Chamber that ever I had beheld, and
there she gave me a prospect of one sitting (though at a great distance) in a
Chair of Gold and Ivory, very pompously Attended by many Legions, all appearing
very bright and shining. Now whom this should be, I was much at a stand, but
being directed by my Guide to make my Reverence, ^ rashly did so; and having
taken ^ view of his seeming Pomp and Magnificence, I concluded it to be the
Richest in the World; and being a little Retired, I took the boldness to
enquire who he was, and received for an Answer, That he was the Prince of the
Air and of Darkness, and Governor of those that gave themselves up (as I had
done) to follow the Direction of such as were the Managers of his Affairs, who
were both h^ Servants and Children; and what ever had been said of him by some,
he could when he pleased Transform himself into an Angel of Light; and though
he indeed, (since he lost that Place,) had nothing to do in Heaven, yet that
his Rule in the Children of Disobedience was great on Earth. This methought was
a kind of wild discourse; but being where I was, I conceived it at that time
convenient to hold my Tongue, least I might be in some more then ordinary
danger, though I wished my self further off, for I took him to be no other then
the Old Serpent, the Roaring Lion, and the Accuser of the Brethren, the Red
Dragon, and the Father of Lies and all manner of Wickedness. But whilst I was
thus thoughtful, there came Trudging after us a little down-look'd Fellow, who
it seems had the Keys of the Treasury of the Palace of Worldly Felicity, and
withal, ordered to Reward me with what he saw convenient; or as Dame Fortune, a
light and incon^ant Lass, who came Tripping be^e him, in a Garment of Sleazy
^urple, should direct; and these soon out-stripping us, opened a narrow Door
with a Golden Key, over the which was Written, THE ROOT OF ALL EVIL: Yet into
this place, that was very dark, Voluptuousness conducted me; here I took ^
prospect of all manner of Trea^tres; as Gold, Silver, Pearls, Diamonds,
Emeraulds, Saphirs, Jaspers, ^erryll, Topaze, T^^queis, and every precious
stone; and with these^ Fortune, after she had given me ^ flattering Kiss,
commanded Mamm^ (for so by this time I understood ^ that kept it was called) to
furni^ me, that I might not be wanting t^ spend it upon my Lusts: When having
laden my self with as much as thought at that time convenient, (...) was all on
a fire to advance further and thereupon I was conducted (...) the Chamber of
Pomp, furnished o^ and neatly hung round with all manner of gaudy Apparel, for
either Se^ of Woolen, Stuffs, Silks, Linne^ Rich Embroyderies, and what else
(...) that kind can enter into the Imag^ nation of Man; and here I had lea^ to
furnish my self with what seem most precious in my Eyes, so the rejecting what
I had forme^ esteemed, I made my self Gay b^ yond expression; which sudden a^
reration infected me with a Diste^ ^er dall'd the pride of the Heart, an^ the
Pride of Life; and no soon^ was I furnished in this place, (...)
Lasciviousness, with whom I ha^ been formerly acquainted, ca^ from her
Apartment to meet me, a^usher me thither; where at my Arrival, I found Paints,
Perfumes, Ribbons, and a hundred idle Toys and impertinent Fancies, which in my
simplicity she Intruded on me, to render me effeminate, and unwilling at any
time to forsake the Palace: Being thus furnished, we turned down a large
Entry, where at the mouth of a large Vault, Drunkenness stood ready to receive
me, for every one in this case was ordered to their particular Stations, to
give me the greater variety in my Visiting the Palace of Worldly-Felicity: In
this place, guarded by Dame Drunkenness, I found store of all manner of
delicious Wines and other Liquors. But things, by reason of some unruly
Visitants, were all in confusion, every thing in a manner turned Tops^-turvy;
and this proceeded (she said) from the Unruliness of those that had continued
till Night, Isa. 5.11.
till Wine had Inflamed them, etc. And here having largly quaffed many vain and
ridiculous Healths, till I had almost lost not only that of my Body, but
likewise that of my Soul, I Reeld into the Apartment of Luxury, and vainly
became one of the number of those that made their Belly their God, Phil. 3.19.
giving my self up to Riot and Gluttony to that Excess, that I became in a
manner nothing less then a Bruit, by indulging my Appetite to a degree of
forgetting any thing beyond endeavoring to satisfy it, which in the end
heightend'd me to a desire of Unlawful Love, and fired me with concupiscential
Imaginations; which my Guide perceiving, lead me into the Chamber or Apartment
of Venus, which was crowded with Gay and Wanton Beauties, who spared no
Alurements or Charms to Entice me to Folly, but spread to the Air their Gaudy
Plumes, Tuned their Sirens Voices, Rolled their Sparklin^ Eyes, gave me the
Amorous Leer, with half a Face, and a tempting Smile, whilst Cupid had spread
his Nets in their Golden Tresses, that dangled on their snowey Breasts, to
captivate my Eyes; nor thought he that enough, unless he made my Heart a Slave
to Lust, who advanc'^ in the Front of this Amorous Train, and with a Thousand
pretended Endearments conquered my Affections, prone at that time to be
subdued; and this was she whom Fables termed a Goddess, by the Name of Venus,
and to whom besotted Mankind paid Devotion, by Erecting Temples and Altars to
a base Adultress; nor less they Fabled her Son, and gave him power to Wound
fond Lovers hearts, blindly shooting at a venture, Painted him Naked, with
Wings, and screen'd his Eyes from the Light; all which Hieroglyphically may
signify no more, Then by his Nakedness his want of shame, which ever
accompanies Lewd Lovers; By his blindness, no doubt his Folly is descypher'd,
and his rashly shooting at a venture, whereby he knows not who he hits, or
where his Arrow flys: And again, his Bow and Arrows signify the Indiscretion
of those that make themselves his Butt, by wilfully thrusting themselves in
his way; his Wings, the wavering of the Minds and inconstancy of Lovers; for
what thing is more variable, light, or inconstant, then a Lawless Lover? With
this sight I was at that time mightily taken, and more especially with the
Amorous Discourse of her who governed this place; and the day being now far
spent, and I in a manner tired with Variety and Excess, was content to rest me
there for that Night; whereupon breaking my mind to Voluptuousness and Folly,
who all that while had Attended me, they highly approved of what I had
Determined; and so promising to return the next Morning, in order to show me
the rest of the Palace, the former departed; but the latter stayed to Attend
on me as my Handmaid, and after many Burning Glances and Lascivious Kisses,
Lust lead me into the Closet of Wantonness, and there dally'd with me on the
Bed of Uncleanness, insomuch, that she ^^pt me Waking till the Day appeared;
and then according to her promise, Lady Voluptuousness returned; when Knocking
at the Door, she was presently let in by Folly, who (as I said) had continued
with me.

CHAP IX. He discourses of other Recreations in the Palace, and how he was
carried by Voluptuousness and Folly to visit the seven Towers, and describes
the Wonders he saw there, withother things, as also a Prospect of its
Situation, etc.
VOluptuousness having at this time tempted me from the Arms of Lust, Lead me
to a fair Banqueting House in the midst of a Spacious Garden, wonderfully
wrought and encompassed with Roses, Hony-Suckles, and Jesamine, twining in
Amorous Ringlets; whilst Flora, who was Mistress of that Place, with all her
Sweets Perfumed the Air, and the Notes of the winged Choristers warbel'd from
their swelling Throats a grateful Anthem to the smiling Spring: here I found
not only store of Jovial and Sprightful Companions, Revelling in the height of
Merriment; but also Tables spread by the care of Voluptuousness, with all
manner of Dainties; and here again we Laughed, Fed, Caroused, and told merry
Tales in abundance; forgeting the Woe that is pronounced against those that
here laugh in Sin and Security, Luke, 6.26.
which Woe is because that shall Mourn hereafter. But having by this time my
fill of this sort of Recreation; for indeed, the Pleasures of Sin, though they
are but for a Season, Heb. 11.25.
are even tiresom in the Fruition: I called to mind the Promise of
Voluptuousness, which was to give me a sight of the rest of the Palace; and
thereupon whispering her in the Ear, she consented to withdraw, and so we left
the Company in the midst of their Revels, and height of Excess, and having
passed through Galleries and Chambers, and taken a Superficial Prospect of
things tending to Vice and Leudness, we came to a large Court surrounded with
seven Towers, in which. dwelt as Commander in Chief, Pride, Envy, Wrath,
Gluttony, Lechery Covetousness, and Sloth; and with these my Conductress would
needs have me acquainted; against which (notwithstanding Folly was in our
Company) I made some objection, aledging that some of them, in the
circumstances I was in, were not fit for my Conversation; but however, she
wrought upon me to give each of them a visit in their order; and of these she
Reckoned Pride (with whom I was familiarly acquainted) to be the first: for
indeed, if rightly considered, he is the original Source and Fountain of many
notorious Sins; nay by his very means so many mischiefs have befallen Mankind,
that it is imposible to number them; nor is there any Sin more hateful in the
Sight of God, for this Sin had the Power to Translate or Metamorphose Angels of
Light into Devils, and cast them from Bliss into Misery; for that God who
gives Grace to the Humble and Meek, ever resists the Proud and Haughty
Minded. Iam. 4.6.


Entering this Tower, I beheld Arrogance and Presumption, who stood to enquire
the Business of those that that came to visit their Master, who with exalted
Looks withstood us, till such time as they were better informed; but soon being
given to understand I was a Favorite, we gained Admittance, and there beheld
Pride upon an exalted Seat, swelling like a Rising Tide, and by him stood
(though with no less Lofty Deportment) Disobedience, Vainglory, Ambition,
Contempt, Scorn, and Haught^less of Mind, with many more of the same Breed; I
expected indeed he would have descended to Congratulate my Arrival; but
contrariwise he only took notice of me with a Nod; for it seems he was so stiff
that he could not (or would not) leave his Seat: yet whilst I marked him well,
he Infused a strange Infection into my Breast, that now I began more and more
to despise thos^ whom I ought to have Honored and Reverenced; though I saw
engraven in black Capitals over the Gate of his Tower or Apartment, THE
ORIGINAL OF SIN, AND CHIEF FAVORITE OF THE PRINCE OF DARKNESS: for by the
means of this Monster, who branches out into so many Mischiefs, is his Kingdom
enlarged; nor was there any thing that the Prince of Peace (our blessed Lord
and Savior) more inveighed against, and by the Example both of his Life and
Doctrine more Reproved; and that we might shun Pride, Mat. 11.29.
in following his steps, he has left us this encouragement, Learn (says he) of
me, sor I am Meek and Humble, and ye shall find Rest for your Souls. For as
Humility pleases God more then all other Virtues; (as being the original of
all Virtues) so is Pride displeasing to him above other Sins, (as being the
Original of all Sin) and is in its self (if rightly Considered) the height of
Folly. For thus: If we are proud of our Bodies, Let us Consider how subject
they are to Infirmities and Corruption, even to a Loathing; If of our Strength,
many Beasts of the field are in that our Superiors; If in Beauty we put our
Confidence, it is fading as the flower of the Field; nor did Solomon, in all
his Glory, Exceed a short lived Lily of the Vall^y: If in Learning, Mat 6.29
that teaches us Humility; and to be Proud of it, implies the greatest
Ignorance in the World: If of Riches, let us consider how much they are
Inferior in that kind to a Golden Mine, or Rock of Diamonds, or any such like
perishable things: And he that is proud of his Birth, is proud of the Blessings
of others, and not of himself; and as for the Souls of Men, they Immediately
proceed from one and the same Fountain of Life and Blessedness, Equal in their
Original, and given by Him who as (I said) is a hater of Pride and Lover of
Humility, and disposed of at his pleasure.

Pride to Contempt and Folly chains us fast, Yet in its self is but an Airy
blast;
Though mischiefs numberless it does Create,
And is the Sin that marks a Reprobate.


Having made my Observation in this place as much as I thought convenient, I
proceeded to the next, where Envy had her abode; who though she is a Spawn of
the first, yet to appearance (especially outwardly) she seems not so; for as
the other feeds himself with Flattery and Vain Imaginations, Contempt and
Scorn, etc. So this, with Ill Will, Spite, Revenge, and sometimes with
Despair, by which she becomes Lean and Ill-favored, especially at the
prosperity of good Men, still vexing and tormenting her self to a degree of
Madness, and is termed the very FIREBRAND OF HELL; and so is her Motto; for as
Love and Charity are Badges of Salvation, so are Envy and Hatred of the
contrary; and consequently promote his Kingdom, who is their Author, by
destroying those Souls they have power to Poison and Overcome: For as an
Envious Man grudges at another Prosperity and good Name, so he delights in his
Infamy and Loss, ever Vexing and Tormenting himself, to promote mischief in the
World; and that perhaps to no manner of purpose, more then to gratify a
causless Anger or Revenge, which redounds not to his own Advantage, but to his
that sets him on work, and furnishes him with Infernal Venom to bring it about;
nor can he create to himself any Pleasure thereby, because Envy becomes ever
the Tormenter of those with whom she abides, and still finds him out new
Objects to Repine at; and is a Disease hard to be Cured, because it is Seat is
altogether in the Heart: And indeed, she looked so ghastly, that for my part I
little affected her Company, an^ therefore left her Snarling by h^ self, and
proceeded to the next though indeed whilst I stayed in the Palace of Worldly
Felicity, I was no^ altogether Untainted with her V^ nom.

For Envy's Poyson's by Contagi^ caught,
Infecting not the Body, but the Thought:
The Mind's the wretched Seat where Envy dwells,
And still is forming there a The sand Hells;
Whilst her Possesser does in Tormen live,
And pines away to see his Neighbo^ Thrive.
In the next Apartment, wh^ should I meet with but Wrath? whos^ Face was like
the Face of a Lyo^ continually Belching and Breathing Threatenings and
Indignation; and by him stood Revenge, Rashness, and Implacableness, and round
about him ^ung the Stories of Murders, unnatural Attempts, and bloody
Enter^rizes; and over his Head Engraven, THE VERY MURDERER OF HOLY LOVE; Nor
can it be otherwise, for as Holy Love prepares the Mind for Heavenly things, so
Wrath prepares it for the contrary, and sets it on Fire of Hell, banishing
Reason, and exposing the Possessor to innumerable Dangers and Hazards,
rendering him the Emblem of a Raging Sea, Isa. 57.20.
that casts up nothing but Dirt and Mire; and as there is nothing on Earth
comes so near to the Divine Goodness, as to be in perfect Love and Charity with
all Men; so on the contrary, nothing Resembles more the Author of all
Wickedness (who is termed a Roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8
going up and down to seek whom he may Devour) then a Man that gives up himself
to Wrath and Implacableness; for if Love be the fulfilling of the Law, Romans
13.10.
then Wrath must be the breach of it. If God be Love, as doubtless he is, 1
John 4.16.
then all things opposite to it, are opposite to himself; and indeed it is that
which the Devil troubles and disturbeth the Minds of Men withal^ that they may
not be at leisure t^ perceive the Snares he lays for their Destruction, and
causes them to run as it were, blindly on, into man^ Evils.

Wrath is a flame that puts out Reason's Eyes,
For why, the Wrathful Man ca^ never be Wise;
Because he loses of himself the sway,
And headlong follows, as it leads the way;
Considers not, what danger he pursues,
What by it to get, or what he is like to lose:
But Drunk with Fury, madly presses on,
Till by his Rashness he is too often undone.
Next to these, Voluptuosness Informed me, was the Apartment of Covetousness,
who having been hitherto a stranger to me, I was the more desirous to see him;
nor that I ^o much cared for his Conversation, ^ut for Novelties sake; for this
Nig^ardly Fellow (it seems) is ever a ^reat Enemy to the Lade Voluptuousness:
But however, not to break ^er promise with me, by giving ^imperfect Prospect,
she was con^ented I should give him a Visit; but ^s for her self, she said she
would ^ay at the Door till I returned; and ^o leaving Wrath in a raging Fit,
upon what account I know not, nor am ^ yet informed, Folly and I entered ^his
place, and there beheld the old Minos turning all things in a manner unto Gold,
yet starving for want of ^ood; Adoring and Worshipping the Mammon of
Vnrightcousness, Romans 1.25.
and ^rusting in Perishable things, Worshi^ing the Creature instead of the
Crea^or; in setting his Heart upon his Riches, and placing his Strength in ^
broken Staff, upon which whom ^oever leans, it will utterly de^eive him; for
he flatters his ^retched Soul like the Worldling in the Gospel, viz. And he
thought with himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no Room to bestow
my Fruits? And he said, This I ^ill do, I will pull down my Barns and build
greater, and there will I bestow my Goods; and I will say to my Soul, Soul,
thou have much Goods laid up for many years, take thine Ease, Eat, Drink and
be Merry: And what insued^ A dreadful Disappointment, Luke 12.17, 18, 19.
viz. But God said unto him, Thou Fool this Night shall thy Soul be Requiredo^
thee, Then whose shall the things b^ which thou have provided? And in the
following Verse, Luke 12.20.
So is he that layet^ up Treasure for himself, and is no^ Rich toward God.
That is, the Man who sets his Heart upon Riches, and sets them up as an Ido^ in
his Heart. And indeed this is Satan's Masterpiece, in Chaining the Affections of
an immortal Soul^ (that should be content with nothing^ less then God himself)
to a Lump o^ Earth, to things that in themselves are here deficient, and
hereafter altogether unavailable. It was a notable saying of St. Bernard's
Brother, a Youth not exceeding Ten Years when his brethren Resolving to enter
into a Monastic Life, told him at parting, That they left him all their
Worldly Goods and Possessions: Ay but, says the Youth, In Vit. St. Bernard.
This is very unequal^y dealt, that you should take Heaven ^or your selves, and
leave me only Earth, But the Covetous Man is of another ^ind, for he will not
Relinquish Earth for Heaven, as is evident in ^he 18th of St. Luke; the Rich
Man ^ade great boasts of his Righteousness, but when our Blessed Savior ^ame
to offer him Eternal Life in Exchange for the distribution of his ^emporal
Possessions to the Poor, ^e would not comply, but went away ^ery sorrowful; and
the Reason was, Luke 18.23.
because he was very Rich; that is, he ^ad great Possessions on Earth, but ^las
no Treasure in Heaven; which is ^he only thing that can render a Man ^ruly Rich
both here and hereafter; Rich here, by having a good Con^cience, which is a
continual Feast; and hereafter, by finding that Trea^ure Incorruptible and
Permanent, when all other things shall make them^^lves Wings and fly away: Prove
23.5.
And indeed, the Covetous Man may be said ^o be Miserable both here and
here^fter; for in this World he meets ^ith Weariness, Watchings, Travel, and
Disturbances, ever Eating the Bread of Carefulness; and in the next, Loss and
Pain; for the Rust of his Riches, which Cankers his Sou^ and makes hin stop his
Ears to the Cries of the Poor and Needy, and with a crushing Hand oppress the
Widow and Fatherless, will rise u^ against him in the day of his Rebuke and
make him hang down his Hea^ in Shame and Confusion of Face.

For he that hugs the Earth fast till h^ Dies,
And Money dares more then h^ Maker Prize.
Must never exect to mount abov^ the Skies;
Or if he do, but to Receive th^^ Doom,
Of Angry Justice, in Reserve ^^ come.
By this time Voluptuousness fearing I might be Infected with the winte^ Breath
of this Miser, began to be^kon me off, who being of my sel^ little desirous of
his Conversation (...) the Garb and seeming Grandeur I was in, soon harkned to
her Alurements, and made an orderly Retreat, promising to give him a serious
visit when Time had Silvered my Locks, and led me into the December of my
Days; yet I left him not without Company, for I perceived Usury, Extortion,
Perjury, Fraud, Oppression, Sacrilege, and many of the same ^rood, peeping
from behind the Curtain, and so I bid him adieu.

When proceeding from his Apartment, I went to that of Luxury, by the advice of
Voluptuousness, my conductress; and the reason was, ^or that after all these
visits, I was not a little desirous of her Company, ^xpecting perhaps more at
that time ^hen I found; for indeed there I had only the figure of what I had
had ^he Practick or Experience before, or ^t least a Repetition, and so I
passed ^t over, Referring the Reader to a ^erious consideration of my former
^ioting; only this by the way, Du^. 32.15.
that ^ike Jeshurun, in my Excess, I waxed ^at, and kicked against the Author
and Donor of Temporal and Eter^al Felicity; which after a deep dis^overy and
true sense of my failings, ^ heartily desire all Good Christians not only to
Contemplate, but evert^ avoid: for this, though many hold ^ of little moment,
and put it off wit^ diverse familiar names, is the inlet t^ many notorious
Vices, and has su^ dry Daughters; the chief of which are greediness, Voracity,
Excess, S^pidity, foolish Mirth, Libidinous Coversation, etc. And indeed
Glutto^ and Drunkenness, are equally d^ structive to Body and Soul, killi^ more
in this World then the Swo^ or Pestilence, by inflaming t^ Blood, and Creating
Evil Humo^ whose Attendants are Diseases a^ Death; causing likewise, in such
e^cess, the Will and Affections to m^tiny and rebel against the Nobl^ Faculties
of the Soul, leading bo^ the Reason and Judgment i^ Captivity, or confining
them und^ the restraint of Stupidity, till su^ time as they have Executed the
Evil Purposes.

For when the Flesh grown stro^ usurps they Sway,
Depraved Man too fondly does (...)
And rashly makes a Pilet of (...) Will,
Who Shipwracks Conscience on the Rocks of Ill,
Stifles sound Judgment, and does Reason Kill.
Thus leaving this place, I procee^ed to the next, which was that of ^athery,
or the Apartment of Lust, ^ith whom (as you have heard) I ^ad been very
conversant, yet I spa^ed not in this general veiw or obser^ation to give her a
visit; and found ^er accompanied with Fornication, Adultry, Incest, Rape, and
other Pe^ilent Companions; nor is she the ^east of those many baits which the
Tempter lays to catch Souls, nor less ^ilded over, then any of the rest; Prove.
5.3.
or Solomon says, The Lips of a ^range Woman drop as an Honey comb, and her
mouth is Smoother then Oil; Verse. 15,
^et consider the Deadly Bain, But ^er End is bitter as Wormwood, ^^arp as a
Two Edged Sword; her ^ee^ go down to Death, and her steps ^ake hold on Hell:
and then again, Verse. 6.
^he better to deceive the Ignorant, ^ash, or Unadvised, Lest thou should^st
ponder the Path of Life, her ways ^^e movable that thou can not know them.
And indeed, he who give himself up to this Vice, runs man^ hazards, especially
three; and tho^ are, The weakening his Body, t^^ loss of Health, and the loss
of (...) Soul, without a sincere and time Repentance: And what may be a ded to
these, even his good Na^^ which ought to be valued above Earthly things.

For he who makes a Harlot his ^ light,
Whose treacherous Smiles to (...) do invite,
Insnares himself, and Hugs a (...) Bane,
By which a Thousand Thousand h^^ been slain;
Lodging a deadly Viper in (...) Breast,
Who wounds his Fame, his Heal^^ his Peace and Rest.
And now growing weary of the Prospect, and inclining to a fit^ Drousiness,
Voluptuousness out ^ pure Kindness to my Infirmity ^ Frailty (as she said)
which is a gre^ wonder to be expected from one^ her quality, told me that
Sloth dwelt in the next Tower, and that if I pleased to pay him a Visit, he
would Entertain me with a Nap, or so forth: Of this I was not a little glad,
though I thought to my self this Tower could not choose but be well Guarded and
Maintained by such a Champion; for as Solomon has it, Prove. 19.15.
Sloathfulness casts into a deep Sleep, and an Idle Soul shall suffer Hunger.

Entering this place, Laziness presently seized upon me, and I became dull and
heavy to any thing that was good, for this is both a Disease of the Body and
Mind; for there is a sloathfulness of Heart, and a neglect, if not a hatred of
Spiritual things, whereby Indifferency and Negligence in Sacred things arise,
and hinder a demonstration of our Love and Zeal toward God, either in good
Words or Deeds, though both of them are requisite and necessary to Salvation:
For, (as it is in the 16th Verse of the foregoing Chapter) He that keeps the
Commandment, keeps his own Soul; but he that despises ^his Ways, shall dye.
Nor will in this matter a Luke-warmness Excuse, but rather Aggravate the
Offense and Breach of the Commandments, as the Churches of Asia sadly
Experienced, by having their Candle-sticks removed; that is, the Light of the
Gospel and the Operation of the Divine assistance of the Spirit ^ Truth; by
which means at this day they remain over-shaddowed with Atheism, Mahumatisme,
and Spiritual Darkness; The five foolish Virgins we see by their Sloathfulness
in not providing Oil were, barred from entering into the Bride-chamber, Mat.
25.9, ^0, 11. 12.
an^ left to bewail their Folly in endless Woe; Mat. 22.11, 12, 13.
and he who through neglect came unprepared of a Wedding Garment, was bound
Hand and Feet, and cast into utter Darkness ^ wherefore, to prevent the like
danger, we are commanded to be up and doing, to Work out our Salvation with
Fear and Trembling; to Work whilst it is Day, least the Night come, wherein no
Man can Work: Nor did our Blessed Savior, Phil. 2.12. John 9.4.
that miracle of Meekness and tender Compassion, spare to reprimand his
Disci^les for their Drousiness, commanding, us to Watch and Pray, least we
enter into ^mptation. Nor was this Sloth ^osted by himself, Mat. 26.41.
but had many de^ending on him, as Luke-warmness, ^rousiness, Carlesness,
Neglect, De^y, Cowardice, Doubting, Mistrust, ^eaviness of Heart, Inconstancy,
^urmuring, Impatience, and many ^^re; amongst which (Fool that I ^as) I vainly
sorted my self; and ^hen I should have Run with Chear^ulness the Race that was
set before me, ^ put my Hand in my Bosom, and ^ry'd with Solomon's Sluggard,
Prove. 10.24.
Yet a ^ little more Sleep, yet a little more ^lumber; and when I was urged by
^he good motions of the Holy Spirit ^proceed in my Duty, I pretended ^^ere was
a Lion in the way.

So Sluggards do, who ^ere supinly Live,
Drowned in Sloth, neglecting still to strive
To win the Prize, that at the Races end,
Does for the Active Zealous Christian stand;
Forgetting in this Warfare there is Renown,
They Sleep, and let another stea^ their Crown.
And indeed, being in this place overpowered with Drousiness, I (...) the end
(in spite of Resistance) fe^ Asleep, and so continued with Sloa^ till the next
Morning.

CHAP X. He is Entertained in a spacious Banqueting House, and declares what
Entertainment he met with there; as also what further Promise Voluptuousness
made him, etc.
MOrning being come, after many tumblings and tossings, many stretchings and
yawnings, I reared my self on my Elbow, and began to consider where I was; but
long I had not, e're Folly (who still was my Attendant) presented her self, and
made me as sensible as she was capable; telling me moreover, that she had
orders to give me a prospect of the Situation of the Palace of Worldly
Felicity; till such time as Voluptuousness, who had retired her self for a
while, found opportunity to return: And thereupon taking me by the hand, she
led me to^an exceeding high Pinnacle, or at least-ways my Sluggishness made me
imagine it so; and from thence ^ beheld it pleasantly situate on Rising Hills,
Flowery Valleys, and Spreading Plains, (for it was exceeding large) furnished
with all the stores of Nature, whilst Rivers, Lakes and Ponds, refreshed and
fe^ the thirsty Earth, and those stor^ with Fish and Fowl of every kind^ proper
to that Element, as the Land^ was with Beasts and Birds suitable to^ it; no
Parks nor pleasant Woods^ were wanting, nor Gardens and^ Orchards, furnished
with Fruits a^ Flowers of pleasant scent, nor any thing that might serve for
Food and Recreation; for Nature in that part had been prodigal, and with a
giving hand strowed Bounties to serve such as should resort to this Palace;
for great indeed was the resort, as I well perceived by the many tracks and
beaten ways, access not being denied Day nor Night; nor considering the Revels
and Feasting there kept, could it be expected a less supply should serve.

When I had gazed and beheld things beyond my Memory to repeat, I began to
think how the Glory and Fashion of this World passes away; and how all that I
beheld was fading and perishing, 1 Cor. 731
things of no duration; and that here we have no tarrying City, but ought to
look for one above: That though we may rejoice Heb. 13^14.
here for a season, yet if we rightly consider, we are but Pilgrims and
strangers. These Imaginations, I say, upon serious consideration got into my
Head; but upon the approach of Voluptuousness, were soon expelled, by reason she
brought not only a banquet of the richest Fare, but diverse Revellers to divert
me from my melancholy and pensive thoughts, so easily is man (in a state of
Sin) Induced to stifle the good motions of the Spirit, operating on and in the
faculties of the Soul. So laying aside what I had well begun, after our repast
was ended I enquired of my Conductress if any Curiosities remained yet to be
seen? To which she replied, There were many; but that in the first place, for
my better recreation, she had prepared Masks; Balls, and other such matters.
And conducting me into the Hall where I had supped, I found all things provided
for my entertainment, and performed in the most modish and dexterous manner,
the particulars whereof being too tedious, I submit them to the imagination of
the Reader; yet thus much by the way, let him understand, That neither Music,
Dances, variety of Apparel, Sprightly Ladies, and Jovial Youths, were wanting;
nor indeed any thing sitting to furnish out such undertakings: but being tired
out with close Recreations, I requested of Lady Voluptuousness, that she would
show me some pastimes at large, that I might have opportunity to refresh my
self in taking the Air; which she promised me the ensuing morning, and so I
retired to take my Repose; for yet I felt the powerful effects of Sloth, with
the Pestilential contagion of others that I had visited. And this was the third
Night since my arrival, that at the importunity of Drowsiness, (a little Page
that Sloth had sent to attend me) I had the opportunity of lying alone.

So powerful were the snares of Beauties Charms,
That until Sloth had forced me from their Arms,
I counted it a Bliss too great to tell;
When I was on the way to Death and Hell.
CHAP XI. A description of his fearful Dream, and how thereupon he became
pensive; his excellent Reflections on the Estate of a Sinful and Voluptuous
Life; yet continues his former Course, etc.
BEing in bed, wearied with Pleasure, which in it self is even tiresom through
Excess, I soon fell a sleep; and amongst other things Dreamed, and beheld in my
Dream, the face of the Heavens (which was exceeding clear) all on a sudden
contracted a melancholy Blackness, when anon it growing Dark as Midnight, there
issued from the broken Clouds Thunder and Lightning, in a fearful manner, which
struck me with horror, trembling and amazement; so methought I looked up, and
saw the Clouds disperse at an unusual rate, and the troubled ^irmament ready to
fall in pieces; the Moon I likewise beheld as a Globe of Blood, and as for the
Sun it seemed altogether to be darkened: And whilst I was wondering what this
might portend, methought I heard a great sound of a Trumpet, and saw a man
sitting on a Cloud in Glory and Majestic Brightness, attended with the hosts
of Heaven; at the sight of whom, the foundations of the Earth were shaken, and
suddenly the Heavens became all on a flaming Fire, and I heard a voice saying,
Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment. Whereupon the Rocks rent, the Graves
opened, and the Earth and Sea gave up their Dead; some of which I perceived
were exceeding glad, whilst others shook with Horror and Amazement, and would
willingly have fled from the face of him that sat on the Throne, seeking invain
to hide themselves. Then methought I beheld the man open a Book, and the Dead
were Judged out of those things that were written in the Book; upon which it
was proclaimed, viz. Gather together the Chaff and the Stubble, and cast the
(...) into the burning Lake. And with that, I felt the ground give under me,
when immediately the bottomless Pit opened her mouth, casting forth Smoke,
grisly Flames, and Coals of Fire in abundance, roaring like peales of Thunder,
into which a great number sunk and were irreparably lost; when on the^ other
hand, I heard a Voice saying, Gather my Wheat into the Garner; and thereupon
many were caught into the Clouds, and ascended with Songs of Praises and
Deliverance, whilst I found my self left behind, vainly seeking (as others had
done) to hide my self from him that sat on the Throne; and the rather, because
my Sins came into my mind, and my Conscience accused me of ingratitude and
rebellion against my Maker, encompassing and filling me with horror and
amazement; but as I was flying, if possible from my self, just as I was on the
brink of the gaping Gulf, and ready to plung headlong into it, giving a great
shriek, I started; and thereupon awaking from my slumber, I found it (to my no
small Joy) to be at that time but a dream; yet this ma^^e a strange impression
on my mind, and began to awaken me out of secturity; especially when I
considered the condition I was likely to be in, if the dreadful day of Judgment
should overtake me at unawares, la^en with my Sins and Transgressions; which
made me a little reflect upon my former vain-spent Life, and like the prodigal
Son, consider how ^ fled from my Fathers House, spending in Riot and all manner
of wickedness not only my wordly goods, which wore given me to be improved to
Gods Glory, but what was far more precious, my stock of Time, which was given
(or rather lent) to work out my salvation in. How I had trifled with the good
motions of the Spirit, and resisted it is striving; how I had refused
Understanding, and the knowledge of Truth, shut the door of my heart against the
approaches of saving Grace, and given my self up to the governance and conduct
of my destroyers, to the enemies of the King of Heaven, in the breach of all
his Commandments, in grievously transgressing and disobeying his Will and good
Pleasure, by letting loose the bridle of my headstrong Will and Affections, by
giving up my self (as you have heard) to all manner of wickedness, not with
standing I had been assuredly informed. that the wages of Sin is Death; and
that by listening to the tempter, I should pr^pare a snare for my own Soul;
notwithstanding this, I say, I indulgec^ my self in sensuality putting far away
the Evilday; Romans 6.23
when on the contrary, I should have accounted my self as a Pilgrim, and have
fixed m^ Affections on the other World, where are durable and lasting Joys,
where True Felicity is only to be found; for he that seeks it in transitory
things, will find himself miserably mistaken: I should have fixed my thoughts
upon Life and Immortality, upon the Kingdom where Christ Reigns in Glory, and
counted my self in this World but as a wayfaring man traveling to my proper
Country, and design nothing more then to be at my Journeys end; and by entering
at the strait Gate, as Wisdom directed, have passed on without fainting, to the
Palla^e of the C^^lestial King, where is fullness of Joy and Pleasures for
overmere. Psalm. 16. Ult.


True it is, This World may pro^berly be said to yield many De^ights and
Refreshments, many Ho^ours and Advancements, which are ^ot denied to the Sons
of Men; But ^o what end does God bestow so ma^y Liberalities? Why that we ^ould
not abuse them, in making ^^em serve our Lusts, and increase ^ur Affections to
the World, but that we should use them to his Glory, and the good of our own
Souls; use them in such manner that we may be said in no wise to Abuse them;
that when at the last day we come to give ^pour Account, each of us may hear
(...) comfortable Sentence sounding ^our Ears, of, Mat. 25.21.
Well done, thou good and faithful Servant! thou have been ^aithfull over a
few things, I will make ^^ee Ruler over many things; enter ^hou into the Joy of
thy Lord. When ^n the other hand, those that have ^eglected and abused the
opportuni^ies and means of Grace and Salva^ion, shall hear this amazing Sound,
^iz. And cast ye the unprofitable Ser^ant into outer Darkness, Mat. 25.30.
there shall be Weepi^g and Gnashing of Teeth.

These considerations one would have thought, might have made me break my chain
of Bondage and Slavery wherewith I had rashly bound my self to serve the
Tempter by giving up my strength to sollow the vain Pleasures and Vanities ^
the World, which rewarded (...) with little other then Toil and (...) bour,
proving for the most part (...) there Pain then Pleasure: But I foun^ by
experience, that those wh^ have gotten a habit of Sinnin^ cannot easily
disencumber themselves or shake it off; the difficulty (...) which, the Prophet
Jeremiah testifies; Can (says he) the Aethiopia^ change his color, or the
Leopard h^^ spots? Jer. 13.23.
Then may you do Good, that (...) accustomed to do Evil. Nor is the ho^^ of
Grace at all times, nor is it (...) the power of man to repent when (...)
pleases, unless with his will and affections, moved with the gentl^ breathings
of the holy Spirit, saving Grace put in, Prove. 1.28.
and carry o^ the work of true Regeneration; f^^ of some it is positively said,
They sha^^ call upon me, but I will not heart; They shall seek me early, but
shall not (...) me, Not that God fails in his Promise ^ receiving a Sinner,
at what time ^ever he shall turn away from his ^ickedness, and become a true
convert; ^^t because this is turning to God ^hen he is in an extraordinary
di^ress and calamity, or perhaps when (...) is just turning out of the World;
which may much be doubted, even ^^y man, to be any true Conversion, ^^t such as
that whereof God spoke ^y the Prophet Hosea, Hos. 7.14.
They Howl and ^oar upon their Beds, and do not call upon me in their hearts.

Todye well, is a long Art, in which to learn it, there is but a short and
uncertain life, mostly spent in ^eep, Infancy, Childhood, Cares, and other
matters: The considera^ion of which, made no doubt the ^ise man call upon us in
this manner, ^iz. Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from
day to day, for suddenly shall his wrath break forth, Ecles. 3.7.
and in thy security thou shall be destroyed.

These things, I say, at this time prevailed not with me to shake hands with my
Lewd Conpanions; for Sin (like a disease) having infected every part, strugled
with and prevaile^ against Reason, which notwithstanding often rallyed, and at
tim^ created a Civil War in my Soul; i^ so much that by their violent e^
counters, swaying sometimes o^ way, and sometimes another, I oft^ stumbled at a
block which (...) Tempter threw in my way, and (...) once within a stride of
plunging into a dangerous Gulf called Despair, an^ had undoubtedly fallen into
it, ha^ not the Invincible Hand of Divi^ Providence suddenlypulled mebac^ to
reserve me for better Days.

And this was done when Sickness had me seized,
When both my Soul and Body were Diseased;
I ory'd alas! when Worldly helps were vain,
Torttour'd with outward and with inward pai^
When naught but Clouds of darkness muff'd my E^
And Death stood snarling ready for his prize;
When Hells of Horror, roused by Conscious gu^
My wounded Mind, more then my Body felt;
When the bold Tempter Aimed his flaming Dart
To Wound and Murder my defenseless Heart;
I faw the danger, and in sad dismay,
Trembling with Fear, Gasping for Life I lay,
And wished that I had chosen Wisdom's way.
O then what Vows, what Promises I made!
How often I Sighed! how of: I faintly Prayed!
Strugl'd like one in a Convulsion-fitt,
To shake off Sin, but found the Load too great;
Whilst he that laid it on me, let me see
How he (more then the World) had flattered me;
And that the World does only bear the blame,
Because by it he does Temptations frame:
Suggesting to me that it was too late,
That my black Crimes for Pardon were too great,
That I was Damned and Lost beyond retreat.
And nothing now had left me but Despair,
And must with him to dismal shades repair.
Consider this, all you that wear his Chains;
Think by his service what will be your gains,
How he rewards his Servants for their pains.
O! think betimes, and to your Father haste,
Ye Prodigals that do your substance waste;
Least the deceiving Citizen, the Fiend,
Make you eat Husks, or worser Food inth' end:
Make you despair, when in a foreign Land,
Far from your home, when death and terrors band,
Battering your weakened Faith, until you fall
In Everlasting Woes, beyond Recall.
This had been my hard fate, though well deserved,
And just the Doom, had not I (hunger starved,
And almost Perishing) with tender Cries,
Moved the Compassion of my Fathers Eyes;
And on my bended knees implored Relief,
With Storms of Sighs, Rivers of flowing Grief;
Who snatch'a me from the bold Destroyers Sword,
From Death and Hell, and favor did afford,
When worldly things could render me no Aid,
But a Retreat, liketh' Ebbing Ocean made,
His Saving Grace the mighty Ruin stayed.
He sent me Balm of Life to cure each Wound,
As in the sequel will be plainly found:
For, as I was saying, notwithstanding the many serious thoughts I had, in
consideration of the Amazing Vision I saw, yet being in the Palace of Worldly
Felicity, they were soon stifled, or at least much allayed, by crouding
Vanities, which formed and brought new seeming Pleasure to my Senses. But how I
was convinced of my Folly, and the wretched Error I was in, The following Pages
will direct you.

CHAP. XII. How Riding to Recreate himself in the Forest of Consciousguilt, he
suddenly perceived the Ruin of the Palace of Worldly Felicity, sinking into
the Gulf of Confusion, and finds himself in a wretched and miserable Estate;
reflects upon his past Life, and becomes a true Penitent.
HAving (as you heard) lived a considerable part of my days in all manner of
Sensuality, in the Palace of Worldly-Felicity, and requiring a more Airey
Recreation, it was agreed upon by all those my Companions, that I should be
highly Attended into the Forest of Conscious-guilt, there to Course such Game
as should be Started. So we Mounted, and Rid together as in Triumph, (I little
dreaming of the danger of the place) though it seems all that have been lulled
like me into a fond Security, in the Palace of Worldly Felicity, are in the
end brought hither, whether they request it or not; for this Forest adjoyns to
the Palace, being exceeding Dark and full of Terror, by reason of the
discouraging Shade that overshadowed it, and the many Pitsalls, Bogs, Ponds,
Snares, and threatening Wild-Beasts that are found therein, ready to Assault
such as they find Defenseless; yet hither is my Simplicity I went, very Jocund
and Gay; nor was it long ever the Game was started, which we followed with full
Cry; for now like Nimrod, we were Hunting after Blood and Oppression; and being
in our full Carreir, had almost made the Game our Quarry: But it so happened,
that being in the only open place of the Forest, which is upon a little Rising
Hill, the Sun shon hot upon me, and I began to faint; when being about to
retire under the cooler Shades, my Horse fell down under me, and I found my
self incapable of moving from thence: Then called I to my Companions to come to
my ^ssistance, but none either came or made reply; yet I supposing I heard
(...) fearful Cry at a distance, Weak and Faint as I was, turned my Head ^o see
what it might mean; when ^o my Horror and Amazment, I perceived the Palace and
all its fading Glories, sinking into the gaping Gulf of Confusion; all the
pleasant places and pleasant Things wherewith I had Indulged my self, vanish
from my sight, leaving in their ^oom the noisome Lake of Sad Remembrance: From
the threatening ^anger of which, whilst I strove to ^y, I found my self Mir'd in
the Exceeding large and deep Bog or Quagmire of an Evil Conscience; for ^he
Hill of Prudence was sunk, so that the more I strugled to get out, the more I
found my self sinking; and then the deluding Enchantment being removed, that
held me as one in a golden Dream, I be held my Sins in their ugly and
afrighting forms; and still as I strove to shake them off, they clung the
faster to me; crying out, We are thy Creatures, and will Accompany thee: Thou
have taken Silver and Garments of Naaman, a^ the Leprosy of Naaman cleaves un^
thee. Then too sadly I remember each Sin with whom I had been famliar. Then I
found my self surro^ded with Blasphemy, Swearing, ^^ing, Covetousness,
Lasciviousne^^ Cruelty, Pride, Ambition, Riot, G^tony, Drunkenness, Lightness,
L^ness, Lust, Envy, Hatred, Ang^ Unquietness, Frowardness, Obstinat^ Rashness,
Violence, Idleness, Sloa^ Hipocrisy, Flattery, Curiosity, D^traction,
Oppression, Slander, (...) with many more, who derided (...) and upbraided me
for being so foolish as to forsake the Council of Wisdom, ingeniously
confessing, That (...) them was no Felicity; that GOD never made them, but that
they had the^ Entrance into the World by the (...) Malice and Subtilty of the
Devil, an^ that he was the seeming Prince (...) whom I had paid my Homage, wh^
I Listed my self under his Banner, (...) the Palace of Worldly Felicity: An^
now I called to mind what Mercy had abused, what offers of Grace had slighted,
how I had grieved the Holy Spirit, and by my Sins crucified the Son of GOD
afresh, and put ^^m to an open Shame; that when Wisdom cried in the Streets, in
the chief ^laces of the City, I either stopped my ^^ars, or turned my Back upon
her. These considerations made me think ^^y self unworthy, so much as to lift
^^y Eyes up toward Heaven, to ex^ect deliverance from thence, seeing (...) was
so Notorious a Rebel against ^^e Celestial King; and if at any ^^me I did,
methought I heard the ^oice of the Prophet sounding in ^^y Ears, viz. What have
I to do with thee, O Joram! 2 Kings 3.
Get thee to the Prophets of thy Father, and of thy Mother; go to the Pleasures
and Advantages that thou have hitherto pursued, and require them to help you.
Then methought the Earth seemed unwilling to bear me, and the angry Heavens
flashed Fire in my Face; all the Creatures whom I had abused tried out for
Justice upon me, whilst the Tempter played his strongest Engines against me,
waiting but the moment when Death should Cut my Thread of Life in sunder, to
devour me. Psalm. 116.3
Then the Pains of Hell ^ot hold upon me, the Sorrows of Death compassed me,
and the Floods of Wickedness made me afraid; the Sorrow of the Grave compassed
me, the Snar^ of Death overtook me. Then I found Trouble and Heaviness, and
cried unto him that alone is able to deliver, who laid help upon one that
(...) Mighty; whilst the Tompter on (...) other hand strove with all his mig^^
to push me headlong into the Gulf (...) Despair, by suggesting my Sins we^^
greater then could be forgiven, a^^ that I was Irreparably Lost: This confess
filled me with horror a^ amazement, but still though through my Infirmities my
Faith was wea^ and imperfect, I cried to my Deliverer, acknowledging my own
vileness^ and confessing the multitude of m^ Transgressions, watering my Co^^^
with Tears, and with Remorse, crying often, Father, I have Sinne^ against
Heaven and in thy sight, Luke. 15.18.29.
an^ am no more worthy to be called thy Son^ make me as one of thy hired
Servants^ O! let me approach Thee, though with shame and confusion of Face O!
shut me not out of thy Heritage but take the lost sheep into thy Fold If thou will, O Lord, though I am vile and wretched, thou can, thou ^ayst cleanse me;
though my sins be (...) Scarlet, yet thou can make me as ^hite as Snow. O
merciful Lord! (...) not so look upon me, so that thou ^^e not thy self;
Regard not so my Wickedness, that thou behold not (...) own Goodness; Remember
(...) so the Sins that I have done, that ^^ou forget the substance thou have
^ade. O merciful Lord! what is ^^e Sense of this saying, Ezekiel. 33.11.
I will not be Death of a Sinner, but I desire that (...) be Converted and
Live? O merci^ll GOD! whose word is thy will, and whose will is thy Power, to
do whatsoever pleases thee, who do promise nothing but what thou do
purpose, and then thou can not ^romise any thing but what thou art ^^le to
perform, suffer me I pray thee (...) prostrate my self at the footstool (...)
thy Mercy Seat. For great is thy ^oving-kindness toward the Sons of ^den.
Lord, If thou will not the Death (...) a Sinner, what necessity if there at I
should Perish? If thou desiresh ^^t a Sinner should be converted and ^ive, what
difficulty is there that I (...) not be Saved? Can the Power and Malice of the
Devil, can the number of my Transgressions either constrain thee, to that which
thou would not, or hinder that which thou desire? Behold, O Lord! Thy
Prodigal Returned, who by sad experience has found thy Word the the Truth,
behold him with the Ey^ of thy Fatherly Compassion, and let not thine Anger
burn against him; for in thy wrath the Soul^ that thou have made must fail
before thee.

Having in this manner poured o^^ my Supplications, methought a Beam of
heavenly Joy darted into my Soul, and the threatening Terron seemed to
disappear: Then began ^ to reflect upon my past spent Life, and to detest
against those that had seduced me; but above all my own Folly, which enticed
and perverted me from the ways of Wisdom and Truth. And having made a
repetition of my manifold Transgressions, and of those that had been my lewd
Associates, I burst out into Tears, and with St. Austin, said Behold, O Lord,
with what Companions I walked the streets of Babylon, I wallowed my self in the
mire of it, as if I had reposed in a Bed of Spices and fragrant Perfumes,
whilst my secret Enemy led me on to the center of Sin, so that I ran into all
manner of dissoluteness, and practiced what soever I affected: a Mist in the
mean time, depriving me of Sight, de^^iving me, O my GOD, of the brightness of
thy Truth, whilst my Sins proceeded from me like the flowing of a Wine Press.

Here again I paused, and strugled with the Temptations that sallyed upon me;
and then in the anguish of my Soul, cried out, How long, how long, O Lord will thou be angry? for ever? How long, how long, O Lord, will thou shut the gate of
thy Mercy against me, and cover with indignation, as with a Cloud, the
brightness of thy Face? How long will thou turn away thine amiable Eyes from
beholding me, who without the assistance of thy saving Grace must ever be
Miserable? O my Redeemer, let thy Mediation plead in thy sacred Merits, my
wretched cause, with thy Fathers Justice! O Thou that wilt not break the
bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, have Pity, have Compassion on me! O
Thou that art the good Samaritan, pour Oyl^a^d Wine into my wounded Soul, and
bind it up in the bundle of Life! Yet, wretch that I am, with what Face can I
approach thy Presence, who have so often rejected thy offers of Life and
Salvation, betrayed thy Cause, deserted thy Standard, and gone over^ thy mortal
Enemy? And though with transcendent mildness thou have called moved and invited
me to return, yet have I obstinately and perversely refused it. Upon this,
hanging down my Head with shame, a flood of Tears burst again from my Eyes;
which ended, methought I heard a voice, saying, I have heard thy Prayers, I
have seen thy Tears! behold, I will heal thee.

And now, by reason of the sudda^ calmness I found within, I had leisure to
reflect upon my past Vanities, and the danger wherein I stood of hazarding my
Eternal welfare, which made me bitterly exclaim against Folly, who had been the
occasion of my running into these dangerous ways, as in like kind she serves
all those that listen to her, and shape their undertakings according to her
Dictates; and then, to aggravate it the more, laughs at them when their
Calamities come as desolation, they not being in the least able to deliver
themselves from shame or danger. Therefore let the Sons of Men consider how
dangerous it is to refuse the call of Wisdom, whose Unerring Rules lead into
the paths of Life, to follow a Deceiver who leads directly to the gates of
Death; for, a^ holy David affirms, Psalm. 36.1, 2.
The Transgressions of the Wicked says within my Heart, that there is no fear
of GOD before his Eyes, for he flattereth himself in his own Eyes, until his
Iniquity be found to be hateful. And this made me consider the wretched estate
of many, who hardened in a course of sin, will fully shut their Eyes till some
more then ordinary Judgment awake them; and this indeed was my case, as in part
you have already understood: for as it is written, viz. Isa. 26.9.
When thy Judgments are abroad, the Nations will learn Righteousness; That is,
the fear of an impendent punishment frequently awakens them out of that
security, which when they put far away the Evil Day, they are apt to slumber
in. And thus declaring my Folly, and the dangerous Adventures I enter prized
and was concerned withal in the Palace of Worldly Felicity, or Sensuality; my
intent is to leave what has been said as a Seamark, to prevent others from
running rashly or unadvisedly upon the same Shoal or dangerous Quicksand on
which so many Thousands are lost, and from thence (without Vainglory) show what
followed in the better part of my Adventures.

The End of the First Part.
The Conviction of Worldly-Vanity: OR, The WANDERING PRODIGAL RETURNED.

THE SECOND PART.

CONTAINING An Account of his Escape from the Palace of Worldly Felicity; Of
the glorious Prospect he had of the Celestial City; And of the Progress he
made (under the Conduct of Divine Grace) to the Palace of Virtue and True
Felicity; The manner of his Proceeding, the various Occurrences he met with by
the way, and his Joyful Reception there at last: His Excellent Description
thereof, and of the Divine and Moral Virtues he found therein.

With many Other Things, both Pleasant and Profitable.

London, Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey. 1687.

The Wandering PRODIGAL Returned.
PART II.
CHAP I. He is rescued from the miserable condition he was in by Divine Grace;
has a prospect and description of the CELESTIAL CITY, and of the, Joy he
conceived thereat, etc.
HAving in the first part of my Travels declared how I was governed by, Folly,
and how I contemned and despised Wisdom (...) Virtue; following a Voluptuous
kind of Life, which in the end I found to be at best but tiresom Vanity, as
indeed all those must do that place their trust too much therein; and how, by
being afflicted, the Eyes of my Understanding (that before were clouded and
shut up in the dark mists of Sensuality) were opened, insomuch that with Holy
David, I may justly say, (...) 11.9.71.
It is good for me that I have been Afflicted. I shall now proceed to tell you,
That continuing in a sense of my own vileness, and still crying out for
deliverance: As I was praying with a willing mind, (...) 9.1.
shedding Tears in abundance, and still wishing that my Head was Water, and my
Eyes fountains of Tears, that therewith in some measure the stains and
polutions of my wicked Heart might be washed away, that so in Regeneration I
might become a new Creature; as I was thus Thoughtful and Penitent, I say, it
so happened that fixing my mind on things above, Col. 3.1, 2.
as I had at my first setting out been directed by the voice of Wisdom, though
(wretch as I am) I refused it; methought I beheld, (at least with the Eyes of
my Soul) a Lady of incomparable beauty, clad in Vestments of purest white,
shining with Transcendant Brightness and Glory; I saw her methought descending
from Heaven, for there it seems she ever dwells with the Eternal Wisdom, till
by his Compassion sent down to Relieve and Refresh poor Penitent Wretches, and
be a means to cause such Wandering Prodigals as my self to resolve upon
returning to their Fathers House, and of making a true and sincere
acknowledgment of their manifold Sins and Transgressions: And whist I lay
grovelling upon the ground in Sighs and Tears, she placed her self before me
with the greatest mildness Imaginable. insomuch that although I was atfirst
abashed, yet soon I took Courage, ^ after some abrupt stammering, occasioned by
the confusion and bad state I was in, I opened my mouth and beganto implore her
assistance, entreating her that she would vouchsafe to draw me out of the miry
sink of my Sins, into which through Rashness and Folly I was fallen and there
in all likelihood must Perish, if not suddenly relieved; for not withstanding
what had passed, I saw many Enemies preparing to assault me, against whose
assaults I was but weakly provided, and little able to make any long defense.

Thus having made my Supplication to this Heavenly Stranger, she mildly
reproved me, and let me (with conviction of Conscience) behold how fondly I had
given my self up to follow the Temptations and Alurements of the Enemies of my
Soul, Prove. 3.17.
and upon what slight terms I had rejected the Counsel of Wisdom, Whose ways
are ways of Pleasantness, and all whose Paths are Peace. In doing which, she
told me my Sins indeed were very great, and that they had been the more
Aggravated by forsaking the good way and treading in the forbidden Paths; Rev.
3.8.
yet (continued she) to true Penitents There is a door set open which no man
can shut; but beware that thou turn not aside again, Psalm. 2. ult.
Least thou perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, etc.
These reproofs and words, spoken with a Majestic and convincing mildness, made
such an Impression on my Heart, that I could not refrain bursting again into
Tears, and in the midst of my Passion cried, O! the Insearchable height and
depth of the Mercies and Love of GOD to. wards his miserable Creatures! even to
those that were his Enemies, who have crucified him to themselves Afresh,
Rejected and Despised him for Tristes, for vain Delights, and Teeming
Pleasures; Him who is only Life, Light, Joy, and the Eternal Center of
Happiness Then she proceeded to give me many words of Comfort and Consolation,
saying, she had a Commission from Him That ever Lives to make Intercession for
Sinners, to draw me out of the Mire wherein I lay; from him that is able to
save to the utmost; and thereupon touching me with her Golden Scepter, I
presently received so much Strength and Vigor both of Body and Mind, that like
the Lame Man that lay at the Gate of the Temple, I leaped from the danger
wherein I was; leaving Folly and my Horse Timerity to struggle by themselves,
who with much striving sunk deeper and deeper, till covered in the Quagmire, I
beheld them no more.

Being (as you have heard) delivered out of the great danger wherein I lay, and
raised by the assistance of Divine Grace (for so by this time I understood the
Lady was called) From the Death of Sin, to the Life of Righteousness, I began
to bethink my self to whom I owed my deliverance; when with Holy David, I made
my humble Acknowledgment. viz, Psalm. 40.1.2.3.4.5.
I waited patiently upon the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard my Cry;
he brought me up also out of a horrible Pit, out of the Miry Clay, and set my
feet upon a Rock, and established my goings, and has put a new Song into my
mouth, even Praises to our GOD; many shall see it, and fear, and trust in the
Lord. Blessed is the Man that makes the Lord his trust, and Respects not the
Proud, nor sush as turn aside to Lies. Many, O Lord my God, are thy ^onderful
works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to ^s-ward, they cannot
be reckoned up in order to thee; If I would declare and speak of them, they are
more then can he numbered. Psalm. 139.^^, 18.
Upon this, methought I heard a voice saying, Arise my Love, my fair One, and
come away; for behold the Winter is past, the Rain is over, the Flowers have
appeared in our Land. Cant., 2.10
Now whist I was looking about me, I beheld afar off a very glorious Country,
shining with Celestial Brightness, to which I found my self all on a sudden
desirous to pass, and therefore took the boldness to inquire of Divine Grace
what happy Land that was, which afforded so glorious a Prospect at so great a
distance? To which she answered me, That it was the Heavenly Canaan in which
was the New Jerusalem, the City shining with the brightness of GOD: upon which
I concluded this was the Country of which I had heard very glorious things
spoken; and being more and more desirous to travel thither, I with much
submission enquired of sundry things and matters relating thereto, and
especially of the City which sent its beams of Light from far, and to which I
well perceived the Palace of Worldly Felicity in all its seeming Glory, (if
what appeared sollid, had been really so) was nothing comparable.

To which she made this reply: As for the City (said she) it shines with the
glory of GOD as clear as Crystal; and as for its Buildings, they are of fine
Gold, glistering like Glass; the Walls and Foundations being of precious
Stones, and the Gates so many entire Pearls; whose streets are paved with Gold;
and that in this City there is no need of Sun or Moon, for the Lamb, who is the
Celestial King, is the Lamp and Light thereof, who gives it a large and
glorious Light; from whose Seat streameth a Fountain or River of Water of Life
as clear as Crystal; and on the banks thereof, is Planted the Tree of Life,
which continually yields both Food and Physic; and in this City there is no
Sickness, Trouble, or Decay; no Curse, no Unclean Thing, but the Throne of GOD
and of the Lamb, and his Servants, who see his Face, and Reign with him for
evermore, etc.

When Divine Grace had showed me these things, I concluded that to this place
Wisdom intended to lead me, when she met me at the parting of the way; the
thoughts of disobeying whose Voice, made me not a little sad; and especially
because I had triss'd away so much precious time in pursuing Vanity, putting
off from Day to Day (as too many worldlings do) the time of Repentance, which
ought to be the early work of our Life; especially considering it may not be at
all times in our power: For setting aside a thousand Accidents or chances that
may befall us, either in suddenly depriving us of Life, Senses or Opportunity,
doubtless our free will, without the assistance of Gods Grace, and the good
motions of the holy Spirit, must necessarily prove ineffectual; and so by a
long obstinacy, a long resisting and grieving the holy Spirit, which should
Seal us to the Day of Redemption, me may at last be left hardened in
Impenitency, and either sink in the Gulf of Despair, or be Split upon the Rock
of Presumption, which is altogether as dangerous, and has done more mischief by
far then the former.

Notwithstanding these thoughts, I could not forget what Divine Grace had told
me concerning the Celestial City, but steadfastly fixing my Eyes upon it, as
place I greatly desired to be at, yet somewhat doubtful by reason of my
unworthiness, whether I should find admittance, I cried out as in a Rapture, O
how Amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts! Psalm. 84.2.
My Soul longs and pants to enter into thy Courts! And now Divine Grace
being fully satisfied that I intended to set forward, she did not attempt to
discourage me; for although she dealt plainly with me, and let me understand
the many difficulties I was like to meet with, she on the other hand supported
me with many indearing promises of Assistance, thereby to enable me not to
faint, or turn aside from the way; and so absolutely resolving to proceed in
what I had determined, I implored her Assistance; which she promised as far as
it was needful; and to show me many things that as yet I was a stranger to.

So happy is the Man whom Grace befriends,
Him upon whom the Heavenly Guest descends;
That he a prospect soon may gain of Life,
Immortal Joys, and Glory free from strife.
CHAP II. After a truc Sense of his Sin, he resolves to Travel toward the
Celestial City, and of the difficulty he met at his setting out, how he
entered the Strait Gate where he met Evangelist, and the Comfort he gave him.
BEing yet in the same Garb I flattered my self in, in the Palace of Worldly
Felicity, I found my self uneasey, as being sensible and ashamed of the miry
condition I was in, I implored Divine Crace that she would help to change them;
but she told me it might not be done, till such time I had repassed the broad
way, and come to a certain place where I should find a Lady that would strip me
of them; at this, though I found them very Cumbersom, I was not a little
pleased; for now having a true sight of the Condition I was in, I began to
loath and detest what formely I had approved and delighted in: And so taking me
by the Hand, she led me to the brink of a noisome Lake, full of fearful
Monsters, Yelling Horribly, and continually Roling in Liquid Fire; at the sight
of which, I started as one in a Dream, when he fancies himself falling from the
top of a Precipice; whilst my hair stood an end with Horror, and with an abrupt
and broken speech, demanded, what this fearful Sight might mean? To which
Divine Grace replied, This is the change of Sin from it is flattering and
delusive shape, to that which is more properly and really its own natural
deformity; This is the Place, and these the Companions of your late imaginary
Sollace and Repose; and here had thou been weltering, had I not been sent to
your assistance by Him who is the Author of Grace and Truth; yet over this Lake
you must pass, before you can arrive at the stage where you are to be disrobed
of your Poluted Garments.

At the sight of this place, and the Thoughts of repassing it, I began
exceedingly to Tremble, crying out, Romans 7.24.
O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death! from
this danger and hazard I am now to undertake! but whilst I was trembling and
crying out, Divine Grace showed me a Bridge that reached quite over the Lake,
which was exceeding narrow, at the sight of which, being little recovered from
my amazement, I greatly rejoiced; and this Bridge is called by some Remorse of
Conscience and Abborrence of Sin; but by reason of its slenderness, it was feeble
and crazy, insomuch that as I passed it, it often cracked and tottered, so that
I had once a mind to retreat, for fear of tumbling into the Lake; and the
rather, for that the Monsters on either side reached at me to pull me in, and
often with their horible bellowing not only shook the Bridge, but put me into
such an amazement, that sometimes I was regardless of my way; besides, the
noisome vapors created a dizziness and disorder: But by the assistance of Divine
Grace I with much difficulty reached the other side. Yet Voluptuousness, who
there lay wallowing in the Embraces of Sensuality, cried after me with a
horrible voice, Job. 20.11
saying, His Bones are are full of the Sins of his youth, and^ they shall lie
down with him in the dust.

But not willing to give further ear to her, I smote my Breast, and fetching a
deep Sigh, said with a loud voice, Psalm. 94.17
If the Lord had not helped me, my Soul should have been put to Silence. And
now Reader, from this consider that none can be said to be Penitents, but such
as through remorse of conscience, having a true Sight of their Sins, and a
sense of their misdoings, with reluctance, and an utter detestation and
abhorrence, reflect upon them, resist them, and mortify their corruptions; and
this cannot be done truly as it ought, without great caution and difficulty,
by reason of natural depravities, and the fresh assaults of Temptations that
frequently offer or cast themselves in our way; which though (as it too
frequently happens) they are sweet as honey in the mouth, which invites many
greedily to take them in, yet in the Belly they are as bitter as Gaul.

Having escaped this danger, and heard the lamentable Cries of those that lay
weltering in misery, we passed on till we arrived at the end of the Green
Lane, where it butted upon the Palace that I had beheld sink down, and instead
of which the noisome Lake arose, where we met with a great Slough called the
Slough of Discouragement, and in it many who had attempted to return without
the assistance of Divine Grace, who relying upon their own strength had
ventured so far that they could neither proceed, nor without some difficulty
reach the side next to the Palace; and the reason was, because it was guarded
by one called Dispondency of mind, who frequently (as they attempted to get out
upon the firm ground) pushed them back again; so that being quite tired and
spent, puzzled between Hope and Despair, they lay fretting themselves in much
Auxiety, and knew not what to do; so hard a matter is it for those that rely
upon their own strength, when they should rely upon the Merits and Gracious
Promises of their Blessed Redeemer, to break the chain of their Sin, or get out
of the Mire into which they have wilfully or unadvisedly plunged themselves:
For Free Will, without free Grace, is weak and insignificant. But it so
happened, that whilst I made a little stand at the brink of this Slough, one
called Promise, came and laid a strong Bridge of Assurance, which reached from
one side to the other, and over this we passed; but had not gone far, before I
espied a pleasant Path that crossed a Meadow, which led a nearer way, over
which I was desirous to go; but Divine Grace pulled me by the Sleeve, saying,
Let thine heart be toward the highway; Jer. 31.1.
the way that thou wentest turn again. Upon which, I immediately started back
into the Road, and so we kept on till we came to the place where the ways
parted. The which when I perceived, I called again to mind the Counsel of
Wisdom, and was not a little grieved that I had rejected it, considering the
many miseries I underwent since I took the Left-hand-way; yet I mingled my
Grief with Joy, that it was once more in my choice; and so with a willing Mind,
I entered in at the Strait Gate, crying, Welcome, Life; and fell to leaping for
Joy; for now I felt my mind lighter then ever, though I was not disrobed, nor
those difficulties that^ been suggested as yet appeared; but far I had not
gone, before I met a Man of mild aspect, who came up to me and desired to
admonish me in a few things; and being glad of such an opportunity, I thanked
him kindly, and promised attention: And he proceeded:

I am (said he) Evangelist, whose care it is to direct those that enter in at
this Gate, in their way to the Celestial City: And thereupon he demanded how
it had fared with me? To which I briefly told him all that had befell me: after
which, he made me sensible that I had seen him before, and that he had given me
good advice, the which if I had taken, I might have escaped the danger I had
incurred; but seeing I had turned from the Evil of my ways, it might not be too
late for me to reach the Palace of True Felicity, seeing the Lord thereof has
promised, Ezekiel. 33.11.
That at what soever time a Sinner Repents and Turns from the Evil of his
ways, his Soul shall Live, for that he wills not the Death of a ^inner, but
desires that he be conver^ etc. Nay invites all those that are weary and heavy
Laden, to come unto him for Rest, declaring that he will in no wise cast them
out, promising them freely, without price or Money, Is^. 55.1.
the water of Life; and makes himself our Advocate, to plead our Cause: you are
one of those for whom he laid down his Life, one of those for whom he shed his
most precious Blood; and for so great kindness what does he expect more then
your obedience and faithful Service, your entire affections, Math. 11.30.
and perseverance in welldoing. Nor, as himself has declared, is his Service or
Yoke uneasy; or should it be so, which indeed it is not, yet know you serve him
not for naught; your Reward, if you persevere to the end, will be a crown of
Life, an exceeding weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17
a Pearl of an inestimable value, a Kingdom without end, an Eternal
Inheritance, etc. Wherefore look well to your Feet, that you withdraw them not
from the way of Peace, nor that you faint, Math. 20.16.
for many are called, but few are chosen; Wherefore so Run, that ye may obtain
the Reward, the prize of Glory; 1 Cor. 9.24
and be vigelent in holding fast the Faith, that in the end, when you have
fought the good fight, 2 Timothy 4.7. and 8.
you may receive the Crown of Righteousness which the Righteous Judge will give
you in that Day. Suffer nothing on this side the Mark of your high calling to
trouble or affright you, no Temptations, Tribulations, and Sorrow, to overcome
you; but with a constant and steadfast Faith, Rely upon Him for Succor and
Support, under whose Banner you are now to fight; nor fear his ability, for
unto Him all Power in Heaven and Earth is given. This encour agement and
caution I thought fit to give you, that you neither faint nor look back; and
shall not be wanting, as further occasion offers, even as you can bear it.

Evangelist having given me this Heavenly Lecture, I found a tenfold Joy arise
in my Heart, and after returning him a Thousand thanks, passed on, accomp^^yed
with Divine Grace, till I came into a very low descent, which I understood to
be the Valley of Humility, and here stood the School of Repentance, to which I
must enter before I could pass any further. Of which take an account in the
following Chapter.

CHAP III. How having entered the Valley of Humility, he came to the House of
Repentance, and how he was there Entertained; the Ingenious Confession he made,
with Admonitions and extolling the Divine Goodness, etc.
APproaching the House of Repentance, which stood in the middle of the way to
the Celestial City, I perceived it hung with Sighs, and dropping with Tears,
paved with Groans, and ciel'd with Prayers and Ejaculations, appearing very
Mournful and Melancholy; but for all that, I was not in the least dejected,
but staid in the Porch till there came a grave Matron in a mourning Weed, plain
and decent, with a Lovely yet Sorrowful Countenance; and after her followed two
more, who appeared to be her Daughters; and these, I understood by Divine
Grace, were Repentance, Sorrow for Sin, and Confession of Sin: Then Divine
Grace addressing her self to the first of these, told her to what end she had
brought me thither, by what means, and to what degree she had wrought upon me;
how I was become sensible of my own vileness, and therefore desired her to
qualify me further, according to her Rule and manner, that I might be fitting
to pass toward the Celestial City, whither I was bound

The Ladies having well understood the Cause of my coming, highly approved it,
and kindly welcomed me, showing me my Apartment, and what else was convenient
for me. So that having no other business finess then to apply my self to the
ways of Virtue, I lea^^'d a Lesson different from that which I had learned in
the Palace of Worldly Felicity; for now instead of Drinking, Rioting, Gaming,
Debauchery, and the like, I applied my self to Fasting, Prayer, and other such
like Pious and Devout Exercises; and when I had so done for a few Days, I found
a wonderful change wrought in me; yet all this while my Lewd Apparel remained
upon me, of which I was not a little ashamed, though how to get it off I could
not tell; yet calling to mind what Divine Grace had told me, how that at a
certain place I should be dis-en-cumber'd, I concluded this might be that
place; wherefore taking the opportunity, I besought the Lady Repentance to do
me that kindness, who as readily consented; and thereupon taking me into the
Retirement of Sorrow for Sin, where was a deep Dungeon, she took off my Hat of
Haughtiness, my Girdle of Intemperance, my Sword of Violence, my Coat of
Vainglory, my Hose of Vain Delight, and consequently all my other Lustful and
Vicious Attire, my Shirt of Lasciviousness excepted: which, that I might not be
altogether naked, I entreated her to spare for a time; and these she cast into
the dark Dungeon called Oblivion, to prevent their rising up in Judgment
against me when I came to the Celestial City: And so I being thus Lightened,
continued in great content of Mind; so that true Repentance of all things in
the World, makes the greatest change; it changes things in Heaven and Earth,
for it changes the whole man from Sin to Grace, from vicious habits to holy
Customs from unchaste Bodies to Angelick Souls, from Drunkenness to sober
Counsels; and even GOD himself (in whom there is no variableness or shadow of
change) is pleased by descending to our weak understandings, to say that he
changes; that is, upon Man's Repentance he alters his determinate Decrees in
case of Punishment, or the like; as in the case of Ninnive, and that of
Hezikiah, with more that I might mention, which for brevities sake I pass over.
Repentance prevails with the Almighty to revoke his Sentence, cancels the Bills
of Accusation, and throws the Records of Shame and Sorrow from the Court of
Heaven, and even to lift the Sinner from the Grave to Life, from the Prison to
a Throne, from Hell and guilt of Eternal Torture, to Heaven and a title of
never-ceasing Felicities.

Being now under the Jurisdiction of this good Matron, she would not suffer me
to rest till she had made a further trial of my Patience; and thereupon taking
me by the Hand, she carried me into another Apartment, and there showed me a
very strait hole, which she said entered into the Chamber of Sincerity, through
which I must pass, if I intended to Arrive at the Celestial City; upon which I
began to cry out, That it was impossible that ever I should be able to pass
through such a small hole; for to my seeming, my Hand would scarcely enter, and
thereupon I asked Counsel of Divine Grace, who told me there was indeed no
other way, and that although it seemed impossible with Man, Mat. 19.26.
yet all things were possible with GOD; therefore I ought to Rely upon him, and
not be discouraged; for that I must put off the Old Man, which according to the
first Conversation, was corrupted with many Evils, Col. 3.9.10.
and put on the New Man, whose Conversation ought to be Justice, Truth and
Holiness. The Old Man is the Affections of Sin, and the former Evil Life; and
the New Man is the Godly Life, begun in Holiness: And whilst she was thus
discoursing, looking through the Window of my Understanding, I beheld an aged
Eagle rough and disordered, who towering a while, in the end descended into a
Crystal Fountain that stood hard by, and having dived therein, her Feathers
moulted, and she became young, sprightly and gay; and whilst I was wo^ dering
what this might signify, Divine Grace entered the narrow hole, caught me by
the Hands, and said, Hos. 11.4.
I will draw thee in with the Cords of my Love; which she did, whilst
Repentance thrust behind; so that by reason of the straitness of the place, my
Shirt of Lasciviousness was rent to pieces, and I began to complain of the
Rigor; but soon the hole grew wider, and I found much case, being now much
lighter and at ease, especially in my Mind, then I was before; insomuch that
concluding the worst was past, I began to Sing in this manner: How happy am I
now I Am entered in!
By which I am disburden'd of my Sin,
Which like a heavy Weight so lately pressed
My sinking Soul, and robbed it of it is Rest!
Happy are they that Ruled are by them
That lead the way to New Jerusalem.


And now being in, Repentance put m^^^ Garments suitable to my condition o^ the
great work I was to undertake, which were Spun by Humility Patience, M^^k^ess,
Charity, and many other Virtues; and so let me consider further to what end I
came thither. And that I might have yet a deeper sense of my Sin, soon after
Returning, she put me into an unusual Agony, though she quickly gave me a
Cordial, as in the sequel will appear.

CHAP IV. He is Affrighted by the Terror of Conscience, but is at the Earnest
Intercession of Sorrow for Sin, spared at the Command of Divine Grace; and
crying out against Presumption, is humbled under a sense of Sin.
CErtain it is that GOD has many and wonderful ways to bring Sinners home to
himself, as sometimes by Threats, sometimes by Promises, and sometimes he draws
them with the Cords of his Love, by degrees preparing them to be fit Vessels
for the Reception of his Grace, which has power to sof^en and mollify the Stony
Heart, and baffle all Worldly Interest; as appears by the Conversion of St.
Paul, the Call of St. Matthew, and others: But nearer to the purpose,

When Repentance had Apparelled me, as I said, with Garments suiting my
Condition, she placed me in a Stony Chair, and having allowed me a Breakfast of
spare Diet, I scarcely had ended it, when going out, she returned again with
diverse in her Company, and of these she placed one on my Right Hand, one on my
Left, and another directly before me; who with an angry and threatening Look,
star'd dreadfully in my Face, having moreover a Red Book in one Hand, and a
Scorpion in the other; and whilst I was in a trembling Fit, and wondering what
i^ should mean, she had command to open the Book, which she immediately did;
and in it I too plainly beheld in Bloody Characters, the many Crimes and
Follies that since my coming into the World I had committed; which made me
start, and forced all the Blood in my Body into ^ay Face, not being able to say
one Word for my self; whereat she let loose her Scorpion upon me in a pitious
manner, insomuch that I cried out for mercy; whilst she, on the other hand,
fell to upbraiding, saying, Turn not away wretched Man, for it is not in thy
power to fly from me: Turn not away, I say, but behold thy wicked Actions
Recorded in this Book, the smallest of which thou art not able to deny; see how
in dreadful Letters stand Engraven thy Pride, Arrogance, Ambition, Spite,
Hatred, Contempt of others, thy abused Prosperity, and slighting of offered
Favou^s, and misusing of time, thy Wrathfulness, Injuries done against thy
Neighbor, thy Covetousness, Backbiting, Slandering, Gluttony, Wantonness,
Fornications, Adulteries, Drunkenness, Lying, Swearing, Profane Speeches,
Sloth, contempt and neglect of Sacred things, thy trusting in the Arm of
Elesh, and relying upon Perishable things; the Follies of thy Youth, and the
Sins of thy Riper Years; with many other Abominable and Notorious Crimes,
hateful in the sight of GOD, and deserving to be punnish'd with no loss then
Damnation: Then how, Guilty Wretch, dare thou without shame and confusion of
Face, look toward the Celestial City, when you have been so Notorious a Rebe^
against the King thereof, by taking part with the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil? Upon this sharp Reproof, the Damsel called Sorrow for Sin, being then
present, fell bitterly to Weeping, and fetching many deep Sighs, as if her
Heart would break, interceding with Conscience for me, who was all this while
afflicting me, and threatening with fearful Judgments of Wrath and Fiery
Indignation to come; Heb. 10.22.
insomuch that I sat amazed and confounded within my self, looking every moment
when the House would fall about my Ears, for me thought the Earth shook under
me; and I, who a little before thought I was free from all danger, found my
self now as bad (for the time) as when I lay bemir'd on the brink of the Gulf
of Despair Wherefore let none be over confident, least he be deceived; 1 Cor.
10.12.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. That is, let not
Presumption whisper in his Ear, as in this case he did in mine, Luke 18.11
lest like the Proud Pharisee, he be puffed up with a conceit of his own
Righteousness, or with the Young Man, pretend himself to be a strict observer
of the Commandments, etc. Mark. 10.20.
and boast of great things, when indeed he is nothing; for when we have done
all we can we must lay our Hands upon our Hearts, and say, We are unprofitable
Servants, and that our own Righteousness is but as filthy Rags; Luke 1710.
flying from the terror of an acusing Conscience to the tender compassion and
merciful Pro^^^es of a blessed Redeemer.

Whilst I was in my Trembling fit, under the Sense of my Guilt, which
Conscience presented to the Eyes of my Soul, in came Divine Grace, at whose
Feet I fell prostrate, humbly beseeching her, that she would take Compassion
upon a distressed wretch, and deliver me from the Scorpion or Sting of
Conscience; who perceiving me truly humbled by a sense of my Sins, commanded
Humility to raise me; which she kindly did, saying, He that abaseth himself
shall be Ex^^^ed; Note.
and thus being enabled to stand on my feet, least Discouragement (a terrible
Giant who had made the Slough I have mentioned, to hinder the return of those
that pass the Bridge of Ignorance to the Palace of Worldly Felicity) Should
meet and assault me on my way, she caused Remembrance to open her Golden Book,
and read me a Lecture from thence, and so^ she did, as in the following Chapter
will appear.

Where Golden Lines, in Golden Letters writ,
You will with comfort favorably meet.
CHAP. V. Remembrance opens her Book and reads him a comfortable Lecture,
mostly containing GOD's gracious Promises of Mercy and Forgiveness to true
Penitents, and thereby allays his Fears.
REmembrance (whoall this while had stood by) having received her orders,
opened the Book she had in her Hand, in which I beheld Lines of Gold in Pages
of Azure, when touching the Seat of my Mind with a Silver Wand, she thus
procceded: Has Sin (said she) Abounded? Grace has more abounded: Romans 5.20
Wherefore he that mistrusteth the Mercies of GOD, mistrusteth him to ^e
M^r^^ful, inju^ub the Fountain of Mercy and Good^ess, in denying him to be Love
and Power; Love, to star him up to compas^on, and tender Bowels of Mercy, and
Power, to do what seover seems ^ood in his own (...): and in these con^st all
the hope of poor Sinners, who had ^ey to do with any but a merciful GOD, must
unavoidably Parish; for ^n the strictness of his Justice, the least Sin is
Sufficient to Sink a Soul to ^he Depth of M^sery. But that he is Love, Sacred
Writ test^^ies, and renders ^t in all th^^^s one of the highest Attri^utes of
Omnipotency; nor is it in any small degree communicated to mankind, but rather
in a most transcendant man^er, viz. In this was manifested the Love of GOD
toward us, 1 John. 4.9.
because that GOD sent his only begotten Son into the World that we might Live
through him. Herein is love, not that we loved GOD, but that he loved us, John.
15.13.
and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our Sins: Greater Love (says our
blessed Savior) then this has no Man, that a Man should l^y down his Life for
his friend: This is the Rock and Anchor hold both of Faith and Hope, for
without out it we must have inevitably perishe^ and the Souls that he has made
mus^ have failed before him; that is, of hi^ Mercy had not infinitely out
weighe^ his Justice. Nay this blessed Saviou^ not only laid down his L^fe for
lost an^ and undone Man, and took it up again^ gloriously ascending to the
Right Han^ of his Father, 1 John. 2.1.
but there likewise eve^ lives to make Intercession for us: For if any Man Sin
we have an Advocat^ with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
Propitiation for the Remission of Sins. Again, Behold (says St. John) what
manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, John. 3 ^^
that (...) should be called the Sons of God! not that God has either occasion
for us or our Service, for we can in no wise add any thing to his State or
Felicity, who is (...) finitely happy from all Eternity, beyo^^ Degree or
Comparison; but that it i^ his Nature to do good to all his Creatures, and to
have Compassion on the Works of his Hands: Isa. 43.25.
Wherefore speaking to this purpose by the Prophet Isaiah, h^ says, That it is
he himself that blo^teth out our iniquities for his own name^ sake, and that
for the Love he bears us he will not have our Sins in Remembrance; but then it
is conditionally, that we become sorrowful for our misdo^^gs, and repent us of
the Evil of our ^ays. That he has power to Pardon ^^d Forgive us, Mat. 28.18.
is past all peradven^ure, for all power in Heaven and Earth ^ in his hands;
and as his Mercies are ^nfinite, so is his Power Unlimited and ^comprehensible;
nor is his Care and Regard less, for he that keeps Israel, neither Sleeps
nor Slumbereth. Therefore let the Wicked Man leave his ways, and the Unjust Man
the Evil of his d^^ings, and turn unto the LORD, and ^he will have mercy on
him, and is ready to forgive him, and those that do trust in him shall not be
Confounded; Psalm. 91.1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
for whosoever dwells in the Secret of the most High, shall abide in the Shadow
of the Almighty; surely he will deliver thee from the Snare of the Hunter, and
from the Noisome Pestilence; he will cover thee under his Wings, and thou shall
be safe under his Feathers, his Truth shall be thy Shield and thy Buckler; thou
shall not be afraid of the Arrow that flies by Day, nor of the Plague that
destroys by Noonday; a Thousand shall fall on thy side, and Ten-thousand at
thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh (...) his (...) but (...) on (...)
them out of (...) them in the (...) Peace (...) Father (...) out of (...) to
(...) us to our^ endless Comfort, That GOD so lov^^ the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, to the end that whos^^^er believes in him might have (...)
Life: for he came into the World not to condemn the World, but to the ena that
he might sav^ Sanners.

Having heard these comfortable Sayings, I greatly rejoiced; and began to Sing
in this manner: O! what Return can Sinners make to thee
For Mercies that are far beyond degree!
O Gracious Lord! What can poor Dust repay!
Nothing but Sighs and Tears! Alas, can they
Hope for (...) Yes, if truly sent,
From Hearts that Contrite are, and Pendent.


CHAP. VI. He acknowledges his wonderful Change, is Assaulted by
Discouragement, (...) him, and puts him to slight; (...) from the School of
Repen^, is like to run into the (...), but is prevented by Understanding, and
conveyed (...), with other matters of Note.
HAving through the Assistance of (...) been thus long ^the School of (...), my
Mind and Affections were wonderfully ^ang'd from what they were in the ^rmer
(...) of my Life, for I now ^egan to think of nothing but the ^ountrey whither
I was going, and ^as continually Meditating on it, and Contemplating of it is
Beauty an^ Holiness; all that I had heard spoken of it, returning continuall^
afresh into my Mind, insomuch that I cried out, Psalm. 84.1.2.
O! how Amiable are the Dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts! M^ Soul longs and
pants to Enter in^thy Courts! In thy presence is the f^ness of Joy, and at
thy Right Ha^ are Pleasures for evermore. Psa. 16.11.
An^ when at any time Discouragemen^ assaulted me, Acts 14.22.
Suggesting, The through many Tribulations I must E^ter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, a^ that Bonds and Afflictions abided ^ in every City, I Answered him in
the words of St. Acts 20.23.
Paul, viz. I account that the Afflictions or Sufferings of the present Life,
are not worthy of the Gl^ry that shall be Revealed. Romans 8.18.
And while I was thus considering with my sel^ Divine Grace came to me, and to^
me it was time to pass on, and pr^forward toward the Mark or Prize my high
Calling; Phil. 3.14.
to which I willingly submitted, all the Ladies prom^sing in like manner to
Accompa^ me; and so with Joy I proceeded^ For being disburthened of my Sin^
Apparel, I was much the lighte^ and then (according as ^^isdom had ^old me) the
way see^^'d more pleasant, though not altogether free from danger. For the
Prince of the Palace of Worldly Felicity, to whom ^ had formerly been a Slave,
was abroad with his I^gions to prevent (if possible) my safe Arrival at the and
of my Journey; who often ^ry'd after me to Return, and made many hideous
howlings to affright and discompose me, that so they night shake or stagger my
Resoluti^on: But as much as in me lay, I stopped my Eats and cried out, I will
walk in the strength of the LORD; Psa. 7.16.
and thereupon for a time they ceased to pursue me. So in the end, we came to a
Crooked Lane, called the Path ^f Error; into which I had almost stepped before I
was aware, but ever my Foot reached the Ground, Understanding, a good Hermit,
whose Honse stood on the other hand, stepped forth and pulled me back, and told
me of the danger I was in; at which I began to tremble in such a manner, that I
was scarcely able to return him Thanks, and especially because upon a second
View, I beheld Hymeneus and Philetus, with many other Erroneous Seducers and
Brothers of Error, who stood closely lurking to pluck in such as passed
carelessly on their way; for here finding (or supposing at least) the Path
easy, and that no other wa^^ butted upon it, I had vain-gloriou^ out-strip'd
my Company, in a manner forgetting how I had been a little before punished for
harkening t^ Presumption; and for this, Conscience (as soon as she came up with
the rest) began sharply to Rebu^^ me; but seeing I only attempted, b^^ had not
entered the Lane, she upon the supplication of Repentance, gave over, and so we
altogether entered the House of the Good Hermit Understanding, over whose Door
was written this Sentence, Psa. 49.20.
viz. Man that is Born in Honor and Understands not is like the Beast that
Perishes. Upon the Reading this, I began to consider that a Man might
understand and yet not understand aright; That he might be (if we may rightly
term him so) a Man in understanding as to Worldly Affairs, and in that boast
great things, as the Sage. and Philosophers of Old did: Nay, go somewhat
surther, and yet be a Child in True Understanding, as to Heavenly things, of
which the Prophet Jeremy speaks, viz. Jer. 9.29.
Thus says the LORD, let not the Wiseman glory in his Wisdom, neither let the
Mightyman glory in his Might, nor let the Rich-man glory in his Riches; but
^le^ him that glories, glory in this, That he understands and knows Me that
I am the Lord.

Being come into the House of this Good Man, the first thing he showed me was a
Man that lay bound with Chains of Security, in a dark Dungeon that was under
the Floor of his House; yet in that Estate he seemed very pleasant, not at all
regarding the misery he seemed to be in, neither was he able to get out of it,
though he was encompassed with Tombs and Coffins: Then I asked him whom this
might be? And he put a Book into my Hand, and pointing to a certain place, bid
me read; when looking earnestly upon the place, I sound these Words, viz. Prove.
7.6.7.
For at the Window of my House I locked through my Casement, and beheld amongst
the Simple-ones, I discerned amongst the Youth, a Man void of Understanding:
Upon this I considered it was the Emblem of my self, when forsaking Wisdom and
following the Advice of Folly, though I was then in the depth of Misery, yet by
reason of my Simplicity, and for want of Understanding, I knew it not, but
rested content even in that wretched Condition: Then I demanded why he was
placed amongst Coffins and Tombs? Then he pointed to another place, and bid me
read; which I did, and found these words, viz. The Man that wandereth out of
the way of Understanding, shall remain in the Congregation of the Dead. Prove.
21.16.
Then began he to reprove me, and upbraid me with my former Follies and
Vanities, with my Disobedience to the call of Wisdom, and other things; but I
freely confessing and owning all these, bid Sorrow for Sin speak a little on my
behalf: Whereupon she declared, though she must confess that I had been a
grievous Sinner, and had indulged my self with all manner of Vain-Peasures; yet
by the means of Divine Grace, having had a through sight of the miserable State
I was then in, I had Renounced the World and all its Vanities; that I had been
in the School of Repentance, and now was onward of my way, with a reso^ution to
persevere to the end, with hopes of Pardon and Eternal Life; ^ot upon my own
account, or through any merits of mine, but up^on the account, and by and
through the meritorious Death and Passion of my Blessed Savior, GOD manifested
in the Flesh; hoping by him to be raised from the Death of Sin, to the Life of
Righteousness; 1 Cor. ^^.22.
for as by Adam came Death, so by Christ comes the Resurrection of the Dead.
Therefore being truly sensible, sincerely and heartily sorry for what was past,
she hoped that he would not only pass by my former Frailties, but further what
I had well begun with sound Advice.

This calmed his Temper, and he upon the Motion of Divine-Grace, promised to
furnish me with some of those Instructions which Wisdom had left for my
Learning, who he said in that kind took Compassion on me, even when I despised
her ways, and that concerning Religion.

So kind is Heaven to Prodigals Returned,
Who of their Sins Repented have, and Mourned,
That they so kind so good a Father fled,
To live with Worldlings, live amongst the Dead.
CHAP VII. Understanding gives him Cordial Advice, and prepares him to proceed
to the House of Religion; and how after sound Counsel he went on his way, and
what else befell him.
UNderstanding having promised to give me some sound Advice, that might profit
me in my further Progress, thus began:

Now (said he) you are Entered upon this holy Warfare, you ought to quit your
self like a Man, not to Faint, but run with patience, and consider the danger
of him that looks back; the Reward you are sensible is great, that will crown
you, if you persevere to the end; and a great Reward cannot reasonably be
expected without Labor: Religion is not Nominal only, but Practical, and must
not be trifled with; for take it in its Latitude, ^^ signisies the whole Duty
of Man; and without performance of that Duty, Salvation cannot be reasonably
expected: It comprehends Justice, Charity, Sobriety, Patience, Meekness, and
many other Virtues; because these being commanded by GOD, become a part of that
Honor and Worship which we are bound to pay unto Him; in relation to which,
St. James says, That Pure Religion, Jam. 1.27.
and undefiled before GOD and the Father, is this, To visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted of the World: Nor
must this be done superficially or hypocritically, for Praise or vain Applause,
but seriously and heartily, Mat. 6.18.
not as unto men, but as unto the Lord. Nor does this, which some term the
External part of Religion, consisting in good Offices to our Neighbor, etc.
excuse us, but there follows that which is more peculiarly to be observed.

The Internal part of Religion is called the Internal (...) which the Soul is
only and more immediately employed and ministers to GOD in special Actions of
Faith, Heb. 11.1.
Hope and Charity; Faith believes the Rev^^ation of GOD, and is the Evidence of
things not seen; Hope expects his Promises, and Charity loves his Exce^encies
and M^r^^es; the last of these, 1 Cor. 13.^3.
by reason of it is many singular Properties, being by the Apostle termed the
greater of the Three: Again, Faith guides our Understanding to GOD, Hope gives
us all the passions and Affections to Heaven and Heavenly things, Charity gives
the will to the service of GOD; Faith opposes Infidelity, Hope does the like to
Despair, and Charity to Enmity, Hatred, and all other Passions of that kind;
and these three Sanctify the whole Man, and make your Duty to GOD, and your
obedience to his Commandments to be Reasonable and Delightful; and therefore to
be Inti^e, Persevering and Universal.

Understanding having thus given me a further insight in Religion then I had
before, and humbly entreated, That the GOD of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father
of Glory, would give unto me the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, which
searches in all things, yea the deep things of GOD, to lighten the Eyes of my
Understanding, 1 Cor. 2.10.
that I might know what is the Hopes of his Calling, and the Riches of the
Glory of his Inberitance in his Saints, Ephesians. 1.17.1^.
he suffered us to depart, yet promised to ^^assisting when need should require
it.

CHAP VIII. How he caine to the House of Religion (being enticed in the way to
turn aside by Hypocrisy and others) and of the (...) he sound these; the good
Instructions he (...), with many other matters.
HAving left this place, I passed on with great Joy, pondering in my mind what
I had heard; and asking many questions of my Dear Companions, about the way,
they freely satisfied me in all things; telling me the next place I should come
to would be the House which (however it might seem to my outward appearance)
would prove very glorious within to true Penitents, insomuch that David, Psa.
84.10.
tho a King, desired rather to be a door keeper in the House of GOD, then to
dwell in the Tents of Wickedness; That is, then to live wickedly in all worldly
Plea^^^e; and that it was far better known by the Inside then the outside, for
that Hypocrisy had built her a House on that Road very nearly resembling that
of True Religion, and and for the outside was rather fairer, by which many who
traveled that way, had mistaken the latter for the former, and were by the Lady
Dissimulation (that keeps it) after they had along time flattered themselves,
led to the top of a Mountain standing on the lest side the way, and by one
Self-conceit removed thence to a dark Land, where they wander to this day.

This terrible Story made me very cautious and circumspect, whereupon I
resolved to keep even with those that accompanied me, and not to go before
them, as I did when I had like to have turned down the crooked Lane of Error.
And now being come within fight of a House on the Left Hand, I concluded it to
be the same; whenas out came a grave Matron, with a Vail over her Head and
shoulders, seeming very Sorrowful, and her Face to appearance was much Furrowed
with Tears; yet for all that, I perceived a couple of Fellows at her heels,
called Desire of Vainglory and Praise of Men; This piece of seeming Gravity,
with a very demure Countenance (as I came near her) said, Welcome, welcome, my
Son; whilst those that attended her stepped forward, and entreated me to turn in
and take a Refreshment: But having in mind what had been told me, Mat. 23.13.
and remembering the dreadful Sentence pronounced against Hypocrites and
Unbelievers, by the assistance of Divine Grace I stopped my Ears, and crying
out, Life, Life, Eternal Life, I passed by, and escaped this carcass or shadow
of Religion, by which too many are ensnared in embracing the shadow for the
Substance; by contenting themselves with the Apples of Sodom and Gomorrah,
whose outsides are of a Gold and Crimson Color, when the infide produces
nothing but Cinders and Ashes. (...). 23. (...).
Nor unsitly, but rather excellent, is the saying of our Blessed Savior, where
he compares Hypocrites to painted Sepulchers: and indeed this is a Sin that
walks the most lavisi^^le to Men, because it is lodged in the secrets of the
Heart, where GOD alone is the Scearcher.

Having escaped this danger, I ^lainly beheld the Ho^^^ of Religion, or true
Devotion, at which I greatly rejoiced. This House stood in the middle of the
way, and through it those that Travel to the Coe^e^tial City must needs p^ss,
or they will fail of their expectation. And upon our approach, Humi^ty and
Sincerity came to usher ^s in, whilst Good Theology, who was Master of the
place, stood to receive and welcome us with a gratulation of Peace; and so being
entered, methought it was one of the most desirable pleces I had seen in my
way; and here I learned of (...) He^^ed M^ster, to be Lowly and Meek, pouring
out my Spirit in Supplication and Prayer, Mat. 11.29
entreating Sorrow for Sin and con^essi^m of Sins to assist me in as much as in
them lay, to make an acknowledg^ment of my own vileness, the better ^o suppress
the strivings of the Fle^^, who in this transitory Life will at one time or
other Rebel against the Spirit, though Watchfulness and So^riety be never so
constant in their Attendance: though (as (...) assared me) in Religion is the
greatest Cornfort and Encouragement Imaginable, for though the Body ^^ never so
much Afflicted, yet i^ w^^ keep close with GOD ou^ (...) will be at case, our
good (...) be a continual Feast: We are, ^ays he, 2. Cor. 4.2.9.
Tro^bled on every (...) Distressed; we are (...) not in Despair; Persecut^^,
but not fors^ken; Cast down, but not De^^r^yed; and again, Who is he that will
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is Good? But (...) for Rightcousness
sake, happy are ye; and be not assraid of their (...), neither be Troubled. 1
Pet. 3.1^.14.
Wherefore laying aside all Malice and Guile, and Hypocrisies, and (...), and
all Evil speaking, as new born Babes desire the sincere milk of the word that
you may grow thereby, if ye have tasted that the Lord is Gracious; to whom
coming, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
as unto a living Stone, dis-al-lowed indeed of Men, but chosen of GOD and
precious, ye also, as living stones are built up a Spiritual House, etc.

These sayings made Tears of Joy stand in my Eyes; and now to render my comfort
the greater, having repeated many promises of performing (by the assistance of
Divine Grace) not only what was, but what should be further commanded, ^ found
my self strictly embraced; when looking to see by whom, I perceived a beautiful
Lady, called Steadfast Faith, standing at my Right Hand, who had before I was
aware put the Girdle of Firm Belief about me, and when she apprehended I was
Sensible of what she had done, she with an earnest Speech delivered these
words, viz. Be thou Faithful unto Death, Rev. 2.10.
and I will give thee a Crown of Life; and immediately I had a prospect of very
glorious things; Then came Hope, and gave me an Anchor of Promise to secure me,
if at any time I should be tossed on the ^ough Sea of Distrust. Then Charity
^over'd me with a mantle of Compasion, and having received the sacred Pledges
of his Love (which he left as a remembrance of himself till his coming) with
the most profound Reverence and Devotion, it was agreed by all the company,
that I should be instantly conveyed to the Palace of Wisdom and Virtue, both
these being one and the same Person; for True Virtue, is Godly Wisdom, and
Godly Wisdom is True Virtue. Now when I heard what was determined, I was
somewhat abashed, because Remembrance (who still attended me) loooking
earnestly upme, it came into my mind how I had at the parting of the ways
refused her Instructions; but however taking Counsel of Theology, I sound that
through her Palace, was the only way to the Celestial City, and very near the
Gate thereof; for indeed her conversation is mostly in Heaven, though by the
will of the Celestial King, she condescends to converse with Mortals, as well
appears by the following account given of her by the wisest of Men, viz. The
Lord by (...) has founded the Earth, by V^^^rs^anding has he e^^ab^^^hed the
Heavens. Prove. 13.19.
And therefore knowing that by going over to her, I should be nearer my
Jou^^ies end; I plucked up a good courage, and resolved upon it, saying (thou^^
but softly) thus to my self: The ways of Wisdom (...),
But need, (...),
Who takes (...),
She Would Heavenly (...), and (...) thither bent.


CHAP. IX. Being well Instructed, he passes on to the P^llace of True Felicity,
deser^^es it, and is there ^ntertain'd with great Joy, and has from thence a
full Prospect of the Celestial City.
BEing determined to pass on to the desired place of Rest, I perceived at my
setting out from the House of Religion (where I learned many things to surther
me in my way) the powers of the Air and Darkness were mustering against me, to
oppose my proceedings; but being furnished and supported as I was, the Terror
(...) little or no effect upon me; notwithfranding they cast Shame, Disgrace,
Contemps and Scorn in my w^^, for I set my Face like a Flint against their
Assaults; and with a steadfast Mind, opposed them with Patience, Constancy,
Perseverance, Meckness, Humility, and the like.

And now the good Hermit Understanding, who followed me to the House of
Religion, by the Appointment of Divine Grace, becoming my^ Tutor or Gaurdian,
next her self I found my self doubly Blessed, and^ so the way growing even, we
went^ smoothly on; True Content being^ the forerunner of our Company, who
still removed those Rubs that Adversity cast into the way, and made it easy to
us; so that before the Sun declined, I had a Prospect of the Palace, being in
a manner at it, when methought it was the fairest that ever I beheld at such a
nearness; though indeed the Celestial City gave a more glorious Prospect; but
however, this must be Entered before one can come to the other.

The Structure of this Palace of Virtue (for so henceforward I shall call it)
stood upon a spacious Hill, green and pleasant to behold, and reached as high
as Heaven; upon the Wall of which there were seven strong Towers, Guarded by
Divine Virtues; and in chief, were under the Command (as I understood) of
Faith, Hope, Charity, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance and Good Will; and over
these Reigned Wisdom as Queen ^d Lady of them; and not only ^er these, but over
many more; ^r all Virtues submit to her Conduct. and thus far at present I had
my In^lligence from Understanding, my ^utor.

And now having in my Company ^ivine Grace, Understanding, Me^ory, Conscience,
Repentance and ^eligion, or Theology (who would at any Entreaty Accompany me)
The Three Divine Virtues I mentioned in ^he House of Religion, being gone
be^fore to reassume their stations, and the rest disinissed till further
occasion might offer; we came up to the Gate, which was very Narrow, neither
were the Paths much beaten, by reason of the small resort; and there we were
met with Songs of Praise and Hosannahs to the Co^lestial King; and so we
entered the Palace in Triumph.

And now I found by Experience, that Virtue, if there was no other Reward but
enjoying it even in this World, in finitely exceeds Vice; but far be it from
any to think it has it is Reward on this side Heaven; for Holy David, speaking
of the Soul of a Righteous Man, Ps^ 36.8.
says, I^ shall be satisfied with the abundance of GOD's House, and he shall
give it Drink of his Pleasure as out of a River. And i^ this may be termed no
more then a^ Heavenly Conversation, whilst o^ Earth, though some (...) yet hear
what our Ble^^^^ Saviou^ says, which is beyond all Contradiction meant of the
future State, viz. Joh. 17.24.
Father, I will that they be with me where I am, that (...) may behold my Glory
which thou h^^st given me. And now, as in the Palace of Worldly Felicity were
exceeding Stories of Perishable things; so in this Palace of True or Spiritual
Felicity, were things Incorruptible and Eternal, Treasures of every Virtue,
durable and ^^sting, as the Author of them. And here it will not be amiss to
give a brief Description of the place, or rather of the Heavenly Guests I found
therein, and that no further in Alegory, but by the help of Understanding, as
plain as may be, for the better Advantage of the Reader; and having in the
former part given a Character of Wisdom, I shall proceed to give a Description
of Virtue, as far as it is warrantable, that not differing (in the main) from
the former.

CHAP. X. He gives a Description of Virtue, together with her Noble Qualities,
the means whereby she Operates in the Soul of Man, and why to be desired.
VIRTVE is that Good which is wrought in the Minds of Men, by a Divine
Ins^^^n^e; and and according to St. Austin (in his Second Book of Free-(...),
Chap. 18.) is a good quality of the Soul Divinly direlled, (...) and (...) him
to (...) to do what good he can to all, (...); to resist evil and (...) that
which is good. And so by the Soul of Man, up^on which it Oper^^es, (...)
understands the (...) of the Mind or Soul, as Reason Judgment and Will: The
Inferior part we call Sense, which is (...) to Beasts as Men; and there^^^^
the Rational part, which is a Ray of Divinity, is properly taken for the Soul;
and this it is that Virtue h^ the power over, to order or dispos^ and from
hence we infer that Virt^ is a good quality of the Soul; that is to say, of
Free Will; for Virt^ qualifieth Free Will, disposing it an^ preparing it to Do
and Will well though neither of these can come t^ pass, without the Assistance
of Divine Grace.

As for the Second part of the Definition, it is in consideration of Man's
living Justly and Uprightly and he that does otherwise is no tru^ Friend to
Virtue; for as Vice is diametrical to Virtue, so is any thing that borders or
depends upon it And whosoever lives well, if he persevere in so doing to the end,
he need not fear of having the Reward du^ to Virtue, which is no less then
Eternal Life; it follows then that b^ Virtue, True Felicity is only attainable;
for Virtue Redressing and Correcting the Depravities and Exo^bitances of
Free Will, so that being as it were new molded, it is di^pos'd to do that
which is Just an^ Upright; so that he that is trul^ Virtuous, altogether shuns
that which is Evil, and chooses that which is Good; and this made David wish,
Psalm. 27.4.
That he might dwell in GOD's House all the Days of his Life: And for a further
Encouragement to Virtue, our Blessed Savior tells us, that, Mat. 7.3.
The Just shall Shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Much more
might be said in this case to render Virtue Lovely and desirable in the Eyes of
Men; but seeing she has not only been Recommended to them by our Blessed
Savior, the Fountain of Virtue and Goodness, but by the Prophets, Apostles,
and Good Men of all Ages; those who refuse to Entertain her upon such
Recommendations, will hardly be induced to it by any endeavor of Mine. So to
conclude this General, I shall only add, That Virtue is a Work of GOD in Man,
and not of Man in himself; for as the Rain moisteneth the Ground, to render it
Fruitful, and yet the Rain is not the Ground, nor the Ground the Fruit; Even so
in the Ground of our Souls he Infuses his Grace, to render us Fruitful in Good
Works.

CHAP XI. He gives a brief Account of Faith so far as is warrantable; to what
end she serves, and the especial Marks of her Appearance, etc. as also of Hope
and Charity.
FAITH is, Heb. 11.1.
as the Apostle says, the Evidence of things not seen, giving us Confidence and
Ass^^tance of things to come, which otherwise weighed in Humain Reason, might
appear impossible; and this excellent Virtue made Abraham and the Patriarchs
and Prophets, etc. so famous and acceptable in the sight of GOD, by being
confident through Faith, that none of GOD's Promises should fail, Abraham we
hear believed, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness; Romans 4.3.
Nay more, had the Honor to be styled the Father of the Faithful: Whilst those
that have been dissident, have been ever Reproved and come to Naught; as the
Obstinate Jews in the time of our Savior, who for their unbelief and hardness
of Heart are called a Faithless Generation; for though Abraham by Faith had
seen the Day of our LORD so many Years before, yet his faithless Offspring,
notwithstanding such lively and apparent Demonstrations, hardened their Hearts.
Faith in it is Offices consists, First to believe with a steadfast Assurance,
all those things that GOD has Revealed to us, when once we are Convinced he
has spoken them; and that without too curious an Enquiry, or Attempt to search
into his ways, we humbly submit, relying upon him for the fulfilling of his
promises, which cannot fail; for as well may he cease to be, as cease to be
just; Heaven and Earth (says our blessed Savior) Shall pass away, but my word
shall not pass away till all be fulfilled; Mark. 13.31.
and therefore may be as fully relied upon, as if already seen fulfilled or
possessed.

Secondly, We ought to believe nothing concerning GOD, but what is Honorable
and Excellent, as being assured that that belief that is accompanied with
dishonorable thoughts or distrust, is little available; nor is Faith less the
Parent of Charity, for it produces not only a steadfast Belief and Trust in GOD,
but a love toward him and relyance on him, with a true acknowledgment of his
Goodness both in Word, Deed, and Thought. To let the contemplation of his
Excellencies employ our chiefest care, and possess the very center of our
Souls, is a great Sign of true Faith, especially if nothing of Vainglory be
mixed therewith, but we are content to cast our selves entirely upon him,
estranging our Affections from Worldly things, and placing them upon those that
are lasting and Divine; and St. Paul says, Romans 10.17.
This Faith comes by Hearing; and indeed it may well do so, for that the Ear
conveys the Promises to the Soul, and there the Understanding frames them in
their divinest shapes, whilst Faith sets its signet of true belief upon them,
which must be likewise confirmed by Charity or Divine Love for although we had
Faith even to remove Mountains, yet without Charity, 1 Corn. 13.2.
as Holy Writ testifies, it is nothing; for even the powers of Darkness believe
and Tremble; so that belief serves only to aggravate their punishment, because
it is neither accompanied with Love, nor Charity; and thus much briefly
concerning a well-grounded Faith.

Hope in the Palace of Virtue takes the next place, and is highly to be
approved, because it is the Mother of Patience, and the preventer of Despair,
eacourages a Christian in perseverance, and expectation of the Reward that is
promised to those that do well, and confirmed by Faith; for where as Faith, is
a firm and steadfast belief in general, of all the revealed will of GOD, so is
Hope of what more immediately concerns the party with whom it resides, and is
between the two Extremities of an infalible Assurance of Blessedness, and a
Desparation of it; and the more a man recovers from the last Extremity, the
more perfect is his Hope: And in this case it suffices the Believer, that he
believes and loves GOD, that he has a firm Affiance and Confidence that GOD of
his good Grace will have Mercy and Compassion on him, and will give him
whatsoever he has promifed to his Elect, hoping that he is of their number And
not only to hope, for that would be too supine and negligent, but to strengthen
that Hope with Prayer, Acts of Charity, and other Christian Duties; so that in
the end, Hope may not fail of its expectations, but be satisfied with those
blessings it so earnestly expected.

As for Charity, the greatest of these Three, 1 Pet. 4.8.
it is no doubt a garment of Righteousness that covers a multitude of Sins;
and without this, St. Paul, the great Apostle of the Gentiles accounted himself
nothing. And to this I join Good Will, which is one and the same, for the
truly Charitable Man wills no Evil; and Love and Charity are inseparable
Companions, being linked together in a Chain of Causes, and consist of Internal
and External Acts, viz. Acts of Compassion, Love, Tenderness, Forbearance, Long
Sufferance, Patience, and Brotherly kindness, as well as Liberality, relieving
and succoring those that are in Distress or Affliction, by Alms, good Counsel,
and whatever else is necessary or convenient, without any expectation of
applause or retribution; for those that give any thing upon that account, are
like them that when they gave Alms, caused a Trumpet to be sounded in the
Market place, that they might have the praise of Men, so by that means it
appears it was no true Charity, and consequently not registered in Heaven; but
on the contrary being attended with Pride and Vain Glory, things most hateful
to the Almighty, instead of laying up treasure there, they treasured up to
themselves wrath against the day of wrath: Nay the proud Pharisee's merely
boasting of what he had done in this kind, begat him rebuke and eternal infamy;
for doubtless Charity is a spark of Divine Love, which inflameth the heart and
prepares it for the reception of saving Grace; and there is no thing more that
our blessed Savior takes notice of in his distinguishing the Righteous from
the Wicked, at the last Day, then by the Charity of the one, and the
Hard-Heartedness of the other; as you may find it at large in Mat. 25 etc. Nay
he has commanded us to do whatsoever in this kind is requisite, not only
heartily, but with all the Privacy imaginable, to prevent Vain Glory or the
applause of Men; and has promised us for so doing, that the Father who sees in
secret, will reward us openly; and this is the only opportunity GOD has given
the Sons of Men ^o make themselves friends of the Unrighteous Mammon, Luke.
16.19.
that when ye fail, they may recieve you into Eternal Habitations, and lay up
treasure where neither Moths nor Rust can corrupt, Math. 16.19.
nor Thieves break through and steal.

Having gathered these things from good Understanding, I was not a little glad,
and thereupon put up my Petition to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
whose hands are the Hearts of the Sons of Men, that he would continue to me his
Grace, and more and more enlighten my Understanding, that he would put a godly
Fear into my heart, whereby I might ever apply my way to Wisdom. Which when I
had done, I went to take a survey of the four Morral Virtues who are of no
small account to a good Christian, wherefore I shall not think it amiss to
describe them, though for brevities sake I shall be as concise as will stand
with convenience.

CHAP. XII. He gives a description of Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance, Excellently representing them in their several Capacities, Motions
and Opperatio^n, etc.
THe Moral Virtues are accounted both by Ancient Philosophers and Modern
Divines, Four, viz. Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, in which the
Sages of old, by the light of nature placed their chiefest happiness, squaring
thereby their Actions, and regulating their Affairs; nor are they at all to be
rejected or slightly accounted, though under a greater light then the Heathens
could everpretend to, for St. Hierom says, By these the Christian lives well,
even in Morality. For Prudence directs him in his Affairs, Justice preserves
his Integrity, Temperance preserves him in Health; and srequently in
Prosperity, whilst Fortitude furnishes him with a constant mind, to bear him
out in all Hazards and Mischances; gives him courage and strength to defend
himself against danger and malicious attempts: And again, Prudence puts it in
our power to contemplate the Creation, and admire the Creator in the beauty of
his Creatures, to extol his Wisdom and Power, his Excellence and Order; and by
degrees raise our Souls to a higher pitch of perfection. Temperance enables us
to subdue and mortify our Lusts, and to bring them under Subjection, enables us
to be vigilant and watchful against the enemy of our Souls; Prudence directs us
to shun Temptations, Fortitude to resist them with a godly zeal, and Justice to
live uprightly, doing to all as we would be done by; so that these being used
to a right end, border upon or are props and supporters to the former. But to
come to somewhat more particular.

Justice may be said to be a Virtue of two kinds; as first, it is a general
Virtue, and comprehends in it self all Virtue; as for instance, The man that
lives uprightly and justly is called a just man; and is in the second place
understood by the name of Distributive Justice, and so becomes National, and is
the Defender of Innocence, the Scurge of the Guilty, and the Support of
Kingdoms.

Fortitude is a Virtue by which Justice in a manner is supported, though it may
be divided into the Force of Arms and the Constancy of Mind, and so applied
either Spiritually or Temporally; for by what but by Constancy and Courage,
Patience and Assurance of an Eternal Reward, did the Apostles, Martyrs and
Confessors maintain the Truth of their Profession against Pagans, Infidels, and
even the Powers of Darkness, against Persecutions, Temptations, Fiery Trials,
and a hundred kinds of Deaths; Rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to
Seal the Testimony that they bore with their Blood.

Temperance, says St. Austin, is a power a Man gains over himself, prevailing
even against his craving Appetite, and by degrees enables him to Rule his
Passions, which is the noblest Conquest a Man can make; for when this Virtue is
away, all other Virtues lose much of their force; for when a Man is overcome
with Wine and Excess, he is prone to all manner of Vice, letting loose the
Reins of Passion and Inordinate Affection.

Prudence is the Queen, even of these, if rightly considered, because wherever
she comes, she commonly Rules the rest; and by her Discretion directs and
orders the whole Frame of Man; prompting and disposing him to do that which is
Just, Moderate, Sober and Discreet. And now having taken a Survey of these, I
applied my self to Holy Duty, observing all that in me lay, to keep the
Commandments, Pray and Sing Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, as I remember
Wisdom told me, Those that were Conversant with her were wont to do; and least
by any means I should grow flack or negligent herein, Understanding brought
Perseverance to me, who gave me the following Directions, by the Command of
Divine Grace.

CHAP XIII. He is brought to Perseverance, by whom and Understanding, he is
further Instructed; He is Recommended to her by Divine Grace; and leas a
Prospect of the Celestial City from the Tower of Faith, where he continues in
Expectation.
UNderstanding and the rest that Accompanied me to the Palace of Virtue, being
all this while with me, I was y my Tutor carried to the Apartment of
Perseverance; For said he, unless you hold out to the End, it had been better
for you that you had never set forward, if by a Relapse you should lose at last
what you have so long strugled for; the loss will be the more intolerable, and
your fault the greater. When looking about me, I saw Divine Grace, to whom I
made my Humble Obedience; whereupon she comforted me, and bid Understanding
bring out the Lady of that place, which she accordingly did; when considering I
had not seen her before, I beheld her with a submissive Look, and she on the
other hand beheld me with a grave, yet somewhat severe Look, and upon the
Motion of Divine Grace, thus Accosted me: I understand (said she, you are
lately come from the Palace of Voluptuousness to this place, therefore
consider well your Ways, and set a Watch over your Heart; for though now, by
reason of Divine Grace, you are not only Arrived at the Palace of Virtue, but
in favor with the Celestial King, of whose City you have had a Prospect; yet
know, without me you may yet fall short of your Expectation; both Faith and
Hope, ^r. 17.9.
I say, may fail you, if you slight my Counsel and Advice; for the Heart of Man
is deceitful and desperately wicked, who can know it?

Upon this saying, I fell upon my Knees in the presence of Divine Grace, and
all the other Virtues that were present, and made a solemn Protestation, That I
would take heed to my way, and do (by the Divine Assistance) what ever I was
able to please ^he Lady Preseverance; and she on ^he other hand taking me up
Lo^ingly in her Arms, promised not to depart from me, unless I gave her cause,
till I came to the Coele^tial City. And so by the whole Assembly being
Recommended to each other, we continue in Love and Friendship in the strictest
Bonds of Amity to this day, continuing in great Felicity in the Palace of
Virtue, and hourly from the Tower of Faith taking a Prospect of the Holy and
Heavenly Jerusalem, Replenished with Peace and Pleasures for evermore.

In which, Great GOD, when this short Life is past,
Let my poor Soul be by the Mercy placed,
That I the Pleasures of True Life may Taste.
FINIS.

