A LETTER FROM THE Bishop of Rochester, To the Right Honorable The Earl of
Dorset and Middlesex, LORD-CHAMBERLAIN OF His MAJESTY'S Household, Concerning
his Sitting in the Late Ecclesiastical Commission.
In the Savoy: Printed by EDW. JONES. MDCLXXXVIII.

A LETTER From the Bishop of ROCHESTER, To the Right Honorable The Earl of
Dorset and Middlesex, etc.
MY LORD,
I Think I should be wanting to my self at this time, in my own necessary
Vindication, should I forbear any longer, to give my Friends a True Account of
my Behavior in the late Ecclesiastical Commission. Though I profess, what I
shall now say, I only intend as a Reasonable Mitigation of the Offense I have
given, not entirely to Justify my Sitting in that Court; for which, I
acknowledge, I have deservedly incurred the Censure of many Good Men: And I
wish I may ever be able to make a sufficient Amends to my Country for it.

Yet thus much, My Lord, I can justly allege for my self, That the Commission
was made, and my Name put into it, altogether without my Knowledge; when I
hapen'd to be at Salisbury, holding an Archiepiscopal Visitation with the
Bishop of Chichester, and other Commissioners: Where, by God's Blessing, we
composed several old Differences and Animosities, and restored Peace and Unity
to that Church.

At my return from thence to London, I found I was appointed to be one in a New
Commission: But I could never see a Copy of it, nor did I ever hear its
Contents, or know the Powers granted in it, till the time of its being publicly
opened at Whitehal; whither I was sent for, on purpose, in haste, that very
Morning, from my House in the Country; being just come home from a
Confirmation, and from paying my Duty to Her Royal Highness the Princess of
Denmark at Tunbridge.

Upon the first publishing the Commission, I confess, through my Ignorance in
the Laws, I had little or no Objection in my Thoughts against the Legality of
it; especially when I confider'd, That having past the Broad Seal, it must
needs, according to my apprehension, have been examined and approved by the
King's Learned Council in the Law, Men generally esteemed of eminent Skill in
their Profession. Besides, I was farther confirmed (though too rashly I grant)
in my Error, when I saw two Gentlemen of the Long Robe, Persons of the greatest
Place and Authority in Westminster Hall, joined with us; who, I should have
thought, would never have ventured their Fortunes and Reputations, by
exercising a Jurisdiction that was Illegal.

And I believed I had Reason to conclude, That this very Argument might prevail
also with some others of the Temporal Lords, that sat among us. Particularly
the Earl of Rochester has often assured me, 'twas that which induced him to
accept of the Commission; and that he did it, as I my self did, with a purpose
of doing as much Good as we were able, and of hindering as much Evil, as we
possibly could, in that Unfortunate Juncture of Affairs.

As for my own Part, I was startled when I perceived my Lord of Canterbury
scrupled to be present with us; whose Example, it is true, I ought rather to
have followed than the greatest Lawyers in all Matters of Conscience. Yet I
hope his Grace will excuse me, if I declare, that I did not at first know He
made a Matter of Conscience of it. Nor did I understand his Grace took
Exception at the Lawfulness of the Commission it self, till after my Lord of
London was Cited, and had Appeared, and Answered, and the unjust Sentence was
past against him.

For it was on the very Day the Commission was opened, immediately, as I
remember, after it was read, that my Lord of London was informed against, for
not Suspending Dr. Sharp: Which, though it exceedingly surpised me at first,
yet observing with what heat the Prosecution was like to be carried on against
him, that very Consideration did the more incline me to Sit and Act there, that
I might be in some Capacity of doing Right to his Lordship. And whether I did
him any Service through the whole Process of his Cause, I leave it to my Lord
himself to judge. That I gave my Positive Vote for his Acquittal, Both the
Times when his Suspension came in question, I suppose I need not tell the World.

Having thus, in the beginning of that Court, and the highest Ferment of it,
freely discharged my Conscience, by Endeavoring to clear my Lord of London, I
must own, I thenceforth unawares took a Resolution, which, how hurtful soever
it may now prove to my self, yet I am still apt to believe, did the Church of
England no Disservice in the Main. My Design, by continuing longer among them,
was to make sure of one Vote at least, and to do my Part, to the utmost of my
small Interest and Ability, to lessen the Blow which I feared was coming on the
Clergy, since it could not altogether be avoided.

And I was the more persuaded to take this Course, not only because the
Legality or Illegality of the Commission seemed at first rather a Moot-case,
than a determined Point either way; diverse of the Principal Lawyers, as I was
told, being divided in their Opinions concerning it; but also because I saw,
some other Persons were ready to fill my Chair there, as soon as it should be
empty; Men of whose Principles and Practices I was so well aware, that I knew
they wou^d not have the same regard as my self for the Churches Preservation.
And perhaps I might add this further for the Extenuation of my Fault, That I
was not discouraged by some Grave and Worthy Persons, for this very purpose, to
keep in some longer time: But I forbear to name them, that I may not involve
any Good Man in my Infelicity.

However, upon these Motives I Acted, and, in pursuance of this Design, God
knows, I Voted, as long as I remained at the Board: Where all my Opinions were
so contrary to the Humor of the Court, that I often thought my self to be
really in as much Hazard from the Commission it self, by my not Complying, as
any of my Brethren could be, that were out of it.

I Appeal to all that were acquainted with the Transactions there, whether ever
I gave my Consent to any Irregular or Arbitrary Sentence; whether I did not
constantly and firmly Declare against every Extravagant Decree. I could almost
presume to affirm, That I was, as far as in me lay, some way or other, a Common
Solicitor, or Advocate for all that were unjustly Prosecuted before them. And
I might exemplify this beyond all Contradiction, if I should enumerate every
particular Cause, that came under their Cognizance.

After my Lord of London was Sentenced, his Lordship knows, I was always upon
the Watch to obstruct all farther Proceedings against him. Nay, his Lordship
well remembers, I had once obtained to have his Suspension taken off, if he
would but have made an ordinary Submission.

Then I was Zealous for Exeter-College, in their Defense against Father Petre,
in a Business of so great Importance, that if the College had been overcome in
the Suit, that whole Society must soon have been abandoned to Popery.

I did my utmost to oppose the Violent Persecution upon the whole University of
Cambridge; when the Vice Chancellor was suspended his Office, and his
Mastership of Magdalen-College, because a Popish Priest, who was one of the
Missionaries to pervert the Scholars, was denied a Degree in their Convocation.

I faithfully Assisted and Served Christ-Church in Oxford, when they were in
danger of having new Statutes Imposed upon them, which would Infallibly have
laid open that Royal College, to the Ruin of their Good Learning and Religion.

I absolutely resisted all the Alterations in the Statutes of Sidney-College,
and all other Changes and Abrogations of Oaths, that were then made or designed
in the Statutes of either University, for the advantage of Popish Priests and
Students, and for the freer course of Mandamus's in their Favor.

I ever gave my Advice for all sorts of Business, to be returned into the
common course of Justice; as that all Ecclesiastical Matters should be referred
back to the several Bishops from whose Dioceses the Complaints were brought;
and that all Informations against Colleges and Hospitals should be recommitted
to their proper Visitors.

I persisted unmovable in my Dissent from every Vote that passed against
Magdalen-College in Oxford; from their very first Citation before that Court,
to the cruel incapacitating of the President and Fellows.

I could mention many other Particulars, wherein I successfully labored to
relieve diverse of the inferior and greater Clergy from Oppression; to prevent
some from being called before us at all; to preserve others after they were
accused by malicious Sycophants and Informers, that swarmed then every where:
Some in the Case of Tithes; some for pressing Churchwardens to take Legal
Oaths; some for not Reading, some for Preaching against the King's Declaration.

But there are Two Eminent Instances, which I cannot omit. The one, That when
the Bishop of Lincoln was Petitioned against by his Archdeacon, and there was,
at that time, Inclination enough in the Court to pursue him to Extremity, yet
my Lord Bishop of Peterburgh, by interceding for him with the King, and I with
the Commissioners, so effectually wrought, that the Prosecution against him was
discountenanced and fell to the Ground.

The other Instance concerns my Lord of Canterbury; and I am confident his
Grace will readily give me this Testimony, That I served him honestly and
industriously on some Occasions, wherein he was like to be embroiled with the
Commission; which must inevitably have ended in his Grace's Suspension at
least, since he was resolved, whenever he should be brought before them,
whatever the Pretense had been, to deny the whole Power and Jurisdiction of the
Court.

As for the last Scene transacted there, which was in Order to Censure the
whole Clergy, for refusing to Read the Declaration: In that I hope I need say
nothing in my Defense, it being publicly known to the whole Nation, how I then
demeaned my self; how I broke loose from the Commission in a time, when I was
convinced I could do the Church no farther Service there, and when the Popish
Party was in the height of their Power and Rage. Then it was that I joined my
self again to the Common Interest of the honest Clergy, just when they were on
the very Brink of Destruction, before we ever dreamed of this Glorious
Deliverance.

This is certain, that my leaving and defying the Commission at that time, did
apparently exasperate the Popish Priests, and the Ringleaders of the
Jesuitical Faction against me, to the highest Degree imaginable. Nay, some
Worthy Men have made me almost so vain as to fancy, that my bidding the
Commission then Farewell in so public and peremptory a Manner, was no
inconsiderable Stroke toward the Dissolution of the Commission it self. It is
evident, that immediately upon the receipt of my Letter, wherein I renounced
them, they Adjourned in Confusion for Six Months, and scarce ever met
afterward.

Thus far I am sure, my perpetual Behavior therein, was so much all of a
piece, so directly against the Vogue of the Court, and the Counsels of Popery
then prevailing; and the Effects of it did so visibly destroy my former
Interest with the King, that whereas it is manifest, I was, when the Commission
began, in as fair a probability as any Clergyman in England, to receive great
Effects of His Majesty's Favor; yet after my Opposing my Lord Bishop of
London's Suspension, and my other Votes Conformable to that, I fell by Degrees
under His severe Displeasure.

I might add moreover, that it is very probable, I was at last in more imminent
Danger than any of my Brethren; I say, my Lord, than any of my Brethren, the
Seven Petitioning Bishops, and my Lord of London only excepted; whose Merits
and Sufferings, in Asserting our Laws and Religion, were so conspicuous, and by
consequence the Fury of the Papists against them so implacable, that perhaps it
would be Presumption in any other Clergyman, much more in Me, to come in
Competition with Them for either of those Honors.

Upon the whole Matter therefore, though as to the Legal Part of the Commission,
which belonged to Lawyers to judge of, I was mistaken, for Acting in it at all:
Yet in the Conscientious Part, which properly concerned me as a Divine, to Act
in it honestly and sincerely, according to the best of my Judgment, in that, if
I shall not be thought to deserve Thanks, yet I hope I may obtain Pardon from
all Men of Candor and Ingenuity.

My Lord, I know your Lordship's Generosity and Tender Concern for your
Friends, whereof I have had so much Experience, will excuse me for troubling
you with this my long Confession and Apology, for my share in the
Ecclesiastical Commission. I wholly submit it to your Lordship's Prudence and
Kindness, to make what use of it you please in my behalf. Only, this I will
say, That if I had as good a Cause for you to Plead, as I have in your Lordship
a Patron to Defend me, I should not have an Enemy in all England.

Westminster, Feb.21, 1688. My Lord, I am Your Lordship's most Faithful,
Humble, and Obedient Servant, Tho. Roffen.

FINIS.

