A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, December. the 24th. 1676.

By THOMAS SPRAT, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Published by his Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West end of St. Paul's. 1677.

A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL.
St. MARK, X. ver. 15. Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the
Kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein.
THese are the words of our Blessed Savior, on occasion of his Disciples
forbidding little Children to be brought to him: which it may be supposed, they
did in zeal for the reputation of their Master; believing it to be far below
the dignity of so great, and wise a Teacher, to spend time in instructing of
Children; whilst his chief adversaries the Pharisees appeared in their
Synagogues, and most public Assemblies, and there, with much pompous
ostentation of profound Wisdom, taught their men, those that thought
themselves, in that Nation, their wisest men.

But Christ himself understood better the interest, and power of his own
Religion. He knew, that the design of his coming into the world, was, not to
continue that Pharisaical, falsly-grave formality of life, and worship, which
was then in use; but to introduce a rational, moral, spiritual Doctrine, and a
plain, unaffected, saving way of teaching it. He knew, that his Doctrine so
taught was able to convert the most specious, worldly wisdom; or to confound
it, if it would not be converted.

And therefore he took a course quite contrary to the Pharisees practice, and
to his own Disciples expectations. He taught in the meekest manner, and refused
not the meanest Scholars. S. James 4.6.
He resisted the proud, but he gave grace to the humble. The Scribes, and
Pharisees he often sharply contradicted, the multitude he always mildly
instructed: By his different behavior to the one, and the other, he gave
evident proof, that all false pretenses, and affectations of knowledge are more
odious to God, and deserve to be so to men, than any want, or defect of
knowledge can be.

In prosecution of this most plain, and familiar way of teaching, whereas his
Disciples here would have rejected little children, Ver. 13, 14.
he rebuked them, he took the children in his arms, he blessed them; for the
innocence of their age, he gave it many testimonies of his extraordinary favor.

The first benefit he did to mankind in this world, was his becoming a child:
The first sign he showed of his own Divine Wisdom, was his disputing with the
Jewish Doctors, in the age of a child: The first example he gave of obedience,
and that even to the Jewish Law, was his being circumcised, when a child. And
here also, when he would prescribe a pattern of Evangelical purity, and
humility, he declares, that little children, and those men who most resemble
their nature, are not only capable, but most capable of his heavenly Kingdom.

The Kingdom of God, and Heaven, in the New Testament, is either taken for that
Eternal Reward prepared for those that believe, and obey the Doctrine of
Christ, or else for that Doctrine it self revealed in the Gospel: so nearly are
the Joys of Heaven and the Laws of Christ united; so surely, shall the
possession of the one follow the practice of the other; that in the Word of God
they are often both comprehended in the same phrase of the Kingdom of God.

This expression of receiving the Kingdom of God as a child, is best
interpreted by our Liturgy, in the Office of Baptism; where it is said, that By
these words our Blessed Savior exhorts all men to follow the innocence of
little children.

Whosoever therefore shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child,
that is, Whosoever shall not entertain and practice the word of God, with a
true child-like simplicity and innocence, shall not enter therein; that is,
shall not partake of the blessings of everlasting life.

The whole sense of my Text may be contained in two Propositions.

The first, That, for the right apprehending of the Doctrine of our Saviors
Kingdom, the Gospel, there is required an ingenuous plainess, an unfeigned
simplicity of mind, and understanding.

The second, That, for the sure inheriting of the joys of that Kingdom, we are
all commanded to practice an undissembled integrity of life and manners.

Of these, the first that I am to recommend to you, is, that simplicity of
mind, which is necessary for the right receiving of Divine Truth.

All wise Masters and Teachers, especially if they profess any Art, that is
deep, out of the way, and of great use, are wont to expect in their Followers,
some praeparatory skill in other lower Arts, before they will proceed to teach
them those that are higher. And here you see, our Blessed Savior also requires
his praeparations, in those whom he will inlighten with his heavenly Doctrine.
But in a way how much different, how much more condescending than that of the
Teachers of all worldly, and Humane Arts! For toward the attaining of the most
profound Wisdom, as is the knowledge of God; in the most useful study, as is the
salvation of our own souls: what praeparations does he exact? Only the
docility, the innocence, the simplicity of children.

But, before we proceed farther, this Christian Simplicity must first be
rightly stated, and well understood: For it has been often mistaken on both
extremes. Some make it to consist in a blind Faith, as the Enthusiasts; some in
a blind Obedience, as the Papists. The first conclude from hence for their wild
illuminations, and groundless Inspirations, and deny all manner of use of their
natural understandings, and judgments in Divine things: The other build on it
the necessity of an absolute slavery of their understandings, and Consciences
to their Spiritual Governors: whereas the true Evangelical simplicity should
keep the sober, middle way between both these: It is so to tempered, as neither
to extinguish the man's true natural light, nor invade the Christians just
spiritual liberty.

First, I say, by this child-like simplicity of mind, there is not intended any
defect of the natural, or acquired abilities of our understandings, or any
neglect of employing our understandings in examining the most spiritual
Doctrines of the Gospel. As God did never require an entire perfection of
Divine knowledge in any Christian, so much less did he ever enjoin an
imperfection of natural knowledge in any Saint. It Is true, the things of God
must be spiritually discerned: But how so? not that they must be discerned by
other faculties of the soul, quite different from those, by which we discern
natural Truth; but by the same faculties, only those raised, and more
spiritually exercised.

Does not the Gospel tell us, that Gods is a Reasonable Service? Heb. 12.1.
It is our most reasonable duty, we being his Creatures: it is most conformable
to right reason; it is the most noble object of it; it consists in sound,
sober, intelligible Doctrines, in plain, practicable, rational Precepts. Of all
the Creatures, none that we know of, are capable of Gods grace, and mercy, and
redemption by Jesus Christ, but only Rational Creatures; not the brute Beasts,
that are below our way of understanding, nor Angels, that are above it. And
therefore certainly that which does, in some sense, put mankind only into a
possibility of being saved, cannot be wholly excluded in the great work of
salvation: certainly it is not the natural weakness of little children, but
their native candor; not their want of knowledge, but their docility that is
here proposed to our imitation.

Nor secondly, does this receiving the Kingdom of God as a child, suppose any
implicit obedience, or blind resignation of our understandings to all the
Commands and Impositions of any one present Church, or pretended Head of it, as
the only infallible Judge of all matters of Faith.

Obedience is indeed a virtue most acceptable to God, most beneficial to men:
Unity is one of his greatest blessings: Communion is the most beautiful
ornament of the Christian Church. And, thanks be to God, there may be as much
Union, and Communion amongst Christians, as is necessary for the being, and
convenient for the well-being of Christianity, without any such tyranny in the
Governors of the Church, or servitude in its Members: without inslaving of
private Conscience, which is Antichristian; and only by a moderate governing,
and restraining of private Conscience, which is most Christian, as well as most
essential to the preservation of human society.

The Church has a sacred and venerable Authority, as long as it teaches such
Doctrines, and requires such Duties, as are agreeable to our Saviors. Whilst it
does so, much reverence is due to it, much to the persons, more to the
Doctrines, to the persons for their Doctrines sake; to the Doctrines for our
Saviors sake. But if the name and title of the Holy Church of Christ shall be
so abused, as to impose on our practice superstitious Precepts, as is the
Worship of Saints, and some others; or on our understandings, incredible,
impossible Doctrines, as is Transubstantiation, and the like; in such cases,
you are free by the Laws of God, and Man: Your spiritual obligations do not
bind you to believe such Doctrines, and your natural liberty, as well as your
Christian, sets you free from obeying such Precepts.

Our blessed Savior here expects, that we should receive his Laws, as
children, but not as slaves. Those Laws may be sometimes severe, nay, they are
imperial, and absolute, as they come from God; for he is our Lord: but even in
respect to him, they are paternal too, for he is also our Father. They are
delivered to us with a Royal Power, and sweetened by a fatherly tenderness; and
they should be received by us, with the duty of subjects, with the affection of
children: As children we should behave our selves to him, as children also to
his Ministers, because they are to us in his stead: but still as children, not
as mean vassals. The true Church of God is the Vicegerent of Gods spiritual,
paternal Authority, which the Sectaries unjustly deny it; but it is not the
Vicegerent of Gods uncontrollable, omnipotent, temporal Power, which the
Church of Rome as unjustly usurps.

This being premised, we may now the better go on to examine, wherein the true,
sincere, Christian simplicity consists, as to that part of it, which concerns
the receiving of heavenly Truth.

If we consider the original example which we are here commanded to imitate, it
seems that this blessed Temper is chiefly composed of three excellent virtues;
of all which there is some weak resemblance in little children.

As the minds of children are generally clear, spotless, white, untainted,
unprejudiced; as they are usually tender, gentle, pliable, capable of the best
impressions; as children commonly receive their food, not with nicety, or with
intent to quarrel at it, but willingly, and earnestly, for their increase and
growth: so, in conformity to that innocent pattern, all the true followers of
Christ should endeavor to obtain,

First, a plainess, and purity of understanding; such as is free from
artifices, free from prejudices.

Secondly, a submissive and guidable spirit, a disposition easy to all;
especially tractable to those, that have either a civil, or spiritual Authority
over them.

Thirdly, an exact care so to learn the truths of Religion, that they may be
employed for their true end, and best advantage, which is practice, and growth
in the duties of a pious, and devout life.

First, toward our right instruction in the Doctrines of the Gospel, we should
all labor to bring our minds clear, unprejudiced, clean, incorrupt. For the
being void of errors, is the first great step to the greatest knowledge; and
that understanding, in which though little is written, yet nothing is blotted;
that which is not disfigured by ill impressions, is a subject most capable of
the best. There nothing is required but plain teaching; whereas the mind that
is either perverted by false knowledge, or made crooked by deceitful
prejudices, must not only be taught, but first untaught that ill it had
learned: and to unteach is a much more difficult work than to teach.

Such a pure, simple, undefiled disposition of mind, by nature we cannot
pretend to; because of the original corruption of our nature; but by the Grace
of God in the Gospel we may attain it: and it is the chief design of the Gospel
to direct us in the way to it.

That teaches us to cleanse, and repair by repentance, and amendment, our
natural decays, and pollutions; to be constantly watchful in keeping our souls
free from carnal, moral, nay, spiritual prejudices against Religion; to
endeavor sincerely, that our minds be not often overthrown by violent
passions, nor too much disordered by worldly affections; not seduced by secular
ends, that secretly undermine the soul; not corrupted by bodily lusts, that
openly war against the soul; especially that they be not infected by false
Enthusiastical conceptions, concerning God, and Religion; which are wont most
dangerously to insinuate themselves into the soul, as seeming to come from
Heaven, and coming under the shadow of Religion it self.

The second part of this child-like simplicity, is to be teachable, and that in
a right method, to be desirous of learning precepts, as well as truths; of
truths to learn the plainest, and most useful, before the deepest and most
subtle; of precepts to apply our selves to those that concern our selves, more
than others.

This teachable humility is not only consistent with the greatest spiritual
knowledge, but inseparable from it. It Is the property of all true knowledge,
especially spiritual, to enlarge the soul by filling it, to enlarge it, without
swelling it; to make it more capable, and more earnest to know, the more it
knows.

Even in natural things, whoever pretends to have learned so much, that he has
no need, nor will to learn more, he has never learned any thing aright. And if
this be so in natural things, in which the instruments, and helps of our
knowledge are weak, and the objects of it finite; how much more is it so in
Divine things? in which the instruments, the helps, the objects, the benefits
of our knowledge are infinite. In Divine things to be always teachable, to be
always learning, is not only the most certain way to Divine Wisdom, but even a
good degree of Divine Wisdom it self.

The third part of such a true simplicity of understanding is a sincere desire,
and unwearied endeavor to use, and improve our divine knowledge in a right
manner, and to a right end. And what is the great, substantial, saving use, and
end of all spiritual knowledge? Is it not to use it as children do their meat?
to desire the sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2.2
as new born babes, that we may grow thereby? That we may grow thereby. And
they who receive their spiritual food in such a manner, what they may want in a
delicate appetite, they have in a wholesome; if they come short of others in the
curiosity of their taste, they as much exceed them in the strength of their
digestion: which in a spiritual life, as well as a natural, is a greater sign
of a healthful constitution: whilst all other knowledge in Religion only serves
to make a show, and flashes away in discourse, this endures, and is solidly
beneficial for sanctification here, for salvation hereafter.

Such is that simplicity of understanding, which is necessary for the right
reception, increasing, and improving of our knowledge in the truths of the
Gospel. I am next to consider that simplicity of manners, which should always
accompany the sincere entertainment, and practice of the precepts of the Gospel.

This indeed has a very near connection with the former. The head truly
enlightened will presently have a wonderful influence in purifying the heart;
and the heart really affected with goodness, will much conduce to the directing
of the head. The beginning of this blessed work is most commonly in the head,
the perfection in the heart; but neither of them can be perfected without the
other.

And what now is meant by the true, unfeigned, Christian simplicity of life,
and manners, and conversation? we ought to be exceeding cautious, on what kind
of men we fix this character; for we live in an age, wherein, of all others,
hypocrisy has put on the best counterfeited vizors, the most holy disguises.

First then, as I did before in the simplicity of understanding, so I must now
do in this simplicity of heart: I must try to vindicate, and separate it from
the mistakes, and extremes of it. And therefore I affirm, that it does not
consist in any sullen separation, or affected purity, or demure contempt, and
omission of the common customs, and usages, and fashions of this world. For
most certainly, with such common things a Christian may comply, without danger,
with true innocence, and piety; and he may abstain from them, out of the
greatest spiritual pride. Is not a morosity and singularity in such things
often made a veil, and cover of licentiousness in greater things? have we not
known it frequently used as an opportunity of the greatest moral dishonesty?

Must a Christian by the obligations of his holy profession, differ from, and
abhor all the customary forms of civil life? how then could St. Paul become all
things to all men? would he have conformed universally to all sorts of men, if
all manner of civil, or spiritually conformity had utterly been unlawful?

Must I with unmannerly freedom, affront Authority, despise the public
Formalities of Government, live in a different way, put on another face, and
garb, than the rest of my Countrymen, and alledg the Christian simplicity to
justify this my rudeness? what then will become of the Christian liberty,
which in other cases these men so much magnify? If this be Christian
simplicity, was not the Mosaical severity a much lighter yoke? Did not our
Blessed Savior himself abolish all such Judaical reservedness and separation,
at the very first founding of the Catholic Church? which, it is probable, had
never been Catholic so soon, if he had distinguished his Disciples from all the
rest of mankind, as the Jews were, in every little circumstance, or custom of
humane life. For whilst the true Religion it self was straightened by the Jewish,
severe spirit; the Church of God was narrow in compass, confined almost to one
Country, despised by all the world besides. It was the honest freedom, and
universal charity of the Christian spirit, that first rent the veil, and
enlarged its bounds, and spread its authority to the utmost ends of the earth:
so that next to the Almighty Power of God, one of the chief occasions of the
prodigious swiftness of the Churches first progress, was, that the Primitive
Christians asserted the just liberties of humane nature, and set men free from
the Jewish unreasonable sowerness, and harsh impositions.

It Is true, we are commanded not to be conformed to this world: Romans 12.2.
But in the very next words, we have the true interpretation of that command.
For it follows, Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind. It is a new
mind, and the transforming of the heart; not new looks, or habits, or gestures,
that Christianity requires. To the indifferent things of this world we may be,
to the decent things of it we should be conformable; only to the wickedness,
and corruptions of it we should not. No Christian is forbidden the honest
skill, and practice, and prudence of this world; rather some are commanded it,
all are allowed it, only none must be perverted by it; all must use it, for
higher, and more spiritual ends.

So far is the true Religion from obliging all its professors, either to
withdraw wholly out of the world, or in conscience to avoid all the usual
observances, and manners, or even the innocent delights of it, whilst they are
in the world; that perhaps none are more capable, as of bringing more benefit
to mankind, so of doing more service to God, or exercising more Evangelical
Graces; than those men, that are of the most practical lives, and engaged in
most secular business. Greater will be their victory over the world, if they
shall converse in it, without being defiled by it. If they shall labor to
perform well all their natural, moral, political, and Religious Duties in it,
most instructive will be the example of that Piety, most diffusive that
Charity, which is set on a hill so eminent, and placed in so good a light.

Were a Christian to be the Disciple of John the Baptist, he might then indeed
think himself bound to follow the solitary, rigid life of his Master in the
Wilderness: But seeing he is to be a Christian, he may be a Citizen of this
world, as well, as of the New Jerusalem: He ought certainly to imitate a
greater example than of John the Baptist, that of our blessed Savior himself;
who, though he too had his time of retirement in the Wilderness, yet lived not
there; but was frequently in the Temple, conversed generally in the City, with
all sorts of people, went about every where doing good.

Give alms, Luke 11.41.
says our Savior, of such things as you have, and behold all things are clean
to you. Let but a Christian perform the great, substantial duties of
Christianity; and all other ordinary things are clean, and lawful to him. All
things; of which some things were denied to the Jews: all things, that are not
unclean in their own nature: those indeed can be lawful to none. The
righteousness, and holiness of the Gospel consists not in doubting much; but in
living well: not in a zeal against little things, but for great things, Tit.
2.14
in being zealous for good Works. Undoubtedly there may be as much
superstition, in some cases, on a Religious account, to forbear doing what we
lawfully may do; as it is to do what we should not. Superstition transgresses
on both extremes, and may offend as much in a too scrupulous forbearing, as in
over-doing.

The true Christian Purity, and simplicity of life, that is here recommended,
is therefore such, as is not bound to avoid all manner of compliance with the
external fashions, and comely ceremonies of human life, and conversation. It Is
enough, if it uses ceremonies, as ceremonies; if it prefers the substance far
before them, if it chiefly regards the inward reality. It Is such, as is not at
all opposed to decence, or civility, or good manners, or good breeding; but to
craft, unjust artifice, guile, and dissimulation. It Is such, as, according to
our Saviors own precept, must have the harmlesness of the Dove, Mat. 10.16
and yet may have the wisdom of the Serpent. That wisdom, which single in the
Serpent is hurtful, and poisonous; when it is tempered with the innocence of
the Dove, is most commendable, most useful.

In a word, it is such a simplicity, as St. Paul the Christian put on, when he
ceased to be Saul the Pharisee: such as St. Paul himself describes, when he
thus exhorts the Corinthians: 1 Cor. 14.20.
Brethren, says he, Be not children in understanding; in malice be ye children,
in understanding be ye men. You see to all true Christians a manly
understanding, is as much commanded, as a child-like purity: so that in the
most Euangelical simplicity, the prudence, and discretion of a wise man may be,
should be joined with the native innocence, and inoffensive meekness of a
little child.

You now behold the sum of those duties, to which, by the words of our Savior
in my Text, we are all obliged. They represent to us the necessity of a
simplicity of mind, in receiving the Laws of Christ, and of an honest plainess
of heart, in living accordingly: which indeed are the two principal things,
that, in all true Religion, are to be studied, and practiced by all good men.

Some proportion, and degree of both these virtues, I say, is necessary to all
Christians. I do not say, the highest and most complete degree of them to any:
that is inconsistent with the frailties of our mortal condition, which God
himself is pleased to consider, in the gentleness of his Precepts. His Laws are
perfect, as he is perfect; holy, as he is holy: But, seeing we cannot be
equally so, by reason of human infirmity, God is pleased to accept of integrity
instead of perfection, to prefer simplicity before hypocrisy, confessed
ignorance, before presumption. What we really, and humbly endeavor, out of his
abundant Grace, he will help us to perform, or accept of our endeavors. As we
must strive to be children in innocence, so in his infinite goodness, he looks
on us, to be but as children in weakness.

I am not ignorant, that this Doctrine of Christian simplicity may sound
strange in the ears of those men, who consult only the low, and mean interests
of this life; and therefore fancy themselves, in the proud imaginations of
their own hearts, to be the only wise, and subtle men of this world. With such
men, simplicity generally passes in the worst sense, for pusillanimity,
weakness, folly, for a poor-spirited Christian Grace, that amongst the ancient
Philosophers, they think, would scarce have escaped the being reckoned for a
vice.

But let none be too hasty in condemning the true genuine simplicity: for I
must tell them, it has always had an extraordinary preeminence, and dignity,
not only in Religion, though chiefly there; not only in the sight of God,
though that certainly were sufficient: but in all other things, in the judgment
of all truly-wise men, in all the works of nature, and art, in all the best
practice of civil life.

If we observe the order of the whole Creation, and the ranks of all things
visible, and invisible, are not the highest, and most perfect Beings still most
pure, most simple, and most of one nature? Thus it is from the noblest bodies
to the souls of men, from the souls of men to Angels, from Angels to God
himself: the higher any of these rise in their excellence, they are still the
more simple in their essence.

If we examine all the productions of men's hands, or minds; is not the greatest
perfection of all Art, a most exact imitation of true nature? There is some
kind of easy, solid plainess, that far excels all the comeliness of artificial
ornaments. There is some kind of simplicity that is attended with inexpressible
majesty. That, says St. Chrysostom on those words of St. Matthew, St. Chrysostom.
on St. Matthew. 19.14. (...).
like to these in my Text, that is the great design of all Philosophy, that is
the very life of Angels, to have the highest understanding accompanied with
unfeigned simplicity.

If we reflect on the most polite customs and manners of human life, nothing is
truly graceful, that is over-mix'd, or unnaturally forced; no word we speak, no
phrase we use, no gesture, no tone of voice, that is over-artificial, but it
presently offends: nothing in beauty, in habit, in action, in motion, can
please, that is affectedly labored, and over-adorn'd: nothng has so much
reverence in human conversation, as true ingenuity, manly plainess, gentle
easiness, undissembled sincerity: nothing sooner, or more, or longer, affects
men with delight, and love, and admiration: nothing is more honorable, nothing
more amiable, nothing indeed more easy, and safe. It is very probable, that
more deep, dark, reserved, crafty men, have at last failed of their designs,
even in this world, than the plain, upright, houest men. The crafty man has
many parts to play, many minds to put on, many faces to shift; so that it is
almost impossible for him so to act all, as not to be discovered in some, and
then he will be suspected in all: whereas the honest man has but one part to
perform, which is his own, and that far more easy for him to do; because he
always acts according to plain nature.

Thus even in all worldly things, as nothing is perfect without decence; so
nothing can be decent without simplicity. But above all things, this is true in
Religion, especially in the Christian Religion. The Gospel, in the great
Duties, and Truths of it, is a plain and simple thing; it is simple in its end,
which is one, and always the same, eternal life: simple in the means that
conduce to that end, which are but two, and those always the same, Faith and
Obedience. And so simple should be the practice of all, that would use those
means in a right manner, and expect thereby the benefit of that end.

Nothing shows a nearer resemblance to the Divine Nature, than a mind that is
pure, unmixed, and undefiled: nothing manifests a greater conformity to the
Divine Laws, than a life of plain innocence: nothing more expresses that free,
and generous disdain, which all true Christians have, or should have of these
earthly, transitory things: nothing declares a more magnanimous confidence in
the Divine Providence: nothing a more submissive resignation to the Divine
will: nothing a more steadfast, and assured hope of future happiness: nothing
can keep us safer from dangerous mistakes in all matters of eternal concernment.

The plain, fair, even, candid mind, of which a right measure may soonest be
taken, is best prepared to take a right measure of spiritual things. That mild,
and innocent disposition, which least of all deceives others, is least of all
capable of being dangerously deceived it self, in the ways of everlasting
salvation. Have not more bold, venturous, artificial wits fallen into errors,
than they, who have been content with the steady, constant, firm motion of
meek, and humble Christians? Whilst those presume all on themselves, they trust
to the most fallible guide: whilst these wholly suspect themselves, and implore
most the grace of God, they never fail of a certain assistance, and direction.
And what has been generally the success of both? the humble, teachable temper
of the one has produced many real Saints: the proud, presumptuous, subtle
spirit of the other has proved a fruitful soil for the production of Heretics,
or Atheists.

Give me leave therefore most humbly to advise, and beseech you all, as you
would be esteemed the true Disciples of Christ, to labor for this blessed
temper, which is most proper for Disciples, this humble and sincere practice of
what you do know, this humble willingness to be taught what you do not know;
and submission to those that do.

I do not by this, in the least, plead for the gross blindness, and implicit
Faith of the Laity, which is one of the chief Artifices of the Church of Rome.
No, we that are Ministers of the Church of England, may be content; nay, we may
really wish, that all our Laity had as much true, solid understanding in
Religion, as our Clergy. We can get no advantage by your want of knowledge, no
more than you can do by ours. We have no spiritual cheat with which to delude
you; for the representing of which we should stand in need either of darkness,
or of a false light. We have nothing in our public profession, which the wisest
men, the most pious Christians may not outwardly practice; nothing in our
Faith, which they ought not inwardly to believe.

We know, and are well assured, that the only reason, why our Church is not
more generally embraced, and admired, is, because the purity of its Doctrine,
the sobriety of its Devotion, the moderation of its Discipline, the largeness
of its Charity, are not more impartially, and calmly examined, more generally
understood. Our Church in its Spiritual State, as you are Christians, is most
conformable to the Rules of Christ, to the Apostolical practice, to the
Primitive Institutions. In its Rational state, as you are men, its Doctrines
are very agreeable to the reason of mankind; its Precepts most becoming the
purest, and the strictest laws of Nature, and Virtue, and Morality. In its
Political state, as ye are Englishmen, its Interest is inseparable from the
Interest of our Nation, and Government.

We are therefore so far from being jealous of your most curious, and exact
search into the Practices, and Principles of our Church, that we desire it;
nay, we most earnestly beseech it. We are in no danger from men's most subtle
inquiry into it; we may be from their utter carelessness, and indifference
toward it.

We are not against any man's seeing Spiritual Truth; only we would not have the
blind presume to teach others to see: we would not have men think they see,
when they do not; which is the most certain way for them never to see at all.
We would have you know, as much as you can; only we would have you believe that
both you, and we, may know much more than we do: We entreat you to strive to
know all, in a right way, by sober degrees, for right purposes, and uses, and
ends.

Most seasonable is this advice; and I wish it could be most effectually
recommended. For, to speak plain truth, a meek, humble, teachable Spirit, and
by consequence, a devout, peaceable, and obedient Spirit are almost quite gone
out of the world: whereas all things in Religion should be plain, scarce any
thing will now please, that is so: Whilst so many strive to be Teachers, and
place most of their Religion in that, how many censurers have we of others? how
many Reformers of the public? how few learners? how much fewer practisers
themselves?

Alas! is it not apparent, that ever since so many of the Laity have so much
invaded, so many have so much despised the Office of the Clergy; Pride has
evidently prevailed over Humility, Faction over Unity, ill Nature over Charity?

Though I am not willing to make a Satyr on any Religious Party; nor do I think
that the best way to reclaim them: our Consciences should convince their
Consciences, our Lives should confute their Lives: else it is not enough only to
employ our tongues, and our fancies against their Consciences: yet for Truths
sake, this I must say; that of all the Sects amongst us, who contemn the
Authority of the Church, who separate themselves from the great things of our
Religion, on a dislike of some small things; and amongst whom all think
themselves gifted Brethren alike: Whatever other virtues, or shadows of
virtues, they may seem to have; whatever sobriety of Life, or strictness of
Conversation, or freedom from some scandalous sins they may pretend to: For
which yet I cannot but say, that if they are really such, as they pretend, I
wish they were ours; yet may they not generally be observed to be exceedingly
defective in the two principal, Fundamental Graces of Christianity? which are
Humility, and Charity. Humility of looks, or habit they may have; but have they
as much of heart, or life? Charity of Good Works do they not too much despise,
as a low, legal way to Heaven? Charity of Opinions, have they any at all?

It cannot be denied, but in this last Age, in most of our memories, our Nation
has manifestly degenerated from the practice of former times, in many Moral
Virtues, and Spiritual Graces, which should teach us to render to God, the
things that are Gods, and to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. Where is that
integrity of Manners, that truth of Conversation, that dutiful observance of
Order, that modestly of Private Life, that Charity toward men, that humble
Devotion toward God, in which, we can only say we have heard, our Nation once
excelled?

'Twould be a melancholy employment to search into the causes of this unhappy
change: but whatever other occasions may have contributed to the continuance
and increase of it; certainly the chief cause of the beginning of it was
Spiritual Pride, and Hypocrisy; the want, nay the contempt of an humble, and
docible Spirit.

The different effects of this disposition, and of that, which is contrary to
it, have been abundantly tried in all Histories, in all States, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical; especially Ecclesiastical. Those Countries, and Societies of
men have ever most flourished, where men have been kept longest under a
reasonable Discipline, those, where the number of Teachers have been few in
comparison to the number of Learners. There was never yet any wise Nation, or
happy Church, at least never any that continued long so: where all have thought
themselves equally fit, and have been promiscuously admitted, to be Teachers,
or Lawgivers.

What can be the consequence of such a headstrong, stiff-necked, overweening,
unmanageable Spirit? can any thing be more destructive to Church, and State,
than such a perverse humor, as is unteachable, ungovernable it self, and yet
overhasty to govern, and teach others? where Children get too soon out of the
government of their Parents, and Masters: where men think it a Duty of
Religion, to strive to get out of the Government of their Magistrate, and
Prince: where Christians shall think themselves not at all bound to be under
the Government of the Church, must not all domestic, and Politic, and spiritual
Relations soon be dissolved? must not all order be speedily overthrown, where
all the true ways to make, and keep men orderly, are confounded?

And what, in time would be the issue of such a confusion? what? but either
gross ignorance, or false knowledge? which is as bad or worse: what? but a
contempt of virtue, and prudence, under the disgraceful titles of pedantry, and
formality? what? but a looseness of tongues, and lives? and at last men's taking
pride in, and valuing themselves on such looseness? what but a disobedience to
the Laws of man, in a pretense of the Kingdom of God; but, in truth, a neglect
of all the Laws both of God, and man? In short, what but mad Enthusiasm first,
and then licentious Atheism? for very near is the distance, very easy the
passage from one of these extremes to the other.

Wherefore for these most pernicious distempers, the great prevention, the best
remedy is this in my Text, that we all receive the Kingdom of God as little
children: that children be carefully instructed in Religion, as children,
whilst they are so: that our grown men, our wise men, especially our witty men,
should not disdain to be as children, in respect of spiritual instruction: that
the same modesty of opinions, and duty to Governors, and submission to
Instructors, which children have by nature, without any experience, they would
strive to have by choice, as the main end of, and best means to improve their
greatest wit, and experience.

It Is good for a man that be bears the yoke in his youth. Lam. 3.27.
It Is good for him that bears it, not only for human society: It Is good to
bear the yoke; the severest direction, the hardest restraint; much more to
yield to the tenderness of counsel, the easiness of instruction, the wholesome
severities of Discipline.

First then, in the name of God, may the means of Education, the times of
Institution, the rules of Discipline, the Laws of Government, the distance and
duties of Inferiors to Superiors, of all degress, be most seriously regarded:
that our men may be brought up to business, to professions, fitted for the
world, for Heaven, by the laborious methods of virtue, and knowledge, and
obedience, by an exact Rule, by sure degrees: no matter how slow, so they be
but sure; better too slow than too precipitate.

And lastly, may our men of ripe years, our men of business, our great men be
entreated to revive, and restore the ancient simplicity, and integrity of
manners: to practice an inward humility, and lowliness of mind; an outward
innocence toward all, condescension to Inferiors, observance of Superiors,
submission to Teachers, subjection to Rulers: and to practice all these
excellent virtues, not only as so many moral, or political Duties, but, as
indeed they are, as some of the most Christian, most Spiritual, and most
Evangelical Graces.

Thus for us all to become as Children, is the surest way to preserve where it
is, to recover where it was lost, private virtue, public honesty, and a
national piety.

And by the words of our Savior in my Text, I am empowered to promise to this
blessed Temper, an eternal Reward. For if whosoever shall not receive the
Kingdom of God as a little child, shall not enter therein: Hence we may well
conclude, that whosoever shall receive it as a child, shall enter therein. For
of such, says our Savior, is the Kingdom of God. Of which I beseech Almighty
God to make us all partakers. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books, Printed for, and sold by H. Brom, since the
dreadful Fire of London, to 1675.
COmber on the Common Prayer: in two Volumes. A Guide to Eternity: By John
Bona, Octavo. Dean W. Lloyd's Sermon before the King about Miracles.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of John Lord Bishop of Chester. 6d. -- His Sermon
before the King in Lent, 1673. 6d. The Seasonable Discourse against Popery: in
40. 6d. -- The Defense of it: 40. 6d. -- The Difference betwixt the Church and
Court of Rome: 40. 6d. The Papists Apology to the Parliament answered. 6d. Mr.
Naylor's Commemoration Sermon for Colonel Cavendish. 6d. Mr. Sayer's Sermon at
the Assizes at Reading. 6d. Mr. Tho. Tanner's Sermon to the scattered Members
of the Church. 6d. Mr. Stanhop's four Sermons on several occasions: 80. bound.
1 s. 6d. Papal Tyranny, as it was exercised over England for some Ages; with
two Sermons on the fifth of Nov. by Dr. Du Moulin: 40. 1 s. 6d. -- His Sermon
at the Funeral of Dr. Turner, Dean of Canterbury. 6d. Bishop Laney's last
Sermon before the King. Dr. Duport's three Sermons on Nov. 5. Jan. 30. May 29.
The Reformed Monastery, or Love of Jesus. The History of the Charterhouse, with
the Life and last Will of Thomas Sutton, Esquire

