A SERMON Preached before The Artillery Company OF LONDON AT St. Mary Le Bow,
April 20. 1682.

BY THOMAS SPRAT D. D. One of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

Published at their request.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker, at the three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1682.

To the Honorable Sir William Prichard Knight and Alderman, President of the
Artillery Company. Sir James Smith Knight and Alderman, Vice President.
To the Right Worshipful, Sir Matthew Andrews Treasurer.
As also to the Right Honorable, Earl of Thanet, Lord Allington, Lord Lumley,
Lord Paston,
To the Right Worshipful, and Worshipful, Sir John Narborough, John Shales Esquire
Philip Frowd Esquire Maj. Richard Burdon. STEWARDS.
And to the whole Court of Assistants, Field-Officers, Captains, and Gentlemen,
Professing and Exercising Arms in that Renowned and Honorable Society.
Right Honorable, etc.
IN obedience to your commands, I have published this honest-and loyal
Discourse: which is all I can say to its advantage: except, what was an
unexpected commendation to it, that the Enemies of our Church and State have
thought fit to dislike it; and to show they did so, have had recourse to their
old Arts of lying, and slandering. But it is no matter what they say or do;
whilst you continue like your selves, to think the practice of Loyalty not only
a part of your Profession, as Soldiers, but of your Religion as Christians.

As to the main Doctrine here delivered, there is not any one true Son of the
Church of England, but will consent to it: nor any of its Adversaries, that can
oppose it without renouncing the common Principles of Christian Government. As
for the manner of handling it, I have reason to ask your pardon, but not
theirs. That I have not managed it as so noble an Argument deserves, I beg your
excuse. That I have not treated of it with bitterness, or virulency; I believe,
even they will confess, when they shall read it; and let them consider, what
moderation, and temper a man had need be of, that in this Nation, and this Age,
shall speak against Faction, and Rebellion, without extraordinary Severity.

Right Honorable, etc. I am Your most humble, and most obedient Servant Thomas
Sprat.
April 29, 1682.
A SERMON Preached before The Artillery Company.
St. LUKE xxii. part of ver. 36. -- He that has no Sword, let him sell his
garment and buy one.
WHen in such Warlike Solemnities, as yours of this day, men of my Profession
are admitted to the honor of bearing any part, I suppose it is not expected,
that we should cloy, and vex your ears with the terms of your own Art; or
affect impertinently to entertain you with discourses on the Heroic Science of
Arms. 2 Cor. 10.4.
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual. And if it was justly
esteemed once a very indecent presumption in a Philosopher, to read a Lecture
of Battles before one great Commander; how much more improper would it be for a
Divine to undertake to teach the Art of War in the presence of so many.

But when you call us hither to serve you in these your annual Triumphs, I know
you do it with a pious design, That as all Wars of old were usually begun with
a public Sacrifice, so these your exercises of War should first be consecrated
by devotion; That here in the House of God you should first receive the
Churches Prayers and Benedictions on those Weapons, which abroad you are so
ready to employ in the Churches defense; That of those Arms, of which you have
elsewhere learnt the skilful, and the glorious practice, here you might
consider the saving, and the religious use: How a mere natural Courage may be
so improved by Piety, as to become a most Christian Grace: How Victory may be
not only made lawful, and barely innocent; but how it may be sanctified: and
sanctified, not first by Rebellion, then by Sacrilege; but by fighting only in
a truly good and righteous Cause; and by defending it, not with hypocritical
zeal, and zealous cruelty; not only with Valor, and Conduct; but with
Fidelity, Loyalty, Justice, Equity, and Charity. How this may be done, it
being, I humbly conceive, my proper business here to deliberate; whilst I
endeavor to do it, I must entreat the favor, not only of your common
patience, but of your more than ordinary pardon: if, besides my many other
infirmities, that, which ought to have been an advantage, shall prove my
disadvantage: if even this great appearance, so beautifully-terrible, as an
Army with Banners, which guards this place, and secures all within it, and
round about it, particularly us of the Clergy, shall yet happen somewhat to
discompose me, so that I shall not be able to bring a firmness of mind equal to
the greatness of the occasion.

However for my encouragement I have brought with me our blessed Lord, the
Great Captain of our Salvation, speaking to you with power: and, in the words
of my Text, pronouncing that, which at first hearing, seems a most surprising
Doctrine for the Prince of peace to deliver: That sometimes the Habiliments of
War are more necessary, more becoming a Christian, than the very Robes of
Peace: That in some seasons of imminent danger, those of his Disciples, who had
not Swords, were obliged to sell, if need were, their very garments to buy them.

Such is the literal sense of the words. But was not this a strange Precept for
that King to enjoin, whose Kingdom was not of this world? Joh. 18.36.
How could this be consistent with that meekness in Persecutions, that
long-suffering of Injuries, that very love of Enemies, with which his whole
Gospel abounds? How was this conformable to his mild example, Acts 8.32.
who went as a Sheep to the slaughter, and as a Lamb that is dumb? Mat. 26.53.
Who though he might have summoned more than twelve Legions of Angels to his
immediate rescue, yet never employed them as a Triumphant Host, but as an
Harmonious Choir, Luke 2.14.
to sing Peace on Earth, good will toward men. How comes he just then, as he
was going to be betrayed by one of his own Disciples, into the hands of his
most cruel Enemies, against whom he designed nothing less than opposition; how
comes he then to talk of furnishing his Attendants with Instruments of War, and
of preferring Swords before Garments? Then especially, when presently after, as
soon as he was seized on by the High Priests Officers, he severely rebuked the
great Apostle St. Peter for but once using the Sword: Mat. 26.52.
Put up thy Sword, says he, into its place. He that takes the Sword shall
perish by the Sword.

It is true, these two remarkable Sentences of our blessed Savior, that to St.
Peter, and this in my Text, may seem at first view capable of contrary
interpretations. But if we shall examine the circumstances, and occasions of
their delivery, we shall soon find that they do not only very well agree with
each other; but both together may teach us the whole Christian Doctrine of War:
what use of secular Arms the Gospel permits, what it condemns.

First, St. Peter's case was this; he, with an unseasonable passion, proceeding
from his own intemperate zeal, without any call from his Superiors, had
wounded the High Priests Servant, whilst he was performing, it is true, a most
unjust action, but was commissioned to do it by public authority. Him
therefore his Master censures for striking with the Sword without a sufficient
warrant. That he blames as an illegal attempt of a private man against a
public Officer.

Put up thy Sword, says he, O Peter. Submit with patience. Oppose not
Authority. Do not thou break the Laws of thy Country though for kindness and
love of me. Put up thy Sword. He that uses the Sword unlawfully, though on a
pretense never so pious, shall perish by the Sword: shall either be destroyed
by it here, or punished hereafter by God himself for having so used it.

Wherefore we are not to conclude, that our blessed Lord, by this check given
to St. Peter, did absolutely prohibit all manner of using the Sword among
Christians; but only that he taught us the great duty of Christian submission.
For if St. Peter was, then certainly all other Christian Subjects are,
forbidden to unsheath the Sword against their lawful Sovereign, or his
Ministers, as they are commissioned by him, though they do it on a pretext so
spiritual, as the cause of Christ himself. And of all that call themselves
Christians, methinks the pretended Successors of St. Peter might hence have
been warned, not to grasp at an universal power of the Sword, or to usurp a
Temporal Sovereignty over the world, on any shadow of right derived from St.
Peter: since he was so far from having any such power, so unsuitable to his
Apostleship, that of all the Apostles, St. Peter only was left to himself, to
give an opportunity, by his public reproof, for confirming the quite contrary
Doctrine.

Now in my Text, our blessed Lord prepares his Disciples, with extraordinary
courage to overcome those dangers they had hitherto been freed from: but after
he should leave them, they were presently to encounter. In the verse foregoing
he appeals to them, whether they had wanted any thing in his service, though
formerly he had sent them forth without Purses, or Scrips, or Shoes; without
having taken any common care beforehand for their subsistence: and they
acknowledging they had lacked nothing, He proceeds here to advise them, that,
for the future, whoever had Purses, or Scrips, they should not neglect them;
whoever had not Swords, they should provide them.

Erasmus in a just indignation, that the Grammatical sense of these words
should be so wrested by some Interpreters as to justify the groundless
Quarrels, and cruel Wars between the Christian Princes of his time, will allow
my Text to have only a mystical meaning, and interprets it thus: He that has no
Sword of the Gospel, or of the Word of God, let him by all means procure it.

But the general voice of the best Interpreters agree, Calvin, Grotius, Dr.
Hammond, etc.
that our Lord, by putting his followers in mind of furnishing themselves with
Purses, Scrips, and Swords, does, as by so many Symbols, and Signs, represent
to them, that now shortly far worse times of perils, and persecutions attended
them; that therefore they ought to be more cautious, and watchful, more careful
to be supplied with all inward, and outward just assistances; as all men are
wont to make a greater provision of Purses, Scrips, and Swords, when they
perceive some great and imminent dangers approaching.

My Text therefore being apparently a figurative expression, whereby our Lord
commands all his followers to arm their minds against the Spiritual Conflicts,
and Temporal Afflictions they were to meet with; I beg the liberty only to use
the figure no farther than St. Austin does, Contra Manich. lib 22.
who cites this very place against those Heretics, that condemned all use of
secular Arms as unlawful: So I crave leave from this Symbol of buying Swords to
infer thus much, that although spiritual Arms are a Christians proper weapons
in times of danger; yet even the natural means of just defense are allowed to
Christians, as well as to other men.

A Doctrine which the severest of our blessed Lords Precepts do not in the
least overthrow. For although it is certain, that by such Commands as that,
Luke 6.29.
Unto him that smites thee on the one cheek offer also the other, we are
positively required to bear all tolerable injuries with mildness, and
self-denial; yet no Casuist is so severe in expounding that and the like
Scriptures, but they universally grant, that when private men's lives are in
jeopardy, and much more when the public life of the State is in danger, the
free use of all the honest means of Personal, or Political safety was never
prohibited by our blessed Savior.

Now then from this figure of a Sword, I take occasion to propose this great
truth to be the subject of my present Discourse. That notwithstanding the most
Evangelical Precepts of meekness, patience, forgiving, blessing, and praying
for Enemies, still the warlike furniture, and use of just Arms is in all Ages
of Christianity lawful, is in some seasons, some exigencies of times, a Duty
more incumbent than the very Arts of Peace; that Christians, as well as other
men, may furnish themselves with Swords, not to act the least private injury,
but to defend themselves, as much as may be, against all; and especially may
use their Swords, when lawfully called, against public injury; in assisting the
Civil State of which they are members; in fighting the Lords Battles; and then
they fight the Lords Battles, when they fight for the cause of their temporal
Princes.

Of this Doctrine, when I shall have briefly dispatched the general Theory, I
will then, God willing, if your attention shall hold out, try to reduce it to
the particular practice, and magnanimous design of this great Assembly, by
representing to you, that, if ever there was any Time, or Country, or Society
of men, to which our pure and peaceable Religion it self has more than
ordinarily recommended the pious use of the Sword, or the due preparations for
using it, this is the Time, this the Country, this the Society, you having such
Laws and Liberties to defend; not against your Prince, to whom, or to his
Progenitors you owe them; but against the same parties of your Fellow Subjects,
who once already usurped them; you having such a Church and Faith to contend
for, against foreign Usurpations, Domestic Separations, and Combinations of
Separation, you having such a Faiths-Defender to serve with your Purses, your
Scrips, your Swords, your Lives.

As to the first thing propounded; I shall not spend time in proving this
universal truth, That all defensive, or offensive means means of safety, which
amongst all men are righteous, are equally so to Christians as to any other
part of Mankind. It will be enough in this matter to say, That all the
Instruments of a just defense, or offense, are by the Christian Law as much
allowed to be used, as by the Natural Law they are taught to be provided.

And that, Cicero Pro Milone.
says the Heathen Orator, is a Law not given to us, but born with us, to which
we were not educated, but made; which we took not from reading, or institution,
but from the very Principles of our beings: that when ever our Lives are in
danger, from the treachery of Robbers, or rage of Enemies, then Omnis honesta
esset ratio expediendae salutis, then, says he, all ways of securing our selves
are honest, and even honorable, for so the word honestum does usually signify.

I must not go so far as Tully does; I cannot say, with him, that all ways of
defending our Lives from danger are honest; much less are they honorable. But
this I will say, that all Lawful ways, in such cases, are not only truly
honorable, but truly Christian, and I will use no other proof of it than what
he alleges, That this is most agreeable to the true Law of Nature.

For, let none be mistaken, the Doctrine of Christ, in its highest
Dispensations of Grace, in its severest Rules of Mortification, did never
design to abolish the original Dictates of Right Reason, or of sincere Nature:
but rather to correct the irregularities of Reason misguided, and to reform the
Depravations of Nature corrupted. Of Right Reason and Nature all the Light and
Rules were written by the finger of God on the hearts of men; of the Gospel all
the Truths and Precepts were written by the Holy Spirit of God in his revealed
Word. The Hand indeed and the Character of the one is much clearer and more
legible than the other. But, since the same God was the Author of both, they
cannot in the least contradict each other.

For its part, so far is the Gospel from doing so, so far from destroying the
common Principles of Humanity, toward our being, or well-being in this world,
that it more strongly confirms, and advances them all by the higher Commands of
Christianity. So far it is from extinguishing the harmless desire of
self-preservation, that of all Institutions in the world it proposes the best
means to effect it.

Wherefore that is a thing rather to be taken for granted than proved, That the
use of the Sword, for public or private defense, is lawful among Christians: A
self-evident truth; denied by none but by some wild Sects of Enthusiasts. And
indeed it were to be wished that all those who are of that opinion would in
practice stick to it, since it may be observed of them, that they are never
against the use of the Sword, but when they are not Masters of it.

Thus far then your Duty is plain before you. The profession of Arms is not in
the least contradictory to the Christian Profession in general. But still there
is some difficulty behind, how the forcible drawing of the Sword can be
consistent with those severe and mortifying Graces, to which above all other
Religions, indeed well-nigh contrary to all other, Christianity alone obliges
all its Disciples? How Warlike Enterprises can stand with Meekness? How an
undaunted heart with Self-denial? How a daring spirit with Patience? How
Conquest with love of Enemies?

What shall we say in this Question? Will it suffice to affirm, That Christ our
great Lawgiver has divided the parts of his Discipline? Has distributed to
several men their several portions of it according to their distinct conditions
in this world? That only from such as you, the governing and active part of
mankind, He requires Valor, a high Mind, and a brave Spirit? And that only
from such as us, the lower, and the obeying part, he expects Mildness,
Gentleness, Patience? That cannot be: For although to several Stations and
Relations of men in this world our blessed Lord has assigned their peculiar
duties: yet to no particular Rank or Order of men did he ever confine any one
of all his general Precepts.

Wherefore there must be some other way for all these Virtues, that seem so
extremely distant, to meet and entirely agree in the same Breasts. To this end,
you may be assured, that our Lord did never so enjoin any one Christian Grace
to all Christians, as utterly to exclude any other: He never obliged any of his
Followers to be so meek, as to be without all Courage; nor so courageous as to
be void of all Meekness. But he has so wisely tempered, and graciously
proportioned all his heavenly gifts, that the stoutest courage, which he
teaches, is always found to be the meekest; and the meekest heart, which he
makes so, is in the likeliest way to be the most courageous.

Here then let us fix. If this be true, then instead of any jealousy, that the
strictest Laws of Christ will break a brave mind, or debase a bold heart to
Cowardice; you ought rather hence to conclude, That only by his Laws, and the
Hopes, and Rewards which attend their performance, you can be taught a perfect
Valor. And consider, I pray, how undeniable this will appear in the particular
Instances.

It is true, our holy Faith most solemnly injoyns Condescension,
Long-suffering, Forbearance, Mercy; and requires the more of all these in men
to one another, since it shows us there is so infinitely much of them in God
toward men. But now will any of these Virtues be a hindrance to the true
Fortitude? Rather in the common experience of the best, and most generous part
of Mankind, as well as of Christians, is not the truest Fortitude always
observed to be the most inoffensive, most accessible, hardest to be provoked,
easiest to be entreated?

It is confessed, the Law of Christ requires the most fearless minds,
nevertheless to fear God; to fear him so, as to tremble at offending him; so as
to obey him, and by such a fear helps us to enjoy him. But now, can can there
be any surer means, than such a fear, to raise your minds above all unworthy
fear of men, or worldly dangers? We know the Gospel commands us to fear men
too, for Gods sake: obliges the stoutest minds, as much as the gentlest, to pay
an equally-dutiful submission to their Lawful Superiors. But does the
strictest obedience suppress the true stoutness? Do not you find, that
exactness of Discipline increases it? Is it not brutish Ferity rather than
manly Boldness, which will not endure the easy yoke of Conscientious Obedience?

It is granted, our Religion forbids all men to invade each others Rights.
That, says the fierce, or the ambitious man, would put a stop to many a gallant
and valorous action. It would indeed to many a licentious, and outrageous: But
not to any worthy Enterprise. For, as in Peace nothing can be truly just, so in
War nothing can be truly brave, where the sacred distinction between Right and
Wrong is not kept inviolable.

My Brethren, That slowness, and backwardness of attempting upon others
unjustly, that fear of injuring others; for such a Fear, it is not your shame,
but your praise to own; that willingness to right others as well as your
selves, which Christianity teaches all its Disciples, will certainly make a
Soldier innocent in all his Quarrels, and the consciousness of that innocence
cannot but render his mind more calm, serene, and even invincible in all their
Events. Whence come Wars, and Fightings among you, James 4.1.
says the Apostle, Come they not from your Lusts? It is true, Rapine, and
unjust Wars come from thence: and that Religion, which most subdues your Lusts,
will most remove the occasions of such Wars. But at the same time, and by the
very same way, it will more secure the Success, more increase the Renown, and
more brighten the Luster of all your just Arms.

Wherefore so far is Christianity it self, so far those Doctrines, it most
tenderly cherishes as its own genuine product; the Doctrines, I mean, of
Humility, Patience, Kindness to the Afflicted, and Pardon of Offenders; so far
is any of these from being opposite to the Principles of true Honor, and
Valor, your Art professes: that whoever would conceive in his mind the perfect
Character of an excellent Warrior; so he ought to form his Image; to furnish
him with all kinds, but especially to adorn him with this kind of easy, mild,
and gentle Virtues.

And if the very Heathens thought their Poetic Heroes could not be complete,
except they first received their Arms from their Gods: How much more ought a
Christian Hero to fetch his from Heaven? Ephesians. 6.11.
How devoutly ought he to put on the whole Armor of God, as St. Paul calls all
the Graces of a Christian life; how careful should he be, not only to abstain
from the common sins, which Religion condemns; but to aspire to the highest
Duties, it commands! not only not to be given to Luxury, and Debauchery, not
only not to owe his valor to his vices; but amidst so many more temptations, to
keep his Eyes, and Thoughts from being defiled, as well as his hands from being
rapacious: Not only not to blaspheme Heaven, and defy his Maker, with horrid
Oaths, and Curses; but more humbly to Reverence, more dutifully to depend on
that God, to whom he more peculiarly appeals: to keep your natural Lives more
than ordinarily innocent, which are exposed to so many more than natural
Deaths: to have your Minds free from all sordid Passions, or Desires, far above
the mean appetites of Avarice, or Cruelty: to have true Glory only for your
End: to use no inglorious means in acquiring it: to have your Courages
strengthened with Truth, Faith, Righteousness; sweetened, and graced with
Brotherly Love, Pity, Compassion: not to be Enemies to your very Enemies; but
only to their Oppressions, and Injustice; to be Friends, Lovers, Imitators of
their virtues: not only to be unconcerned in Dangers, but patient in bad, mild
in good Success; merciful in Victory.

These, my Brethren, Religion tells us are the chief Excellencies of a
Christian. These, you know, are the principal Accomplishments of a Soldier. Of
these your Profession acknowledges the Necessity, and labors for, what the
School of Christ only teaches, the Perfection.

The use, and honor of just Arms appearing thus consistent with the sincerity,
with the very meekness of Christianity: Be pleased, that we now go on to
contemplate, in what special Opportunities, what conjunctures of times, they
may be most justly, and with truest praise employed.

First without question, always justly the Sword may be drawn by private Men,
to defend their Lives against private Assaults; but not always, nor at any
time, for their private revenge. Your personal Preservation from Injury, God
has, in some sort, committed to your selves, and to your own Swords, as well as
to the Magistrates care: but in no sort, distinct from the Magistrate, has God
entrusted to your selves, the avenging of any personal Injuries.

What a bold invasion then on Authority! what a rude violation of Public
Justice, is the too common ill custom, of Men's striving to right themselves by
private Duels! what is it indeed, but another kind of Rebellion against the
Government! that every man's hand should be ready to be lift up, against every
man, on every imaginary affront! that the Shadows and Punctilio's of Honor
should be so much, more regarded, than the solid Substance of it! that those
weapons, which nothing ought to command, but the Sacred Cause of your God, and
your King, men should oftener draw, for every trifle, on every rash word,
against their Countrymen, their Neighbors, their best Friends sometimes;
against their King in his Subjects, against their God in his Laws.

A mistaken way of men's gaining to themselves a contemptible Reputation; when
either Passion, or Intemperance makes them not themselves. A way of Honor,
which the most victorious Nations, of the Ancient World, seldom, or never
practiced; and which that very Nation of the Modern World, that either first
introduced, or most cherished it, is grown quite ashamed of. I beseech you, let
not the English think that to be the greatest bravery, which was never esteemed
brave by the old Romans; whose National greatness of Mind, in other things, you
so much resemble. Let not the English any longer allow that to be
praiseworthy, which your next Neighbors on the Continent, your old Competitors
in Arms, have quite forsaken, as dishonorable: and since they have done so,
have remarkably flourished in the Field.

You cannot but know, that it has not bin by particular Quarrels, or single
Combats against the Will of the Prince, that the Profession of the Sword has
bin made so famous: I must say, had there bin no other use of it, it had soon
bin most infamous: A Skill fitter for divided Barbarians, than for Nations
civilized. The virtue, the loveliness of your Art consists in the joint force
of it: that it can make whole Troops, and Armies to have at once the strength
of a great Multitude, and the firm Union, and well combined motion, as it were,
of one Man.

There never was, nor ever will be any Country, or Government, that got a
lasting fame, or Empire, by the unruly Passions, and unlawful Attempts of
private Men. Most surely many States have bin destroyed by them, whilst those
Kingdoms have bin always most prosperous, and renowned, where an orderly,
well-disciplin'd Valor has bin most encouraged, and single Outrages most
severely punished: where no force has bin thought honorable, but what is
justified by Authority: and that force honorable in the judgment of the Gospel
it self.

Wherefore Secondly, as by private Men, for private Safety, though, not for
private Revenge, the Sword may be justly drawn; so much more by all in a Public
Cause. And then not only for Safety, but also for Revenge: for Revenge too;
since vengeance belongs only to God; and to none besides himself, but to the
Public Sword, has God reserved the repaying of vengeance.

For just defense then, I say, and for just offense too, the Sword ought to be
used in a Public Cause. But let us remember, nothing can make it to be a Public
Cause, but a lawful Authority. It can never be made so by every, or by any
private Spirit. It is most true Divinity, as well as Politics, that none the
most vehement persuasions, or dissuasions of Conscience, none the greatest
pretenses to new Light, or Divine Inspirations can justify any Member of a
Christian State, or Church, nor any whole Church, to violate the established
Laws of their Country by resisting. Nay, there can be no surer proof of an
erroneous Conscience, of a Spirit, that is not of God, than this, if it shall
provoke Men possessed with it, under any color of the Cause of God, to Arm
against, and by open force to oppose the Powers, that undoubtedly are of God.

It Is true of old under the Jewish dispensation, God himself thought fit
sometimes, by an immediate call, different from that of the Civil Government,
to excite private Men to draw the Sword, and to perform acts of Supreme
Justice, Yet then he made them cease to be private Men any longer; first placed
them in his own stead; showed certain, signs of his presence with them; and
often gave them the power of Miracles, to confirm what they did. So that no man
now ought to imitate such extraordinary Examples, without being able to produce
the like extraordinary Commission. And that is not now God's method any longer.
His revealed Law being now completely discovered, God himself has seldom, or
never now recourse to such instances of his absolute Prerogative. And therefore
certainly no man ought to usurp them at his pleasure. To the Law, and to the
Testimony, to his written Word, he now refers us; and, as that commands, to
Kings, and all that are in Authority; to whom alone he has committed the
executive part of his common Power, as to the Vicegerents upon Earth of his
Justice and Mercy.

Thirdly therefore, on a public Call only, and only in a public Cause, can just
public Arms be taken up; and so they may be even by Christians: for the Cause
of God, and the King: which, though in words they seem divided, yet in reality
they are one, and the same, and inseparable: as the same Sword, of old, was
called the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, the Supreme Magistrate. This, my
Brethren, is not only the best, but the only true Cause of God in this World,
for which all Subjects are bound in Conscience to fight; the Cause of their
lawful Sovereign, that which he Authorizes, either by his Person, or his
Commission, or his Allowance.

This, I say, is the only true Cause even of God, which can justly call for
your Swords. Besides this, we know, God has another Cause in the World; that of
his own Church, and the true Religion: which whenever it is united with the
Sovereign Authority; as, Blessed be God, it is in our Nation, then that is of
all others unquestionably, a Cause the most sacred, the nearest, and dearest to
God himself. But wherever the Cause of the true Religion, and that of the
Supreme Power, are at variance, then God himself is pleased to take his own
Religion into his peculiar care; to maintain, and advance it in a way, that of
all others is the most Divine, a way that is more esteemed of God himself, let
me say it, than even your way of triumphant Arms, and Conquest. For such is the
way of gentle teaching, and innocent living, and patient suffering, and meek
obedience.

By this Method only God chose to begin the Gospel, and first raised the
Christian Church whilst the Empire was Heathen, and the World idolatrous, and
by no other Methods, but such as conform to this, most surely not by forcible
resistance, or open violence, does God still allow the Gospel to be carried on
by Subjects; wherever the Sovereign Power is addicted to Superstition, or
Idolatry.

But what, say they, must we not arm against the lawful Prince for the Cause of
God, and his Truth? How then shall we exercise our Zeal for the true Religion?
What then will become of the true Religion it self?

No, not for the Cause of God. For then at best, you will oppose one Cause of
God against another: and, as you order it, the false Cause of God against the
true: and thus for the seeming interest of Christianity, you infringe the
fundamental Percepts of it.

Not you, My Brethren. I speak this for the sake of some without Doors; if they
would but hear us. But alas! they make it a part of their Religion not to hear
us. However I must say, that Zeal may be irregular, and wicked, though in the
Cause of the true Religion. Zeal is not only to be justfy'd by the cause, which
raises it; but as much by the authority on which it acts. As for the right, and
well-ordered Zeal, whenever it has not the countenance, or concurrence of the
Magistrate; it ought only to be employed in peaceable Actions: in their Wishes,
and Studies, and Prayers; in their Counsels, and Advises, when called to it;
but chiefly in amending their own lives, and turning the edge of their Zeal on
their own Sins; by that innocent, but effectual way too, to do their parts to
preserve, and spread the true Faith.

Wherefore let them no longer entitle the true Religion to their own
Discontents, or Ambitions. What Religion can there be, in Men's persuing violent
paths, on a pretense of the Glory of God, but contrary to his express commands?
Let them practice its duties; and God will assert its interest. Religion
desires none to be its Champions, except they first become its Disciples; and
such are not they who will do evil, Romans 3.8.
that good may come.

Can such men think to give us better examples for the propagating Religion,
than the first great Masters, and Founders of Christianity did? or can they
hope for better Success in it, than they had: and what way did they judge best?
what by Experience did they find best to promote it? Prodigious indeed was the
Gospels first increase: But far more, admirable the means of it: which were
chiefly their Enemies Persecutions, their own Submission, and the power of
Miracles. By the wonders they wrought, they exercised a violence over Nature;
but none over Laws, or civil Governments, to change, or to subvert them. By a
lowly yielding to the Heathen Empire, they first softened its fury, then
converted it: they piously rendered to their Caesar's the things, that were
Caesar's: they cheerfully paid them Tribute; readily took up Arms at their
Summons; most willingly performed all their Laws, except such as that of
adoring them. Though they could not be induced by fear, or favor to rank their
Princes equal with their God, yet they preserved them in the next place: though
they would never worship, them as Gods upon Earth, yet they religiously obeyed
them as God's Deputies and Representatives: they judged those, who rebelled
against them, worthy of Death, as if they had actually rebelled against God
himself. What else means St. Paul? Romans 13.2.
when, in so many words, he declares, That whosoever resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation. Out of all doubt, he there speaks of the Temporal Power,
and of Eternal Damnation to ensue upon resisting it: than which what more
grievous Punishment could have bin inflicted, had they immediately resisted God
himself?

And recollect, I entreat you, the time, when this was so positively pronounced
by St. Paul. It must have bin written, under the reign of Claudius, or Nero. So
that it is evident, all that resisted them, were, without repentance, in a
damnable state. Can there be then any color so specious, any cause so just, in
which, instead of Damnation, a Christian subject may justly expect to receive
to himself Salvation, on the account of resisting?

Was it then forbidden, on the penalty of everlasting Death, to rebel against
those Emperors, most cruel Tyrants, most fierce Enemies to the Christian Name,
Monsters of Men, either of no Religion, or a false one, and yet a disgrace to
Heathenism it self? if however on the most solemn obligation of Conscience,
they were not to be opposed, much less destroyed by any Christians; what can be
said greater, or more august than this? what stronger, what more sacred
Confirmation can be given to our conscientious ob(...)another manner of
Authority? By how many more ties, Temporal, and Eternal, are we bound to yield
a faithful subjection to a Christian King? Under whose gentle Protection, his
Subjects prosper; though some almost against their wills: a King, whose Power
is only shown by moderate Laws, which to his mildness owe their Moderation: in
a word, a King, who is the best nursing Father of the best Church in the
Christian World.

Against this Doctrine, I know the Enemies of our Peace will be ready with
their old, and obsolete Objection, That this is Court Flattery, and a Divinity
only sit for Camps, and standing Armies. I must tell them, it had bin well for
our Country, if we had never heard of worse Camp-Divinity than this, we had
then never felt the real tyranny of a standing Army. And if they would consult
Scripture for other uses, than to pervert it, they would soon be convinced,
that this is good Evangelical Divinity. Nay, this Assembly gives me confidence
to inform them, what they will be more loath to hear, that now, God be praised,
this is not only good Camp, but good City-Divinity too.

But, when we teach the great Doctrine of Obedience, if we must be said to
flatter, our comfort is, we flatter in no worse company, than that of the
Apostles, St. Peter, and St. Paul, and wellnigh of all the divinely-inspired
Penmen of the Bible. However when they accuse the Church of England of this
kind of Flattery, that is, of unshaken fealty to the Crown, let them consider,
which of the two is the more excusable Flattery: to humor the uncertain
populace, and the unstable vulgar, which to serve is the lowest Slavery; or to
Preach a due Submission to the Lawful established Government; which to obey is
the safest Liberty?

You see, My Dear Brethren, the course of my Argument has brought us to such a
Cause, as is worthy of your Swords, if need shall require. Though the Ardour of
your Loyal Valor must give me leave to say, I hope, and I verily believe,
there will be no such need. I am persuaded, and, I think, I may presage, that
this present alacrity, and vigor, to which you, and His Majesty's other Loyal
Subjects have bin of late awakened, this cheerful posture, and prepared
readiness of your Swords to be drawn, will be an abundant Safety to our King,
and Country without once drawing them. Such will be the Innocence, as well as
Justice of your Arms, such the desperate condition of your Adversaries; that
whenever they draw their Swords against their Prince, they must throw away the
Scabbard: whilst yours, by God's Providence, being managed with an ordinary
watchfulness, and sobriety, will be sufficient to defend him, without ever
unsheathing them.

But if, which God in his Infinite Mercy a^^ert, if ever the same tumultuous
spirit, on the same groundless insinuations, shall once more infatuate the
corrupt part of the Nation, to their own Destruction, to their own certainly it
will be at last; if they do not again meet with the like mercy: But if God, in
his unsearchable Judgments, shall suffer our Country, in the same Age, to be
scourged again the same calamitous way: then what can be a more Noble, or more
Pious Cause, wherein to employ your Arms, than this of the King, and his Family?

A Cause, in which you will scarce meet with an Enemy, but he, or his Relations
have bin already forgiven. And so they will carry about with them the black
guilt, not only of Rebellion, but of an ungrateful Rebellion, after Pardon
received; a Sin, which the Devil is not capable of committing; whilst you will
have a Cause, in which all your several Interests, that are elsewhere
scattered, of personal Preservation, of political Duty, of conscientious
Obedience, are united. In this one Cause, all your Countries Blessings, all
your Churches Rights, all your own Securities are involved: in defending his
Life, his Throne, who is the breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord:
who has not only this common to him with other Kings, that he is the Image of
the Divine Power, but has, this peculiar to himself, or communicated to him
with a very few, that he is the Image of the Divine Mercy: of whose Abhorrence
of all Illegal Oppressions, or Arbitrary Proceedings, if the grace of all his
former Oblivions, and Indemnities has not yet convinced a stubborn Generation
of Men, after they have so long enjoyed the benefits of them, what need they
any other new Argument, than this here before me? that when he has such a
Nobility, and Gentry, such a Militia of the whole Kingdom, especially yours,
entirely at his Service; yet he is pleased to use your Arms no otherwise than
now, in the peaceful Exercises of War.

For such a King, whilst his Goodness, and Benignity gives you no occasions to
fight for him, what can all his Subjects do less, than to love, and revere him
in Peace? to yield him an active Obedience the more cheerfully, since he has
taken care, we shall have no opportunities of giving him a passive Obedience?
not only not to hinder but to perform his just Commands? to think our selves
only capable of being a great People, by making him greater? Romans 13.1.
Every Soul to be Subject to him? So, if we believe St. Paul, there is a
necessity we should be. The Phrase in the Original is (...); Romans 13.4.
which signifies the necessity not only of a cold, and forced, and merely just
Subjection; but of a regular, well-disposed Submission; not only to live
quietly, but in a quiet order; nay more, to live, as it were in Military Order
under him. For the word belongs to your Profession. The Rules of the warlike
Art are properly called Tacticks, and such should be our Obedience to our
Sovereign: so exact, as that which you practice in Armies: so, as strictly to
observe his Orders; so, as to be careful not to transgress his Laws, for love
of him, more than for fear of Punishment; so, as to be silent from Murmurings,
loud only in Applauses, and Thanks to Almighty God for the felicities of his
Reign.

Happy all his Subjects! if all were but sensible of their Happiness, and would
do their parts to perpetuate it. Happy! if all would remember what he has
forgot: and remember it, not to upbraid others, but to beware, and grow wiser
themselves for the future. Happy! if all were such as you. So willing to obey
the King in quiet times; so skilful to serve him in the Administrations of his
Justice; so ready, and able to guard him against all Confusions.

Such an Academy of Arts, as well as Arms; such a Company of Citizens, such a
Nursery of Commanders cannot, under God, but afford him a sure defense in his
Wars; as you do already supply him with the Riches, and Ornaments of Peace.

Happy is the People, that is in such a case! Happy is the People, whose God is
the Lord! The Lord of Hoasts; who gives Salvation to Kings; who delivers his
Servant David from the hurtful Sword and arms him with the Sword of Justice;
Ps. 144.
which he manages by a law of Kindness: and which I beseech Almighty God, may
flourish in his hand, for many, many years; in his House, for all Generations
to come. Amen.

FINIS.

