The Lord Bishop of Rochester's LETTER to the Right Honorable the Lords
Commissioners of His Majesty's Ecclesiastical Court.
MY LORDS,
I Most humbly entreat your Lordships favorable Interpretation of what I now
Write, that since your Lordships are resolved to proceed against those who have
not Complied with the King's Command in Reading his Declaration, it is
absolutely impossible for me to serve his Majesty any longer in this
Commission. I beg leave to tell your Lordships, That though I my self did Submit
in that particular, Yet I will never be any ways Instrumental in Punishing
those my Brethren that did not: For as I call God to Witness, that what I did
was merely on a Principle of Conscience, so I am fully satisfied, that their
forbearance was upon the same Principle. I have no reason to think otherwise of
the whole Body of the Clergy, who upon all Occasions have signalized their
Loyalty to the Crown, and their Zealous Affections to his present Majesty's
Person, in the worst of Times. Now my Lords, the Safety of the Church of
England, seeming to be exceedingly Concerned in this Prosecution, I must
Declare I cannot with a safe Conscience sit as Judge in this Cause upon so many
Pious and Excellent Men, with whom (if it be God's Will) it rather becomes me
to suffer, than to be in the least accessory to their Sufferings: I therefore
Earnestly Request your Lordship to interceed with his Majesty, That I may be
Graciously dismissed any further Attendanee at the Board, and to assure him,
that I am still ready to Sacrifice whatever I have to his Service; but my
Conscience and Religion.

My Lords, Your Lordships most Faithful and Humble Servant R --


