A True ACCOUNT AND DECLARATION OF The Horrid Conspiracy Against the Late KING,
His Present MAJESTY, AND THE GOVERNMENT: As it was Ordered to be Published by
His Late Majesty.

The Third EDITION*

In the SAVOY:

Printed by Thomas Newcomb, One of His Majesty's Printers. 1685.

JAMES R.

OUR Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Appoint Thomas Newcomb One of Our
Printers, to Print this Account and Declation; and that no other Person presume
to Print the same, as they will answer the contrary. Given at Our Court at
Whitehal, the 23 Day of May 1685. in the First Year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command, Sunderland.

JAMES R.

JAMES the Second, By the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas Our Dearest Brother the late King of ever Blessed Memory, gave special
Order in His Lifetime for Drawing up the following Account and Declaration of
the Horrid Conspiracy against His Sacred Person and Ours; and had provided,
that the Substance of it should be Impartially Collected out of Original
Papers, and unquestionable Records, and was Himself pleased to direct in what
Method it should be digested, taking particular Care, that the Truth of the
whole Narration should have such Clearness and Strength, as it might deserve to
be owned by Himself. Accordingly it was Composed and ready for the Press, when
it pleased Almighty God to take that Excellent Prince to his Mercy. And whereas
it is but too evident, that the same Hellish Plot is not entirely extinguished,
but that diverse of the Wicked Actors in it are still carrying on new
Contrivances against the Happy Peace of Our Dominions; We cannot but judge it
seasonable in this Juncture of Time to have Our Subjects reminded of the Rise,
Progress and Mischievous Designs of that desperate Confederacy. To this end,
having first Read and Examined this Account and Declaration, that We might be
the better able to give Our Royal Testimony, as We do by these Presents, to the
Faithfulness and Certainty of the whole Relation, We have caused it to be now
Printed and Published.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal, the 21 day of May, 1685. in the First Year of
Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, Sunderland.

map and floor plan of Rye House The Rye House
Malting House Outward Court Yard From the Meadow to the Court Wall 250 pases
Corn Chambers and stables formerly Called flouings Roe the narrow passage 25
feet wide Bridge the Road from Hoddensdon to Bishop stafford Ware River Between
Ware River and the Moat is 87 feet Great Parlor Parlor Court yard Hall Kitchen
Gate house


the south Front next the road
south elevation Garden Moat






A True ACCOUNT OF THE Horrid Conspiracy Against the Late KING, His Present
MAJESTY, And the GOVERNMENT.
THE KING has thought fit to lay open, and to declare to the World, An Exact
Account of the late Accursed Conspiracy, which was actually formed, and carried
on in England, and set on foot in Scotland, against His own, and his only and
dearest Brothers Life, and against the Peaceable and Flourishing Government of
His Majesty's Kingdoms; as far forth, as hitherto the Particulars of it have
come to His Knowledge, by the Voluntary Confessions, or undeniable Convictions
of diverse of the Principal Conspirators.

By this faithfully representing the plain Matter of Fact, though perhaps all
the Groundless Suggestions, and Malicious Insinuations of Factious Men, will
not be wholly put to silence; it being their old, and constant Artifice, to
support, and encourage their Party, by Impudent Slanders and Falsehoods, against
the clearest Light, and most evident Proof: Yet however His Majesty will have
the Satisfaction hereby to confirm the Loyalty, and good Affections of all His
loving Subjects at Home, and to establish Abroad the Reputation, and Honor of
His Royal Justice.

And moreover (which His Majesty most of all regards) this Public, and Lasting
Testimony will be given of His sincere Thankfulness to Almighty God, for that
Miraculous Deliverance from a Danger, which came so near His Sacred Person, and
was so far spread in the Ruin, it threatened to all His People.

It is well known, what mischievous Arts of late Years have been used, and what
Treasonable Courses taken, to withdraw these Nations from their bounden Duty
and Allegiance, and to expose His Majesty's most Just, and Merciful Government
to Calumny and Contempt: The Rebellious Design having been apparently carried
on by all sorts of Malcontents; whom either their Crimes, or Wants, their
furious Zeal, or unbounded Ambition, inclined to wish for a Disturbance of the
Peace, and Prosperity, which His Majesty's Dominions have so long enjoyed, to
the Envy of all His Neighbors.

To this wicked purpose, many the very same fatal Methods and specious
Pretenses, which, in the Days of His Majesty's Glorious Father, had involved
these Kingdoms in Confusion and Blood, were once again revived, and by many the
very same Persons; Men of crafty, restless, and implacable Spirits; impenitent
after the most Gracious Pardons; whom long Experience had made skilful in
seducing weak, and unstable Minds, by counterfeiting the plausible Names of
things in themselves most excellent, but most dangerous when abused; such as
Liberty, Property, Conscience, and Religion.

By these wretched Instruments, was this most gentle, and benign Government
again reproached with Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power: The Church of England was
once more Traduced, as Popishly affected: The most able Officers, and
faithfullest Servants of the Crown again Reviled, under the odious Title of
Evil Councillors.

In the mean time Sedition and Schism were every where promoted; unreasonable
Fears suggested; vain Suspicions of future Dangers augmented to destroy the
present Tranquillity; desperate Speeches, infamous Libels, Traitorous Books
swarmed in all places; and under color of the only True Protestant, the worst
of all Unchristian Principles were put in practice; all the old Republican, and
Antimonarchical Doctrines, whose Effects had formerly proved so dismal, were
now again as confidently owned, and asserted, as ever they had been during the
hottest Rage of the late unhappy Troubles.

From these Preparations to a new Rebellion, the Party began by degrees to
proceed to Action. Distinctions of Sides were made: Names, and Tokens of
Separation were given: Illegal Conventicles were maintained, in defiance of the
Laws of God, and Man: Tumultuous Feasts, and Factious Clubs were set up in
City, and Country: Close, and Seditious Meetings haunted: Frequent Cabals
appointed, and by Men of high degree with the lowest: Great Stores of Arms
provided by private Persons: Insolent Progresses made through diverse Countries;
thereby to glory in their Numbers, and to carry far and near the Terror of
their Power, and even to Muster their Party ready for some sudden Blow, or
general Insurrection.

All these, and many more such Personal Indignities, and Public Assaults on
the Government, His Majesty long endured with the same Mildness, and Clemency,
wherewith he had already forgiven the highest Crimes against himself; His Royal
Goodness still patiently expecting, and wishing, that in time the most
obstinate of his misguided Subjects would see their Error, and return at
length to a sense of the Duty, they owe him by all the strongest Bands of
Nature and Laws, Religion and Gratitude, that can possibly oblige Subjects
toward a Sovereign.

But when His Majesty was abundantly convinced that all those dark
Consultations, and open Tumults of unruly Men, were but so many infallible
Signs, and Forerunners of Rebellion, or some extraordinary Commotions; Then at
last, in a tender respect to his Peoples Safety, more than to his own, was His
Majesty constrained to awaken his Authority, to try what good Effect the Vigor
of his Laws would have on those Offenders, with whom all his repeated Mercy and
Indulgence had so little prevailed.

Yet such was then His Majesty's hard Fortune, so firmly combined were the
Disaffected, especially by their Prevalent Interest in packing the Juries of
London and Middlesex, that whilst His Majesty carefully endeavored to
distribute Impartial Justice to all his Subjects, he could not obtain the same
Right Himself; his Enemies still becoming more numerous, and united in those
very places, where their desperate Enterprises against the Government, were
likely to be most sudden and pernicious.

Amongst diverse other infamous Examples of this Nature, was that of College
the Joyner. For though the Criminal was so mean a Man, and no other ways
considerable, but for his audacious Forwardness in affronting the Government;
yet His Majesty, with all His Royal Authority, could hardly prevail to have him
brought to a Fair and Legal Trial. Nor had His Majesty been able at last to
procure so much Justice to be done, had not the Process been removed into
another County, where (the Rulers of the Faction being less powerful,) that new
and damnable Opinion and Practice of the Lawfulness of Equivocating and even of
Perjury for the Good Old Cause, had not prevailed over the old and honest
English Principles of Truth and Honor.

However though in the end His Majesty's Justice got the better at that time,
yet it was defeated in a greater, and more important Instance, that of the late
Earl of Shaftsbury; who had been long and reasonably suspected, and in the
issue was manifestly discovered to be the chief Author, and supreme Manager of
all these Traitorous Contrivances against his Majesty's Crowns and Life.

The said Earl His Majesty had formerly pardoned, enriched, enobled, and
advanced to one of the highest Stations in the Kingdom; by a long Succession of
manifold Bounties, endeavoring to render his Abilities, and Experience in
Business, serviceable to his King, and beneficial to his Country.

Yet so treacherous and undermining was his Genius; so unmeasurable his
Ambition; so impatient of quiet, and moderate Courses; so much fitter he was to
be the Instrument of a Tyrant, than the Servant of a Just and Good Prince; that
after many heinous Infidelities and Offenses committed by him, and forgiven by
his Majesty, he was at length necessitated to discharge him his Service; yet so
as to leave him one of the most considerable Peers in the Kingdom for Title and
Estate.

But his aspiring and revengeful Spirit could not brook so gentle a disgrace.
Wherefore having deservedly been dismissed the Court, he presently attempted to
set the Country directly against it. Immediately he professed himself the most
zealous true Protestant, and the greatest Patriot; Thereby slily insinuating
his designs into the Heads of all Sects and Divisions in Church and State: To
them betraying some, vilifying others; maliciously interpreting all His
Majesty's Counsels; Making those very Consultations, and resolutions of State,
whereof he had been the chief Adviser, when he was in Power, to be the
principal Objections against the Government, when he was displaced.

Thus he and his party went boldly on to disturb the Public Quiet, and to
affront His Majesty's Authority with the highest Insolence: In Words and
Writings defaming it, as Arbitrary and Tyrannical, whilst in Deeds he insulted
over it, as believing it to be weak, and resolving to make it despicable. And
all this with a secure confidence not only of Indemnity, but Success; Knowing
himself to be under the protection of Juries of his own appointment, or
approbation: And therefore presuming he was far out of the reach of His
Majesty's just Indignation.

And so for a time it unhappily proved. For being legally indicted of Crimes of
the highest Nature; though the Evidence against him was clear, and positive;
some of the Witnesses being the very same Men, whose Testimony had been
approved of, in the prosecution of Oats's Plot; And the very Original draught
of a treasonable Association having been actually found in his Custody; yet he
could not be brought to a Lawful Trial by his Peers, the Indictment being
stifled by a shameful Ignoramus; and that accompanied with so much Insolence,
that the very Ministers of His Majesty's Justice were in much more danger than
the Criminal, and hardly escaped the rude Assaults of his Confederates and
Party.

However, from so great a Violation of Common Right, and of the Royal Dignity,
His Majesty gained this very considerable Advantage, That thenceforth he
plainly perceived the main Strength of all his Enemies Arrogance lay in their
Extravagant Power to pack the City-Juries. For what Treason might not the Earl
of Shatftsbury securely Project, or Ferguson Write, or an Association Act
against the Government, whilst Goodenough, and a settled Club, was at hand with
their Corrupt Pannels, to Indemnifie, and if need were, to second and applaud
their most Villainous Practices?

Wherefore His Majesty foreseeing how destructive, in time, the Effects of so
great and growing a Mischief would be, resolved at length, after a many
Intolerable Provocations, to strike at that which he had now found to be the
very Root of the Faction.

This His Majesty, and all wise and good Men perceived, could be no other ways
done, than first by reducing the Elections of the Sheriffs of London to their
Ancient Order and Rules, that of late were become only a Business of Clamor
and Violence: And then to make Inquiry into the Validity of the City-Charter it
self; which an ill Party of Men had abused to the Danger, and would have done
it to the Destruction of the Government, had they been suffered to go on never
lb little farther uncontrolled.

In both these most just and necessary Undertakings, the Righteousness of His
Majesty's Cause met with an answerable Success. First, notwithstanding all the
Tumultuous Riots the Factious Party committed, to disturb the peaceable Issue
of that Affair; yet the undoubted Right of the Lord Mayor's Nominating the
eldest Sheriff, was restored and established: And so the Administration of
Justice once more put in a way of being cleared from Partiality and Corruption.
And then a due Judgment was obtained, by an equal Process of Law, against the
Charter it self, and its Franchises declared forfeited to his Majesty.

But though this happy Event of His Majesty's Controversy with the disaffected
part of the City of London, was in all Humane probability, the only effectual
Course to provide for the future Peace, and Stability of the Government; yet it
had like to have proved a present Occasion of its utter Ruin.

For when so many guilty Persons found, that the great Point of the Sheriffs
was resetled on its Ancient Bottom, and the City-Charter it self in hazard of
being speedily vacated; so that now there would be no farther evasion for them,
by any pretense of Law, to escape unpunished: Then they concluded it was high
time to bring their Devilish Purposes to a quicker issue, and once for all to
strike boldly at the Heart of the KING and Kingdom.

Particularly the Earl of Shaftsbury, being conscious to himself of the
blackness of his Crimes, and of the Iniquity of the Verdict, by which he had
for that time escaped; and finding he was now within the compass of the Justice
he had so lately frustrated and contemned, thenceforth gave over all his
quieter and more plausible Arts of Sedition, whereby he proudly bragged he
should, in time, as his Expression was, Leisurely walk his Majesty out of his
Dominions; and on a sudden betook himself to more precipitate Enterprises:
Alarming his Companions with a prospect of their common danger; thence
inflaming some to Insurrections, others to Assassinations; supposing now there
was no way left for him, or them, to justify their former Misdemeanors and
Treasons, but by attempting and succeeding in greater Mischiefs.

This was found by evident Proof to have been the principal rise and occasion
of ripening the Horrid Conspiracy in the Kingdom of England. Nor could there
possibly have happened a stronger Justification of His Majesty's Counsels in
attempting to rectify the City-Juries and Elections; since it is apparent his
principal Enemies laid so much stress on the unjust Power they had therein
usurped, that, being once fairly driven from that Strength, they immediately
resolved, nothing less than a barefaced and avowed Rebellion could repair the
Loss their Party sustained by so great a Blow.

As for His Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland, it is notorious there has been long
sheltered in it a desperate Faction of furious Zealots, that under the old
Professions of the Cause of Christ, and a purer way of Gospel Worship, has
grown up by degrees to a Violation at last, not only of all the Rules and
Institutions of true Religion, but of common Humanity. For does not the whole
Christian World at this day behold with Horror, that the most Villa nous Tenets
of the fiercest Scottish Covenanters, and even of their Remonstrators, have
been outdone by their Successors and Disciples in the Field-Meetings, and
Armed Conventicles? Have they not thence proceeded to all the Execrable Rage of
Rapine and Violence? In so much that some of them have lived and died glorying
in the most barbarous Murders, and basest Cruelties; refusing obstinately with
their last Breath, so much as to pray for His Majesty, or to say, God save the
King; though by an unexampled Mercy, they had their Pardons assured to them at
the very place and moment of their Execution, upon that single Condition.

And besides the remains of those Bloody Enthusiasts, whose Principles are not
yet entirely extinguished, though their force has been twice vanquished in open
Field, by Gods Providence prospering His Majesty's Arms; It is certain also the
Peace of that Kingdom has of late been much endangered by other great Numbers
of Factious and Seditious Spirits, who, though at first they would not venture
to encourage publicly the others declared Treasons, yet stuck not secretly to
favor and foment their Cause, and as the event infallibly proves, would soon
have Owned and Headed their Fury, had it prosper'd.

Wherefore the wise care of former Sessions of Parliament there, having
sufficiently provided by a due severity of Good Laws, against the dreadful
Consequences of continuing the Field-Meetings; for the farther securing the
Reformed Religion, and the Ancient Rights of the Crown and the Royal Family in
that Kingdom, it was judged advisable, by the Wisdom of His Majesty's great
Council, the last Session of Parliament, to appoint and Authorize a Solemn Test
to be taken by all Persons in place of public Trust, or Power.

In that Session the Test was soon passed into an Act of State, without any
considerable opposition: Though there were not wanting some turbulent Men in
the Assembly, who took that occasion of showing, how ill they were affected to
the established Government of their Country; Which they could have no other
inducement to be, but either a desire of Commotions, by reason of the desperate
State of their own ill-spent Fortunes, or Envy at the better Condition of
Honester Men, or some inveterate Contagion of Treason, derived down to them
from the last unhappy Age of Confusions.

Of that unquiet and seditious Party, the chief and declared Head was the late
Earl of Argyle, who during the very sitting of the Parliament, had, by many
indirect ways, attempted to hinder His Majesty's Service; the said Earl, and
the then President of the Session, and their Accomplices taking their
opportunity, in wording the Test, to add thereto all the very same Clauses,
that have since giver any Color of scruple to themseves. But when all his
crafts for obstructing the Bill were defeated by the far greater Number of well
disposed Members, the Loyal Voters for it being at least Ten to one of the
disaffected; then no sooner was the Parliament adjourned, but the said Earl of
Argyle, first at Edinburgh, next in traversing several Shires, did make it his
Chief Business to insinuate every where, into the minds of the Clergy and
Laity, the most malicious prejudices imaginable against the whole Tenor of the
Test.

And afterward on his return to Edinburgh he often presumptuously declared, he
would either not take it at all, or take it only with a reserve of his own
explanation; which, he put in Writing and dispersed: the contrivance of it
being such, as dissolves all the Obligations of the Oath, and makes his own
present Fancy and private Opinion, the only Standard, whereby he meant to be
guided in all the public Duties of his Loyalty and Allegiance.

At length His Majesty's High Commissioner the Duke, and the Privy Council of
that Kingdom, having been well informed of the said Earls seditious Carriage in
City and Country, and being fully confirmed in their Judgments and Confidences
of his Traiterous Purposes, in that fallacious and equivocating Paraphrase on
the Test, which he owned in their presence, perverting thereby the sound sense,
and eluding the force of His Majesty's Laws, in order to set the Subjects loose
from their Obedience, and to perpetuate Schism in the Church, and Faction in
the State: Upon these Grounds, he was most deservedly Prosecuted by His
Majesty's Advocate, before the Sovereign Justice-Court, according to the known
Laws of his Country; and after a full and equal Trial, he was found guilty of
Treason, by the Learned Judges, and a Jury hot only of his Peers, but also many
of them his own nearest Relations.

Soon after Judgment given, albeit the King was far from any thought of taking
away his Life, and that no farther prejudice was designed against him, but the
forfeiture of some Jurisdictions and Superiorities, which he and his
Predecessors had surreptitiously acquired, and most tyrannically exercised;
besides the disposal of part of his Estate to pay his just Creditors, and some
few moderate Donatives to those, whom he and his Father had formerly ruined for
their Fidelity to His Majesty, the Surplusage being intended entirely to
return, and descend to his Family; yet the said Earl abusing the great Freedom
indulged him in Prison, (which he enjoyed as largely after his Condemnation, as
before) fled from His Majesty's Mercy, the knowledge of his own Guilt not
suffering him to venture on that Clemency, whereof he had before participated
so plentifully, when he was under the like Sentence of Condemnation.

The King however, notwithstanding this new Provocation, still retained the
same benign thoughts of favoring his Wife and Children. And before it was
known that the said Earl had more Debt on his Estate than the full value of it
amounted to, (which really was his Case) His Majesty was graciously pleased, in
one Royal Largess, to give thrice more of the Inheritance to his Posterity,
than their Father could lawfully have done, had it never been forfeited.

But how ill he deserved, or requited so many Acts of Grace and Bounty, will
appear by the sequel of his Behavior after his Escape. For in stead of doing
what his Accomplices and Dependants gave out he intended, that he would humbly
cast himself at His Majesty's Feet, and implore his Pardon, which he, of all
Men living, had no reason to think desperate, he is no where to be found, but
associating with His Majesty's implacable Enemies in the Head of new
Machinations of Treason, employs his Liberty abroad in maintaining Traitorous
Correspondences at Home, with restless Malice exciting the wicked Conspirators
of both Kingdoms to a fatal Union against the Life, Government and Family of
his Liege Sovereign and Benefactor.

And all this is to be proved upon him by Arguments as clear as the Sun, by the
Credit of his own Authentic Letters, and by the plain Depositions of his
principal Messengers and Agents in the whole Villainy.

By this brief Recollection of the troubled State of Affairs, and the
Tumultuous Temper of ill Men's Minds, in His Majesty's Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, about the time when this treasonable Conspiracy was in agitation, the
impartial World may perceive, from what destructive feeds of Sedition, private
Passions and Animosities, under the disguise of Religion and the public
Interest, so Monstrous a Birth was produced.

In the wonderful Discovery of which detestable Confederacy, and in the happy
Prevention of its dire Effects, as all who have heard of it, must acknowledge
that a signal care of Gods Providence has appeared, for His Majesty's and these
Nations Preservation: So His Majesty gives the Sacred Word and Protestation of
a King, that nothing has been done, on his part, but what was agreeable to that
Royal Benignity and Natural Candor of his whole Life, whereof all the World,
even his Enemies, have had such undoubted Experience.

The Evidence was, most of it, delivered in His Majesty's own presence. The
Examinations were taken by Men of unquestionable Reputation and Honor. The
whole Proceeding has been managed with all imaginable Integrity. There has been
no straining or extorting of Accusations to blemish the Fame of the Innocent:
No Temptation of Rewards proposed: No Pardon assured beforehand, for
discovering or aggravating the Crimes of the Guilty.

Some Witnesses, who offered themselves, of whom there might have been any
colorable Suspicion, His Majesty wholly rejected: Lest it should once again
happen, that the Wasted Credit, or needy Condition, or profligate Lives of the
Persons deposing should derogate from the strength of their Depositions, and
administer any the least doubt of Subornation.

Those Witnesses His Majesty admitted had been generally Men strongly
prepossessed in Conscience, Zeal and Interest for that Party: Men whose former
avowed Hatred of the Government was reason sufficient to gain them an absolute
trust with any, who studied to overthrow it. They were not of desperate
Fortunes; Nor despicable Men. For the most part they separately and singly
brought in their Discoveries. Diverse of them had little or no Conversation or
Familiarity one with another. There was no shadow, or possibility of a
combination between them all to discover; yet such is the prevalence of
Self-conviction, and so great the Power of Truth, that all their several
Discoveries did perfectly agree with themselves and with each other in all
material parts and circumstances.

It was therefore in the Summer of the Year 1683, a time when all His Majesty's
Dominions enjoyed a settled Peace, and profound security, whilst the greatest
part of the Neighboring World was involved in Wars and Combustions, that His
Majesty and his Council were suddenly awakened with the surprising Knowledge of
this dreadful Conspiracy, which had been laying very deep and broad for many
Months before.

The Man whom God chose to make the first Discoverer, was Josiah Keeling,
Citizen and Salter of London. A Person of good Credit in the common Business of
his Calling: but otherwise a most perverse Fanatic; so fiercely addicted to
their Cause, that he had been one of the busiest Sticklers in all the late
Public Oppositions against the Government. Particularly, he was the very Man
who undertook, and performed the most insolent Assault upon Authoriy, that
perhaps the Party ever attempted in full Peace; which was the Arresting the
Lord Mayor, in open Day, in the midst of the City of London, for refuting to
admit the pretended Sheriffs, who had been chosen by those Meetings of the
Factious in and about the City, that the Law has since condemned as Unlawful
and Riotous.

However, by so eminent and bold a piece of Service, together with his former
approved Activity and Violence for the discontented Interest, was Keeling
judged by the chief Conspirators fitly qualified to be admitted into their most
private Consultations. And accordingly thereafter they trusted him, as one of
their surest Confidents. In so much that he was invited to make one of the
Forty Miscreants, whose proper part it was to Assassinate His Majesty's and his
Royal Highnesses Persons.

Of which Number after he had freely consented to be, and had met and acted
jointly with the rest for some time, to prepare the cursed Work for a speedy
Execution; it pleased the Divine Goodness so to touch his Soul with the Horror
of so amazing a Crime, that he could not rest Day nor Night, till after much
conflict in his Mind, he had fully determined to discharge his Conscience of
the Hellish Secret.

Wherefore having first Communicated some part of his burden to one Mr. Peckam
his private Friend, who had often before warned him in general of the dangerous
course he was in, by so deeply engaging in all the former Seditious Intrigues,
he was by him directed to address himself to the Lord Dartmouth, one of His
Majesty's Privy Council, who remitted him to Sir Leolyn Jenkins, Principal
Secretary of State, before whom he gave his first Information upon Oath, and in
due form of Law, on the Twelfth of June in that Year.

But the intended Assassination, upon the first disclosing of it, appeared to
be so prodigious a Barbarity, that His Majesty for some time gave but very
little Ear, and slow Credit to this Information, as little suspecting as
deserving such usage from the worst of his Subjects.

Which generous Caution that His Majesty took, not to be imposed on by New
Rumors of Plots, and his Gracious Tenderness not to believe so ill of his very
Enemies, but upon certain Demonstration, was one of the chief Occasions, that
diverse of the principal Agitators and Managers of the whole business, took the
Alarm, and got time to scatter and withdraw beyond the Seas.

However, by Gods Providence continually watching over His Majesty's and these
Nations safety, so many of the Traitors soon after fell into the Hands of
Justice, who did either voluntarily acknowledge their being Partakers of the
Treason, or were Convicted of it by Evident Proof; that henceforth whoever
shall pretend not to believe the Truth of the whole, they must either be such
as were Parties in the Design, or so monstrously unreasonable, as to believe
there never can be a Real Plot against any Prince or State, but what does
actually succeed and take effect.

Thus much is certain of this Conspiracy, and it is so remarkable and
extraordinary, that perhaps the like cannot be affirmed of any other mentioned
in all History, that there was scarce a Man Attainted, or Executed for it, who
did not, more or less, add some new Light to the several parts of the dark
Contrivance; either by a plain Confession of it, or by their very manner of
denying it; and by the weakness of the Subterfuges, whereby they endeavored to
palliate their Crimes.

Upon the whole Matter, though His Majesty doubts not but the Treasonable
Infection was, in some degree or other, spread into most Quarters of these
Kingdoms, amongst the Ringleaders of the Republican Clubs, and lawless
Conventicles in Town and Country; there being no reason for any Man to think
otherwise, since it was the usual boast of their principal Factors, That more
than Twenty Thousand Persons were made privy to the very beginnings of it,
before the late Earl of Shaftsbury's Flight: Yet His Majesty utterly abhorring
that bare Suspicions, though never so probably grounded, should prevail to
conclude any Man Guilty, has resolved no Reflection shall be made on the Fame
of any, but only such, whose part in it was made out by positive Testimony.

And in the Kingdom of England, besides the Earl of Shaftsbury, who during his
time, was the Prime Engineer in contriving and directing all the several
Motions and Parts of the whole Conspiracy; next under him, the Persons who are
already Judicially found to have been deeply concerned as Actors, some in the
Insurrection part, others in the Assassination, diverse of them in both
together, are these,

The Duke of Monmouth, whom the Factious Party had long Corrupted, and
Alienated from his Duty and Gratitude to the King and his Royal Highness, by
suggesting and increasing in him groundless Fears, and poys'ning his Mind with
unjust and forbidden Hopes.

The Lord Gray of Wark, who for some Years had been engaged in the most furious
Designs of the Faction; of late especially, after he found that the Wickedness
of his private Life could neither be so well hidden, or go unpunished in a
quiet State as in public Disturbances.

The late Earl of Essex, whose dark and turbulent Spirit and insatiable
Ambition had carried him on to be one of the Principal Authors of all the late
Destractions in Public Councils and Popular Heats against the Government: Till
after many such ill Practices, unworthy the Son of such a Father, God left him
at last to fall into this Precipice; and permitted him to punish himself for it
more severely than the King could ever have found in his Heart to do, had he
but given His Majesty time to make use of the excellent Goodness of his Nature.

The Lord Howard of Escrick, who had always been a busy Promoter of Fanatical
and Republican in Projects for Alterations in Church and State; and was
therefore for a time the second Favorite of the Disaffected, whilst he was
Imprisoned with the Earl of Shaftsbury. Nor did they ever make any Objections
against the Honesty of his private Life, till he came to the honestest part of
it.

The Lord Rassel, a Person carried away beyond his Duty and Allegiance into
this Traitorous Enterprise, by a vain Air of Popularity, and a wild Suspicion
of losing a great Estate by an imaginary return of Popery; whereby he was the
more casily seduced by the wicked Teachers of that most Unchristian Doctrine,
which has been the cause of so many Rebellions, and was so conformable to his
Presbyterian Education, That it is lawful to Resist and Rise against Sovereign
Princes for preserving Religion.

Colonel Algernoon Sidney, who from his Youth had professed himself an Enemy to
the Government of his Country, and had acted accordingly. As he lived, so he
died, a Stubborn, Assertor of the Good Old Cause.

Mr. John Hambden the Younger, who has renewed, and continued the Hereditary
Malignity of his House against the Royal Family; his Grandfather having been
the most Active Instrument to widen the Breach between the late Blessed KING,
and the seduced part of his People. The Usurper Cromwell of en owned, That Mr.
Hambden was the very Man who advised him to oppose the Justice and Honor of
His Majesty's Cause, with an affected Zeal of Conscience and pure Religion.

Sir Thomas Armstrong, a Debauched Atheistical Bravo; one of those, who with an
Hypocrisy peculiar to this Age, would have passed for the most forward
Reformers of Church and State; whilst they themselves both in their Practice
and Opinions, were the greatest Corrupters of Virtue, and all Good Manners.

Lieutenant Colonel Walcot, an Old Officer in Cromwell's Army; who after Pardon
and Indemnity received, and a plentiful Estate secured to him by His Majesty's
moll Happy Return, yet was actually engaged in all the Plots against the
Government ever since: Particularly in that of Ireland some Years ago, to
surprise the Castle of Dublin. He was Introduced by the Lord Howard, under the
Character of a Stout and Able Officer, into a strict Familiarity with the Earl
of Shaftsbury; from whom he never after parted till his Death; accompanying him
in his Flight into Holland, and returning thence with his Corpse; he and
Ferguson having this peculiar Mark of his Kindness, to be named Legatees in his
Last Will and Testament, as his special Friends.

Colonel John Romzey, who had gotten Credit abroad in Portugal, by his Courage
and Skill in Military Affairs. He was recommended to the Earl of Shaftsbury as
a Soldier of Fortune, resolute and fit for his turn, in any desperate Attempt.
By His Majesty's Favor, upon his Royal Highness's Intercession, he got
possessed of a very considerable Office in the Customs of Bristol; which having
sold, he afterward most ungratefully became the said Earls entire Cteature and
Dependant. Nor was he ever a professed Papist, as, since his Confession, the
Party has given out that he was, according to their wonted Impudence of Lying.

Thomas Shepard Merchant of the City of London, one of a plentiful Estate, and
eminent Repute, as any of his Rank on the Exchange: But a Violent
Nonconformist, and Disciple of Ferguson's.

The two Goodenoughs, Richard and Francis, both Notorious Enemies of the
Established Government in Church and State. During all the time of the Factious
Citizens most furious Eruptions against Authority, they had been both, for some
Years, by turns, Under-Sheriffs of London and Middlesex; so that the whole
wicked Mystery and Trade of packing the Ignoramus Juries passed through their
Hands.

Major Holms, a Fifth-Monarchy-Man, an old Army-Officer, a Confident of
Cromwell's, and Trustee for his Family. In the late Times of Usurpation he was a
Major in the English Army in Scotland, where he became acquainted with the Earl
of Argyle, and was since made intimate to all his Treasonable Purposes.

Richard Rumbald Maltster, another old Anny-Officer, a desperate and bloody
Ravilliac, who had often before laid Designs for the KlNG's Murder, which God
as often prevented by some signal Providence.

William Rumbald, his Brother worthy of such a Brother.

Aaron Smith, a furious Fanatic, who amongst many other Seditious Practices,
was a Factious Solicitor for College the the Joyner: and with unparalleled
boldness dared to menace the Government, and to put a Libel into that notorious
Malefactors hands, before the Judges faces, at the very time of his Trial: for
which High Misdemeanor, he has since fallen under the censure of the Law.

William Hone, a Joyner, a melancholy Enthusiast, of College's Trade and
Spirit; who besides a large Confession of his and others share in this
Conspiracy, did also frankly own at his Trial and Death, that many Years before
he had proposed and designed the Killing of the King out of Bow-Steeple, as His
Majesty was passing to Guild Hall.

John Rouse, a busy Agent in all the Tumultuous Proceedings of the City
Elections.

Zachary Bourn, a Brewer, Son to an obstinate Independent, and he himself one
of Ferguson's Hosts and Familiars. Thomas Lea a Dyer, Andrew Barber, both
Anabaptists. However these three last mentioned did in some measure expiate
their Guilt, by their ingenious and voluntary Confessions.

John Ayloff a Lawyer, the very Man who in a spightful defiance of His
Majesty's Government, did many Years since venture to put a French Wooden Shoe
into the Speakers Chair of the House of Commons. Nor has the rest of his Life
since come short of the insufferable Insolence of that Action.

Joseph Tyley, Edward Norton, Edward Wade, Richard Nelthrop, Robert West, all
of them Republican Lawyers, their Hatred of the Government transporting them to
be Factious, against the known Interest of their own Profession. These were all
Men of Crafty Heads, and Nimble Tongues; restless Spreaders of false News, bold
Talkers in Seditious Clubs; where, according to the corrupt fashion of those
Times, the most profligate Persons of all Conditions were wont openly to
Arraign the Monarchy, and vilify the Church, under the fair shows of amending
both, and a tender Concernment for the Public Good.

Next, in the Kingdom of Scotland, the Names of the chief Instruments, who are
already proved to have transacted that part of the Conspiracy under the Conduct
and Influence of the late Earl of Argyle, and who since, well nigh all to a
Man, but those that escaped on the first Notice of the Discovery, have made
ample Declarations of their Guilt, are these,

Sir Hugh and Sir John Campbell, near Relations of the said Earls, and as much
the professed Enemies of their Countries Peace and Government.

Sir John Cockran, Mr. William Baillie, Men egregiously disaffected to the
Government, and therefore of considerable Interest with its most desperate
Enemies in both Kingdoms.

These, together with Monroe, were the Persons desired by the English Managers,
to come up to London, and Treat of a Joint Conspiracy with their Brethren here,
under the disguise of Planting Carolina. At the same time Lieutenant Colonel
Walcot was called out of Ireland for the same end, but under color of being
the intended Governor of that Plantation. To this purpose they were first
invited hither by the Earl of Shaftsbury, and after his Death again sent for by
a Particular Messenger. Accordingly they actually came up and Negotiated here
some time, in order to a firm Conjunction between the Traitors of both Nations
for a general Rising. Nor was the Treaty wholly broke off, or adjusted, at the
very time when the Discovery broke forth.

To these are to be added, James Steuart, Son to Sir James Steuart sometimes
Provost of Edinburgh. He was fitted for such a design by his hot and fiery
Temper, and by his Education, and his Fathers Example; who together with most
of his Relations, were violent Covenanters. This Man was the Author of the
Libel called, The Scottish Grievances.

The Lord Melvil, descended from Progenitors of such Principles as have been
ever against the Crown, when they have fancied their Kings not Zealous for the
Reformation. This Man had the Management of the Duke of Monmouth's Affairs in
Scotland many Years: And when the Duke marched against the Rebels near
Bothwel-Bridge, the said Melvil (as the Earl of Shaftsbury had advised) sent to
them to Capitulate, assuring them, the Duke of Monmouth had Orders to give them
good Conditions; and when they would not submit, Melvil was overheard to say,
That all was lost: For the Beating of them would lose the said Duke with his
Friends in England.

Sir Patrick Hume of Polwart, who kept Correspondence with Shaftsbury many
Years, and had been formerly Imprisoned in Scotland for Traitorous Expressions.

-- Pringle Lord of Tordwoodlie, a noted Fanatic, and of Antimonarchical
Principles from his Infancy.

-- Denham of East-Sheels, just such another, but less cautious, and more
headstrong.

-- Montgomery of Lenshaw, a Covenanter to the highest degree of Bigottry.

Commissary Monroe, who had well served His Majesty in the Wars, as an active,
brave Man: But upon some Injuries he pretended to have received from the Duke
of Lauderdail, he grew enraged to such a degree, as led him into these Courses;
which now make him so uneasy to himself, that he has often begged of his
Keeper to kill him, for such an ungrateful Wretch should not live.

Hugh Scot Lord of Gallowsheels, James Murray Lord of Philiphaugh, both
zealous Sticklers for the Field-Conventicle-Meetings.

Besides these, the Principal Scottish Agents, there were diverse other inferior
Emissaries of that Nation, who went to and fro to carry on the Traitorous
Intercourse between Scotland and England, and with the Earl of Argyle in
Holland. Such as William Carstares, a Scotch Conventicle-Preacher to a Numerous
Meeting at Theobalds, where Rumbald was his frequent Hearer.

William Spence, who had been Comptroler, and was now Employed as Secretary to
the Earl of Argyle, taken in London under the Name of Butler.

John Nisbet, born in Northumberland, bred up at the University of Edinburgh;
where he was the Leader of those Seditious Students, who raised a Tumult upon
occasion of Burning the Pope in that City.

But of all the Conspirators, whether English, or Scotch, the Man, to whom next
the late Earls of Shaftsbury and Argyle, belonged the chief place and
precedence in the whole Diabolical Design, was Robert Ferguson a Scotch-Man; he
had been diverse Years a fierce Independent-Preacher in the City of London, and
had long Brandished his Poisonous Tongue and Virulent Pen against the
Government: He is manifestly convicted to have had a Hand in the most
Scandalous Libels of those Times; And was always particularly cherished,
magnified and maintained by the Party, for his peculiar Talent in aspersing the
Government, and reviling His Majesty's Person. So that upon all Accounts, of
his restless Spirit, fluent Tongue, subtle Brain, and hellish Malice, he was
perfectly qualified to be the great Incendiary, and common Agitator of the
whole Conspiracy; and after Shaftsbury's Death, it cannot be denied, but he was
the Life, and Soul of all, especially for the carrying on of the Assassination.

These Persons appear hitherto to have been the principal Contrivers or
Instruments of the whole Treason in the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

Diverse others there are, concerning whom more than conjectural Proofs may be
given, of their being engaged in it: But His Majesty is willing to spare
particular Names, as far as may stand with the Necessary, and Just Vindication
of his Government.

It may suffice, that of these His Majesty has here allowed to be mentioned,
the World is abundantly satisfied, that the several Shares they undertook in
this Conspiracy, were very agreeable to their former well known perverse
Principles, and declared Disaffections to the Government.

It is therefore certain that in the Year 1682, before, and especially after
Midsummer-Day, when the great Business of Electing the City Sheriffs came of
course to be Agitated; the whole Factious Interest in and about the Town,
prepared to employ the Main of their Power and Craft in preventing the Swearing
of the True Sheriffs, on the Michaelmas-Day ensuing.

All which time nothing was omitted by the Disloyal Citizens, and great Numbers
of Strangers unduly mingled with them in all their Assemblies, to elude or
terrify the Honest Zeal of the Loyal, and to deceive and gain over the
doubtful Members of the City; Whether by direct or indirect ways, it mattered
not: For just about that time the New and Devilish Invention came to be most in
Vogue, by which they made the receiving all Oaths, and taking the very Blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to be only an Instrument for the promoting their
pretended Godly Designs.

Wherefore in that space of time, all imaginable profane, and seemingly holy
Cheats and Prevarications were Practiced: All sorts of Arms never before known
to be procured in such Quantities by private Persons; such as Blunderbusses,
Steel Armor covered with Silk, and the like, were carefully sought after, and
bought up: The most improbable false Rumors filled every Street; That now all
true Protestants were to be Massacred in an Instant; That such Sheriffs were
Nominated, as had contented to be the Executioners; That Popery was speedily to
be Introduced barefaced, and in Triumph; That all faithful Adherents to the
Government were but Papists in Mascarade: Popery being still made the Word of
Alarm to excite and exasperate the Populace: Though it is manifest, the Authors
of all those Clamours against Popery, never intended its Suppression: For that
would not have consisted with their Design, which was, by the Popular Dread of
it, upon all Occasions to shake the Crown, and undermine the Church of England.

The Truth is, to such a height of Arrogance were things grown on their side,
that whoever shall indifferently reflect on the dangerous Devices, slanderous
Reports and Writings, and other violent Emotions of the whole Party, that
Summer in the City, they will have just cause to conclude, that the course of
their Proceedings was not so much a Civil Struggle against their
Fellow-Citizens for Victory in the Peaceable Choice of Two subordinate Officers
of justice, as a Decisive Contention for a Mastery over the whole Government.

Yet however cunningly the Train was laid, it took no effect but on themselves.
The Noise and Rage of all their Mutinous Routs in Taverns and Coffee-Houses
vanished into Air. Sir John Moor the Lord Mayor, together with the greater
number of wiser, richer, and better Citizens, understood rightly, and stuck
unmoveably to the Kingdoms, and their own true Interest. Mr. North and Mr. Rich
were quietly admitted, and sworn Sheriffs at the appointed time, with the usual
Solemnities.

Immediately after this, the very same Night the Earl of Shaftsbury privately
withdrew from his own House, redoubling his old Exclamations of Popery,
Tyranny, Superstition, Idolatry, Oppressions, Murders, Irish Witnesses; of
whose Subornation no Man in the three Kingdoms could have given a more exact
account than himself.

Whilst he thus lay secret in the City, Romzey, Walcot, Ferguson, Goodenough,
and others his Accomplices, daily frequenting him, they applied themselves with
all diligence to expedite the Rebellious Work before projected: His Vainglory,
and the Conceit of his own Dexterity, and his former constant success in making
Confusions, inclining him to fancy what his Flatterers suggested, that the
whole City and Kingdom were at his beck, and upon the holding up of his Finger,
would presently rise in Arms to extirpate the two Brothers, Slavery and Popery,
as they were lewdly wont, in their private Debauches, to style the King and his
Royal Righness.

The said Earl of Shaftsbury had some time before let on foot a Treaty with the
Earl of Argyle, who, after his escape out of Edenburgh-Castle, came privily to
London, held diverse Meetings with the Confederates, and offered, that for 30000
l. Sterling he would make a sturdy Commotion in Scotland. But the Sum of Money
demanded being so considerable, and many other Scruples started, and unforeseen
Difficulties rising, which could not so presently be removed, as Argyle's
pressing danger required, he first quitted the Field, and retired into Holland,
with intention there at a greater distance, and more security, to renew and
prosecute the same Proposal.

About that time also both ways of destroying these Kingdoms were brought under
their Consideration, the general way of an Insurrection, and the more
compendious way, as they called it, of Assassinating the King and Duke in their
return that October from Newmarket. The Insurrection was instantly promoted on
all Hands, in Town and Country. But the Assassination having then not been soon
enough thought on, went no farther than Discourse, to be afterward resumed,
and more deliberately provided for against the next Opportunity.

In the mean while the long expected Michaelmas-Day being thus calmly passed,
and the New Sheriffs having taken a peaceable Possession of that Power, whose
influence on the whole Nation, the said Earl of Shaftsbury well understood, no
Man better: Then he began on a sudden to have a quicker and sharper sense of
the urgent State of their common Affairs, especially of his own Imminent Peril,
and to accuse the rest of the Confederates of backwardness, if not of Treachery
in the Public Cause: First communicating his Suspicions and Jealousies to the
Lord Howard, who had been so lately the Companion of his restraint, and
Jail-deliver.

The Lord Howard was retired some Days before into Essex, waiting the result of
that great Day in the City, whence he received frequent intimations from his
Friends of the Faction, in a Style obscure, but by him well understood and
concerted between them; That now the business which had been Transacting so
long amongst his Correspondents, was coming to good Issue, and called for his
speedy presence.

That occasioned his return on the same Michaelmas-Day, and presently after,
Walcot came to him from the Earl of Shaftsbury with a Message expressing his
earnest desire to speak with him, in his Concealment at one Watson's in
Wood-street.

Accordingly the Lord Howard giving him a Visit, the substance of the said
Earl's first discourse with him, was, That finding the Due Elections, as lie
called them, of the City frustrated, and the Pseudo-Sheriffs established, he
could no longer think any honest Man safe; and had therefore hid himself there,
having first made what Preparations were needful for a sudden Rising: That many
Thousands were ready in the City to Master the Gates, and attack Whitehal: That
they within were to be assisted from the Countries adjacent with 1000 or 1200
Horse under good Officers. Only he complained of the Duke of Monmouth's, and
the other great Men's backwardness, who had promised, by Rising in other remote
Counties at the same time, to give a Diversion to the standing Forces.

The Sum of this the Lord Howard the next day Communicated to the said Duke;
who also on his part complained of the Earl of Shaftsbury's acting of late on a
separate Bottom, and that his present Fears had blinded his usual Prudence; and
therefore he required a speedy Meeting with him, to re-establish a better
Understanding and Union of Counsels between them all for the future.

This discourse being reported back to the said Earl, he replied, His People
were impatient of longer delays, having advanced so far, that there was no
retreat; the Design being imparted to so many, that it was impossible but it
would quickly take Air. Upon this he proceeded to declare his vehement
suspicion of the Duke of Monmouth; That his Dilatoriness proceeded from some
private Correspondence between him and his Majesty: That it was to be feared
the said Duke acted with a prospect very different from theirs; only minding
the advancement of himstelf: whereas his own Resolutions were, that since it
was now manifest their Liberties were no more to be secured but under a
Commonwealth, he alone with his Interest would attempt the Deliverance of his
Country: If the rest of the Lords would concur with him, they might share in
the Glory; else he hoped he should be able to effect the Work without them, by
the help of an honest brisk Party in the City.

Upon this Answer the Duke of Monmouth, suspecting that before their People
could be ready in the Country, the Earl of Shaftsbury's unseasonable Anxiety
for his own Safety might put him on attempting some rash Action in London,
which would be easily quelled by the formed and disciplined Guards, and so the
whole Design might be stifled in a moment; he did therefore the more earnestly
press the Lord Howard to make another essay to procure an Interview.

The Lord Howard did so, and got from the said Earl a promise of meeting the
Confederate Lords the next Day in the Evening; which yet, when the time came,
he put off with an excuse by Colonel Romzey.

However, some Days after they did meet; their Differences were in some measure
piec'd up, and they began to act jointly again toward a speedy Insurrection.

To this purpose several Days were proposed. One about the latter end of
October, but it was delayed a little longer, till the concurrence of the
several Counties could be signified up: Then that of Queen Elizabeth, being
November. 17. was named, but rejected, because all His Majesty's Guards were
commonly in Arms to watch and suppress the wonted Tumults of the Rabble on that
Day.

At last the Nineteenth of November was fixed on; which happening that Year to
be on a Sunday, whilst some excepted against it for that reason, Ferguson with
his usual impious Virulency, replied, That the Sanctity of the Day was suitable
to the Sanctity of the Work.

The Day being thus determined, they all presently fell to prepare as their
several parts were allotted: Especially the great Managers held Assemblies to
receive Accounts, how the Counties were disposed, and to consult upon
surprising the Guards; for which end the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, and
Sir Thomas Armstrong, undertook to view the posture of their Quarters, and
reported back to their Principals, That the seizing them was a thing very
feasible; which very particular the Duke of Monmouth afterward confessed in so
many words to His Majesty, when he rendered himself.

In the mean time the Earl of Shaftsbury was very uneasy, and weary of lurking
in Holes, where every sound and breath of Air began to frighten him. Wherefore
with repeated and importunate Messages he pressed the other Lords to keep to
their Day; expostulating with them upon their former slowness, whereby they had
lost so many advantageous Opportunities. The case being now so much altered,
that he, who once presumed his driving out the King would prove but a leisurely
walk to him; when the danger drew near himself, was become so apprehensive, and
rash, as not to afford his own wicked Counsels leisure enough to come to any
tolerable Maturity.

At length one Day, when their great Council about London was assembled at
Shepard's House in Abchurch-Lane, the said Earl sent Colonel Romzey to quicken
their Debates, and once for all to learn the result of their final
Determinations. But they having just before received several Advices out of the
West, that their Friends there, especially in Taunton and Devonshire, could not
possibly be ready on so short a warning, presently sent him back such word;
concluding it could not be helped, but he and they must be content to respite
the time of Execution to a longer day.

This positive Answer broke all his Measures, and made him instantly resolve to
leave England. Wherefore first he removed his lodging into Wapping; Then, the
very Night that place was Burnt, being also the Night of the same 19th Day of
November on which he had expected to set the whole Nation in a Flame, he
privately sculk'd down the River; Attended only by the two chief Accomplices and
Witnesses of his Treasons, Walcot and Ferguson; the latter of them having been
forced for some time before to abscond too, because of a Warrant out against
him, for Publishing some one, or other of his many Treasonable Pamphlets.

That was the last considerable Effort made by the Earl of Shaftsbury, against
the King and Kingdom. After this nothing more was heard of him, but that being
got into Holland in a Panick fright, he lived obscurely and soon after died in
Amsterdam; having few or no other Companions of the last part of his Life, but
several miserable English and Scotch Fugitives, who had formerly been the
Instruments of his Traiterous Practices, and were forced to fly the stroke of
Justice, on that Account: So that he could not but know, that all those about
him in his Sickness and Death, had Just reason to hate, and curse him, as their
principal Seducer and cause of their Ruin.

Nor can such an end of such a Life be justly reflected on, without a special
Adoration of the secret Counsels of the Divine Providence. That he, who a
little before was generally esteemed the Head, and Protector of all the
Factious in the Kingdom, whom he vouchsafed to distinguish and Honor by the
Title of Worthy Men, and the Terror and Scourges of all the Good, and the
Loyal, whom he marked out, and designed for Destruction and Slaughter, under
the Name of Men Worthy: He who, in his own conceit, had so much the absolute
disposal of the Hearts and Hands of all the Disaffected, as to be able to
subvert the Established Government, when he pleased, and had really once gone
very far to effect; it, had not his own Presumption Defeated his Malice; That
this very Man, having seen all his hopes, and contrivances dashed in Pieces at
home, should have nothing left to do, but to take shelter, in that
Commonwealth, which in his former Greatness, he had so mortally provoked; there
to lead a Life of Disgrace and Misery, and to Dye neglected in a Country of
which he had formerly expressed so great a Hatred: And yet still retaining so
much Venomous Rancour against his most Gracious Master, as to profess with his
last Breath, that he had deservedly received his Deaths Wound, meaning the
bruise in his Side and now his Death in that Country, where he had done his own
so much Mischief; When he was one of the Commissioners sent thither, in the
Year 1660, to invite His Majesty home freely and without Terms.

After this, though the Earl of Shaftsbury was gone, yet the impressions of
Mischief he had left behind on the minds of the Confederates, would not so
easily vanish. They soon reflected on his last advice, that so many having been
made Conscious to the Design, they should certainly find more safety in pushing
it on boldly, than in too late a Retreat. Upon this immediately they recovered
their Spirits and Resolution, which his hasty flight had somewhat Damped;
thenceforth they renewed their Consultations with greater vigor than before:
The Principal Managers having their frequent Meetings, as also the inferior
Instruments theirs; whilst some of each Number gave secret intimations to the
other of what was passing in their separate Assemblies.

Of the great Council of Six, the Consults that have been hitherto plainly
testified and sworn to, were those at Mr. Hambdens, at the Lord Russels, and at
Mr. Shepards. The Subordinate Cabals were kept in diverse places in and about
the City; As in the December of that Year, at Colonel Romzey's House in the
Soho Square; in the next February at West's Chamber in the Temple, about which
time it was agreed that Ferguson should be sent for, as he was, and came over
accordingly. Then their Meetings were more frequent upon the Kings being at
Newmarket, and after: Usually at West's Lodging, for the convenience of its
situation; Or in common Taverns; As at the Miter within Aldgate; The
Horse-Shooe on Tower Hill; The Fortune at Wapping; The Syracusa-House; The
King's Head in Atheist-Alley; The Salutation and the George in Lumbard-Street on
June the Twelfth, the very Day of the Discovery, they met at the Sun-Tavern
behind the Exchange; on June 14 they met at Bailly of Jerviswood's Chamber, and
again in Bartholomew-Lane, and at the Green-Dragon on Snow-hill; and so
continued to do some where or other, till they totally dispersed from Walcot's
Lodging in Goodman's Fields.

Their Meetings being so generally in places of Public Entertainment;
Therefore to prevent the Observation of Drawers and Servants, they often
discoursed of their whole Bloody Business, in a Canting Language of their own
making.

The King was sometimes called the Churchwarden of Whitehall: The King and
Duke the Blackbird and the Gold-Finch; the Captain and Lieutenant. Provisions
of Arms, as Blunderbusses, Muskets, Pistols, were talked of, under the
disguised Names of Swan-Quills, Goose-Quills, Crow-Quills. The Insurrection was
styled the General Point, the Assassination the Lopping Point, and striking at
the Head. And because several of the Conspirators were Lawyers, it was
sometimes agreed, that their wicked intentions against the King and the Duke,
should be veiled under the terms of Dissesing him in Possession, and barring
him in Remainder: At other times the Killing of both passed for executing a
Bargain and Sale, as being a short manner of Conveyance; and the Rising in
Arms, as the longer, and more tedious way, for executing a Lease and Release.
The Villains thus wantonly abusing the Innocent Terms of the excellent
Profession of the common Laws of England, to cover their horrid Designs against
His Majesty's Person and Crown, whose Preservation and Prosperity is the great
end, and sense of all those Laws.

But for the most part, when they were free and amongst themselves, they
discoursed of the whole contrivance in plain Language, and without reserve:
their common Healths being such as these; To the Man who first draws his Sword
against Popery and Slavery, in defense of the Protestant Religion. Confusion to
the two Brothers, Popery and Slavery; explaining the same to be meant of the
Royal Brothers of Whitehal And when some of them, who were less hardened in
Cruelty, expressed some kind of consternation and dread of the Consequences of
so dire a Stroke, and desired the Infamy of it might be thrown on the Papists;
others, particularly Ferguson, declared, They thought the Action too good to
have the Papists carry away the Honor of it; and often applauded it as a
Glorious Work; That it would he an Admonition to all Princes to take heed how
they Oppressed their Subjects; That he hoped to see the Fact rewarded by a
Parliament, and the Actors in it have the Honor of Statues erected to them,
and the Title of Preservers of their Country. So also when Nelthrop, Walcot and
some few others readily declared themselves willing to join in the
Insurrection, but shrunk a little at first at the horror of the Assassination,
R. Rumbald and R. Goodenough with monstrous impiety maintained the Kings and
the Dukes Murder as the more pious Design of the two, and recommended it as
keeping one of the Ten Commandments, and the best way to prevent shedding
Christian Blood.

In these their private Cabals, the Matters they promiscuously treated of, were
either a general Insurrection, or the Assassination of the Kings and his Royal
Highnesses Persons. Of the Assassination diverse ways were consulted, till they
fixed on that of the Rye. The Insurrection was proposed to be made at the same
time in England and Scotland. The adjusting that part of it, which related to
Scotland, was chiefly under the care of the Council of Six, and managed by
Commissioners of both Nations sitting in London: All which Particulars are so
circumstantially set forth, so often repeated, and demonstrably confirmed in
the ensuing Evidences, that it will be sufficient here only to direct the
Readers Observation, by giving a brief Summary of the whole.

Toward an Insurrection throughout England, they laid the greatest stress on
the City of London; not doubting but if that were once secured to them, the
rest of the Nation must of course fall in; taking encouragement and example in
this, as in many other things, from the cursed Methods of the Unnatural
Rebellion in the late Kings time.

The City of London therefore was carefully divided by them into Twenty parts;
and to that purpose one of the largest Maps of the City and Liberties was hung
up in West's Chamber, the most usual place of their Rendezvouzes; the making
the several Partitions and Allotments of the whole, being committed to Richard
Goodenough, who by reason of his universal acquaintance, as having been so
often Undersheriff, was judged the fittest Man of the whole Party for that
Work.

The City being thus divided, it was agreed, that every Division should be
assigned to some one Principal Man of geatest Trust, Courage and Conduct; each
of those Twenty was to choose Nine or Ten, or more, in whom they could conside.
These were to have the inspection of the several Under-walks, and from time to
time to make returns of their Numbers and Strength; and when the List was
finished, it was to be communicated to the supreme Managers.

By this means they made no question but they should have a select Body of at
least Eight or Ten Thousand approved and well appointed Men to make the first
Onset; Goodenough alone having assured them, that out of seven Divisions only,
there were 3000 Resolute Men prepared to be ready at an hours warning.

For the increasing their Numbers, and drawing in new Converts, this one
general Rule was carefully prescribed, That the bottom of the Design should in
the beginning be warily concealed from all Persons with whom they treated.
First their Inclinations were to be tried by gradual Insinuations, and
plausible Discourses at a distance, till they had gained a full assurance of
their Fidelity. They were to be asked, What they would, or could do, in case of
a Foreign Invasion? When it was answered, They would readily assist against any
Common Enemy: Then it was next to be demanded, Whether they would contribute
the assistance of their Persons, or Purses, or both? That being also
determined, it was to be farther inquired, What Furniture of Arms, Horses, and
Money they had in readiness? What Friends they could Engage? And if these
Questions were resolved according to their Minds, then the whole Mystery of the
Villainy was to be frankly disclosed. They were to be told in downright terms,
That there was already an Oppression and Force upon all they had; That there
was an actual Invasion on the English Liberties, Properties and Consciences:
That the only Obligation the Subject has to the King, is a Mutual Covenant;
That this Covenant was manifestly broken on the Kings part; That therefore the
People were free from all Oaths, or other ties of Fealty and Allegiance, and
had the Natural Liberty restored to them of asserting their own Rights, and as
justly at least against a Domestic, as against Foreign Invaders.

The way being thus made to sound and prepare the Dispositions of ill Men for
any Violent Enterprise; the next thing that came under Deliberation was Money.
For that, several of the particular Conspirators declared, they had
considerable Sums of their own, or deposited with them, which were ready, and
might be called for on Occasion; That great Subscriptions had been made of
diverse Thousands of Pounds, which when the time of Action drew near, were to be
distributed amongst the Chief of the Twenty Divisions; That this would be
enough to make provision for a sudden Push: But if the business succeeded, Half
a Years Rent of the Chimney-Mony would be due, besides what the Excise-Office
and the Custom-House might afford: That all the Money and Plate in
Lumbard-street, and what was in the possession of the Bankers Goldsmiths, and
other Wealthy Men in London, or the Suburbs, was either to be seized on as a
just Forfeiture, or Borrowed under the Name of the Old, and Antiquated Cheat of
the Public Faith. Particularly Ferguson, whose constant Custom it was, in all
their Consults, to outdo all the rest by some peculiar Circumstance of Cruelty
of his own Invention, added on this Head, That little or nothing was to be
expected from the Old Rich Citizens; that therefore Five or Six of them were to
be killed at first, and their Estates given to the Mobile, to terrify the rest.

The next necessary Provision they debated on was Arms. And it is notoriously
known, the whole Party had for a long time before, been gathering great
abundance of all Sorts: All probably with the same prospect, and in the same
Proportion for their Parts in the Conspiracy, as the Lord Gray had done for
his, though they happened not all to be so manifestly detected. For a good
while before any Conspiracy was suspected by His Majesty, or his Ministers, the
said Lord was found to have by him, hid under other Common Furniture in a dark
Garret, above Fourscore Complete Arms in his Private City-House, where no open
Robbery or Assault could be feared; and by consequence, there could not be the
least shadow of pretense that they were laid in there for his own lawful use or
defense.

But besides these Stores, which they had every one made for themselves; it was
resolved at the very first to attempt the Public Magazines in and about the
City; Particularly that in the Artillery-Ground, where a considerable Number of
Excellent Arms were commonly kept without a Guards, for the frequent exercises
of the Citizens.

Many thoughts also were spent how to engage the Seamen to their Side. To this
end several Riotous Meetings were made at Wapping, the greatest Men amongst
them not disdaining there to Feast and Cajole the Rabble; often styling that
Scum of People they there met with, their honest Wrapping Friends. Besides
this, some Sea Captains were tampered with, and a Golden Ball was proposed to
be hurled upon Black Heath; none questioning but the Seamen, assembled at that
sport, would declare for them as one Man; upon a groundless fancy, that they
were of themselves highly discontented, and ready to Mutiny for want of Pay.

Though it must be said, and His Majesty does hereby publicly own, that their
Practices with the Seamen met with the least success of any. Nor is it
imaginable, the brave Race of English Mariners should ever prove false to His
Majesty, who has cherished, encouraged, and promoted that Profession more than
all the Kings of England have done since the Conquest; His Majesty well
understanding that the Safety, Riches and Honor of this Kingdom depend most on
its Maritime Greatness.

However, the Conspirators not in the least doubting but they should have
sufficient Numbers to make a stand, and give time to others to come in, and
declare; their Rendezvouses were appointed in the chief Piazza's, and most or
the convenient Posts of London and Westminster; whence they might at once
Attack the Bridge, the Exchanges, the Guards, the Savoy, Whitehal and the
Tower; and they had ready in Town about 100 of Cromwell's old Officers to Head
and Govern the mixed Multitude as soon as they should appear in Arms.

At the same time a Party of 500 Horse was to come out of the Country to scour
the Streets; and immediately Barricadoes were to be made: the Horses of
Hackney-Coaches, and other Strangers were to be seized on: the Horse-Guards not
actually mounted to be surpised in their several Stables: the Churches to be
broken open, and used as St. Paul's was in the late times.

Ferguson had also often assured them, he could promise for three hundred Scots
to be ready at a day; affirming, that such a Number, most of them
Bothwel-Bridge Men, resided about Town, as Journeymen in diverse Trades, and
were to be commanded by Ten or Twelve Gentlemen of that Nation: Adding, that
some hundreds more went about the Country with Packs, taking that way to get
and carry Intelligence, as well as for a Livelihood.

Upon supposition of this Strength, Whitehal was to be assaulted at once by one
Party from the Strand, by another on the backside from Westminster, and on the
River by Watermen in Boats with Hand-Granadoes. And in confidence that His
Majesty and the whole Court would speedily either be taken or fly, there were
distinct Parties assigned to way-lay them on the Road either to Windsor or
Portsmouth.

Their principal Aim being to surprise the Tower, as a place most able to annoy
them, and where there lay great Magazines and Stores of Ammunition to furnish
them, they had many Debates of Stratagems proposed on that subject.

One was to be performed by Night, by firing a parcel of Fagots to burn down
the Gates, whilst a strong Party without was to be ready to make a brisk Attack
in the first Confusion of the Garrison.

Another to be Executed about Two in the Afternoon, thus; One party privately
Armed was to go see the Armory, another the Lions: The first to return into the
Sutler's House by the Gate: At the same time, some were to come in Coaches on
pretense of visiting the Lords then Prisoners: Those in the Sutler's House were
to Issue out, and kill a Horse, or overthrow a Coach just in the passage. Then
both parties to join, and seize on the Guards; and by a sign given, upon the
Coaches over-turning, Two or Three Hundred Men, lodged in Houses thereby, were
to come in and Second the rest.

Another was, that some of the Conspirators, as Constables, and Officers, of
Justice, should bring in others as Offenders, and that several should enter
feined Actions one against the other in St. Catharines-Court, then held in the
Tower: On the Court Day others were to come in as Plaintiffs, Defendents, and
Witnesses, who joining with those that seemed to come out of Curiosity, all
these might be seconded by a like party prepared from without; the over turning
a Coach being likewise made use of in this Case Whichsoever of these ways
should happen to be attempted: The Lord Dartmouth, Master-General of the
Ordnance was immediately to be dispatched, as one whose Bravery and Courage
they feared would prompt him to Blow up the Great Magazine of Powder there, and
so Bury them with himself in the Ruin, if he found he could not other ways
resist them.

Besides securing to themselves by the^^ means the Cities of London and
Westminster, which was their greatest Care; they had also under Consideration
the Raising Commotions at the same time in diverse other parts of England:
Especially in those Counties of the West and North, which they believed the
Duke of Monmouth's Progresses had most inclined to their Factious Interest.

In every County some one Great Man was to put himself at the Head of the
Rebellion, and diverse of them had their proper Stations appointed.

Particularly of Newcastle they made themselves sure; and laid great stress
upon it, by reason of its vicinity to Scotland, and the influence its Coal-Pits
have on the City of London.

In Cheshire they depended on a numerous assistance; that being the County, in
which the Earl of Shaftsbury had formerly advised the Insurrection should
begin, and a Free Parliament be declared for, at the time of the Duke of
Monmouth's going thither in one of his Mock-Triumphs.

Portsmouth was to be attempted by some going into the Town on pretense of
seeing the place; at the same time another Party coming in on the Market Day,
disguised like Countrymen, and both together were to fall on the Guards.

From Taunton they expected great Numbers, remembering the old Disloyalty of the
Inhabitants, which they had evidenced by a most remarkable insolence; having
presumed for some Years after His Majesty's most happy Restoration, to keep
solemnly a Day or Thanksgiving to God for raising the Siege which his Father
had laid against the Parliaments Rebellious Forces in that Town.

In Bristol they had secured a good Party, which they doubted not might easily
Master the City; as manifestly appears by the full Confession of Holloway
Citizen of Bristol, which he freely made upon his very first Examination, and
afterward confirmed at his Execution, when he could not have the least hope of
Pardon to be obtained thereby.

At the same time when they were making these Preparations for an Insurrection,
the other design of Assassinating His Majesty and his Royal Highness kept equal
pace with it.

It is manifest that some of these very Men had often before devised the Kings
and his Royal Brothers Murder diverse ways. For besides what Hone confessed of
the Proposal to shoot them from Bow-Steeple; and another Project of destroying
them the next Lord Mayor's Day before, which was laid aside upon notice that
His Majesty and his Brother intended not to be there; and besides Richard
Rumbald's Invention of blowing up the Playhouse, when they should both be
present; the said Rumbald informed his Confederates, that he and some of his
Friends had resolved to cut off the King and the Duke in their Journey to, or
from Newmarket, above ten Years before; and had lain sometime in ambush to that
purpose, but without effect, because, as God would have it, His Majesty and his
Royal Brother then unexpectedly went the other way through the Forest; which,
as the Wretch himself could not but observe, they have seldom or never done
before or since.

And now also, upon this occasion, diverse ways of performing the Assassination
were debated. One was to make the attempt on them in St. James's Park, as they
were passing privately, and sometimes almost alone to st. James's.

Another, when they should be going down the River for their Divertisement,
either to sink the Barge by overrunning it with an Hoy, or by boarding it on a
sudden, and Shooting out some Planks with Blunderbusses.

Another, to plant Men in the Pit at the Playhouse, who should be ready to
Shoot at them unawares with Pocket Blunderbusses, two of which Rumzey sent to
His Majesty.

Another, to do it in their return thence to Whitehal, under Bedford-Wall in
Covent Garden; where one part of the Assassines might walk unsuspected in the
Piazza, a Second within the Rails, a Third in the Church Porch; and all Issue
forth in an Instant, to compass the Coaches, and dispatch the Business, or do
the Trick, as they styled it.

It was also proposed to be undertaken between Windsor and Hampton Court, or in
their going to Winchester, or if the Royal Brothers should happen to be present
at the Bull-Feast in Red-Lyon-Fields.

But all these other propositions, as subject to far more Casualties and
Hazards, soon gave place to that of the Rye in Hartfordshire: A House then
inhabited by the forefaid Richard Rumbald; who proposed that to be the Seat of
the Action, offering himself to Command the Party, that was to do be Work. Him
therefore, as their most darning Captain, and by reason of a Blemish in one of
his Eyes, they were afterward wont, in Common Discourse, to call Hannibal:
Often Drinking Healths to Hannibal and his Boys; meaning Rumbald and his
Hellish Crew.

The commodiousness of the Rye for any such desperate Enterprise soon
encouraged them to six it there: Its lonely and retired Situation, and the
Enclosures about it being such as would afford all advantages imaginable to the
Assailants, and give as great Inconveniences to the Persons attacked.

The place being agreed on, it was first questioned, whether the stroke should
be struck, upon His Majesty's going to, or coming from Newmarket: But it was
thought more expedient to defer it till His Majesty's return.

That Point being over, they had several Meetings, to consult of all the
Circumstances of the Parricide.

The Number of the Men to be personally engaged were Forty at Least, to that
end two or three Lists of Names were drawn up, out of which the choice was to
be made, and the Roll was near completed.

The Arms to be used were Blunderbusses, Muskets, Pistols, Carabines. To get
them down thither without suspicion, many ways were thought on. One, to put
them up in Chests, and bring them by Land in Carts. Another, to hide them in a
Boat, under Coals, or Oysters, or such common Lading, and so to convey them up
the River of Ware. Another, that every one concerned should go down privily
Armed, and so all Traveling in small Parties, scattered, and at their leisure,
they might easily meet unperceived about the Rye; at the time prefixed.

When the Fatal Hour should approach, the attempt was agreed to be made in this
manner: Some one or two were to be sent forth on the Road toward Newmarket, to
discover in which Coach the King came, and what Company attended him; which
they well knew was commonly no more than some six of the Guards; and those also
were supposed to have their Horses weak, and almost tired by that time they
came thither, so near Hodsdon? one of the usual Stages where His Majesty was
wont to change Coaches and Guards.

Upon warning thus given of the Kings being near at hand, all were to be in
readiness within the House and Yards to issue forth in a moment, some on
Horseback, some on Foot.

Immediately upon the Coaches coming within the Gates and Hedges about the
House, the Conspirators were to divide into several Parties: Some before in the
habit of Laborers were to overthrow a Cart in the narrowest passage, so to
prevent all possibility of escape: Others were to fight the Guards, Walcot
choosing that part upon a Punctilio of Honor: Others were to shoot at the
Coachman, Postilion and Horses: Others to aim only at His Majesty's Coach,
which Party was to be under the particular direction of Rumbald himself; the
Villain declaring beforehand, That upon that occasion he would make use of a
very good Blunderbuss, which was in West's possession, most blasphemously
adding, that Ferguson should first consecrate it.

It is indeed a thing prodigious to tell, and were it not for the undeniable
proofs of it, very difficult to be believed, that not only one or two such
Furies should rife up in a whole Age, but that so great a Number of Men should,
in the same time and place, be found so void of all Humanity, as not only to
imagine and contrive so horrid a Fact, but to discourse of it in so many
Meetings, so sportfully and merrily as they did, as if the cruellest Tragedy
which wicked Men or the Devil ever invented, had been only a matter of common
pastime and loose raillery. Thus when at one of their Consults West invited
Rumzey to be Godfather to his Child, he answered, He would, if he might be
allowed to call him Brutus. And when it was once proposed to Kill the King and
the Duke at the Playhouse, by blowing up the whole Audience with them,
Ferguson approved the way, and impudently said, That then they would Die in
their own Calling. And when some objected against it, That by this means the
Innocent would perish with the Nocent; another justified it, saying, What did
the Jack-Daws do amongst the Rooks? And when some proposed that to give a
better color to what they did, the King and Duke should not be killed, but
only seized and brought to Trial, after that the People had got the better; it
was answered by Ferguson, That it was never thought Injustice to shoot, or set
Traps for Wolves and Tigers.

The execrable Deed being thus supposed by them to be feasible without much
Opposition, they then farther considered the several ways of their escaping
afterward. Sometimes they thought of retreating toward Cambridgeshire, and
scattering there; sometimes of retiring into the Rye-House, which being guarded
with a Moat, and Brick-Walls, they doubted not to defend it against the
frighted Country People for some Hours till Night, when they might shift for
themselves, and disperse. Another way that Rumbald himself proposed, was to
lead them out of the great Road through the Meadows, which were to be galloped
all along; so that they might with ease come into London by Hackney-Marsh,
before the News of what was done could possibly get thither. It was concluded
at the same time, that diverse Lords, and principal Men of their Party, should
be invited to an Entertainment that very day in the City, that they might be
upon the place to Head the Faction at the first arrival of the News.

But whilst they were thus wholly intent on this barbarous Work, and proceeded
securely in its Contrivance, without any the least doubt of a prosperous
success; Behold! on a sudden God miraculously disappointed all their Hopes and
Designs, by the terrible Conflagration, unexpectedly breaking out at Newmarket.
In which extraordinary event, there was one most remarkable passage, that is
not so generally taken notice of, as for the Glory of God, and the Confusion of
His Majesty's Enemies it ought to be.

For after that the approaching fury of the Flames had driven the King out of
his own Palace, His Majesty at first removed into another Quarter of the Town,
remote from the Fire, and as yet free from any annoyance of Smoke and Ashes.
There His Majesty finding he might be tolerably well accommodated, had resolved
to stay, and continue his Recreations as before, till the Day first named for
his Journey back to London. But His Majesty had no sooner made that resolution,
when the Wind, as conducted by an invisible Power from above, presently changed
about, and blew the Smoke and Cinders directly on his new Lodgings, making them
in a moment as untenable as the other. Upon this, His Majesty being put to a
new shift, and not finding the like Convenience elsewhere, immediately
declared he would speedily return to Whitehal; as he did: which happening to be
several days before the Assassines expected him, or their preparations for the
Rye were in readiness, it may justly give occasion to all the World to
acknowledge what one of the very Conspirators could not but do, That it was a
Providential Fire.

Now upon the first notice in Town of the Fire at Newmarket, and that by
consequence the King would be necessitated to come home sooner than was
imagined, the principal Assassines were summoned by Ferguson to a Meeting that
very Night.

They at first received the News with various Apprehensions and Motions of
Mind, looking on one another with much Astonishment and Confusion. Amongst the
rest, Walcot acknowledged, He thought it an Expression of Gods disapproving the
Undertaking: whilst Ferguson, without any sign of the least relenting, said,
That he perceived God had reserved His Majesty for his own Judgment. However,
that Evening they generally agreed, That since Arms, Horses and Men could not
be provided in so short a space, because the King was daily expected, and the
day of his coming uncertain, therefore all farther thoughts of the business
should be laid aside for that time.

Yet the next Morning, the Company being again assembled, upon Reports spread
abroad that His Majesty purposed to retire to Cambridge, and stay there some
days, Ferguson vehemently insisted, That the Design should instantly be
reassumed; That what could be, should be done in so narrow a time. And
particularly Armstrong offered himself to go down in person to the Rye in order
to it, if a Sum of Money could be presently raised, and a competent number of
Men got together.

But the noise of the Cambridge Journey soon vanishing, put an end to those
Deliberations; though it was a constant expectation and whisper among the
Party, that some hing extraordinary would be done on the very day of His
Majesty's coming home.

In these uncertainties they remained till the King came; and some days after
R. Rumbald returning from the Rye, increased their rage for this defeat, by
telling them, That he saw His Majesty and his Royal Highness pass by his House
but very slenderly guarded, only with five or six Persons, and those tired, and
ill appointed; so that he doubted not but with the like number of stout and
well-arm'd Men, he might easily have taken them both off.

Upon this, presently after at their next Meetings it was agreed, That to
prepare against any such disappointment for the future, a sufficient Number of
Arms should be bought, and kept in readiness for any other opportunity, if such
could be found during any of His Majesty's Journies that Summer; or at farthest
in his next going to Newmarket.

To this purpose West told them he was acquainted with a very good Gun-smith,
and took upon himself to provide the Arms; Ferguson engaging to pay the Money
for them.

Accordingly West bought Thirty Case of Pistols, Thirty Carabines, and Ten
Blunderbusses of one Daft a Gun-smith in Sheer-Lane; and Ferguson paid him for
them about three weeks before the Discovery.

West's pretense of buying so great a quantity of Arms, was to send them into
America, where he had a Plantation; and to disguise the business the better, he
caused them to be sanguin'd, in show to preserve them from Rust in so long a
Voyage, and had them made up in Sea-Chests, as ready to be Transported.

So they continued till after the noise of Keeling's having betrayed all. Then
West to avoid suspicion sent them to a Sea-Captain, setting Sail for the
West Indies, but without any Bill of Lading or Consignment, as is usual; in
whose Custody the Arms were seized, and delivered into His Majesty's Stores, to
be there kept for a better use.

In these their several Consults many casual Discourses intervened, relating
indifferently either to the Insurrection or Assassination: As, What Commissions
were at first requisite to be given out, and in what style they were to run.
What Declaration was to be immediately published to justify the Fact. What
Project of Government to be pitched on, and settled afterward.

It was agreed that the Commissions for this Nation should be issued forth in
the Name of the Confederate Lords and Commons of England.

For preparing a Declaration, diverse of their Number were ordered to bring in
their Conceptions apart, out of all which Collection, a complete Remonstrance
was to be gathered by some of their ablest Heads.

The main drift of the whole was to amuse the Peoples Fancies for a Time with
new Chimera's of Freedom from Taxes, and Advantages for Trade, and Moderation
of Law Expenses, and a Toleration of all Sects; then to calumniate the Royal
Family for diverse Generations past; to asperse His Majesty as a Tyrant and
Oppressor, and to accuse all his Faithful Subjects, as servile Instruments of
Arbitrary Power, and Betrayers of their Country: Whilst they and their Party
were to be magnified, as the only Asserters and Restorers of Liberties,
Properties, and the True Protestant Religion. Their design in all this being
the same that has been constantly put in practice by all Promoters of Sedition
and Treason in all Ages; Who have always thought they have done more than Half
their business, if they can but once appropriate to themselves all the Good and
pleasing Words of things plausible and popular; and fasten on the Government
the Names and Titles of things vulgarly odious, or contemptible.

Touching the new Form of Government to be set up in stead of the old, they
were not altogether so unanimous, that being also natural to all Schisms and
Factions, that tho they may sometimes agree in what they would ruin, yet they
never did, nor can long consent in what they shall settle.

Some were still for retaining a show of Monarchy, though with such
Restrictions as would make the Prince little better than a Duke of Venice.

Others were positively for a Commonwealth, and the entire subversion of the
present constitution, openly declaring, it was their purpose not only to change
Names, but Things.

Nay upon this Point, some of them doubted not frequently to profess in plain
Terms, That if their great Darling, the Puke of Monmouth, should be squeamish,
as they worded it, in Approving and Confirming what had been done in Heat of
Blood, then be himself should fare no better than the rest, when their Swords
were in their Hands.

A sufficient Admonition to all Men of Quality and Estate, how hazardous their
condition is, and how mean their Servitude, whilst they are heading popular
Tumults; tho for a little time perhaps they may seem to others, and fancy
themselves, to have an absolute sway over them.

But their particular Head of Discourse in which the Conspirators chiefly
delighted, and were wont in their Meetings most amply to enlarge their
inventions, was concerning their resolutions of several kinds of vengeance to
be Executed on those Eminent Persons of all Professions, whom they thought most
capable and willing to oppose their Bloody Enterprise.

In that part indeed their Passion transported them beyond all bounds of common
Prudence, even to the highest Degree of ridiculous Vanity, and extravagant
Ostentation of their full assurance to succeed in the dire Attempt.

Having first Gloried in the Imagination of imbruing their Hands in Royal
Blood, they scrupled not to profess they would continue the Assassination on
all the principal Officers of the Crown, and Ministers of Justice; and
spightfully projected all Circumstances imaginable which they thought might
aggravate the Terror or Ignominy of their Punishment.

Sir John More, the Lord Mayor of the former Year, and Sir William Pritchard
the Lord Mayor, and Mr. North and Mr. Rich the Sheriffs of that present Year,
were concluded fit to be Murdered, and their Skins stuffed and hung up in
Guild Hall, for a dreadful Warning, to Posterity.

Alderman Cornish or Gould was to be declared Lord Mayor; Papillion and Dubois
Sheriffs: If they refused, they were to undergo as bad a fate. Some others also
were doomed to the like destiny, who might think they deserved well of the
Faction by their Moderation. But they resolved that Neuters should be treated
as ill as their most avowed Enemies.

Most of the Judges were to be killed for their pretended Illegal and Arbitrary
Judgments, and their Skins in the same manner hung up in Westminster Hall.

Some of the Principal Abhorrers, Addressers, and reputed Pensioners in the
late Long Parliament, (under which Titles in their Modern Opprobious Language
they had been used to comprehend the most steady Adherents to the Crown, and
True Sons of the Church of England) were to be brought to Trial, and Death: The
Skins too of those they styled Pensioners were to be hung up in the House of
Commons.

The Churchmen they hated, and despised in general, as Men whose Interest
could never be divided from the Crown, and of course would fall with it.

The Marquess of Hallifax, the Duke of Beaufort, the Earl of Rochester, Sir
Leolyn Jenkins, the Lord Keeper, and diverse others who had been His Majesty's
most faithful Counselors in the time of extreme hazard, were named as Men
whose Destruction was certain, and who could not possibly escape the first rage
of the Massacre. Particularly it was determined the Lord Keeper should be sent
to Oxford, and hanged on the same Gallows on which the Infamous College had
been Executed.

In this furious manner they proceeded to lay about them in their common
Discourses with all the Infernal Malice that is so agreeable to their
Principles, and inseparable from them; there never having yet been found, in
all Records of Time, any pretended Conscientious Zeal, but it was always most
certainly attended with a fierce Spirit of implacable Cruelty.

During all this time, as it cannot be imagined that either of the Cabals was
altogether unacquainted with what the other was doing; so it is manifest, some
of their great Men understood the dark Hints that were sometimes given them, of
Striking at the Head, and Shortning the Work by removing two Persons: And also
that these Inferior Instruments proceeded on assurance, That when they came to
Action, they should he Headed by Men of much higher Quality and Condition than
as yet openly appeared amongst them.

Wherefore of the Debates and Resolutions of their great Council, thus much has
been already testified upon Oath: That shortly after that the Earl of
Shaftsbury fled, it was thought expedient, for the furtherance of the Design
projected in his time, that a small Select Number of the most eminent Heads of
the Party, in and about London and Westminster, should be united into a close
Cabal, or secret Council; who might have their frequent Assemblies, and be
ready, on all occasions, to guide and direct the motions of the Lower Agents.

The Persons, who undertook this Universal care and inspection, were the Duke
of Monmouth, the Earl of Essex, the Lord Gray, the Lord Russel, the Lord
Howard, Colonel Algernoon Sydney, and Mr. John Hambden Junior. Besides that,
Romzey, Armstrong, Ferguson, Shepard, and some others, were admitted, as
occasion served, on some particular Debates.

Their first Meeting was in January of thar Year at Mr. Hambden's House: Where
some general Heads were propounded of things to be resolved on, in their more
mature thoughts. As, Where the Insurrection should first be made, in City or
Country, or in both at once: What Counties were most disposed for Action: What
places would be most proper for their Rendezvouses: What Arms were necessary,
how to be provided, where to be laid in: What Money needful at first to be
raised, and where to be deposited, so as to Administer no Ground of Jealousy:
And by what means the discontented Party in Scotland might be brought into the
Confederacy.

This last was looked on as the principal Point, and deserving their first
Direction. Wherefore at their next Meeting about ten days after, at the Lord
Russel's House, they began with considering a way of Settling an Intelligence
with the Earl of Argyle beyond the Seas, and with his Accomplices in Scotland.

Upon this a Messenger was Ordered to be sent into Scotland: It was committed
to Colonel Sydney, to choose the Person, and to furnish him with Instructions.

The Man chosen by Mr. Sydney, at the recommendation of Nelthrop, for his known
merits toward the Cause, was Aaron Smith. The Sum given him to defray his
Expenses, was Three, or Fourscore Guinea's. The substance of his Message was to
invite up Sir John Cockran, the Cambells of Cessnock, and some others, to treat
in London.

Here the Lord Howard's Information stops. For then the Managers seemed to
agree amongst themselves to have no more constant Assemblies, till the return
of the Messenger. Tho since it appears, the said Lord was thereafter excluded
from their Consutations, for having been too lavish with his Tongue, in
reporting abroad what had been there transacted.

However it has been proved by unquestionable Evidence, that presently after
this, Aaron Smith did set forth toward Scotland, arrived there the Spring of
that Year; and by some indiscretion had like to have spoiled the whole
business: Which to recover, and to remove all suspicions, Cockran was forced to
present himself before the Council of Scotland.

Afterward he and his Companions came to Town, and the Negotiation was warmly
set on Foot: In the mean time Cockran and the rest often attended at Windsor to
make their Court, one day kissing the King's and the Duke's Hands, the next
consulting with the English Cabal; all in show to solicit the Interest of
Carolina, whilst they really intended a Business of far greater Importance,
which was, in their own Language, To see what could be done for the delivery of
the Nations.

At the same time the late Earl of Argyle for his part had deputed some of his
Confidents hither to attend the issue of those Debates, to represent his
Proposals, and to transmit to him the Results of their Counsels; the whole
correspondence between them being veiled under a style of Merchandise.

The Treaty being thus begun, some general Things were easily agreed on by all
sides. The Scots were to rise first; the English to have notice of it with all
possible speed, then to second them here: The Rebellion in both Kingdoms to be
before Harvest: Arms and Ammunition to be transported out of Holland: Argyle to
go with them and Head the Rising.

These things being quickly passed over, some other Matters endured a longer
contest; and one unseasonable Dispute had like to have broken all; The English
Commissioners required, They should presently declare for a Commonwealth and
the Extirpation of Monarchy; which the Scots refused, protesting, The
generality of their People would never hearken to that at first.

But the great Point on which the Conclusion of the whole depended, was the Sum
of Money to be raised, and entrusted with the Scots to lay out: The Sum at first
demanded was Thirty Thousand Pounds; that sunk afterward to Ten Thousand; But
for the raising of this, the English made several delays and scruples, being
willing to trust their Scotch Brethren with any thing but Money.

Upon this Contrast the Treaty was often on and off; the Scots talking high,
objecting to the English, That they were only good at Fireside Plotting;
whereas for their part they were resolved to rise, though they had nothing but
their Claws to fight with.

At length they came to an Agreement, That the Ten Thousand Pounds should be
raised, and put into the Hands of Shepard, who was to return the Bills for it
by Ferguson or Baillie to Amsterdam.

After this manner was the whole Conspiracy going on, when the Discovery
overtook it. For now the happy Twelfth of June was come. Josiah Keeling had
sworn to his first Deposition before Mr. Secretary Jenkins: But finding that
His Majesty and his Ministers were exceeding diffident of his single
intelligence in a business of so vast a Moment, he considered which way he
might best strengthen his Evidence. To that end he prevailed with Goodenough,
who had an entire confidence in him, that his Brother John Keeling might be
admitted into the next Meetings of the Conspirators, he himself promising to be
answerable for his Secrecy.

This was done, and thereupon both the Brothers gave in their joint Testimony
upon Oath on the 14th of June, touching the progress of the Treason. So they
continued to do for a day or two more, tilt John Keeling let fall some
Expressions to his Relations, which they whispered about among their Fanatic
Acquaintance, That, as they called it, something was working which might do
mischief to honest People.

That being rumored about, came quickly to the Knowledge of some of the
Conspirators. Upon this they immediately assembled, and Rumbald declared his
Fears of Keeding's Treachery, and that were he sure of it, he would instantly
get him knocked on the Head. But Keeling coming in amongst them somewhat
cleared himself, and allayed their Jealousy, by many asseverations of his
fidelity to the common Cause.

Soon after they met again, when it was suggested, that Keeling had been seen
about. Whitehal and on the Road to Windsor, where His Majesty then resided: But
Keeling still frequenting their Company, renewed the Protestations of his
Innocence; pretended his going to Whitehal was upon other business; complained
he was in great want of Money; upon which one Hundred Pounds, the Sum he told
them he stood in need of, was presently raised and lent him that Evening, lest
his Want should be a Temptation to him.

But their distrust increasing every Hour, it was mentioned to Keeling, that
the best way for him to render himself unsuspected, would be to withdraw out of
Town for some short time, Rumbald offering him his House to retire to. Keeling
still endeavored by many Imprecations to quiet their Suspicions of him; but
persisted that he could not go into the Country, by reason of urgent business
of his Calling and Family.

So for that time he got safe out of their Hands, which they afterward
extremely regretted; some of them owning that it was their purpose, if they
could have got him abroad, to have killed and privately Buried him.

But shortly after this, they heard that Warrants were out against diverse of
them, and therefore agreed to meet on Monday June 18th, at Walcot's Lodgings in
Goodman's- Fields, to consult once for all what should be done for their common
safety.

Accordingly at that time there met Walcot, Norton, Wade, Romzey, the two
Goodenoughs, Nelthrop, West, Ferguson. Their Opinions were very different what
course was to be taken. West once proposed, that all should stand their ground,
and by a bold Denial, and their Personal Credit, outface and baffle Keelings
single Word. But the consciousness of their own Guilt would not let them
hearken to that advice.

Wade and some others offered, as Armstrong had done to some of them just
before, That things should still be put to a Push, that if a Thousand Men could
be got together, and the Duke of Monmouth at the Head of them, something might
still be done: At the worst it were better for them to Dye like Men, than to be
hanged like Dogs. But that was also rejected as a wild and desperate course.
Romzey and the rest alleging their Peoples Hearts were down, and accusing
their great Men for want of Spirit and Resolution.

Then they determined upon flying; and had some thoughts of hiring a Vessel
immediately to transport them into Holland. But finding, on Inquiry, that the
Boat could not be cleared at the Custom-House till next Morning, nor at
Gravesend till the Afternoon, they concluded that would be too late; and
therefore every Man was left to shift for himself.

So they separated in much Terror and Confusion. Only Walcot, according to the
constant sacrilegious way of the whole Party, to entitle the Almighty to their
greatest Impieties, said at parting, God would yet deliver the Nation, though
he did not approve of the present Instruments. And Ferguson, to keep up the
same Character of remorseless Villainy to the last, took his leave of them in
these very words, That he perceived they were Strangers to this kind of
Exercise, but he had been used to fly, and would never be out of a Plot as long
as he lived; and that he hoped yet to meet some of them at Dunbar before
Michaelmas.

Now a day or two before this their final separation, the King and his Council
began to be convinced of the truth of Keeling's Evidence, by a full knowledge
of the Witnesses Character, and by the firmness and consistency of his
Tistimony; besides many other concurring Circumstances. Wherefore His Majesty
ordered Warrants should be issued out against the Persons accused, whereof some
absconded, others were taken. Of these last, diverse confirmed what Keeling had
sworn, and named others as Partakers in the Treason. Whereupon more and more
appearing every day to have been engaged, Proclamations were Published in
England and Scotland for their speedy Apprehension. By this means, through the
Providence of God, so many of them were either seized, or delivered themselves
up, as have irrefragably confirmed every part of the foregoing Account. What
became of the several Conspirators, will appear by the following List:

Of the ENGLISH,
SIR Thomas Armstrong presently after fled beyond the Seas, where he remained
till the next Year, when he was surpised at Leyden in Holland, brought into
England, and received the deserved reward of his Horrid Ingratitude and
Treasons.

John Ayloff fled, and withdrew from Justice, and stands Outlawed upon that
account.

Andrew Barber was taken and freely confessed.

Robert Blaney came in, and confessed what was done and said at the Traiterous
Meeting at Colonel Romze's House.

James Burton fled, and is also Outlawed for Treason.

William Blagg a Sea Captain, was taken, tried and acquitted, there being but
one positive Evidence against him.

Zechary Bourn was seized on in Essex, as he was making his escape into
Holland, and largely confessed afterward.

Colonel Danvers of Newington, was taken and dismissed upon Bail. He has since
Published a most Malicious and Scandalous Libel against His Majesty: For which
he is fled.

The Earl of Essex taken at his House in Hertfordshire, and committed Prisoner
to the Tower.

Richard and Francis Goodenough, both fled, and since Outlawed.

The Lord Gray of Wark was seized on, examined before His Majesty, and ordered
to be sent to the Tower. But in his going thither, by the negligence of the
Sergeant at Arms, he made his escape, got beyond Sea from the Coast of Sussex;
and is now also Outlawed.

John Hambden Junior taken, Tried for High Crimes and Misdemeanors, Condemned
in 40000 l. Fine, and Imprisonment.

Major Holms taken in London; he confessed the Correspondence with the Earl of
Argyle, whereof the Key was entrusted with him and some others.

James Holloway fled, was taken at Mevis in the West Indies, and sent back into
England, confessed and was Executed.

William Hone in his flight was taken in Cambridgeshire. He made his first
Confession at Cambridge, the substance of which he afterward owned upon all
occasions to his Death.

Joseph How was taken and confessed.

The Lord Howard of Escrick was taken in his House at Knightsbridge, hid behind
the Hangings of his Chamber; and at length confessed.

Thomas Lea the Dyer was taken, and confessed.

The Duke of Monmouth withdrew upon the first Proclamation wherein he was
Named, and lay hid for diverse Months, till he rendered himself, and confessed.

Edward Norton fled, and is Outlawed.

John Nisbet fled, was taken in Essex ready to go beyond Sea. He was the Author
of the Letter of Trade written to Gourdon a Scotch-Man under the Name of
Pringle.

John Rouse taken, Tried, Condemned, Executed, making at his Death a Penitent
Confession.

John Row once Sword Bearer Bristol, fled upon the first Discovery; as did also
both the Rumbalds: They are all three Outlawed.

Colonel Romzey first absconded, then rendered himself, and confessed.

The Lord Russel taken at his House in Southampton-Square, Tried, Condemned,
Beheaded. He confessed enough to show his Crime, but not his Repentance.

Thomas Shepard hid himfelf, but soon came in and frankly confessed.

Aaron Smith had kept secret some time before, because of a Sentence against
him for high Misdeameanors: But was taken, and is still a Prisoner.

Colonel Algernoon Sydney taken, Tried, Condemned, Beheaded.

William Wade, Joseph Tyley fled, and are Outlawed.

Colonel Thomas Walcot first retired, then sent a Letter to Mr. Secretary
Jenkins, plainly acknowledging That the Plot was laid very deep and wide,
promising to discover more, if he might have hopes of Pardon. But before he
could receive an answer, the Conscience and fright of his own Guilt made him
withdraw from the place where he had appointed to stay for it. He was soon
after taken, Arraigned, Condemned, Executed; persevering to the last in the
main of his Confession.

Robert West withdrew for a time, but then gave himself up, and has amply
confessed.

Besides these there were diverse others at first secured, but afterward
dimiss'd by course of Law; as the Lord Brandon, Mr. Booth, Major Wildman, Mr.
John Trenchard, Major Breman, Mr. Charlton; this last having been taken in
disguise.

Of the SCOTS,
MR. James Steuart, Brother to the Lord of Cultness, had fled out of Scotland
a short time after the Earl of Argyle, upon occasion of dangerous Papers taken
in his keeping. Thereafter he transacted only by Letters and Negotiations,
remaining out of danger beyond the Seas.

Commissary Monroe and the two Campbells of Cessnock were taken.

The Lord Melvin, Sir John Cockran and Ferguson escaped diverse ways; though
Ferguson stayed some time in Town after the Discovery, in hopes still of
obtaining Bills of the Money to be remitted into Holland.

William Bayley of Jerviswood was seized on in London, conveyed to Edinburgh,
and there Tried, and lately Executed.

William Carstares, William Spence, Alexander Gourdon of Earlston taken, the
two first in Town, the last at Newcastle.

By the positive Confession of these three Scotch men, together with that of
Major Holms, who were the Earl of Argyle's chief Agents in this business, was
the first greatest light given of the said Earls part in the Conspiracy.

Of these, Alexander Gourdon Lord of Earlston was a Zealous
Field-Conventicler, and had been a Bothwel-Bridge Rebel: Where, upon the rout
of their Army, his Father was killed, and he taken Prisoner. Having afterward
got his Liberty, he became Solicitor for the Faction, in England and Holland,
under pretense of collecting Contributions for maintaining such of them as were
denounced Fugitives; for which purpose he had a formal Commission signed and
sealed in the Name of the General Assembly of their Party at Edinburgh.

Before any Discovery, he was taken at Newcastle under a feigned Name,
endeavoring to get a passage beyond the Seas. About him were seized diverse
Original Papers, which as soon as he was made Prisoner, he tried to make
privately away, but the Kings Officers observing his design, secured them.

Amongst these Papers, there was one very remarkable Letter written to him
under another Counterfeit Name of Pringle. The Composer of it was John Nisbet,
one of Argyle's Agents in London. It was dated March the 20th of that Year,
when the Conspiracy was in the height. It gives a perfect account of their
Condition at that time during the Transactions between the English and Scottish
Traitors: Whilst they sometimes hoped the Treaty would take effect; sometimes
feared it would break off without coming to any Resolution.

Amongst many other mysterious intimations of Treason, Nisbet tells him, That
Trading being very low here, and many breaking daily, desperate Diseases must
have desperate Cures: That while they had some Stock left, it would be better
to venture out, than to keep Shop till all be gone; for after this they should
not be able to act, but must let all go: That he had been showed a Model of
Affairs, in such order as he saw; venture they must, and venture they would:
That now they knew what Goods had been most prejudicial to the Trade: And
therefore for the future, resolved to insist only on Negatives; this being the
best way to still some Critics of the Trade: That they would first endeavor
to dispatch the Old Stuff: That some Stock was to be got, to set the broken
Merchants up again: That if all holds that is intended, it is almost time to
set forward, if they had but their Factors and Emissaries home, who are gone
forth to try how Countries will like their Goods: That they will return within
a Week: Then matters will in instanti off or on, Break, or go through: That if
any strange thing should fall out in the mean time, he would post it to him:
That things were full as High as he had Written.

These are some amongst diverse others of the Covert Significations of the
Conspiracy, contained in Nisbet's Letter; which being taken about Gourdon, and
sent with him into Scotland, after diverse Examinations before the Council
there, he plainly detected what was the true sense hidden under the Mystical
Style of every Expression in the whole Letter.

Particularly, That by the Merchants here being low, and often breaking, was
meant the Prosecution of Dissenters by Excommunications, or other legal ways:
That therefore they had resolved upon a desperate Cure, which was Rising in
Arms: That the Model of Affairs which would make them venture, was the Method
then going on in order to a Rising: That by only insisting on Negatives, was
intended the Conspirators agreeing what they should pull down, which was the
whole Government, but not determining positively at first what they should set
up: That by Critics in the Trade, were designed the old Scotch Fanatics, who
had so often rebelled. That Excluding the old Rotten Stuff, was the Destruction
of the entire Frame of the ancient Constituon Civil and Ecclesiastical: That
the Broken Merchants to be set up, were the baffled Scotch-Whigs to be spirited
again with new assistance: That their being here at a point to set forward, was
the English Conspirators being ready for a Rendezvous: That the Factors and
Emissaries, were People sent forth through England and Scotland to try Men's
Inclinations toward a General Insurrection: That by saying, That upon those
Factors return, Matters would be soon on or off, was intended, that when their
Agents were come back to give an account of their success, accordingly the
Design would be either deferred longer, or they should instantly rise: That the
strange thing mentioned, was a speedy Insurrection: That by things being full
as high as he had written, was implied the Rebellion was almost ripe, and ready
to break forth.

This is the substance of the Interpretation of the Letter of Trade that
Gourdon of Earlston gave in upon Oath at several Examinations. He moreover
confessed, That upon receipt of this Letter he presently came into England,
where he had frequent Conferences with Nisbet touching the Contents of every
Clause in it, who always understood it in this sense: That by him and diverse
others he was made fully acquainted with the Treaty then going on in London,
and with the Earl of Argyle's Correspondence with the Persons treating for a
speedy Rebellion in both Nations.

Another Scotch-Man whose clear and undoubted Testimony has put this
Confederacy between the English and Scotch Traitors out of all Question, is
William Carstares, who had been a Zealous and Fierce Preacher to the Sectaries
of both Kingdoms: And was formerly Prisoner in Edenburgh-Castle, being accused
for publishing a Treasonable Pamphlet, called, The Grievances of Scotland.

At that time he was much employed in many Messages relating to this
Conspiracy: Especially with Major Holms in dispersing the Earl of Argyle's
Libellous Books, and carrying too and fro his Letters in which Carstares passed
under the Name of Read.

He was apprehended at Tenterden in Kent, seeking an opportunity of flying
beyond Sea. He was taken under the Name of William Swan, then declared his true
Name was Moor, but at last owned it was Carstares.

This Carstares being brought before the the King, and refusing to confess any
more than some general Hints; alleging, That it was no place for him to answer
in a Criminal Matter; Upon that he was sent into Scotland, where being Examined
before the Lords of the Secret Committee, September 8th 1684, he confessed and
afterward renewed and confirmed the same Confession November 18th, and
December 22th of the same Year.

His Deposition having been already made Public, it will be enough only to
note some special Heads of what he deposed. He confessed, That James Steuart,
Brother to the Lord of Cultness, wrote to him out of Holland in November or
December 1682. the Letter importing, That if a considerable Sum of Money could
be procured from England, something of Importance might be done in Scotland:
That this Letter he Communicated to Shepard, and he to Colonel Sydney, Danvers
being present: That Shepard returned answer, Mr. Sydney was averse from meddling
with the Earl of Argyle, suspecting him to be too much inclined to the Royal
Family, and the present Government: That the said Carstares still urged one
might be sent to the Earl of Argyle: That not being able to obtain this, for
the foresaid Reason, he himself went into Holland, was introduced to the Earl,
and there discoursed with him particularly about remitting the Money to him
from England, and raising 1000 Horse and Dragoons, and surprising
Edenburgh-Castle.

That the Earls answer was, The Castles would fall to them of course, after
that the Work was done abroad: That without a Thousand Horse and Dragoons
raised in England to be ready to assist them, nothing could be done: That if
such a Number could be raised, he would come into Scotland with them; whereby
he guessed he might get that Country without trouble, having such a standing
Body for their Friends to Rendezvous to.

That the said Earl of Argyle recommended the Deponent to Major Holmes: That
James Steuart contrived a way of Correspondence by Ciphers and false Names, and
sent them over to Holmes, and the Deponent for their use; and still desired him
to press for the 30000 l. and did not propose any lest Sum, the said Earl
saying he had particularly calculated the Expense for Arms and Ammunition, etc.
though Steuart added, If something less could be had, the Earl would content
himself.

That when the Deponent was ready to ship for England, Steuart writ him word
there was hope of the Money: That the Day after he arrived here he acquainted
Sir John Cockran with the said Earls demands of the Sum of Money, and the Horse
and Dragoons: That Sir John Cochran carried him to the Lord Russel, to whom the
Deponent proposed the Affair; but being a stranger, had no answer from him at
that time: That afterward having met the Lord Russel at Shepard's House, where
Shepard told him the said Lord was come to speak with him about the Money, the
Deponent reiterated to the Lord Russel the former Proposition for 30000 l. and
the 1000 Horse and Dragoons; the said Lord answering, They could not get such a
Sum raised at the time; but if they had 10000 l. to begin with, that would draw
People in, and when they were once in, they would soon be brought to more; but
as for the Horse and Dragoons, he could say nothing at present, for that
behoved to be concerted on the Borders.

That the Deponent made the same proposal to Ferguson, who was much concerned
and Zealous in promoting it; and told him, He was doing what he could to get it
effected; always blaming Colonel Sydney, for driving on designs of his own.

That the said Deponent met twice or thrice with Melvin, Cochran, Jerviswood,
Monroe, the two Cambells of Cessnock, Mongomery of Langshaw and Veatch, where
they discoursed of Money to be sent to Argyle: That Monroe, Melvin, and the
Cessnocks were against meddling with the English Conspirators, as Men that would
talk, but would not do: That therefore it were better for the Scots to attempt
something by themselves: That Veatch, Jerviswood, and this Deponent were for
accepting the Money.

That at one of their Meetings it was agreed, one Martin, late Clerk of the
Justice Court, should be sent into Scotland to hinder the Country from Rising,
till they saw how Matters went in England: That the said Martin did go at the
Charge of the Gentlemen there met, and was directed to the Lairds of Polwart
and Torwoodlie, who sent back word, It would not be so easy a matter to get
the Gentry of Scotland to concur; yet that afterward Polwart writ to Monroe,
That the Country was readier than they imagined.

That the said Deponent had the Key of the Cipher agreed on in his keeping,
when a Letter came from Argyle to Major Holms, intimating that the said Earl
would join with the Duke of Monmouth, follow his Measures, and obey his
Directions: That for the Decyphering of this, he gave the Key to Veatch, who
was to deliver the Letter to Ferguson, and he to the Duke of Monmouth.

To all this Carstares added in his Deposition of Sept. 18. 1684. That he
himself had communicated the Design on foot to three famous English
Conventicle-Preachers, Griffith, Mede, and Dr. Owen, who, he affirmed, did all
concur in promoting it, and were desirous it should take effect; which part of
Carstares's Oath is the more remarkable, because the King solemnly affirms,
That the Duke of Monmouth, in his Confession to His Majesty, and his Royal
Highness, did particularly name those very three Men, as conscious of the Plot,
and withal declared in these very words, That all the considerable
Nonconformist Ministers knew of the Conspiracy. An instance that alone, if
there were not many more such, were a sufficient Instruction to all
Separatists, of what tender Consciences the Men are, whom they choose for the
principal Guides of their Consciences: Since after all this, Mede deposed
before his Majesty, That he never heard of any Disturbance intended against the
Government; but that on the contrary he himself had once advised Ferguson, upon
discourse of some Libel of his then newly made public, That it was not their
part to do such things. Nay, their great Oracle Dr. Owen, being examined upon
Oath, before the Lord Chief Justice Jones, and being asked, Whether he had not
heard of a Horrid Plot against the Life of the King? did, not long before his
Death, take God to witness, and subscribed to it with his dying Hand, That
indeed he had heard of such a Plot by the means of the Kings Proclamation, but
no otherwise.

But that which still farther undeniably confirms the Scotch part of the
Conspiracy with the English, was the Confession of William Spence a Scotch-Man,
and of Major Holmes an Englishman, the former being a Menial Servant to the
Earl of Argyle, the other his long Dependent and Friend; a Man active in the
times of Cromwell, and always disaffected to His Majesty's Government.

Major Holmes being taken in London in the beginning of the Discovery with
several of the Earl of Argyle's Original Letters about him, and being examined,
confessed, He knew of the Earl of Argyle 's proposing to some principal Men in
England, That for 30000 Pounds he might he furnished for his Expedition into
Scotland: That the English at last condescended to send him 10000 Pounds: That
though he had not personally converst with the Great Men who were to raise the
Money, yet he had often heard the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, the Lord
Russel named: That he himself was appointed by the Earl of Argyle to convey
Letters to and from his Countess and others his Correspondents: That he could
not Decypher those taken about him, but that William Spence could: That this
Spence went under the Name of Butler, and was just then come over in the
Packet-Boat from Holland, to dispose of the Libel, called, The Earl of Argyle'
s Case.

This Deposition was given by Major Holmes, on June 29. 1683. the very day that
Spence being arrived from Holland, was apprehended under the Name of Butler.

Besides this Evidence of Holmes concerning Spence, it appears plainly by the
Earl of Argyle's own words in several passages of his Letters, taken in
Holmes's possession, especially in that part of the long Letter of the 21st of
June, which was not written in Cipher, That the said Spence, alias B. as he
afterward owned himself for the Man, knew his the said Earls Address, and how
to write to him; adding, That he could instruct Holmes in this Cipher, else he
had lost six hours Work.

Wherefore upon this assurance that Spence could Decypher the Letters, he was
examined before the King; but not confessing any thing material, and seeming
resolved not to do it, he was lent into Scotland, where he was brought to
discover the whole Intrigue; acknowledged, That he himself was the B. or Butler
mentioned in the Letters: That those superscrib'd to West and Robert Thomson
were directed to Major Holmes under those false Names: That he the said Spence
could open the Letters, and explain the way of reading them; which he did, and
then justified upon Oath the Explanation he had made to be according to their
true sense.

It happened also at the same time, whilst Spence was under close Examination,
that Mr. Gray of Crechie, a Scotch Gentleman, skilled in the Art of Ciphers,
did, without any the least Communication with Spence, Decypher some of the
principal of the said Earls Letters; and when both Spence's and Mr. Gray's
Copies were found to agree exactly, there could not possibly have been given a
more certain Demonstration of the Truth of Spence's way of Decyphering, which
he confessed he was taught by Argyle himself.

In this manner were these Letters proved Authentic, and the right meaning of
them unfolded. And it is evident by the plain Tenor of them, that some of them
were written by the said Earl just about the time that the Conspiracy was near
ripening, and when he was informed of Ten Thousand Pounds only ordered to be
sent him: Others were written after he had heard that the Plot was discovered.

In every one of those Papers it is easy to trace out manifest Footsteps of
the whole Conspiracy. But particularly that of June 21 New Style, which is June
the 11th of the English, written the very day before Keeling made the first
discovery, contains not only a vehement expostulation of the said Earl of
Argyle's touching the delay of the Money from England, and the smallness of the
Sum designed; but a plain Narration how the Insurrection was to be concerted in
both Kingdoms.

The Body of the Letter was written in Cipher, the Preface and Postscript in
plain Hand; in both there is reference made to Butler's, that is Spence's,
being able to expound it; and from the very same Spence was taken the
Exposition of it upon Oath.

Therein the said Earl tells his Correspondent in England, That he knew not the
Grounds their Friends had gone upon to offer so little Money, nor did he
understand what Assistance they would give: That till he knew both, and heard
what Carstares, or any other they should send over, had to say, he purposed
neither to refuse his service, nor object against any thing resolved here.

However, that the said Earl had truly mentioned in his Proposition formerly
made the very least Sum he thought could do the Business effectually; which was
not half of what had been requisite in another Juncture of Affairs: That what
Money he proposed to be raised, was so much within the power of the Persons
concerned, that if a little less could do the Business, he had thought it would
not he stood upon: That the said Earl reckoned the Assistance of the Horse
absolutely necessary for the first Brush: That as to the precise Number named,
he would not be peremptory, but he believed there would need that effectual
Number: That 1000 might be as easily raised as 5 or 600; and it were hard if it
stuck at the Odds.

That they should consider, whether all ought to be hazarded upon so small a
difference as to the Money: That though it is true, what was propounded is more
by half than is requisite for the first Weeks Work, yet soon after, all or more
will be necessary; and then Arms cannot be sent like Money by Bills.

That there are above 1200 Horse and Dragoons, and 2000 Foot at least in
Scotland; all well appointed and tolerably well commanded: That it were hard to
expect Country People on Foot without Horse should beat them triple their
Number: That if Multitudes could be got together, they would still need more
Arms and more Provisions.

That if some considerable thing be not suddenly done at the first appearing,
it may fright a little, but will do no good.

That the standing Forces will take up some station; probably at Stirling: That
they will have for aid not only the Militia of Twenty Thousand Foot, and 2000
Horse, but all the Heritors, to the Number it may be of 50000 Men: That though
many should be unwilling to fight for the standing Forces, yet most will once
join, and many will be as concerned for them, as any can be against them.

That though the said Earls Party should have at first all the success
imaginable, yet it is impossible but some will keep together, and have
assistance from all the three Kingdoms; then it will not betime to call for
more Arms, far less for more Money to buy them, and they should then prove like
the Foolish Virgins.

That it is next to be considered how the discontented English Lords could
employ so much Money, and so many Horse, better for their own Interest, though
the Protestant Cause were not concerned; this being a little Sum, and small
Fonds to raise so many Men, and by Gods Blessing to repress the whole Power of
Scotland.

That the Horse to be sent from England need stay but a little while to do a
Job, unless future events should make Scotland the Seat of the War; which would
be yet more to the advantage of England.

That by the best Husbanding the total of the Money proposed, it cannot purchase
Arms and absolute Necessaries for one time, for an Army of the Number they were
to deal with: That nothing out of the whole is designed to be bestowed on many
things useful, and some necessary, as Tents, Wagons, Clothes, Shoes, Horse,
Horseshooes, etc. All which are not only Once to be had, but daily recruited,
much less was any of it apportion'd to provide for Meat or Drink, Intelligence,
or other incident Charges.

That some honest well-meaning good People may undertake for little, because
they can do little, and know little what is to be done.

That the said Earl had made the reckoning as low as if he had been to pay it
all out of his own Purse: That he was resolved never to touch the Money; only to
have it issued out according to Order: That he freely submits to any knowing
Soldier for the Lists, and to any skilful Merchant for the Prices be had
calculated.

That it will be a great encouragement for Persons of Estates and consideration
to venture, when they shall know there is a project and prospect of the whole
Affair, and Necessaries provided for such an attempt.

That if after the said Earl shall have spoken with Carstares, he sees he is
able to do any service, he will be very willing; if he be not able, he will
pray God some other may.

That before it be given over, he wishes he might have such a conference as he
had mentioned in another Letter a week before: wherein he had offered either to
come over privately in Person, or to meet any to be sent from hence.

That he expected not all the Horse from the discontented Lords, but some
considerable part might be raised by particular Friends.

That he had yet more to add, to enforce all he had said, but it could not be
expressed at that distance: That something more was to be done to prevent the
Designs of the Enemies, which he dares not now mention, lest it should put them
on their Guard: That he has a considerable Direction in his Head, but all is in
Gods Hands.

This is a faithful and impartial Abstract of the Mystical Letter; than which,
how could there have been expressed by words a more complete Deduction of the
said Earl's part in the designed Insurrection?

Immediately after the Ciphers, this follows in words at large, The Total Sum
is 128 Guilders, and 8 Stivers, that will be paid you by Mr. B.

Which last Clause was the Rule whereby Mr. Gray found out, and Spence
discovered the Decyphering of the whole Letter; and it was accordingly done by
each of them apart, by making eight Columns, and placing 128 words in each
Column descending, as upon view of the Authentic Printed Copies will appear to
any Man beyond all Contradiction.

In short, this Letter of the late Earl of Argyle's was known by many of the
Privy Council thereto be his Hand; and his own Lady upon Oath deposed, She knew
it to be his, though she did not know the Contents of it.

And such is the Account that is to be given of the said Earl of Argyle's
Loyalty, which he had desired might be the only Standard in what sense he would
take the Test.

Hitherto he had been by Inheritance Lord High Admiral and Justice General of
Argyle, Tarbat, and the Isles, and Great Master of the Household. He was by His
Majesty put into Places of great Dignity and Trust; he was made extraordinary
Lord of the Session, one of His Majesty's Privy Council, and one of the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury. And after his Fathers Condemnation for the
highest Crimes, and his own Forfeiture of his Honor and Estate for Treasonable
Expressions in a Letter of his, he was restored to all his Father possessed,
except the Title of Marquess. But notwithstanding all these, and many more
Obligations of the like nature which he had to His Majesty, his fondness of
esteem with the Factious People, his aversion to Monarchy, and hatred of the
Royal Family, particularly of the Duke of York, led him to this height of
Ingratitude.

This, and diverse other Letters of the like Traitorous importance, all written
with Argyle's own Hand, being at one and the same time taken about Major
Holmes, the Person chiefly intruded by the said Earl to receive and convey all
his Correspondences with England and Scotland, it cannot be doubted but very
many more Papers of the same dangerous Tenor had been this way interchang'd
between him and the English and Scotch Conspirators, during the whole progress
of the Conspiracy. Especially considering, that in some of these, the Earl of
Argyle refers to some Expressions and Propositions which he says he had made in
others; and there are no such Expressions to be met with in all these Letters
that are taken: Besides that with the Letters themselves there were also seized
about Holmes several Alphabets, and a Key of Words; whereas of one of the
Alphabets there has been as yet no use found in Decyphering; and though in the
Key there are Eighty new-coyn'd Words, yet not above Six of them are made use
of in all the parcel of the said Earl's Letters hitherto intercepted.

However, by the Light these Letters gave, so well agreeing with several other
Intelligences received from many Hands, His Majesty's Council of Scotland were
abundantly convinced that the Bloody Design had reached thither also; and
therefore immediately ordered the bottom of the Business to be searched into by
a Secret Committee. Whereupon Warrants were issued out there to apprehend
Walter Earl of Tarras, Brother-in-Law to the Duke of Monmouth, Sir Patrick Hume
Lord of Polwart, (...) Pringle Lord of Torwoodlie, James Murray Lord of
Philiphaugh, and Hugh Scot Lord of Gallowshiels; all of them being Persons
named by Carstares and others as Partakers with Argyle in this Treason, as they
had been formerly most active with him, in endeavoring to disturb the Loyal
Proceedings of the Parliament for enacting the Test.

Of these the Lord of Polwart and Torwoodlie having been the most busy, and
so conscious of their greater guilt, concealed themselves, and have hitherto
escaped; the other three were taken, and brought to Edinburgh, where they
freely confessed upon Oath: As did also Commissary Monroe, who had been sent
thither Prisoner out of England. All which Depositions and Confessions they
again repeated and confirmed in the same solemn manner at the Trial of Mr.
William Baillie of Jerviswood.

The Earl of Tarras without either craving, or receiving any security for
himself, did ingenuously confess,

That about the time, when Sir John Cockran, and Commissary Monroe got their
Commission from the Carolina Company for London, Mr. Baillie desired him to
speak to Monroe, that he might be added to the Commission: Telling him that he
was resolved to go to London however upon his own charges: For that his, and
their going about the Carolina business was only a Pretense and a Blind; but
the true design was to push forward the People of England, who did nothing but
talk, to go more effectually about their business.

That thereupon the said Baillie did settle a Correspondence with the Deponent,
whereby the one was to give an account what past between the Country Party in
England, and the Scotch Men there; the other to write back what occurred in
Scotland.

That the said Baillie told him, the only way to secure the Protestant
Religion, was for the King to suffer the Parliament to sit, and pass the Bill
of Exclusion: Which the King might be induced to do, if the Parliament would
take sharp and brisk Measures with him.

That after the said Baillie went to London, he did give the Deponent account
by Letters, how things were in great disorder there; but he hoped effectual
courses were taking to remedy them.

That Mr. Robert Martin did come to Mr. Pringles of Torwoodlie in May 1683, and
brought the Deponent a Letter from the said Baillie then at London.

That Martin told the Deponent, things in England were in great disorder, and
like to come to a height, but the Country Party were considering of Methods for
securing the Protestant Religion.

That the Scotch-Men at London had asked 30000 Pounds, but that Argyle was to
have 10000 l. which Sum was to be sent by Baillie into Holland to buy Arms, and
then Argyle was to Land with those Arms in the West-Highlands of Scotland.

The Earl of Tarras deposed farther, That Philiphaugh and he went to
Gallowshiels House, where they met with Polwart and Gallowshiels.

That there it was discoursed among them, that in case the English should rise
in Arms, it was necessary so many as could be got on the Borders, should be in
readiness to deal with Straglers, and Seize on Horses, and thereafter join with
those that were in Arms on the Borders of England: That then it would be
convenient to surprise Berwick, Stirling, and some other strong places: That
some Persons should be employed to inquire what Arms were in the Country: That
it was resolved every one should speak to, and prepare such particular Persons
as they could trust, not at first in plain terms, but indirectly, and upon
supposition of a Rising in England: That there was a Word and Sign to be used
among them, the Sign was by loosing a Button on the Breast, the word was
Harmony.

That it was agreed among them all, that the best time for Argyle to Land, was
when there should be a Stir in England. Stir being the word which these Scotch
Traitors and the Lord Russel used to express what in plain English is called
open Rebellion.

In the like manner Commissary Alexander Monroe deposed upon Oath,

That the Earl of Tarras did propose to him, that Mr. Baillie might be made one
of the Commissioners for the Affair of Carolina.

That he did go along with Mr. Baillie to London, and heard him by the way
regretting the hazard, their Laws, Liberties, and the Protestant Religion were
in.

That Mr. Baillie spoke to the Deponent more than once at London for getting
Money from the English to be sent to Argyle, to bring home Arms for the said
Argyle's use to raise an Insurrection in Scotland.

That in Baillie's Chamber in London, William Veitch a Forefault, that is, a
declared Traitor, being present, Sir John Cockran did expressly speak of Money to
be sent to Argyle for the foresaid purpose.

That on another occasion he heard some of them say, there would be 20000 Men
in Scotland ready to assist the Rebellion.

That Mr. Robert Martin was sent down from that Meeting in Baillie's Chamber to
Scotland, to try what the Scots would do for their own Safety: That is was
agreed the People of Scotland should Rise, when there was a Rising in England.

That the Commission was granted to Martin by all the Persons present, who were
the Lord Melvil, Sir John Cockran, the Cessnocks Elder and Younger, Mr. William
Carstares, Mr. William Veitch, Jerviswood, and the Deponent, who did all
contribute Money toward his Journey.

That Martin at his return from Scotland meeting, with the Deponent, told him,
Matters were in such a Condition there, as a little would kindle the Fire in
order to a Rebellion.

Then also James Murray Lord of Philiphaugh confessed, and deposed upon Oath,

That in May 1683. upon a Letter from Mr. Pringle of Torwoodlie to invite him
to his House, he came, where he found Mr. Martin lately come from London.

That upon discourse Martin told them the City was much irritated through some
Attempts upon their Privileges; but that all honest Men were of good heart, and
very brisk.

That Torwoodlie then told the Deponent he expected the Earl of Tarras, having
sent for him, because Martin had a Letter directed to him from Jerviswood:
Torwoodlie adding, That there were great Matters in Agitation at London, that
Martin was come down with a Commission to their Friends here; but he was to
Communicate his Instructions only to Polwart and himself, who were to pitch on
such Persons as they thought fit to entrust with the Affair: That he had great
confidence in the Deponent, and therefore had sent to acquaint him, that things
were now come to a Crisis: That he had reason to think England would shortly be
in Arms: That it was no Project of an inconsiderable Party, but a Design
through the Kingdom: That many of the finest Men, and of greatest Interest and
Credit were engaged in it there, and had agreed for the advancing Money to
furnish Arms here: That Polwart would be at Gallowshiels that Night, and it
would be necessary the Earl of Tarras and the Deponent should confer with him
fully on the Business.

That about this time the Earl of Tarras came, who retired a little to
discourse with Martin.

That then Torwoodlie told the Deponent, that although Martin would not Commune
with them upon his Commission directly, yet it would be fit they conferred, and
without taking notice of his Commission, discoursed of things as their own
private Notions, abstracted from any prospect of a present Design.

That accordingly after Dinner they four retired to a Chamber, and after some
general talk of the Discontents of both Kingdoms, these Suppositions following
were discoursed of, Martin starting all, or most of them.

If the Country Party in England should have thoughts of going into Arms, what
could be expected here in such a case?

Would it not be expedient to have a settled Correspondence between that Party
there, and here?

Might it not be so adjusted, that both Kingdoms should draw out in one day?

Might not as many be expected in these Shires, and about Edinburgh, as would
surprise the Rulers, and some to join with the English on the Borders, and
seize on Berwick, others to attempt Stirling-Castle?

If Argyle should at the same time Land in the West, and raise that Country,
would not these Measures contribute much to the Advancement and Interest of the
Party? Encourage all that had an Inclination to them, and scare many others
from acting against them? And so they might have leisure to join from all
places. And then might it not be expected there would be as many in this
Kingdom, as would be able to deal with the Forces here, at least divert them
from troubling England?

These Queries being proposed, it was answered, That as to settling a
Correspondence, it was very convenient for those of a Common Interest, but none
could be found here fit to manage it that would undertake it.

That as to trysting, that is to say, Rising at the same time, that could not
be done without divulging the Design to all Ranks of People, which none would
consent to, except those already in desperate Circumstances, and they would not
generally have much Influence.

That the thing was not at all advisable for Scotland, because if those in
England, especially in London, the Spring of their motions, should happen to
have an Interruption near the time appointed, then the Scots not having timely
notice, might rise alone, and so be exposed as a Prey.

That Argyle's coming was not much to be relied on, by reason of the
uncertainty of Sea-Voyages: That he might himself be suspected of private
Designs; that Despair might blind his usual Prudence, and prompt him to
indigested Methods; so it was expected few of the Gentry, but such as were
under very hard Circumstances, would embarque with him. That as to the
surprising their Rulers, it was inveighed against, as an Action not to be
thought of amongst Protestants.

That then Martin told the Company, if any had a mind for a suit of Armor, he
could provide as many as pleased, of a new Fashion, very light, and of an easy
rate, from one who had made a great many lately for honest Men in London.

That then all the Company except Martin, went to Gallowshiels House, where
they met him and Polwart.

That after Supper, having given and received mutual assurance that they were
free to commune with Gallowshiels, and he with them, touching matters of great
Secrecy and Importance, they sat close together, Polwart beginning the
discourse:

And signifying to them, he was credibly informed that the Country Party in
England would draw into the Fields shortly, and as he heard, before Lammas:
That Gallowshiels seemed visibly surpised at it, saying he loved better to be
walking in his own Parks than to be meddling in such matters: However assuring
them, if there came any troublesome work, he would join with them firmly.

That the Earl of Tarras also disapproved of doing any thing during the Kings
Life; because that might strengthen the Dukes Interest: That therefore he
suspected it was a project of the Common-Wealths-Men, with whom he believed few
Scotch Gentlemen would join; and that he was almost persuaded the Duke of
Monmouth would not concur in any Rising during the King's Life.

That to all this Polwart answered, He heard the English had once agreed on
that Principle, but it seemed they found they must either do their business
now, or lay aside all hopes of doing it hereafter. For if the Charter of London
were let fall, they should not only lose all safe Opportunity of digesting
Matters, but also a great part of their Strength: Adding that he heard all
things were concerted mutually between Monmouth's Friends and the Heads of the
Commonwealth Party; and though Monmouth was shy on that account, yet he hoped
he would engage, or he would be deserted by that Party.

That then Polwart mentioned the former Queries, as overtures agreed on between
other Friends in London, and the Principal Men of that Party there.

That the Earl of Tarras and the Deponent repeated their former answers,
Gallowshiels joining forwardly with them.

That Polwart replied, He was fully of their Opinion, if things were entire,
but referred it to be considered? whether it were not better to comyly with some
of these Methods, though not so justifiable as could be wished rather than
disappoint the Business totally.

That there was another Argument urged against rising with the English, because
it was talked there had been a Day appointed in England in Shaftsbury's time,
which did not hold; so they were not to be relied on.

That then it was proposed to be deliberated what Methods were most proper in
the Companies Opinion for Scotland to follow, in case of Englands Rising first.

That it was said, All that could be expected or desired from Scotland was,
that upon certain News of Englands being in the Field, those of the Southern
Shires should presently rise, and as soon as so many could convene, as would be
able to deal with straggling Parties, March to join the English on the Borders,
that then it would be seasonable for Argyle to Land in the West; and these
Parties on the Borders might divert the Forces, till he had time to put himself
into a posture.

That it was left to Polwart to Commune with others to this purpose.

That all the Company seemed to agree, they should move nothing in the Affair,
till they had a certain account what England proposed, and who were to be their
Heads; that if they designed any thing against the Kings Person, or for
overturning Monarchy, they should not be clear to join.

That it was recommended to all the Company, to be inquiring indirectly about
the affections of their Neighbors, and what Arms were amongst them; that so,
if they should resolve to join with the English, they might know where to seek
the Men and Arms suddenly.

That here it was said by one, (by Polwart as the Deponent thinks) That if the
Earl of Tarras, Torwoodlie, Gallowshiels, and he took Horse, most part of
Tiviot-Dale and Selkirk-Shire would soon come to them, especially when they
heard that England was risen.

That they all agreed to meet there again at Midsummer-Fair, when the account
from England might be expected; but in case it came to any of their hands
sooner, each promised to advertise the rest.

The Deponent farther added, he was told in private by Polwart or Torwoodlie,

That Polwart kept Correspondence with their Friends at London, naming the Lord
Melvil, Sir John Cockran, Jerviswood, and Commissary Monroe.

That the Money to be advanced by the English Party to Scotland, was ready when
Martin left London.

That it was expected within few days after, it would be dispatched with some
Confident to Holland; that it was 10000 l. and was to be employed by that
Confident at Argyle's sight, for buying of Arms, and providing Shipping to
transport them with Argyle.

That as soon as the Scots at London got Notice of their Confidents arrival in
Holland, and that all other things were concluded with the English, which might
be about the middle of June, then they would come down into Scotland, and give
them a particular Account of all Resolutions taken.

That the Deponent was told all Letters were written by both Parties, as about
the Carolina Business, or concerning some Houshold-Furniture: That there was a
Sign and a Word agreed on, that they might know with whom to use freedom; the
Word was Harmony, and the Sign was the Opening of Buttons on the Breast-Coat,
and shutting them presently.

That the Deponent never saw it used, except when he visited Parkhay in
Edinburgh about the end of June; who asking whether he had the Word and Sign of
the Carolina-Men, and the Deponent having given them, said, He was afraid the
Carolina Business did not go well, for there had been some of the Managers
expected there eight days past, but none were come: Nor could he learn any of
their Friends had heard from them for several Posts.

The said James Murray of Philiphaugh deposed farther, That at their Meeting at
Gallowshiels it was resolved they should keep their Cess or Tax unpaid till
their next Meeting at Midsummer, and should deal with all those they had
influence upon to do the like, and that upon the Supposition mentioned in his
former Oath.

Next, Hugh Scot Lord of Gallowshiels confessed and deposed, That the Earl of
Tarras and Philiphaugh did come to his House in May 1683. That Polwart came
likewise thither, where there were Discourses and Proposals, That if the
English did rise in Arms, their Friends in the South-Shires should rise with
them: That they should seize the Horses belonging to the Kings Troops where
they grazed, and attempt the Town of Berwick, and the Castle of Stirling.

That it was likewise there discoursed of the late Earl of Argyle 's coming to
invade Scotland; but because of the uncertainty of Sea-Voyages, there was not
much stress laid upon it.

That it was also proposed, such of the South-Country whom they trusted should
be acquainted with it: That Endeavors should be used to learn what Arms were
in the Country: That the Earl of Tarras, Philiphaugh, Torwoodlie, Polwart, and
some others should draw to Horse with the first, when the Rising should be in a
readiness; and that it might be expected the South parts of Tiviot-Dale and
Selkirk-Shire would join with them.

The said Gallowshiels had also deposed before the Lords of the Secret
Committee, That the Earl of Tarras and Philiphaugh being in his House in May,
discoursed of an intended Rising in England and in London in particular, and of
Proposals made to the Scots to rise with them: That Polwart was there present,
and told them he was sure the English intended so; That they discoursed it was
fit to seize Berwick and Stirling: It was also talked of bringing the Duke of
York to his Trial.

The said Gallowshiels deposed farther before the Lords of the Committee, That
in the Month of May 1683. the Earl of Tarras, Hume of Polwart the Elder, and
the Lord of Philiphaugh came to the Deponents House, where they spoke of the
security of the Protestant Religion, and of a Party in England who would secure
or seize the King or Duke: That if any should rise in Arms to defend or rescue
them, there was another Party who would rise against them.

That it was proposed some Countrymen should be spoken to, to try their
Resolutions: That it was likewise proposed to seize the Officers of State.

That it was there said, Sir John Cockran was to come to the West from England
to advance the Design: That the Earl of Argyle was to Land in the West
Highlands to raise that Country.

That of these Matters all that were present discoursed, as of an Affair they
were agitating, and wherein themselves were particularly concerned.

These several plain and full Proofs, together with the Depositions of
Carstares before mentioned, being also strengthened by the Confessions of
Thomas Shepard and Zechary Bourn, and all exhibited at the Trial of William
Baillie of Jerviswood, were not only over-abundantly sufficient to convince the
Person accused of his particular share in the Guilt; but they also remain as so
many standing and indubitable Testimonies of the Truth of the whole Conspiracy
between the English, and Scotch Rebels.

After all this, how is it possible that the most audacious of the Factious
Party of both Nations, notwithstanding their being so expert in driving on the
Trade of Lying and traducing their Governors, should ever have any tolerable
color of probability to invalidate or discredit the undoubted Evidence of so
many Witnesses, most of them Men of high Quality, great Estates, potent
Interests; all of them Zealous and indefatigable Assertors of the Rebellious
Cause; and this Evidence given in by them at first voluntarily, and often again
reiterated, and adhered to, against Baillie their Chief Companion in Iniquity,
their near Kinsman and Friend?

As for Baillie of Jerviswood himself, the Persons who passed upon his Assize
did with one Voice find the Crimes of Art and Part in the Conspiracy, and of
concealing and not revealing the same, clearly proved against him. Whereupon he
was adjudg'd to suffer the Punishment of a Traitor: His Life and Death being
such as might be expected from the Nephew and Son-in-Law of the Old Arch
Traitor Warriston, in whose Family he was bred up, and tutored under his
Discipline, according to his Principles.

Such were the chief Steps the Scotch Conspirators had made in their part of
the Treasonable Design, as far as through the Divine Favor it has been
hitherto traced out by the Extraordinary Diligence, Wisdom and Integrity of His
Majesty's present Ministers in that Kingdom. For the Readers clearer
comprehending the whole progress of the Villainy, the King thought best to have
it thus represented in one view, and put all together in an uninterrupted
course of Narration: Though by this Methoddivers things have been already
spoken of, which in the natural course of time happened after the several
material passages, that remain yet unmention'd, relating to the English part of
the Conspiracy.

Wherefore, to return to the Year 1683, and to what happened in England that
Summer, shortly after the first Discovery; His Majesty having now received
irresistible Proof of the certainty of the Wicked and unnatural Design, that
the World might have the like Conviction, resolved speedily to bring some of
the most Notorious Malefactors to a fair and open Trial.

The first Person who was put upon justifying himself, was Lieutenant Colonel
Thomas Walcot, on the Twelfth of July of that Year. Against him diverse
Witnesses were produced, who, in their Depositions, first gave some distinct
account of the Plot in General, and then of the particular share the Prisoner
at the Bar had in it.

As to what concerned Walcot himself, Colonel Romzey first deposed, That the
said Walcot came out of Holland with Ferguson after Shaftsbury 's Death: That
he came to West 's Chamber where he was present when a List was brought of the
Assassines, and agreed to join with them, intending to Command a Party to
charge the Guards: That he undertook to go and view Rumbald 's House, and
bought a Horse for that purpose: That he was present at the dividing of London
into twenty parts in order to an Insurrection; and at the Consult for buying of
Arms after the disappointment at the Rye: That he was at the Meeting for
carrying on the Conspiracy on Thursday before the Discovery: That after it they
met at Captain Tracies, Walcot's own Lodgings, himself being present.

Next Josiah Keeling swore, That Walcot was at the Traiterous Assembly at the
Salutation-Tavern, when the Deponent was called Gulick, and a Health drunk to
the English Gulick; West saying that Gulick in Dutch was Keeling in English;
adding, He hoped to see Keeling at the Head of as good an Army at Wapping, as
it was reported one Gulick was then at Cologne.

Then Zechary Bourn witnessed, That Walcot used to come to Ferguson when he
lodged at his House: That Walcot and several others met at the Dragon on
Snow-Hill, and often in other places, in order to raise Men, and divide the
City into twenty parts for securing the King and the Duke: That almost every
time they met, at least three times, the Prisoner at the Bar was there: That he
was at the Meeting at Tracies, where they debated of standing to it with Swords
in their Hands, and of kiliing Keeling for having made the Discovery.

Robert West's Testimony concerring him went somewhat farther back. He deposed,
That he became acquainted with Walcot the Summer before, when he told the
Deponent the Carolina Business was only a Pretense; That he asked the Deponent
upon the Election of the Sheriffs, Will the People do nothing to secure
themselves? Thereupon acquainting him with an Insurrection then designed within
three weeks or a month: That Shaftsbury was in the Design, and had engaged him
also: That he had an Expectation of being Colonel of Horse; asking the said
West, Whether he would have any Command under him? That upon his refusal, he
desired him to lend him a Suit of Silk Armor: That the said Walcot told him of
several Designs to Attack the King and the Duke: That in the Business of the
Rye, he undertook to Command the Party that was to set upon the Guards: That
after the Disappointment, he met with the other Conspirators, where they
discoursed of it, and complained they had not Arms in readiness: That he
sometimes made one in the Traiterous Discourses at the Deponents, and at the
Young-Devil-Tavern: That he was present at the Meeting at Trades relating to
their escape; the Prisoner at the Bar himself then saying, God would still
deliver the Nations.

His Letter to Mr. Secretary Jenkins was also produced, which he was proved to
have owned before the Council to be his Hand. The substance of it being, That
he was come to Town to lay himself at His Majesty's Feet: That this was the
first Crime he had been Guilty of since the Kings Return, and too soon by much
now: That he was ready to discover to His Majesty all that he knew in England,
Scotland and Ireland, which might be something more than the first Discoverer
could acquaint him with, especially as to Ireland: That his intimacy with a
Scotch Minister, through whose Hands much of the Business passed, occasioned
his knowing very much; and that it was laid very broad, or he was mis-inform'd;
concluding with a proposal that he would follow the Traitors who were fled, and
give notice what Measures they should take; with other the like expressions.

There was likewise a Paper given in Evidence that was taken about him in
Newgate; wherein he desired Romzey and West to spare him, saying, They had
ground enough to serve the King upon other Men.

But as to his private Confession to the King upon his first Examination, that
was not produced against him, though in that he had told diverse new Particulars
of the Conspiracy, and named the Men of Quality who had undertaken to raise the
several Shires.

Against all this Walcot's defense only consisted in his own denial of having
had any Hand in the Assassination; saying, He knew well enough, if he should
have undertaken to charge the Guards whilst others killed the King, he was
equally Guilty with those that killed him; but that he was sick of the Gout
during the Meetings whilst the King was at New Market: Moreover, that those
Witnesses were sufficiently dipped themselves, and swore against him to save
their own Lives: That Goodenough and Rumbald he never knew: That the last
Meeting at his Lodgings was appointed by Romzey, he himself knowing nothing of
it: That he came accidentally to the other Meetings only to hear News. He
confessed he heard there was a Design amongst diverse great Lords and Gentlemen
for asserting Liberties and Properties; but that he was not at their
Consultations. The Sum was, That he had heard a great deal of an Insurrection,
but had no hand in it, and therefore his fault could be only Misprision of
Treason. And as to his Letter, he alleged he had only heard what he promised
to discover from Ferguson.

To the most material parts of this Defense, it was answered by His Majesty's
Learned Council at Law, That there is nothing more just than to make use of
some Traitors to Convict others, else Treason might be hatched most securely:
That because the Witnesses had been concerned in the Plot, therefore they were
to be believed; for who should know it but those that were concerned? That
better Witnesses could not have been had, except the thing had succeeded: That
the very being at Treasonable Consults, and keeping them private, is not only
Misprision, but High Treason. And as to his having the Gout, West told him, he
remembered it very well by a good token, that Walcot himself said, He was
afraid when the time came, he should not be able to draw on his Boot.

But the whole Evidence against Walcot being clear and positive Testimony, and
what he pleaded for himself being only his own single Affirmation and Negation,
without any support of Witnesses, the Jury immediately brought him in guilty of
High Treason. According to which Sentence he was Executed on the 20th of the
said Month. At the time of his Execution he again acknowled'g what he had told
the King, and writ to the Secretary of State, That the Business was laid very
deep; he said, An Act of Indulgence would do well, because the King had a great
many Men to take Judgment of: He persisted, he was to have had no hand in His
Majesty's Death, though he confessed it was proposed when he was present: He
declared he did not know that this Conspiracy was older than the August or
September before: but so old he owned it was.

The next Offender that came under the Stroke of Justice, was william Hone a
Joyner, who being brought to the Bar, would presently have confessed himself
guilty of great part of the Accusation. But refusing to confess all, he was
required to plead, and the next day was brought on his Trial. Then again he
desired he might retract his Plea, and offered to plead Guilty. But since he
would not own the whole Indictment, for Satisfaction of the World the Evidence
against him was produced.

Josiah Keeling swore, That the Prisoner at the Bar was at the Dolphin-Tavern,
when several sorts of Arms were agreed on to be provided under the borrowed
Names of Swan-Quills, Goose-Quills, Crow-Quills: That after that Meeting, Hone
told the Deponent, He was to be one of them who were to go down to the Rye to
Assassinate the King. That he since also told him, It would never be well till
the Blackbird and the Gold-Finch were knocked on the Head; explaining those
terms to be meant of the King and the Duke. To which Witness Hone replied in
open Court, That as to the Blackbird he owned it, but not as to the Gold-Finch.

Then West Deposed, That Goodenough having told him he would try Hone, whether
he would attempt on the Duke without the King, the Deponent asked Hone, Whether
he had seen Goodenough? He answered, He had, and that he had spoken to him
about a job for the Duke. That at another time also Hone asked the Deponent,
Master, shall we do nothing? Adding, That if the Duke of Monmouth would be
true, and appear, he would bring 50 or 60 Men from the other side of the Water,
to help to do the Business. And that the Deponent demanding what Business? He
answered, A brisk Push at the two Brothers. That being further questioned, What
Brothers? He said, The Captain and Lieutenant; which were the counterfeit Names
they sometimes used for the King and the Duke.

Then Sir Nicholas Butler deposed, He had known Hone many years, and always
knew him guilty of plotting, contriving, and ready for such Enterprises as
this: particularly that he had proposed taking off the King and the Duke with
Cross-Bows from Bow-Steeple, whilst they were standing in a House directly over
against it on the Lord Mayors Day: That Hone confessed this very thing when
examined before His Majesty: That he had also acquainted diverse Persons, that
he was to make one to kill the King and the Duke.

Then Captain Richardson swore, That the Prisoner confessed to Sir Nicholas
Butler, in his presence, that Goodenough came to him and told him, he wanted
Laborers; That Hone asking him for what? Goodenough said it was to kill the
King, and the Duke: That he did agree to be one of the Number: That Hone did
say another time, he was for killing the King, and saving the Duke; but that
Goodenough was for both: That he told them of the business of the Rye, calling
it the place where the King was to have been Murdered.

To all this Hone made no other answer, but that he was drawn in by Goodenough;
and as for killing the King from Bowsteeple, he was told of it by another. So
the Jury found him Guilty without going out of the Court.

At his Execution, he owned himself Guilty of the Crime, for which he stood
condemned. Only alleging again, that he was drawn in. He confessed also, he
did say he was for killing the King, and saving the Duke of York.

On which last expression the Factious party immediately laid hold. And they
have since most impudently made use of it, in their Libels both at home and
abroad, to take the aspersion of this Conspiracy, off from themselves,
insinuating that this saying of Hone's (a Notorious Fanatic) must needs prove
him to have been a concealed Papist. Whereas it is apparent, he said it upon a
quite different account: Since it was a common opinion among them, that if they
could but do the Kings Business, their work against the Duke would be much
easier: A Lesson first taught them by their great Master the Earl of
Shaftsbury. For when in one of their Traiterous Cabals, among other
Considerations of time and place, for killing the Royal Brothers, that between
Hampton Court and Windsor was proposed, and some excepted against it, because
his Majesty and his Royal Highness seldom went that way together; the said Earl
advised them not to stand upon that, and not to omit the opportunity of making
the King away for any such Objection; giving this wicked reason for his advice,
That if the King were once dispatched, they should easily be able to deal with
the Duke of York; grounding his Judgment on a most false Supposition, That the
People were generally averse from his Royal Highness.

The next Criminal arraigned was William Lord Russel, who was brought to his
Trial July the 13th of that year.

Against him Colonel Romzey deposed, That in the end of October, or the
beginning of November 1683. there met at Mr. Shepard's House in Abchurch-Lane,
the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, the Lord Russel, Sir Thomas Armstrong and
Ferguson: That the Earl of Shaftsbury desired him to go to them thither, to
know what resolution was taken about the Rising of Taunton: That he did go, Mr.
Shepard carried him up where they were, and he delivered his Message. That the
Answer was, Mr. Trenchard had failed them; and there could be no more done in
the matter at that time: That there was at the same time a discourse by all the
Company about seeing what posture the Guards were in, that they might know how
to surprise them; That some of them undertook to go and see: That my Lord
Russel in particular did speak about the Rising, and gave his consent to it.

Then Mr. Shepard swore, That in October last, Ferguson requested of him, in
the Duke of Monmouth's Name, the convenience of his House, for some Persons of
Quality to meet in; That the same Day in the Evening the Duke of Monmouth, the
Lord Gray, the Lord Russel, Armstrong and Ferguson came: That they desired to
be private, and none of his Servants to come up: That their discourse was, How
to surprise the Guards: That the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray and Armstrong
went one Night to the Mews to view them: That the next time they came,
Armstrong said, The Guards were remiss, and the thing was feasible: That they
had two Meetings of this kind at his House; That in one of them something was
read by Ferguson in the nature of a Declaration, setting forth the Grievances
of the Nation in order to a Rising: That he could not say positively the Lord
Russel was there when it was read; but the said Lord was there, when they
talked of seizing the Guards.

Then the Lord Howard of Escrick gave his Deposition, consisting of two parts,
a general Declaration of what he knew of the whole Conspiracy, and his
particular Evidence touching the Lord Russel's being engaged in it.

In the general part, his Testimony was agreeable to what has been already
cited out of his Confession to his Majesty; only in some passages he was more
particular as to Persons, especially concerning Lieutenant Colonel Walcot, the
Earl of Shaftsbury, the Lord Gray, and the Duke of Monmouth, as appears by the
Printed Trial.

But what peculiarly related to the Lord Russel was to this effect; That after
the Earl of Shaftsbury's Flight, the chief Persons concerned in the Conspiracy
in his time, began to consider they had gone so far it would be unsafe for them
to make a retreat; and that so great an Affair consisting of so many
Particulars, which were to be managed with so much fineness, it would be
necessary to have some General Council: That therefore they resolved to erect a
Cabal among themselves, which was made up of six Persons, the Duke of Monmouth,
the Earl of Essex, the Lord Russel, Colonel Algernoon Sydney, Mr. Hambden
Junior, and the Deponent: That this was about the middle of the January before:
That then they met at Mr. Hambden's House, where it was presently agreed, their
proper Province was to take care of the whole: That the chief things they
debated were, Whether the Insurrection should begin first in London or the
Country; the Duke of Monmouth insisting, it should be first in the Country;
then what Countries and Towns were fittest, and most ready for Action; then,
what Arms were to be got, and how to be disposed; then that it was necessary to
have a common Bank of 25 or 30000 l. to answer the occasions of such an
Undertaking; but that the greatest point was to order it so, as to draw
Scotland into a consent with them; because it was requisite all diversion
should be given to the Kings Forces.

That about Ten Days after every one of the same persons met again at the Lord
Russel's House: That they then came to a resolution of sending some Persons to
the Earl of Argyle, to settle an Understanding with him, and that a Messenger
should be dispatched into Scotland, to invite some Scotch-Men hither, who best
understood the Estare of Scotland, to give an account of it: That the Persons
agreed on to be sent for were Sir John Cockran, the Lord Melvil, and one of the
Name of Cambel: That to this purpose it was ordered, a Person should be thought
on that was to be sent: That Colonel Sydney was entrusted to take care of that
Business: That the said Colonel told the Deponent, he had sent Aaron Smith:
That then they agreed not to meet again till the return of the Messenger; who
was gone about a Month before they heard any thing of him; though the Letter he
carried, could have done no great hurt, had it been taken, because it was
written in a kind of a Cant, under the disguise of a Plantation in Carolina:
That all this Debate at the Lord Russel's went without contradiction, all there
present giving their consent: That as for raising Money, every one was put to
think of such a way, that Money might be collected without Administering
Jealousy: That after this the Deponent met no more with them; but when he
returned out of the Country, he was informed Aaron Smith was come back, and
that Sir John Cockran Was also come to Town.

Then Attherbury the Kings Messenger deposed, That the foresaid Cambel and his
Son were taken in London, making their escape out of a Window in a Woodmongers
House, four Days after they had been in Town; during which space, they
confessed they had changed their Lodgings three Times, and that they and Mr.
Baillie of Jerviswood came to Town together.

Against this Evidence the Lord Russel's defense (besides some Objections in
point of Law, wherein he was overruled by the Opinion of all the Judges there
present) was to this purpose:

That the two times they met, was upon no formed Design, only to talk of News,
and of things in general: That the Lord Howard having a voluble Tongue, they
delighted to hear him discourse: That he knew of no such Council of Six chosen,
for who should choose them? That the Witnesses against him swore to save their
own Lives, and therefore could not be credible: That Romzey was notoriously
known to have been highly obliged by the King and the Duke; and it was strange
he should be capable of such a Design as to Murder the King; that no Body then
could wonder, if to save his own Life, he should endeavor to take away
another: That the time by the 13th of the King was clapsed, since the
Prosecution was not made in the six Months: That a Design of Levying War is no
Treason, except it appear by some Overt Act: That there was but one Meeting at
Shepara's House, nor was he ever there but once: That then he came late, staid
not above a quarter of an hour, tasting Sherry with Shepard; and that there
ought to be two Witnesses to one and the same thing at the same time.

Then he produced Witnesses to prove that the Lord Howard, before he was taken,
declared He believed the Lord Russel innocent, and knew nothing against him.

The rest of his Justification consisted of the Testimony of several Persons
concerning the Virtue and Sobriety of his former Life.

As to what concerned the Lord Howard's saying, He believed the Lord Russel not
to be guilty; it was answered by the Lord Howard himself, That he confessed he
had said so, being then himself not accused, so that he intended to outface
the thing both for himself and the Party; but now his Duty to God, the King and
his Country required it, he must say the Truth; and that though the Council of
Six were not chosen by any Community, yet they did erect themselves by mutual
Agreement one with another into that Society.

The rest was answered by the Kings Learned Council at Law, That he was not
Tried upon the 13th of the King, but upon the 25th of Edward the Third: That to
Raise a Conspiracy within the Kingdom is what is called Levying War by that
Statute: That to Design to seize on the King, or to depose him, or to raise the
Subjects against him, has been settled by several Resolutions of the Judges to
be within that Statute, and Evidences of a Design to kill the King: That in
Cases of Treason, it is not necessary there should be two Witnesses to the same
individual Fact, at the same time; but if there he two Witnesses of things
tending to the same Fact, though at several times, and upon several occasions,
it is sufficient: That if there be one Witness of one Act of Treason, another
of a second, another of a third, they will be enough to Convicta Man of High
Treason: That so it was determined by the Opinion of all the Judges in England,
and by the Lords in Parliament in the Lord Stafford's Case.

It was farther urged, That the Witnesses against the Lord Russel were not
profligate Persons, nor Men who wanted Faith and Credit before that time; but
such against whom there had been no legal Exceptions made by himself: That
there was no Contradiction, no Correspondence or Contrivance at all between
them; and that it cannot be imagined such Men should Damn their own Souls to
take away the Life of a Gentleman, against whom they had no Quarrel.

As for Romzey's being much obliged to the King and the Duke, That it was
apparent by many Instances, that no such, though the greatest Obligations, had
hindered ill Men from Conspiring against His Majesty. For was not the Earl of
Essex, were not diverse others of the Conspirators in like manner obliged, and
advanced in Estate and Honor by the King?

As to their coming only to Shepard's to taste Wine, it was said, That could
not have been the end of their Meeting: Why did they then come so privately?
Why then did they order none of the Servants to come up? It was plain the
Design they met on, required only such Persons to be present as had an
Affection for the Cause.

It was also urged, That it is not a good Objection against a Man's being
Evidence in High Treason, that he himself was engaged in it; but that such Men
are the most proper Persons to be Evidence, none but they being able to detect
such Counsels.

As for the several Divines, and Men of Honor and Quality produced to testify
the Virtue and Sobriety of the Lord Russel's Conversation; it was answered,
That an Affectation of Popularity has often proved a Snare strong enough to
tempt many Men, who have otherwise been of great Temperance and Virtue. Nor
indeed can there be any more dangerous Enemies to a State or Kingdom, than such
as come sober to endeavor its Destruction. Which old and true Observation was
signally exemplified in this particular Case of the Lord Russel; For West
deposed, That the Underacters in the Treason most depended on the said Lord,
for this very reason, because they looked on him as a Man of great Sobriety.

Upon the whole Process he was found guilty of High Treason. But in stead of
Drawing, Hanging and Quartering, the usual and legal Penalty of that Crime, the
Execution was by His Majesty's Clemency changed into that of Beheading. Though
it is well known, this very Prerogative of the Kings having it in his Power to
alter the Punishment of High Treason, had been vehemently disputed by the
Party, and particularly by the Lord Russel himself in the Lord Stafford's Case.

The said Lord Russel at the time of his Death, which was the 21st of that
Month, delivered a Paper to the Sheriffs, and left other Copies of it with his
Friends, whereby it was immediately dispersed amongst the People; the general
drift of it being to make odious Insinuations against the Government, invidious
Reflections on the Ministers of His Majesty's Justice, and undue Extenuations
of his own Fault.

As to the whole Matter of it, Time, the best Discoverer, and Light of Truth,
has since shown it to be full of Enormous Falsehoods: And for the manner of its
Composure, it was such, as rather became the Subtilty, Artifice and
Equivocation of some crafty hypocritical Confessor, or Presbyterian Casuist,
than the Noble plainness and simplicity of a Gentleman; especially of One who
in this very Paper so much boasts of the Sincerity and Candor of his whole
Life, and of his perpetual hatred of Tricks and Evasions.

Among diverse other notorious Shifts and Prevarications contained in it, this
is observable, That in this Paper he declares solemnly he never was at
Shepard's in that Company but once, as in his Trial he had affirmed absolutely
he never was there but once: whereas, besides what Shepard positively swore,
That he was more than once there, and in that very Company; the said Lord
Russel himself also, when he was Examined in the Tower by His Majesty's Command
June 28th, confessed, He had been at Shepard 's House frequently; which
Confession after it was written down, read and repeated by himself, he in great
Agitation of Mind desired he might alter it. And the Alteration he made was to
put in diverse times in stead of frequently. The Truth of which appears by the
Original thus subscribed, and corrected by the Lord Russel; and by the known
Integrity of Sir Leolyn Jenkins, Sir Jon Ernly, and His Majesty's
Attorney General and Sollicitor-General, who received the Examination, and have
attested the Alteration.

The Lord Russel likewise in the Printed Speech affirms, His intention of going
to Shepards was to taste Sherry; and in his Trial he said, He staid not above a
quarter of an Hour there tasting of Sherry. Though presently after in the very
same Paper, forgetting what he had said, he acknowledges, He was desired to go
thither by the Duke of Monmouth, upon a business of greater consequence than
the tasting of Sherry: Which was, That the Duke of Monmouth called upon him to
tell him, that the Earl of Shaftsbury and some other hot Men would undo them
all, if great care were not taken; and therefore entreated him to go with him
to Shepards. To this he adds, That when he came thither, there were things
spoken by some with much more heat than Judgment; Things of the same Nature, no
doubt, with those he confessed to have heard before in the Earl of Shaftsbury's
Company, which made the Duke of Monmouth himself cry out, Did you ever hear so
Horrid a thing? However all these Treasonable Discourses about making some
Stirs as he styles them, the said Lord would fain have had pass only for
Misprision of Treason. Though it is remarkable that in all those his last
Words, there is no more sign of his asking Forgiveness of God or the King, for
his confessed Misprision, than for the High Treason. Moreover in the same
printed Paper he solemnly avows, There was no undertaking at Shepards for
seizing the Guards; none appointed to view or examine them; only that there was
some discourse then, and at other times, about the feasibleness of it; adding,
That several times by accident he heard it mentioned, as a thing might easily
be done. By which and other the like concessions in that Speech he well nigh
grants himself Guilty of the Crime whereof he was accused; since the Judges
often affur'd him, that those Discourses and Consultations not revealed are
High Treason.

He farther says, it was by a strange fetch, that a design of seizing on the
Guards was construed a design of killing the King. But that this construction
was no such strange fetch, Colonel Walcot himself might have informed him; who
both at his Trial, and his Execution, did with far more Truth and Ingenuity
allow, that it was the same thing for him to engage the Kings Guards, whilst
another killed him, as to kill him with his own Hands.

Though, to put this whole Matter out of question, touching that Consultation
at Shepards, for seizing the Guards, His Majesty declares on the Faith of a
King, appealing also to the Memory of his Royal Highness to confirm the same,
That the Duke of Monmouth did, in express Terms confess this very particular,
and all the Circumstances of it to His Majesty at the time of his rendering
himself: Namely, That the foresaid debate of surprising the Guards was at
Shepards; that the Lord Russel was one of the Persons debating it; that the
result was, the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas Armstrong
should go view the Guards in order to seize them; that accordingly they three
did go, and take a view of them to that end; and that the report they made to
the same Company at their next Meeting was, that the thing might be done, if
they had any considerable strength.

But what need any farther Proof of the insincerity of the Lord Russel's last
Justification, than the forementioned Deposition of Carstares? An Evidence not
only by Law unquestionable, but such as cannot but be esteemed by the very
Conspirators themselves of invincible strength and conviction: Since he was a
Man eminent in their Party, and one of their principal seducing Teachers. And
what the said Carstares deposed relating to the Lord Russel, His Majesty thinks
fit to be repeated here again. It was, That when he returned into England out
of Holland, where he had been to concert matters with the Earl of Argyle, for
promoting the General Conspiracy; the next Day he met with Sir John Cockran,
and having acquainted him with the Earl of Argyl 's demands of 30000 l.
Sterling, and the Thousand Horse and Dragoons, Sir John Cockran carried the
said Carstares to the Lord Russel; to whom he proposed the affair, but being
then a perfect stranger, had noreturn from him at that time. That afterward
the Deponent met with the Lord Russel accidentally at Shepard 's House, where,
as Shepard affirmed, the said Lord was come to speak with him about the Money
beforementioned. That when the other two had done talking, Carstares himself
desi'd to speak with the Lord Russel; and that in his discourse with him,
having reiterated the former proposition for the 30000 l. and the Thousand
Horse, and Dragoons, the Lord Russel answered in these very Words; They could
not get so much Money raised at the time, but if they had 1000 l. to begin, that
would draw People in, and when they were once in, they would soon be brought to
wore. But as for the 1000 Horse and Dragoons, he could say nothing at the
present, for that behoved to be concerted on the Borders.

By which plain Deposition, agreeing with so many other Witnesses, it is
manifest that when they whom the Lord Russel trusted with Composing his last
Speech, permitted him to affirm on the word of a Dying Man, He knew nothing of
any Design against the King or Kingdom, either they did grossly prevaricate with
him, or he with them.

His Majesty has judged it convenient that the wholes Proceeding with the Lord
Russel, should be thus particularly recollected, as well that one great
Instance for all might be given of the Impartiality and fair course in which
the public Justice was administered against the Conspirators, as also that it
might appear with what weak Cavils, Ambiguities and Tergiversations they
defended themselves both living and dying. For the others who were afterward
brought to condign Punishment, it will not be so needful to descend into every
minute part of their Trials, Condemnations and Executions, which have been
already faithfully published; especially since those that followed made most of
the same Objections in Law and Fact as were before most solidly answered. It
will be enough only to make some few Observations, where any new Matter shall
arise, for the fuller Demonstration of the wicked Design.

On July the 13th of that Year, was John Rouse brought to Trial. Against him
there was ample Evidence given: First by Thomas Lea; That the said Rouse
undertook to provide 100 Arms for the City-Divisions: That he said, Nothing
could be done unless the King were seized; adding, We remember Forty One, when
the King went and set up his Standard; therefore we will seize them that they
shall not set up their Standard.

That he farther said, It would be convenient to have a Ball played on
Black Heath; to that end some Sea-Captains must be spoken to, he promising to
speak to Ten: That when the Ball should be won, every Captain might take his
Party, and tell them they had other Work, and then go with long Boats and Arms
to seize the Tower: That the said Rouse had several such Discourses, and went
diverse times to view the Tower to that end: That after the Discovery he said to
Goodenough and Nelthrop, Be not discouraged, but let the Business go on: That
he said, Take off the King and the Duke, and then no Man can have Commission to
fight for them: That he also affirmed, He was under an Oath of Secrecy, never
to trust but one at a time with the Design.

Then by William Leigh, That the said Rouse farther endeavored to get Seamen
to seize on, and Command some of the Kings Ships, lying as Guard-Ships at
Woolwich and Deptford: That being asked, What he would do with Ships without
Powder and Shot, with which they could not be provided except the Tower were
surpised? He replied, We must secure the Tower and Whitehal, both, or;we can
do nothing.

And farther, to prove the said. Rouse's former Traiterous Tempter of Mind
against His Majesty's Government, it was sworn by Mr. Corbin, That upon some
discourse concerning the Parliament at Oxford Rouse said, He foresaw it would
be a short Sessions, but that these frequent Prorogations and Dissolutions of
Parliament would not avail him: For whatever the King has, the Parliament gave
him, and they may take it away when they please: That the King had for
forfeited his Crown, and had no more Right to it than he had.

Against this all the Defense Rouse made was, That the words attested by
Corbin, were spoken upon a Supposition of the Popes Power over Princes: That as
for William Lea he had nothing to say against him, but hoped he was an honest
Man; and for Thomas Lea, that the said Lea himself first began those
Treasonable Discourses, which Rouse intended to have revealed, had not the
other got the start of him. But this being only supported by his single Yea-and
Nay, without the Credit of any one Witness to strengthen it, the Jury presently
gave their Verdict that he was Guilty.

For diverse Years before he had been a most Notorious Boutefeu in the City of
London; and was one of the many scandalous Examples of the gross Corruption and
Iniquity of the Ignoramus-Juries of that time; he having been unjustly
acquitted by them, when in the Year 1681, he was Indicted of high Crimes,
particularly for those Traiterous Words mentioned in Corbin's Evidence.

But at lad the Divine Vengeance overtook him in this manner: At his Death
among other things he ingenuously confessed, he had deserved the Sentence
passed against him; that he had heard and understood too much in several kinds
of Meetings, especially of some, who though they called themselves True
Protestants, were Ten Thousands times worse than any others.

On November the 7th of the said Year 1683, was Colonel Algernoon Sydney
arraigned, having sued out his Habeas Corpus; and on the 21st he was brought to
his Trial. He was Indicted for being one of their Great Council of Six; for
sending Aaron Smith into Scotland; and for writing a most Treasonable Libel
against the Government, which was found in his Closet on the Table, when his
Papers were seized.

As to the said Colonels having been one of their Council of Six, and present
at, and consenting to all their Deliberations, at Mr. Hambden's and the Lord
Russel's the Lord Howard deposed to the same sense as he had done at the Lord
Russel's Trial; adding now one particular, which more especially affected
Colonel Sydney; That the said Colonel, the Duke of Monmouth, and the Deponent
were the first Movers of erecting that Council, the Duke of Monmouth
undertaking to incline the Lord Russel to it, and Mr. Sydney promising for the
Earl of Essex and Mr. Hambden.

Touching the Second Article, His sending Aaron Smith into Scotland to invite
some Scotch-Men hither, the Lord Howard farther witnessed, 'That at their first
Meeting at Mr. Hambden's, amongst other Matters, it was chiefly debated how to
make a coalition of Councils between them and Scotland; That to this purpose it
was proposed some fit Person should be thought on to send thither to unite them
and the English Conspirators into one sense and care: That this was discoursed
of at the first Meeting.

That at the next, which was at my Lord Russel's House, every one of the same
Persons being present, they fell to Consult of what they had charged themselves
with the time before, concerning sending into Scotland; and also the settling a
Correspondence with Argyle: That the Scotch Gentlemen Named to be sent to, were
Melvin, Cockran and the Cambels: That Colonel Sydney offered he would take care
of the Person to be sent, saying, he had one in his thoughts whom he judged a
fit Man to he trusted, naming Aaron Smith for the Man: That as many of the
Company as knew him, thought him a very proper Person for that employment: That
the Duke of Monmouth undertook to invite Melvin hither; and a Letter was to be
sent to Cockran by Smith: That these Scotch-men were to be desired to come, and
acquaint their Council here, how they found Scotland tempered; what
opportunities or advantages there might be of putting that Kingdom into a
Commotion; and how they might there keep time and place with the English.

That shortly after this, the Deponent went to Colonel Sydney's, and found him
just going into London: That the said Colonel took out of a Cabinet several
Guinea's, saying, They were to be given to Aaron Smith for his Expenses: That
he was sent accordingly; and the Colonel told the Deponent afterward, He was
gone, and was upon the Road, and that he had heard from him when he was about
Newcastle.

It was next plainly proved, That those Scotch-men came up soon after Smith
arrived there. This was sworn by Sir Andrew Foster, that Cockran, Monroe, and
the two Cambels came to Town about the end of the Spring, or the beginning of
Summer; Cockran and Monroe pretending their Business was a Purchase in
Carolina; and that upon the very first rumor of a Plot, Cockran absconded,
Monroe and the Cambels were taken.

To this purpose Attherbury the Messenger also deposed, That about the end of
June, or the beginning of July 1683, he was sent by His Majesty's Warrant into
London, upon a Discovery of some Scotch-men lodging in Blackfriars; but the
Common-Sergeant of the City and others having been there before him, found them
making their escape in a Boa^ That the Persons were Sir High Ca^^^l, Cockran,
and another: That this was after they had been in Town but a little while.

The next Head of the Accusation concern 'd the Treasonable Pamphlet sound in
Colonel Sydney's Study, at the time of his Apprehension. To this, first Sir
Philip Lloyd Clerk of His Majesty's Council deposed, That having been sent by
the King and Council to seize Colonel Sydney's Papers, he did go, and put up
what he found in his Closet: That he found those Papers now given in Evidence
lying upon his Table where he usually writ: That he seized them toward the
later end of June: That having put them up, he offered Colonel Sydney that he
might Seal them with his own Seal, but he refusing, the Deponent set his Seal
to them, and so delivered them to the Council.

Next it was made out, by as firm Proof as such a Matter will bear, That all
the Sheets produced were of Colonel Sydney's own Handwriting, which was
evidenced by Mr. Shepard, Mr. Cook, and Mr. Carry, Men of known Repute and
Credit, who had long dealt with Mr. Sydney in Matters of Money, and had paid
diverse Bills of Exchange for him, upon Notes written in the same Hand, and were
never called to any account for Mis-payment.

Then were the Papers read, containing rank Treason almost in every Line.

For therein were broached and asserted many horrible Doctrines both against
Monarchy in general, and the English Monarchy in particular: which according to
the usual false Reasoning of all Republican Writers, he endeavored to justify
by diverse Quotations and Examples of Sacred and Profane History grossly
perverted, and misapplied against the present Government of his Country.

In short, the whole design of those Papers was to maintain, That Tyrants may
be justly deposed by the People; and that the People are the only Judges who
are Tyrants: And peculiarly concerning this Nation there are these Expressions:

The Power originally in the People of England is delegated to the Parliament.
He, the King, is subject to the Law of God, as he is a Man; to the People that
makes him a King, in as much as he is a King: The Law sets a Measure to that
Subjection: The Parliament is Judge of the particular Cases thereupon arising:
He must be content to submit his Interest to theirs, since he is no more than
any one of them in any other respect, than that he is by consent of all raised
above any other: If he does not like this Condition, he may renounce the Crown:
But if he receive it upon this Condition, (as all Magistrates do the Power they
receive) and swear to perform it, he must expect the Performance will be
exacted, or Revenge taken by those he has betrayed.

And in another place he says, We may therefore change or take away Kings
without breaking any Yoke; or that is made a Yoke, which ought not to be one.
The Injury is in making, and imposing, and there can be none in breaking it.

And in another, That the People must needs be the Judge of what happens
between them, and the King, whom they did constitute. And in another, that as
for the Peoples being Judges in their own Cases, it is plain they ought to be
the only Judges.

And in another, That the Power of calling and dissolving Parliaments is not in
the King. And in another, 'That the general revolt of a Nation from its own
Magistrates can never be called a Rebellion.

These are some of the Treasonable Tenets contained in Mr. Sydney's Papers,
amongst many other Assertions that are equally Criminal, but too long to be
here inserted. Concerning all which villainous Opinions this is certainly known,
and confessed by all good Men, That as they laid the Foundations of the late
miserable War against his Majesty's blessed Father, and thereby occasioned the
spilling so much Blood, even of the Royal Blood it self; so whenever the
Multitude shall be infected with the like Antimonarchical Doctrines, it will be
impossible for the best Kings, or the most happy Kingdoms in the World, to be
free from perpetual Treasons, and Rebellious Plottings.

To all this Colonel Sidney's Answer being only made up of most of the same
Pleas in Law that had been overruled, and the same objections against the Lord
Howard which were satisfactorily repelled in the former Trials: besides that he
only barely denied the sending of Aaron Smith, and his having any hand in, or
knowledge of that Message: And as for his Treasonable Papers, he would not
grant them to be his, or if they were found in his Study, he affirmed That they
might have been written many Years ago in answer to Sir R. Filmer 's Book of
Monarchy; and written with no intention of publishing them, but only for
private diversion, and the exercise of his Pen. In short, his Defense
consisting rather in Nice Cavils. at the known Forms of Law, or Discourses
ridiculing the Design of a Council of Six, and the whole Conspiracy it self,
than in any solid Arguments or Evidence to invalidate the Witnesses, or to
clear himself from the Crimes proved upon him, he was presently found Guilty.

His Execution in respect of his Quality, His Majesty altered from the usual
Punishment of High Treason, into that of Severing his Head from his Body. At
the time of his death on December the 7th he also delivered the Sheriffs a
Written Paper: Wherein, after having excused his not speaking what he wrote, by
alleging this reason among others, That this was an Age, which makes Truth
pass for Treason; he objects against the Lord Howard the Infamy of his former
Life; which Objection no Man in England had less cause to make than himself,
the Lord Howard and he having been known to be entire Confidents, Familiars and
Friends for many Years past of their Lives, and till the very time of the
Discovery.

Touching his Papers produced against him, he gives an account full of manifest
Equivocations, and ambiguous Reservations. He sufficiently intimates they were
his own, but implies they were written long ago against a Book of Controversy
in Matters of Government. Thereupon he goes on, openly to justify those
Papers, by Positions dangerous enough to the Public Peace, but quite different
from what was laid to his charge at his Trial, and was quoted word by word out
of those Papers. For instead of being a general Discourse for the Peoples
Rights against Kings, without any particular Applications to Time or Place, as
in this his last Paper he insinuates them to have been; it is apparent to any
Man that can but read, that those Sheets of his Writing, which were given in
Evidence, struck at the very Root of the English Monarchy, and that therein he
studied to do his part to bring the Ax very near the Kings Neck once again.

He farther, in that printed Speech, most injuriously reviles his Judges,
affirming with notorious falsehood and petulancy, That lest the Means of
destroying the best Protestants in England should fail, the Bench was filled
with such as had been Blemishes to the Bar.

He goes on to make diverse the like frivolous and groundless Reflections on the
legal and regular Proceedings against him; concluding with a Prayer that could
be dictated by none but a fierce Republican, and a furious Enthusiastical
Spirit met together. It was in truth a Prayer more proper for their Treasonable
Meetings at Mr. Hambden's or the Lord Russel's, than to be used as the last
words of a Gentleman dying in the profession of his Innocence.

For after having fondly declared, That he fell a Sacrifice to Idols, he thus
addresses his Speech to the great God of Heaven: Bless thy People and save
them. Defend thy own Cause; Defend those that defend it. Stir up such as are
faint, Direct those that are willing. Confirm those that waver. Give Wisdom and
Integrity unto all. Grant that I may dye glorifying thee for all thy Mercies;
and that at the last thou have permitted me to be singled out as a Witness of
thy Truth; and even by the Confession of my Opposers, for that Old Cause in
which I was from my Youth engaged, and for which thou have often wonderfully
declared thy self.

He makes it his last Glory, That he was engaged in that Old Cause from his
Youth; and he was so. Being yet very young he took up Rebellious Arms against
his Majesty's Blessed Father, and merited so well of that Old Cause, that he
was thought rightly qualified to be Named, though he did not actually sit,
amongst the black Number of the Regicides.

Upon His Majesty's most happy Return, his fixed aversion to the restored
Government was such, that he would not personally accept of the Oblivion and
Indemnity then generally granted to the whole Nation. But he voluntarily
banished himself for many Years; till about the Year 1677, he came into England
again, and by His Majesty's special Grace obtained a particular Pardon, upon
repeated promises of constant quiet, and Obedience for the time to come: Which
how he made good, the World may Judge. In fine, he fell a memorable warning,
and fatal Example to all the English Nobility and Gentry of this, and all
future Ages; that they should take heed of being so far infatuated with the
fancy and Chimerical Felicities of Ancient or Modern Commonwealths, as to
despise and attempt the ruin of the far more solid Liberty and Happiness to be
enjoyed under the English Monarchy.

On the 28th Day of November 1683, Mr. John Hambden Junior, having also sued
out his Habeas Corpus, was arraigned for High Misdemeanor, and brought to his
Trial the 6th of February following.

In this Trial, the Lord Howard positively deposed to the same sense as before
touching the general Transactions of the Conspiracy till the Earl of
Shaftsbury's Death; and particularly afterward of the Meeting of the Council
of Six at Mr. Hambden's own House, where Mr. Hambden made an Introductory
Speech to open the Assembly: and the subject of their Debates was concerning
the Time, Place, Men, Arms and Money to be provided toward a Rising; and also
that then the sending a Messenger into Scotland was proposed, and referred to
be debated the next Meeting.

Farther, That Mr. Hambden was present at that next Meeting at the Lord
Russel's House; and amongst the rest deliberated of sending the Messenger into
Scotland; when Aaron Smith was named, and approved to be the Man.

But the substance of the Lord Howard's Evidence having been before
sufficiently set down, it will be needless now to follow exactly every
Circumstance of it. It is enough only to note, That most of the same Objections
being again repeated by the Defendents Council, had the same or like Answers
returned them by the King's.

There was indeed one new and very material thing then first particularly and
unquestionably made out in this Trial, which was the certainty of Aaron Smith's
carrying the Treasonable Message into Scotland. This was now demonstrably
proved by Sheriff and Bell, both Inhabitants of Newcastle; Sheriff being the
Man at whose House Smith lay in his passage to and fro, and Bell the very Guide
that went thence to conduct him into Scotland.

Touching this Matter; First, Attherbury one of the Kings Messengers testified,
That Sheriff and Bell had a full view of Aaron Smith, who was brought for that
purpose from the King's Bench before the King: That Sheriff and Bell did then
own Aaron Smith to be the Man who had passed under the Name of Clerk: That
Sheriff declared the said Clerk lay at his House; and Bell said that he
traveled toward Scotland with him, being hired to show him the way: That to
all this Aaron Smith would not answer one word.

Then Sheriff himself deposed, That he keeping the Black-Spread-Eagle in
Newcastle, Aaron Smith came to his House about the middle of February 1683:
That he staid there one Night, went away, and returned again in twelve days, or
thereabout: That he traveled from his House Northward toward Scotland, but
first desired one might be got to show him the way: That to that purpose the
Deponent sent for Bell, whom Smith presently hired to go with him: That when
Smith came back, he lay another Night at his House, and so returned into the
South toward London: That Smith went all the while by the Name of Clerk: That
the Deponent directed him to a Gentleman at Jadburgh, which is Forty Miles from
Newcastle, and within Six Miles of Scotland.

Then Bell swore, That Aaron Smith was the very Man who went by the Name of
Clerk. That the Deponent living at Newcastle, and getting his Livelihood by
letting out Horses and guiding of Travelers; Sheriff sent for him, told him
the said Clerk wanted a Guide into Scotland: That this happened on the Thursday
before Shrove Tuesday: That the next Morning being Friday, he conduced Smith
toward Jadburgh; that on the Saturday the Deponents Horse was tired; so Smith
left him taking another Guide; appointing him to come after as fast as he could
to Jadburgh: That the Deponent overtook him there on Sunday; and on Monday
Morning saw him take Horse with another Guide for Scotland, saying he was going
toward Douglas: That Bell presently went back to Newcastle: where he saw Smith
and discoursed with him, upon his return out of Scotland.

Then it was also proved by Sir Andrew Foster and Attherbury, That the
Scotch-Men sent for by Smith's Message, did come, and staid in Town, till upon
the Discovery of the Plot, they were either taken or absconded.

By this plain Evidence of the several Stages of Smith's Journey, that
Treasonable intercourse with Scotland was made out beyond all possibility of
Confutation. So that from the very time of the Consultations at Mr. Hambden's,
and the Lord Russel's about sending a Messenger; the Truth of Colonel Sydney's
undertaking to send one; of his naming Aaron Smith for the Messenger; of
Smith's going to Scotland; of the Scotch-Mens coming up that were sent for; and
of their being surprised, endeavoring to hide themselves, upon the first
breaking forth of the Plot; all this appears to be indisputably confirmed, and
traced step by step, almost from Day to Day, especially if these Newcastle Men's
Depositions shall be compared with the Testimony that is subjoined of two
Scotch-Men Thomas Steil, and Oliver, concerning Aaron Smith's actual arrival in
Scotland, and what he did whilst he was there at that time.

The issue was, Mr. Hambden was immediately found Guilty of the High Trespass
and Misdemeanor, and thereupon fined 40000 l. to the King, and ordered to give
Sureties for his Good Behavior during Life. A Punishment that cannot but be
esteemed very moderate, considering the Nature of his Crime, which nothing but
the want of another positive Witness could have made less than High Treason.
And the King cannot but here take this occasion once for all, to give the World
Notice of this Infallible Instance of his mild and merciful Proceedings toward
the Conspirators. For His Majesty does solemnly declare, That if he had not
granted the Duke of Monmouth's Request That he would not make him a Witness,
neither Mr. Hambden, nor scarce any one Man of all those that were freed upon
Bail, had escaped Death. Not to mention diverse others, whom the said Duke of
Monmouth named as Parties in the Conspiracy, that were never yet questioned.

On the 14th of June 1684, Sir Thomas Armstrong having been taken in Holland,
was brought to the King's Bench Bar, upon an Outlawry against him for High
Treason. Whereupon the Kings Attorney demanded An Award of Execution: Since
upon his not appearing, when formerly Indicted of High Treason, he was now by
the course of Law attainted for the same.

Armstrong being asked, What he could say for himself? alleged, He was beyond
Sea at the time of the Outlawry, and begged he might be Tried.

It was answered, That after a Record of Outlawry, the Judges had nothing to do
but to appoint Execution.

Against this Armstrong urged, That by the Statute of the 6th of Edward the
Sixth, the Person Outlawed had a Years time to Reverse the Outlawry, if he were
beyond Sea.

The Bench replied That by the plain words of that Statute, none could have the
benefit of it, but such as within one Year should yield themselves to the Chief
Justice of England, and offer to Traverse the Indictment upon which the
Outlawry was pronounced.

To this Armstrong pleaded, That the Year not being yet out, he did now render
himself to the Chief Justice.

But that Plea not being admitted, because he did not yield himself according
to the sense of the Act, but was brought a Prisoner, and so could have no
Advantage of the Proviso in the Statute; Armstrong alleged, That the same
Favor had been lately granted to another, meaning Holloway, who though he was
in the same condition of Outlawry, yet was offered to take his Trial if he
pleased.

It was answered, That was done out of the mere Grace and Favor of the King,
who if his Majesty thought good, might extend the like Favor to him also. But
that was not the business of a Court of Justice; they were only to take care to
satisfy the Law.

Moreover, the Kings Attorney acquainted the Court, That the Prisoner at the
Bar deserved no fort of Indulgence or Mercy from the King; not only for that
when he was seized beyond Sea, Letters of fresh Communication with Foreign
Ministers and other People were taken about him, but also because it appeared
to His Majesty by full Evidence positively given, That after the Disappointment
of the Meeting at the Rye by Gods Providence in the Fire at New Market,
Armstrong was one of the Persons that actually engaged to go upon the Kings
hasty coming to Town, and to destroy him by the way as he came.

Then was he ordered to be Executed June the 20th. At the place of Execution he
likewise delivered the Sheriffs a Paper, wherein he continued to Object against
the legal Course of the Proceedings upon him, complaining, That with an
unordinary roughness he had been condemned, and made a President, though
Holloway being also Outlawed, had his Trial offered him a little before.

As to the new Evidence against him, which the Kings Attorney mentioned at the
King's Bench, he only answered it by a bold and flat denial: affirming upon his
Death, He never had any Design against the Kings Life, nor the Life of any Man;
both which may be easily allowed to be equally true.

But to evince the contrary as to the Kings Life, it will be sufficient to set
down the very words of the Lord Howard's Deposition, together with the
Testimony of Colonel Romzey, which the Kings Attorney had then ready to
produce, amongst many other old and clear Proofs to convince him of designing
the Kings Destruction.

The Lord Howard having first confessed some Discourse between the Duke of
Monmouth and himself, in October of 1683, wherein the said Duke had proposed
the failing on the King at Newmarket, goes on in these words:

Upon Reflection I am apt to think, that from this time and not before, the
Design of way-laying the King in his return to London, was first meditated. And
I am the more confirmed in this Opinion from the Consideration of the Behavior
of the Duke of Monmouth and the Lord Gray; who seemed to be very big of
expectation of some great thing to be attempted upon the Day of the Kings
coming from Newmarket; upon which Day (as I have before observed) Sir Thomas
Armstrong was not to be found till the Kings Coaches were come into Town: And I
do verily believe he was to have Headed the Party.

This very Particular the Lord Howard gave in upon Oath among his first
Confessions to His Majesty. Nor can any Man think it sufficient to invalidate
the Truth of this, that Armstrong in his last Paper calls it a base Reflection,
affirming He could have proved it to be a manifest falsehood; considering that
Colonel Romzey also upon notice of Armstrong's being taken, made Oath in these
very words:

Sir Thomas Armstrong did come to me the Sunday-night after the Fire at
New Market, and told me, That he just came from Ferguson, and that
notwithstanding the King and Duke were to return so soon, yet Ferguson did not
doubt to have Men ready by that time to do the Business; and desired me to go
with him to Ferguson's Lodging in his Coach, which I did. When I came there,
Ferguson told me the same, but that they wanted Money. Upon which Sir Thomas
desired me to Lend some, and he would see me Repaid; and added, That if he had
been in Stock, he would have done it himself.

After this, the King could not think himself in the least bound to go out of
the way of the Law, for showing any distinguishing Act of Grace to Sir Thomas
Armstrong; especially when it is manifest there was scarce a Man living, who
had more Personal obligations to His Majesty than he had; and yet no Man had
made more ungrateful returns for them, than he had done. Nor could His Majesty
forget, how many other Persons, and some very near his Majesty, Sir Thomas
Armstrong had been the Chief Instrument of perverting. Upon which account His
Majesty had reason to look on him, as the Author of many more Treasons besides
his own.

There is now scarce any thing material left unmention'd relating to the Proof
either of the Assassination or Insurrection, but what may be readily supplied,
by any intelligent Reader, out of the Original Records of Informations and
Confessions, whereof by His Majesty's Command, there are Copies an next to this
Narration for an Authentic Confirmation of its Truth. Only the King is pleased
that a more particular account should be given than has been hitherto made
Public, of the Duke of Monmouth's rendering himself, of the Reasons then moving
His Majesty to grant him his Pardon, and of what is toriety of the Fact and all
the Circum what happened immediately upon it, which occasioned the said Dukes
final Disgrace and Banishment from His Majesty's presence.

As to the late Earl of Essex's Murdering himself in the Tower some few days
after his Imprisonment there, His Majesty cannot think it becomes Him to
descend to any particular Justification of his own, or his Ministers Innocence
in that Calamitous Accident.

Though His Majesty is not ignorant, that diverse most Malicious Pamphlets have
been lately spread abroad in English, and other Languages, which with an
unparalleled Impudence have accused several Persons of eminent Virtue and
Honor about His Majesty, not sparing even his Royal Highness; nay scarce
freeing the King himself, from being Personally Conscious of so Base and
Barbarous an Action.

But after the Truth of the whole Matter has been carefully examined and
asserted by the Coroners Inquest, whose proper Business it was; and after
Braddon has suffered the Punishment of the Law, for Suborning even Children to
bear false Witness in the Case; and after the Notoriety of the Fact, and all
the Circumstances of it, have been so clearly made out, that there is not a Man
in all England, of an honest Mind, or sound Sense, who does in the least doubt
it; His Majesty disdains to enter into dispute with every Petulant Scribler, or
to answer the villainous Suggestions and horrid Calumnies contained particularly
in the Libel called The Detection, and in the Epitome of it; the one written by
Ferguson, the other by Danvers; both infamous Men, and mortal Enemies to His
Majesty's Government and Person.

Yet His Majesty cannot but think it deserves Observation, That when the late
Earl of Essex had so many considerable Relations and Alliances with diverse the
greatest Families in the Kingdom; and when neither his Lady, nor Brother, nor
any one of all his Numerous Friends and Noble Kindred, who were most nearly
concerned, did ever express the least Jealousy of foul dealing or ill practice
upon the said unfortunate Earl; and when all Men's Eyes are opened, and scarce a
Man of their own Party has any scruple in his Thoughts about that Business; yet
that now at last their old Advocate of Treason Ferguson should come forth in
Print, to outface so clear a Demonstration of Truth, and should try still to
turn the Envy of that unhappy Stroke on the Court, and the King, and his
dearest Brother. It cannot but seem a prodigious Confidence and Presumption,
that Ferguson should be their chosen Champion in this Cause! The Man, who by so
many Depositions stands Outlawed and Convict of having had the greatest share
in the blackest part of the Conspiracy! The Man, in accusing whom almost every
Witness both Scotch and English consented, so that his Crimes have been proved
by more than Twenty plain Evidences; particularly the Duke of Monmouth himself
having confessed to His Majesty, That in all their Debates Ferguson was always
for Cutting of Throats; saying, That was the most Compendious Way. That this
very Ferguson should so far make good his own words at parting, when he vowed,
He would never be out of a Plot as long as he lived! That now in his Banishment
under the load of so many undeniable Treasons, he should still appear as the
great Patron of the Old Cause, and should presume he can impose on the World in
a matter of Fact so fully tried, so clearly proved and determined! mined! What
can be a greater Impudence, than that Ferguson should still expect that he
could make any Man living believe, the King himself, or the Duke of York could
ever be induced to practice his Compendious Way on the Earl of Essex?

However from this one instance the King hopes the World will judge, how most
Injuriously and Barbarously he has been used by his Adversaries in their other
Libels against him; in most of which it is well known the same venomous Pen was
employed.

As for the deplorable end of the said Earl, His Majesty freely owns, there was
no Man in his Dominions more deeply afflicted with it than himself: His Majesty
having been thereby deprived of an extraordinary Opportunity to exercise his
Royal Clemency; and to testify to all his Loyal Subjects and Old Friends, how
highly he valued the Memory and Sufferings of the Lord Capel.

Next himself, His Majesty thinks he is also bound in common Justice to
declare, That his entirely beloved Brother was most tenderly concerned and
grieved at that lamentable Effect of the Earl of Essex's Despair: His Majesty
being best able, upon his own knowledge to vouch for the Duke of York, That he
never deserved ill of the said Earl, and was always most readily inclined, for
both their Fathers sakes, to have forgiven whatever ill the Earl of Essex had
done to him.

Now touching His Majesty's Pardoning the Duke of Monmouth, and what followed
upon it, the King is pleased this Account shall be given.

The World needs not be told with what extraordinary regret to His Majesty, the
said Duke was of late Years perverted from that sense of his Duty and
Allegiance, His Majesty might justly claim from him, upon many more Obligations
besides that of being his Subject.

But it was one of the first and principal Artifices of the Earl of
Shaftsbury's Malice, after his own disgrace at Court, to be revenged on the
King, by afflicting him in so tender a part, and by sly Insinuations, to wrest
from his Bosom a Person, who he knew, had so great a share in His Majesty's
Affections.

This was indeed a Talent peculiar to the Earl of Shaftsbury, That of all Men
living he could most easily turn himself into all shapes, and comply with all
Dispositions; positions; having by long practice, got the skill to cover his
Hooks with Baits fitting every Humor. The Covetous, who are no small Number of
the pretended Godly Party, those he was wont to feed, and deceive with hopes of
Wealth and new Sequestrations: The Ambitious with Praise and Vainglory: The
Nonconformist Zealots, with Promises of Liberty in Religion; sometimes not
refusing to stoop lower, and even to serve and assist the Pleasures and
Debauches of Men that way inclined, if he found them any way useful for his
purpose.

Wherefore the said Earl observing in the Duke of Monmouth a Mind rash,
unsteady and ambitious, soon made him an easy Prey to his wicked Subtilty,
disguised under fair and plausible Colors: On the one side, puffing up his
Youthful Thoughts with a vain Ostentation of Honor, and the Temptation of Fame
to be gotten by Asserting and Defending his Countries Liberties and Religion,
always pretended by him to be in imminent danger, whilst He was out of place:
On the other, inflaming him with imaginary Suspicions of the Duke of York's
irreconcilable Hatred to his Person. Which was so far from having any real
Foundation, that on the contrary, His Majesty, who best knows, does freely here
testify for his dearest Brother in this particular, That the Duke of Monmouth,
till he made himself incapable of his Friendship, never had a more entire, or
fast Friend about His Majesty; and there was scarce ever any Honor or Benefit
conferred on him, but it was obtained of His Majesty by his Royal Highnesses
Intercession.

However by such groundless Jealousies and empty Conceits, was the Duke of
Monmouth insensibly drawn to desert his only true Interest, and to give himself
over to the Delusions of His Majesty's mortal Enemies.

This the King apparently perceiving, and foreseeing how in the Event it would
tend to the said Dukes inevitable Ruin, His Majesty tried by all imaginable
ways of Kindness to cast forth the Evil Spirit in him, and to rescue him out of
their Hands. At length, when no milder course would serve, His Majesty required
him on his Allegiance, to go beyond the Seas, and there to remain till his
farther pleasure was signified. His Majesty still hoping, that at so great a
distance the Poison would be lest effectual, and that by his absence the said
Duke would be kept Innocent of the Treasonable designs which his New Associates
were furiously carrying on against the Government.

But in that expectation His Majesty was unfortunately disappointed. The Duke
of Monmouth presently showed, how much his False Friends and Treacherous
Flatterers had prevailed over his unwary Youth; and how different they had
taught him to be from the Obedience, which at the same time was practiced by
his Royal Highness. For the said Duke of Monmouth soon returned into England
contrary to His Majesty's express Command.

The discontented Party having thus got him again, and made him surer to
themselves by this new Affront to His Majesty, began now to take new Life and
Vigor by his presence: With insufferable Boldness and Contempt of Authority,
showed him every where to the Rabble; Leading him about with insolent Pomp,
through many Countries; openly owning and crying him up as the Head of their
Cause; the unhappy Young Man all the white not understanding that he was only a
Property.

By these fatal steps he was was at last brought into the most pernicious
Counsels and Undertakings. And whilst nothing less was intended by his Tempters
but the subversion of all that is well-settled and sacred in Church and State;
they deluded him into the very same Designs, by popular Shows and empty Names
of the Protestant Duke, the great Champion and Protector of the Privileges of
the Subject and the Reformed Religon: Which under His Majesty, can never want
any other Protector; nor can ever stand in need of such Champions as many of
late have vaunted themselves to be, of whole Religion there can be given no
better Account than of their Loyalty.

Such then was the state of things, when upon the first breaking forth of this
Horrid Conspiracy, His Majesty with inexpressible Surprise and Grief, Found by
undoubted Evidence the Duke of Monmouth very deeply engaged; and therefore had
but too just reason to put him into a Proclamation among the other
Conspirators: After that the said Duke had withdrawn himself from His Majesty's
Justice, and so long was become incapable of his Forgiveness.

In this obstinate defiance the Duke of Monmouth continued, till the Outlawry
against him, and other his Accomplices began to draw to an Issue. Then His
Majesty received from him the first Letter: In which His Majesty fancied he saw
a greater Spirit of Ingenuity than afterward proved. However finding in it so
clear and full expressions of the said Dukes remorse for his former Disloyalty
to His Majesty and Ingratitude to the Duke of York, and so frank Professions of
his Resolutions to amend for the future, joined with the greatest Imprecations
on himself; if he should wilfully violate his Promises therein made: His
Majesty did thereupon immediately return this Answer written with his own Hand,
(that His Majesty might not be wanting on his part to lay hold on any good and
probable Opportunity of reducing him to Reason, and saving him from utter
Ruin:) If the Duke of Monmouth desires to make himself capable of my Mercy, he
must render himself to the Secretary, and resolve to tell me all he knows,
resigning himself entirely to my Pleasure.

This determinate Declaration of His Majesty's Will, drew from the Duke of
Monmouth a second Letter; wherein with vehement and pathetick Words he
aggravates his Distraction and Torment for having offended His Majesty.
Confesses Himself in fault, betrayed into fatal Mistakes, misled into
Mischiefs, whereof he did not at first, in the least, suspect the Consequences:
declares, That his Crime appeared to him in so terrifying a shape, that he
preferred even Death before his present sense of it: implores His Majesty's
Pardon no otherwise, but if he may receive it by his Royal Highnesses
Mediation: professes To speak this not only in outward Form, but with the
greatest Sincerity in the World: resigns Himself to His Majesty's Disposal, not
only now, but for the remainder of his Life: engages Absolutely to put his very
Will into His Majesty's Hands for the future, which he acknowledges had been so
ill a Guide to him in times past: concluding, That till he could receive some
comfortable Return to this his unfeigned Submission, he was the most miserable,
disconsolate Creature living.

Upon the Receipt of this second Letter, the King being persuaded there could
be no room left to question the Sincerity of a real Change in the Duke of
Monmouth, and knowing he had now enough in his Hands to overwhelm him with
Confusion, if it should prove otherwise, His Majesty did thereupon without any
more reserve, immediately admit him into his Presence, being introduced by Mr.
Secretary Jenkins.

When the Secretary was withdrawn, there being none else present but his Royal
Highness, His Majesty can have no other Testimony besides of what past between
them but God, who knows all things; And to the same God His Majesty appeals, as
well as to his dearest Brother: Nothing doubting but if the Duke of Monmouth
shall ever return to any sense of his Duty to God and his King, he himself will
be a third Witness of the Truth of what His Majesty now declares; That the Duke
of Monmouth, with Signs of the most humble Contrition and sincere Sorrow for
his past Miscarriages, did then fully and freely acknowledge his having been
Conscious of the Conspiracy; and gave His Majesty much greater Light into many
Particulars of it than he could possibly else have obtained.

It Is true, His Majesty does not deny the said Duke persisted to the last in
renouncing any the least knowledge or thought of the Assassinating part. Nor
did His Majesty much press him on that side; his Royal Indulgence easily
inclining him to wish and to believe, That One who had the Honor to be taken
so near to him, could not be guilty of so vile a Parricide.

But of the other part, the Traiterous Design to seize on His Majesty's Person,
and subvert the present Government by an Insurrection; of that His Majesty must
own and profess on the Word of a King, The Duke of Monmouth made no scruple to
confess his share; and so largely to set it forth, that there was little of the
Conspiracy before known, which the said Duke did not confirm; and many Passages
of it were before unknown, which he revealed.

After this His Majesty made no delay to give him many certain Proofs of his
entire Forgiveness of all past Offenses, and of his renewed Affections and
Royal Bounty to him for the future; presently cherishing him near his own
Person with his wonted Tenderness; declaring in Council the perfect Contentment
he had received by his Submission, and ordering his Pardon to be dispatched
with all expedition; promising him withal at his earnest Entreaty, That he
should not be a Witness; a Favor refused to the late Duke of Orleans in France
upon the like occasion.

Yet no sooner was the Pardon completed in due Form of Law, but His Majesty
and the whole Court was afresh Alarmed with the continual resort to him of
diverse Persons, whom His Majesty knew to be engaged, and had Proof sufficient
to Convict them in course of Law, if he would have produced it all.

To this at the same time were added many arrogant and impudent Speeches of his
late Accomplices and Dependants, saying, That the said Duke had wade no
Confession, but had asserted the Innocence of some that had suffered. Which
manifestly tended to vilify the Truth of the whole Discovery, and to bring a
Scandal on all the Proceedings of His Majesty's Justice.

Wherefore at last His Majesty was awakened, and thought fit to put him gently
in mind by what was so lately past, of his danger of relapsing into the same
Precipice, out of which nothing but his Royal Goodness had recovered him. And
for the better Security of the said Duke himself, as well as of the Kingdom for
the time to come, His Majesty instantly demanded of him to give some such
Satisfaction to the whole Nation in public, as he had but just before given
His Majesty and his Royal Highness in private.

The Duke of Monmouth seeming willing to comply with His Majesty's molt
Gracious Desires, all that His Majesty obliged him to do, was to Write over,
and Subscribe a Letter, which His Majesty himself was pleased so to word, as
not only to consult the Duke of Monmouth's Safety, but also his Credit, as much
as could possibly stand with his Majesty's own Safety or Credit. For His
Majesty permitted him in that Letter wholly to acquit himself of the Bloody
Assassination, and only required him to own again his part in the Insurrection.
And His Majesty leaves it to all the World to Judge, whether in this Letter, of
His Majesty's own prescribing, he did not express the Duke of Monmouth's Guilt
far more tenderly, than the said Duke himself had done in his own Letters to
His Majesty, before his Pardon was Sealed.

This Letter the Duke of Monmouth readily Subscribed, and Presented to His
Majesty. But his former ill Adherents and Corrupters still flocking about him
in great Numbers, and Animating him to continue Faithful to his Old Friends of
the Party; assuring him, he could not fail in little time to overbear all that
should stand in his way, by the Power of his recovered and increased Favor; by
these and such like Mischievous Instigations, they soon got so much the better
of his unstable Mind, as to overthrow all his new-made Vows of Loyalty.

Insomuch that presently after he came rashly to the King, and earnestly
entreated the foresaid Letter might be returned him again; having been
instructed to pretend a Fear, that some opportunity might be taken from it by
his Enemies to blast his Reputation, and perhaps to bring him in to give
Evidence against others his Companions in the Conspiracy.

His Majesty had often before said and promised enough to him to free the Mind
of any reasonable Man from such Jealousies. But when all Protestations of that
kind, on His Majesty's Part, could have no effect; and the said Duke still
vehemently insisted, That the Paper he had signed might be delivered him back,
His Majesty once for all told him, he would never keep it against his will,
that he might not have the least occasion to say he was forced to write what he
did: But withal seriously warned him to consider what irreparable ill
consequences on his part, were likely to follow upon his obstinacy: and
therefore gave him time till the next Morning to deliberate calmly with
himself, what was to be his final Resolution.

The next day the Duke of Monmouth appearing still more fixed in his perverse
Demand, His Majesty freely put the Letter again into his Hands; but withal from
that moment banished him His Presence and the Court.

Nor can His Majesty reflect on the said Duke's undutiful Behavior in the
issue of this whole Affair, without an extreme Indignation, to find, that after
so submissive and ample a Confession of his Crime, both by Writing and Speech,
he should not only give no other sign of his Repentance, but that the very
first use he should make of his Majesty's Gracious Pardon for it, was to take
by it the advantage of entering more securely on a pew course of Disobedience.

The King has thus condescended to set-forth an Impartial Relation of the
Beginning, Proceeding, and Defeat of that whole detestable Conspiracy. His
Majesty has so long delayed the Publication of it, chiefly in Consideration of
many of the Criminals themselves, how ill soever ever they may have deserved of
him. For the Law allowing them the space of a whole Year, after the Outlawry,
to render themselves before they were to be looked on as Men absolutely
condemned, His Majesty was willing to stay till the full time was expired;
still hoping, that some of them would come voluntarily in, and stand a Legal
Trial, and, if possible, prove themselves Innocent.

But since not one of the Persons Outlawed has all this while ventured himself
on the Laws of his Country, His Majesty has now thought it not fit any longer
to suppress the Evidence against them. And what is here published, though it be
not near the whole of the Informations given in upon Oath, yet will be found
abundantly sufficient to Convict every Man of them, either of the intended
Insurrection or Assassination; Both which His Majesty knows are made out with
as much clearness of Testimony, and strength of indubitable Records, as any
Humane Affair is capable of.

What now remains? But that His Majesty should engage himself before God and
the whole World, to make a right use of so great a Blessing as his Deliverance
from these desperate Treasons; and should with the Authority of a King, and
with the tender Affection of a true Father of his Country, require and admonish
all his Subjects of all Parties and Opinions, to do the like.

For himself, his Majesty cannot but be deeply sensible he has been now once
more preserved by the immediate Hand of God; and therefore looks on himself as
afresh obliged to manifest his Gratitude to Heaven, by promoting the Glory of
his Preserver, in continuing to consult above all things the Welfare of his
Church, and the Peace and Happiness of this great People committed to his
Charge.

And His Majesty declares he will improve this new Advantage the Divine Favor
has so marvellously put into his Hands, not in Acts of Severity and Revenge,
which his Nature utterly abhors; but by imitating the Divine Goodness, as in a
regular Course of strict Justice to all obdurate Impenitents, so, which he much
rather desires, in his usual method of Mercy and Kindness to as many as shall
give sincere Proofs of Penitence, and Reformation of their past Crimes; Virtues
which His Majesty has too much Reason to believe his and his Fathers Enemies
have hitherto been very little acquainted with.

As for those His Majesty's misguided Subjects, who after all this persevere to
be disaffected to His Government, His Majesty has reason to expect that now at
length they would be convinced by that very Providence which used to be their
own principal and best-beloved Argument, whenever it seemed to be never so
little on their side; and that henceforth they would quietly submit to, and
follow the same Providence; since it has so signally appeared against them, and
much more wonderfully declared it self for, than ever Mr. Sydney had reason to
say, it had declared against His Majesty.

If there can possibly still remain any well meaning Men in their Party, led
away by the specious Delusions of good Words abused to the worst things; if any
such have really thought their Lives and Fortunes, Laws and Consciences at any
time in Danger, under His Majesty's Government; let them but Remember and
consider sadly what was the Issue of the very same Jealousies, Murmurs and
Tumults against His Royal Father of Blessed Memory; whether the first and most
eminent Instruments of subverting, for a time, this Renowned, and ancient
Monarchy, were not themselves beguiled by the same methods into the meanest
Slavery, both Spiritual and Temporal: Out of which they were compelled at last
to confess, they could be no other wise redeemed, but by returning again into
the very same constitution of things, they had so unwisely overthrown?

Or if the Experience of time past, so dearly bought, can prevail nothing on
them, let them but seriously reflect on their present Condition. Instead of
hardening to what wicked and designing Men, under the most deceitful Colors
suggest to them for Sinister Ends, let them guide their Opinions by their own
plain and sensible Observation. Let them but fairly and indifferently compare
the present State of all Nations round about them with their own: And then let
them refuse, if they can, to bless God and the King, for their inexpressible
advantages above all others.

Whilst dl His Majesty's Subjects find they may if they will securely enjoy
Peace, Plenty, Liberty, and the best Religion; why should any Torment
themselves, or disquiet others with wild imaginations and Fears of future
Evils? Which nothing can be so ready a way to bring upon them as their own
Fears.

Henceforth therefore let no vain pretense of Liberty and Property once more
push them on to the same desperate Designs, wherein when they had formerly
success (which they cannot always promise themselves) yet even then it turned
within a few Years to the Ruin of their own Pretenses.

Let no mistaken Zeal of Conscience seduce them again to Disobedience, since
the only Obligations of a True Christian Conscience lead all to Obedience, none
to Rebellion.

Let them no longer be infatuated by the false Shows and Insinuations of
Popularity: Rather let them learn once for all, who is the only true Patriot,
what is truly Popular, what not.

Let them know, That whoever complies with the common Peoples sudden Humors and
changeable Passions, against their solid Interest; Whoever labors to make the
whole Government obnoxious to any single Sect or Party; Whoever strives to
divide the Country or City from the Court; Whoever endeavors to enlarge
disputable Privileges, to the hazard of known Prerogatives; In fine, Whoever
would pervert Liberty into Licentiousness, that Man can never be a True
Patriot; all that is false Popularity: It is indeed equally as Destructive to
the People as to the Prince.

Those Counsels only are and ought to be esteemed really Popular, which proceed
on sure and legal Foundations, to confirm the Monarchy where it is strong, to
strengthen and support those parts of it, which by length of time may have been
somewhat weakened and decayed. those Persons only are the True Patriots, and
design their Countries Good the best and only sure way, who make it their
Business to keep the King in a condition to protect his People. There is no
true, commendable English Popularity, but true English Loyalty.

Thus much His Majesty vouchsafes to advise all His Enemies, and discontented
Subjects; though even to them he has done all the Good in this World to oblige
them not to be so.

There is one sort of these, whom the King acknowledges he once thought he
should never have had just Reason to rank among his Enemies. Those Persons His
Majesty means, who after having well approved their Loyalty to His Glorious
Father in the last Age of Rebellion, have yet since been either wholly
perverted, or have very much staggered in their due Obedience and Love to
himself.

For them His Majesty declares he would fain still retain His wonted Kindness.
And if either private Envy, or a too Presumptuous Value of their old Merits,
shall have made them entirely to forget the many vast Benefits and Favors that
He, or his Father have so liberally conferred on them; or if the late
groundless Rumors of Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power shall have so far
prevailed, as to sour and corrupt Them also; yet they might remember, that
their Generous Loyalty did once before remain untainted, and bravely stood the
Shock amidst the very same Rumors and Slanders, as popularly, but as falsely
urged then against the Government, as they have been of late. So that either
then they were in the wrong, or are now; and cannot possibly have been both
times on the right side.

Wherefore His Majesty conjures them to look back on the Actions of their
former Lives; and to make the Honor gotten by them in their Youth for their
Courage and Fidelity to the Crown, first a reproof, then an example to their
Old Age. Once for all, let them seriously observe that they are come at last to
be unfortunately deluded, not only by many the very same ill Principles, but
also by many the very same ill Parties of Men, which they once esteemed it
their Glory and Conscience to fight against.

But as for all who still continue the Kings Faithful Friends and Dutiful
Subjects, His Majesty most willingly takes this occasion to speak to them in
another Style. His Majesty cannot but testify to all the World the delightful
sense he retains of their unmovable Steddiness and renewed Fidelity to him, in
these late times of extreme difficulty and distraction. He cannot suppress
within his own Royal Breast his Joy, to find the same unshaken Principles and
Practices of Loyalty to his Blessed Father, still surviving and flourishng in
them, and inherited by himself with increase.

And after the unvaluable Mercy of God to him and his Subjects in his most
happy Restoration, His Majesty cannot but esteem This to have been equaled by
none but That; that, in so dangerous a Juncture of Public Affairs, he has met
with so many unfeigned Testimonies of Love to his Person and Zeal for his
Government, from all Degrees of Men in the Nation.

And if some have swerved from their Duty, yet His Majesty's Indignation and
Resentments against them are overwhelmed by the comfortable remembrance of the
far greater and better Number of those who stood by him in the severest Trials.

So His Majesty has just reason to acknowledge, the main Body of the Nobility
and Gentry has done: So has the whole sound and honest Part of the Commonalty:
So the great Fountains of Knowledge and Civility, the Two Universities: So the
wisest, and most Learned in the Laws: So the whole Clergy, and all the Genuine
Sons of the Church of England: A Church whose Glory it is, to have been never
tainted with the least Blemish of Disloyalty.

His Majesty cannot here forbear to let the World know, what entire
Satisfaction he has taken in one special Testimony of his Subjects Affections;
whence through Gods Gracious Providence the Monarchy has gained a most
considerable Advantage, by means of this very Conspiracy; And it is, that so
great a Number of the Cities and Corporations of this Kingdom, have since so
freely resigned their Local Immunities and Charters into His Majesty's Hands;
lest the abuse of any of them should again hereafter prove hazardous to the
just Prerogatives of the Crown.

This His Majesty declares he esteems as the peculiar Honor of his Reign;
being such, as none of the most popular of all his late Royal Predecessors
could have promised to themselves, or hoped for. Wherefore His Majesty thinks
himself more than ordinarily obliged to continue, as he has hitherto begun, to
show the greatest Moduration and Benignity, in the Exercise of so great a
Trust: Resolving upon this occasion, to convince the highest pretenders to the
Commonweal; that as the Crown was the first Original, so it is still the surest
Guardian of all the Peoples Lawful Rights, and Privileges.

In Conclusion His Majesty makes this solemn Declaration to all his Loving
Subjects: That as by former and late Experience, he has found, next under God,
the firmness of his Friends to him has saved his Authority and Life; So he is
resolved to secure both, by his Constancy to his Friends. Such as was the Old
Loyal Party, and as many as have been bred up,


