A TREATISE PARTLY THEOLOGICAL, And Partly POLITICAL, Containing some few
DISCOURSES,

To prove that the Liberty of PHILOSOPHIZING (that is Making Use of Natural
Reason) may be allowed without any prejudice to Piety, or to the Peace of any
Commonwealth; And that the Loss of Public Peace and Religion it self must
necessarily follow, where such a Liberty of Reasoning is taken away.

John Epist. 1 st chap. 4 th v. 13 th.

Hereby know we, that we dwell in God, and God in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit.

Translated out of Latin.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1689.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
THE Gentleman that turned the following Treatise Written Originally in Latin
into English, did it at spare Hours, only to divert and please himself, and
therefore cares not who is displeased with his having done it. There are
certainly some, who will pass very severe Censures upon this Treatise; but that
will not at all concern the Translator, who is not bound to make good the
Authors Opinions, being only obliged to justify, that the Version has truly
and faithfully (though not every where Word for Word) rendered the Authors Sense
and Meaning. Religion and Government being the Subject Matter of the Book, it is
easy to guess what Sort of Men are like to decry it; but let those who are
angry and find fault with it answer it; In the mean time the Crape Gown and the
Long Robe are both defied to prove there are any Tenets in the whole Treatise,
half so dangerous or destructive to the Peace and Welfare of human Society, as
those Doctrins and Maxims are, which have of late Years been broached by
time-serving Churchmen and Mercenary Lawyers; for which they justly deserve the
hatred and contempt of all Mankind. Nothing more needs be said to any Reader,
than to desire he will deliberately read the Book twice over, before he condemn
or commend it, when that is done, whether he like or dislike the Treatise it
self, or the Translation of it, shall be all one to him, who never valued
himself upon other Peoples Opinions, nor did ever think any part of his
Reputation depended upon the Judgment of Fools or Knaves.

THE PREFACE.
WEre it in the Power of Men, to govern all their Affairs, by sure and
infallible Council; or could Mankind always live in a constant course of
Prosperity, there would be no such thing in the World as Superstition; but
because Men many times fall into straights, out of which no Council can deliver
them, and by immoderately coveting the uncertain Goods of Fortune, miserably
Fluctuate between hope and fear; those two Passions easily driving the doubtful
mind of Man hither and thither, render it prone to believe any thing, whereas
otherwise it is over Confident, Proud and Vainglorious. And of this, though few
know themselves, there is scarce any Body ignorant: Do we not daily see many
weak Men during prosperity so wise in their own conceit, that they think
Council an Affront; but in adversity when they know not which way to turn
themselves, begging every Bodies Advice, and there is not any, be it never so
vain, foolish and absurd, which they will not follow upon very light grounds,
they will also hope the best, and presently again fear the worst, whatever
happens during their fears which puts them in mind of any past good or evil,
that they think Prognosticates good or bad Fortune, and though they be a hundred
times deceived, count it a lucky or unlucky Omen. Whatever is strange and
unwonted, begets their Wonder, and looking upon it as a prodigy, say it
portends almighty God's Anger; for the pacification whereof, Men given up to
superstition, but Enemies to true Religion, think it horrible Impiety not to
make Prayers and Oblations, and to that end fancying a Thousand things, as if
nature it self were as perfectly distracted as they, make strange
Interpretations of her Meaning. This then being the condition of Mankind, we
find those Persons most addicted to all kind of superstition, who greedily
desire those things with are uncertain, and every one of them (especially when
they are in danger and cannot help themselves) with Vows and Womanish Tears
imploring Divine Assistance; calling reason (because it cannot show them a
certain way to the vanities they desire) Blind, and human Wisdom Folly; but on
the contrary, believe dreams, dotages of the Imagination and Childish Follies
to be divine Oracles; saying that God despises the Wisdom of the Wise, and
has not Written his Will in the mind of Man, but on the entrails of Beasts,
and that Idiots, Lunaticks and Birds by divine inspiration and instinct, can
foretell his Decrees, so mad has Fear made Men. And as Superstition has its
Original from Fear; so is it kept up and continued by it; of which Truth if any
Man desire (beside what has been said) any particular Examples, let him read
the 5 th Book and 4 th Decade of Quintus Curtius, where he will find Alexander
the Great, applying himself to Diviners and Prophets, when he first began to
doubt his Fortune at the Straights of Susa; but after the Conquest of Darius,
never more consulting them, till terrified with the revolt of the Bactrians,
and with the Scythians provoking him to Battle when he lay wounded; he returns
again to the Folly of human Superstition, and commands Aristander, to whom he
gave much credit, to inquire by Sacrifices, what was like to be the event of
his Affairs, and to this purpose many Examples may be produced, all which would
clearly show, that Men are most troubled with Superstitious Fancies during
their Fears; and all those things which they have so vainly and religiously
revered, are nothing but the false representations and dotages of a
Mellancholly and timorous Mind. And Lastly, that they who pretend to
prediction, are much in request with the common People, and most feared by
Kings and Princes, when a Kingdom is in any great distress or calamity, but
because these things are so vulgarly known, I pass them by.

Fear then being the cause of Superstition, it clearly follows, that all Men
are naturally inclined and subject to it (whatever others say, who think it
proceeds from a certain imperfect confused knowledge Men have of a Deity.) It
follows likewise, that Superstition must of necessity be very various and
inconstant, because all ridiculous Follies of the Mind, Fits of Frenzy, yea
Superstition it self, cannot be maintained, but by Hope, Hatred, Anger and
Deceit; it proceeding not from Reason but Passion, and that too very violent.
As therefore Men easily fall into all sorts of Superstition, so on the
contrary, it is very difficult to make them continue in any one kind; because
the common People being all times alike miserable, are never long quiet, but
still most pleased with that which is new, and never yet deceived them; which
inconstancy, has been the cause of many Tumults and cruel Wars, and as Quintus
Curtius in his 4 th Book and 10 th Decad has very well observed, nothing so
absolutely governs the Multitude as Superstition. Whence it happens, that the
common People under color of Religion, are sometimes easily induced to adore
their Kings, and at other times to curse and abhor them, as the common Plagues
of Mankind: Therefore to avoid this mischief, great Pains are taken to adorn
and attire Religion (whether true or false) that it may appear very Grave and
Solemn, and all Persons pay unto it the highest degree of respect and
veneration. This has so luckily succeeded amongst the. Turks, who count it a
Crime so much as to dispute, and have their understandings possessed with so many
prejudices, that there is no place in their Minds left for Reason, no not so
much as doubt.

But if it be, as indeed it is, the great Arcanum and concern of Monarchical
Government, to deceive the People, and to cover Fear by which they are kept in
Subjection, under the specious name of Religion; that so they may fight for
Slavery as for their own Safety, and think it no Shame but their greatest
Honor, to spend their Blood and Lives for the Glory of one single Person; so
on the contrary, in a free Commonwealth, nothing can be more mischeivously
devised or attempted, than to possess Men's Judgments which are free, with
Prejudices; or in any manner to restrain or compel them, it being utterly
repugnant to Common Liberty: As for Seditions stirred up under pretense of
Religion, they arise from enacting Laws concerning things merely speculative,
and because Opinions are many times Condemned for Crimes, and the maintainers
and followers of those Opinions, seldom Sacrificed to the public Safety, but to
the Hatred and Cruelty of their Adversaries: But if the Laws of Government,
would take no Notice of Words, and only punish Men's Actions, there could never
be any lawful pretense for such Seditions, nor could Controversies be turned
into Quarrels. Seeing therefore that Men are seldom so happy to live in a
Commonwealth, where every one is allowed the Liberty of Judging and Worshipping
God according to his own Understanding, or where nothing is esteemed dearer and
sweeter then Liberty; I thought my Undertaking would be neither unpleasing or
unprofitable, if I could make it appear, that such a Liberty may be granted,
without any danger to Religion, or the Peace of a Commonwealth; but that all
three must stand and fall together. And this is the chief thing, which in this
Treatise I intended to demonstrate; to which purpose I thought it necessary, in
the first place, to mark out the chief Prejudices concerning Religion, I mean
the Footsteps of Ancient Servitude, and in the next place, those Prejudices
which relate to the right of Sovereign Power; which many with shameless
boldness study to Usurp, and then to secure themselves, amuse the Minds of the
Multitude still Subject to Superstition, with specious shows of Religion, that
all may again run into Bondage. In what order I make these things manifest, I
will presently in few words declare; but first I will mention the Causes which
moved me to write.

I have often wondered, that Men who boast themselves Professors of the
Christian Religion, which consists in Love, Peace, Moderation and Dealing
uprightly with all Men, should so unjustly contend, and cruelly hate one
another, by which their Faith is better known, then by the forenamed Virtues.
There is now scarce any Man whatever he be, Christian, Jew, Turk or Heathen,
that can be known by any thing but his habit and attire, by frequenting such a
Church, by maintaining such an Opinion, or by being the sworn Disciple of such
a Master; but in all other things Men's Lives and Conversations are all alike:
Searching into the Cause of this Evil, I found it proceeded from the common
Peoples being persuaded, that a very great part of Religion, consisted in
setting a very high value upon the Service, Dignities, Offices and Benefits of
the Church, and in honoring Churchmen with all possible Reverence; for so soon
as this abuse crept into the Church, every Knave had a mind to be a Priest, and
the desire of propagating Religion, degenerated into sordid Avarice and
Ambition; so that the Temple it self, was turned into a Theater, where
Ecclesiastical Doctors did not Preach, but like Orators harangued the People,
not to instruct, but to be admired by them; publicly reproaching their
Adversaries, and venting such new fangled Doctrines, as they thought would best
please the Multitude. From hence necessarily arose those great Contentions,
Envy and inveterate Hatred, which no length of time could assuage. It Is no
wonder then, that of the primitive Religion, nothing remains but the external
worship; wherein the People seem rather to Flatter than Adore God; Faith is
become nothing but credulity and prejudice, such as turns rational Men into
Brutes, by denying them the Liberty of their Judgment to distinguish Truth from
Falsehood, and such as seems purposely invented, totally to extinguish the Light
of Human Understanding. Piety and Religion, O immortal God! now consist in
absurd Mysteries, and they that contemn and reject Human Reason and Knowledge,
as naturally depraved, they forsooth, which is strangely irrational, must pass
for Men divinely illuminated. Truly if such Men had but one spark of Divine
Light, they could not be so superciliously Mad, but would learn to Worship God
with more Prudence, and instead of hating, as they now do, would love those
that differ from them in Opinion; and forbearing to prosecute them with so much
enmity, would rather (since they pretend to fear their Salvation, more then
their own Fortune) have pity and compassion upon them: Moreover, if such Men
had any Divine Light, it would appear in their Doctrine. I confess they
pretend, they can never enough admire the profound Mysteries of the Scripture,
yet I cannot perceive they teach any thing, but the Speculations of Aristotle
and Plato, to which, that they may not seem followers of the Gentiles, they
have fitted and accomodated the Scripture; and, as if it were not enough, for
these Men to run mad with the Greeks, would have the very Prophets also to dote
like themselves; which clearly shows, they never saw the Divinity of the
Scripture, no not so much as in a dream. By how much the more they admire the
Mysteries of Scripture, so much the more they seem to flatter and sooth
Scripture, rather than believe it; of which likewise another Evidence is, that
many Men (as to the better understanding and finding out the true meaning of
Scripture) lay it down for a Principal and Fundamental position, that the
Scripture is of divine inspiration, and in every part infallibly true; which is
the very thing that cannot be made out or proved by any other way, but a strict
examination and right understanding thereof; and do likewise establish it for a
rule, that in interpreting Scripture, which needs no human Glosses, the
Scripture it self is our best guide.

When I seriously considered that natural reason was not only contemned, but
also by many condemned, for the Fountain of Impiety, and human inventions past
for divine Doctrins; that Credulity was accounted Faith, and Philosophical
Controversies were maintaned both in Church and State with so much animosity
and heat of dispute; from whence I perceived that not only cruel hatred and
dissension (by which Men are easily stirred up to sedition) but many other
mischeifs (too tedious to be here mentioned) took their beginning; I resolved
diligently to examine the Scripture a new, with a free and unprejudiced mind,
and neither to affirm any thing positively of it, or admit any thing to be it is
Doctrine which was not clearly Demonstrated by it. Under this caution, I
Composed a method of interpreting the Sacred Volums, and furnished with it, I
began in the first place to inquire, what Prophesy was? why God revealed
himself to the Prophets? and whether they were acceptable to God, because they
had sublime thoughts and notions of God and Nature, or only for their Piety?
These things being known, I could easily determine that the Authority of the
Prophets, was of greatest weight in things relating to real virtue, and to the
use and benefit of Life; but in other matters, their opinions did very little
concern us. This being likewise known, I further inquired, what it was for
which the Jews were called Gods chosen People, and when I perceived, it was
only because God chose out for them, a particular part and climate of the
World, where they might live conveniently and securely; I thereby also learnt,
that the Laws revealed by God to Moses, were nothing else but the Statutes of
that particular government of the Jews, and that none but the Jews, were bound
to receive them; yea that the very Jews themselves, were not bound by them any
longer, then their Government continued. That I might know whether it can be
concluded from Scripture, that the understanding of of Mankind is depraved by
Nature, I inquired whether the Catholic Religion, or the Divine Law revealed to
all Mankind by the Prophets and Apostles, were any other then that which
natural Reason teaches and Lastly, whether Miracles happen contrary to the
order of Nature? and whether they do more certainly and clearly prove the Being
and Providence of God, then those things do, which we clearly and distinctly
understand by their first Causes? but when I could find nothing in whatever the
Scripture expressly teaches, disagreable or repugnant to human understanding,
and when I likewise saw, that the Prophets taught nothing but what was plain,
and might easily be understood, and that they adorned and confirmed their
Doctrine, with such a Style and such reasons, as they thought would most affect
the minds of the multitude with Devotion toward God; I was fully persuaded,
that the Scripture left reason perfectly free, and had nothing to do with
Philosophy; but that each stood on its own basis. But that I might plainly
demonstrate these things, and put an end to the whole matter, I show which way
the Scripture is to be interprepreted, and that all its knowledge of things
Spiritual, is to be drawn from it self, and not from those things which we know
by the light of nature. Then I pass on, to show those prejudices which spring
from thence, and that the common People (addicted to Superstition, prizing the
relics of time above eternity) do rather adore the Books of the Scripture,
than the very word of God it self. After this I show the revealed word of God,
not to be any certain number of Books, but a simple knowledge of Gods will
revealed to the Prophets (that is) to obey God with the whole heart, by
practicing Justice and Charity: I show that the Scripture teaches this,
according to the capacity and opinions of those to whom the Prophets and
Apostles were sent to Preach this Word, which they did, that Men without any
reluctance might cordially embrace it. The Fundamentals of Faith being
discovered, I Lastly, conclude the object of revealed knowledge to be nothing
else, but obedience, and so distinct from natural knowledge, as well in respect
of its object, as its foundations and means; that it has nothing in common
with it; but each maintains its own proper dominion, without any mutual
disagreement, and that neither ought to be subservient, or a handmaid to the
other. Moreover, because the dispositions of Men are very different, one being
possessed with this, and another with that opinion, and that which moves one Man
to Devotion, provokes another to Laughter; every one ought to have the Liberty
of his own judgment, and the Power of interpreting the Principles of Faith,
according to his own reason; and that no Man's Faith is to be justified or
condemned, but only by his Works; so that all Men may obey God with Freedom of
mind, and only Righteousness and Charity be in esteem. After I have by these
things, showed the Liberty granted by God's revealed Law to all Men, I go on to
the other part of the question, which is, that this Liberty may be allowed,
without any prejudice to the Peace of a Commonwealth, or to the Rights of the
Supreme Powers; nor can it be taken away, without great detriment and danger,
both to peace, and the whole republic. To demonstrate this, I begin from every
Man's natural right, which reaches so far as every Man's Desire and Power can
extend it self, and no Man by the Law of Nature, is bound to live according to
another Man's Will or Inclination; but every Man is the assertor of his own
Liberty. Further I show, that no Man departs from this right, but he that
transfers the Power of defending himself to another, and that he must
necessarily and absolutely be the keeper of that right, upon whom every one
has devolved his own natural right of living as he pleases, together with the
Power of Defending himself; and from hence I prove, that they who are possessed
of the Supreme Power, have right to all things within their Power, and that
they only are the Protectors of Law and Liberty; all other Men being obliged to
Act, according to their determinations and Decrees; but because no Body can so
far deprive himself, of his Power of defending himself, as to cease from being
a Man, I thence conclude, that no Man can be totally deprived of his natural
right, but that Subjects do still retain by the Law of Nature, many things
which cannot be taken from them, without very great danger to Government. Those
things being granted to be their rights either by tacit implication, or by
express agreement and stipulation made between them and their Governors. These
things being considered, I passon to the Commonwealth of the Jews, which I
fully enough describe, showing upon what Reason, and by whose Decree, Religion
first began to obtain the force of a Law; touching upon some other things by
the By, which seem worthy to be known. After this I show that they who have the
supreme Power, are not only Protectors and Interpreters of the Civil, but also
of the Divine Law, and that in them only is the right of Judging, what is just
or unjust, pious or impious. And then I conclude that that Right is best
maintained, and the Government most safe, where every Man has free liberty to
think, and speak what he thinks.

These are the things, Philosophical Reader, which I offer to thy examination;
believing they will be acceptable to thee, for the Excellency and Utility of
the Subject, as well of the whole Book, as of every single Chapter, to which
many things might be added; but to this Preface, I do not intend the Dimensions
of a Volum: the chief things in it, are sufficiently known to Philosophers, to
others I care not to commend this Treatise, because I have not the least hope
they will like it. I know how fast those Prejudices stick, which the mind of
Man has embraced under the form of Religion; I known also, it is as impossible
to root out Superstition, as Fear out of the Minds of the common People, whose
constancy is but contumacy, and are never to be governed by Reason, but always
rashly praise or dispraise. The Vulgar therefore, and all of like Affections
with them, I do not invite to read these things, I had rather they should
contemn the Book, then be troublesome by making perverse Constructions of it,
as they use to do of all other things; not profiting themselves, but hindering
others, who would reason more like Philosophers, did they not think Reason
ought to be but a Handmaid to Divinity: To Men of that Opinion, I think this
Work extremely useful, but because many have neither mind or leisure to read
these things, I am forced here, as well as in the end of the Treatise to
declare; I have written nothing which I do not willingly submit to the
Examination and Judgment of the chief Rulers of my Country: For if they shall
think any thing I say, repugnant to the Laws or public Peace of it, I willingly
unsay and recant it. I know my self a Man Subject to Mistake, but I have taken
the greatest Care I could, not to Err, and particularly, that whatever I write,
may in all things be consonant to the Laws of my Country, and agreeable to
Piety and good Manners.

A TABLE Of the several CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. OF Prophesy. CHAP. II. Of Prophets. CHAP. III. Of the calling of the
Jews, and whether the Gift of Prophesy were peculiar only to the Jews? CHAP.
IV. Of the Divine Law. CHAP. V. The reason why Ceremonies were instituted? of
the belief of Scripture-Histories, why and to whom it is necessary? CHAP. VI.
Of Miracles. CHAP. VII. Of the Interpretation of Scripture. CHAP. VIII. Shows
that the Pentatenk, the Books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel and the Kings,
were not Written by the Persons whose Names they bear; and then inquires,
whether those Books were Written by several Persons, or by one only, and by
whom? CHAP. IX. Whether Hesdras did perfectly finish those Books? and whether
the Marginal Notes found in the Hebrew Copies, were but diverse readings? CHAP.
X. The rest of the Books of the Old Testament are examined in the same manner
as the forementioned. CHAP. XI. Whether the Apostles Writ their Epistles as
Apostles and Prophets, or only as Doctors and Teachers? and what is the Office
of an Apostle? CHAP. XII. Of the true Original Hand Writing or Text of
Scripture, why Scripture is called Holy? and why the Word of God? Lastly, that
the Scripture so far as it contains the Word of God, is derived to us pure and
uncorrupted. CHAP. XIII. What is Faith? who are the faithful? what are the
Fundamentals of Faith? Faith distinguished from Philosophy. CHAP. XIV. Divinity
no Handmaid to Reason, nor Reason to Divinity; upon what ground we believe the
Authority of Sacred Scripture. CHAP. XV. How Commonwealths came to be founded,
of every Man's Natural and Civil Right, of the Right of Supreme Powers. CHAP.
XVI. No Man can transfer, or part with all his particular Right to the Supreme
Power, nor is it necessary that he should: Of the Commonwealth of the Jews,
what it was while Moses lived? and what after his Death before they chose
Kings? and of the Excellency of it; lastly, what were the Causes why so Divine
a Commonwealth perished, and could not subsist without Seditions? CHAP. XVII.
Certain Political Maxims Collected out of the Commonwealth and Histories of the
Jews. CHAP. XVIII. That Religion, and all things relating to it, are subject to
no other Power, but that of the Supreme Magistrate; that the external Form of
Public Religious Worship, ought to be accommodated to the Peace of the
Commonwealth, if we would rightly obey God. CHAP. XIX. That in a free
Commonwealth, it is lawful for every Man to think as he pleases, and to speak
what he thinks. CHAP. VIII. Shows that the Pentateuk, the Books of Joshua,
Judges, Ruth, Samuel and the Kings, were not Written by the Persons whose Names
they bear; and then inquires, whether those Books were Written by several
Persons, or by one only, and by whom? CHAP. IX. Whether Hesdras did perfectly
finish those Books? and whether the Marginal Notes found in the Hebrew Copies,
were but diverse readings? CHAP. X. The rest of the Books of the Old Testament
are examined in the same manner as the forementioned. CHAP. XI. Whether the
Apostles Writ their Epistles as Apostles and Prophets, or only as Doctors and
Teachers? and what is the Office of an Apostle? CHAP. XII. Of the true Original
Hand Writing or Text of Scripture, why Scripture is called Holy? and why the
Word of God? Lastly, that the Scripture so far as it contains the Word of God,
is derived to us pure and uncorrupted. CHAP. XIII. Shows that Scripture
teaches nothing but what is very plain, intending nothing but Men's Obedience;
neither does it teach or declare any other thing of the divine Nature, then
what a Man may in a right Course of Life in some degree imitate. CHAP. XIV.
What is Faith? who are the faithful? what are the Fundamentals of Faith? Faith
distinguished from Philosophy. CHAP. XV. Divinity no Handmaid to Reason, nor
Reason to Divinity; upon what ground we believe the Authority of Sacred
Scripture. CHAP. XVI. How Commonwealths came to be founded, of every Man's
Natural and Civil Right, of the Right of Supreme Powers. CHAP. XVII. No Man can
transfer, or part with all his particular Right to the Supreme Power, nor is it
necessary that he should: Of the Commonwealth of the Jews, what it was while
Moses lived? and what after his Death before they chose Kings? and of the
Excellency of it; lastly, what were the Causes why so Divine a Commonwealth
perished, and could not subsist without Seditions? CHAP. XVIII. Certain
Political Maxims Collected out of the Commonwealth and Histories of the Jews.
CHAP. XIX. That Religion, and all things relating to it, are subject to no
other Power, but that of the Supreme Magistrate; that the external Form of
Public Religious Worship, ought to be accommodated to the Peace of the
Commonwealth, if we would rightly obey God. CHAP. XX. That in a free
Commonwealth, it is lawful for every Man to think as he pleases, and to speak
what he thinks.
CHAP. I. Concerning Prophesy.
PRophesy or Revelation is the true Knowledge of any thing revealed to Men by
God; and he is a Prophet, who declares and expounds those things which God has
revealed, to Persons that cannot have any certain knowledge of those
Revelations, but must therefore only by mere Faith receive and embrace them. A
Prophet was by the Jews called Nabi, (that is) an Orator or Interpreter; as
appears in the 7 th chap. of Exodus v. 1 st. And the Lord said unto Moses, see
I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, and Aron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet,
as if he should have said, Aron by Interpreting to Pharaoh, what thou say,
shall Act the Part of a Prophet, and thou the Part of God.

We will speak of Prophets in the next Chapter, but in this only of Prophesy.
It follows from the definition which has been given of it, that Natural
knowledge may be called Prophesy; for those things which we know by the light
of nature, depend only upon the knowledge of God, and his Eternal decrees: but
because this knowledge is natural to all Mankind, being founded upon Principles
common to all Men; it is of no value with the vulgar, who always affecting
things rare and out of their Road, despise the Gifts of Nature; and therefore
wherever mention is made of Prophetical knowledge, they totally exclude
Natural, which may with as much right be called Divine, as the other whatever
it be; seeing the Nature of God of which we participate, and the decrees of
God, dictate it unto us, neither does Natural knowledge differ from that which
Men call Divine, but only because Divine knowledge exceeds the Limits of
Natural; and because the Laws of Humane Nature considered in themselves, cannot
be the cause of Divine knowledge: but Natural knowledge in respect of the
certainty which it includes, and in respect of the Fountain from whence it
proceeds, namely from God himself, does in no wise give place to Prophetical
knowledge, unless some will think or rather dream, that the Prophets had Humane
Bodies, but not Humane Souls, and therefore their perceptions and knowledge
were of a quite different Nature from ours.

But though natural knowledge be Divine, yet they that possess and propagate
it, cannot be called Prophtes, because the things which they teach, may with
equal certainty, and in as high a degree, be Apprehended and Embraced by
others, as well as by themselves, and that too not by Faith only.

Since therefore our Mind for no other reason, but only because it contains
in it self, the Nature of God, as its Object, and also participating thereof,
is able to Form certain Notions which explicate the Nature of things, and teach
us the use of Life, we may with reason conclude, that the Nature of Man's mind,
being what it is conceived to be, is the prime Cause of Divine Revelation, for
all those things which we clearly and distinctly understand, the Idea of God
(as we have already shown) and Nature dictate to us, not in words, but in a
much more excellent manner, and such as best suites with the Nature of the
Mind, as every one finds by his own experience, who has but tasted what
certain knowledge is: but because my chief purpose is to speak of those things
which belong only to the Scripture, that little I have said of Natural
knowledge shall suffice, and I now proceed to other causes and means, by which
God reveals to Men, those things which do exceed, and also those which do not
exceed the bounds of Natural knowledge, (for nothing hinders but that those
things which we know by the Light of Nature, God may by other ways, communicate
to Men) of which now I will more fully Treat.

But whatsoever is said upon this Subject, ought to be fetched only from
Scripture; for we can say no more of things that pass our understanding, then
that which the Prophets have delivered to us, either by word or writing; and
because we have not any Prophets that I know in these our days, all that we
have to do, is diligently to peruse the Sacred Volums which the Prophets have
left us; but still with this caution, that we determine nothing positively of
things of this Nature, nor attribute any thing to the Prophets themselves,
which they have not plainly spoken and taught. But it is in the first place to
be observed, that the Jews never used to make mention of mediate and particular
Causes, nor ever regarded them; but for the promoting of Religion, Piety, and
Devotion, had always recourse to God, (for Example) if they got Money by the
Trade of Merchandising, they said God gave it, if they earnestly desired to do
any thing, they said God disposed their Hearts to it, if they seriously thought
on any thing, they said it was declared to them by God; so that every thing
which the Scripture says God declared to any one, is not to be taken for
Prophesy and Supernatural knowledge, but that only which the Scripture expressly
declares, or from the Circumstances of the narration, plainly appears to be
Prophesy and Revelation:

If then we run through all the Sacred Volums, we shall find, that all those
things which God revealed to the Prophets, were revealed to them either by
words, or by Figures and Signs, or else by both together, and that the words,
and Signs, were either real and true, without the imagination of the hearing
and seeing Prophet; or but imaginary (that is) the fancy and imagination of the
Prophet, even when he was awake, was so disposed, that he verily thought, he
heard words, or saw and beheld some thing or sign. God in a true and real
voice, revealed those Laws to Moses, which he prescribed to the Jews; as
appears by the 25 th chap. of Exodus v. 22. where he says, And there will I
meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from above the mercy Seat, from
between thee two Cherubims which plainly shows, that God made use of some real
voice, seeing Moses wherever he pleased, found God ready to speak to him; and
that only this voice, by which the Law was Published, was a true and real
voice, I will presently show.

One would think that the voice by which God called Samuel was real; because in
the first Book of Sam. the 3 d. chap. and last verse, it is said, The Lord
appeared again in Shiloh, for the Lord revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by
the word of the Lord, as if he had said, the appearance of God to Samuel, was
nothing else, but Gods making known himself to him by word, or signified no
more, then that Samuel heard God speaking: but because we are forced to
distinguish between the Prophesy of Moses, and that of the other Prophets, it
must be concluded, that the voice heard by Samuel, was but imaginary; because
it was like the voice of Ely, which he had so often heard, and therefore the
sooner wrought upon his fancy; for being thrice called, Samuel still thought it
was by Ely, the voice which Abimelech heard was imaginary, for it said Genesis
chap. 20. v. 6, God said unto him in a Dream, and therefore Abimelech not
waking, but in his sleep, (the time when the fancy is naturally most apt to
imagine things that are not) might have a strong Impression of Gods Will upon
his Imagination.

It is the Opinion of some Jews, that the words of the Decalogue, were not
vocally pronounced by God; but that the Israelites only heard a noise, which
did not articulately form words, but that the People during the noise, mentally
understood the Laws of the Decalogue, which was once also my own Opinion,
because I found the words of the Decalogue in Exodus, to differ from those of
the Decalogue in Deutronomy: whence it might seem to follow, seeing God spoke
but once, that the Decalogue is not the very words of God, but only contains
the Sense or signification of his Will. But unless we will wrest the Scripture,
it must be granted, that the Israelites did hear a real and true voice; for the
4 th verse. of the 5 th chap. of Deuteronomy. says, The Lord talked with you Face to
Face in the Mount, (that is) as two Men use Personally and Corporally, to
communicate their conceptions one to another; therefore it seems much more
consonant to Scripture, that God did really create a voice, by which he
revealed the Decalogue; but the reason why the words of the two Decalogues
vary, may be seen in the 8 th following Chapter of this Book; yet that neither
fully solves the doubt; for it seems very Irrational, to conclude that any
thing created by, and depending on, God as all other created Beings do, should
be able to express or expound, the Essence or Existence of God Personally, viz.
by saying in the first Person, I am the Lord thy God, though where a Man says
with his Mouth, I understand, yet no Body thinks it is the mouth of that Man,
but his Mind that understands; but because the mouth has Reference to the
Nature of the Man that said it, and the Person also to whom it was said knows
what is the Nature of the Intellect, he easily understands the mind of the
speaking Person, by a Comparative consideration of himself, but they who knew
nothing of God, but his mere name, and desired him to speak that they might be
certain of his Existence, how could they be satisfied in their Request by any
Creatures saying, I am thy God; when that Creature which said so, did no more
resemble God, nor belong to his Nature, then any other Creature did, what if
God should have Framed the Lips of Moses, yea of any Beast? to have articulatly
pronounced and spoken those words, I am thy God does it follow, that the
Israelites should thereby have understood the Being and Existence of God?
Moreover, the Scripture seems plainly to declare, that God himself spoke, (and
for that end descended from Heaven down upon Mount Sinai) and that not only the
Jews heard him speak, but also the Nobles and Elders, as we read in the 24 th
c. of Ex. Neither does the Law revealed to Moses, to or from which, nothing was
to be added or taken away, and was the Established Law of the Country, ever
command that we should believe God to be Incorporeal, and to have no Shape or
Figure; but only that we should believe there is a God, and should Worship him
only, and that the Jews might not depart from his Worship, he commanded that
they should not fancy or make any likeness or Image of him; for since they had
never seen any likeness of God, they could make no Image which would Resemble
God, but necessarily some other Creature which they had seen; and so bestow the
Worship and Honor of God upon that Creature. The Scripture expressly declares
God to have Figure, and that Moses when he heard God speak, happened to see it,
though indeed it was but his back parts; in which there is a hidden Mystery, of
which we will hereafter speak more at large. I will now go on to quote those
places, which declare the means, whereby God has revealed his Decrees to Men.

That Revelation may happen only by Signs or Figures is plain by the 21 th
chap. of the 1 st. Book of Chron. where God declared his Anger to David, by an
Angel holding a drawn Sword in his hand, in like manner to Balaam, and though
Maimonides and some others would have it thought, that in this Story and all
others, which relate the appearing of Angels, as to Manoah, and to Abraham when
he would have Sacrificed his Son; the Apparitions were always in sleep, (not
that any Man broad waking is able to see an Angel) yet they talk to no purpose,
for they minded nothing else, but straining Scripture to countenance
Aristotle's and their own idle Figments, than which nothing can be more
ridiculous.

God revealed to Joseph, his future Dominion by Images, that were not real and
external, but internal and depending only upon the Imagination of the Prophet.

By Signs and Words God revealed to Joshua, that he would Fight for the
Israelites, by showing to him an Angel with a Sword in his hand, as Captain of
the Host, and by words also, which Joshua heard from the Angel, it was
represented to Isaiah by Figures chap. 6. That God's Providence would desert
the People, by imagining the most holy God on a very high Throne, and the
Israelites polluted and plunged in the filth of their Sins, and so at a great
distance from God: by which signs he understood the present miserable state of
the People; but their future calamities were revealed to him by words spoken,
as it were, by God himself. And of this kind, I could bring many Examples out
of Sacred Writ, were they not so generally known to all; but all these things
are more clearly proved by the Text it self; in the 12 th. Chap. Numb. v. 6, 7.
If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known to him in a
Vision (that is by signs and hieroglyphics (but as for the Prophesy of Moses,
it was vision without signs) and will make my self known to him in a dream
(that is not in a true real voice and words.) But to my Servant Moses not so,
with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently and not in dark Speeches,
and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold (that is) beholding me as a
Friend and Companion, speaks to me without fear, as it is in the 33. chap. of
Exodus v. 11. Therefore without doubt the rest of the Prophets, did not hear a
true and real voice, which yet more evidently appears out of the 34. chap. of
Deu. v. 10. And there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom
the Lord knew face to face; which must be understood by voice only, for Moses
himself, as the 33. chap. of Exodus plainly declares, did never see God's Face.

Beside these ways and means, I have mentioned, I find no other in Sacred
Sripture, whereby God has communicated himself to Men; and therefore (as I
have already said) no other are to be supposed or admitted, and though we may
clearly understand, that God may immediately communicate himself to Men, for he
without using any Corporeal Means does communicate his Essence to our Minds;
yet that any man by the mind alone, should comprehend those things, which are
not contained in the Principles of Natural Knowledge, nor can be deduced from
them; must necessarily argue, that that man's mind, is far more Noble and
Excellent, then any Human Understanding; Wherefore I believe, never any Man
arrived to so great a degree of Perfection above others, beside Christ, to whom
the purposes of God, for the Salvation of mankind, were immediately revealed.
So that God did manifest himself to the Apostles, by the Mind of Christ, as he
did before to Moses by an Aereal Voice, and therefore the Voice of Christ, like
that which Moses heard, may be called the Voice of God. And in this Sense also
we may say, the Wisdom of God viz. Wisdom more then Human, assumed Human Nature
in Christ, and Christ was the Way to Salvation.

But I think it necessary for me here to declare, that some things, which some
Churches determine and maintain, concerning Christ, I do neither assert nor
deny; for I ingenuously confess, I do not understand them, those things which I
have affirmed, I have collected out of the Scripture it self. I have no where
read, that God appeared or spoke to Christ, but that God was revealed to the
Apostles by Christ, who was the Way to Salvation. And lastly that the Old Law
was not delivered immediately by God, but by an Angel. Wherefore if Moses spoke
to God Face to Face, as a Man uses to do with his Friend, (that is by the
mediation of two Bodies) Christ communed with God mentally or Mind to Mind. I
do therefore maintain, that beside Christ, no Man ever reeived any Revelation
from God, but by the help of the Imagination, or by the help of Words or Signs,
and therefore to Prophesy, there is not so much need of a perfect
Understanding, as of a Lively Imagination, as shall be shown in the following
Chapter, we are now to inquire what the Scripture means by the Spirit of God,
infused into the Prophets, or the Prophets speaking by the Spirit of God; to
find out the meaning of these Phrases and Expressions, it is first necessary,
to search what the Hebrew word Ruagh signifies, which the Vulgar interprets
Spirit.

The word Ruagh, in its Proper and Genuine Sense, signifies Wind, but is very
frequently used, to signify many other things, which nevertheless are derived
from Wind: For sometimes it signifies Breath, Psalm. 135. v. 17 th. Neither is
there any Breath in their Mouths. Secondly it signifies Life or Respiration. 1
st. Book of Sam. chap. 30. v. 12. His Spirit came again to him, (that is he
breathed.) Thirdly, it is taken for Courage and Strength, Iosu. chap. 11 th. v.
11 th. There was not a Man left to breath. Ezekiel. chap. 2. v. 2. And the Spirit
(that is Strength) entered into me and set me upon my Feet. Fourthly, it is
taken for Virtue and fitness, Job. chap. 32. v. 8. There is a Spirit in Man,
(that is as appears in the following Verse.) Wisdom and Understanding, but is
not always to be found in the Aged, for I now find it depends upon the
particular Qualification and Capacity of a Man. So in the 27. chap. of Numb. v.
8. Take thee Joshua the Son of Nun, a Man in whom is the Spirit. Fifthly, It is
taken for a Man's Opinion, Numb. chap. 14 v. 24. Because he had another Spirit
with him. Proverbs chap. 1 st. v. 23. I will pour out my Spirit, (that is my
Mind) unto you. And in this Sense. It is used to signify the Will, Purpose, or
Resolution, the Appetite, the Desire, and the Anger or Passion of the Mind:
Ezekiel. chap. 1. v. 12. They went every one straight forward whether the Spirit,
(or their Will) was to go, they went. Isaiah. chap. 30. v. 1. That take Council
but not of me, that cover with a Covering but not of my Spirit. Isai. chap. 29.
v. 10. The Lord has poured out upon you the Spirit, (that is) the desire of
deep Sleep, Judges chap. 8. v. 3. Then their Spirit (that is Anger) was abated
toward him. Prove. chap. 16. v. 32. He that rules his Spirit, (that is his
Appetite) is better then he that takes a City. Prove. chap. 25. v. 28. He that
has no rule over his own Spirit, is like a City broken down. Isai. chap. 33.
v. 11. Your Spirit (in the English Translation Breath) as Fire shall devour
you. Moreover this Word Ruagh, as it fignifies the Mind, so does it serve to
express the Passions, and sometimes the gifts of the mind. A high Spirit
signifies Pride, a lowly Spirit humilitly, an evil Spirit hatred and
melancholy, a good Spirit kindness and benignity, the Spirit of jealousy, the
Spirit of fornication, the Spirit of wisdom, council, fortitude, which because
in Hebrew, Substantives are oftener used than Adjectives, signify a wise,
prudent, valiant Mind. Sixthly, it signifies the life or soul, Eccles. chap. 3.
v. ii. Spiritus idem est omnibus, The same breath is to all, and the Spirit
returns to God that gave it. Lastly, it signisies the quarters of the World
(from whence the wind blows) and likewise the sides of any thing which stands
toward those quarters, as appears, Ezekiel.chap. 37. v.9. and chap. 42. v.
16,17,18,19. etc. Now it is to be noted, that a thing is attributed to God, and
said to be God's; First, because it pertains to the Nature of God, and is as
it were a part of God; as when we say the Power of God, the Eyes of God.
Secondly, when a thing is in the Power of God and Acts according to his Will
and Pleasure; so in Scripture the Heavens are called the Heavens of God,
because they are his Chariot and place of Abode. Assyria is called the Scourge
of God, and Nebuchadnezzer the Servant of God. Thirdly, when a thing is
dedicated to God, as the Temple of God, the Nazarite of God, the Bread of God.
Fourthly, that which has been delivered by the Prophets, and not revealed by
the Light of Nature, therefore the Law of Moses is called the Law of God.
Fifthly, when any thing is superlatively expressed; as the Mountains of God,
(that is) the highest Hills; the sleep of God that is deep sleep; in this sense
is to be understood the 11 th Verse of the 4 th Chap. of Amos, where God says,
I have overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, (that is)
like that memorable overthrow: for seeing God himself speaks, it cannot
otherwise be properly expressed, the Natural Knowledge of Solomon is called
Divine, and the Knowledge of God, because it was so much above that which is
common. The Psalms speak of the Cedars of God, to express their extraordinary
height, in the First Book of Sam. Chap. 10. v. 7. it is said, The fear of the
Lord fell on the People, which signifies a very great fear and in this sense,
all things which exceeded the Capacity of the Jews, and whose natural Causes
where not known to them, were always referred and attributed to God. Tempests
were called Gods Chiding and Threatenings, Thunder and Lightning his Darts and
Arrows, they thought God kept the Winds shut up in the Caverns of the Earth,
which they called his Treasuries; in which Opinion they differed from the
Heathen, only by believing God, and not AEolus, to be their Ruler; upon this
ground Miracles are also called the Works of God, that is stupendous,
wonderful works, though indeed all things in Nature are the Works of God, and
only by Divine Power act and subsist; in the same Sense the Psalmist calls the
Miracles done in Egypt the Powers of God, because in the Jews greatest danger,
they opened a way to their safety and deliverance, when they least expected it,
and were therefore so much admired by them.

Seeing then the Works of Nature which are strange and unusual, are called the
Works of God, and Trees of extraordinary height and magnitude, the Trees of
God, it is no wonder that in Genesis, Men very Valiant and of great Stature,
though impious Robbers and Fornicators, were called the Sons of God, the Ancient
Heathen as well as the Jews, used to attribute to God, every thing in which any
one excelled other Men; Pharaoh when he heard the Interpretation of his Dream
said, that the Spirit of the Gods was in Joseph, and Nebuchadnezzar said, the
Spirit of the Holy Gods was in Daniel; nothing was more frequent among the
Latins, then to say things very curiously wrought, were done by a Divine Hand,
which Expression if a Man would turn into Hebrew, he must say done by the Hand
of God.

By these places I have quoted, many other in Scripture where mention is made
of the Spirit of God, may be easily understood and explained, the Spirit of
God, and the Spirit of Jehovah, in some places signify nothing but a vehement
dry and destroying Wind, as Isa. Chap. 40. v. 7. The Grass withers, the
Flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it. Also Genesis Chap.
1st. v. 2. and the Spirit of God (that is a strong Wind) moved upon the Waters.
It also signifies a great Mind or Courage, the Courage of Gideon and Sampson,
are styled in Scripture the Spirit of God (that is) a bold daring Mind, ready
to undertake and attempt any thing. So also any particular virtue or skill more
then ordinary is in Scripture called the Spirit of God, Exodus Chap. 31. v. 3.
And I have filled him with the Spirit of God in Wisdom and Workmanship speaking
of Bezaleel; so Isa. Chap. 11. v. 2. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, (that is) as the Prophet more fully explains himself, the Virtue of
Wisdom, Council and Might: in like manner Saul's Melancholy, is called an Evil
Spirit of God, or from God, that is, deep Melancholy; for Saul's Servants who
called his Melancholy the Melancholy of God, were they that sent for Music to
recreate him, which showed that they did not think his Melancholy to be any
more than Natural, sometimes by the Spirit of God is signified the Life of Man,
Job Chap. 27. v. 3. The Spirit of God is in my Nostrils alluding to what is
said Genesis Chap. 2. v. 7. God breathed into Man's Nostrils the Breath of Life; so
Ezekiel. Chap. 37. v. 14. says, Prophesying to the Dead, and I will put my Spirit
in you, and ye shall live, that is I will restore Life to you, in the same
Sense speaks, Job Chapter 34. v. 14. If he gather unto himself his Spirit and his
Breath; so likewise is to be understood the 3 Verse of the 6 th Chap. of Genesis
My Spirit also shall not always strive with Manfor that he also is flesh, (that
is) Man hereafter shall do according to the dictates of his Flesh, and not of
his Mind, which I gave him to discern Good from Evil, Psalm. 51. v. 10, 11.
David says, Create in me a clean Heart O God, and renew a right Spirit within
me, cast me not away out of thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me;
because it was believed, that Sins came only from the Flesh, and that the Soul
or Mind did incline Men only to good: therefore the Psalmist implores Gods
Assistance against his carnal Affections, and prays that his Mind or Soul which
God gave him, may be preserved and kept by God, now because the Scripture
describes God like a Man, and because the Common Peoples Capacity is weak does
attribute to God a Mind, affections of Mind, and likewise a Body and Breath,
therefore the Spirit of God is many times in Scripture taken for the Will, the
Mind, the Power, and the Breath of Gods Mouth, Isa. Chap. 40. v. 13. the
Prophet says, who has directed the Spirit of the Lord (that is) who has
disposed the mind of God, to will any thing which he himself has not
determined. Likewise Chap. 63. v. 10. They rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit.
Hence it is, that sometimes it is taken for the Law of Moses, because it does as
it were explain and unfold Gods Mind; for Isa. in the 11 th V. of the 63. Chapter
says, where is he that put his Holy Spirit within him, (that is) the Law; as
is clearly Collected from the Context. Nehemiah Chapter 9. v. 20. says, thou
gave also thy good Spirit to instruct them, speaking of the time of the Law,
Deuteronomy. Chapter 4. v. 6. Moses speaking of the Law says, This is your wisdom and
understanding, so David, Psalm. 43. v. 11. says, Thy good Spirit leads me
into the Land of Vprightness, (that is) thy mind revealed to us, leads us
into the right way, the Spirit of God also signifies the Breath of God, which
is as improperly attributed to God as is Body or Mind, Psalm. 33. v. 6. And all
the Host of them by the breath of his Mouth, it signifies the power and might
of God, Job Chap. 33. v. 4. The Spirit of God has made me (that is) the Power
of God or rather his decree, for the Psalmist speaking poetically says, by the
Word of the Lord were the Heavens made and all the Host of them by the Breath
of his Mouth. Also Psalm. 139. v. 7. It is said whether shall I go from thy
Spirit, where Spirit signifies Gods Power and presence. Lastly, the Spirit of
God is used in Scripture, to express the affections of Gods Mind, namely his
Benignity Mercy, etc. Michah Chap. 2. v. 7. Is the Spirit of the Lord
straightned, are these his doings? so Zachary Chap. 4. v. 6. not by might not
by power but by my Spirit, (that is) only by my Mercy, and in this Sense I
think, ought to be understood the 12 th Verse of the 7 th Chapter of Zachary,
They made their Hearts as an Adamant Stone, least they should hear the Law and
the Words which the Lord of Hosts has sent in his Spirit by the former
Prophets, where Spirit must signify mercy, in this Sense speaks also the
Prophet Haggai Chap. 2. v. 5. Lo my Spirit, that is my Grace and Mercy
remains among you, fear ye not; Isa. Chap. 48. v. 16. It is said, the Lord
and his Spirit has sent me, there Spirit may be understood to signify the
Will and Mercy of God, or his mind revealed in the Law; for the Prophet says
from the beginning (that is when he first came to declare Gods Wrath and
Judgments against them, he spoke not in secret, from the time that it was
published there was I, but now I am a Messenger of Joy sent by the Mercy of God
to proclaim your restoration: it may also as I have already said be taken for
the mind and will of God, revealed in the Law, (that is) he by the Command of
the Law Levit. Chap. 19. v. 17. came to admonish them; therefore under the same
conditions and in the same manner, he warns as Moses did, and at last like
Moses, ends with predicting their restoration, but in my Opinion the first
Exposition seems the best.

To return to what was first intended, by all these Quotations it is evident,
that these following plain Phrases of Scripture. The Prophets had the Spirit of
God. God poured out his Spirit upon Men. Men were filled with the Spirit of
God, and with the Holy Ghost, signify nothing more, then that the Prophets had
some particular extraordinary Virtue above other Men, and were Persons very
Eminent for their constant piety: Moreover, that they understood the Mind and
Will of God; for we have shown, that the Spirit in the Hebrew Language,
signifies both the mind and the purpose and resolutions of the mind; yea the
Law, because it makes known Gods Mind, is called the Spirit and Mind of God: so
that the imagination of the Prophets, forasmuch as by it the decrees and
purposes of God were revealed, may likewise be called the Mind of God, and the
Prophets may be said to have the Spirit of God, now though the Mind and Will of
God, be Written in our minds, and his Eternal purposes and decrees be Engraven
on our Hearts; and consequently (to use the Scripture Phrase) we also
understand the Mind of God; yet because natural Knowledge is common to all Men,
it is very little esteemed, and the Jews who valued themselves above all other
Nations, extremely despised it, because it was common to all Mankind. Lastly,
the Prophets were said to have the Spirit of God, because Men were altogether
ignorant of the Causes of Prophetical Knowledge, and did not only admire it,
but as they did all other strange and unusual things, ascribed it to God as the
immediate Author of it.

We may then without any scruple affirm, that the Prophets did no other way
understand the revelations of God, then by the help of imagination; that is by
the means of words or signs, and these either real or imaginary: for seeing we
find in Scripture, no other means beside these, it is not lawful to suppose or
fancy any other: but by what Laws and Rules of Nature it was done, I confess I
am utterly ignorant. I might with others say, it was done by the Power of God;
but it would be little to the purpose, and no more then if I should by some
unintelligible terms express the form of any thing, all things are done by the
Power of God, for the Power of Nature is nothing but the Power of God, and it is
certain that we therefore do not understand the Power of God, because we are
ignorant of natural Causes; and we very foolishly have recourse to the Power of
God, when we know not the natural Cause of any thing, (that is) when we are
ignorant of Gods Power, but we have now no need of knowing the cause of
prophetical Knowledge, for as I have already intimated, we only endeavor to
find out what the Scripture teaches us, that from thence as from the precepts
of Nature we may know our Duty, but with the Causes of Scripture-Doctrines we
have nothing to do. Seeing then the Prophets by the help of imagination,
understood those things which God revealed, there is no doubt but they
perceived many things, which were beyond the extent of natural understanding,
for from words and signs many more Ideas may be formed, then can be only out of
those Principles and Notions, upon which all our natural Knowledge is founded.

Hence it is evident, why the Prophets perceived and declared all things
parabolically and in dark Speeches, and expressed all spiritual things after a
corporal manner, because that does better suit with the nature of the
imagination; neither can we now wonder, why the Scripture or the Prophets,
spoke so improperly and obscurely of the Spirit or Mind of God, as Numb. Chap.
11. v. 17. I will come down and talk with thee there; and I will take of the
Spirit which is upon thee, and put it on them. Likewise in the 1 st Book of
Kings chap. 22. v. 11. and Zedekiah the Son of Chenaanah made him Horns of
Iron, and he said, thus says the Lord, with these shall thou push the Syrians
till thou have consumed them, Michah saw God sitting, Daniel saw him like an
Old Man clothed in white Garments, Ezekiel like fire, and they who were with
Christ descending like a Dove, the Apostles like Cloven Tongues, and Paul
before his Conversion like a great light, all which Visions, agree with those
fancies and imaginations, which the vulgar have of God and of Spirits. Lastly,
because the imagination is wandering and unconstant, Prophesy did not long
continue with the Prophets, nor was it frequent but very rare, and as there
were but very few that had it, so likewise 'twas very seldom; we are now to
inquire, how the Prophets could be sure of those things, which they perceived
only by the strength of imagination, and not by the certain Principles of
mental Knowledge: but whatever may be said concerning this Particular, ought to
be fetched from Scripture, though (as we have already confessed) we have no true
knowledge of the thing, and cannot explain it by its first Causes; however what
the Scripture declares concerning the truth and certainty of the Prophets. I
will show in the following Chapter, wherein I resolve to treat of Prophets.

CHAP. II. Of Prophets.
IT appears by the preceding Chapter, that the Prophets were not endued with
perfection of mind above other Men; but only with strength and vivacity of
imagination, which Scripture-Histories abundantly testify: Solomon excelled all
others in Wisdom but not in the gift of Prophesy, Heman, Darda, Kalcoll, though
Men very Wise, yet were no Prophets, when plain Countrymen who had no Learning,
yea Women as Hagar, Abraham's Maid had that gift: which is agreeable both to
Reason and Experience; for they who most excel in fancy and imagination, are
less apt to understand things clearly, and they that have excellent
understandings, have their fancy and imagination not so strong, but better kept
within compass, that it may not be confounded with the intellect: those Men
therefore, who endeavor out of the Books of the Prophets, to find the true
knowledge of Natural and Spiritual things, are extremely mistaken; which I
purpose to show at large, because the Times, Philosophy, and the matter it self
requires it. I will not at all value what superstition babbles to the contrary,
which hates nothing more then such Men as live good Lives, and are lovers of
true solid knowledge; with shame be it spoken, it is now come to that pass, that
they who freely confess, they have no particular Idea of God, and only know him
by created Beings (of whose Causes they are Ignorant,) are presently branded
with the Name of Atheists.

To proceed orderly in proving the Point; I will show, that there was a
difference between the Prophets, not only in respect of imagination and
temperament of Body, but also in respect of the Opinions wherewith they were
prepossest; so that they never became the more Learned by Prophesy; which I
will presently more fully make out, but I must first speak of the Prophets
certainty, because it belongs to the Subject of this Chapter, and because it
contributes somewhat to the Proof of what I design to demonstrate.

Because simple imagination does not in its own Nature include certainty, as
every clear and distinct Idea does; there must necessarily some other thing
accompany imagination, to make us sure of the things we imagine, and that is
reasoning whence it follows, that Prophesy of it self, does not include
certainty; because it depends only upon the imagination, and therefore the
Prophets themselves, were not certain of what God revealed, by the Revelation
it self, but by some sign; as appears by Abraham Genesis chap. 15. v. 8. And he
said, Lord God whereby shall I know that I shall Inherit it? asking a Sign
after he heard the promise: without doubt he believed God, and did not ask the
sign that he might believe, but that he might be sure the promise came from
God. The same thing more plainly appears by Gideon, Judges chap. 6. v. 17, and
he said unto him if I have found Grace in thy sight then show me a Sign, that
thou talkest with me. God said to Moses, let this be a sign unto thee, Ezechiah
who well knew that Isaiah was a Prophet, asked a sign of him when he foretold
his recovery; which shows that the Prophets had always some sign, by which they
were certain of the things they Prophetically imagined; and therefore Moses
Deuteronomy. chap. 18. v. 22. bids the People ask a sign of any that pretend to
Prophesy, which sign was to be foretelling some future event. Prophesy
therefore in this particular gives Place to Natural knowledge, which needs no
sign, but in its own Nature includes certainty; but the certainty of Prophesy,
was not Mathematical, but only Moral, which also appears by Scripture Deuteronomy.
chap. 13. Moses warns the People, that if any Prophet should teach them to
Worship any other God, though he confirmed his Doctrine by Signs and Miracles,
yet the Prophet was to be put to death; for Moses goes on and says that God did
by Signs and Miracles prove the People, whether they loved the Lord with all
their heart. Christ in like manner warns his Disciples, telling them Math.
chap. 24. v. 24. there should arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and
should show great signs and wonders. Ezechiel chap. 14. v. 9. plainly declares
that God sometimes deceives Men with false Revelations; And if the Prophet be
deceived when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet;
which Michaiah also testifies of the Prophets of Ahab, 1 st. Book of Kings
chap. 22. v. 21. 22, 23.

And though this shows Prophesy to be a thing somewhat doubtful and uncertain,
yet it had a great deal of certainty in it, for God never deceives the Godly
and Elect, but according to that saying in the 1 st. Book of Sam. chap. 24. v.
13. As says the Proverb of the Ancients, wickedness proceeds from the
wicked, but my hand shall not be upon thee, and as it likewise appears by the
History of Abigal and her discourse, God uses pious Persons as Instruments of
his goodness, and wicked Men for Executioners of his wrath, this likewise is
made Evident by the Case of the Prophet Michaiah, for though God had decreed Ahab
should be deceived by the Prophets, he made use of false Prophets; but to a
good Prophet, revealed the Truth of what was to happen, and did not hinder the
Prophet from foretelling the Truth; but still the certainty of the Prophet was
but Moral, because no Man can justify himself before God, nor boast that he is
the Instrument of God, the Anger of God led David to Number the People, whose
Piety the Scripture sufficiently declares, all Prophetical certainty was
founded upon three Particulars. First the Prophets did as strongly, and with as
much vivacity imagine the things revealed, as Men waking use to do the things
they see; Secondly the certainty of the Prophets was confirmed by a Sign, and
Thirdly because their Minds were continually inclined to Virtue and Justice,
though the Scripture does not always make mention of the sign, yet we ought to
believe the Prophets still had a sign; for the Scripture does many times leave
out circumstances and conditions, and relates things as supposed to be known.
Moreover, it is to be granted, that the Prophets, who Prophesied nothing new,
but what was contained in the Law of Moses, had no need of a sign; (for
example,) the Prophesy of Jeremy concerning the destruction of Jerusalem,
needed no sign, because 'twas confirmed by the Prophesies of the rest of the
Prophets, and by the threatenings of the Law; but for the confirmation of
Hananiahs Prophesy, who against all the Prophets foretold the sudden
Restoration of the City, there was necessity of a sign, till the coming to
pass of what he predicted should make it good, Ierem. chap. 28. v. 9, 10.

Seeing then the certainty of Prophesy which depended upon signs, was not
Mathematical (that is such as necessarily followed from the thing apprehended
or seen) but only Moral; and that signs were given to satisfy and convince the
Prophet himself, it likewise follows, that signs were given according to the
Opinion and Capacity of the Prophet; so that the sign which made one Prophet
confident and certain of his Prophesy, could not assure another, as the signs
were different and various, so also Revelation it self did vary in every
Prophet, according to the disposition of his imagination, the temper of his
constitution, or the Opinions wherewith he was prepossest, (for example) if a
Prophet were cheerful and merry, to him were revealed Victories and Peace,
which cause Mirth and Gladness; such things using to take up the fancy of such
Men, to a Man sad and melancholy were revealed Wars, Plagues and Evils to
come; if a Prophet were kind, merciful, chollerique or severe, accordingly were
his Revelations: The fancy of the Prophet was also sometimes, the cause that
Revelations differed in Styles for if the Prophet were of an elegant and
exalted fancy, the mind of God was made known to him in an eloquent lofty
Style, if the Prophets fancy were obscure and confused, so was in like manner
his Revelation, when Revelations were made to a Country rustic, the signs
represented were Oxen, Cows, etc. to a Soldier, Captains and Armies, to a
Courtier, Palaces and regal Thrones. Lastly Prophesy varied according to the
Opinions wherewith the Prophets were affected, Math. chap. 11. to the Magi
addicted to Astrology, the Nativity of Christ was revealed by a Star appearing
in the East, to the Dreamers or Prophets of Nebuchadnezzar was revealed the
destruction of Jerusalem by inspecting the entrails of Beasts; that King also
understood it from Oracles and the Shooting of Arrows into the Air. To Prophets
who believed Men had free Will, and Acted according to their will and choice,
God revealed himself as indifferent, and ignorant of Men's future Actions, all
which Particulars we will singly prove, by Places of Scripture.

First it appears by the 2 d Book of Kings chap. 3. v. 15. that Elisha before
he Prophesied to Iehoram, desired a Minstrel to Play before him, and that till
he was pleased with the Music of the Instrument he could not, because he was
Angry with the King, foretell what should happen; they who are Angry with any
Person, are apt and inclined to imagine Evil rather then good, but they are
mistaken who say God is never revealed to Angry and Melancholy Persons; for to
Moses who was incensed against Pharaoh, without the help of any Musical
Instrument, God revealed that miserable Plague of the death of their first
born, Exodus chap. 11. God was revealed to Angry Cain, to angry and impatient
Ezechiel was revealed the misery and obstinacy of the Jews, Ezekiel. chap. 3. v.
14. Jeremy sad and weary of his Life, Prophesied the Captivity of the Jews, so
that Josiah would not consult him, but sent to a Woman Hilkiah the Prophetess,
to whose milder disposition the mercy of God was more likely to be revealed 2 d
Book of the Chron. chap. 24. v. 22. Michiah never Prophesied any good to Ahab
(as did some other Prophets in the 1 st Book of the Kings chap. 20. v. 13.) but
all his Life time Prophesied Evil; as plainly appears in the 1 st Book of the
Kings, chap. 22. v. 8. and more plainly in the 2 d. Book of Chron. chap. 18. v.
7. the Prophets therefore in respect of the different temperament of their
Body, inclined to some Revelations more then to others. The Style also of
Prophesy, differed according to the Eloquence of every Prophet; the Prophesies
of Ezekiel and Amos are Written in a lower and less Elegant Style, then those
of Isaiah and Nahum; and if any who understand the Hebrew Tongue, desire to
inquire narrowly into these things, let them compare some Chapters one with
another of diverse Prophets upon the same Subject, and they shall find a great
deal of difference in the Style: compare the first Chapter of the Courtier
Isaiah, from the 11 th verse. to the 20 th, with the 5 th chap. of the Herdsman
Amos, from the 21 th to the 24 th verse, compare the Order and Reasons of the
Prophesy of Jeremy, which he wrote chap. the 49 th at Edom; with the Order and
Reasons of Obadiah: compare the 40 th chap. of Isai. v. 19, 20. and his 44 th
chap. from verse the 8 th, with the 8 th chap. 6 th verse and the 13 th chap. 2
d. verse, of the Prophet Hosea, if all things be considered, it is very Evident
that God had no peculiar Style of speaking, but according to the Learning and
Capacity of the Prophet, it was either Elegant, Concise, Sharp, Rude, Prolix or
Obscure: Prophetical Representations and Hierogliphicks were various, though they
signified the same thing: for the Glory of God leaving the Temple, was
otherwise represented to Isaiah, then it was to Ezekiel; the Rabbines would
have both representations to be the same, and that Ezekiel being a Country Man,
extraordinarily admired his own; and therefore described it with all its
Circumstances: but unless the Rabbines were assured by Faithful Tradition the
thing was so indeed, we are not bound to believe them; for Isaiah saw Seraphims
with six Wings, and Ezekiel Beasts with four, Isaiah saw God clothed and
sitting upon a Throne, Ezekiel saw him like Fire, both of them without doubt
saw God as each was wont to imagine Representations also varyed, not only in
their manner and form, but in their clearness and perspicuity; for the
Representations made to Zachary were so obscure, that they could not be
understood by the Prophet himself without Explication, as appears by the Story;
and those of Daniel, though explained, were not understood by him, which happened
not in Respect of the difficulty of the thing revealed (for it concerned Human
Affairs, which exceed not the bounds of Human Capacity but only as they are
future) but because Daniel was not so well able to Prophesy waking, as in his
sleep; which appears by his being so terrified in the beginning of the
Revelation, that he was scarce able to stand, and therefore through weakness of
imagination and want of strength, things were so obscurely Represented to him,
that he could not understand them, though they were Expounded, and here it is to
be observed, that the Wonders which Daniel heard were only imaginary, and
therefore being at that time so much troubled, it is no wonder that he could
not understand by words which he so confusedly and obscurely imagined, but they
that say God would not clearly reveal the matter to Daniel, seem not to have
read the words of the Angel, who said expressly, Dan. chap. 10. v. 14. Now am I
come to make thee understand what shall befall thy People in the latter days,
etc. those things therefore remained obscure, because at that time there was no
Man found, who so much excelled in the strength and Power of imagination, as to
have a clearer Revelation made to him. Lastly the Prophets to whom it was
revealed that God would take away Eliah, persuaded Elisha that he was only to
be Translated to some other place, where he might be found by them; which
Evidently proves that they did not rightly understand Gods Revelation, there is
no need of being larger upon these Particulars; for nothing is more manifest in
Scripture, then that God did bestow upon some Prophets, a much greater Portion
of the Gift of Prophesy, then he did upon others; but that Prophesy and
Representations differed, according to the Opinions which the Prophets
maintained, and that Prophets were prejudiced with different, yea contrary,
Opinions (I mean concerning things merely Speculative; but as to things
relating to honesty and good manners, we ought to think otherwise) I will more
exactly and fully prove, because it is a matter of greater moment, and from
thence will conclude, that Prophesy never left the Prophets more Learned, but
left them in the Opinions wherewith they were prepossest, and for that reason
in things merely Speculative, no Man is obliged to believe them.

Many men have very unadvisedly persuaded themselves, that the Prophets knew
all things, within the compass of Human Understanding, and though some places of
Scripture tell us plainly, that the Prophets did not know some things; yet they
are rather willing to confess, they do not understand those places of
Scripture, then yield the Prophets were Ignorant of any thing; or else they
endeavor so to wrest the Words of Scripture, that they would have it say, that
which it does not mean. If either of these be lawful, then Farewell to all
Scripture, for in vain do we endeavor to prove any thing by Scripture, if
those things which are most clear in it, shall be reckoned amongst those that
are obscure and unintelligible, or else shall be interpreted as we please. (For
example) nothing is more plain then that Iosuah, and perhaps he that wrote the
Book of Iosuah, did belive; that the Sun moved about the Earth, that the Earth
had no motion, and that the Sun for some time stood still: Yet many because
they will not allow of any mutation in the Heavens, so expound that Place, that
it shall not seem to imply any such thing; but others, who think themselves
better Philosophers, because they believe the Eatrh moves, and the Sun stands
still, or at least moves not about the Earth, do with might and main, endeavor
to wrest the Proof of their Opinion, out of the same Scripture against its
plain Words: Indeed at these Men, I much wonder, is any Man obliged to believe,
that Iosuah a Soldier was perfectly skilled in Astronomy? and that a Miracle
could not be revealed to him, or that the Light of the Sun, could not remain
longer above the Horizon then ordinary, unless Iosuah understood the Cause
thereof; both seem to me ridiculous, and I had rather plainly say, that Iosuah
did not know the true Cause of that continuing Light, and that all the Army
with him did think, that the Sun had adiuvrual motion about the Earth, and that
it is standing still that particular Day was the true Cause of its longer
shining; but did not understand, that the great abundance of Hail, which the 11
th. Verse of the 10 th. chap. of Iosuah says, was then in the Region of the
Air, might cause a greater refraction of Light then ordinary, or some other
thing of like Nature, which is not our Business here to inquire. In like manner
according to the Capacity of Isaiah, a Sign was given by the Shadow's going
back upon the Dyal of Ahaz, because his Opinion was, that the Sun moved and not
the Earth; and for Parhelij perhaps, he never dreamt of any such thing, which
we may without any scruple maintain, for the Sign might really happen, and be
foretold to the King, though the Prophet were ignorant of the true Cause
thereof: The same may be said of Solomon's Building, that if all the measures
and Proportions of it were revealed by God, they were revealed according to
Solomon's Capacity and Opinion, for seeing we are not bound to believe that
Solomon was an exact Mathematician, we may lawfully affirm, that he knew not
what proportion the Diameter of a Circle ought to bear to the Peripheria or
Circumference, but thought with the common sort of Workmen, that it should be
as three to one; but if it be lawful to say, that we do not understand the Text
in the 1 st. Book of Kings, chap. 7. v. 23. Truly I know not what we can
understand from Scripture, since there the Building is simply and historically
related; if it be lawful to suppose the Scripture meant otherwise, but, for
some Reason to us unknown, would write in that manner, what can follow but a
total overthrow of all Scripture? and then there is nothing so absurd or
wicked, which Malice can invent, that may not under Scripture Authority be
countenanced and committed; but what we maintain savors not of Impiety, for
Solomon, Isaiah, Joshua etc. though Prophets, were Men subject to Human
Infirmities. The drowning of all Mankind by a Deluge, was revealed to Noah
according to his capacity, for he thought no Part of the World was inhabited
but Palestine, and the Prophets without any prejudice to their Piety, might be,
yea were Ignorant, not only of things of this Nature, but also, of Matters of
greater consequence, for they discovered very little of the Divine Attributes,
but had mean and Vulgar Opinions of God, to which their Revelations were
accommodated; as by many Testimonies of Scripture shall be proved, so that we
may plainly see, they were not so much commended for the Excellencies and
Sublimity of their Knowledge, as for their Piety and constancy of Mind.

Adam was the first Man to whom God revealed himself: Yet he knew not that God
was Omnipresent and Omniscient; for he hid himself from God and endeavored to
excuse his Sin to God, as if he had been before a Man; therefore God was
revealed to him according to his Opinion and Capacity, that is, as one who was
not every where, and as one Ignorant of Adam's Sin; For Adam heard, or seemed
to hear God walking in the Garden, calling and asking Adam where art thou?
Asking likewise because Adam was ashamed, whether he had eaten of the forbidden
Tree? Adam therefore knew no other Attribute of God, then that he was the maker
of all things. God was revealed to Cain according to his Capacity (that is) as
one ignorant of Human Actions, nor did he need any higher Knowledge of God to
repent of his Sin. To Laban God revealed himself, as the God of Abraham,
because Laban believed that every Nation had a peculiar God, as appears Genesis
chap. 31. v. 29. Where he says to Jacob, the God of your Father spoke to me
Yesternight. Abraham was ignorant of God's Vbiquity and Prescience; for as soon
as he heard the Sentence against Sodom, he prayed that God would not execute
it, till he knew whether all deserved the Punishment, Genesis chap. 18 th. v. 24.
Peradventure there may be found Fifty righteous within the City. Nor was God
otherwise revealed to him, for in Abraham's imagination God said, verse. 21 th.
I will go down now and see whether they have done according to the Cry of it,
which is come unto me, and if not, I will know. God's Testimony of Abraham in
Genesis chap. 12. v. 19. Speaks of nothing but Abraham's Obedience, and that he
would command his Children, and his Household after him to keep the Way of the
Lord, and to do Judgment and Justice; but says nothing of any extraordinary
knowledge or Conceptions, that he had of God. Moses did not perfectly know that
God was Omniscient, and that Human Actions were governed by his Decrees; for
though God told him, Exodus chap. 3. v. 8. That the Israelites would hearken to
his Voice, yet Moses doubted and said in the 1 st. verse of the 4 th. chapter.
What if they will not believe me nor hearken to my Voice? And therefore God was
revealed to him, as indifferent and ignorant of Men's future Actions, for he
gave unto him two Signs and said, Exodus chap. 4. v. 8, 9. And if it shall come
to pass they will not believe thee, nor hearken to the Voice of the first Sign,
they will believe the Voice of the latter Sign, but if they will not believe
the latter Sign, then take of the Water of the River etc. And indeed if a Man
will without prejudice consider the Opinions of Moses, it will clearly appear,
that Moses thought God a Being that always was, is, and ever shall be; and
therefore called him Jehovah, which in Hebrew expresses those three times of
existing; but of his Nature he declared no more, then that he was very
merciful, kind and very jealous, as appears in many Places of the Pentateuch.
He believed and taught also, that this Being was so different from all other
Beings, that he could not be expressed by the likeness of any other visible
Thing; that he was invisible, not because he thought beholding him was in it
self impossible; but only in respect of Human Frailty, he thought also that
this Being was in regard of his own Power, single and but one, he allowed that
there were other Beings, which by the Order and Command of God, were God's
Substitutes and Vicegerents (that is) Beings to whom God gave Power and
Authority to govern Nations, to provide for and take care of them; but Moses
declared the Being, which the Jews were bound to worship, to be the most high
God (that is) in the Hebrew Phrase, the God of all Gods; therefore Moses in his
Song, Exodus chap. 15. v. 11. says, who is like unto thee O Lord amongst the
Gods! and Iethro Exodus chap. 18. v. 11. says, Now I know that the Lord is
greater then all Gods (that is) I must acknowledge with Moses, that Jehovah is
greater then all Gods, and of Singular Power: but whether Moses believed, that
the Beings which were God's Vicegerents were created by God, may be doubted,
since he said nothing (that we know) of their Creation or Original. Another of
Moses's Doctrines was, that this being out of a Chaos, Genesis chap. 1 st. v. 2.
brought this Visible World into Form and Order, furnished Nature with the Seeds
of all things, and therefore has absolute Power and Authority over all things,
as it is Deuteronomy. chap. 10. v. 14, 15. And by that absolute Power, chose the
Jewish Nation for himself, and appointed a Particular Place of the Earth for
their Habitation, Deuteronomy. chap. 4. v. 19. and chap. 32. v. 8. But other Nations
and Countries, he left to the care of other Gods substituted by him, and
therefore God was called the God of Israel, and the God of Jerusalem, 2 d. Book
of Chron. chap. 32. v. 19. And other Gods were called the Gods of the Nations:
For this Reason the Jews believed, that the Country which God chose for them,
required a particular and different worship of God, from that of other
Countries, nor would they suffer the worship of other Gods, or any worship
proper to other Countries to be exercised amongst them, it was believed that
the People whom the King of Assyria brought into the Country of the Jews, were
devoured by Lions, because they knew not the manner of the worship of the God
of the Land, 2 d. Book of Kings chap. 17. v. 24, 25. It is the Opinion of Aben
Ezra, that Jacob upon this Ground, when he was about returning into his own
Country, commanded his Sons to put away the Gods of the Land in which they
were; and prepare themselves for a new Way of Worship, Genesis chap. 35. v. 23.
David told Saul, because he was by Persecution compelled to forsake his
Country, that he was driven out from the Inheritance of the Lord, and sent to
serve other Gods 1 st. Book of Sam. chap. 26. v. 19. Lastly, Moses believed
that God had his Habitation in the Heavens, Deuteronomy. chap. 33. v. 26 Which was a
frequent Opinion among the Heathen. Now if we carefully observe the Revelations
of Moses, we shall find them fitted and suited to those Conceptions and
Opinions which he had of God: because he believed that God's Nature was
Gracious, Merciful, Longsuffering etc. Therefore according to this Opinion, and
these Attributes was God revealed to him, Exodus chap. 34. v. 6, 7. Where it is
declared why God appeared to him: also Exodus chap. 20. v. 4, 5. In Exodus chap.
33. v. 18. We read that Moses desired to see God, but because Moses, as has
been already said, had formed in his imagination no Likeness or Figure of God,
and as I have already showed, God was not revealed to the Prophets, but
according to the disposition of their Fancy and Imagination, therefore God
appeared to him under no Image or Similitude, and the Reason of it was, because
'twas repugnant and contrary to the imagination of Moses; but other Prophets,
Isaiah, Ezekiel and Daniel testify that they saw God. Moses was answered by God
in the 20 th Verse of the 33. Chap. of Exodus thou can not see my Face; and
because Moses believed that God was visible (that is it implied no
contradiction in the Divine Nature to be so) else he had never made such a
request, therefore God also answered, no Man shall see my Face and live, giving
a Reason suitable to Moses's Opinion; for God did not say that his Divine
Nature was in it self invisible, and impossible to be seen; as indeed it is,
but that it could not be seen because of human Weakness and Frailty. After the
Israelites had worshipped the Golden Calf, that God might reveal to Moses the
Israelites should become like other Nations, God tells him, Exodus Chap. 33. v.
2, 3. that he would send an Angel (that is a Being) who instead of the supreme
Being, should take care of the Israelites; but that he himself would be no more
in the midst of them: and from this Moses was to conclude, that the Israelites
were thenceforth not to be beloved by God any more then other Nations, who were
committed to the care of Angels or other Beings, as appears by the 16 th Verse
of the Chapter. Lastly, because Moses believed that God dwelt in Heaven,
therefore was God revealed as descending from Heaven upon Mount Sinai, and
Moses that he might speak with God ascended the Mount, which he needed not to
have done, had he thought God to be in all places: The Israelites knew very
little of God, though he was revealed to them; as was sufficiently manifested, by
their bestowing on a Calf, the Honor and Worship due to God; and by saying to
that Calf, these be thy Gods, O Israel, that brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt. Nor is it to be believed, that Men accustomed to the Superstitions of
Egypt, Ignorant and broken to the Yoke of a tedious Bondage, should have any
right Understanding of God; or that Moses should teach them any thing more,
then a peculiar manner and way of living; not instructing them as a
Philosopher, to make living well their free and voluntary choice; but as a
Legislator compelling them by the Commands and Power of Law: So that a good
Life, the Love and Service of God, was to them rather Servitude then true
Liberty, or the Grace and Gift of God: for Moses Commanded them to love God and
keep his Law; that they might acknowledge their deliverance out of Egypt to be
by God, he terrifyed them with threatenings in case they Transgrest the Law, and
promised them many Blessings, if they carefully observed it; So that he dealt
with the Israelites, as Parents use to do with Children void of Reason, which
is an Evidence, that they were ignorant, how Excellent a thing Virtue is, and
what was true happiness. Jonas thought he could fly from the presence of God,
which implied, that he also believed God had substituted other Powers, to take
care of those Countries and Nations which were not within the Territories of
Judea, in all the Old Testament, we read of no Person who spoke so rationally
of God as Solomon, who for natural Knowledge excelled all the Men of his time,
and therefore thought himself above the Law (which was only given to those who
wanted the dictates of Reason and natural Understanding) and slighted the
observance of those Laws, which particularly concerned him as he was King, and
consisted in three Particulars, as may be seen, Deuteronomy. Chap. 17. v. 16, 17. he
was indeed to blame in breaking those Laws, and did not do like a Philosopher,
when he delivered himself up to pleasure and sensuality; yet we read in
Ecclesiastes, he declared all the Goods of Fortune to be Vanity, and that
nothing is to be so highly prized as Wisdom and Understanding, and no
punishment equal to a Man's being a Fool, Prove. Chap. 17. But let us return to
the Prophets, of whose differing Opinions we have taken notice, the Rabbines
who have left us the Books of the Prophets now extant, found the Opinions of
Ezekiel so contrary to those of Moses, as may be seen in the Treatise of the
Sabbath ( Chap. 1 st fol. 13. page 2 d.) that they were near resolving not to
receive the Book of Ezekiel for Canonical, and had concealed it, if a certain
Person called Hananiah, had not undertaken to expound it, which some report he
did with great Labor and Study; so that it is not certain whether it were a
Commentary he wrote, and was perhaps lost, or that he changed and glossed upon
Ezekiels words and discourses, according to his own fancy; however it was, the
18 th Chapter of Ezekiel does not seem to agree with the 34 Chap. of Exodus v.
7; nor with the 32 Chap. of Jeremy v. 18. Samuel believed that when God had
decreed any thing, he never repented or changed that decree, 1 st Book of Sam.
Chap. 14. v. 29; Saul when he repented of his Sin and desired to worship God;
Samuel told him God would not change his Decree, but the contrary was revealed
to Jeremy, for when ever God decreed good or evil to any Nation, if Men became
either better or worse, before the Execution of the Sentence, God did
accordingly alter his decrees, Ierem. Chap. 18. v. 8, 10. the Prophet Joel
believed that God repented of the Evil which he at any time decreed, Io. Chap.
2. v. 13. in the 4 th Chap. of Genesis v. 7. it clearly appears, that it is in
Man's Power to overcome Evil Temptations, and to live well by what God said to
Cain, who notwithstanding as we find in Scripture and in Josephus, never
subdued his Passions, by the forecited Text in Jeremy, we may conclude that God
changes his purposes either of doing good or evil, according to Men's living
well or wickedly; yet on the contrary, St. Paul teaches nothing more plainly,
then that Men have no Power over themselves, against the Temptations and Lusts
of the Flesh, but by the particular Mercy and Election of God; as may be seen
in the 9 th Chapter to the Romans from the 10 th Verse onward; in the 3 d Chap.
v. 3 d, where he asks whether God be unrighteous in taking vengeance, he
Corrects himself in speaking after that manner like a Man.

From what has been alleged, we have sufficiently proved what we proposed,
namely that God fitted and suited his Revelations according to the Capacity and
Opinions of the Prophets; and that they might be and indeed were, ignorant of
things merely speculative, which did not pertain to Charity and a godly Life,
that the Prophets were also of very different Opinions, and consequently in the
Knowledge of Natural and Spiritual things, we are not to rely and ground our
selves upon them: We conclude then, that we are not bound to believe any thing
more from the Prophets, then the end and substance of what they revealed; and
that in other things, it is free for a Man to believe as he thinks best, (for
example) Cains Revelation teaches us, that God did admonish him to live well,
which was the intent end, and substance of the Revelation; but it does not
declare to us the freedom of Man's Will, or any other Philosophical Matter;
therefore though in the Words and Reasons of that Admonition, freedom of Will
seem to be clearly asserted, yet it is lawful to be of a contrary Opinion, since
those Words and Reasons, were only applied and suited to the Capacity of Cain.
The Prophet Michaiahs Revelation only declared, what should be the Event of the
Battle between Ahaband Aram; and therefore we are only bound to believe that;
but whatever else was contained in that Revelation concerning the true and
lying Spirit of God; or concerning the Host of Heaven standing on each side of
God, with other Circumstances in that Revelation; they do not at all concern
us, but every one may believe of them as he thinks most agreeable to Reason,
the same may be said of the Reasons declared to Job, for God's having absolute
Power over all things, if it be true that they were a Revelation, and that he
Writ as an Historian and not (as some believe) like a Poet: they were revealed
according to Jobs Capacity, for his particular Conviction, but they were not
intended as Universal Reasons to convince all Men; nor are we to determine
otherwise of the Reasons used by Christ, to convince the Pharisees of their
Ignorance and Obstinacy, and to persuade his Disciples to live righteously; all
those Reasons were accommodated to the Opinions and Principles of the Persons
to whom they were urged (for example) when Christ said to the Pharisees, Mat.
Chap. 12 v. 26. If Satan cast out Satan he is divided against himself, how then
shall his Kingdom stand, here Christ convinces the Pharisees, from their own
Principles and Opinions, who said he cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils; but we ought not to conclude, that Christ's Words are an absolute proof,
that there are Devils and a Kingdom of Devils. So also when he said to his
Disciples, Matthew. Chap. 18. v. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little Ones, for I say unto you, that in Heaven their Angels do always behold
the Face of my Father which is in Heaven, by these Words Christ taught nothing
more, then that they ought not to be proud, or despise any one, whatever else
was faid, was only the better to persuade his Disciples, the same may be said
of the Signs and Discourses of the Apostles; nor need we say more of this
Subject, because it would be extremely tedious to Quote all those places of
Scripture which are Written only Ad hominem, or according to Men's Capacity; and
with a great prejudice to Philosophy, are maintained to be Divine Doctrines.
It Is sufficient to have mentioned these few general ones, the Curious Reader
may himself examine the rest; but seeing all those things which I have spoken
concerning Prophets and Prophesy, do directly concern the thing I aimed at,
which was to divide Philosophy from Theology; yet because I have only touched
upon the question generally, I will now in the following Chapter, inquire
whether the Gift of Prophesy were peculiar only to the Jews, or common to all
Nations? And also what is to be understood by the calling of the Jews.

CHAP. III. Of the calling of the Jews, and whether the Gift of Prophesy were
peculiar only to the Jews.
EVery Man's prosperity and true happiness consists only in the fruition of
good, but not in the glory, that he alone and no other Person enjoys that good;
for whoever thinks himself the more happy, because it is well with him when it
is not so with other Men; or because he is more fortunate and prosperous then
others, is ignorant what is true felicity and beatitude; and the joy which
arises from such a conceit is Childish, and savors of an envious Evil Mind
(for example) Man's true beatitude and felicity, consists only in Wisdom and the
knowledge of Truth, but not in his being wiser then other Men, or that other
Men want true knowledge; for that adds not at all to his Wisdom, which is his
true happiness, he therefore that rejoices in being happyer then other Men,
takes Pleasure in their misfortune, and is an envious Evil Man; and he that is
so, never knew true Wisdom or the Peace of a good Life; seeing therefore, that
the Scripture for the better persuading the Jews to obey the Law, says Deuteronomy.
chap. 10 v. 19. that God chose them above all People, and was nigher to them
then to all other Nations Deuteronomy. chap. 4. v. 7. that he gave them Statutes and
Laws more righteous and just, then he did to other Nations, as it is in the 8
th Verse of the same chap. and lastly, that God made himself more known to them
then to other People, as it is in the 32 th verse of the 4 th chap. All this
was spoken according to the capacity and understanding, of those that did not
know what was true blessedness, as we have shown in the foregoing Chapter, and
as Moses himself, testifies in Deuteronomy. chap. 9. v. 6, 7. for the Jews had not
been less blessed, though God had equally called all Men to Salvation, nor had
God been less gracious to them, though he had been as nigh to other Nations;
their Laws had not been less righteous, nor they less wise, though the same had
been prescribed to all other People, and the Miracles done among them had not
less declared Gods Power, though the like had been wrought for other Nations; nor
had the Jews been the less obliged to serve and Worship God, though God had
equally given to all other Men the same Gifts which he bestowed on them. God's
saying to Solomon (in the 1 st Book of Kings chap. 3. v. 12.) that none after
him should be ever like him for understanding, seems to be only a manner of
speaking to declare the excellency of Solomon's Wisdom; what ever the words
mean, yet we ought not to believe, that to increase Solomon's happiness, God
promised never to make any Man so wise as he; for that would not at all have
made Solomon's Wisdom greater, neither would a wise King have given God the less
thanks, though God had said, he would bestow as much Wisdom upon all other Men.

But though we say, that Moses in the forecited places of the Pentateuch, spoke
according to the Capacity of the Jews; yet we cannot deny but that God
prescribed those Laws of the Pentateuch to the Jews only, that he spoke only to
them, and that no other Nation ever saw such miracles as were wrought amongst
them, all that I intend is, that Moses spoke after such a manner, and made use
of such arguments, the better to convince their Childish understandings, and
bind them the faster to the service and worship of God. Lastly, we will show,
that the Jews did not excel other Nations in knowledge or Piety, but in some
other thing; or (that I may with Scripture speak to their Capacity) God did not
make choice of the Jews above other Nations, that their knowledge might be more
sublime, or their Lives more righteous then other Peopl's, but for another end
and purpose; and what that was, we will in order declare.

But before I begin, I will in few words explain, what I mean in that which
follows, by Gods disposing and direction, what by Gods external and internal
assistance, what by Gods calling or Election. And Lastly, what I intend by
fortune, I take Gods disposing or direction, to be the fixed order and
immutable course of Nature, or the Concatenation of Natural things and causes;
for we have already shown, that the universal Laws of Nature, whereby all
things are done and determined, are nothing else but Gods eternal decrees,
which imply eternal verity and necessity: therefore whether we say, that all
things are done and brought to pass, according to the Laws of Nature, or by the
ordination and decree of God, we say but one and the same thing; because the
Power of all Natural beings, is nothing else, but the Power of God by which all
things were ordered and done, it therefore follows, that whatever Man, who is a
part of Nature, does for the preservation of his being, or whatever Nature
without any endeavor of his, offers him for that end; it is offered by the
divine Power, operating either by human Nature, or by things without it: so
that whatever human Nature can perform by its own Power for self preservation,
that may be truly called Gods internal assistance, and that benefit and
advantage which Man receives from the Power of external causes, may be justly
termed Gods external help: which fully explains what is to be understood by
Gods calling or Election; for since no Man can do any thing but by the
predeterminate order of Nature, that is according to Gods eternal direction and
decree, it is a necessary consequence, that no Man chooses for himself any way
or manner of living, or effects any thing, but by the particular Will and
Calling of God, who chose him before others, so to live, and so to Act. Lastly
by fortune nothing else is to be understood, but Gods disposing and directing
human Affairs, by external and unexpected Causes. These things premised, we
return to our first purpose, of inquiring what it was, for which the Jews are
said to be chosen by God before other Nations, and to make it out, I proceed in
this manner.

All those things which we can honestly and lawfully desire, may be referred to
these three Heads. First, to know things by their first and immediate Causes.
Secondly. to Master our Passion and affections, and acquire a constant habit of
virtue, and Lastly, to live in Bodily health and safty. The means directly
conducing to the two first of these heads, and which may be considered as prime
and efficient causes; are contained in human Nature; so that the obtaining of
them is within our Power, or chiefly depends upon the Laws only of human
Nature: and therefore it must be concluded, that those gifts are not peculiar
to any one Nation, but were always common to all Mankind, unless we can
persuade our selves, that Nature first procreated diverse kinds of Men; but the
means which conduce to our living in health and safty, consist chiefly in
things external, and are therefore called the gifts and goods of Fortune,
because they depend upon the disposition of outward causes, of which we are
altogether ignorant, so that in this particular, the Fool and the wise Man is
alike happy or unhappy, yet as to secure living and to avoid the injuries both
of Men and Beasts, human wisdom and diligence may contribute very much; reason
and experience teach us, that to live in safty, there is no way so ready and
certain, as to form Societies Subject to Laws, to choose a convenient part of
the Earth for habitation, and to unite every individual Person's strength, to
preserve the whole Collective Body: but to the forming and preserving of
Societies, no little wisdom and diligence is required; and therefore that
Society shall be more secure, more lasting, and less Subject to Fortune and
Accidents, which is founded and ordered by prudent and careful Men; and on the
contrary, those Societies which are formed and governed by Men of gross and
mean understandings, do for the most part depend upon Fortune, and are of no
long continuance; but where such a Society stands long, it owes its duration
not to its own, but to some other conduct, and if it overcome great dangers,
and the Affairs thereof prosper, it cannot but admire and adore Gods disposing
and ordering things (by external and hidden causes, when he does not Act by
human Nature and Understanding) seeing whatever happens to such a Society of
Men beyond their Expectation and Opinion, may be counted a Miracle.

Nations therefore are distinguished one from another, in respect of Society and
Laws, under which they live and are governed; so that the Jewish Nation was not
chosen by God before others, in respect of their understanding and tranquillity
of mind, but in regard of their association and Fortune, by which they arrived
to that government which lasted so many Years, it manifestly appears by
Scripture, that the Jews excelled other Nations only in the prosperous
management of those Affairs, which concerned their Living Securely, and that
they overcame great dangers only by Gods external Assistance; but in other
things they were but equal to other Nations, and God was alike good to all, it
is evident as we have proved in the preceding Chapter, that the Jews as to
their knowledge, had very vulgar Notions and thoughts of God; and therefore as
they were not chosen above others, upon the account of their knowledge; so
neither were they chosen in respect of their virtue and good Life, for in that
they were but like other Nations, and but a very few of them were chosen; their
calling and election, consisted in the temporal felicity and advantages of
their government, neither can we perceive, that God promised any more to the
Patriarchs and their successors, yea by the Law, nothing else was promised for
a reward to obedience, but the continual prosperity of their Government and
some other benefits of this Life: in case of disobedience and breach of
Covenant, they were threatened with the ruin of the Government, temporal misery
and destruction, and no wonder; for the end of all Society and Government, (as
has been already and shall hereafter be more fully declared) is to live in
Happiness and Security. But Government cannot subsist without Laws which every
Man must obey, for when the Members of a Society refuse to be governed by the
Laws, in that very instant the Society is dissolved, and the Government
destroyed, to the Commonwealth of the Jews, nothing else could be promised for
the constant Observation of their Law, but the safety, benefits and
conveniences of this Life, and for their Rebellion no other punishment was
prophesied, but the destruction of their Government, the Miseries which would
thereupon ensue, and perhaps some other Evils which might peculiarly happen to
them from the ruin of their Government, which was singular and different from
others, but of these things we need say no more at this time, I only add, that
the Laws of the Old Testament, were revealed and prescribed only to the Jews,
for when God called and chose them to a particular kind of Society and
Government, they were necessarily to have singular Laws; whether God prescribed
peculiar Laws to other Nations, and revealed himself prophetically to their
Lawgivers, under those attributes which they in their imagination used to
ascribe to God, I am not certain; however it appears by Scripture, that other
Nations had Governments and particular Laws by the external direction of God,
to prove which I will only quote two places, Genesis chap. 14. v. 18, 19, 20.
where it is said, that Melchisedech was King of Salem, and the priest of the
most high God, and that he blessed Abraham, which (as we may see Numb. chap. 6.
v. 23.) was the Priests Office, and Abraham the beloved of God gave to the High
Priest the tenth part of all his booty; which plainly proves, that before God
founded the Jewish Nation, he constituted Kings and Priests in Jerusalem, and
prescribed them Laws and Ceremonies: but whether he did it prophetically I
cannot affirm, however I am persuaded, that Abraham while he continued there,
lived religiously according to those Laws; for Abraham received no particular
Religious Rites from God, and yet it is said Genesis chap, 26. v. 5. that Abraham
kept the Commandments, Statutes, and Laws of God, which must necessarily be
those of King Melchisedch. Malachy chap. 1 st. v. 10, 11. God there reproves
the Jews saying, who is there even among you that would have shut the Doors for
naught? (meaning of the Temple) neither do ye kindle fire on my Altar for
naught, I have no Pleasure in you says the Lord of Hosts, neither will I
accept an Offering at your hand, for from the Rising of the Sun to the going
down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place
incense shall be offered to my name, and a pure offering, for my name shall be
great among the heathen says the Lord of Hosts, which words sufficiently
testify unless we wrest their sense, that at that time, the Jews were not more
beloved of God then other Nations, that God was made known more to other
Nations by Miracles, then he was at that time to the Jews who then without
Miracles, recovered again in part their Government, and that other Nations had
Religious Rites and Ceremonies, wherewith God was well pleased; but these
things I pass by, it being sufficient for my purpose to have shown, that the
Election of the Jews concerned nothing else, but the temporal well fare of
their Bodies, their Liberty, Government, or the ways and means by which it was
erected; consequently their Laws as they were necessary to the Establishment of
that particular kind of Government, and Lastly, the manner how those Laws were
revealed: but as to all other things, wherein the Happyness of Man's Life
consists, they were but equal to other Nations. Seeing then the Scripture Deuteronomy.
chap. 4. v. 7. Says, that no Nation had God so nigh unto them as the Jews.
That must be understood only in Respect of the Government, and of that time
only in which so many Miracles happened; but in Respect of Knowledge and Virtue
which is true Happyness, God (as we have already proved) was equally Gracious
to all Men, which is evident in Scripture, for the Psalmist says, Psalm. 145.
v. 18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all them that call
upon him in Truth: also in the same Psalm. v. 9. The Lord is good to all, and
his tender Mercies are over all his Works. Psalm. 33. v. 15. He fashioneth Men's
Hearts alike. The meaning of which Expression is, that God gives to all Mankind
the same Intellect; for among the Jews, as it is well known, the Heart was
believed to be the Seat of the Soul and Understanding. It appears Job chap. 28.
v. 28. That the Law prescribed by God to all Mankind, was to fear the Lord,
depart from evil and to do well, and therefore Job, though a Gentile, was very
acceptable to God, and excelled in Religion and Piety: Lastly, it is plain by
the 4 th. chap. of Jonah. v. 21. That God was not only to the Jews, but to all
Men, Gracious, Merciful, slow to Anger, and of great Kindness, which are the
Words of Moses, Exodus chap. 34. v. 6. So that Jonah said, he fled to Tarshish,
because he knew God being Merciful and Gracious, would pardon the Ninevites,
who were Gentiles. We then conclude, seeing God is equally good to all Mankind,
and that the Jews were only chosen by God in respect of their Society and
Government; that every particular Jew considered as a Person out of that
Common-weath and Government, had no Gift of God above other Men, nor was there
any difference between a Jew and a Gentile. If God be equally good and gracious
to all Men, and that the Duty and Office of a Prophet, was not so much to
instruct Men in the particular Laws of their Country, as to teach them the Way
to good and Virtuous living; there is no doubt but all Nations had their
Prophets, and that the Gift of Prophesy was not peculiar to the Jews: which is
proved by Profane, as well as by Sacred, Histories. Though in the Sacred
Histories of the Old Testament, it does not plainly appear, that other Nations
had so many Prophets as the Jews, or that any Gentile Prophet was expressly sent
by God to other Nations; nothing is to be inferred from thence, because the
Jews only took care, to write the History of their own Affairs, and not of
other Nations. It is enough that in the Old Testament, we find that Gentiles,
and Men uncircumcised as Noah, Enoch, Abimeleck, and Balaam did Prophesy; and
that also the Jewish Prophets, were not only sent by God to their own People,
but likewise to other Nations. Ezekiel Prophesied to all the Nations known in
his Time, and Obadiah, for ought we know, to none but the Edomites. Jonah was a
Prophet chiefly to the Ninevites, Isaiah did not only lament and foretell the
Calamities, and Prophesy the Restoration of the Jews, but also of other
Nations, for he says chap. 16. v. 9. Therefore will I bewail with the weeping
of Iazer. In chap. 19. He first foretells the Calamities, and afterward the
Restoration of the Egyptians; in the 19, 20, 21, 25. Verses, he tells them God
would send them a Savior, and would deliver them, that God should be known to
them, and that they should worship God by Sacrifices and Oblations; and Lastly,
he calls Egypt the Blessed People of God, all which is very worthy of our
Observation. Lastly, Jeremy was not only a Prophet to the Jews, but was in
Express Terms called the Prophet of the Nations. Ierem. chap. 1 st. v. 5.
Before thou came out of the Womb, I sanctified thee, and ordained thee a
Prophet to the Nations. He Prophetically be wayl'd and foretold, the
Restoration of other Nations, he says, chap. 48. v. 31. Therefore will I howl
for Moab, I will cry out for all Moab, and v. 36. Therefore my Heart shall
sound for Moab like Pipes. And afterward foretells the Restoration of the
Egyptians, the Amonites and Elamites. Without question other Nations had their
Prophets as well as the Jews, though the Scripture mentions only Balaam, to whom
was revealed what should befall other Nations, as well as the Jews; Yet we are
not to believe, that Balaam never Prophesied till he was sent for by Balaack;
it appears by the story, that he was Famous for Prophesy, and other Divine
Endowments; for Balaack said to him Numb. chap. 22. v. 6. I know, he whom thou
blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed. So that he had the
same Power and Virtue, which God Genesis chap. 12. v. 3. bestowed upon Abraham.
Balaam also answers Balaack's Messengers, as one accustomed to Prophesy; for he
bid them stay all Night till the Word of God were revealed to him; when he
Prophesyed, (that is) made known what was truly the Mind and Will of God, he
used to say these Words. He has said, who heard the Words of God, and knew
the. Knowledge of the most high, who saw the Vision of the Almighty salling
into a Trance, but having his Eyes open. Lastly, after he had by Gods Command
blessed the Israelites, he began as he was wont to Prophesy of other Nations,
foretelling what should happen to them in time to come, all which fully proves,
that he had been always a Prophet, or had often Prophesyed; and what is further
to be observed, that he likewise had that which made the Prophets certain of
the truth of their Prophesy, namely an honest and good Mind, for he did not as
Balaack thought, curse and bless whom he would, but only those that were to be
blessed or cursed as God pleased; therefore he answered Balaack, if Balaack
would give me his House full of Gold, I cannot go beyond the Commandment of the
Lord, to do either good or bad of mine own Mind, but what the Lord says that
will I speak; as for Gods being angry with him, it was no more then happened to
Moses, when by Gods Command he went into Egypt, Exodus Chap. 4. v. 24. where it
is said, the Lord met him and sought to kill him, his taking Money to Prophesy
was no more then was done by Samuel, 1 st Book of Sam. chap. 9. v. 7, 8. St.
Peter in his 2 d Epistle Chap. 2. v. 15, 16. and Jude in the 11 th Verse of his
Epistle tells us, in what Balaam sinned, but what says the 20 th Verse of the
7 th Chap. of Ecclesiastes, No Man so just upon Earth who always does good and
never Sins: certainly the Prayers of Balaam were very prevalent, seeing it is so
often recorded in Scripture, that for a Testimony of God's Mercy to the
Israelites, he refused to hear Balaam, and turned his Curses into a Blessing,
as we may see, Deuteronomy. Chap. 23. v. 5. Josh. Chap. 24. v. 10. and Neh. Chap. 13.
v. 2. So that without question he was a Person very acceptable to God, who is
never moved with the Prayers or Curses of wicked Men. Seeing therefore that
Balaam was a true Prophet, and that notwithstanding, Joshua Chap. 4. v. 22.
calls him a Southsayer, yet that name was sometimes taken in a good Sense, and
those that the Gentiles called Augurs or Diviners, were true Prophets, and
those whom the Scripture Condemns for false Diviners, were they that deceived
the Nations, as the false Prophets did the Jews, which clearly appears out of
other places of Scripture. We therefore conclude that the Gift of Prophesy, was
not peculiar to the Jews, but common to all Nations; but the Pharisees
zealously maintain the contrary, and say that the Jews only had that Divine
Gift, and that other Nations did foretell future Events (what will not
Superstition invent) by I know not what Diabolical Power and Arts: the place of
greatest Authority in the Old Testament, which the Pharisees quote for the
Confirmation of their Opinion, is Exodus Chap. 33. v. 16. where Moses says to
God, Wherein shall it be known here that I and thy People have found Grace in
thy sight: is it not in that thou go with us, so shall we be separated I and
thy People from all the People that are upon the face of the Earth. Hence the
Pharisees infer that Moses Petitioned God, to be present with the Jews, that he
would prophetically reveal himself to them, and that he would not grant that
Favor to any other Nation, certainly it is very ridiculous to think, Moses
envyed the presence of God to other Nations and People, or that he durst desire
any such thing, but the truth of the Case was, that after Moses knew the
obstinate disposition and Rebellious Mind of his Nation, he clearly saw that
without very great Miracles, and the particular external Assistance of God, he
should never perfect what he had begun; but that they must all necessarily
perish without such Assistance; and therefore that it might appear God would
preserve them, he prayed for that extraordinary external Aid from God, for he
says, Exodus Chap. 34. v. 9. If now I have found Grace in thy sight, O Lord,
let my Lord I pray thee go among us for it is a stiffnecked People, the reason
therefore why Moses desired that particular external help from God, was because
the People were stubborn and disobedient, and that Moses desired no more then
this external Assistance, appears evidently by Gods Answer, v. 10. of the same
Chapter, Behold I make my Covenant before all thy People, I will do Miracles
such as have not been done in all the Earth nor in any Nation: So that Moses
here treats of the Election of the Jews only in that Sense I have explained
it, and requested no other thing of God, but I find another Text in Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 3. v. 12. which much more satisfies me, though he
seem to be of a disserent Opinion from mine; for he says, what Advantages has
the Jew or what profit is there in Circumcision? much every way, chiefly
because unto them were Committed the Oracles of God. But if we carefully
consider the Doctrine which Paul chiefly designed to maintain, we shall find it
so far from contradicting mine, that it perfectly agrees with it; for he says,
v. 29 th. of the same Chap. Is he the God of the Jews only, is he not also of
the Gentiles? And chap. 2. v. 25, 26. he says, if the Circumcised break the
Law, Circumcision is made Uncircumcision, and if the Uncircumcised keep the
Righteousness of the Law, shall not his Uncircumcision be counted for
Circumcision? He further says, v. 9. of the same Chapter, that both Jews and
Gentiles were all under Sin, but there can be no Sin where there is no
Commandment or Law. It Is evident that the Law was absolutely revealed to all
Mankind (as I have already shown by the 28 th. v. of the 28 th Chap. of Job)
under which all Men lived; namely that Universal Law which obliges all Men to
live a virtuous and good Life; and not that particular Law, which was ordained
for the Constitution and Advantage of any single Government, and was suited to
the disposition of only one particular People. Lastly, Paul concludes, because
God is the God of all Nations, that is equally good to all Mankind; and because
all were equally under the Law and Sin, therefore God sent Christ to all
Nations, that he might free all from the Bondage of the Law, that for the
future they might do well, not by the compulsion of Law, but by their own free
will: So that Paul makes good my Doctrine to a tittle, by his saying that the
Oracles of God were Committed to the Jews, we are to understand that the Laws
which were given to other Nations, by Revelation and internal Communication to
their Minds, were delivered to the Jews in Writing; or we must say, (that
seeing Paul endeavored to confute that which only the Jews could Object) he
answered according to the understanding, and the then received Opinion of the
Jews, the better to insinuate those things which he had partly heard and seen,
because with the Grecians he became a Greek, and to the Jews a Jew. Nothing now
remains, but answering the Objections of some Men, who persuade themselves that
the Election of the Jews, was not temporal only, and in respect to their
Government, but eternal: they say that the Jews after the loss of their
Government, though so many Years dispersed and divided among all Nations, still
survive and are yet in being, which never happened to any other Nation; that
the Scripture in many places seems to declare, that God chose them to be his
People for ever, and that though they have lost their Government and
Commonwealth, they are still Gods Elect: the places of Scripture which they
think most clearly prove this eternal Election, are chiefly the 36. v. of the
31 Chapter of Jerem. where the Prophet testifies, that the Seed of Israel
should continue Gods People for ever, by comparing them with the immutable and
fixed order of Heaven and Nature. Thus says the Lord (...) gives the Sun for
a Light by Day, and the Ordinances of the Moon and Stars for a Light by Night,
who divides the Sea when the Waves thereof Roar; if these Ordinances depart
from before me, says the Lord, then the Seed of Israel also shall cease from
being a Nation before me for ever. The second place of Scripture is, Ezekiel.
Chap. 20. from the 32. Verse onward, where God seems to declare, that though
the Jews should wilfully depart from his Worship, yet he would gather them
again from all Countries where they should be scattered, and would lead them
into the Wilderness of the People, as he did their Fathers into the Wilderness
of Egypt, and after he had separated from them the Rebels and Transgressors, he
would bring them into his Holy Mountain, where all the House of Israel should
serve him, there are other places of Scripture cited by the Pharisees, but in
answering these two, I think I shall clear all others, which will be easily
done, after I have proved by Scripture, that Gods choice of the Jews was not
eternal, but on the same Conditions that he before chose the Canaanites, who
also, as we have shown, had a High Priest, who Religiously Worshipped God, and
yet were at last rejected by God for their Luxury, Sloth and Idolatry. Moses,
Levit. chap. 18. v. 27, 28. warns the Israelites, that they should not
pollute themselves with Incest and other Abominations, as did the Canaanites,
least the Land spewed them out as it did the Nations before them, and Moses
Deuteronomy. chap. 8. v. 19, 20. in express Words threatens their total Destruction; I
testify against you this day, that ye shall surely perish as the Nations which
the Lord destroys before your Face, so shall ye perish because ye would not
be obedient unto the Voice of the Lord your God, and to this purpose, there are
other places in the Law, which show, that Gods Election of the Jews was not
eternal, if therefore the Prophets foretold them, of a new everlasting Covenant
of the Knowledge, Love and Favor of God, it is manifest that it was promised
only to those, that were Pious, and feared God; for in the forecited 20 th.
Chapter of Ezekiel. it is expressly said, that God would separate from them the
Rebellious and Transgressors, Zeph. chap. 3. v. 11, 12. God, says he, would
take away out of the midst of them those that were Proud, and he would leave an
Afflicted and Poor People, and because this Election was founded only upon
Piety and real Virtue, it is not to be imagined, that it was promised to none
but those that were Godly and Virtuous amongst the Jews exclusively to all
other Nations; but we ought to believe, that the true Prophets among the
Heathen (which we have showed all Nations had) did likewise promise the same to
their own People, and still comforted them with it, this eternal Covenant of
the Knowledge and Love of God, is Universal as appears, Zeph. chap. 3. v. 10.
from beyond the Rivers of AEthyopia my Suppliants even the Daughter of my
dispersed shall bring my Offerings. So that in this particular, no difference
is to be made between Jews and Gentiles, and therefore no other Election was
peculiar to the Jews, but what I have declared; the Prophets in their
Prophesies of this Election, which only had respect to virtuous living, mingled
many things concerning the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Temple, and
rebuilding the City, and under those Figures according to the Custom and Nature
of Prophesy, expounded things Spiritual, that they might likewise declare to
the Jews whose Prophets they were, that Restoration of their Government and
Temple, which they were to expect in the Reign of Cyrus. That the Jews should
still remain without any Government after a dispersion of so many Years is no
wonder, seeing they have separated themselves from all Nations, and incurred
their hatred not only by external Rites contrary to those of other Nations, but
also by the sign of Circumcision, which they most religiously observe, that
their being hated by other Nations contributes very much to their continuance,
is proved by Experience. When the King of Spain heretofore compelled the Jews
to profess the Religion of that Kingdom, or else to quit the Country, many Jews
turned Papists, and because those that changed their Religion became thereby
capable of the same Privileges and Honors which natural Spaniards enjoyed,
they were presently mixed with the Natives, and in a short time there remained
none of the race: but the contrary happened in Portugal, where though the King
forced them to profess the Religion of the Country, they still lived apart by
themselves, because they were declared incapable of all Preferments. I am of
Opinion, that only the sign of Circumcision may be able to perpetuate the
Nation, and unless the Principles of their Religion Effeminate their Minds,
they may one time or other when they see a fair opportunity, Re-establish their
Government, and be again chosen by God. Of the like Case, the Chinese are a
Famous Example, who Religiously preserve a particular lock of Hair upon their
Heads, by which they distinguish themselves from other People, and have thereby
preserved themselves so many thousand Years, that their Antiquity exceeds all
other Nations, they have heretofore recovered their lost Empire, and without
doubt will do so again, when the Courage of the Tartars, has lain a while
longer buried in Wealth, Luxury and Sloth. Lastly, if any Man upon what ground
soever will maintain, that Gods Election of the Jews was eternal, I will not
contradict him, provided he grant that their Election whether Temporal or
Eternal, and as it was peculiar to the Jews, did only respect their Government
and bodily Conveniences (which alone may distinguish one Nation from another)
but that upon the account of Knowledge and Virtue, there is no Nation
distinguished from, nor any chosen by, God before another.

CHAP. IV. Of the Divine Law.
THE word Law taken absolutely, signifies, That, according to which every
individual, or all, or some, of the individuals of the same Species, do Act by
one and the same determinate Rule, and that Rule depends either upon the
necessity of Nature, or the Will and Pleasure of Men: the Law which depends
upon the necessity of Nature, is that which necessarily follows from the very
Nature or Definition of any thing; and the Law which depends upon the Pleasure
of Men, and is more properly called Law, is that which Men for the greater
safety and benefit of Life, or for other Causes do prescribe to themselves and
others, (for Example) that all Bodies when they hit or dash against other less
Bodies, do loose so much of their own Motion, as they impart to those other
less Bodies, is the Universal Law of all Bodies, which follows from the
necessity of Nature: so likewise when a Man remembers one thing, he is
presently mindful of another like it, or as soon as he sees them together, is a
Law which necessarily follows from Human Nature; but that Men voluntarily part
with, or are compelled to part with that Right, which every one has by Nature,
and oblige themselves to a certain Rule and Manner of living, depends upon the
Will and Pleasure of Men; and though it be absolutely granted, that all things by
the Universal Laws of Nature, are ordained to be, and Operate, according to a
certain and determinate Rule; yet I say those Laws do depend upon the Pleasure
of Men. First, because Man as he is a great part of Nature makes and
constitutes a part of the Power of Nature, and therefore those things which
follow from the necessity of Human Nature (that is from Nature it self as we
conceive it regulated by Human Nature) though they follow necessarily, yet they
follow from Human Power; wherefore the Sanction of those Laws may very well be
said to depend upon the Will of Men, because it so depends upon the Power of
Man's Mind, that the Mind of Man as it apprehends things under the Notion of
true or false, may nevertheless be clearly understood, without those Universal
Laws; but not without the Law of necessity as I have defined it. Secondly, I
have said those Universal Laws of nature, depend upon the Pleasure of Men,
because we ought to define and explain things by their next and immediate
causes, and that Universal consideration of Fate and the chaining together of
causes, can no way help us in the forming and ordering our thoughts concerning
particular things, (that is) we know not how things are ordered and tied
together, so that it is better, yea absolutely necessary, for the benefit of
Life, to consider things as they are possible, and so much of Law considered
absolutely.

But because the name of Law, by Translation, is applied to natural things, and
commonly by Law, nothing else is meant but a command, which Men may, or may not
perform, so that it confines human Power to bounds and limits, beyond which it
might go, and yet commands nothing which it is not able to do, therefore Law
more particularly defined, is that rule and manner of living, which Men for
some end prescribe to themselves or to others: but because very few know the
true end of Laws, and Men being for the most part incapable of Understanding
it, do not live according to the dictates of reason, therefore Lawgivers, that
they might equally bind all, have wisely established an end very different, from
that which necessarily follows from the Nature of Laws (namely) by propounding
to those who keep the Law, that which they most love, and by threatening the
breakers of the Law, with that which they most fear; and so endeavor, as far as
it is possible, to rule the multitude, as a Horse is governed with a Bridle; so
that Law in its common acceptance, is that rule of living, which by the Power
of others is prescribed to Men, and consequently that they who obey Laws are
said to live under Law, and may be called Servants or Subjects, he that gives
to every one his due because he is afraid of the gallows, is under the Power of
another, and being compelled by the fear of punishment to do what he does,
cannot be called just, but he that gives to every one his due, because he
knows the necessity and the true end and reason of Laws, what he does is free
and voluntary, and he may therefore be deservedly called a just Man: which I
suppose to be St. Paul's meaning, when he said, they that lived under the Law
could not be justified fy'd by the Law, for justice as it is commonly defined,
is a constant Voluntary resolution of rendering to every Man that which is his
due, and therefore Solomon Prove. chap. 20. v. 15. says, it is joy to the just
to do judgment but the wicked fear. Seeing then Law is nothing else but a rule
of living, which Men for some end prescribe to themselves or to others, the Law
may therefore be distinguished into human and divine, by Man's Law we understand
that rule of living which secures life and the weal public, but the Divine Law
has respect only to our chiefest good, that is the true knowledge and love of
God: the reason why I call this Law Divine, is in respect of the Nature of our
chiefest good, which I will with all possible brevity and plainess declare.

Whereas our better part is our underderstanding, it is certain if we seek our
own good, we ought chiefly to endeavor as much as is possible, the perfecting
our intellect; because in the perfection of that consists our chiefest
happiness; and since all our knowledge and certainty which removes all doubt,
depends only upon the knowledge of God, because nothing can be, or be known
without God, and because we may doubt of all things, while we have no clear and
distinct Idea of God, it follows that our perfection, and chiefest happiness,
depends only upon the knowledge of God. Moreover, since nothing can either
exist, or be known, without God, it is certain that all things in Nature, in
respect of their essence and perfection, do imply and express the Notion of
God, and consequently the more we know natural things, the greater and more
perfect knowledge we acquire of God; because the knowledge of an effect by its
Cause, is nothing else, but knowing the true Nature and Property of the cause;
so that by how much the more we know natural things, so much the more perfectly
do we know the being of God, who is the cause of all things; and all our
knowledge (that is) our chiefest happiness, does not only depend, upon, but
wholly consists in, the knowledge of God: which consequence is made good, by a
Man's becoming more or less perfect, according to the Nature and perfection of
the thing he most loves, and so on the contrary. He therefore is most perfect,
who pertakes most of the highest Beatitude, and who above all things, loves and
is most delighted with the intellectual knowledge of God, who is the most
perfect of all beings. Hitherto then our chiefest good and happiness, still
returns into the knowledge of God, the end then of all human actions, so far as
we have an Idea of him being God; the means which this end requires, may be
called the commands of God, because they are as it were prescribed by God
existing in our minds; and the rule of living which respects this end, may be
called the divine Law; but what those means are, and what that manner of living
is which this end requires, how the best Goverments and Men in living one with
another should pursue this end, is a Subject for moral Philosophy to handle, my
present business is only to speak in general of the Law divine.

If then the love of God be Man's chiefest felicity and beatitude, and the
ultimate end and scope of all Men's actions; it follows, that he only keeps Gods
Law, whose care is to love God, not for fear of punishment, or for the love of
any other thing, as Pleasure, Wealth, Fame, etc. but only because he knows God;
or because he knows that the knowledge and love of God is the chiefest good
the; sum then and chief precept of the Divine Law, is to love God as our
chiefest good, not as we have already said, for fear of some Evil or
Punishment, nor for the love of any other thing in which we take delight. But
though the Notion of a God dictate to us, that God is our chiefest good, and that
the knowledge and love of God, is the end to which all our Actions ought to be
directed; yet the carnal Man cannot understand these things, and they seem
vanity to him, because he has too low and narrow a knowledge of God, and
because also in this chiefest good which consists only in speculation and
purity of the mind, he finds nothing that he can handle, eat, or wherewith to
gratify the Flesh, with which he is most pleased: but they that know there is
nothing more excellent then reason, and a clear understanding, will esteem them
the most solid of all Pleasures. We have now shown in what chiefly the Divine
Law consists, and what are human Laws, namely all those which are directed to
another end, unless they were established by divine Revelation; for under this
consideration, things also as we have already shown, are attributed to God; and
in this sense the Law of Moses, though it were not Universal but accomodated to
the disposition and preservation of one particular People, may be called the
Law of God or the Divine Law; seeing we believe it given by prophetical
Revelation: So that now if we consider the natural Divine Law, as we have
explained it, we shall find it to be Universal and common to all Mankind; since
we have derived it from human Nature in general. Secondly, that it does not
require the belief of Histories whatever they be, since this Divine natural
Law, is understood only in consideration of human Nature, and we may as well
conceive it in any other Man as in Adam, and as well in a Man who lives a
solitary, as in one that leads a social Life, nor can the belief of Histories
though true, give us the knowledge, or consequently the Love of God; for the Love
of God proceeds from the knowledge of God, and the knowledge of God, must be
derived from common notions in themselves certain and known, so that the belief
of History, is far from being a means absolutely necessary to the attainment of
our chiefest good; but though the belief of Histories cannot give us the
knowledge and Love of God, yet we grant reading of them to be very useful in
respect of civil Life, for the more we know and observe Men's manners and
conditions, of which their Actions are the best evidence; with the greater
caution may we live amongst them, and the better may we suite our Lives and
Actions to their dispositions so far as is reasonable. Thirdly, this natural
Divine Law requires no Ceremonies, (that is) Actions in themselves indifferent,
and are only good in respect of their institution, or because they represent
some good necessary to our well being; or rather Actions whereof our
understanding does not comprehend the reason; for natural light requires
nothing but what that light can attain to, and only that which it discovers to
us can be our good and the way to our happiness: those which are good only by
precept and institution, or because they are representatives of some good, they
cannot perfect our understanding, they are but mere shadows, and and cannot be
reckoned amongst those Actions which are the Offspring and Fruits of our
knowledge and sound judgment; which to prove more at large, is not here
necessary. Fourthly, the highest reward of the Divine Law, is the Law it self;
namely to know God, and to love him freely and continually with the whole
heart; and the penalty of the Law, is the loss of that knowledge and love, the
Bondage of the Flesh, and an inconstant Fluctuating Mind. These things thus
considered, we are now to inquire first, whether by natural light, we can
conceive and know God as a Lawgiver and Prince prescribing Laws to Men?
Secondly, what the Scripture says of this natural light and Law? Thirdly to
what end Ceremonies were instituted? Fourthly, of what concern it is to know
and believe the Sacred Histories. Of the two first particulars, we will treat
in this, and of the two last in the following Chapter. What we are to conclude
concerning the first particular, may be easily deduced from the Nature of Gods
will, which is distinguished from Gods knowledge, only in respect of our reason
(that is) the will and knowledge of God, are in themselves one and the same
thing, nor are they distinguished but in reference to the thoughts we form of
Gods knowledge (for example) when we consider that the Nature of a Triangle is
from all eternity contained in the Divine Nature, as an eternal Truth, then we
say God has the Idea of a Triangle, or understands the Nature of a Triangle;
but when afterward we consider that the Nature of a Triangle, is so contained
in the Divine Nature not in respect of the necessity of the essence and Nature
of a Triangle, but in respect only of the necessity of the divine nature, yea
that the necessity of the essence and Properties of a Triangle as they are
conceived to be eternal Verities depend only upon the necessity of the divine
nature and knowledge of God, and not upon the nature of the Triangle, then that
which we have called Gods knowledge we call Gods Will and decree, therefore in
relation to God, we say one and the same thing when we say that God knew, or
that God willed and decreed that three Angles of a Triangle, should be equal to
two right Angles. Whence it follows that Gods affirmations and negations, must
always imply eternal necessity and verity, if then (for example) God said to
Adam, that he would not have him eat of the Tree of Good and Evil, it would
imply a contradiction that Adam should be able to eat of it, and it was
impossible that Adam should eat of it, if that divine decree did imply eternal
verity and necessity, but because the Scripture says, that God did command
Adam, that he should not eat of that Tree, and yet notwithstanding he did eat
of it, it must necessarily be said, that God only revealed to Adam the Evil
that would follow upon it, but did not reveal the necessity of the Evil's
following, whence it came to pass, that Adam understood that Revelation, not as
an eternal verity and necessary Truth, but as a Law or Ordinance, upon which
Gain or Loss was to follow, not in respect of the Necessity and Nature of the
Action done, but only in respect of the Absolute Will and Command of a Prince.
The Revelation therefore in respect of Adam only, and only for want of
Knowledge in him, was a Law, and God a Lawgiver and Prince. For the like
defect of Knowledge, was the Decalogue a Law to the Jews, because they knew not
the Being of God to be an Eternal Verity; therefore, that which was revealed to
them in the Decalogue, namely that there was a God, and that he only was to be
worshipped, was received by them as a Law, but had God spoken to them
immediately, and not by Corporeal means, they had taken it for an Eternal
Verity and not for a Law, and what we say of Adam and the Israelites, may be
said of all the Prophets, who writ Laws in the Name of God, that they did not
rightly understand God's Decrees to be Eternal Verities. (For Example) Moses by
Revelation or by Principles revealed to him, understood the means whereby the
People of Israel might be best united, in a particular Place of the World, form
a Commonwealth, and erect a Government, and also the best way to compel that
People to obedience; but yet he did not know, nor was it revealed to him, that
those means, or that Way was best, neither that from the common Obedience of
the People, in such a Climate of the World, that end would necessarily follow,
to which those means were directed; and therefore all those things were not
understood by him as Eternal Verities, but as Precepts and Institutions, which
he prescribed as the Laws of God, and this was the Reason, that he imagined
God, was a Governor, a Lawgiver, a King merciful and Just, when all these are
only the Atributes of Human Nature, and not any Part of the Divine Nature: but
though we say this of the Prophets, who writ Laws in the Name of God, we ought
not to say the same of Christ, for though he seemed to write Laws in the Name
of God, we are to believe, that he understood things truly and perfectly, for
Christ was not so much a Prophet, as he was the Mouth of God, for God by the
Mind of Christ (as we have shown in the first Chapter) did reveal some things
to Mankind, as he did before by Angels, (that is a Created Voice.) And by
Visions; wherefore it would be altogether Irrational to think, that God
accommodated his revelations to the Opinions of Christ, as that God fitted
heretofore his revelations to the Opnions of the Visions, and of the Angels
(that is created Voices) that he might communicate the things, which were to be
revealed to the Prophets, then which nothing can be more absurd, especially
since Christ was not sent to the Jews only, but to all Mankind: so that it was
not sufficient his Mind should be fitted to the Opinion of the Jews, but to the
Opinions and Documents general to all Mankind, that is those Notions which were
common and True; and from communicating himself immediately to Christ, or to
his understanding, and not as he did to the Prophets by words and Signs,
nothing else can be concluded, but that Christ did truly perceive and
understand those things which were revealed; for then a thing is clearly
understood, when it is clearly and mentally perceived without the help of Words
and Signs. Christ therefore understood things truly and plainly, and if ever he
prescribed them as Laws, he did it because the People were ignorant and
obstinate, and acting God's Part, applied himself to the Nature and Dispofition
of the People, and therefore though he spoke somewhat plainer then the rest of
the Prophets, yet sometimes he spoke Obscurely and by Parables, especially when
he spoke to them, to whom it was not given to know the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
chap. 13. v. 11. But without doubt, all things which he taught those, to whom
it was given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, he taught them as
Eternal Verities, and did not prescribe them as Laws, and in this
confideration, he freed them from the Bondage of the Law, and yet nevertheless
did the more confirm it, and deeply ingrave it on their Hearts, which Paul
seems to declare in the 7 th. chap. of his Epist. to the Romans, v. 6 th. But
now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we were held, that
we should serve in Newness of Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter, and
in chap. 3. v. 8. Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith
without the Deeds of the Law. But neither does Paul speak very clearly, for he
says, Romans chap. 3. v. 5. I speak as a Man, which he expressly says, when he
calls God just and righteous, and without doubt because of the Frailty of the
Flesh, he supposes Mercy, Grace and Anger to be in God, applying his
Discourses to the understanding of the Common People as may be seen in his
first Epistle to the Corinthians chap. 3. v. 1, 2. Brethren, I could not speak
unto you as Spiritual, but as unto Carnal Men. Romans chap. 8. v. 18. He
declares that the Mercy and Wrath of God does not depend upon Men's Works, but
on his own Will. Moreover no Man is justified by the Works of the Law, but only
by Faith, Romans chap. 3. v. 28. And by Faith nothing is meant, but a full
consent of the Mind. Lastly, Paul declares that no Body is Blessed who has not
in him the Mind of Christ, Romans chap. 8. v. 9. Now if any Man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; by which Mind and Spirit, he may
understand the Laws of God to be Eternal Verities. We conclude therefore, that
God was described as a Prince and Lawgiver, and styled Just and Merciful, only
in regard to the Capacity of the Vulgar, and their want of Knowledge, but that
God from the necessity and perfection of his Nature, does act and govern all
things, and his Will and Decrees are Eternal Verities, and imply Eternal
Necessity, which is the thing I purposed in the first Place to explain, and
prove, passing now to the Second Particular, let us run through the whole
Scripture, and see what it says of this Natural Light and Divine Law. The
first thing we meet with, is, the History of the first Man, where we are told,
God commanded Adam, he should not eat of the Fruit of the Tree of good and
evil, which seems to signify, that God commanded Adam, to do and seek after
God, under the Notion of good, and not as it is contrary to evil: that is, to
seek after good for good's sake, and not for fear of evil; for he that
doth-good as we have already said, upon the account of knowing and loving what
is good, does it with a free and constant mind, but he that is compelled by the
fear of evil, is forced by punishment, acts like a Slave, and lives under the
command of another; and therefore that one thing which God commanded Adam,
comprehends all the Divine Natural Law, and perfectly agrees with the Dictates
of Natural Reason, now would it be a difficult matter from this very Principle,
to unfold the whole History or Parable of the first Man; but I pass it by,
because I am not certain whether my Explication will agree with the Writers
meaning, and because many will have the History to be no Parable, but a plain
and simple Narration: it will therefore be better to make use of other Places
of Scripture, those especially, of which he was Author, who in Strength of
natural Knowledge exceeded the wisest of his Age, and whose sayings, the People
counted as Sacred as they did those of the Prophets, I mean Solomon, whose
Prophesy and Piety is not so much commended in Scripture, as his Wisdom and
Prudence; he in his Proverbs calls Human Understanding, the Fountain of Life,
and places misfortune only in Folly; for he says, chap. 16. v. 22.
Understanding is a wellspring of Life to him that has it, but the Punishment
of Fools is their folly. Where we are to note, that by the word Life, in the
Hebrew is signified, happy Life, as appears Deuteronomy. chap. 30. v. 10. I have set
before thee Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing, therefore choose Life. And he
therefore deriveth the happiness of Life from Knowledge, and Punishment from
the want of it, which Expressly agrees with what we observed in the fourth
Place, concerning the Divine Natural Law: but that this Fountain of Life the
Understanding, prescribes Laws to the Wise, is proved by Prove. chap. 13. v.
14. The Law of the Wise is a Fountain of Life, that is as appears by the
forecited Text, the Understanding and Knowledge. Moreover, chap. 3. v. 13.
It Is said in express Terms, that Uuderstanding and Wisdom make a man happy, and
give him the true peace of mind. Happy is the Man tbat finds Wisdom, and the
Man that gets Understanding. And v. 16, 17. Length of days is in her right
Hand, and in her left Riches and Honor, her ways are ways of Righteousness,
and all her Paths (which Wisdom points out) are Peace. In the Opinion of
Solomon then, only Wise men live quietly and happily, not as the wicked, whose
minds are disturbed and tossed to and fro with contrary Passions and Affections:
So that as Isaiah says chap. 47. v. 20, 21. The wicked are like the troubled
Sea, that cannot rest, there is no Peace to the wicked. Lastly, in the Proverbs
that which clearly confirms this Opinion, is what he says, chap. 2. v. 3. If
thou criest after Knowledge, and liftest up thy Voice for Understanding, then
v. 5. Thou shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the Knowledge of
God. (or rather the Love of God, for the Hebrew word Iadah signifies both,) for
Verse the 6 th. (which observe well) The Lord gives Wisdom, out of his Mouth
comes Knowledge and Wisdom. Which words clearly declare, First, that only
Understanding and Wisdom teach us to fear God Prudently, ( i e) to serve him
truly, and to worship him rightly. Next, that Wisdom and Knowledge flow from
the Mouth of God, and are given by God; that is, our Understanding and Wisdom
depends upon, proceeds from, and is only perfected by, the Idea or Knowledge of
God: Solomon goes on, and in the 9 th Verse shows, that in, and from, this
Knowledge, is continued and derived the Science of true Morality and Policy;
Then shall thou understand Righteousness, Judgment and Equity, yea every good
thing. And Verse the 10 th When Wisdom shall enter into thy Heart, and
Knowledge is pleasant to thy Soul, Verse the 11 th. Discretion shall preserve
thee, understanding shall keep thee. All which Expressions plainly agree with
natural Knowledge, which teaches us Morality and true Virtue; after we have
gained the Knowledge of things, and tasted the Excellency of Understanding. The
Happiness and Tranquillity, therefore of a Man, that improves his natural Reason
and Knowledge, does not in Solomon's Opinion chiefly depend upon Fortune; (that
is God's external Assistance) but upon his own internal Virtue and Faculties
(that is God's internal aid) because by watching, working, and well
considering, he preserves himself. Lastly, that place of St. Paul. Romans chap.
1 st. v. 20. Is very worthy of our Notice, where (according to Tremelius's
version of the Siriack Text) he says, The invisible things of God, from the
Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his external Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse.
By which words he makes it evident, that all men by the Light of natural
Reason and Knowledge, may understand the Power of God, and his Eternal
Divinity, by which they may be able to know and conjecture, what they are to
seek and pursue, and what they are to avoid; and so concludes, that all are
without excuse, and cannot pretend Ignorance, which they might very well, if
he spoke of Supernatural Knowledge, and of the Bodily passion and resurrection
of Christ; therefore he goes on in the 24 th Verse and says, God gave them up
to uncleanness, through the Lust of their own Hearts, describing to the end of
the Chapter, the Vices of Ignorance; which Vices, he declares to be the
punishment of Ignorance, agreeing with that Proverb of Solomon mentioned Chap.
16. v. 22. The punishment of Fools is their folly. So that it is no wonder,
Paul says evil doers are inexcusable, for as every Man sows, so shall he reap.
Evil unless Wisdom prevent, necessarily brings forth evil; the Scripture
therefore expressly commends natural Knowledge, and the Divine Natural Law, so
that I have done with what I intend to treat of in this Chapter.

CHAP. V. The reason why Ceremonies were instituted? to what end? and tow hom
the Belief of Scripture-Histories are necessary.?
IN the foregoing Chapter we have shown, that the Divine Law, which makes Men
happy, and teaches the right way of Living, is Universal to all Mankind; and
we have so derived it from Human Nature, that it appears to be born with, and
as it were engraved upon, the Mind and Heart of Man; but because Ceremonies,
those at least which we find in the Old Testament, were only instituted for the
Jews; and so fitted to their Government, that for the most part, they might be
observed in their Public Assemblies, though not by every Individual Person; it is
manifest, that they did not belong to the Divine Law, nor contributed any thing
to the making men happy or virtuous, but concerned only the Election of the
Jews (that is by what we have proved in the third Chapter) the temporal
happiness of the Body, and peace of their Government, and consequently could be
of no longer use, than while their Government lasted. If those Ceremonies in
the Old Testament, had any relation to God's Law, it was only because they were
instituted by revelation, or upon revealed Principles; but because the most
solid reason prevails little with ordinary Churchmen, I will make use of
Scripture, to show upon what account, and in what manner, Ceremonies were
useful to the Establishment and Preservation of the Jewish Commonwealth. The
Prophet Isaiah very plainly declares, that by the Divine Law is meant, that
Universal Law which consists in living uprightly, not in Ceremonies, Chap. 1
st. v. 10. He calls upon the People to hear the Law of God, but tells them in
the following Verses, that God hated their Sacrifices and Oblations, their New
Moons, their Feasts, and their Sabbaths, and in the 16. and 17. Verses
declares, the Law it self to be comprehended in a few Particulars; namely in
cleansing the Heart, in constantly doing well, in relieving the Oppressed, and
no less clear is that Place, in the 40 th Psalm. v. 7, 8. Sacrifice and
Offering, thou did not desire, mine Ears have thou opened, burnt Offering and
Sin Offering have thou not required, Idelight to do thy Will O God, for thy Law
is within my Heart: here David calls that the Law of God, which is written in
his Heart or inward Parts, separated from Ceremonies, which not being in their
own Nature good, are not written in our minds: beside these two Places, others
may be found in Scripture, which testify the same thing, but there is no need
of more Quotations. That Ceremonies conduce not to our true Happiness, but
respect only the temporary Prosperity of Government, appears likewise by the
Scripture, which for the Observation of Ceremonies, promised only bodily
Benefits; but for keeping the Universal Divine Law true Felicity: In the Books
commonly called the five Books of Moses, nothing is promised, but temporal
Prosperity, namely, Honor, Fame, Victory, Riches, Pleasures and Health; and
although in those five Books, are contained beside Ceremonies, many things that
are Moral, yet they are not there contained as Moral Doctrines, and Universal
instructions common to all, but as Commands and Precepts, fitted to the
particular Capacity, and Genius of the Jewish Nation, and such as concerned the
prosperous State of that Government: (for Example) Moses did not teach the Jews
as a Doctor and Prophet, but commanded them as a Lawgiver and Prince, that they
should not kill or steal; nor does he prove this as Doctrine by Reason, but to
his Commands adds Punishment, which according to the disposition of every
Nation, as we find by Experience, may and ought to vary, the Commandment of not
committing Adultery, respected only the Prosperity of the Commonwealth and its
Government, for had it been a Moral Doctrine, which concerned the Peace of the
mind, as well as of the Commonwealth, and every particular Man's true felicity,
it would have as much condemned the inward concupiscence of the Heart, as the
outward act of Lust, as Christ did Math. Chap. 5. v. 28. Whose Doctrines were
Universal, and therefore the reward which Christ promised, were Spiritual and
not Corporal; for Christ was sent not to ordain Laws, and Establish Government,
but only to Preach and Teach the Universal Divine Law: and hereby we understand
Christ did not Abrogate the Law of Moses, seeing he introduced no new Laws into
the Jewish Commonwealth, but Preached only Moral Doctrines, which he
distinguished from the Laws of the Commonwealth, because the Pharisees were so
Ignorant, that they thought every one lived Righteously who kept Moses Law,
which (as we have already said) concerned only that Commonwealth, and served
rather to compel, then instruct the Jews. But let us now return to other places
of Scripture, which for the observing of Ceremonies, promise nothing but bodily
benefits, and for the keeping of the Universal Divine Law, true beat tude. In
this point, none of all the Prophets speaks so plainly as Isaiah, Chap. 58. for
after Condemning Hypocrisy, and commending Liberty and Charity toward
themselves and their Neighbors, which are Virtues dictated to us by the
Universal Divine Law, he says, Verse the 8 th. Then shall thy Light break out
as the Morning, and thy Health shall spring forth speedily, thy Righteousness
shall go before thee, the Glory of the Lord shall be thy reward. Afterward he
commends to them the keeping of the Sabbath, and for their care in observing
that, he promises, Verse the 24 th. Then shall thou delight thy self in the
Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed
thee with the Heritage of Jacob thy Father for the Mouth of the Lord has
spoken it: by which we plainly see, that the Prophet promised to the Practice
of the Divine Natural Law, a spiritual Reward, a sound Mind in a healthful
Body, and the Glory of God after Death; but to the Observation of Ceremonies,
nothing but the prosperous continuance of their Government, and bodily
Happiness, in the 24 th. and 25 th. Psalms, no mention is made of Ceremonies,
but only of moral Duties, because those Psalms treat of nothing but true
Happiness and Beatitude, though Parabolically propounded; for it is certain that
Gods Holy Hill, his Tabernacles, and dwelling in them, with other Blessings
mentioned in those Psalms, could not literally signify the Mountain of
Jerusalem, or the Tabernacle of Moses, for they were inhabited by none but the
Tribe of Levi, who Ministered in the Tabernacle and Temple. Moreover all those
Sayings of Solomon, cited in the preceding Chapter, concerning the Excellency
of Wisdom and Knowledge, promise true Felicity, because they teach us to know
and fear God, that the Jews after the destruction of their Government, were not
bound to the Observation and Practice of Ceremonies, is evident by the Prophet
Jeremy, who foretelling the approaching destruction of the City of Jerusalem,
Chap. 9. v. 23, 24. declares that none are acceptable to God, but they that
know him, and understand that he exercises loving Kindness, Judgment and
Righteousness in the Earth, and that he will delight in none but those that
know these things; as if the Prophet had said, that after the destruction of
the City, God would for the future require nothing else of the Jews, but the
Observation of the Natural Law, Obligatory to all Mankind. The New Testament
likewise proves the same thing, for it teaches only Moral Doctrines, and
promises to the Practice of them the Kingdom of Heaven; the Apostles, after
the Gospel began to be Preached to Nations that were not obliged to the Laws of
the Jewish Commonwealth, quite left off Ceremonies, and if the Pharisees after
the destruction of their Government, retained any, or the greatest part of
them, it was more to oppose the Christians, then to please God; for after the
sacking of the City, when the Jews were carried Captives into Babylon, and were
not (for ought we know) divided into Sects, they presently neglected
Ceremonies, bid farewell to the whole Law of Moses, forgot the Laws of their own
Country, as superfluous, and mixed themselves with the rest of the Nations, as
appears out of Esdras and Nehemiah: therefore without doubt, the Jews after
their Government was dissolved, were no more bound by Moses's Law, then they
were before they became a Commonwealth, for while they lived among other
Nations before their going out of Egypt, they had no peculiar Law, nor were
obliged to any but the Natural Law; observing also the Laws of the Country and
the Nation where they lived, which were not repugnant to the Divine Natural
Law; the Patriarchs indeed offered Sacrifices to God, but that was because they
were from their Infancy accustomed so to do, it being the Practice of all Men
from the time of Enoch to offer Sacrifices, to incite and testify their
Devotion: the Patriarchs therefore offered their Sacrifices, neither as Men
Commanded by any Divine Precept, or Instructed by the Universal Law of Nature,
but only because it was the Custom of that time, and if they did it by any
Command, that Command was no other then that of the Commonwealth wherein they
lived, and which (as I have shown in the 3 d. Chapter where I spoke of
Melchisedek) they were bound to obey.

Having justified my Opinion by Scripture-Authority, I will next from general
Principles very briefly show, why Ceremonies were useful to Establish and
Preserve the Jewish Commonwealth. Society is not only convenient, but
absolutely necessary to living securely from the danger of Enemies, and
likewise for the quicker and more easy dispatch of human labor and business;
for unless Men mutually assist one another, they must want both time and means
(so far as it is possible) to preserve themselves; all Men are not equally fit
for all things, nor is every one able to procure those things of which he
singly stands in need; no individual Person has time or strength enough to
Plow, Sow, Reap, Grind, Bake, Boil, Weave, Knit, and do very many other things
necessary to support Life, not mentioning Arts and Siences, which perfect and
make human nature happy; we see that those People who live Barbarously without
any Policy, lead miserable brutish lives, and do not come by those necessaries
and sorry Household Stuff which they have, without helping one another; if Men
were so constituted by Nature, that they would desire nothing but what right
reason dictates, Societies would need no Laws, and only to instruct Men in the
precepts of Morality, would be sufficient to make them with a free and constant
mind, do whatever should be for the public Good, but it is far otherwise with
human Nature, all men indeed seek their own Good and Advantage, not according
to the Dictates of right Reason, but according to their own peculiar Lusts, and
hurryed with the violence of their own Affections, without regard to any thing
else, believe that to be good, which they ardently desire. This is the reason
why no Society of Men can subsist without Government, Force and Laws to
moderate and restrain unbridled Passions and Affections: but down right
compulsion is intolerable to human Nature, and therefore Seneca, the Tragedian
says, Empires maintained by force last but a little while; mild Governments
endure longest, what Men do out of fear they do against their Will, never
considering the utility or necessity of what they do, but only take care to
avoid capital Punishment; yea, they can hardly refrain from rejoicing at the
losses and misfortunes of their Rulers, and though they themselves suffer by it,
cannot forbear wishing and doing them all the mischief they are able; but above
all things, Men are impatient of obeying, and being governed by their equals;
and lastly, nothing is more difficult than to deprive Men of that Liberty,
which they once enjoyed: From all which it follows, that all Societies, if it
be possible, should be governed by their own general assemblies, that so no
Body may be Subjected to his equal; but where the reins of Government are in
the hands of a few, or one single Person, there that single Person ought to
have extraordinary qualifications above others, or at least, should endeavor
to make the People think so, and in every government such Laws ought to be
made, as are likely to incline Men to do their duty, not for fear of punishment
but in hope of reward. Moreover, because obedience consists in executing the
commands of those that rule, it follows, that in a Society where the ruling
Power is in the Collective Body of the People, and Laws are made by general and
common consent, there is no such thing as obedience, and though the Laws be
increased or diminished, yet still the People remain free; because they are not
Subject to the Authority of another, but Act by their own voluntary universal
agreement and consent: but it is quite contrary, where a single Person governs;
for there all are Subject to whatever he commands, so that unless the People
have been always educated under such absolute government, it will be very
difficult for a Monarch, to make new Laws, or to take away any liberty from the
People, which they have formerly enjoyed.

These things being thus generally considered, we now come to the Commonwealth
of the Jews, who when they went first out of Egypt, were not obliged to the
Laws of any other Nation, so that they might then constitute and enact what
Laws and Statutes they pleased, and fix themselves and their government, in any
part of the World they had a mind to possess; but being a stupid People, and by
long servitude depraved in their understanding, they were unfit to make good
and prudent Laws, or to govern themselves by their own democratical Authority
without a Superior, the Power of governing was therefore to be put into the
hands of a single Person, who was to command the rest, and compel them by
force, who was likewise to prescribe and interpret Laws: This Power Moses
easily obtained, because he excelled all others in divine Virtue and Power,
which Power he persuaded the People by many Testimonies Exodus chap. 14. v. 31.
and chap. 19. v. 9. was given him by God, being thus qualified he made and
prescribed Laws to the People, but took special care, that the People might do
their duty, not so much out of fear, as of their own free will, which he did
upon two considerations; First, because the Peoples obstinate and Rebellious
Nature, would not endure continual compulsion. Secondly, because there was an
approaching War, which was like to succeed better by encouraging, then by
threatening the Soldiers, every one endeavoring by his valor rather to get
Reputation, then avoid Punishment: for this reason also, Moses by Gods command,
introduced Religion into the Commonwealth, that Devotion, more then fear,
might incline them to obedience. Lastly, he obliged them by many benefits,
which he promised they should receive from Heaven. The Laws which he established
were not very severe, as will appear to any Man that considers, how many
circumstances were required to the condemning of any offender; that the People
who could not govern themselves, might absolutely depend upon the verbal
commands of the supreme Magistrate, he did not permit them being accustomed to
Bondage, to do any thing of their own accord; but whatever they did, was to be
done according to the prescript of the Law; no Man could at his own Pleasure,
Plow, Sow, or Reap; no Man could eat what he pleased, nor could he cloth
himself, shave his Head and Beard, or make merry, but according to certain
Rules set down in the Law; nor was this all, for they were to have upon the
Posts of their Doors, upon their Hands and their Foreheads, certain Signs
which were to put them in continual mind of their obedience: the end and design
then of Ceremonies, was that the People might do nothing by their own will and
determination, but only by the command of another, and by continual Action and
meditation confess, they were not Masters of themselves, but wholly Subjected
to the will of another, by all which it is evident, that Ceremonies conduce
nothing to true felicity, and that those of the Old Testament, yea the whole
Law of Moses, concerned only the government of the Jews, and consequently had
respect to nothing more then Bodily conveniences; as for Christian Ceremonies,
namely Baptism, the Lords Supper, Holy Days, public Forms of Prayer, or any
others common to Christianity; if they were ever instituted by Christ, or his
Apostles, (which does not clearly appear) they were only appointed as marks and
signs of the Universal Church, but not as things that contain any Sanctity in
themselves, or contribute any thing to eternal happiness, and therefore being
ordained, not in reference to government, but only in respect to mutual
Society, he that lives alone, or he that lives under a government where the
Christian Religion is forbidden, is not obliged to the Observation of these
Ceremonies, and yet may live happily; an example whereof we have in the Kingdom
of Iapan, where the Hollanders by the command of their East India Company,
abstain from all outward Worship, and that their so doing is justifiable, I
think is not difficult to prove from the Fundamental Principles of the New
Testament. But I hasten to the Second particular which I purposed to treat of
in this Chapter, namely, why believing the Histories contained in Scripture is
necessary, and to find out this by Natural reason, I thus proceed.

Whoever will persuade, or dissuade Men to, or from, any thing, which is not
in, or by it self known; must deduce that thing from Principles generally
granted and allowed, and must convince those Men either by reason or
experience, that is, by things which Men by their Senses know to have happened
in Nature, or else by maxims which the understanding can neither doubt or deny;
but unless experience be such as is clearly and distinctly understood, though it
may convince a Man, yet it cannot equally affect the understanding, and
disperse the Clouds thereof, as will that which is proved by intellectual
Principles (that is) orderly deduced from Notions certain and intelligible,
especially if the question be of any thing that is merely Spiritual, and falls
not under sense: but because to prove things only by intellectual Propositions,
requires a long Chain of Notions, much Circumspection, Sharpness of Wit, and
great Temper, all which are seldom found together; therefore Men had rather be
taught by experience, then put themselves to the trouble of linking together
all their perceptions deduced from a few maxims: so that he that would teach a
whole Nation, I need not say all mankind any particular doctrine, and would be
clearly understood in all things by all Men, he must confirm his Doctrine by
experience, and must accomodate his reasons and the definitions of what he
teaches, to the capacity of the vulgar, who make up the greatest part of
Mankind, and must not think of giving such definitions as he thinks fittest,
for tying his reasons together, because he would then write only to the
Learned, and would be understood but by a very few. Seeing then the Scripture
was revealed first, for the use and instruction of a whole Nation, and
afterward of all Mankind; it was absolutely necessary, that the things therein
contained, should be suited to the capacity of the common People, and confirmed
only by experience: to make my meaning yet more clear, I say that all things
taught in Scripture, which are only Speculative, are chiefly these. First, that
there is a God, or a being which made all things, and by infinite wisdom
governs and sustaineth all things, who takes great care of Mankind, and
particularly of those that live honestly and Religiously; but for those that
live wickedly, he separates them from the good, and afflicts them with grievous
Punishments. But all those things the Scripture confirms only by experience,
namely by the Histories which it recites, nor does it plainly define any of
these things, but fiteth all its reasonings and expressions, according to the
capacity and understanding of the vulgar, and though experience can give a Man no
true and plain knowledge of things, nor teach a Man what God is, in what manner
he orders and upholdeth all things, or how he takes care of Mankind, yet it
gives Men so much light and knowledge, as is sufficicient to Imprint in their
Minds Piety and Obedience. So that now I think it is very plain, to what Persons
and for what reasons, the belief of Scripture Histories is necessary, that is
to the common People, by whom things cannot be clearly and distinctly
understood; and whoever denies these Histories, because he neither believes the
being or Providence of God, is impious; but he that is ignorant of these
Histories, and yet by natural reason concludes there is a God who made and
preserves all things, if he live a virtuous life, that Man is blessed, yea more
blessed then the vulgar, because beside the Truth of his Opinions, he has a
clear and distinct understanding. Lastly, he that is ignorant of Scripture
History, and knows nothing of God by the light of natural reason, if he be not
impious and obstinate, yet he may well be accounted a Beast rather then a Man,
and to have no Gift of God in him: but it is to be observed, that when we say
the knowledge of Scripture History is very necessary for the common People, I
do not mean all the Histories contained in the Bible, but only the chief; and
those that give the clearest Evidence of the before mentioned Doctrins, and
have the greatest influence upon the minds of Men; for if all the Histories in
the Scripture, were absolutely necessary to prove its Doctrine, and no
conclusion could be made but from the consideration of all the Histories
together contained in it, then the demonstration and proof of its Doctrine,
would not only exceed the capacity of the vulgar, but the understanding of all
Mankind; for who could possibly retain and comprehend so great a Number of
Histories, and so many circumstances and parts of Doctrine, as might be
collected from so many and different Histories; truly I cannot be persuaded
that those Men, who left us the Scripture as we now have it, abounded with so
much Wit, as to be able to find out such a demonstration of its Doctrine; much
less do I believe, that the Doctrine of the Scripture could not have been
understood, unless we had been told of Isaacs strivings about the digging of
Wells, of Achitophels, Council to Absalon, and the Civil Wars between the
Children of Judah and Israel, with other Chronicles of like kind; or that the
Jews who lived in the time of Moses, were not so capable of understanding the
Doctrine of Scripture by Histories, as were the Jews who lived in the time of
Esdras, of which more hereafter, the common People are therefore obliged to
know only those Histories, which stir up their minds to Devotion, Piety and
Obedience, but they are not competent Judges of those Histories, because they
are more pleased with the narrations and the unexpected events of things, then
with the Doctrine it self; and for this reason beside the reading of Histories,
they need Pastors and Ministers in the Church, to instruct their weak
understanding. But not to digress from what we principally designed to prove,
we conclude that the belief of Histories whatever they be, does not belong to
the Divine Law, nor does of it self make Men happy or blessed, nor are
Histories profitable, except it be in point of Doctrine, which is the only
thing that makes some Histories therefore contained in the Old and New
Testament, excel those that are profane and common, and Scripture Histories
mutually compared, are more excellent one then another, for sound and wholesome
Doctrine. He then that reads Scripture Histories, and in all things gives
entire credit to them, yet if he follow not their Doctrine and amend his Life,
it is all one with him, as if he read the Alchoran, a Comedy, or any vulgar
History; but as we have already said, he that never heard of Scripture, if his
Opinions be true, and his Life righteous, he is truly blessed, and the Spirit
of Christ is in him: but the Jews are of a contrary Opinion, for they say, let
a Man's Opinions be never so Orthodox, and his Life never so virtuous, yet if he
be guided only by natural Light, and not by the Doctrins which are
Prophetically revealed to Moses, he can never be blessed and happy, which Rabbi
Maimonides boldly affirms in his Eighth Chapter and Second Law concerning
Kings. He that receives the Seven Commandments and diligently performs them,
is one of the Pious among the Nations, and Heir of the World to come (that is)
if he receive and Practice them, because God in his Law commanded and revealed
them by Moses, and because those precepts were also given to the Sons of Noah:
but if he Practice them by the guidance and dictates of natural reason, he is
none of us, nor is he to be thought one of the Pious and Learned of the
Nations. It was an opinion among the Jews, that God gave to Noah seven
Commandments, and that all Nations were obliged to observe only those seven;
but that God gave many more Commandments to the Jews, that he might make them
much happier then other Nations. Rabbi Joseph the Son of Shem Tob in his Book
called Kbod Elohim, or the Glory of God, likewise says, that though Aristotle
(whose Book of Ethics was in his opinion the best that ever was written) had
omitted nothing which belonged to that Subject, and he himself had diligently
Practiced all he Writ, yet he could not be saved, because he embraced those
Doctrins he taught, as the dictates of reason, and not as divine and
Prophetical Revelations. But these conceits are mere Fopperys, grounded neither
upon reason or Scripture, and need no more confutation, then does the opinion
of some Men, who maintain that by natural light and reason, we cannot know any
thing belonging to Salvation, a Tenet that cannot be rationally proved, by Men
who do not allow themselves any reason but what is corrupted and depraved, and
if they boast of any thing above reason, it is mere Folly and far beneath
reason, as sufficiently appears by their manner of living: so that of this we
need say no more, I will only add this, that no Man can be known but by his
works, and therefore they that abound in the Fruits of Love, joy, peace, long
suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, etc. against whom
says Paul ( Galat. chap. 5. v. 22.) there is no Law, whether they be taught by
reason or Scripture, they are certainly taught of God, and are truly blessed.

CHAP. VI. Of Miracles.
AS Men use to call that knowledge Divine, which exceeds human capacity and
understanding; so when any thing is done in nature, of which the common People
know not the cause, that they call the Work of God: for the vulgar believe Gods
Power and Providence do most plainly appear, when they see any thing strange
and unusual happen in nature, contrary to the customary opinion they have of
Nature; especially when that which happens, is for their benefit and advantage;
and they think the being of a God never more clearly proved, then when nature
seems not to keep its constant course; and therefore conclude, that those Men
deny the Being and Providence of God, who endeavor to explain and understand
what they call Miracles by their natural causes. They indeed think, that while
Nature goes on in her wonted course, God does nothing, and on the contrary,
when God Acts, the Power of Nature and Natural Causes are idle and at a stand:
so that they imagine two numerical distinct Powers, namely the Power of God, and
the Power of Nature appointed and directed (or as most Men now believe) Created
by God; but what they mean by either, or what they understand by God and
Nature, they know not, but fancy Gods Power to be like that of a great King.
And the Power of Nature nothing but blind force and violence, the Common People
therefore, call the extraordinary Works of Nature, Miracles, or the Works of
God, and partly out of Devotion, partly out of a desire to contradict those
that love the Study of Natural Sciences, they affect, being ignorant of Natural
Causes, desiring to hear of things they do not know, and those things, which
they least know, they most admire: by taking away Natural Causes, and by
imagining things out of the order of Nature, they think God is most adored when
all things are immediately referred to his Power and Will; neither do they
think the Power of God at any time so wonderful, as when according to their
fancy, it conquers and subdues the Power of Nature. Which Opinion was first
brought into the World by the Jews, who to convince the Heathen, that then
Worshipped the Sun, Moon, the Earth, Water, Air, etc. told them their Gods were
weak, inconstant, mutable, and subject to the Power of the invisible God; whose
Miracles they proclaimed, and by them endeavored to prove, that the whole
frame of Nature was by the Power of that God whom they worshipped, created
chiefly for their good and benefit: with which Opinion Men were so pleased,
that ever since they have not ceased to fain Miracles, that they may be thought
better beloved by God then others; and that the end and purpose of Gods making
and preserving all things, was chiefly for their sakes. How arrogant is the
foolish Vulgar who conceive nothing rightly of God or Nature, but confound the
Ordinances of God, with the imaginations of Men, and think Nature so narrow,
that they believe Man to be the principal part thereof. Having thus discovered
the Opinions and Prejudices of the Common People concerning God and Nature, I
will proceed in order, and show first, that nothing can happen contrary to
Nature, whose order and course, is eternal, constant and immutable, explaining
also what is a Miracle. Secondly, that we cannot know the essence, existence
nor consequently the providence of God by Miracles, but they more manifestly
appear, in the constant and unchangeable order of Nature. Thirdly, I will prove
by some Scripture Examples, that the Scripture it self, by the decrees,
purposes and providence of God, means nothing else but that regular course of
Nature, which necessarily follows from its eternal Laws. Lastly, I will show,
how Scripture Miracles are to be interpreted, and what we are principally to
observe in the Relations we have of Miracles: all which particulars, are the
subject of this present Chapter, and will be very useful to the design of this
whole Treatise. The first Particular is proved, by what we have said in the 4
th Chapter Concerning the Divine Law, (namely) that whatsoever God wills and
decrees, implies eternal verity and necessity; for the Knowledge of God is not
distinguished from his Will, and we say the same thing, when we say God wills,
and God knows any thing; because by the same necessity, derived from the
Nature and Perfection of God, whereby he knows any thing to be what it is, by
the same necessity, must God will that thing to be what it is: but since
nothing is necessarily true, but what is so by the Will and Decree of God; it
clearly follows, that the Universal Laws of Nature, are the very Ordinances of
God, which flow from the necessity and perfection of his Divine Nature.
Whatever therefore comes to pass in Nature, which is repugnant to its
Universal Laws, that must necessarily be contrary to the Decree and Knowledge
of the Divine Nature; or if any one conclude that God does any thing against
the Laws of Nature, he likewise must grant, that God Acts contrary to his own
Nature, which is the greatest of all Absurdities. As therefore nothing happens
in Nature, contrary to its Universal Laws, so neither does any thing happen,
which does not agree with, and follow from them; for whatever is done, is done
by the Will and eternal Decree of God (that is) according to Laws and Rules,
which imply eternal Verity and Necessity: and therefore though the Laws in which
are contained eternal Verity and Necessity, be not known to us, yet Nature
always observes them, and consequently keeps her constant and unchangeable
course. No rational Man can believe the Power and Virtue of Nature to be
limited, and its Laws confined to some particular Operations and Effects, and
not fitted Universally to all; for since the Power and Virtue of Nature, is the
very Virtue and Power of God; we ought to believe the Power of Nature infinite,
and the Laws of Nature so general, that they extend themselves to all things,
which fall under the comprehension of the Divine Knowledge: otherwise it must
be granted, that God Created Nature so weak and impotent, and its Laws and
Rules so defective, that to preserve and maintain Nature, he must upon every
new occasion assist and succor it, that things may fall out according to his
Will; which is very irrational for any Man to suppose. If then nothing happens
in Nature, which does not follow from its Rules and Laws, that its Laws are
extended to all things within the compass of Divine Knowledge, and that Nature
keeps a fixed immutable and regular Course; it is manifest that whatever Men
call a Miracle, is only so in respect of their Opinions, and signifies nothing
else but some work or thing done, of which we cannot discover the natural
Cause, by an example of any thing that ordinarily happens like it; at least the
Person cannot, who relates or records the Miracle. I might call that a Miracle,
whose cause cannot be made out from any natural Principles known by the Light
of Nature; but because Miracles were wrought according to the Capacity of the
Vulgar, who knew not the principles of natural things, it is certain that the
Ancients counted that a Miracle, which they could not explain as the common
People use to do natural things, namely, by recurring to their Memory, for
bringing to mind some other thing of the like kind, which they did not admire:
for the common People think, they very well understand a thing, when they do
not admire it. By this Rule and no other, Men in old and later times, have
judged of Miracles, and it is not to be doubted, but many things are related in
Scripture for Miracles, whose causes might have been made manifest from the
known principles of natural things, as we have hinted in our 2 d Chapter, where
we spoke of the Suns standing still in the time of Joshua, and its going
backward in the time of Hezekiah on the Dyal of Ahaz, but of these things more
at large, when I come to speak of the Interpretation of Miracles. I will now go
on to prove the Second particular, namely that we cannot by miracles understand
the Essence, Existence, or Providence of God, but that they are more clearly
apprehended by us, in the fixed and immutable order of nature, which I thus
prove. If the Existence of God be not of it self known to us, it must then be
made out and concluded, from Notions whose verity is so firm and unshaken, that
there cannot be a Power by which those Notions may be changed, at least, they
ought to appear so to us at that time, when from them we conclude the existence
of God, if we will have that existence to be indubitable: for if we could think
those Notions mutable by any Power whatever it be; then might we doubt of the
Truth of those Notions, and consequently of our conclusion, namely God's
Existence; nor could we be certain of any thing, and seeing we cannot know what
is congruous or contrary to Nature, but that which we prove to be congruous, or
contrary to those Prime Notions; if we could conceive any thing in Nature to be
done, by any other Power whatever contrary to Nature, that must also be
contrary to those first Notions, and so be rejected as absurd and against
Reason; or else we must doubt of our prime Notions, and consequently of God,
and all things else. Miracles therefore in what manner soever we apprehend
them, as they are understood to be Works contrary to the Order of Nature; are
far from proving God's existence, they rather bring it into Question, for
without Miracles we may be assured of it, namely, by knovving that all things
observe the certain and immutable Order of Nature; but granting that to be a
miracle, which cannot be explained and made known by natural Causes, we
ought then either to conclude, that it has natural Causes, but such as cannot
be found out by Human Understanding, or that it has no immediate Cause, but
God or his Will; but if all things which are effected by Natural Causes, are
done only by the Power and Will of God, we must necessarily at last come to
this, that whether a Miracle have natural Causes or not, it is a Work which
cannot be manifested by a Natural Cause (that is) it is a Work which exceeds
Hnman Capacity, and from a Work that exceeds Human Understanding, we can
understand and collect nothing: for whatever we clearly and distinctly
understand, we do it by the thing it self, or some other; and that which is
clearly and distinctly understood by it self, ought to be perfectly known to
us; therefore by a miracle, or any Work exceeding Human Capacity, we cannot
conceive God's Essence or Existence, nor can we absolutely understand any thing
of God or Nature: but on the contrary, when we know all things to be ordained
and established by God, and that the Operations of Nature ncessarily flow from
the Essence of God, and that the Laws of Nature, are the Eternal Decrees and
purposes of God; it must necessarily be concluded, that we so much the better
know God and his Will, by how much the better we understand and know Natural
Things, how they depend in their first Cause, and how they operate according to
the Eternal Laws of Nature: So that in Respect of our Understanding, with much
more Reason are those Works to be called the Works of God and his Will, which
we clearly and distinctly understand, then those of which we are totally
ignorant, though they strangely effect our imagination, and cause our wonder;
because only those Works of Nature, which we clearly and distinctly know,
render our Knowledge of God more sublime, and more evidently declare the Will
and Decrees of God: So that those Men do but trifle, who, when they do not
understand a thing, run presently to the Will of God, and ridiculously betray
their own Ignorance, moreover, whatever we conclude from miracles, yet the
Existence of God cannot in any manner be concluded from them; for since a
miracle is a limited Work, and expresses only a certain and limited Power, we
cannot from such an Effect, conclude the Existence of a Cause whose Power is
infinite; but only of a Cause whose Power at most, is greater then that Effect.
I say at most, because from many concuring Causes, there may follow an effect,
whose Virtue and Power may be less then all the Causes together, and yet much
greater then the Power of any one of those Causes taken single; but because the
Laws of Nature. As we have already shown, extend themselves to things Infinite,
being conceived by us under a kind of Eternity, and Nature by them proceeds in
a certain and unchangeable course; so far do those Laws in some measure declare
to us, the Eternity and Immutability of God; and therefore we conclude that
neither God's Being or Providence, can be known by miracles; but may much
better be concluded from the fixed and unalterable Course of Nature: I speak
now of a miracle, as it is taken for a Work that is above Human Capacity, or
believed to be so; for as it is supposed to be a Work, that interrupts or
perverts the Order of Nature, or is repugnant tc its Laws; it is so far from
giving us any Knowledge of God, that it takes away, that which we naturally
have, and makes us doubt of God and all other things. Nor do I know any
difference between a thing done contrary to Nature, and that which is done
above Nature (that is as some explain themselves) a thing which is not done
contrary to the Order of Nature, but yet is not effected and produced by
Nature: for seeing a miracle is not wrought out of Nature, but within the
Compass of it; though it be concluded to be above Nature; yet it must necessarily
interrupt Natures Order, which, by the Decrees of God, we conceived to be fixed
and immutable; and therefore whatever is done in Nature, which does not follow
from the Rules of Nature, that must necessarily be repugnant to that Order,
which God to all Eternity by Universal Laws established in Nature, and
consequently, being against Nature, and its Laws, the believing it must bring
all things into doubt, and lead us to Atheism, So that by what has been said,
I hope I have so proved the Second Particular, that we may again conclude a
miracle, whether contrary to Nature or above it, to be a mere absurdity, and
that by a miracle nothing can be understood in Scripture, but a Work of Nature,
which is indeed above Human Understanding, or at least believed to be so.
Before I proceed to the Third Particular, I resolve to prove from Scripture;
that we cannot know God by Miracles: indeed the Scripture does no where
Literally say so, but we may conclude it from the 13. Chap. of Deuteronomy. Where
Moses commands the People to put any Prophet to death, who went about to seduce
them: And though the Sign, and the Wonder come to pass whereof he spoke unto
thee, an yet thou shall not hearken to the Words of the Prophet, for the Lord
your God proves you; that Prophet shall be put to death. From whence it
clearly follows, that miracles might be done by false Prophets, and unless men
were fortifyed with the true Knowledge and Love of God; they might be induced
by miracles to worship false Gods, as well as the true: Moses adds, because the
Lord your God proves you to know, whether you love him with all your Heart,
and with all your Soul. The Israelites notwithstanding all their miracles, had
no right Notions of God, which appears by Experience; for in the Absence of
Moses, they called upon Aron to make them visible Gods, who to their Eternal
shame, made them after so many Miracles done, a Calf to represent God. Asaph,
who had heard of so many miracles, yet doubted of God's Providence; and had he
not at last understood what was true Happiness, he had gone out of the right
Way, Psalm. 73. Solomon also in whose time the Jews were in their highest
Prosperity, believed that all things happened by chance, Eccles. Chap. 3. v.
19, 20, 21. and chap. 9. v. 2, 3. The very Prophets themselves, knew not how to
reconcile the Course of Nature and Human Eevents, with the Notions they had of
God's Providence; but to Wisemen whose Knowledge is not built on miracles, but
upon clear and distinct conceptions, the thing is very evident, especially to
those who place true Happiness in Virtue and Tranquillity of Mind; and study
more to submit to Nature, then to make Nature obedient to them; knowing
certainly, that God directs Nature as its own Universal Laws, and not as the
particular Laws of Human Nature require; and that God has a care not only of
Mankind, but of the whole Frame of Nature in general; and it appears by
Scripture, that miracles cannot teach us to know God or his Providence, though we
find in Scripture that God wrought miracles to be known to Men. Exodus Chap. 10.
v. 2. The wonders which he did in Egypt, were to convince the Israelites, that
there was a God; yet it does not follow, that the miracles themselves taught
them to know God, but only that the Jews were prepossest with such Opinions,
that they would easily be persuaded by those Signs: for as I have already
showed in the Second Chapter, that the conceptions, which the Prophets had by
Revelation, were not drawn from Universal and common Notions; but from
concessions sometimes absurd, and from the Opinions of those, to whom the
Revelations were made; and from theirs, whom the Holy Spirit would convince, as
we have proved by many Examples, and the Testimony of Paul, who was to the Jews
a Jew, and with the Grecians a Greek. But though those Miracles were sufficient
to convince the Israelites, and the Egyptians, from their own Principles, that
there was a God, yet they were not able to give them a right understanding and
Idea of God; they understood nothing more by them, then that there was a Power
greater, then all other known Beings, and that that Power took a particular
care of the Jews, whose Affairs were at that time, so prosperous above all
other Nations; but did not teach them, that God has an equal care of all
Mankind, which we know only by Philosophy or true Wisdom; and therefore the
Jews, and all that knew nothing of God's Providence, but from the different
State of Human Affairs, and from the disparity of men's Fortunes, persuaded
themselves, that the Jews were better beloved by God, then all other Nations;
though they did not excel any other People in Human perfection, as we have
already declared in our Third Chapter. We now proceed to the Third Particular,
that is to prove by Scripture, that the Commands and Decrees of God, and
consequently his Providence, are indeed nothing else, but the regular Course of
Nature (that is) when the Scripture says, any thing was done by God, or the
Will of God, nothing more is to be understood, then that it was done according
to the Order and Rules of Nature, and not as the Vulgar imagine, that Nature
was idle and ceased from Action, or that the Order of Nature, was for sometime
interrupted. The Scripture does not give us the true Knowledge of things, which
do not concern its Doctrine, because, as we have already declared, it needless,
it meddles not with demonstrating things by their natural Causes, nor with
things that are merely Speculative; and therefore to prove by consequence, what
we intend; we will quote some Scripture Histories, whose Relations are fullest
of Circumstances. In the first Book of Sam. Chap. 9. v. 15, 16. It is said,
that God told Samuel in his Ear, that he would send Saul to him; and yet God
did not send him, as Men use to send Messenger; one to another, but this
mission of God, was nothing but the Order and Course of Nature; for Saul sought
his Father's lost Asses, and thinking he should not find them; by Advice of his
Father's Servant, he went to the Prophet Samuel, to know if he could tell him
where they were; nor does it appear any where in the whole Relation, that Saul
had any particular Command from God, beside this natural Course to go to
Samuel. Psalm. 105. v. 24. It Is said, that God turned the Heart of the Egyptians
to hate the Israelites: which turning was Natural; as appears by the first
Chap. of Exodus, where very good Reasons are given, for the Egyptians keeping
the Israelites in subjection. In the 9 th. Chap. of Genesis v. 13. God says to
Noah, that he would set his Bow in the Cloud; which Action of God was nothing,
but the Reflection and Refraction of the Sunbeams, in the minute drops of Rain
Water. Psalm. 147. v. 18. The natural Operation, and warmth of the Wind, by
which, Frost and Snow are melted, is called the Word of God; and v. 15. the
Wind is called the Commandment of God, Psalm. 104. v. 4. The Wind and the Fire
are called the Messengers and Ministers of God, and many other like places in
Scripture clearly show, that the Decree, the Command, the Saying and Word of
God, are nothing else but the Operation and Order of Nature; and without doubt
many things which are related in Scripture, and attributed to God, naturally
come to pass; because it was not the intent of Scripture, to give us an account
of things by their natural Causes; but only to relate those things which
strongly possess the imagination, and in such manner and style, as was most
likely to cause admiration and fill Men's minds with Devotion. If then we find
in Scripture some things, of whose natural causes we are ignorant, or that seem
to have happened against the order of nature; we are not presently to doubt,
but believe, that what did really happen, came to pass by the course of nature;
which is confirmed by the many Circumstances that accompanied miracles, though
the Circumstances were not particularly related, or were at least poetically
related: I say the Circumstances clearly prove, that the miracles required, and
had natural causes. When the Egyptians were to be smitten with the Plague of
boiles, Moses was to cast up and sprinkle Ashes into the Air, Exodus chap. 9. v.
10. The Locusts also by Gods natural command, namely by an East Wind blowing a
whole Day and Night, covered the Land of Egypt, and left it again with a strong
West Wind, Exodus chap. 10. v. 13. 19. By the command of God, was a way made
through the Sea for the Jews, by an East Wind that blew a whole Night Exodus
chap. 14. v. 21. when the Prophet Elisha was to raise the Child, thought to be
dead, he several times stretched himself upon the Body, till he grew warm and
opened his Eyes, in the 2 d. Book of Kings chap. 4. v.34,35. so also in the 9
th.chap. of St. John's Gospel, some Circumstances are mentioned which Christ
used, when he Cured the blind Man; many other things are related in Scripture,
which all declare that miracles require somewhat more then the absolute command
of God; and therefore though all the Circumstances of miracles and their natural
causes, be not always particularly expressed; yet we ought to believe, that
miracles were not wrought without them. Which appears by the 14 th chap. of
Exodus v. 27. where it is said, that only upon the stretching out of Moses's
hand, the Sea returned again to its full strength, without making mention of
any Wind; yet in the 15 chap. of Exodus called Moses's Song v. 10. it is said,
thou did blow with thy Wind (that is a strong Wind) and the Sea covered them.
So that this Circumstance was omitted in the Story, to make the miracle appear
the greater: but some will urge, that we find many things in Scripture, which
cannot in appearance be explained by natural causes; as that the sins of Men
may be the cause of the Earths Barrenness, and Men's Prayers the cause of its
Fertility; that Faith may give sight to the Blind, with other things of the
like kind, recorded in the Old and New Testament: but to this I have already
given Answer, in showing that the Scripture, does not give us the knowledge of
things by their next immediate causes, but only relates things in that order,
and expresses them in such Words and Phrases, as are most likely to stir Men
up, especially the multitude to Devotion; and for that reason speaks many times
very improperly of God, and the things it treats of, not so much to convince
our reason, as to affect and possess our minds, and our imaginations; if the
Scripture should relate the destruction of any Empire, in the same manner that
Historians and Politicians use to do, it would not at all affect the Common
People, but when the overthrow of a Kingdom is poetically described, and
declared to be the immediate Work of God's own hand, how strangely are Men
moved with it? When the Scripture says, that for the Sins of Men, the Earth is
barren, or that blind Men are restored to sight by Faith; it signifies no more
then do those other Sayings, that God is angry or grieved with our Sins, that
he repents of the good he has done, or intended, and that God by seeing a Sign
called to mind his promise, all which Expressions are spoken poetically, or
according to the Opinions and Prejudices of the Writer; so that we absolutely
conclude, that all things which the Scripture relates to have happened, did
happen as all things do, according to the Laws of Nature; and if in Scripture
there be any thing recorded which by plain and evident Demonstration, may be
proved to be repugnant to the Laws of Nature, or impossible to follow from
them; we ought to believe it was inserted by Sacrilegious Men; for whatever is
against Nature, is against Reason, and whatever is against Reason, ought to be
rejected as absurd. Nothing now remains, but only to say somewhat of
interpreting Miracles, or rather to recollect what has been already said, and
illustrate it by some Example, which is the fourth Particular I promised to
treat of. That no body by mistaking a Miracle, may think there is something in
Scripture which is contrary to the Light of Nature. It seldom happens that Men
relate any thing that comes to pass so nakedly and truly, but that to their
Relations they add somewhat of their own conceits; yea when they see or hear
any thing, unless they beware of their own preconceived Opinions, they will be
so far prepossest, that they will never rightly understand what they see or
hear, especially if what has happened be above the Capacity of the Spectator
or Relator, and it be for his advantage that the thing should happen in that
very manner: hence it is that Men in their Histories and Chronicles, rather
vent their own Opinions, then make faithful Relations, and one and the same
Matter of Fact, related by two Men of different Opinions, shall be so diversely
represented, that it shall seem two different Cases: so that often times it is
not very difficult, by the very Histories to discover what were the Opinions of
the Historians: to Evidence this, I might cite many Philosophers, who have
Written Histories of Nature, as well as Chronologeis, but I will make use of
only one mentioned in Scripture, and leave the Reader to judge of the rest. In
the time of Joshua, when the Jews believed that the Sun was carried about the
Earth by a Dyurnal Motion, and that the Earth did not move at all, they fitted
the Miracle which happened when they fought against the five Kings, according
to this their preconceiv'd Opinion, and did not say simply, that the day was
longer then ordinary, but that the Sun and Moon stood still, or ceased from
motion; which at that time served as a very good Argument to convince the
Heathen, who Worshipped the Sun, that their God the Sun, was under the Power of
another Deity, who could at his pleasure make him change his Course; and
therefore partly out of Religion, and partly from the Opinion wherewith they
were prepossest, they apprehended and related the thing much otherwise then
indeed it was; therefore to explain Miracles and to understand by their
relations, how things did truly and really happen, it is necessary to know the
Opinions of those, who first reported the Miracles, or left them in Writing,
and to distinguish their Opinions, from that which was represented to them by
their Senses, else we may confound their Judgments and Opinions, with the
Miracle it self: It is likewise necessary to know their Opinions, that we may
not confound the things which really happened, with the things which were only
imaginary, and but Prophetical Revelations; for many things in Scripture are
related and believed as things real, which were but representations and mere
imaginations; as that God the first and highest of all Beings, descended from
Heaven, Exodus chap. 19. v. 18. Deuteronomy. chap. 5. v. 23. upon Mount Sinai, and that
the Mountain smoaked because God came down upon it in the midst of Fire: we are
likewise told of Eliahs going to Heaven in a Fiery Chariot, with Horses of
Fire; all which were but representations suited to the Opinions of them, who
delivered to us those things for realities; when in truth they were but mere
representations; whoever is but little wiser then the Multitude, knows that God
has neither Right or Left Hand, that he neither rests nor moves, that he is
comprehensively in no place, but is infinite, and in him are contained all
perfections. These things I say are known to Men, who judge of things by the
perceptions of a pure understanding and not as their Fancy is affected by their
outward Senses; as is usual with the Vulgar, who believe God to be Corporeal,
and imagining he Exercises Kingly Dominion, fancy his Throne to be in Heaven
above the Stars, at no great distance from the Earth; to which and the like
Opinions many Cases in Scripture are Accommodated; but yet ought not to be
thought real by Wise Men. Truly to understand how Miracles happened, it
concerns us to know the Phrases and Figures of the Hebrew Language; for he that
is not well acquainted with them, will take many things in Scripture for
Miracles, which were never thought so by the Penmen of it; so that he will not
only be mistaken in the Things and Miracles that happened, but will be likewise
ignorant what was the meaning of those by whom the Scripture was Originally
Written (for Example.) The Prophet Zachary chap. 14. v. 7. speaking of a future
War says, but it shall be one day which shall be known to the Lord, nor Day
nor Night, but it shall come to pass that at the Evening time, it shall be
Light, in which words he seems to predict a great Miracle; but they signify no
more, then that a doubtful Battle should be fought, whereof the Success should
be known only to God, but toward Evening the Jews should be Victorious. In the
like Phrases and Expressions, the Prophets were wont to foretell and write the
Victories and overthrows of the Nations, Isaiah. chap. 13. v. 10. declares the
destruction of Babylon in these words, the Stars of Heaven and the
Constellations thereof shall not give their Light, the Sun shall be darkened in
his going forth, and the Moon shall not cause her Light to shine, which no body
believes did happen in the destruction of that Empire, nor that which the
Prophet adds. v. 13. therefore will I shake the Heavens and the Earth shall
remove out of her place. In like manner, Isaiah chap. 48. v. 21. they thirsted
not when he led them through the deserts, he caused the Waters to flow out of
the Rock, for them he clave the Rock also and the Waters gushed out; by which
words nothing more is meant, then that the Jews found Fountains in the deserts,
by which they quenched their thirst; for no such Miracles happened when by the
consent of Cyrus they returned to Jerusalem, many expressions of like Nature,
occur in the Scripture, and are only fashions of speaking amongst the Jewish
Nation; I need instance in no more, but let it be observed, that the Jews made
use of such Phrases, not only for Ornament to their Language, but also to
express their Devotion; and therefore attributed all things to God; so that the
Scripture seems to relate nothing but Miracles, even when it speaks of things
merely natural. We are therefore to believe, that when the Scripture says God
hardened the Heart of Pharaoh, nothing more was signified, then that Pharaoh
was very obstinate and disobedient; and when it is said, God opened the Windows
of Heaven, nothing more is to be understood, then that there fell abundance of
Rain: whoever then will but consider, that many things in Scripture are related
very briefly, imperfectly, and without Circumstances, shall find nothing
repugnant to natural Reason, but many things which seem very obscure, may with
a little Meditation be explained and easily understood: so that I think I have
sufficiently proved, what I intended: but before I put an end to this Chapter,
I have thought fit to intimate, that in speaking of Miracles, I have taken a
course different from that I made use of in treating of Prophesy; for I
declared nothing positively concerning Prophesy, but what I could conclude from
fundamental Princiciples revealed in the Scripture; but what I have said
concerning Miracles, I have drawn from Principles known by the Light of Nature,
which I did designedly, because I could not know wherein Prophesy consisted,
nor could I aver any thing of it (it being a mere Theological question
exceeding human Capacity) but what I could derive from revealed Principles; so
that I was forced to make a short Historical Collection of Prophesy, and from
thence to form some Maxims which might instruct me, as far as 'twas possible,
in its Nature and Properties: but because that which we inquire concerning
Miracles, namely, whether any thing in Nature can happen which is either
contrary to its Laws, or does not follow from them, is a Philosophical Subject,
I thought it much better to clear the Question, by making use of Principles
known by the Light of Nature, as those that are most obvious. I say I did it
purposely, because I can also prove it from fundamental Principles of
Scripture, which declares that the course and order of nature in general, is
constant and immutable, Ps. 148. v.6. he also established them for ever and
ever, he has made a decree which shall not pass, and Ierem. chap. 31. v.35,
36. thus says the Lord who gives the Sun for a Light by Day, and the
Ordinances of the Moon and the Stars for a Light by Night, which divides the
Sea when the Waves thereof roar; if these Ordinances depart from before me
says the Lord, then the Seed of Israel shall cease also from being a Nation
before me for ever: the Philosopher in his Book of Ecclesiastes chap. 1. v. 10.
says, is there any thing whereof it may be said, see this is new, it has been
already of old time, which was before us, v. 11. he says, there is no
remembrance of former things, neither shall there be any remembrance of things
to come with those that come after: by which words he means, that nothing
happens which has not happened before, though it be forgotten; in the 3 d
Chapter v. 11. he says that God has made every thing beautiful in its time,
and v. 14. he says whatever God does, it shall be for ever, nothing can be put
to it nor any thing taken from it, v. 15. that which has been is now, and that
which is to be, has already been, which clearly declares, that Nature keeps a
constant fixed and unchangeable course, that God in all Ages known and unknown,
it still the same, that the Laws of Nature are so large and perfect, nothing
can be added to, or taken from them, and lastly that there is nothing new in
Miracles, but what seems so to Man's ignorance, these things are expressly
declared in Scripture, but it is no where said, that any thing happens in
Nature, either contrary to its Laws, or not proceeding from them; so that
Miracles require Causes and Circumstances, and are not immediately wrought by I
know not what Kingly and absolute Empire, which the Vulgar attribute to God;
but by his divine Power and Decree, manifested in the Laws and Order of Nature,
and that Miracles may be wrought by seducing Impostures; as appears, Deuteronomy.
chap. 13. and Matthew. chap. 24. v. 24. from whence it manifestly follows, that
Miracles were things natural, and therefore (to use Solomon's expression) are
not to be thought new or contrary to Nature, but have as near an Alliance as is
possible, to natural things, which may be easily made out by the Rules I have
laid down, drawn from the Scripture: but though I say we are taught these things
by Scripture, yet I do not mean, that the Scripture delivers them to us as
Doctrines necessary to Salvation, but only that the Prophets received them as
we do, and therefore it is left to every Man's Liberty, to have such an Opinion
of them, as is most likely to incline him most religiously and heartily to
serve God, and of this mind was Josephus, for he concludes his Second Book of
Antiquities with these words; Neither ought any Man to marvel, at this so
wonderful discourse, that through the Red Sea a passage should be found, to save
so many Persons in times past, and they rude and simple; whether it were done
by the Will of God, or that it chanced of it self; since not long time ago God
so thinking it good, the Sea of Pamphilia divided it self, to give way to
Alexander King of Macedons Soldiers, having no other passage, to destroy the
Empire of the Persians, and this all acknowledge, who have Written the Acts of
Alexander, and therefore of these things let every one think as he pleases.

Chap. VII. Of the Interpretation of Scripture.
MOst Men acknowledge the Holy Scripture to be the Word of God, which teaches
Mankind the way to true Happiness and Salvation; but this Opinion has so
little influence upon Men's Lives, that the common People take no care, to
regulate theirs according to the Doctrines of Scripture; and every Man
believing himself divinely inspired, would under pretense of Religion, compel
all others to be of his Opinion. We often see those whom we call Divines, very
solicitous to father their own Fancies upon Scripture, and the Divine Authority
thereof, making no scruple with great boldness to interpret it, and tell us
what is the mind of the Holy Ghost. When they meet with any difficulties, they
do not so much fear mistaking the Holy Spirits meaning, and the right way to
Salvation; as to be found guilty of Error, and by loosing their Authority to
fall into contempt; but if Men did heartily believe that which they profess
concerning the Scriptures, they would lead other kind of Lives, there would not
be half so much contention and hatred in the World as now there is; nor would
Men with so much Blind Zeal and boldness, venture upon expounding Scripture,
and introduce so many novelties into Religion; but on the contrary, would be
very cautious of maintaining any thing for Scripture Doctrine, which is not
manifestly contained in it, and the Men who have not been afraid to adulterate
Scripture in so many places, would never have committed such impious Sacrilege.
But ambition and wickedness have so far prevailed, that Religion does now
consist, not so much in obeying the dictates of the Holy Spirit, as in
defending Men's own fantastical opinions; Charity is now no part of Religion,
but discord and implacable hatred pass under the masque of Godly Zeal. To these
evils superstition has joined it self, teaching Men to despise reason and
nature, and to admire and reverence that only which is repugnant to both; it is
no wonder that Men to be thought the greater admirers of Scripture, should
Study so to expound it, that it may seem contradictory both to nature and
reason, and therefore dream of profound mysteries hidden in it, which mysteries
(that is their own obsurdities) they labor and weary themselves to find out;
and neglecting things which are of most use, ascribe to the Holy Spirit, all
the Dotages of their own imagination, and with much heat and passion, endeavor
to defend their own idle conceits. Whatever is the result of Men's
understanding, that Men endeavor to maintain by clear and pure reason, but all
opinions derived from their passions and affections, must be defended by them
to avoid these troubles, and to free our minds from all Theological prejudices,
that we may not rashly receive the Foolish inventions of Men, for the Doctrins
of God; I will now treat of a right method of interpreting Scripture, of which
method whoever is ignorant, he can never certainly know the true Sense and
meaning, either of the Scripture or the Holy Ghost. I say in few Words, that
the method of interpreting Scripture, does not differ from the method of
interpreting nature; for as the method of explaining nature, chiefly consists
in framing a History thereof, from whence, as from undeniable concessions,
shall follow the definitions of natural things; so likewise to expound
Scripture, it is absolutely necessary to compose a true History thereof, that
thence, as from sure Principles, we may by rational consequences collect the
meaning of those who were Authors of the Scripture, that every one (who admits
of no other Principles or concessions in expounding Scripture, or in reasoning
of the things therein contained, but such as are fetched from the Scripture it
self, or the History of it) may proceed without danger of Erring, and be able
to discourse and reason as securely of things which exceed human capacity, as
of any thing we know by natural light. Now that it may evidently appear, that
this is the only sure way, and agrees with the method of explaining nature, we
are to observe, that the Scripture very often treats of things, that cannot be
deduced from Principles known to us by natural light; because Revelations make
up the greatest part of Scripture History, which Principaly contains Miracles;
that is (as we have already showed in the foregoing Chapter) narrations of
things not common or usual in nature, suited and fitted to the judgment and
opinions of the Historians that wrote them: Revelations also as we have showed
in the Second Chapter, were accomodated to the opinions of the Prophets, and
exceed human capacity, wherefore the knowledge of all these things (that is) of
almost every thing contained in Scripture, ought to be derived only from
Scripture, as the knowledge of natural things ought to be from nature: as for
moral Doctrins contained in the Bible, though they may be demonstrated from
common and general Notions, yet it does not appear by those Notions, that the
Scripture teaches those Doctrins; nothing but the Scripture it self makes out
that, and to give a clear demonstration of the Scripture's Divinity, we must
from the Scripture it self, prove the Truth of the Moral Doctrins which it
teaches, because in that Truth only, the Divine Authority of Scripture
appears; for as we have already shown, the certainty of the Prophets, consisted
in their being just and virtuous, which to make us believe them, ought likewise
appear to us. We have already shown that Miracles cannot prove the Divine
Nature of God, and that they might be wrought by false Prophets, the Divine
Authority of Scripture appears then, in its teaching us what is true and real
Virtue, and that can be proved only by Scripture it self, if not, we could not
without a great deal of prejudice believe the Scriptures, and think them to be
of divine inspiration: the Scripture indeed, does not give us any definition of
the things whereof it treats, so neither does Nature; and therefore as from
several Actions of Nature, we make definitions of natural things; in the same
manner, from several narrations of all things contained in Scripture, are
conclusions to be drawn. The general rule then of interpreting Scripture is,
that we conclude nothing to be Doctrine, which does not manifestly and clearly
appear, from the History of Scripture; what kind of History it ought to be, and
what are the Principal things it ought to contain, comes now to be declared.

First, it ought to contain the Nature and Proprieties of that Language in
which the Books of Scripture were Originally Written, and which the Authors of
those Books were wont to speak; that so all the Senses which every Speech,
according to the ordinary use of speaking will bear and admit, may be found
out; and because the Penmen both of the Old and New Testament were Jews, the
knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue, is above all things necessary, to understand
not only the Books of the Old Testament, which were Written in Hebrew, but also
of the new; for though some of the Books of the New Testament, were Published in
other Languages, yet they are full of Hebrewisms.

Secondly, The Sentences of every Book, ought to be Collected and reduced to
Heads; that so all that concern one and the same Subject, may be easily found,
and all those which seem doubtful and obscure, or repugnant to one another,
ought to be noted: I call those Speeches clear or obscure, whose Sense is
easily or difficultly made out by the context, and not in respect of the Truth
of those Speeches, easily or difficultly perceived by reason; for only the
Sense of what the Scripture says, and not the verity is our business; we are
therefore to take special heed, that in searching out the Sense of Scripture,
we do not suffer our reason, as it is founded upon the Principles of natural
knowledge, to be prepossest with prejudice; and likewise that we do not
confound the true Sense of the words, with the verity of the matter; for the
true Sense is to be found out, only by the use of the Language, or by such a
way of reasoning, as is grounded only upon Scripture. That all these things may
be perfectly understood. Take this example for illustration; These sayings of
Moses God is Fire, and God is jealous how plain and clear are they, so long as
we regard only the signification of the words, but in respect of reason and
truth, how dark and obscure, yea though the litteral Sense of the words be
contrary to natural reason, yet unless it contradict any fundamental Principles
derived from Scripture, their litteral Sense is still to be retained, so on the
contrary, if these sayings in their litteral construction, should be found
repugnant to Principles deduced from Scripture, though they should be most
agreeable to reason, yet they ought to be Metaphorically not litteraly
understood. To know then whether Moses did, or did not believe God to be Fire,
we ought not to conclude the one or the other, because the Opinion is either
contrary or consonant to reason, but it must be gathered from some other of
Moses own sayings (for example) because Moses in very many places has plainly
declared, that God is not like any visible thing, either in Heaven, Earth, or
the Waters, we must conclude that either this saying, God is Fire, or else all
his other sayings are to be Metaphorically interpreted, but because we ought as
seldom as it is possible, to depart from the litteral Sense, we must therefore
inquire whether this saying God is Fire will admit of any other Sense beside
the litteral, (that is) whether the word Fire signify any other thing beside
natural Fire, and if in the Hebrew Tongue, it can never be found to signify any
thing else, then this saying of Moses is no other way to be interpreted, though
it be repugnant to reason: but on the other side all those other sayings of
Moses, though consentaneous to reason, are to be conformable and accomodate to
this; but if the common use of the Language will not suffer this to be done,
then those several sayings are Irreconcilable, and we are to suspend our
judgment of them. But now because the Word Fire, is also taken for anger and
jealousy, Job. chap. 31. v. 12. these sayings of Moses are easily
reconcilable, and we may lawfully conclude, that these two Sentences God is
Fire, and God is jealous signify both the same thing.

Moreover, because Moses plainly says, God is jealous, and does no where
declare that God is free from all manner of passion and affections of the mind,
we may conclude that Moses did think, or at least taught other Men to think,
God was jealous, though we believe the opinion contrary to reason: for as we have
already shown, it is not lawful for us, to wrest the Sense and meaning of
Scripture, according to the dictates of our reason or preconceived Opinions,
because all our knowledge both of the Old and New Testament, must be derived
only from themselves.

Thirdly, This History of Scripture, ought to give such an account of the Books
of the Prophets remaining with us, as may inform us, of the Lives, Manners and
Studies of the Authors of every Book; who the Person was, upon what occasion he
wrote, in what time, to whom; and in what Language, and Lastly, it ought to
tell us, what was the Fortune of every Book, how it was first received, into
whose hands it fell, how many various readings it had, how it came to be
received for sacred and Canonical. And Lastly, how all the several Books came
together into one Volume; I say all these things this History of Scripture
ought to contain. To know what Sentences of Scripture are to be taken for Laws
and precepts, and what only for moral Doctrins, it is very expedient to know
the Life, Manners, and Study of the Author; beside we can with more ease know,
the meaning of any Man's Words, when we know his genius, disposition and
ingenuity. Moreover, that we may not confound Doctrins whose morality and
Obligation is perpetual, with those that were but temporary, and of use only to
some particular People; it behooves us to know, upon what occasion, at what
time, to what Nation, in what Age, all these instructions were Written. Lastly,
it is fit we should know, beside the Authority of every Book, whether the Books
have been adulterated, or at least whether any Errors have crept into them, and
whether they have been corrected by Learned and Faithful Men, all which things
are absolutely necessary to be known, that we may not with Blind Zeal receive
every thing obtruded upon us, but believe that only, which is certain, plain,
and past all doubt.

After we have such a History of Scripture, and have firmly resolved to
conclude nothing to be the Doctrine of the Prophets, which does not naturally
follow, or may be clearly drawn from this History; then it will be time to
prepare our selves, to search out the meaning of the Prophets, and of the Holy
Ghost; which to do, the like method and order is required, that is to be used
in interpreting nature by its own History; for as in searching out natural
things, we first endeavor to inquire concerning that which is Universal, and
common to all nature, as Motion and Rest; and the Laws and Rules of both, which
nature always observes, and by which it continually Acts, and from these we
afterward by degrees proceed to other things less general; so likewise from
this History of Scripture, we are first to inquire after that which is most
general, and is the Basis and Foundation of all Scripture, and is commended by
all the Prophets, for the most profitable and perpetual Doctrine to Mankind
(for example) that there is only one omnipotent God, who only is to be
worshipped, who provideth for all, and loves those best, who serve him and love
their Neighbors as themselves, is a Doctrine every where so express and plain
in Scripture, that no Body ever doubted the Sense and meaning thereof; but what
God is, why and in what manner he beholds and provideth for all things, the
Scripture does no where expressly and positively declare, nor teach it as an
eternal Doctrine, but on the contrary, the Prophets as we have already shown,
did not agree amongst themselves concerning these things, and therefore in
matters of like nature, we are not posi^ively to determine what is the Doctrine
and meaning of the Holy Spirit, though it may be very well made out by natural
knowledge. This general Doctrine of the Scripture, being rightly known, we are
then to pass on to things less Universal, which concern the common use of Life,
and which are derived like rivulets from this general Doctrine. Such are all
the particular external Actions of real Virtue, which cannot be Practiced but
as occasion is offered, and whatsoever in Scripture relating to them seems
doubtful or obscure, must be explained and determined by the Universal
Doctrine; and for those things which seem contradictory one to another, we are
to examine. Upon what occasion, at what time, and to whom they were written (for
example) when Christ said, Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be
comforted. We know not who are the Mourners meant in this Text; but because
Christ afterward, bids us take no thought for any thing, but seek the Kingdom
of God and the righteousness thereof, which he commends to us as our chiefest
good, Math. chap. 6. v. 33. therefore it follows, that the Mourners meant by
Christ, must be those who lamented to see the Kingdom of God and its
righteousness, so much neglected by Men; for which no others could Mourn, but
those whose affections were Heavenly, and contemned all things here below. So
also when Christ said Math. chap. 5. v. 39. Whatsoever shall smite thee on the
right Cheek, turn to him the other also, if he had spoken this as a Lawgiver,
by this command he had abrogated the Law of Moses, which he declares in the 17
th verse, he came not to destroy, but fulfill: We are therefore to inquire, who
said this, to whom, and when he said it. First, it was Christ that said it, not
as a Lawgiver who ordained Laws; but as a teacher, who gave moral
instructions, not so much to reprove their deeds, as to correct their thoughts:
next he spoke it to Men oppressed, who lived in a Commonwealth extremely
corrupted, where justice was neglected, and whose ruin and destruction was
near at hand: this Doctrine of Christ, was likewise Preached by the Prophet
Jeremy, before the first destruction of the City of Jerusalem, Lament. Chap. 3.
v. 30. He gives his Cheek to him that smites him. Wherefore seeing the
Prophets did not teach this Doctrine, but in the time of oppression, nor was
any where commanded by them as a Law; and on the contrary Moses (who did not
write in times of oppression, but took care to establish a good Commonwealth)
though he condemned revenge, and the hating of our Neighbor, yet he commanded,
that an Eye should be given for an Eye: hence it appears by the fundamental
Principles of Scripture, that this Doctrine of Christ and Jeremy, for suffering
Injuries and submitting to Wicked Men, ought to be practiced only in times of
oppression, and in Places where Justice is not so easily to be had; but not in
a good Commonwealth, because in good Governments, where Justice is maintained,
every Man is obliged if he will be Just, to require Satisfaction for Injuries
before a Judge, Levit. Chap. 5. v. 1. Not upon the score of Hatred and Revenge,
which are forbidden, Levit. Chap. 19. v. 17, 18. But to preserve and maintain
the Justice and Laws of a Man's Country, and that wicked Men may not get
advantage, and thrive by their wickedness, all which is agreeable to Natural
Reason: to this purpose, I could bring many more Examples, but these are
sufficient to explain my meaning, and show the usefulness of that method, which
is the Subject of my present Discourse. But hitherto I have only shown, the Way
to find out the Sense of those Scripture Sentences, which concern the Use of
Life; and are therefore more easily understood; because among the Penmen of the
Bible, there never was any controversy about them; but other passages in
Scripture which concern Matters merely Speculative, are not so plain and
obvious, because the Way to them is very narrow; for though in things merely
Speculative, the Prophets as we have already shown, differed amongst
themselves, and the narrations of things, were suited to the prejudice of every
Age, yet it is not at all Lawful for us to determine, what was the meaning of
one Prophet, by the clear Places of another; unless it be evident to us, that
they were both of one Opinion: how then the meaning of the Prophets, in such
Cases is to be known by the History of Scripture, I will in few words declare;
we must in the first Place, begin with what is most general, and from those
Sentences of Scripture, which are most plain and clear, inquire what is
Prophesy or Revelation, and in what it chiefly consists. Next we ought to
inquire, what a Miracle is, and after that of things usual and common; this
being done, we ought to consider the Opinions of every Prophet, and from them
guess at the meaning of every Prophesy, History and Miracle: but what caution
we are to use, that in these things we do not confound the Sense of the
Prophets and Historians, with the meaning of the Holy Spirit, and the Truth of
the Matter, I have already shown in their proper Places. But this is to be
noted concerning the meaning of Revelations, that this my method teaches us,
to find out only those things, which the Prophets heard or saw, and not what
they signified and represented to us by Figures an Hierogliphicks; of these
things we can only make Conjectures, but cannot certainly derive them from the
fundamental Principles of Scripture. Now though I have shown the manner of
interpreting Scripture, and proved it to be the sure way of finding out the
Sense thereof; yet indeed I confess those Men may have a more certain Knowledge
of the true meaning of it (if any such Men there be) who have received a
Traditional Explication thereof, made by the Prophets themselves (which the
Pharisees affirm they have) or such as have a high Priest, who cannot err in
expounding Scripture, and that the Roman Catholics boast of their Popes: but
seeing we cannot be sure of such a Tradition, or the Authority of such a Priest
or Pope, we cannot build upon either, because the Primitive Christians deny the
one, and the most Ancient Sects of the Jews the other. And if we consider the
Series and Succession of Years, which the Pharisees received from their
Rabbis, by which they carry their Tradition as high as Moses himself, we shall
find it false, as I have proved in another place: such a Tradition therefore,
ought to be much suspected, and though in our method, we are forced to suppose
some kind of Jewish Tradition to be sincere and incorrupt, namely, the
Signification of words in the Hebrew Tongue, which we have received from the
Jews, yet we need not much doubt this, though we very well may the other; for it
can be of no Advantage or Use to any Man, to change the Signification of any
Word, though it often may be, to alter the Sense of a Speech. It is also very
difficult to be done, for he that should endeavor to change the Sense of any
Word, must necessarily construe all those Authors, who have written in that
Tongue, and used that Word in its common acceptance, according to the Genuine
Sense of every Author; or else must falsify them with a great deal of Caution.
The ignorant multitude as well as Learned Men, are the keepers of a Language,
but the Learned only preserve the Sense of Speeches and Books, and
consequently, though Learned men may change or corrupt the Sense of some scarce
Book; yet they cannot the Signification of Words: beside if any man had a mind
to alter the Signification of a Word, to which he is accustomed, he cannot
without a great deal of difficulty do it, either in speaking or writing. For
these and other Reasons I am persuaded, it never yet came into any man's head
to corrupt a Language, though many have perverted the Sense of a writer, either
by changing or misinterpreting his sayings. If our method (which lays this
for a ground, that the knowledge of Scripture, is to be drawn only from the
Scripture) be plain and true; then where it is not able to give us the true
Sense and Knowledge of Scripture, we may well despair of it: what difficulty
there is of arriving by this method to the true Meaning and Knowledge of the
Sacred Volumes, or what is further to be desired in it, I will now declare. The
chiefest difficulty in this method is, that is requires a perfect Knowledge of
the Hebrew Tongue, but how is that to be had? the Ancient and most skilful
Masters in the Hebrew Language, have left little to posterity of the Elements
and Learning of it; we have from them neither Dictionary, Grammar, or Rhetoric.
The Jewish Nation has lost all its Ornaments and Beauty (which is no wonder
having suffered so many Calamities and Persecutions) and retains nothing but a
few Fragments of their Language, and of a few Books, for all the names of
Fruits Birds, Fishes, and many other things, by the Injury of time are lost. So
that the Signification of many Names and Words, in the Old and New Testament,
is unknown or very disputable. Seeing then all these things, and likewise a
Dictionary of the Hebrew Phrases, and manners of speaking in the Hebrew
Language, are very necessary to be had, because all the Forms of Speech
peculiar to the Jewish Nation are forgotten and lost; we cannot as we would
find out all the Senses of every Sentence in Scripture, which according to the
customary use of the Language it comprehends, and there are many Sayings in
Scripture, though expressed in known words, whose Sense nevertheless is obscure and
inscrutable, and as we have no perfect History of the Hebrew Tongue, so the
Nature and Constitution of the Language is such, and so many Ambiguities spring
from it; that it is impossible to frame such a method, as shall direct a Man to
find out the true Sense of all that is said in Scripture: for beside the Causes
of Doubt common to all other Languages, there are some others in this, from
whence proceed many uncertainties, which causes here to specify, I think worth
a Man's pains.

First, Obscurity and ambiguity in Scripture, is caused sometimes by using the
Letters of the same Organ one for another. The Jews divided all, the Letters of
their Alphabet into five Classes or Forms, because there are five particular
Parts or Instruments of the Mouth used in pronunciation: the Lips, the Tongue,
the Teeth, the Palate, and the Throat; for Example Alpha, Ghet, Hgain, He, are
called Guttural Letters, and are without any difference known to us, taken one
for another. El which signifies To, is often taken for Hgal, which signifies
upon, and so interchangebly; whence it comes to pass, that all the Parts of a
Speech are rendered doubtful, or are like words which have no Signification. The
Second cause of ambiguity, is the diverse and manifold Signification of
conjunctions and Adverbs; for example, Vau promiscuously serves to join and
disjoyn, signifying And, but, because, indeed, otherwise, then, Ki has seven
or eight Significations, because, although, if, when, even, as, that, burning,
and so almost all Particles.

The Third cause of many Ambiguities is, because Verbs in the Indicative Mood,
want the Present, the Preterimperfect, the Preterpluperfect and the Future
tense, and others much used in other Languages. In the Imparative and
Infinitive Mood, they want all the Tenses except the Present, and in the
Subjunctive have none at all; and though all these defects of Moods and Tenses,
may with great Elegancy be supplied, by Rules and Principles deduced from the
Language; yet they have been wholly neglected by the Ancient Writers, who
promiscuously used the Present and Preterperfect tenses for the Future; and
sometimes the Indicative Mood for the Imperative and Subjunctive; which caused
great Ambiguity in their Writings: beside these three great Causes of
uncertainty in the Hebrew Language, there remain two other very observable, and
both of very great moment. The first is, that the Jews made no use those
Letters we call Vowels. The Second, that they never used in their Writings to
distinguish their Words, or express their quantity, by any Marks or Signs; and
though both Vowels and Marks use to be supplied by Points and Accents, yet we
cannot trust to them, seeing they were invented, and brought into use by modern
Men; whose Authority is of no great Value. The Ancients wrote without Points,
that is without Vowels or Accents, as appears by many Testimonies, but some of
later times brought in both, to interpret the Bible as they thought fit; so
that the Points and Accents, which we now have, are only Expositions of Men of
the present Age, whom we ought not to reverence and believe above other
Expositors: they that are Ignorant of this, know not the Reason, why the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews is to be excused, that in the 21 th. Verse of the
11 th. Chap. of that Epistle, he explains the Text in the 31 th. Verse of the
47 th. Chap. of Genesis quite otherwise, then it is in the pointed Hebrew Text;
as if the Apostle had been to learn the Sense of Scripture from the Punctists,
in my Opinion the Punctists are mistaken; that it may appear they are, and that
the difference of the two interpretations, arises from the want of Vowels, I
will give you both: The Punctists by their Points render the Text in Genesis
thus, and Israel bowed himself Upon (or by changing hgain into Aleph, a Letter
of the same Organ) toward the Beds Head; but the Author of the Epistle says,
Israel bowed himself leaning Upon the top of his Staff, by reading Mateh,
instead of the Word Mitah, which difference comes only from the Vowels. Now
seeing the forecited Chapter of Genesis, speaks only of Jacob's Age, and not
of his Sickness as does the following Chapter, it is much more probable the
Historian meant, that Jacob leaned Upon the top of his Staff (wherewith Men of
very great Age use to support themselves) and not that he did bow himself upon
or toward his Beds Head; because in so rendering the Text, there is no need to
suppose any interchange of Letters. By this Example, I have not only reconciled
that Place in the Epistle to the Hebrews, with the Text in Genesis, but have
also shown how little credit is to be given to our new Points and Accents; so
that he who will interpret Scripture without prejudice, must with a great deal
of doubting narrowly examine them.

To return to our purpose, every one may easily conjecture, that from such a
Nature and Constitution of the Hebrew Tongue, must proceed so many Ambiguities,
that it is impossible for any method to resolve them all; and there is little
hope it can be done, by the mutual comparing of one saying with another (which
we have declared to be a singular way of finding out the true, of many Senses,
which every Sentence according to the common use of the Language, will bear and
admit.) Seeing this comparing of Places, cannot explain one another but by mere
chance; because no Prophet wrote with express Intention, to explain the Words
of another Prophet or his own; and also because we cannot know one Prophet's or
Apostle's meaning by another, unless it be in things that concern the use of
Life; but not when they speak of things Speculative, and when they relate
Miracles or Histories: moreover, I can give you many Instances of Speeches in
Scripture, that are inexplicable, but at present I pass them by, and proceed to
observe, what other difficulties yet remain, in this method of interpreting
Scripture, and what is further to be wished for in it. Another difficulty
attends this method, because we have not such a History of all the Books of
Scripture as is necessary; for we know not the Authors, or rather the Penmen
of many of the Books; at least we doubt of them, as I shall at large show in
the following Chapter; neither do we know, upon what Occasion, or when those
Books of whose Penmen we doubt, were written, we are ignorant into what Hands
all the Books fell, nor know we in whose Copies so many various Readings are
found, and whether there be not some, which have more various Readings: what
advantage it is to know all these things, I have briefly declared in its proper
place; but I have there purposely omitted some things, which come now to be
considered, if we read any Book, that contains things incredible,
unintelligible, or written in very obscure Terms, and know not who was its
Author, or at what time or upon what occasion it was written; in vain do we
labor to find out the true Sense thereof, for none of these things being
known, it is impossible to understand, what the Author did or could mean: but
when we are once satisfied in these things, our Thoughts demine without
prejudice, and give to the Author, or to him in whose Favor the Author writ,
neither more or less then is his due; nor do we think of any other things, then
were or might be in the Author's mind, and such as the time and occasion
required: and this is apparent, for it often happens, when in diverse Books, we
read stories one like another, we pass different Judgments on them, according
to the different Opinions we have of the Writers. I remember I have read in a
certain Book, of a Man called Orlando furioso, who rid upon a winged Monster
through the Air, into what Countries he pleased, and slew a great Number of Men
and Giants, with abundance of other Fancies beyond all Reason and Sense. A
story like this I have read in Ovid of Perseus, and another in the Book of
Judges and Kings of Sampson, who single and unarmed slew Thousands of Men, and
of Eliah who with a Chariot and Horses of Fire, mounted up to Heaven; these
stories I say are like one another, yet we make different judgments of every
one of them. The first Author wrote nothing but Fables, the Second matters
Political, and the Third Sacred, and this for no other reason, but the
different opinions we have of the writers. It is therefore evident, that the
knowledge of those Authors, who have written things obscure and very difficult
to be understood, is absolutely necessary to interpret their writings, and
among several readings of obscure Histories, that we may choose the true, it is
necessary to know in whose Copies those diverse readings are found, and whether
many other readings have not been met with, amongst Men of greater Authority.

Lastly, we meet with another difficulty in expounding some Books of Scripture,
by not having those Books in the same Language wherein they were first written;
for it is the common opinion, that the Gospel according to St. Matthew, and the
Epistle to the Hebrews, were written in the Hebrew Tongue, which Copies are no
where extant. In what Language the Book of Job was written is a doubt, Abenezra
in his Commentaries, affirms it was Translated out of some other Language into
Hebrew, which is the cause of its obscurity: Of the Apocryphal Books I say
nothing, because they are of little or no Authority. These are all the
difficulties in this method of interpreting Scripture by such a History as
might be had of it, of which I promised to give an account, and I think them so
great, that I may boldly say, we cannot know the true sense of Scripture in
many places, or at most, we can without any certainty but guess at it; however
this is to be observed, that all those difficulties can only hinder us, from
knowing the mind of the Prophets in things imperceptible, which we can only
imagine, but not in things intelligible, of which we may form clear conceptions:
for things which in their own nature are easily conceived, can never be spoken
so obscurely, but that they may be quickly understood, according to that usual
saying a Word to the Wise. Euclyd who writ of nothing but what is very plain
and obvious, is easily understood by every Body in any Language, and therefore
to be sure of his Sense and meaning, there is no need of a perfect, but only a
superficial knowledge of the Tongue wherein he wrote, nor of knowing his Life,
Study, Manners, in what Language, when, or to whom he wrote, neither knowing
the Fate of his Book, its various readings, or how it came to be generally
received; what I say of Euclyd, may be said of all Men, who have written of
things in their own nature easy to be understood; so that we conclude, the
meaning of the Scripture, and the true Sense thereof, concerning moral
Doctrins, may be easily attained, by such a History as might be composed of it:
For all Lessons of true Piety, are given us in words of common and frequent
use, and are therefore plain and easy to be understood; and because our
happiness and the peace of our Lives, consists in Tranquillity of Mind, which
we find only in things which we clearly understand; it evidently follows, that
we may certainly find out the meaning of Scripture, in things necessary to
happiness and Salvation; and therefore we need not be so Sollicitous about
other matters, which when they seem so difficult to our reason and
understanding, have more curiosity in them then profit. I have now shown what
is the true method of explaining Scripture, and sully declared my opinion
concerning it, I doubt not but every one sees, this method requires nothing
more then natural reason, whose Nature and Virtue chiefly consists in deducing
by right consequences, things obscure from known and indisputable concessions;
and though we grant, that this natural light is not sufficient to find out all
things in Scripture, it is not from any defect in this natural light, but
because the right way which it shows us, was never observed and trodden by Men:
So that in tract of time, it is become painful, and almost impossible to pass,
as in my opinion manifestly appears by the difficulties I have mentioned. It
now remains that I examine those Men's opinions, who are not of mine: the first
to be considered is theirs, who positively affirm, that natural light is not
sufficient to interpret Scripture, and that only Supernatural light can do it;
but what they mean by Supernatural light, I leave them to explain: I suppose
they do but in obscure terms confess, that they are very doubtful of the true
Sense of Scripture, for if we diligently consider their expositions, we shall
find they contain nothing Supernatural; yea they will appear to be mere
conjectures, if they be compared with their explanations, who pretend to
nothing more then what is natural; they will be found like them to be human,
long Studied and Elaborate. In maintaining that natural light is not able to
explain Scripture they are mistaken, what we have said makes it clear, that the
difficulty of expounding Scripture does not arise from any defect of strength
in natural light; but only from Men's sloth (I will not say malice) who have
neglected to Compose such a History of Scripture, as might have been framed of
it; and also because all Men (if I be not deceived) confess, that Supernatural
light is a divine gift bestowed only upon believers; but the Prophets and
Apostles Preached not only to believers but to wicked unbelievers, who were
notwithstanding their impiety and unbelief, capable of understanding the
meaning of the Prophets; otherwise they had Preached but to Children and
Infants, and not to Men endued with reason: and Moses had in vain prescribed
Laws, if his Laws were intelligible only to believers who needed no Law.
Wherefore they that seek after supernatural light to understand the mind of the
Prophets and Apostles, seem void even of natural light, and such I think are
far from having that Heavenly Gift of light supernatural. Maimonides was not of
these Men's Opinion, for he thought most places of Scripture would bear several,
yea contrary Senses, and thought likewise, that we cannot be certain of the
true Sense of any place, unless we know the place as we interpret it, to
contain nothing but what is agreeable to reason, or not contrary to it; for if
in its litteral Sense it appear repugnant to reason, though the Sense appear
clear, yet he thinks the place ought to be otherwise interpreted; and this he
plainly declares in the 25 th Chapter of his Book called More Nebuchin, where
he says know that I do not refuse to say the World is eternal because there
are Texts in Scripture which say the World was created, for the Texts which
declare the World was created, are not more then those that tell us God is
Corporeal, neither are the ways of expounding those Texts, concerning the
Creation of the World, Shut up or barred against us; but we could as well
explain them, as I did the other when I proved God to be incorporeal; perhaps I
could better and with more ease expound the Texts of the Worlds Creation, and
maintain the World to be eternal, then I did those of Gods corporiety, when I
proved God to be incorporeal; but for two reasons I will not do it, or believe
that the World is eternal: First because it is evident by a clear
Demonstration, that God is not Corporeal, for all places of Scripture whose
litteral Sense is repugnant to a Demonstration, require explication, because it
is certain they ought not to be taken literally, but the eternity of the World
is not proved by any Demonstration, and therefore it is not necessary to offer
violence to the Scripture, and wrest it by expositions, to maintain an opinion
that is but probable, when we may with any reason maintain the contrary
opinion. The second reason is, because believing God to be incorporeal, is not
contrary to the Fundamentals of the Law, but to believe the eternity of the
World, as Aristotle did, destroys the very Foundation of the Law. These are
the Words of Maimonides, from which that manifestly follows which I said
before: for if he were convinced by reason, that the World was eternal, he
would not scruple to wrest the Scripture and make such expositions of it, as
might support that opiuion; and he would be presently certain, that the
Scripture though it every where plainly say the contrary, did declare the World
to be eternal, and consequently, could never be certain of the true Sense of
Scripture, though never so plain; so long as he doubted the Truth of the thing;
or that the Truth were not evident to him, for so long as the Truth of a thing
is not apparent, we are so long ignorant whether the thing be agreeable or
contrary to reason, and consequently, we know not whether the litteral Sense be
true or false; which opinion if it were true, I would absolutely grant, that
some other light, beside what is natural, is necessary for us to interpret
Scripture: for most of the things we meet with in it, cannot be deduced from
Principles known by natural reason (as we have already shown) and therefore the
Truth of them cannot be made manifest, by the strength of natural reason; and
consequently the true Sense and meaning of the Scripture, cannot appear to us
without some other light. Moreover, if this opinon were true, the common People
who are ignorant of, or at least do not mind Demonstrations, would entertain no
Scripture but what they received from the Authority or Testimony of
Philosophers; and consequently ought to suppose, Philosophers cannot Err in the
interpretation of Scripture; which truly would be a new Ecclesiastical
Authority, and a kind of Priesthood which the vulgar would rather scorn then
reverence. And though our method require the knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue,
which the vulgar have no time to Study; nothing can upon that Score be
objected, for the common People of the Jews and Gentiles, to whom the Prophets
and Apostles Preached, understood the Language of the Prophets and Apostles,
and by it understood the meaning of the Prophets, though not the reasons of the
things they Preached, which according to the opinion of Maimonides, they ought
to have known, to make themselves capable of understanding the Prophets
meaning. It does not follow from the rule of our method, that the common People
must necessarily rely upon the Testimony of interpreters, for I have given an
instance of a People, that knew the Language of the Prophets and Apostles: but
Maimonides can never show me a common People, that knew the causes of things,
which he says was the knowledge whereby the mind of the Prophets was to be
understood, and as for the common People of these days, we have already shown,
that all things necessary to Salvation, though the reasons of them be not known,
may be easily understood in any Language, because they are so common and
ordinary, and for this knowledge the vulgar do not depend upon the Testimony of
interpreters; in other things they follow the Fortune of the Learned. But to
return to a stricter examination of Maimonides opinion, first he supposes that
the Prophets did in all things agree one with another, and that they were most
excellent Philosophers, because as he will have it, their conclusions were
drawn from the Truth of things, but this I have proved in my Second Chapter to
be false. Next he supposes, that the Sense of Scripture cannot be made out by
Scripture, for as much as it does not Demonstrate any thing, nor does it prove
the things of which it Treats by definition and Primary Causes, wherefore
according to the opinion of Maimonides, the true Sense of Scripture can neither
appear or be deduced from Scripture: But I have likewise proved this to be
false, in the present Chapter; For I have made it appear, both from reason and
examples, that the Sense of Scripture is found out only by Scripture, and to be
derived thence, even when it speaks of things unknown to us by natural light.
Lastly, Maimonides supposes that it is Lawful for us, according to our
preconceived opinions, to expound and wrest the Words of Scripture, and to deny
or change the litteral Sense thereof be it never so express and plain; which
Liberty is Diametrically opposite, to what I have Demonstrated in this and
other Chapters, and Savors of too much boldness: but should I grant him this
Liberty, what advantage will he get by it? none at all, for those things which
cannot be Demonstrated, make up the greatest part of Scripture, we cannot by
this way make out, nor by this rule expound or interpret them, when on the
contrary by following our method, we may explain many things of this kind, and
as we have already shown, safely dispute of them, but those things which are in
their own nature perceptible, their Sense is easily drawn from the context, and
as Maimonides method is unprofitable, so it takes from the common People all
certainty, which they, and all that follow any other method, can by diligent
reading have of the Sense of Scripture; and therefore we reject it as
dangerous, useless, and absurd, as for the forementioned Tradition of the
Pharisees, we know not that there is any such, and as for the Popes Authority,
I for no other reason deny it, but because it wants clear Proof, for had they
as much Scripture to show for it, as heretofore the Jewish High Priests had for
theirs, I should be as little concerned that some of the Popes of Rome, have
been Heretics and wicked Men, as that the Highpriests of the Jews were
sometimes as bad, and yet by the command of Scripture, had still the Power of
interpreting the Law; as appears by the 17 chap. of Deuteronomy. v. 11, 12. chap. 33.
v. 10. and Mal. chap. 2. v. 7, 8. But because the Popes can show us no such
Testimony, their Authority is very much to be doubted, and that no Man may
deceive himself, and think that according to the example of the Jewish
Highpriests, the Catholic Religion also wants a High Priest, it is to be
observed, that the Laws of Moses were the public Laws of the Country, and
needed a public Authority to maintain them; for if every Man have a Liberty of
interpreting the public Laws as he pleases, no Commonwealth can stand, but
presently dissolves, and public Laws become private: but in Religion the Case
is quite different; for seeing Religion does not so much consist in external
Actions, as in Truth and Singleness of Heart, it is of no Public Power or
Authority; for Truth and Sincerity of mind is not infused by the command of
Laws, or by public Authority, and no Man can be compelled by force or by Laws,
to be made holy, nothing but good brotherly Council, education, and a man's own
free judgment can do that. Seeing then every Man has right to think of
Religion as he pleases, and it cannot be imagined any Man can part with this
right; it is in every Man's Power to judge of Religion, and consequently to
expound and interpret it to himself; for as the chief Power of interpreting
Laws, and judging of Public Matters, resides in the Magistrate upon no other
account, but because they are public; so likewise for the same reason, the
Supreme Authority of explaining and judging of Religion, is in every particular
Person, because it is every private Man's right. The Authority then of the
Jewish High Priest to interpret Laws, is far from proving the Popes Authority
to interpret Religion but rather the contrary that every particular Man has
right to do it; So that it is evident our method of interpreting Scripture i.
the best, for seeing the supreme Power of interpreting it, ought to be that
natural reason which is common to all Men, and not any Supernatural light or
external Authority; this method ought not be so difficult and abstruse, that
none but acute Philosophers can make use of or Compose it, but it must be
fitted and proportioned, to Men's understanding and capacity, as I have proved
mine to be, the difficulties that are in it, have proceeded from Men's sloth and
negligence, not from the nature of the Method.

CHAP. VIII. Shows that the Pentateuk, Books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel,
and the Kings, were not Written by the Persons whose Names they bear, and then
inquires whether the Writers of all these Books were diverse Persons, or but
one, and who?
IN the former Chapter, we have spoken of the Foundations and Principles of the
Knowledge of the Scriptures; and we have shown them to be nothing else, but a
true History of the Scripture, which History, though very necessary, the Ancients
neglected to compose, or at least if they Writ or left any by Tradition, it
perished by the injury of time; and consequently a great part of the
Fundamentals and Principles of Scripture-knowledge was lost; which loss however
had been more tolerable, if Men of succeeding Ages had kept themselves within
their true bounds, and had faithfully delivered to their Successors, those few
Principles which they received or found out, and had not out of their own
Brains forged new, whereby the History of Scripture is not only imperfect, but
remains full of Errors, and the Foundations of Scripture Knowledge, are not
only so few that a perfect History cannot be built on them, but they are also
very faulty and defective. To rectify this, and remove the common prejudices in
Divinity, is my purpose, but I fear I go about it too late, for things are now
almost come to that height, Men in this point will endure no correction, but
obstinately defend whatever they have embraced under the form of Religion;
Reason prevailing with very few, so universally have these prejudices spread
themselves in the Minds of Men. I will nevertheless endeavor and try what I
can do, because the business is not absolutely desperate: that I may in order
show what these prejudices are, I will begin with those which concern the
Penmen of those Books that are accounted sacred, and first concerning the
Writer of the five Books of Moses, commonly called the Pentateuk. Men have
generally believed, that they were Written by Moses himself, and the Pharisees
so stiffly defended this Opinion, that they counted him a Heretic that thought
otherwise: and for this Reason Aben Ezra a Person of an ingenuous disposition,
and no mean Learning, being the first I read of who took notice of this
mistake, durst not plainly declare his thoughts, but only hinted his Opinion in
obscure Words, which I will not scruple to explain, and give you their naked
meaning. Aben Ezra's Words in his comment upon Deutronomy are these. Beyond
Jordan -- Now thou may understand the Mystery of twelve and Moses also wrote
the Law and the Cananite was then in the Land, in the Mount of the Lord shall
it be seen, behold his Bedsted was a Bedsted of Iron then shall thou know the
Truth, by these few Words he shows and plainly declares, that it was not Moses,
but some other Person that lived long after him, who wrote the Pentateuk; and
that Moses wrote some other Book, to make this appear his first Observation is,
that the Preface of Deutronomy which begins thus, These be the words of Moses
which he spoke unto all Israel beyond Jordan, could not be Written by Moses who
never passed Jordan. His second Observation is, that the Book which Moses wrote
was fairly Copyed out in the compass of one Altar, as appears Deuteronomy. chap. 27.
v. 5, 8. Josh. chap. 8. v. 31, 32. which Altar the Rabbis declare, was made
only of twelve Stones; from whence it follows, that the Book which Moses Writ,
was a Volume much less then the Pentateuk; and this I think Aben Ezra meant by
the mystery of twelve, unless perhaps he understood those twelve Curses which
are in the forementioned 27 th Chapter of Deutronomy, which he might believe
were not Written in the Book of the Law, and therefore beside the Writing of
the Law, commanded the Levites to repeat those Curses, that they might by Oath
bind the People to observe the Written Laws, or else perhaps he meant the last
Chapter of Deutronomy, that speaks of Moses's Death; which Chapter consists
only of twelve Verses: but these and other things which are spoken only by
guess, need not a more curious Examination. The third Observation is, that it is
said Deuteronomy. chap. 31. v. 9. Moses wrote this Law and delivered it, etc. which
could not be the words of Moses, but of some other Person declaring what Moses
did, and what he wrote. His fourth Observation is that place Genesis chap. 12. v.
6. where it is said, speaking of Abraham passing through Canaan, that the
Cananite was then in the Land, which words must be Written after Moses's Death,
when the Cananites were driven out, and did not possess the Land; and this must
likewise be the meaning of Aben Ezra's commenting upon this place in these
words; And the Cananite was then in the Land, it seems that Canaan Nephew to
Noah, took that Land from some others who possessed it, if not, then there is a
great mystery in the thing, whosoever understands it, let him be silent (that
is) if Canaan invaded those Countries, then the meaning of those Words the
Cananite was then in the Land, must be that there was a time past when the Land
was inhabited by another Nation, but if Canaan were the first who lived in that
Country (as appears by the 10 th. Chap. of Genesis he was) then the words must
imply, that in the time of the Person, who wrote the Book of Genesis, the
Cananites were not in the Land; so that Moses could not be the Writer of it,
because in his time the Cananites were still in the Possession of that Country;
and this is that Mystery, he would not have made public. His Fifth Observation
is that which is in the 22 th chap. Genesis v. 14 where speaking of Mount Moriah,
the Text says, it is said to this day in the Mountain of the Lord shall it be
seen: now it was not called the Mountain of the Lord, till after it was
dedicated to the Building of the Temple, and this choice of the Mountain was
not made in the time of Moses, who did not speak of any place chosen by God,
but only foretells that God would in time to come, choose a place which should
bear Gods Name. His sixth Observation is what is said, Deuteronomy. chap. 3. speaking
of Og King of Basan, these words are interposed, v. 11 th. for only Og King of
Basan remained of the remnant of the Giants behold his Bedsted was a Bedsted of
Iron is it not in Rabbah of the Children of Ammon? Nine Cubits was the length
thereof, which Parenthesis clearly shows, that the Writer of these Books lived
long after Moses, for this manner of speaking argues, that the Person related
what past long ago, and to obtain credit, showed some Ancient Relics. Without
question this Bedsted, was first found in the time of David, who Conquered this
City, as is declared in the 30 th Verse of the 12 Chap. of the second Book of
Samuel and not only here, but a little after, the Historian, to Moses words
adds these in the 14 th Verse, Jair the Son of Manasseh took all the Country of
Argob unto the coasts of Jeshuri and Maachathi, and called them after his own
name Bashan, Haveth, Jair, unto this day; these Words I say were added by the
Historian, to explain Moses's Words in the 13 th Verse, and the rest of Gilead
and all Bashan being the Kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half Tribe of Manasseh,
all the Region of Argob, with all Bashan which is called the Land of the
Giants, and therefore the Historian was forced to explain what those places
were, which were anciently so called, and also to give a reason why in his time
they were called by the name of Iair, who was of the Tribe of Judah and not of
Manasseh, as appears by the 2 d Chap. of the 1 st Book of the Chron. v. 21, 22.
We have now explained Aben Ezra's meaning, and also those places in the
Pentateuk quoted by him, to make good his Opinion; but indeed he has not taken
notice of all, nor of the principal places, for there are more of greater
moment which I will now mention: First, the Writer of these Books does not only
speak of Moses in the third Person, but also testifies many things of him,
namely God spoke with Moses, God spoke with him face to face, Moses was the
meekest of all Men, Numb. chap. 12. v. 3. Now the Man Moses was very Meek above
all Men upon the Face of the Earth, Moses was wroth with the Officers of the
Host, Numb. chap. 31. v. 14. Moses the Man of God, Deuteronomy. chap. 33. v. 1. Moses
the Servant of the Lord dyed, Deuteronomy. chap. 34. v. 5. And there arose not a
Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses. v. 10. but in Deutronomy where the Law
which Moses wrote and declared to the People is set down, Moses speaks and
tells them what he did in the first Person, Deuteronomy. chap. 2. v. 1, 17. The Lord
spoke unto me and I prayed unto the Lord, but then again after the Historian
had repeated Moses's words, he goes on and again speaks in the third Person,
declaring how Moses delivered to the People in Writing that Law which he had
published. Lastly, the Historian relates, how Moses warned and admonished the
People and ended his Life; all which, namely the manner of speaking, the
Testimony and Character given of Moses, with the context of the whole History,
fully satisfy that the Books were not Written by Moses, but by some other
Person. Secondly, it is to be observed, that this History does not only relate,
how Moses dyed, was buried, and that the Jews Mourned thirty Days for him; but
making likewise a Comparison between him and all the other Prophets that lived
after him, says, he excelled them all, Deuteronomy. chap. 24. v. 10. and there arose
not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses whom the Lord knew face to face.
Which as it is a Testimony that Moses could not give of himself, so could no
other Man who immediately followed him, but it must necessarily be one, who
lived many Ages after him; because he speaks of the time past, saying there
arose not a Prophet since, and of his Burial he says, no Man knows of his
Sepulcher unto this day. Thirdly, it is to be Noted, that the History calls
some places by Names, which they had not in Moses's time, but by others given
them long after, Genesis chap. 14. v. 14. it is said Abraham pursued his Enemies
unto Dan, which name was never given to that City till long after the Death of
Joshua, as appears by Judge. chap. 18. v. 29. and they called the Name of the
City Dan, after the Name of Dan their Father who was Born unto Israel, how be
it the Name of the City was Laish at the first. Fifthly,, it is to be observed,
that the Histories are continued for a longer time then Moses lived; for Exodus
chap. 16. v. 35. it is said the Children of Israel did eat Manna forty Years
until they came to the Borders of the Land of Canaan, namely till the time
mentioned, Josh. chap. 5. v. 12. In the Book of Genesis 36. v. 31. These are the
Kings that Reigned in the Land of Edom before there reigned any King over the
Children of Israel: the Historian without doubt there declares, what Kings the
Edomites had before David Conquered them, and set Governors over them; as
appears in the 2 d Book of Sam. chap. 6. v. 11, 14. by all this it is as clear
as day, that the Pentateuk was not Written by Moses, but by some other who
lived many Ages after him. But let us consider the Books which Moses wrote, and
are mentioned in the Pentateuk: First, it appears, Exodus chap. 17. v. 14. God
commanded Moses to write the War against Amalek, but in what Book it does not
appear, Numb. chap. 21. v. 10. there is a Book mentioned called the Wars of the
Lord, wherein without question Moses gave a full Relation of the War against
Amalek, and also of all those Encampings or pitching their Tents, which the
Author of the Pentateuk says, Numb. chap. 33. v. 2. were described by Moses;
it likewise appears, Exodus 24. v. 4, 7. that Moses wrote another Book, called
the Book of the Covenant, which he read to the People when they first made a
Covenant with the Lord, but this Book or Epistle contained very few things, the
Laws only or Commands of God recited in Exodus from the 22 Verse of the 20.
chap. to chap. 24. which no body will deny, who without partiality and with any
sound Judgment reads that Chapter; it is there declared, that as soon as Moses
understood the Peoples readiness to enter into a Covenant with the Lord, he
wrote the Oracles and Laws of God in a Book, and early in the Morning, certain
Ceremonies being performed, he read to all the Congregation the Condition of
the Covenant, which being read and understood by all the People, they with a
general Consent obliged themselves to all that God Commanded; so that
considering the shortness of the time in which it was Written, and the manner
of making the Covenant, the Book could contain no more then the few things I
have mentioned. Lastly, it appears, that Moses in the fortieth Year after their
going out of Egypt, explained all those Laws which he had prescribed, as may be
seen, Deuteronomy. chap. 1. v. 5. and again obliged the People to the observance of
them, Deuteronomy. chap. 29. v. 14. and then wrote a Book which contained those Laws
so explained, and the New Covenant, Chap. 31. v. 9. which was called the Book
of the Law of God, to which Joshua made an Addition, by registring that
agreement, whereby the People in his time, obliged themselves and entered a
third time into Covenant with the Lord, Josh. chap. 24. v. 25, 26. but because
we have no Book extant either of the Covenant of Moses or Joshua, it must
necessarily be granted, that the Book perished, unless we will be as mad as the
Chaldee Paraphrast Ionatan, and wrest the Scripture as we please; for he being
pressed with this difficulty, chose rather to corrupt the Scripture then confess
his Ignorance; for those words in the 26. v. of the 24. chap. of Josh. Joshua
wrote these words in the Book of the the Law of God, etc. he rendered thus in
his Chaldee Translation. And Joshua wrote these words, and kept them with the
Book of the Law of God, there is no meddling with Men, who will see nothing but
what they list, is not this denying what is Scripture, and forging new at our
pleasure! We then conclude, that this Book of the Law of God, was not the
Pentateuk, but quite another; which the Author of the Pentateuk has orderly
interwoven with his work; as appears by what has been and shall be further
said: where the forecited place in Deutronomy says, that Moses wrote a Book of
the Law, the Historian adds, that he delivered it to the Priests, and commanded
them at certain set times to read it before all the People: which implies that
the Book must be much less then the Pentateuk, seeing at one meeting it might
be read all over and understood by the People: nor can we here forbear to
observe, that of all the Books Written by Moses, this only of the second
Covenant and his Song (which he afterward Writ for all the People to Learn) he
commanded to be Religiously kept; because the first Covenant obliged only those
that were present, and the second not only all present but their posterity
also, Deuteronomy. chap. 29. v. 14, 15. He therefore commanded this Book of the second
Covenant, to be carefully and Religiously preserved to future Ages, and also
his Song; because future Ages were chiefly concerned in it. Seeing then it is
not evident, that Moses ever writ any Books beside the Book of the Law and his
Song, which he commanded to be kept, and that many things in the Pentateuk
could not be Written by him; I conclude that no Man can upon any good ground,
but must altogether against reason, make Moses the Author of the Pentateuk but
some body may perhaps here ask, whether Moses besides these Books did not write
the Laws when they were first revealed to him (that is) whether in the space of
forty Years, he did not set down in Writing any of those Laws which he
prescribed, beside those few contained in the Book of the first Covenant: to
this I answer, that though I should grant it to be very agreeable to reason, that
Moses should commit to Writing, those Laws which he Communicated to the People,
at the same time and place, when and where they were published; yet I deny that
it is lawful upon this Ground to affirm he did; for I have already shown, we
ought in like Cases to determine nothing, but what is manifestly proved, either
by Scripture it self, or by consequences drawn from the Principles of it, and
not because a thing seems Consonant to Reason; for Reason it self does not
oblige us to be possitive: It may be the Senate of Seventy Elders communicated
to the People Moses's Edicts in writing, which were afterward collected, by
him that writ the Pentateuk, and were orderly inserted into the History of
Moses's Life; and so much for the five Books of Moses. It is now time to examine
the rest, the Book of Ioshuah for like Reasons could not be written by Joshua,
it must be some other Person, that gives so good a Character of him in several
places of that Book; Josh. Chap. 6. v. 27. The Lord was with Joshua, and his
Fame was noised throughout all the Country, that he omitted nothing, but did
all that Moses commanded, Chap. 8. v. 35. Chap. 11. v. 15. That he waxed Old,
called all the People together, and at last dyed. Moreover some things are
related which happened after his Death; namely, that the People continued to
worship God as long as the Old men lived, who knew Joshua. In the 16. Chap. v.
10. It is said, that Ephraim and Manasseh did not drive out the Cananites, that
dwelt in Gezur, but the Cananites dwell among the Ephramites to this day, and
serve under Tribute. Which is the same Expression we find in the first chap. of
Judges. v. 21. But the Iebuzites dwell with the Children of Benjamin in
Jerusalem unto this day. Which manner of speaking implies, the Writer relates
what was long ago past, as appears Josh. Chap. 15. Verse the last, the
Iebuzites dwell with the Children of Judah unto this day. The same Expression
is likewise used in the History of Kaleb, beginning at the 13 th. Verse of the
said Chapter. The building of an Altar beyond Jordan, by the two Tribes and a
half mentioned in the 22. Josh. v. 10. In all Probability happened after
Ioshuah's Death; because in all that story, there is not so much as one word
said of him; but the People only deliberated to make War, sent Ambassadors,
received and approved the Answer which was returned. Lastly, it appears by the
14 th. Verse of the 10 th. Chap. That the Book of Joshua was written many Ages
after his Death, for the Text says, and there was no day like that before or
after it, that the Lord hearkened to the Voice of a Man: If then Joshua writ
any Book, it must be that of Iasher, mentioned in the same story v. the 13 th.
As for the Book of Judges, I believe no Man in his right Wits will think it
written by the Judges themselves, for the end of the History in the 2 d. Chap.
clearly shows, it was all written by one single Person, who tells us in many
places, that in those days there was no King in Israel; which is an argument it
was written in a Time when the People had Kings. Concerning the Books of Samuel
there needs no deliberation, seeing the History is carried on so far beyond his
death; but however let this be observed, that this Book must be written many
Ages after him, for the Hestorian in the 1 st. Book of Sam. Chap. 9. v. 9.
says, in a parenthesis. Before time in Israel, when a Man went to inquire of
God, thus he spoke, come let us go to the Seer, for he that is now called a
Prophet, was before time called a Seer. The two Books of the Kings, as appears
by the Books themselves, were collected out of what was written of the Reign of
Solomon, see the 1 st. Book of Kings chap. 11. v. 5. And out of the Chronicles
both of the Kings of Judah and Israel, chap. 14. v. 19, 29. The rest of the
Acts of Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he reigned; behold they are written in
the Books of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah. We therefore conclude, that
all the Books which we have named, were written long after the Matters of Fact
happened which they relate: If we consider the Connection and Subject of these
Books, we shall quickly find, that they were all written by one and the same
Historian, who designed to write the Antiquities of the Jews, from their first
Original to the first destruction of Jerusalem; for the Books are by connection
so linked together, that they seem to be but the single Narration of one
Historian; for as soon as he has done with the Life of Moses, he begins the
next Book with these words. Now after the Death of Moses the Servant of the
Lord, it came to pass that the Lord spoke unto Ioshuah. And ending the story of
Ioshuah with his Death, he does with the very same Transition and Conjunction,
begin the Book of Judges in these words. Now after the Death of Ioshuah, it
came to pass that the Children of Israel asked the Lord: And to this Book of
Judges as an Appendix, he joyneth the Book of Ruth in these words. Now it came
to pass in the days when the Judges ruled, that there was a Famine in the Land.
To which Book of Ruth, he does in the same manner join the first Book of
Samuel: that ended, with his wonted Transition, he goes on to the Second Book,
and to this (the History of David not being fully endded) he joins the first
Book of Kings: then going on with David's History, adds with his usual
Connection the Second Book. The context and Order of the Histories, likewise
declare the Historian to be but one Person, who propounded to himself one
certain end; for he begins with the Original of the Jewish Nation, then in
order shows upon what occasion and at what time Moses prescribed Laws, and
Prophesyed many things to them; afterward he relates how they invaded the Land
of Promise, according to Moses's predictions, Deuteronomy. Chap. 7. And when they had
possessed it, how they would forsake God's Laws, Deuteronomy. Chap. 31. v. 16. And what
evils should thereupon follow, verse. 17. Next he declares how they would choose
Kings, Deuteronomy. Chap. 17. v. 14. Whose Affairs should succeed well or ill,
according to the care they took in observing the Laws, Deuteronomy. Chap. 28. v. 36,
68. And Lastly concludes with the ruin of their Government as Moses foretold:
Of things which served little to the Establishment of the Law, he said nothing,
or else refers the Reader to other Authors; so that all these Books conspire in
this one thing, namely, the publishing the Prophesies and Edicts of Moses, and
making them good by what after happened. The simplicity and plainness of the
Subject of all the Books, the connection of them, and their being written many
Ages after the things done, is argument enough to persuade any Man, that they
were all written by one Historian; but who he was, I cannot evidently prove, I
have some Reasons, and those of some weight, to think it was Esdras, seeing the
Historian (whom we now know to be one Person) carries on the History as far as
Iehoiachim's deliverance out of Prison; and moreover adds, that he sat at the
King's Table all his Life, which must be either the Table of King Iehoiachim,
or of the Son of Nebuchadnezzar (for the Sense is very dubious.) It follows
that it could not be any one before Esdras, the Scripture says of Esdras,
without mentioning any other Person, Ezra. Chap. 7. v. 10. That he had prepared
his Heart to seek the Law of the Lord, to do it; and Verse 6 th. That he was a
ready Scribe in the Law of Moses. So that I cannot conjecture any body but
Esdras should write those Books: in the Testimony given of him, we find that he
did not only seek the Law of God, but that he likewise explained it, Nehem.
Chap. 8. v. 8. Where it is said, that they read in the Book of the Law of God
distinctly, and gave the Sense thereof, and caused them to understand the
Reading. Now because in the Book of Deutronomy, not only the Book of the Law of
Moses (at least a great part of it) is contained, but also many things are
inserted for the better explication thereof; I conjecture, The Book of
Deutronomy to be that Book of the Law of God, written, set forth, and expounded
by Esdras, which they then read, and that many things are put in by Way of
Parenthesis, more clearly to explain it. We gave you several instances, when I
unfolded Aben-Ezras meaning, there are more of the like kind as appears, Deuteronomy.
Chap. 2. v. 12. The Horites also dwelt in Seir before time, but the Children of
Esau succeeded them, when they had destroyed them from before them, and dwelt
in their stead, as Israel did unto the Land of his Possession, which the Lord
gave unto them. This explains the 3 d. and 4 th. Verses of the same Chapter
namely, that Mount Seir, which was the Inheritance of the Sons of Esau, was not
found by them uninhabited; but that they invaded the Horites, who first dwelt
there; and having subdued, destroyed them, as the Children of Israel did the
Cananites after the Death of Moses: likewise in the 10 th. Chapter it is
evident, that the 6, 7, 8, and 9. verses are interposed by Way of Parenthesis
with the Words of Moses; for the 8 th. Verse which begins in these words, at
that time the Lord separated the Tribe of Levi -- must necessarily have
reference to the 5 th. Verse, which speaks of Moses coming down from the Mount,
and putting the Tables into the Ark; and not to the death of Aron (mentioned in
the 6 th. Verse.) Of which Esdras spoke here for no other Reason, but because
Moses in the story of the Golden Calf, which the People worshipped, said, in the
9 th. Chap. v. 20. That he prayed for Aron. The Historian goes on and declares,
that God at that time, of which Moses speaks, chose for himself the Tribe of
Levi, that he might show the Cause of their Election, and also why the Levites
had no Part or Inheritance with their Brethren: this done in the words of
Moses, he follows the thread of the History. If we consider the Preface of the
Book, and all the Places which speak of Moses in the Third Person, and many
other things, which cannot now be known, which he added or expressed in other
words, that they might be the better understood by those that lived in his
time; without doubt had we the very Book of the Law which Moses wrote, we
should find that all the Commandments very much differ not only in words, but
in Order, Matter and Sense. Compare the Decalogue of this Book with that in
Exodus, where it is expressly set down, we shall find this to vary from that;
for the Fourth Commandment in Deutronomy is not only commanded in another Form;
but is enlarged, and the Reason of it likewise differs much from that in
Exodus; so that this as in other Places was done by Esdras, because he
explained the Law of God to those that lived in his days; and therefore it is
likely this was the Book of the Law of God, which he set forth and expounded,
and I likewise believe it, the first of all those Books he wrote, because it
contains the Laws of his Country, which the People extremely wanted, and also
because this Book is with no Antecedent Connection joined to another, but
without any kind of reference begins thus. These be the Words of Moses. And
after he finished this Book, and taught the People the Laws, I believe he
applied himself to compose the whole History of the Jewish Nation, from the
Creation of the World to the first Destruction of the City Jerusalem; inserting
this Book of Deutronomy in its proper Place, and perhaps to the first five
Books gave the Name of Moses, because his Life is the Principal Subject of
them; for the same reason, he called the Sixth Book by the Name of Ioshuah, the
Seventh Judges, the Eighth Ruth, the Ninth and perhaps the Tenth Samuel, the
Eleventh and Twelfth Kings, but whether Esdras perfected them, as he desired
with his own Hand, inquire in the next Chapter?

CHAP. IX. Whether Esdras perfected the Books, which we suppose he wrote? and
whether the Marginal Notes, which are found in the Hebrew Copies be diverse
readings?
HOW much the inquiry made in the former Chapter, concerning the Penman of the
Books therein mentioned, may conduce to the perfect understanding of them; will
be easily guessed by those Places only, which we have quoted to make good our
Opinion in this Point; which places would otherwise have seemed very obscure:
but beside the Writer, there are other things observable in the Books
themselves, which Common Superstition will not suffer the vulgar to discern.
The chiefest of them is, that Esdras (whom I will suppose to be the Writer of
the foresaid Books, till some body show me another more likely to pen them) did
not with his own Hand perfect the Relations which the Books contain; but did
only collect the Histories out of several writers, and sometimes only copying
them out, left them to Posterity neither examined nor put into any Order; but
what should hinder him from completely finishing his Work (unless it were
untimely death) I cannot conjecture: we have indeed no Ancient entire Jewish
Histories; but out of a few fragments left us it is evident, that Esdras as I
have already said, gathered his stories from several Writers, and left them
very confused and imperfect. The History of Ezekiah, as it is found written
from the Relation of Isaiah the Prophet, in the Second Book of Kings chap. 18.
v. 17. is recorded in the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah; and the story in
the Chronicles, see Book the 2 d. Chap. 32. v. 32. We find related almost in
the same words (very few excepted) as it is in the forenamed Chapter of the
Book of Kings: from whence nothing else can be concluded, but that there were
diverse readings of Isaiah's Relation, unless some will also here dream of
Mysteries: Moreover, the last Chapter of this Book of the Kings, is contained
in the last Chapter of the Prophet Jeremy, and we find likewise the 7 th. Chap.
of the Second Book of Samuel, in the 17 th. Chap. of the first Book of
Chronicles; but the words in diverse places so much changed, that it may be
easily known, the two Chapters were taken out of two different Copies, of the
History written by the Prophet Nathan. Lastly, The Genealogy of the Kings of
Edom, which we have, Genesis Chap. 36. from v. 31 th. Is set down in the same
words, in the 1 st. Chap. of the 1 st. Book of Chron. Beginning at the 43 th.
Verse: Now though it be evident, that the Author of the Book of Chronicles, took
the things which he related out of other Historians; yet he had them not out of
the Twelve Books, which we believe were written by Esdras; and without doubt
had we the Original Histories it would so appear: but because we have them not,
let us examine the Histories as they now are, observing their Order and
Connection, their various Repetitions, and their disagreement in Calculation of
Time, that we may judge of other things. Consider first, the History of Judah
and Thamar, Genesis Chap. 38. The Historian begins his Narration in these words.
And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his Brethren: Which
time, must necessarily have reference to some other time, of which he had
immediately spoken before; but to that time spoken of in the preceding Chapter
of Genesis, it could have no Relation; for from the time that Joseph was
carried into Egypt, until Jacob the Patriarch went down thither with all his
Family, there passed but twenty two Years; for Joseph, when he was Sold by his
Brethren, was but Seventeen Years Old, and when he was sent for out of Prison
by Pharaoh but Thirty, to which, if the Seven Years of Plenty, and Two of Famine
be added, they make up in all no more than Two and Twenty; in which space of
time, no Man can conceive so many things should happen; namely, that Judah
should successively have three Sons, of which the Eldest should at a fit Age
marry Thamar, and he dying the Second Brother should take her to Wife, who also
dyed, and that sometime after this happened, Judah himself should ignorantly
lie with his own Daughter in-Law Thamar, and have two Children by her at one
Birth; whereof one likewise, should within the aforesaid time of two and twenty
Years become a Father. Seeing then all these things cannot be referred to the
time spoken of in Genesis, but must necessarily relate to some other time
spoken of in some other Book, Esdras must therefore only Copy out this Story,
and unexamin'd add it to others: but not only this Chapter, but likewise the
whole Story of Joseph and Jacob, must necessarily be taken out of several
Historians, so little congruity is there in it, for the 48 th Chap. of Genesis
tells us that when Joseph brought his Father Jacob to Pharaoh, Jacob was an
hundred and thirty Years Old, from which deduct twenty two which he passed in
Mourning for the loss of Joseph, and seventeen which was Ioseph's Age when he
was Sold, with seven which he served for Rachel; it will appear that he was
fourscour and four Years Old when he Married Leah, and that on the other side,
Dinah was scarce seven Years Old when she was Ravished by Sechem; and Simeon and
Levi not fully eleven and twelve Years of Age, when they Assaulted the City of
Sechem and put all the People of it to the Sword. There is no need of
particularizing all things of this kind in the Pentateuk, if this only be
considered, that in the five Books all the Precepts and Historical Relations
are promiscuously set down, without any order, without any regard had to time,
and that one and the same History is often, and sometimes diversely repeated; it
must be granted that all these things were confusedly gathered and laid
together, that they might afterward be examined and put into order, and not
only those things which we find in the first five Books, but the rest of the
Histories contained in the other seven, were also Collected in the same manner.
Who does not plainly see that in the 2 d Chapter of Judges from the sixth
Verse, a new Historian brought in, who had Written the Acts of Joshua and his
very Words used? For after our Historian in the last Chapter of Joshua, had
spoken of his Death and Burial, and promised in the beginning of the Book of
Judges, to declare what happened after Joshua's Death; if he intended regularly
to prosecute his own History, why does he again in the 2 d Chapter of Judges
tell us what Joshua did, and speak again of his Death and Burial as he had
before, the 17 and 18 chap. of the 1 st Book of Sam. are in all probability
taken out of another Historian, who made the cause of David's frequenting
Readiness Court, to be quite different from that spoken of in the 16. chap. of the
same Book, for he did not understand that David by the Advice of Readiness
Servants, was called to Court, as is declared in the said 16 th chap. but that
his Father sending him to visit his Brethren in Readiness Camp, David by his
Victory over Goliath became known to Saul, and afterward lived in his Court. I
suspect the same thing of the 26 th chap. of the 1 st Book of Sam. and that the
History of that Chapter and what is related in the 24 th chap. are one and the
same; but taken out of several Writers: but of this enough, I come now to
examine the Computation of time. It is said in the 6 th chap. of the 1 st Book
of Kings, that Solomon four hundred and fourscore Years after the Children of
Israel came out of the Land of Egypt, and in the fourth Year of his own Reign,
began to Build the House of the Lord, but from the Histories themselves we can
make it appear it was a much longer time till the Temple was Built.

Years For first Moses governed the People in the desert. 40 Joshua who lived a
hundred and twenty by the Opinion of Josephus and others governed not above. 26
Kusan Risgataim kept the People in Bondage. 08 Othonyel the Son of Kenaz
Judged. 40 Eglon the King of Moab kept the People in Bondage. 18 Ehud and
Samger Judged. 80 Jachin King of Canaan kept the People under. 20 The People
afterward had rest. 40 Were again in Subjection to Midian. 07 Were again at
Liberty under Gideon. 40 Were under the Power of Abimelech. 03 Tola the Son of
Puah Judged. 23 Jair Judged. 22 The People were again in Bondage to the
Philistines and Ammonites. 18 Iephtah Judged. 06 Absan the Bethlemite Judged.
07 Elon the Zebulonite. 10 Abdon the Pirathonite. 08 The People again in
Bondage to the Philistines. 40 Samson Judged. 20 Ely Judged. 40 The People in
Bondage again to the Philistines till delivered by Samuel. 20 David Reigned. 40
Solomon before he began to Build Reigned. 04
All these Years added together make up the Number of 580.

To which number are to be added, the Years of that Age wherein the
Commonwealth of the Jews flourished after the Death of Joshua, until it was
subdued by Kusan Risgataim; which I believe were many; for I cannot be
persuaded, that all the People who had seen the wonders of Joshua's time,
should presently after his Death perish altogether; neither that they who
succeeded them, should at once bid farewell to all their Laws, and from a great
deal of Virtue, fall in an instant into the depth of Wickedness and Folly:
neither that Kusan Risgataim Conquered them at a blow; but seeing all these
things require almost an Age to bring them to pass, it is not to be doubted but
the Scripture in the 2 d. 7 th. 9 th. and 10 th Chapters of the Book of Judges,
does comprize the Histories of many Years which it has passed over in silence.
We are moreover to add the Years which Samuel Judged, whose number we find not
in Scripture, and the Years also of Readiness Reign, which are left out in the
former Computation, because by his History it is not evident how many he
Reigned, indeed it is said in the 1 st Verse of the 13 th Chap. of the 1 st
Book of Sam. that Saul Reigned two Years, but that Text is maimed, and we may
from the History it self conclude his Reign was longer; that the Text is
defective, no Man who has but the least Knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue can
doubt, for it begins thus in the Latin Translation. Annum natus erat Saul cum
regnavit and duos annos regnavit supra Israelem. Which in our English Bible is
thus rendered. Saul Reigned one Year, and when he had Reigned two Years, etc.
but who sees not, that the number of Years of Readiness Age when he began to Reign
was omitted, and that the time of his Reign was more then two Years, any Man
may gather from the History it self; for in the 27 th Chap. of the same Book,
Verse the 7 th. it is said that the time David dwelt in the Country of the
Philistines, was a full Year and four Months; so that by this Calculation all
things else which passed in Saul's Reign, must happen in the space of eight
Months, which no Man can believe: Josephus in the end of his 6 th Book of
Antiquities, has thus corrected the Text. Saul while Samuel lived Reigned
eighteen Years, and after Samuels Death two, but the Story in the 13 th chap.
does in no wise agree with what went before, for toward the end of the 7 th
chap. v. 13. we are told, that the Philistines were so subdued by the
Israelites, that they came no more into the Coasts of Israel and the Hand of
the Lord was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel; and yet in the
foresaid 13 th Chapter it is said, that in Samuels Life time, the Philistines
invaded the Israelites and reduced them to so great Misery and Poverty, that
they wanted not only Arms to defend themselves, but also Smiths to make so much
as a Sword or a Spear, that Man must take pains enough, who made it his
business so to reconcile all the Histories of the first Book of Samuel, that
they should not appear to be Written and put in order by one Historian: but I
return to what I proposed, the Years of Saul's Reign ought to be added to the
foregoing Computation; now how many were the Years of the Israelites Anarchy,
the Scripture does not mention; my meaning is, that the space of time is not
certain, wherein those things happened, which are related from the 17 th
Chapter of Judges to the end of that Book; so that no exact calculation can be
made from the Histories themselves; neither do they agree in any, but differ
very much; so that it must be granted they were collected from diverse Writers,
and were never examined or put into any order. There is no less disagreement in
computation of time, between the Book of Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, and
the Book of Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, for in the 2 d Book of Kings
chap. 1 st v. 17. it is said, Jehoram the Son of Ahab King of Israel, began to
Reign in the Second Year of the Reign of Jehoram the Son of Iehosaphat King of
Judah, but in the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, see the 2 d Book of Kings
chap. 8. v. 16. it is said that Jehoram the Son of Iehosaphat King of Judah,
began to Reign in the fifth Year of Jehoram the Son of Ahab King of Israel: he
that will compare the Histories of the Books of Chronicles, with those in the
Book of Kings, shall find many of the like differences, which I will not here
particularly mention, nor trouble you with the shifts some Authors have used to
reconcile them; the Rabbines perfectly dote, and some Commentators that I have
read, imposing upon us their own dreams and inventions, plainly corrupt the
very Language it self (for example) in the 2 d Book of the Chronicles c. 22. v.
2. it is said Ahaziah wa^ Forty and two Years Old when he began to Reign. Some
would have these Years to commence not from Ahaziah's Nativity, but from the
Reign of Omri, if they can prove this to be the meaning of the Author of the
Book of Chronicles, I may in plain Terms say of him, that he knew not how to
speak Sense. Commentators are full of the like conceits, wherein were there any
Truth, a Man might pofitively aver, that the Ancient Hebrews did not understand
their own Language, but were ignorant of all order in History, and that there
is no rule or any reason to be observed in expounding Scripture; but every Man
may fancy and forge what he pleases. If any think I speak too generally and
without ground, I entreat that Man to show me any such certain order in these
Histories, as Chronologers may without any gross mistakes follow, and that
while he is endeavoring to explain and reconcile the Histories, he will so
strictly observe the Pharses and Manners of speaking, the disposing and
contexture of the Narrations, that another according to his explications, may
in Writing imitate them, which if he can do, I will throw away my Pen and take
him for an Oracle. I have been endeavoring but could never do any thing like
it, I have Written nothing which I did not often and long meditate, and though
from my Childhood, I have been Seasoned with the common and general opinions
concerning Scripture, yet I could not possibly avoid confessing the things I
have mentioned, but I will no longer detain the Reader concerning this
particular, nor will I further provoke him to undertake, that which I think is
not feasible; I only made the proposal the better to explain my own meaning,
and I now proceed to consider those things which concern the Fate or Fortune of
the Books; for we are to observe, that they have not been so carefully kept by
posterity, as that no faults have crept into them: the Ancient Scribes have
taken notice of many dubious readings, and many maimed Texts, and yet not of
all; but whether the faults which have crept into those Books, be of so great
importance as to give the Reader much trouble, I will not dispute; I believe
they are not considerable to those that Read the Scripture with any Freedom of
judgment, and I can positively affirm, that I never observed any Error or
variety of Readings concerning mere precepts or instructions, which could
render them doubtful or obscure; but many will not allow of any faults at all
in any thing throughout the whole Scripture, but peremptorily maintain, that
God by a singular and special Providence, has kept the Bible free from all
corruptions or adulteration, and that the various Readings of it, comprehend
profound mysteries, and will have great Secrets lie hid, even in Asterisms,
Spaces, Points and Accents: but whether this opinion proceed from folly, and
the dotage of Devotion, or from their arrogance and malice, allowing none but
themselves to know Gods Secrets I cannot tell; of this I am sure, I never read
any thing which came from such Men, that seemed mysterious, but rather savor'd
of Schoool-boy conceits. I have met with some trifling Cabbalists, whose Freaks
and Folly a Man cannot choose but admire. That faults have crept into the
Scripture, no ingenuous Person can deny, who reads that Text I have already
mentioned concerning Saul, in the 13 th chap. v. 1 st. of the 1 st Book of
Samuel, and also that in the 2 d verse of the 6 th chap. of the 2 d Book of
Sam. where it is said that David arose and went with all the People that were
with him from Judah, to bring from thence the Ark of God. Who does not see that
the name of the place to which they went to fetch the Ark is lest our, viz.
Kiriathjearim nor can any Man deny but that the Text in the 37 th verse of the
13 th chap. of the 2 d Book of Sam. is defective. But Absolon fled and went to
Talmai the Son of Ammihud and mourned for his Son every day. It should have
been, and David mourned for his Son every day, and therefore in our English
Translation the Word David is put in, but is not in the Latin. There are other
such faults which do not at present occur to my memory. That the marginal Notes
found every where in the Hebrew Copies were dubious readings, no Man will
doubt, who considers that many of them proceeded from the great likness, which
some of the Hebrew Letters have one to another, namely, from the similitude
which is between the Letter Kaf and Bet, the Letter Iod and Van, the Letter
Dalet and Res (for example) in the 2 d Book of Sam. chap. 5. v. 24. it is said
in the Latin Translation, in co tempore quo audies, the margent has it Cum
audies, and Judges chap. 21. v. 22. the Latin Text is, and quando earum patres
vel fratres in multitudine (hoc est saepe) ad nos venerint, into the margent is
put ad litigandum: many different readings likewise come from the use of those
Letters, whose sound or pronunciation is in reading scarcely perceived, and one
is sometimes taken for another (for example) Levit. chap. 25. v. 29. it is
Written in the Text, that if a House were sold which was in a City that had a
Wall, the margent says that had not a Wall. But though these things are evident
yet we will make answer to some arguments of the Pharisees, who endeavor to
persuade the World, that marginal Notes were by those that Copied out the Books
of Scripture, purposely placed there to signify some great mystery: they ground
their first argument which I think very slight, upon the common use of reading
the Scripture, for say they, if these marginal Notes were used purposely to
show various readings, and such as could not be decided; why then has custom
prevailed, still to retain the marginal Sense as always the best, and that it
was fit the most genuine and approved Sense, should be expressed in the Text
rather then in the margent. Their Second Argument which carries some
countenance is this, errors and mistakes in Books say they, are not purposely
put in, but happen by chance, now how comes it to pass that in all the first
five Books, the Hebrew Word (...) Nagnad which signifies in Latin Puella and in
English a Girl or Young Maid, should contrary to the Rules of Grammar be
Written in all places but one as a defective Word, without the Letter He, and
yet in the margent be Written always right, did this happen by mistake, and was
the Writer always so much in haste, that when he came to this word he
constantly left out that Letter? this defect might without any scruple have
been easily mended and supplied? if then these various Readings did not happen
by chance, and yet those evident Errors were left uncorrected, the first
Writers must designedly do it, thereby to signify somewhat. But these Arguments
are easily answered, that which is urged concerning Use and Custom, is not much
to be minded. I know not how far Superstition might prevail, but sometimes both
Readings or Senses might seem equally good and tolerable, and therefore that
neither might be neglected or undervalued, they would have one written, and the
other read; they were afraid in a Matter of such consequence, to pass any
positive Determination, least they might through uncertainty mistake, and take
the wrong Reading for the true; and therefore resolved not to prefer one before
the other, which they must have done, if they had commanded that one only
should be written and read: the Reason why the Marginal Notes are not written
in the Text, is because some things, though they be rightly written, yet they
would have them read as they were noted in the Margent; and therefore they
appointed the Bible to be generally read according to the Marginal Notes. Old
Obsolete words out of use, which the good Manners of the present time would not
permit to be publicly read, caused the Scribes to put things into the Margent,
which they would have publicly read, Marginal Notes not being always dubious
Readings, but contained sometimes Words and Expressions not in Use: the Ancient
Scribes being Men free from evil Meaning, expressed things in plain downright
words without Courtly Epithites; but after Naughtiness and Luxury began to
Reign, those words which the Ancients thought had no immodesty in them, began
to be accounted Obscene; yet there was no necessity upon this account to change
the Text and Scripture it self, but for Decency's sake, they ordained that
those words, which signified Coition and the Excrements, should be publicly
read to the People with greater Modesty, as they were noted in the Margent.
Lastly, whatever the reason be, why they read and interpreted the Text
according to the Marginal Notes, yet it is not because those Marginal readings
are always the truest interpretation; for the Rabbines do not only differ in
the Talmud from the Masorites, and have other Readings which they approve; but
some Notes are found in the Margent, which the common Use of the Language will
not allow (for example) in the 2 d. Book of Sam. Chap. 14. v. 22. The Text
says, in that the King has fulfilled the request of his Servant. Which the
Latin Translation renders, quia effecit Rex secundum Sententiam servi sui,
which construction is very regular, and agrees with that in the 16 th Verse of
the same Chapter; but the reading in the Margent, which is servi tui of thy
servant, does not agree with the Person of the Verb. So also in the last Verse
of the 16 th Chapter of that Book, the written Text in the Latin Translation
is, ut cum consultat (id est consultatur) verbum Dei. But in the Margent is
added the Pronoun quis, for the Nomnative case to the Verb, which was not
learnedly done; for the common Custom of that Language was to use Verbs
Impersonals, for the Third Person singular of Verbs Active, as is well known to
Grammarians. In like manner we meet with many Marginal Notes, which ought to be
preferred before the written reading of the Text. Now for the Pharisees Second
Argument, it is easily answered by what has been said, namely, that the
Scribes, beside dubious Readings, noted obsolete words; for without doubt as in
other Languages, so in the Hebrew, later times antiquated and made useless many
words, which were found in the Bible by later Writers, who as we have said,
noted them in the Margent, that they might be read before the People in the
Sense and Signification that was then in use: for this Reason the word Naghar
is every where found noted in the Margent, because anciently it was of the
common Gender, and signified the same that did the word Iuvenis amongst the
Latins, so also the Metropolis of the Jews was wont to be called Jerusalem, and
not Jerusalaim. I think the same of the Pronoun ipse and ipsa, he and she,
because the later Writers have changed Vau into Iod (which change in the Hebrew
Tongue is frequent) when they would signify the Feminine Gender; but the
ancients never used to distinguish the Feminine from the Masculine Gender of
this Pronoun but only by the Vowels. Moreover, the Anomaly or Irregularity of
Verbs in former and later times was not the same; and Lastly, The Ancients made
use of Paragogical (that is) additional Letters, as an Elegancy particular to
their times; all which I can prove by many examples, with which I will not at
this time trouble the Reader, If any Man ask how I came to the Knowledge of
these things, I answer, because I have found them in very Ancient Copies of the
Bible, though later Writers would not follow those Copies, which is the only
cause that in other Languages almost lost, Obsolete words are still understood:
but perhaps some will still object, and since I have declared, that the
greatest Part of those Notes are not doubtful readings, will ask me first why
of one Place, there are never found more then two readings; why not sometimes
three or more? Secondly, seeing there are somethings in the written Text, so
manifestly repugnant to the Rules of Grammar, which yet are rightly noted in
the margent, it may be asked, how it is possible to believe that the Writers
could make any doubt, which was the true Reading? To this I answer, First, that
there were more Readings then we find noted in our Copies; for in the Talmud
there are many noted, which are neglected by the Masorites, and in many places
so much misliked by them; that the Superstitious Corrector of the Bombergian
Bibles, was forced to confess in his Preface, that he knew not how to reconcile
them: he says, here we know not what to answer more then we did, namely, that
it was the Custom of the Talmudists to contradict the Masorites, and therefore
we have not sufficient Ground to conclude, that of one Place there were never
more then two readings, yet I easily grant, yea I believe, that there are not
now to be found more then two Readings of one place and that for two Reasons.
First, because that, from whence the variety of Readings proceeded, could not
occasion more then two; for we have showed, that the difference of Readings,
arose from the Similitude, which was between some Letters, and still the doubt
was no more but this, which of two Letters was to be written? whether Bet or
Kaf, Jod or Vau, Dalet or Res. Of which there was frequent use; and therefore
it often happened, that the Sense was tolerable with either: beside it was
doubtful sometimes, whether a Syllable was long or short, whose quantity was to
be determined by those Letters whose pronunciation was scarcely to be
perceived: and Lastly, all marginal Notes were not dubious Readings, for as we
have already said, many of them were put in for decency and modesty's sake; and
sometimes to explain Obsolete and Antiquated words. The Second Reason why I
persuade my self that more then two Readings cannot be found of one Place, is,
because I believe the Ancient Scribes met with very few Originals; perhaps not
above two or three; In the Treatise of the Scribes, chap. 6 th. There is
mention made but of three, which they pretend were found in the Time of Esdras,
and boast that the Notes were put in by him; however it were, though they had
three Original Copies, we may with reason imagine, that two of them might still
agree in the same Place together: but every body may justly wonder, that only
in three copies there should be found three diverse Readings of one Place. How
it came to pass, that after Esdras there should be so great a scarcity of
copies, can be no great wonder to any Man, who will but read the first chapter
of the first Book of Machabees; or the Seventh Chapter of the Twelveth Book of
Iosephus's Antiquities: yea it is a Miracle, that after so great and continual a
Persecution, they should be able, if we consider the story, to keep those few
they had. We see then the Reasons why we no where meet with more then two
dubious Readings, so that it can be no argument at all to conclude, that
because there are no where more then two, therefore the Bible in those noted
places was not written right, purposely to signify some Mystery. The Second
Objection which says, some things are so manifestly false written, that no
body can deny it, and therefore those Errors ought to have been corrected
rather in the Text, then noted in the margent is of no great weight; nor am I
obliged to know, what was the Reason they did not do it: perhaps it was beeause
they were so honest, as to leave the Bible to posterity just as they found it,
in the few Originals they met with; and thought fit to note the disagreement
between the Original Copies, rather as diverse, then dubious Readings; nor have
I called them dubious, upon any other account, but because I cannot tell which
of the two ought to be preferred. Lastly, The Scribes beside these dubious
readings, (by leaving a void space in the middle of Paragraphs) have noted many
defective places, the precise number of which spaces, the Masorites have
observed to be twenty eight, I know not whether they believe there is likewise
some mystery in that number, the Pharisees are very religious observers of this
space; there is an Example of one of them Genesis Chap. 4. v. 8. In the Latin
Translation, it is thus written, and dixit Cain Habeli Fratri suo, -- and
contigit dum erant in Campo ut Cain. So that where we expected to hear what it
was Cain said to his Brother, there is only a void Space, of which spaces the
Scribes have left Twenty eight, in many of which nothing would seem to be
wanting, if there had not been such a void space left.

CHAP. X. The rest of the Books of the Old Testament in like manner examined.
OF the two Books of Chronicles, there is not much to be said worth a man's
knowing, nor any thing that is certain; more than that they were written long
after Esdras; and perhaps, after Judas Maccabeus rebuilt the Temple: for in the
9 th. chap. of the first Book of Chron. the Historian tells us, what Families
(in the time of Esdras) first inhabited Jerusalem, and in the 17 th. verse of
that Chapter speaks of the Porters, whereof two are likewise named in the 19 th
verse of the 11 th chapter of Nehemiah, which is a plain proof, that these
Books were written after the City was rebuilt. Concerning the Writer, the
Authority. Doctrine, and usefulness of the Books, I can say nothing; but I very
much wonder they should be esteemed Sacred and Canonical, by those men who
think the Book of Wisdom, Tobit, and others Apocriphal: It is not my purpose to
magnify their Authority, seeing they are generally received for Canonical; as
they are I leave them. The Psalms were collected and divided into five Books,
in the time of the Second Temple; for the 88 th Psalm was by the testimony of
Philo Iudaeus, published when King Iehoiachim was kept a Prisoner at Babylon;
and the 89 th Psalm, when he was set at liberty. I believe Philo would not have
said it, had it not been the received Opinion of his time; or had he not heard
it from very credible persons. I believe the Proverbs of Solomon were collected
much about the same time, or at least, in the days of King Josiah; because it
is said, Prove. chap. 25. v. 1. These are the Pooverbs of Solomon which the men
of Hezekiah King of Judah copied out. But I cannot here forbear to take notice
of the great boldness of the Rabbis, who would have excluded this Book and
that of Ecclesiastes, out of the Sacred Canon, which had been certainly done,
had they not met with some places which commend Moses Law; it is pity such
things, so sacred and excellent, should lie at the mercy of such men; we thank
them for communicating them to us, but it is a great doubt whether they have
been faithfully delivered to posterity, which I will not here strictly examine,
but proceed to the Books of the Prophets: Having seriously considered them, I
plainly perceive, That the Prophesies contained in them, were collected out of
other Books; they are not set down in the order wherein they were delivered,
nor written by the Prophets themselves; neither are all recorded, but such as
here and there could be found out: so that these Books are but mere fragments
of the Prophets. Isaiah began to prophesy in the time of Vzziah King of Judah
as the Writer of the Book of Isaiah himself testifies in the 1 st. chap. and 1
st. verse; and Isaiah did not Prophesy only in that King's Reign, but also
wrote a History of all that King did; as appears in the 2 d Book of Chron.
chap. 26. v. 22. The rest of the Acts of Uzziah first and last, did Isaiah the
Prophet the Son of Amos write; which Book it is pity we have not, those things
which we have, as has been already said, were copied out of the Chronicles of
the Kings of Judah and Israel: The Rabbis likewise declare, That Isaiah also
prophesied in the time of Manasseh, by whom he was put to death; and though in
that they seem fabulous, yet they did not believe all his Prophesies were
extant. The Prophesies of Jeremy which are Historically related, were picked
up, and collected out of diverse Chronologers; for they are not only confusedly
put together, without any regard had to time; but the same History is also
repeated in diverse manners; for the 21 th chap. contains the Prophesy, wherein
Jeremy foretold King Zedekiah, who sent to consult him, That the City of
Jerusalem should be destroyed; and for which Prophesy he was apprehended. Then
after an abrupt breaking off from this History; the 22 th chap. sets forth
Ieremy's Declamation and Prophesy against King Iehoiachim, who reigned before
Zedekiah, declaring Iehoiachim's Captivity. After this, the 25 th chap.
declares those things which were before revealed to the Prophet, in the fourth
year of King Iehoiachim, and without observing any order of time, goes on to
heap together many Prophesies, till at length the 38 th chapter (as if the
fifteen intermediate chapters had been but a Parenthesis) returns again to that
spoken of in the 21 th chap. for the conjunction Then, wherewith the 38 th
chapter begins, relates to the 8,9, and 10 verses of the 21 th chap. and the
relation given in this 38 th chap. of Ieremy's last apprehension, and being
long kept in a Dungeon, is very different from that we have of it in the 37 th
chap. So that it clearly appears, all these things were taken out of diverse
Historians, and no other excuse can be made for them. The rest of Ieremy's
Prophesies contained in other Chapters, where he speaks in his own person, seem
to be copied out of the Book which Baruch writ from Ieremy's own Mouth; which
Book (as appears by the 2 d. verse of the 36 th chap. contained only those
things which were revealed to the Prophet, from the time of Josiah unto the
fourth year of Iehoiachim, from which year the Book begins; out of which Book
also all those things seem to be copied, which are related from the 2 d verse
of the 45 th chap. to the 49 th verse of the 51 th chap. That the Book of
Ezekiel is likewise but a fragment, is manisest by the first verses thereof;
for who does not take notice, that the Conjunction Now wherewith the Book
begins, relates to somewhat that had been already said, and joins that, to what
he had further to say; not only the Conjunction, but the whole Contexture of
what he spoke, implies and supposes other things which had been before
written; for the Writer himself says by way of Parenthesis, in the 3 d verse
of the 1 st. chap. The word of the Lord came often to Ezekiel the Priest, the
Son of Buzi in the land of the Chaldeans: as if he should say, That the words
of Ezekiel which hitherto he had copied out, related to other things which were
revealed to him before the present thirtieth year. Josephus in his 10 th Book
of Antiquities, chap. 9. declares, Ezekiel prophesied that Zedechiah would not
see Babylon, which Prophesy does not appear in the Book we have of Ezekiel; but
the 17 th. chap. foretells the contrary, that he was to be carried Captive
thither. Whether Hoseah wrote any thing more than is in the Book which bears
his name, I am not certain; but I much wonder that we should have nothing more
of his; seeing by the persons testimony who wrote the Book called Hosea, that
Prophet Prophesied no less than eighty four years, as appears by the 1 st verse
of the 1 st chap. where the several Kings are named, in whose times he lived:
in general, we know that the writers of the Books which we call the Prophets,
did neither collect the Prophesies of all that were Prophets, nor all the
Prophesies of those Prophets whose names we have; for we have not any of the
Prophesies of those Prophets who prophesied in the time of Manasseh, (of which
Prophets mention is made, though not by name, in the 2 d Book of Chron. chap. 33.
v. 10, 18, 19.) nor have we all the Prophesies of the twelve Prophets: We have
none of Ionah's Prophesies, but those that concerned the Ninevites, though he
also prophesied to Israel, as appears by the 25 th. verse of the 14 th chap. of
the 2 d. Book of Kings.

Of the Book of Job, and of Job himself, there has been among Writers much
dispute; some think Moses wrote the Book of Job, and that the whole story is
nothing but a Parable, which is likewise a Tradition of the Rabbis in their
Talmud, and favored by Maimonides in his Book stilled More Nebuchim: Others
believe the History to be real and true, and that Job lived in the time of
Jacob, and married his Daughter Dinah; but Aben Ezra, as I have already said,
in his Commentaries on the Book of Job says, It was translated out of some
other Language into the Hebrew; which I could wish he had more clearly proved;
for then we might conclude, the Gentiles also had Books which were Sacred. I
leave the thing still doubtful, and conjecture that Job was some Gentile of
great constancy of Mind, who at first was very prosperous, afterward very
unfortunate, and in the end very happy: for in Ezechiel, chap. 14 v. 14. he is
named with Noah and Daniel for a righteous man. The various Fortune, and
constant Mind of Job, gave many an occasion of disputing God's Providence, and
to the Author of the Book, of composing a Dialogue, whereof the Subject and
Style seem to be a Man's rather at ease, meditating in his Study, than sick on
a Dunghill; and I might with Aben Ezra believe, the Book to be translated out
of another Language, because it seems to affect the Heathen Poesy; the Father
of the Gods being in the first Chapter brought in twice, calling a Council, and
Momus, who is called Satan, answering God with great liberty; but these are
mere frivolous conjectures. The Book of Daniel without doubt from the 8 th
Chapter thereof, contains the Writings of Daniel; but from whence the first
seven Chapters were copied, I know not; we may suspect, that seeing all of
them, but the first, were written in the Chaldee Language, they were taken out
of that Nation's Chronologies, of which could we be certain, it were a clear
proof, that the Scripture is to be accounted Sacred, only in respect of the
things contained in it, and not in respect of the Language, Words, or Style
wherein they are expressed; and that all Books which declare and teach what is
excellently good, in what Tongue, or by what Nation soever written, are equally
Sacred: Let this, at least, be observed, that the Chapters which are written in
Chaldee, are no less Sacred than any of the rest in the whole Bible. To this
Book of Daniel, the first Book of Ezra is so annexed, that it appears they were
both written by one person, who relates what successively past amongst the
Jews, from the first Captivity: And to this Book of Esdras, without doubt is
joined the Book of Hester, for the Conjunction wherewith the Book begins, can
relate to no other Book, nor can it be thought the same Book which Mordecai
wrote; for he that writ the Book of Hester, says in the 9 th chap. v. 20. that
Mordecai wrote Letters, and declares what were their Contents: Moreover, the 31
th of the same Chapter tells us, That Queen Hester confirmed by a Decree, all
things concerning the Feast of Purim, or Lots; and in the 32 th. verse it is
said, it was written in the Book; that is, according to the Hebrew manner of
speaking, in a Book which every one at that time knew; which Book, with others,
Aben Ezra says, was lost; what else concerned Mordecai, the Historian in the 10
th chap. v. 2. says, was written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of
Media and Persia; and therefore, without question this Book of Daniel, was
written by the same person who wrote the Affairs of Daniel and Ezra; and so
also was the Book of Nehemiah called the Second Book of Ezra: so that we
conclude, these four Books, namely, Daniel, Ezra, Hester, and Nehemiah, to be
written by one Historian; but who he was, I cannot so much as guess; but that
we may know whoever he were, from whence he had the knowledge of the things he
relates, and from whence he copied them out; we are to take notice, that the
Governors and Princes of the Jews in the time of the Second Temple, as did
their Kings in the time of the First, kept Scribes or Historiographers, who
writ Annals, and recorded what past; which Annals, or Chronologies, are every
where cited in the Book of Kings; but those of the Princes and Priests of the
Second Temple, are quoted first in Nehemiah, chap. 12. v. 23. and also in the
first Book of Machabes, chap. 16. v. 24. and no question this Book of Annals
was that Book mentioned (in the 32 th verse of the 9 th chap. of Hester) in
which the Decree of Queen Hester, and those things that concerned Mordecai were
written; which Book we agree with Aben Ezra was lost; and out of this Book of
Annals, all things contained in the four Books we have last mentioned, were in
all probability taken and copied; for there is no other Book quoted by the
writer of these four, nor do we know any other of public Authority. That these
four Books were not written either by Ezra or Nehemiah, appears by what is said
in the 9 th and 10 th verses of the 12 th chap. of Nehem. where the Genealogy
of the High Priest Iesuah, is derived down to Iaduah the sixth High Priest, who
went to meet Alexander the Great, when he had almost conquered the Kingdom of
Persia; as appears in the 2 d. Book and 8 th chap. of Iosephus's Antiquities;
or as Philo Iudaeus says in Libro temporum, the sixth and last High Priest
under the Persian Monarchy; which is likewise plainly declared in the 22 th
verse of the aforesaid 12 th chap. of Nehem. where the Historian says, The
Levites in the days of Eliashib, Ioiada, Iohanan, and Iaduah, were recorded
Priests to the Reign of Darius the Persian; that is, in the Annals of that
Government. And sure, no Man will believe, that Hezra or Nehemiah were so long
lived, to survive fourteen Persian Kings; for Cyrus the first King of Persia,
was he that gave the Jews liberty to rebuild their Temple, and from him to
Darius the fourteenth and last King of the Persians, are reckoned 230 years:
therefore without all doubt, these four Books I have mentioned, were written
long after Judas Maccabeus restored the worship of the Temple; and also,
because at that time were spurious counterfeit Books of Daniel, Hesdras and
Hester published by some malicious persons, who were of the Sect of the
Zadduces; for the Pharisees would never own them: and though in the Book which we
call the 4 th of Esdras there are some fabulous stories, which we also find in
the Talmud; yet they ought not to be fathered on the Pharisees; for there is no
Man of sense but believes those Tales were added by some trifling fellow,
perhaps to render the Pharisaical Traditions ridiculous, or to make the people
of that time believe, that the Prophesies of Daniel were fulfilled, thereby to
confirm them in their Religion, and in the midst of so many and great
Calamities, to keep them from despair: But though these Books be of no great
Antiquity, yet many faults (I suppose, through haste in those who copied them
out) have crept into them; for in these, as in the rest, are many Marginal
Notes, (of which we spoke in the former Chapter) and also some places for which
no excuse can be made; but if it be granted, that the Marginal Readings of
these Books, be as the Pharisees would have it, as ancient as the Writers
themselves, then it must necessarily follow, that the Scribes (if they were
more than one) put these Notes into the Margent, because they did not find the
Annals, from whence they copied out the Books perfectly written; and though some
faults be very plain and obvious, yet the Scribes would not be so bold to alter
or mend the Writings of their Ancestors. Of this particular I have said enough,
and I now pass on to show those errors whereof no notice is taken in the
Margent. I cannot tell how many I meet with in the 2 d chap of Ezra, for in the
64 th verse it is said, that the whole Congregation together, of those that
went up out of Captivity to Jerusalem, was forty two thousand three hundred and
threescore; and yet if the particular numbers throughout the whole Chapter, be
exactly summed up and added together, they make the total to be no more than
twenty nine thousand eight hundred and eighteen; so that there is an error in
the total, or particular numbers. Now it is most likely the total number was not
mistaken, but set down right, because every one might keep that in memory, though
he could not remember the particular numbers; had there been any error or
mistake in the total, every body would have known it, and it might have been
easily mended, which is confirmed by the 7 th chap. of Nehemiah, which tells
us, that the whole number of them that came up from the Captivity, was the very
same mentioned in the 2 d chap of Ezra; but the particular numbers very much
differ; for some are more, and others less in Nehemiah, than they are in Ezra,
and amount in all to thirty one thousand eighty nine; so that there is no
doubt, but that the errors as well in the Book of Ezra, as of Nehemiah, were in
the particular numbers: Commentators rack their Wits and Inventions, to
reconcile these apparent contradictions; and while they adore the very Words
and Letters of Scripture, do nothing, as we have already said, but expose the
Writers of the Bible to Contempt; as if they knew not how to speak, or put that
which was spoken by them into any order; yea, they do nothing but make that
part of Scripture which is plain, obscure: For if every Man should take a
liberty of explaining Scripture, as they do, we could not be sure of the true
sense of any part thereof: I am persuaded, those Commentators themselves, though
they with so much zeal excuse the Writers of the Old Testament, would count any
other Man a ridiculous Historian, who should write as they have done; and if
they think him a Blasphemer, who says the Scripture is in some places faulty,
what shall I say of those Men, who belly the Scripture, and so expose the holy
Penmen thereof, as if they knew not how to speak; and deny the plain and clear
sense of Scripture? What in it can be plainer, than that Esdras and his fellow
Priests in the second Chapter of that Book which is said to be his, took a
particular account of all that went up to Jerusalem; seeing the number of them
is set down, who could not derive their Pedigree, as well as theirs that could?
And what is more clear, than that Nehemiah, as appears by the 7 th chap. and 5
th verse of that Book, only copied out the Register which Esdras had made? Who
ever makes any other Exposition thereof, denies the true sense of Scripture,
and consequently, the Scripture it self. It Is ridiculous Piety to pretend to
rectify one place of Scripture by another, when plain places are darkened by
obscure, and those that are right and true corrected and corrupted by those
that are false and erroneous; but God forbid I should call them Blasphemers,
who have no malicious intentions, because there is no Man free from Error.
Beside the Errors which are in the particular numbers, both of Esdras and
Nehemiah's Genealogy, there are diverse in the names of the Families, more in
the very Pedigrees, in the Histories, and, I fear, likewise in the very
Prophesies themselves; for the Prophecy of Jeremy in the 22 th chap. against
Iehoiachim, which says, He should be buried with the burial of an Ass, drawn
and cast forth beyond the Gates of Jerusalem, does not at all agree with the
History of him in the last Chapter of the 2 d. Book of Kings; no nor with what
is related of him in the last Chapter of Jeremy; especially, in the last Verse;
neither do I see any reason why Jeremy should tell King Zedechiah, that he
should die in peace, Ierem. chap. 34. v. 5. who was taken Captive, and after he
had seen his Children slain before his Face, had his own Eyes put out. If
Prophesies may be interpreted according to events, the names of those two Kings
seem to be mistaken one for the other, but that is too paridoxical to be
maintained, and I had rather leave the point under an impossibility of being
determined, seeing if there be any error in it, it must be the fault of the
Historian, and not in the Original Copies from whence he wrote. Of any other
Errors I will take no particular notice, seeing I cannot without troubling the
Reader, because they have been already noted by others. Rabbi Solomon finding
the manifest contradictions which are in the erroneous Genealogies, does in his
Commentaries on the 8 th chap. of the first Book of Chronicles, break out into
these words, Esdras, (whom he supposes to have written the Chronicles) called
the Sons of Benjamin by wrong names, and derived his Pedigree otherwise than we
find it in the Book of Genesis, and describes the greatest part of the Cities
of the Levites, otherwise than Joshua did, because he met with different
Originals: And a little after says, The Genealogy of Gibeon, and others, is
twice and diversely repeated, because Esdras found different Registers of each.
Genealogy; and in copying them out, followed those whereof the greater number
did agree; but when the number of differing Genealogies was equal, he wrote
after the Original of both: So that it appears by Rabbi Solomon's own
confession, these Books were copied from uncertain, and imperfect Originals:
The Commentators themselves, many times do nothing more than show the causes of
the errors, and I believe, that no person of any sound Judgment, can think that
the Sacred Historians, did write purposely to contradict themselves: Perhaps it
will be said, I go about to overthrow the Scripture, and give occasion to
suspect, that it is every where faulty; but I have proved the contrary, for I
hereby vindicate the Scripture, and provide against the adulterating and
corrupting thereof in those places which are clear and true. It does not
follow, that because some places are faulty, therefore all must be so: because
every Book is in some places false, it is no good ground to conclude it is no
where true; especially when the Style of it is perspicuous, and the meaning of
the Author perfectly known. So much for the Books of the Old Testament: Now by
what has been said, we may easily conclude, that before the time of Judas
Macch^b^us, no Books were esteemed Canonical, but those which we now have from
the Pharisees of the Second Temple, (who likewise instituted set forms of
Prayer) these Books being selected from many others, and only by their Decree
received into the Canon: he therefore that will demonstrate the Authority of
Holy Scripture, is bound to prove the Authority of every particular Book, the
proving any one to be Divine, is not enough to prove the Divinity of all;
unless it be granted, that the Council of the Pharisees could not err, which is
impossible for any Man to make good; the reason which inclines me to believe,
that none but the Pharisees chose the Books of the Old Testament, and made them
Sacred by Canon; is, because the last Chapter of Daniel declares, That there
shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, which the Zadduces utterly denied.
Moreover in the Treatise of the Sabbath, chap. 2. fol. 30. parag. the 2 d,
Rabbi Iehuda says, The learned in the Law endeavored to suppress the Book of
Ecclesiastes, because many expressions in it, were contrary (which observe) to
the Books of the Law of Moses; but the reason why it was not suppressed, was,
because it begun and ended according to the Law: A little after he says, They
would also have concealed the Book of Proverbs; and lastly, in the first
Chapter of the same Treatise, fol. 13 th, these are his words, Truly I name the
Man for kindness sake, had it not been for Neguniah the Son of Hiskiah, the
Book of Ezechiel had been absconded, because there are expressions in it
repugnant to the words of the Law: By all which it is manifest, that the
learned in the Law, held a Council to determine what Books should be received
for Sacred, and what should be rejected, so that whoever will be sure of the
Authority of all, must search into the Council, and know upon what ground and
reason every Book was received. I should now examine the Books of the New
Testament, but I hear it has been already done by Men learned in the Sciences,
and skilful in Tongues; I am not Grecian good enough to undertake it, beside we
want Original Copies of those Books which were written in Hebrew, and therefore
I will not engage my self in the business, but only observe some things which
make to my main purpose, and that shall be the work of my next Chapter.

CHAP. XI. Enquires whether the Apostles wrote their Epistles, as Apostles and
Prophets, or only as Teachers; and shows what is the Office of an Apostle.
WHoever reads the New Testament, must be convinced, that the Apostles were
Prophets, but because the Prophets, (as I have showed in the end of the first
Chapter) did but seldom, and not always speak by Revelation; it may very well
be a Question, Whether the Apostles, like Moses, Jeremy, and others, did by
express Command and Revelation write their Epislles as Prophets, or else, only
as private Men and Teachers; especially, because in the 1 st Epist. to the
Corinthians, chap. 14. v. 6. Paul in express terms declares, there are two
sorts of speaking, the one by Revelation, the other by Knowledge; I say
therefore, it may be doubted, whether the Apostles in their Writings did
Prophecy or instruct Their Style, if we mark it, is very far different from
that used in Prophecy; it was always the custom of the Prophets to declare,
That they spoke by the Command of God, still beginning with expressions like
these, So faith the Lord: The Lord of Hosts says, The Word and Decree of the
Lord; which they did use not only in their public Speeches, but also in their
Letters or Writings, which contained Revelations; as appears in the Letter
written by Elijah the Prophet to King Iehoram, (2 d Book of Chron. chap 21. v
12.) and there came a Writing to him from Elijah the Prophet saying, Thus says
the Lord God; but in the Apostles Writings, we meet with no such expressions,
but the clean contrary; 1 st Epist. Corinth. chap. 7. v. 40. Paul says he
speaks after his own Judgment: Yea, in many places we find expressions which
argue a doubtful and uncertain mind; as in the Epist. to the Romans chap. 3. v.
28. Therefore we conclude: And Romans chap. 8 v. 18. for I reckon, and many of
the like kind. Beside these there are other manners of speaking, which do not
at all savor of Prophetical Authority; as in the 1 st Epist. Corinth, chap. 7.
v. 6. But I speak this by permission, not of commandment: and in the 25. verse
of the same chap. I give my Judgment as a Man who has obtained mercy of the
Lord to be faithful; and it is to be observed, That when Paul in this Chapter
speaks, as if he did not know whether he had, or had not a command from the
Lord for what he said, it is not to be understood of a Command from God by
Revelation, but only, that he preached that Doctrine, which Christ the Lord
taught his Disciples in the Mount. Moreover, if we observe in what manner the
Apostles deliver the Doctrine of the Gospel in their Writings, we shall find it
much different from the Prophets way of instructing; for the Apostles are
always found reasoning, insomuch that they seem rather to dispute than
Prophecy. Prophesies contain nothing but positive Opinions and Decrees
therefore God is always introduced, not arguing with Reason, but peremptorily
commanding by the Power and Sovereignty of his Nature and Essence: Prophetieal
Authority allows of no rational disputing; for whoever will by reasoning
confirm his Opinions, does in so doing submit them to the Arbitrary Judgment of
another; as does Paul reasoning in his 1 st. Epist. to the Corinth. chap. 10.
v. 15. I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say: And lastly, because the
Prophets did not understand the things that were revealed to them by Reason and
Natural Knowledge, as we have showed in the first Chapter; though some things in
the Pentateuch, seem to be concluded and confirmed by Inference and Illation;
yet if we consider them, they cannot be taken for peremptory and decisive
Arguments: (For example) when Moses said to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. chap. 21. v.
27. Behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious
against the Lord, and how much more after my death. We are not here to think,
that this was an Argument used to convince the Israelites by Reason, that they
would certainly after Moses death depart from the worship of God, because the
Argument had been false, as may be proved by Scripture; for the people
persevered constantly in it during the life of Joshua and the Elders; and
afterward also in the life time of Samuel, David, and Solomon: these words
therefore of Moses, were but a moral manner of speaking, which he Rhetorically
used, the more strongly to imagine and foretell, that peoples future defection;
the reason why I do not say, that Moses to make his Prediction true, spoke
these words of himself, and not by Revelation as a Prophet, is, because in the
21 verse of the same Chapter; God reveals to Moses in other words, what the
people would do; so that there was no need of reasoning to make Moses surer of
this Prediction and Decree; but it was only necessary to give him a livelier
representation thereof in his imagination, (as I have showed in the first
Chapter) which could be done no better way, than by imagining that the peoples
present rebellious Humor, which he had so often tried, would be the very same
for the future; so that we are not to think, Moses's Arguments which we meet
with in the Petanteuch, to be drawn from the Repositories of Reason, but to be
taken only for manners of speaking, whereby he did more lively imagine, and more
effectually express God's Decrees. I will not deny, but that the Prophets might
reason and argue by Revelation; but that which I maintain, is, That the
Prophets by how much more rational the Arguments were which they used, so much
more natural did their Knowledge appear, which they had of things revealed, and
that the Prophets knowledge was supernatural, chiefly appeared in their
speaking Dogmatically, Imperiously, and Sententiously; so that Moses the chief
Prophet, never made use of any Logical Argument, and I therefore conclude,
Paul's long Deductions and Reasonings, which we find in his Epistle to the
Romans, were never written by Supernatural Revelation, and the manner of
speaking and arguing in the Writings of the Apostles, does clearly show, that
they were not by Divine Revelation and Command, but were the dictates of their
own natural Reason, and contain nothing but brotherly admonitions, full of
gentleness and kindness, (no evidence of Prophetical Authority) such as is that
excuse in the 15. chap. to the Romans verse 15. Brethren I have written the more
boldly unto you; and this Opinion may with the greater confidence be
maintained, because we no where read that the Apostles were commanded to Write,
but only to Preach where ever they went, and to confirm their Doctrine by
Signs; for their Presence and Signs were absolutely required to convert the
Nations to Christianity, and confirm them in it; as Paul himself in his Epist.
to the Romans chap. 1. v 11. expressly declares, I long to see you, that I may
impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end you may be established: But
here it may be objected, that if we allow the Apostles did not write as
Prophets, then by the same reason it may be concluded, they did not preach as
Prophets; for when they went hither and thither to preach, they did it not by
express Command, as did the Prophets in time past. We read in the Old
Testament, Jonah went to Nineveh to preach, that he was expressly sent thither,
and that which he was there to preach was revealed to him. We are told at
large, that Moses was sent into Egypt by God, what he was commanded to say to
the people of Israel, and to King Pharaoh, what Signs and Wonders also he was
to do in their presence to make them believe. Isaiah, Jeremy, and Ezekiel were
expressly commanded to preach to the Israelites. Lastly, the Prophets never
preached any thing, but what the Scripture testifies they received from God,
but of the Apostles we very seldom read any such thing, when they went hither
and thither to preach; but on the contrary, we find the Apostles according to
their own Will and Inclination, chose what places they would preach in, as
appears by that contention even to separation between Paul and Barnabas, Act.
chap. 15. v. 39. and that the Apostles many times in vain attempted to go to
some particular places, whereof we have instances in Paul himself, who says in
his first Chapter to the Romans, v. 13. I would not have you ignorant, that
oftentimes I purposed to come to you, but was let hitherto; and chap. 15. v.
22. For which cause I have been often hindered from coming to you. And lastly,
in the 16 th chap. 1 st Epist. to the Corinth. v. 12. he says, As touching our
brother Apollos, I greatly desired him to come unto you with the Brethren, but
his Will was not at all to come at this time, but he will come when he shall
have convenient time; so that from such expressions as these, from the Apostles
contention, and because when they went hither and thither to preach, the
Scripture does no where testify as it did of the Ancient Prophets, that they
went by the express command of God; we ought to conclude, that the Apostles did
not preach as Prophets, but as Men who were only Teachers. But this Objection
may be easily answered, if we take notice of the difference between the calling
of Apostles in the New, and of Prophets in the Old Testament, for the Prophets
were not called to Preach and Prophecy to all Nations in general, but only to
some particular people, for which an Express and particular Command was
necessary; but the Apostles were called to preach to all Nations without
exception, and to convert them to Christ, so that wherever they went they
executed his Commission; nor was there any necessity before they went, that
which they were to preach should be revealed to them, they being those
Disciples to whom Christ said, Matthew. chap. 10. v. 19, 20. When they deliver
you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given unto
you in that same hour, what you shall speak: We therefore conclude, the
Apostles had those things by particular Revelation, which they personally
preached and confirmed by Signs, but what they simply spoke or writ without
Signs to confirm it, that proceeded only from their Natural Reason and
Knowledge, as you see in the forecited 14 th chap. of the 1 st Epist. to the
Corinth. v. 6. That all their Epistles begin with the Declaration and
Approbation of their Apostleship, makes nothing against me; for on the
Apostles, as I shall presently show, was not only bestowed the gift of
Prophecy, but they had also Authority given them to teach and instruct: Upon
this ground the Apostles began and wrote their Epistles with the declaration of
their Apostleship, and perhaps to gain upon the Minds of their Readers, and to
stir them up to Attention, did in the first place testify, That they were those
Men, who by their Preaching, were known to all Believers; and who, by such
clear proofs had made it evident, they taught the true Religion, and right way
to Salvation. What I find in these Epistles concerning the Call of the
Apostles, and of the Divine and Holy Spirit wherewith they were inspired,
relates only to their Preaching, except it be in those places, where by the
Spirit of God, and the holy Spirit is meant only a sound right Judgment, and a
pure sanctified Mind devoted to God, (of which we have spoken in our first
Chapter.) For example, Paul, in 1 Corinthians chap. 7. v. 40. says, But she is
happier if she so abide after my Judgment, and I think also I have the Spirit
of God; where by the Spirit of God is understood his own Opinion, as the
Context proves; his meaning is, that in his Judgment and Opinion, the Widow
was happy who would not marry a second Husband, for he himself had resolved to
live single, and therefore thought himself happy: Of this kind we find other
expressions, which I think needless to mention: If then it pass for granted,
That the Epistles of the Apostles were the dictates only of Natural Reason, how
could the Apostles only by Natural Reason, teach those things which did not
fall within the compass of it? Consider what I have said in the seventh Chapter
of this Treatise, concerning the Interpretation of Scripture, and we shall find
no difficulty in the Question; for though many things contained in the Bible,
often surpass our Capacity and Understanding, yet we may safely dispute of
them, provided we admit of no Principles but what are fetched from the
Scripture; and upon this ground the Apostles might conclude, collect, and as
they pleased, teach many of those things which they had seen, heard, and were
revealed to them. Though Religion, as it was preached by the Apostles, in barely
publishing the History of Christ, is not to be comprehended by Natural Reason,
yet the principal and chiefest part thereof, which consists, as does the whole
Doctrine of Christ, in moral Precepts and Instructions, every Man by Natural
Light may attain: The Apostles did not stand in need of Supernatural
Illumination, to fit and apply Religion which they had before confirmed by
Signs, to every Man's ordinary Capacity, that it might be readily embraced; nor
was Supernatural Assistance necessary to mind Men of it, the design, and end of
all the Epistles, is, to teach and admonish Men to live that kind of life,
which every one of the Apostles judged best to confirm and establish them in
Religion: and here we are to remember, what was said a little before, That the
Apostles were not only enabled to preach the History of Christ, and confirm
what they preached by Signs as Prophets; but had also Power and Authority to
admonish and instruct Men, in that way which every particular Apostle thought
best; both which gifts Paul mentions in his 2 d Epist. to Timothy chap. 1. v.
11. Whereunto I am appointed a Preacher, and an Apostle, and teacher of the
Gentiles: Likewise in his 1 st Epist. to Timothy, chap. 2. v. 7. Whereunto I am
ordained a Preacher, and an Apostle: (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not)
a teacher of the Gentiles in Faith and Verity; which Texts clearly prove both
his Offices of Apostle and Doctor, but his Authority to warn and instruct,
whomsoever, and whenever he pleased, he expressly declares in his Epistle to
Philemon, verses the 8 th and 9 th, Though I might be much bold in Christ, to
enjoin thee that which is convenient, yet for loves sake I rather beseech thee,
whence we are to note, that if those things which Paul was to command Philemon,
had been received from God by Paul as a Prophet, and which, as a Prophet he
ought to have commanded him; then it had not been lawful for Paul, to change
that Command of God into Entreaties; it must therefore be necessarily
understood, that Paul here speaks of the liberty of Warning and Admonishing,
which he had as a Teacher, and not as a Prophet. Though it be not clearly proved,
that every Apostle might choose that way of teaching which he himself thought
best, but only that they were both Prophets and Teachers by virtue of their
Apostleship, yet Reason tells us, that whoever has Power and Authority to
teach, has also Power and Liberty to choose his own way of doing it; but
because it will be more satisfactory to prove by Scripture, that every Apostle
chose his own particular way of teaching: Consider what Paul himself says in
his Epistle to the Romans, chap. 15. v. 20. So have I strived to preach the
Gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man's
foundation; if every one of the Apostles made use of the same way of teaching,
and all built Christian Religion upon the same Foundation, what reason had Paul
to call those Foundations another Man's? It must necessarily be concluded, that
every one built Religion upon a several Foundation, and it was with the
Apostles, as it is with other Doctors, who having a peculiar method of
teaching, desire always to teach those who are perfectly ignorant, and never
learnt of any other Master. If we carefully read over the Epistles, we shall
find that the Apostles did agree concerning Religion it self, but differed
about its Foundations. To establish Men in Religion, and to prove that
Salvation depended only upon the Grace and Mercy of God, Paul's Doctrine was,
that no Man ought to boast of his Works, but only of his Faith; and that no Man
could be justified by Works, but only by Faith, ( Romans chap. 3. v. 27, 28.) By
Paul also was preached the whole Doctrine of Predestination; but James on the
other side, in his Epistle declares, that a Man is justified by Works, and not
by Faith only, ( James chap. 2. v. 24.) and in few words gives a brief account
of Religion, not at all concerning himself with any of Paul's Disputations:
Without doubt the Apostles building Religion upon several Foundations, has
been the original cause of all those Controversies and Schisms, wherewith the
Church was in the Apostles time, has been ever since, and for ever will be
troubled; unless Religion be purged and separated from all Philosophical
Speculations, and reduced to those few and plain Doctrines which Christ taught
his Followers, which was impossible to be done by the Apostles themselves;
because Men then knew not the Gospel, and because the novity of its Doctrine
should not offend their Ears, they as near as possible, suited and fitted it to
the Genius and Disposition of Men in that time, as appears by (the 1 st Epist.
to the Corinth. chap. 9. v. 19, 20.) and was built upon the most known
Foundations, and received Principles of those times; therefore none of the
Apostles philosophiz'd so much as Paul, who was called to preach to the
Gentiles; the rest preaching to the Jews, who were despisers of Philosophy,
likewise applied themselves to their Genius, (see the Epist. to the Galath.
chap. 2. from the 11 verse forward,) and preached Religion stripped naked from
all Philosophical Speculations: How happy likewise would our times be, could we
see Religion freed from all Superstition.

CHAP. XII. Of the true Original Handwriting of the Divine Law; why Scripture
is called Holy? and why the Word of God? Lastly, That the Scripture, as it
contains the Word of God, is derived down to us pure and uncorrupted.
THey that look upon the Bible, however it be, as a Letter sent from Heaven by
God to Man, will certainly exclaim and say, I am guilty of the sin against the
Holy Ghost, in maintaining, that the Word of God is faulty, maimed,
adulterated, and contradictory to it self; that we have but fragments of it,
and that the Original Writing of the Covenant which God made with the Jews
perished; but I doubt not, would they well consider the thing it self, they
would cease their exclamations; for Reason, as well as the Opinion of the
Prophets and Apostles, plainly declares, That the Eternal Word and Covenant of
God, and true Religion is written in Men's Hearts, (that is) imprinted by God
upon the Mind and Understanding of mankind; which is that true Handwriting of
God, which he sealed with the Idea of himself; (that is) the Image of his own
Divine Nature. Religion was first delivered to the Jews as a written Law,
because they were at that time in their Understanding, little more than
Children; but afterward Moses ( Deuteronomy. chap. 30. v. 6.) and Jeremy ( chap. 31.
v. 33.) prophesied, that in time to come, God would write his Law in their
Hearts; so that the Jews, and, among them, chiefly the Zaduces, always
contended for their Law written in Tables, which others did not, who had it
engraven on their Hearts: He then that considers this, will find nothing in
what I have said, contrary to God's word, or that will weaken Faith and
Religion; but rather, as I have showed toward the end of the tenth Chapter,
what will confirm and strengthen both. Had not that been my intention, I had
been altogether silent upon this Subject, and to avoid disputes, would have
freely granted, that there are deep Mysteries hidden in the Scripture: but
because from thence has sprung up intolerable Superstition, and many other
mischievous inconveniences, of which I spoke in the beginning of the seventh
Chapter, I could not possibly pass them by: Religion needs not be attired with
any Superstitious Ornaments, but rather loses part of its Beauty and Luster,
when it is adorned with such Fopperies. But some will say, That though the Divine
Law be written in Men's Hearts, yet nevertheless the Scripture is the word of
God, and therefore it is as unlawful to say of Scripture, as of the Word of God,
that it is maimed or corrupted. I on the other side fear such Men pretend too
much Sanctity, and convert Religion into Superstition; yea, that they worship
Pictures and Images, (that is) Paper and Ink for the Word of God; this I know,
that I have said nothing misbecoming the Scripture or the Word of God; and that
I have laid down no Position, which I have not made good by clear Reason; and
therefore I may positively aver, that I have not published any thing that is
impious, or that savors of the least impiety: I confess, some profane persons,
to whom Religion is a burden, may take a liberty of sinning, and without any
reason indulging their sensual pleasure, may infer, that the Scripture is every
where faulty and falsify'd, and consequently of no Authority; to such Men
nothing will be an answer, for according to the common saying, that which is
never so well and truly spoken, may be abused by an ill and sinister
Interpretation; they that are lovers of their Pleasure, will take any occasion
to do it; and they who in time past had those Originals, the Ark of the
Covenant, the Prophets and Apostles themselves, were not one jot the more
obedient or the better for them, but all as well Jews as Gentiles were alike
still the same, and Virtue in all Ages was a thing very rare: But to clear all
Scruples, I will now show upon what ground and reason, Scripture or any other
mute thing, may be called Sacred or Holy; next, what is indeed the Word of God,
that it is not contained in a certain number of Books: And lastly, that as it
contains those things which are necessary to Obedience and Salvation, it cannot
be corrupted: By these particulars every one may easily judge, that I speak
nothing against the Word of God, or give any occasion for Men to be wicked or
ungodly.

That is called Holy and Divine which is dedicated to Piety and the practice of
Religion, and a thing continues Holy so long as Men make a Religious use
thereof; when Men cease to be Religious, that thing cease to be Sacred, and
when the thing is used to impious purposes, then that thing which was before
Sacred, becomes unholy and profane: (For example) the very place called by
Jacob the Patriarch Beth-el, the House of God, because he there worshipped God
revealed to him; was afterward called by the Prophets the House of Iniquity,
Amos, chap. 5. v. 5. Hoshea, chap. 10. v. 5. because the Israelites, by the
Command of Jeroboam, did there sacrifice to Idols. Another example will plainly
prove the thing: Words have a certain signification, only by use and custom;
and if they be according to that use so disposed, that they move Men who read
them to Devotion, then those words are esteemed Sacred; and likewise the Book
wherein they are written; but if afterward it come to pass, that the use of
those words is lost, and thereby the words become insignificant, and the Book
wherein such words are, is quite neglected and laid aside, either through
malice, or because Men have no need of it, then the words and the Book, as they
are of no use, so have they no Sanctity in them. Lastly, If those words come to
be otherwise construed, and Custom so far prevail, as to give them a clean
contrary sense and signification, then the words and the Book which were before
esteemed Sacred, may become filthy and profane; whence it follows, that nothing
can be absolutely either Sacred or Profane, but only in respect of Man's Mind or
Understanding; which clearly appears by many places of Scripture; I will quote
only one or two; Jeremy ( chap. 7. v. 24.) says, the Jews did falsely call
Solomon's Temple the Temple of God; for as he further says in that Chapter,
the Name of God could remain in that Temple no longer than it was frequented by
Men who worshipped him, and maintained Justice; but when Murderers, Robbers, and
Idolaters resorted to it, 'twas then but a Den of Thieves. I have often
wondered, that the Scripture no where declares what became of the Ark of the
Covenant, certainly it was either lost or burnt with the Temple, though nothing
was esteemed more Sacred and Venerable among the Jews. The Scripture then is
Sacred, and its sayings Divine, so long as Men are thereby moved to Devotion;
but if the Scripture be quite neglected, as it was heretofore by the Jews, it
is nothing but Paper and Ink, it is then profaned, and left liable to
Corruption; and when it is corrupted and perishes, it cannot be truly said the
Word of God is corrupted and lost; as in the Prophet Ieremy's time, it could
not be truly said the Temple of God was burnt, which Jeremy himself declares
of the Law; for chap. 8. v. 8. he reproves the Wicked in these words, How do ye
say we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us? Lo certainly in vain made
he it, the Pen of the Scribes is in vain; (that is) though ye have the Scripture,
yet ye falsely say, you have the Law of God, since ye have made it of no
effect: In like manner, when Moses brake the first Tables, it cannot be said,
that in anger he cast the Law of God out of his Hands and brake it, no person
ought to think so, he brake only the Stones, which, though before accounted
Sacred, because upon them was engraven the Covenant by which the Jews bound
themselves to obey God, yet afterward had not the least Sanctity in them,
because the People by worshipping the Golden Calf, made that Covenant void: For
the same cause the second Tables, with the Ark wherein they were kept, might
likewise perish. It Is no wonder then if none of those Originals are to be
found, or that the like should befall the Books we have, when the very Original
of Gods Law, the most Sacred of all things is utterly lost: Let Men then
forbear to charge me with impiety, seeing I have spoken nothing against the
Word of God, nor have any way profaned it; if their anger be just, let it be
vented against the people of old, whose wickedness profaned and destroyed the
Ark of God, the Temple, the Law, and all things else that were Sacred: If
according to the 2 d Epist. to the Corinth. chap. 3. v. 3. The Epistle of
Christ were written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in
Tables of Stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the Heart: Let Men cease to adore
the Letter, and not be so much concerned for it. Having sufficiently explained
the Holiness and Divinity of Scripture, let us now see what is properly meant
by Debar Jehovah the word of God. Debar signifies Word, Speech, Decree, Thing;
now upon what grounds any thing in the Hebrew Language may be said to be God's,
or have relation to God, I have showed in the first Chapter; so that I need not
repeat what I have there said, or in the sixth Chapter, what I have said of
Miracles; it is evident what the Scripture means by the Word of God: To make the
thing very clear, I need only declare, that when the Word of God is predicated
of any Subject which is not God himself, it properly signifies that Divine Law,
of which we treated in the fourth Chapter, namely, That Religion which is
universal and common to all mankind, mentioned in Isaiah, chap. 1. v. 10. where
the Prophet declares, That the right way of living, consisted in Charity, and
in a sincere and pure Heart, which he calls the Law and Word of God: The Word
of God is also taken Metaphorically, for the order or course of Nature, and
Fate, (because it follows and depends upon the Eternal Decree of the Divine
Nature) particularly for whatever the Prophets foresaw in this course of
Nature; because the Prophets understood future events, not by natural Causes,
but thought them to be the Will and Decrees of God. Moreover, it is taken for
that which any Prophet commanded or declared, because he knew it not by Natural
Light, but by the singular Virtue and gift of Prophecy; and more especially,
because the Prophets (as we have showed in the fourth Chapter) apprehended God
under the notion of a Lawgiver; for these three reasons then, the Scripture is
called the Word of God, (namely) because it teaches us true Religion, whereof
God from all Eternity is the Author. Secondly, because it makes Prophesies to
be God's Decrees: And lastly, because the Authors of those Prophesies, taught
for the most part that which they did not know by Natural Reason, but by a
faculty and gift peculiar only to them, and introduced God speaking as it were
in them. Now though the Scripture contain many things which are merely
Historical, and may be unnderstood by Natural Knowledge, yet the Scripture is
called the Word of God, in respect of those other particulars I have last
mentioned; so that now we plainly see, why God is called the Author of the
Bible; (namely) upon the account of teaching us what is true Religion, and not
because it contains, and has communicated to us such a certain number of
Books. And hence we may also learn, that the Bible is divided into the Old and
New Testament, because before the coming of Christ, the Prophets Preached
Religion as the Law of their Country, and by force of the Covenant made in
Moses's time; but after Christ's coming, because the Apostles preached Religion
upon Christ's account, as a Law universal to all mankind; not that the Prophets
and Apostles differed in Doctrine, or that the Books of either Testament, are
the Deeds and Indentures of the Written Covenant; nor, lastly, because Natural
Religion which is universal, is new, unless it be in respect of those that knew
it not, according to that saying of John the Evangelist, chap. 1. v. 10. He was
in the world and the world knew him not. If then we had not some of those Books
which the Old and New Testament contain, yet we should not want God's Word, (as
it properly signifies true Religion) for we do not think any part thereof is
wanting, though we lack many of those other excellent Writings, namely, the Book
of the Law, which was so Religiously kept in the Temple, as the Original
wherein the Covenant was first written, with many other Books of the Wars and
Records of time, from whence the Books of the Old and New Testament, which we
now have, were transcribed and collected: And this is made good by many
reasons; first, because the Books of both Testaments were not written at one
and the same time, for the use of all Ages; but by chance for some particular
people, and that as the Time and their particular Disposition required, which
plainly appears, by the calling of the Prophets, who are called to warn and
reprove the ungodly of their own time, and also by the Writings of the
Apostles. Secondly, Because understanding the Scripture, and the meaning of the
Prophets, is one thing; but to understand the Mind of God (that is) the real
truth of things is another; as appears by what has been said in the second
Chapter of Prophets; which distinction likewise holds in Histories and
Miracles, as we have showed in the sixth Chapter: But in understanding places
which treat of true Religion and real Virtue, no such distinction ought to be
made. Thirdly, Because the Books of the Old Testament, were chosen out of many
others, and were approved and joined together by a Council of the Pharisees; as
we have declared in the tenth Chapter; and for the Books of the New Testament,
they were received into the Canon by the Decrees of certain Councils, when
several other Books, by many accounted Sacred, were rejected as Spurious: These
Councils both of Pharisees and Christians, were made up of Men, who were no
Prophets, but only learned Doctors; yet it must necessarily be granted, that in
this choice they made the Word of God their Rule; so that before they gave
their Approbation to the Books, they ought to know what was the Word of God.
Fourthly, Because as we have showed in the preceding Chapter, the Apostles did
not write as Prophets, but only as Teachers, and chose that way of instructing,
which every one judged most easy for his Disciples; from whence it follows, as
we have concluded in the end of the said Chapter, that their Writings contain
many things, whereof in Respect to Religion we have no absolute need. Fifthly
and lastly, Because in the New Testament, there are four whom we call
Evangelists; but who believes it was God's express Will, that the History of
Christ should be four times told and delivered to Men in Writing? Though things
may be contained in one, which are not in another, and that one helps to
understand another; we must not therefore conclude, that all things which the
four declare, are absolutely necessary to be known, and that God made choice of
them to write purposely, that the History of Christ might be the better
understood; for every one preached his own Gospel in several places, and every
one wrote what he preached plainly, that he might the more faithfully relate
the History of Jesus Christ, and not for any explanation to the rest. If by
mutually comparing them together, they are somet^mes more easily and better
understood, that happens by chance, and only in very few places, of which, though
we were ignorant, the History notwithstanding would be very perspicuous, and
Men nevertheless blessed and happy. Having showed that the Scripture in respect
of Religion only, and the universal Divine Law, is properly called Scripture:
It now remains to prove, that in this respect, and as it is properly so called,
it is neither maimed, faulty, or corrupted; and here I call that thing faulty,
maimed and corrupted, which is so falsely written and composed, that the true
sense of the words, cannot either by the use of the Language, or by the
Scripture it self be found out; for I do not affirm, that the Scripture, as it
contains the Divine Law, always observes the same letters, points, accents and
words, (I leave that to the Masorites who so superstitiously adore the Letter)
but only that the signification and sense (in respect of which only, any Speech
is to be called Divine) is derived to us uncorrupted, though the words whereby
that sense was signified, have been often changed; that cannot, as we have
said, detract from the Sacredness of Scripture, for it would not have been one
jot less Divine, had it been written in other Words, or in any other Language.
That we have received the Divine Law in this respect uncorrupted, no body can
question, for by the Scripture it self, without any doubt or difficulty we
perceive, that the sum thereof is to love God above all things, and our
Neighbors as our selves. This cannot be adulterated, nor written by a too
hasty erring Pen, for if the Scripture ever taught any other thing, it must
necessarily teach all other things; otherwise seeing this is the Foundation of
all Religion, take away this Foundation, and the whole Fabric falls to the
ground; and if this were not so, the Scripture were not Scripture, but quite
another Book. It remains then without Controversy, this was always the
Doctrine of Scripture, and consequently, that no error could creep into it to
corrupt its Sense, which would have been quickly perceived by every body, and
who ever had gone about to corrupt it, his Malice would have presently
appeared: If then this Foundation be immovable and incorruptible, the same
must be concluded of other things, which indisputably follow from it, and which
are also fundamentals; as that God is, that he provides for all, that he is
Omnipotent, and that he has decreed it shall go well with Good, and ill with
Wicked-men, and that our Salvation depends only upon his Grace and Mercy. These
things the Scripture every where plainly teaches, and ought always to teach,
else all other things were vain and without any Foundation: It Is as impossible
to corrupt any other Moral Doctrines, which are built upon, and evidently
follow from this Foundation; namely, to do justice, to succor those that are
in want and distress; not to kill, not to covet, and none of these moral
Precepts can be mis-interpreted or corrupted by malice, or obliterated by
length of time: If any of these things should be blotted out, they would be
again dictated to mankind, by the first general Foundation, and more especially
by the Doctrine of Charity which is every where so much commended in the Old
and New Testament: Should it be granted, that there is no wickedness which ever
entered into the Heart of Man, which some person or other has not committed,
yet never was there any Man, who to excuse or justify his Crimes, endeavored
to blot out the Laws, or to preach Impiety for good and wholesome Doctrine. Though
it be every Man's nature, whether King or Subject, when he has done any thing
that is evil, to palliate the fact with such Circumstances, as may make it
appear as little as is possible dishonest or unjust. We therefore conclude,
that the Universal Divine Law, which the Scripture teaches, is delivered and
derived to us pure and incorruptible. There are other things also, which have
been faithfully delivered to us, namely, the general Collection of Scripture
Histories, because they are universally known. The common people of the Jews,
were wont to sing the Antiquities and Ancient Facts of their Nation, in Psalms
or Songs. The principal things done by Christ and his Passion, were quickly
published through the whole Roman Empire, and therefore it is impossible to
believe, unless the greatest part of mankind should agree in that which is
incredible, that the principal things in Scripture Histories should be
delivered to posterity, otherwise than they were first received. Whatever then
is adulterated or faulty, must happen only in this or that Circumstance of a
Prophecy or History, the more to move people to Devotion, or in some Miracle
to puzzle and nonplus Philosophers; or lastly, in matters Speculative, after
they were brought into Religion by Schismatics, abusing Divine Authority to
support their own inventions: But whether these things be or be not adulterated
and corrupted, does not at all concern Salvation, which I will expressly show in
the following Chapter, though I think enough has been already said to prove it,
in this, and the second Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. Shows, that the Scripture teaches nothing but what is very plain;
intending nothing but Men's Obedience; neither does it teach or declare any
other thing of the Divine Nature, than what a Man may in a right course of
life, in some degree imitate.
WE have already declared in the second Chapter of this Treatise, that the
Prophets did not so much excel in perfection of Mind and Understanding, as in a
singular faculty and power of Imagination: That God revealed to them no deep
points of Philosophy, but only things very plain and easy, condesending and
applying himself to their Capacities, and preconceiv'd Opinions. We have in the
fifth Chapter shown, that the Scripture delivers and teaches things in such a
manner, as may render them most easy to be understood by every Man, and that
it does not prove, deduce, and link things together, by maxims and definitions,
but only plainly relates and declares things; and to make Men believe, confirms
what it says by Experience, (that is) by Miracles and Histories; making use of
such a Style, and such Expressions, as are most likely to move and prevail upon
the Minds of the common people; of which I have spoken in proving the third
Particular of the sixth Chapter. Lastly, I have showed in the seventh Chapter,
that the difficulty of understanding the Scripture, lies only in the Language
wherein it was originally written, and not in the sublimity and abstruceness of
the Subject whereof it treats; and moreover, that the Prophets did not preach
only to the Learned, but in general to all the Jews; and that the Apostles
preached the Doctrine of the Gospel, in Churches where there was a common and
universal Assembly of all people: by all which it evidently appears, that
Scripture Doctrine contains no high Speculations, nor Philosophical Arguments,
but only things plain and intelligible by the meanest and dullest Capacities. I
strangely admire the accuteness of those Men, who discover in the Scripture
Mysteries so profound, that it is impossible for the Tongue of Man to unfold
them, and who have filled Religion with so many Philosophical Speculations,
that they have turned the Church into an Academy, Religion into a Science, or
rather into Wrangling and Dispute: But it is no wonder that Men who boast of
Supernatural Illumination should pretend to more than we find in Philosophers,
who own they have no more than what is Natural. I would really admire those
illuminated Men, could they teach us any new Speculations, or any thing that
was not common and vulgar amongst the Heathen Philosophers, whom they call
Blind: For if you inquire what are those profound Mysteries, these inspired Men
perceive in Scripture, they can tell us of nothing beyond the idle fancies and
conceits of Plato and Aristotle, which look more like the Dreams of Idiots than
Discoveries made out of Scripture by Learned Men. I do not positively maintain,
that nothing belongs to Scripture Doctrine, which is matter of mere
Speculation, for in the preceding Chapter I have mentioned some fundamentals of
Scripture that are so; but my meaning is, they are very few and very plain;
what they are, and upon what reason determined to be so, I come now to show,
which will be easily done, after that we know the Scriptures chief design was
not to teach Arts and Sciences, and that it requires from Men nothing but
Obedience, condemning their Obstinacy, not their Ignorance: Moreover, because
Obedience toward God, consists only in loving our Neighbor, (for whoever
loves his Neighbor purposely to obey God, he, as Paul says, Romans chap. 13.
v. 8. has fulfilled the Law) it follows, that no other Knowledge is commended
in Scripture, but that which is necessary to all Men, that they may, according
to this Precept of loving our Neighbor, obey God; which Knowledge, if Men have
not, they must necessarily be stubborn, or at least without the discipline of
Obedience; but all other Speculations which do not directly tend to this end,
whether they concern the knowledge of God, or of natural things, they have
nothing to do with Scripture, and are to be excluded out of revealed Religion.
Now though these things be obvious to every Man, yet because upon this point
depends the ending of all debate in Religion; I will demonstrate and explain
the thing as fully and clearly as is possible; which to perform, we in the
first place ought to prove, That an intellectual and accurate knowledge of God,
is not a gift so common to all Believers as is Obedience. Secondly, That the
Knowledge which God by his Prophets required of all Men in general, and which
every Man is obliged to have, is nothing else but the Knowledge of his Divine
Justice and Love, both which particulars are evidently proved out of the
Scripture it self, Exodus chap. 6. v. 3. God for an evidence of his particular
favor to Moses, says, I am the Lord, I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and
unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah, was I not
known to them; for the better understanding of this Text, we are to observe,
that Elsadai signifies in Hebrew, God alsufficient, because he gives to every
Man that which is sufficient for him; and though Sadai of it self, be often taken
for God, yet the word El, is always to be understood; we are therefore to note,
that in Scripture there is no other word to be found but Jehovah, that
signifies God's absolute Being without any relation to things created, and
therefore the Jews will have this to be God's proper Name, and all others to be
Appellatives; and indeed all the rest of God's Names, whether they be
Substantives or Adjectives, are but Attributes given to God, as he is
considered under a relation to his Creatures, or is made manifest by them: The
word El, or by adding to it the Paragogical Letter He, Eloha signifies nothing
else but Powerful, which is a title of Dignity or Excellency, as when we style
Paul an Apostle: Other Virtues of his Power, are expressed by saying the great
God, God to be feared, the just, merciful God, etc. or to express them all at
once, the plural number of this word El is often used in a singular
signification. Seeing then God said to Moses he was not known to the Patriarchs
by the Name of Jehovah, it follows, they knew no Name or Attribute of God that
expressed his absolute Essence and Nature, but only his Works and his Promises,
(that is) his Power as it was manifested by things visible; and this God said
to Moses, not to accuse the Patriarchs of Unbelief, but to magnify and commend
their Faith and readiness to believe; by which, though they had not so great a
knowledge of God as Moses had, yet they firmly relied on his Promises; not like
Moses, who though he had sublimer Notions of God, doubted his Divine Promises,
and told God, that instead of the Deliverance he had promised, he had brought
the Children of Israel into a worse condition. If then God told Moses, that the
Patriarchs knew not that singular and proper Name of God, to commend their
Faith and simplicity of Heart, and to put Moses in mind of the particular
Favor and Grace God had showed him; it clearly proves my first Position; which
is, That Men are not obliged by any express Command to know God's Attributes,
it being a peculiar gift granted only to some Believers, which I need not prove
by Scripture, since it is evident beyond all dispute, that every Man has not
an equal share of Divine Knowledge; and that a Man is no more able by a Command
to become Wise, than it is in his own power to be, or live: Men, Women and
Children may all, as they are commanded, obey, but never could a Command make
any Man wise. If any Man say there is no need of understanding God's
Attributes, but only of simply believing them, without any demonstration, he
talks idly; for invisible things, which are the objects only of the Mind, can
only be seen by Demonstrations, (that is) firm convincing Arguments, and
therefore what a Man only and barely hears of things invisible, never affects
the Understanding, nor declares a Man's meaning any more, than do the words of
a Parrot, or some artificial Engine, that speak without Understanding or Sense.
But before I proceed further, I ought to give an account why it is often said in
Genesis, that the Patriarchs preached in the Name of Jehovah, which seems
expressly to contradict what I have said. This is easily answered, if we
consider what has been said in the eighth Chapter, where we have proved, that
the Writer of the Pentateuch did not call things and places by those very names
which they had at the time of which the Writer speaks, but by the names which
they were known by, in the Writers own time; therefore when it is said in
Genesis, that God was preached to the Patriarchs by the Name of Jehovah, it is
not because God was known to them by that Name, but because to that Name of
God, the Jews paid the highest Reverence and Veneration when Genesis was
written: and this must necessarily be a true and clear Answer, because it is
expressly said in the forecited text of Exodus, that God was not known to the
Patriarchs by his Name Jehovah; and because also in Exodus chap. 3. v. 13. Moses
desired to know God's Name, which must have been known to him, had it been
known to the Patriarchs before him. It must therefore be concluded, that the
faithful Patriarchs were ignorant of this Name of God, and that the Knowledge
of God is a Gift not a Command. It is now time to pass on to the proof of the
second Particular, That God required from Men by his Prophets, no other
Knowledge of himself, than the Knowledge of his Divine Justice and Love; (that
is) those Attributes which Men in a right course of living, may in some measure
and degree imitate; which the Prophet Jeremy in express words declares; for
chap. 20. v. 15, 16. speaking of King Josiah, he says, Did not thy Father eat
and drink, and do Judgment and Justice, and then it was well with him; he
judged the cause of the poor and the needy, then it was well with him; is not
this to know me, says the Lord? Nor are those words less clear, chap. 9. v.
24. Let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me,
that I am the Lord which exercise loving kindness, Judgment and Righteousness
in the Earth, for in these things I delight, says the Lord. We have a further
proof, Exodus chap. 34. v. 6. where Moses desiring to see and know God, God
reveals no other Attributes to him, but such as declare his Divine Justice
and Love. Lastly, How express in the point are the words of St. John in the
fourth Chapter of his first Epistle; because no Man ever saw God, he makes God
known only by Love; and concludes, that he knows God, and God dwells in him
who has Charity. We see then, that Moses, Jeremy, and John comprize that
Knowledge of God which every Man is bound to have, in that only wherein we say
it is comprehended; namely, in believing, that God is superlatively just and
merciful, and the only pattern of a good life: The Scripture does no where give
any express and positive definition of God neither does it prescribe any other
Attributes to be imitated and believed by us, but those we have named, nor are
those expressly commended as Attributes; so that from all these things we
conclude, that the intellectual Knowledge of God, which considers God as he is
in his own Nature and Essence, which Nature no Man can by any certain course of
life imitate or take for his pattern, does not at all teach a Man how to live
well, neither does it concern a Man's Faith or revealed Religion: So that a Man
may be infinitely mistaken in it, and yet not offend God. Let us not wonder
then, that God applied himself to the Imaginations and preconceived Opinions of
the Prophets, and that faithful Believers had different Opinions of God, as by
many Instances we have proved in the second Chapter; nor let any Man wonder,
that the Sacred Volumes do every where speak so improperly of God, ascribing to
him Hands, Feet, Eyes, Ears, Mind, Local Motion, yea, Passions of the Mind,
saying, he is Jealous, Merciful, etc. and sometimes set him out as a Judge
sitting in Heaven on a Regal Throne, and Christ at his Right hand, all which is
spoken according to the Capacity of the Vulgar, whom the Scripture intended to
make Obedient, but not Learned. Of these things, whatever ordinary professed
Divines, have by Reason and Natural Light discovered to be disagreeable to the
Divine Nature, they will have Metaphorically Interpreted, but that which is
above their Capacity must be taken Literally. If all things of this kind we
meet with in Scripture, must be taken and understood Metaphorically, then the
Scripture was not written for the rude and ignorant common people, but for the
Learned, and especially for Philosophers; and if it should be sin piously and
in simplicity of Heart, to believe those things of God, which the Sacred
Volumes have in the Letter ascribed to him, the Prophets considering the
weakness of the common people's Understanding, ought to have been very wary and
careful, what Phrases and Expressions they used, and should have clearly and
plainly, which is no where done, declared those Attributes of God which every
Man is bound to believe: No Man ought to think, that Opinions considered
absolutely in themselves, without respect to a Man's Works, have any Piety or
Impiety in them, but a Man is said to be Godly or Ungodly in his Faith, in
respect of those Opinions which incline him to Obedience, or those that
encourage him to Sin and Disobedience; so that if a Man, though he rightly and
truly believe, be stubborn and disobedient, his Faith is evil; and on the
contrary, if a Man believe that which is false, and yet live well, his Faith is
good; for the true knowledge of God, is not a Precept, but a Divine Gift, and
God never required from Men, any other Knowledge, than that of his Divine Love
and Justice, which Knowledge is necessary only to Obedience, not to Science.

CHAP. XIV. What is Faith. Who are Believers. The fundamentals of Faith stated.
Faith distinguished from Philosophy or Reason.
TO understand truly what Faith is, it is very necessary to know, that the
Scripture was fitted and accommodated not only to the Capacity of the Prophets,
but also to the Understanding of the inconstant mutable vulgar people of the
Jewish Nation, of which no person can be ignorant, that will but a little
consider and observe the Scripture. He that will take all things which are
promiscuously set down in Scripture, to be that universal positive Doctrine,
whereby God is to be known, can never rightly discern what was suited to the
Capacity of the Jews, but not being able to distinguish between Divine
Doctrine, and the common peoples Opinions, must take human Fictions and Fancies
for Heavenly Instructions, and consequently very much abuse the Sacred
Scriptures Authority. Who does not plainly see, that this is the cause we have
so many Sectaries, who maintain their different and contrary Opinions to be all
Doctrines and Principles of Faith, which they confirm by many Scripture proofs,
so that it is become a Dutch Proverb, Geen Ketter sonder letter, there is no
Sectary or Heretic but has a Text of Scripture to maintain his Opinion. The
Sacred Books of Scripture were not all written by one person, nor for the
people of one Age, but by diverse persons of different dispositions, and for the
people of several Ages distant in time from one another, almost two thousand
years; by some computations many more. We do not charge these Sectaries with
impiety, for applying the words of Scripture to their own Opinions, as
heretofore they were suited to Vulgar Capacities, it being lawful for every one
to apply Scripture to his own Opinions, if he find himself thereby more
inclined to obey God in those things which relate to Justice and Charity; but
we blame the Sectaries for not allowing other Men the same liberty they
themselves take; they count all Men, be they never so honest and virtuous, who
are not of their Opinions, the Enemies of God, and persecute them as such; but
call those who are of their Mind, God's Elect, be they never so very Knaves;
which is the most pernicious wicked humor can possibly be in a Commonwealth.
To make it clear then, how far in point of Faith, every Man may extend his
liberty of thinking what he pleases, and upon whom we are to look as
Believers, though they differ in Opinion; I resolve to show in this Chapter what
Faith is, to declare what are the fundamentals of Faith, and to distinguish
Faith from Reason or Philosophy, which is the chief design of the whole
Treatise. To do these things in order, it is necessary to put you in mind again,
what is the Scriptures principal intention, for that will show us the right
Rule of determining what is Faith. We have told you in the preceding Chapter,
that the chief design of Scripture is to teach Men Obedience, which no Man can
deny; for who does not plainly see the Discipline of Obedience to be the main
scope of the Old and New Testament? The only End of both is to make Men obey
God with all their Heart. I need not repeat what I have already told you, that
Moses did not endeavor to convince the Israelites with Reason, but to bind and
oblige them by a Covenant, by Oaths and Benefits; he threatened those that broke
the Law with punishment, and encouraged the observers of it with Rewards; which
were means not to increase Knowledge, but only to procure Obedience: The
Doctrine of the Gospel, contains nothing but plain simple Faith, namely, to
believe God, and to reverence and worship him, or which is the same thing, to
obey him. There is no need of demonstrating a thing so evident, or of heaping
up Texts of Scripture that commend Obedience, whereof there are many in both
Testaments; what a Man is to do to obey God, the Scripture in many places
declares; namely, that the whole Law consists in loving our Neighbor; so that
it must be granted, that he in the Judgment of the Law is obedient, who
according to God's Command loves his Neighbor as himself; and that he on the
contrary, who hates his Neighbor, or cares not for him, is rebellious and
disobedient. Lastly, it must be confessed, that the Scripture was written and
published, not only for the Wise and Learned, but for all people in general of
all times: Hence then must it follow, that we are not commanded by Scripture to
believe any thing else, but what is absolutely necessary to enable us to
perform and obey this Commandment, so that this Precept is the only Rule of
Catholic Faith, and by it only, all those fundamental Doctrines of Faith,
which every one is obliged to believe, ought to be defined and determined;
which being clear and manifest, and that, from this Foundation only, all things
ought to be rationally deduced and derived: Let any Man judge, whether the many
Disputes and Dissentions sprung up in the Church, could have any other cause
than those I mentioned in the beginning of the seventh Chapter, which force me
here to show from this Foundation I have laid, the manner and reason of stating
and determining, what are the true Doctrines and Principles of Faith; for
unless I do this, and make it good by sure and certain Rules, I have indeed
hitherto done very little, seeing otherwise every Man may introduce what he
pleases, under pretense that it is a necessary means to Obedience; especially,
when any thing comes into question concerning the Divine Attributes: To proceed
orderly in making the thing clear and plain, I will begin with the definition
of Faith, which according to the Foundation I have laid, ought to be thus
defined. Faith, is to have such Thoughts or Opinions of God, as make a Man obey
him; where such thoughts are not, there is no Obedience, and where they are,
Obedience necessarily follows such Opinions; which definition is so clear, and
evidently follows from what we have already demonstrated, that it needs no
explication: What follows from this definition I will briefly show; first, that
Faith of it self without Obedience, is not able to save a Man, as James says,
Chap. 2. 17. Faith without Works is dead; which is the Subject of that whole
Chapter. Secondly, That he who is truly obedient, must necessarily have Saving
Faith; for where ever there is Obedience, there, as I have said, must be Faith,
which the same Apostle says expressly in the 18 th verse of the said 2 d chap.
Show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works;
and John in his 1 st Epist. chap. 4. v. 78. Every one that loves his Neighbor
is born of God, and knows God, he that loves not, knows not God, for God
is love; from whence it likewise follows, that we can judge no Man to be a
Believer, or an Unbeliever, but by his Works, (that is) if his Works be good,
though in his Opinions he dissent from other Believers, yet he is a Believer; and
if his Works be evil, though in words he agree with others that believe, he is an
Infidel; for where there is Obedience, there must necessarily be Faith, and
Faith without Works is dead, which John in chap. 4. 13. expressly declares,
Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of
his Spirit, which Spirit is Love, for he said just before, God is Love; and
concludes from his own Principles, that he certainly has the Spirit of God,
who has Love; and because no Man ever saw God, he concludes, that no Man can
have any sense or knowledge of God, but only by Love; and that no Man can know
any other Attribute of God but Love, by partaking of it; which Reasons, if they
do not absolutely convince, yet they sufficiently explain St. John's meaning.
What he says in the 3 d and 4 th verses of his 2 d chap. in express words
fully proves what we maintain; And hereby, says he, do we know that we know
him, if we keep his Commandments; he that says I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; hence it again follows,
that they are Antichrists, who persecute honest and just Men, that differ from
them in Opinion, and do not maintain their Doctrines; they that love Justice
and Charity, are thereby only known to be Believers, and whoever persecutes
such Believers is Antichrist. Lastly, it follows, that Faith does not require
Opinions that are in themselves true, but such only as are pious, and incline a
Man's Heart to Obedience: There are many things that have not the least shadow
of truth in them, which a Man may believe, and yet be ignorant that they are
false, otherwise he would necessarily be disobedient. How comes it to pass,
that he who is a lover of Justice, and studies to obey God, reverenceth that as
Divine, which he knows is no way agreeable to the Divine Nature? Men may err in
the simplicity of their Hearts, and the Scripture, as I have already said,
condemns stubbornness not ignorance, which follows from the very definition I
have given of Faith; every part thereof being derived from the general
Foundation before mentioned, and from the main end and design of Scripture; so
that Faith does not require from Men, Opinions absolutely true in themselves,
but such only as are necessary to Obedience, and to confirm a Man in love
toward his Neighbor; by which Love, to use St. John's expression, every Man
is in God, and God in him. Seeing then every Man's Faith in respect of
Obedience or Disobedience, and not in respect of truth or falsehood, is to be
esteemed good or evil; and seeing Men's dispositions are so various, that none
agree in all things, but are so diversely swayed by Opinion, that what moves
this Man to Devotion, begets in another Laughter and Contempt; it f^llows, that
to Universal Faith, only those Doctrines are necessary, concerning which,
amongst honest Men there can be no dispute; those things that are of such a
nature, that one Man may account them Religious, and another Irreligious, are
to be judged only by Works; to Catholic Faith then those Doctrines only
belong, which beget in a Man Obedience toward God, and of which, if a Man be
ignorant, it is impossible he should obey him; in other things, every Man
according to the knowledge he that of himself, may, to establish himself in the
love of Justice, think what to him seems best, which will take away all
occasions of Dispute and Controversy in the Church. Now I will not fear to
name those Doctrines of Universal Faith, or those Fundamentals of Scripture
that (by what I have proved in these two last Chapters) tend all to this; that
there is a Supreme Being that loves Justice and Charity, to whom all that will
be saved, must be obedient, and worship him, in the exercise of Justice and
love toward their Neighbor, and from hence these several Positions clearly
and easily follow. First, That there is a God, or Supreme Being, who is most
just and merciful, by whose Example every Man ought to regulate his life; he
that knows not, or does not believe that God is, cannot obey him, or
acknowledge him to be his Judge. Secondly, That this God is one, which Opinion
is absolutely necessary to make a Man adore, admire, and love God, for
Devotion, Admiration, and Love, are caused by that excellency which is in one
above all others. Thirdly, That he is every where present, or that all things
are known to him, for if any thing were hidden from him, or if Man did not
think that he sees all things, we might doubt of his Equity and Justice,
whereby he governs all things. Fourthly, That he has Supreme Power and
Dominion over all things, that he does nothing by compulsion, but of his own
good Will and Pleasure; all are bound to obey him, and he no body. Fifthly,
That the worship of God, and obedience to him, consists only in Justice and
Charity toward our Neighbors. Sixthly, that only they who obey God by such a
course of life will be saved, and others who live Slaves to their Lusts and
Pleasures will be condemned. If Men did not firmly believe this, there would be
no reason why a Man should rather obey God than his own desires and pleasures.
Seventhly and lastly, God pardons the sins of those that repent; there is no
Man living without sin, and therefore if this were not an Article of Faith, all
would despair of Salvation, and there would be no reason to believe God
merciful; but he who steadfastly believes, that God, through Grace and Mercy,
whereby he orders all things, pardons Men's offenses, and is thereby more
flamed with love toward God, he knows Christ according to the Spirit, and
Christ is in him. Every one of these things is necessary to be known, that all
Men without exception may obey God, according to the prescript of the Law which
we have already explained. If you take away any of the aforesaid Positions or
Doctrines, there can be no Obedience; but what God, or what this exemplar of
living well is? Whether he be Fire, a Spirit, Light, Cogitation, etc. it
concerns not our Faith, neither in what notion or respect he is an example for
us to live by. Whether it be because he has a just and merciful Mind, or
because all things subsist and act by him, and consequently, we by and through
him understand what is just and good; it matters not what every Man thinks or
concludes of these things, neither is Faith concerned, whether a Man believe
that God is, in respect of his Power, Omnipresent; or whether he govern all
things by the freedom or necessity of his nature; whether he prescribe Laws as
a Prince, or teach Eternal Verities; whether Men obey God as free agents,
because they have freedom of Will, or because they are necessitated by God's
Decrees? Whether the reward of good Men, and the punishment of evil, be natural
or supernatural? Faith is not concerned how a Man understands these things, so
long as he makes no conclusions whereby he may take a liberty of sinning, or
lessen his Obedience to God: Of these Doctrines of Faith a Man may make such an
interpretation, as is most likely to make him believe, and obey God cheerfully
without any reluctance; for as we have already shown, Faith was heretofore
revealed and written, according to the Capacity and Opinions of the Prophets
and People of that time, so that now also, every Man is bound to apply his
Faith to his own Reason, in such a manner as may make him without the least
doubting or reluctance believe; for as we have proved, Faith rather requires
Piety than Verity, and as Faith cannot be pious and saving, without Obedience,
so nothing but Obedience makes a Man a faithful Believer; his Faith is not
best, who can give the best reasons for it, but he that has done the most and
greatest works of Justice and Charity. A Doctrine which must in all Men's
Judgments be very wholesome and necessary in all Commonwealths, for taking away
the causes of much wickedness and many troubles. Before I go further, by what
has been said, the Objections may be easily answered, which were mentioned in
the first Chapter, where I treated of God's speaking to the Israelites from
Mount Sinai; for though that Voice which the Israelites heard, could not give
that people any Philosophical or Mathematical certainty of God's Existence, yet
it was sufficient to make them admire God, under that knowledge they before had
of him, and incite them to Obedience toward him, which was all that God
purposed and designed in that spectacle; it was not God's intention at that
time to teach them the true and real Attributes of his Essence, (because he
then revealed none to them) but to break and subdue their rebellious and
stubborn humor, and draw them to Obedience; and therefore he did not set upon
them with Arguments and Reason, but with Tempest, Noise, Thunder and Lightning,
as is recorded, Exodus 20. 20.

I am now to prove, that between Faith or Theology, and Philosophy, there is no
commerce or affinity; which no Man can deny, who knows how much the Foundation
and End of these two faculties differ; for the end and design of Philosophy, is
Verity; and the intention and end of Faith, is nothing but Obedience and Piety.
The fundadamentals of Philosophy, are common notions which are to be drawn only
from Nature it self, but the principles and fundamentals of Faith, are to be
derived from Scripture-History, Scripture Language, from the Scripture it self,
and from Revelation; as we have shown in the 7 th Chapter: Faith therefore
allows every Man such a freedom and liberty of Reasoning or Philosophizing,
that he may think what he will of any thing, provided he do nothing that is
wicked, and condemns only those for Heretics and Schismatics, who broach
Doctrines that are the causes of disobedience, hatred, contention, and wrath;
esteeming only such to be Believers, who use their utmost endeavors to
persuade and practice Justice and Charity. Lastly, Because what I have said in
this and the former Chapter, was what I chiefly intended in the whole Treatise;
I earnestly request the Reader, before I proceed further, that he will again
and again carefully read, and seriously consider, the Contents of these two
Chapters, and that he will have Charity enough to believe, that I have written
nothing with design to introduce new Doctrines; but only to rectify what is
amiss, which I hope e're long to see done.

CHAP. XV. Theology or Divinity is no Handmaid to Reason, nor Reason to
Divinity: Why we believe the Authority of the Holy Scripture.
AMongst those that know not how to distinguish and divide Philosophy from
Theology, there is very great dispute, whether the Scripture ought to be
subservient to Reason, or Reason to Scripture, (that is) whether we are to
judge of the Sense of Scripture by Reason; or whether Reason ought to submit to
Scripture? The Scepticks, who deny the certainty of Reason, maintain one of
these Opinions, and the Dogmatists, who judge all things by Reason, the other;
but both, as appears by what I have said, are extremely mistaken; for whoever
follows either of the two Opinions, must necessarily deprave either Reason or
Scripture. We have shown that the Scripture does teach us no Philosophy, but
only Piety, and all things contained in it, are fitted to the Capacity and
Opinions of vulgar people: Whoever then goes about to apply it to Philosophy,
must father upon the Prophets, many things whereof they did never so much as
dream, and interpret that to be their meaning which never was. He, on the other
side, who makes Reason or Philosophy a Handmaid to Divinity, will be
necessitated to let the mistaken Opinions of old times pass for Divine Truths;
possessing and blinding his Understanding with Error and Prejudice, and both
run mad together without Reason. The first among the Pharisees, who openly
declared, that Scripture was to be accommodated to Reasons, was Maimonides,
(whose Opinion we have hinted and refuted in the 7 th Chapter) but though this
Author were of great Authority among the Pharisees, yet the greatest part of
that Sect did not agree with him in this point, but generally maintained the
Opinion of Rabbi Iehuda Alpakhar, who endeavoring to avoid the Error of
Maimonides, fell into the clean contrary Opinion, holding that Reason ought to
be a Handmaid to Scripture, and wholly subjected to it; and would have nothing
in Scripture metaphorically interpreted, because the literal sense was contrary
and repugnant to Reason, but because it was so to the Scripture it self, (that
is) to the positive Doctrines of Scripture, and laid it down for a general
rule, that whatever the Scripture did in plain and express words affirm and
teach, that upon the account of its Authority was to be admitted for Truth, if
no other Position were found in the Bible, which did only consequentially, but
not directly contradict it; for there are some Scripture expressions, which
seem to imply contradiction to what has been positively and expressly declared,
and therefore those places only are to be metaphorically taken: (For example)
Deuteronomy. 6.4. it is plainly and positively declared, That there is but one God, or
that God is but one; but there are many places where God speaking of himself,
and the Prophets of God speak in the plural number, which manner of speaking
supposes and implies more God's than one, though that does not clearly and
directly appear to be the intention of the words: All those places therefore
are to be metaphorically interpreted, not because it is repugnant to Reason,
that there should be more Gods than one, but because the Scripture it self
directly declares that there is but only one. So likewise, because the
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. does in the Rabbi's Opinion directly declare, that God
is Incorporeal, therefore upon the Authority only of this Text, and not upon
any account of Reason, we are bound to believe God has no Body, and
consequently, all places of Scripture are to be metaphorically taken, which
ascribe to God Hands, Feet, or which seem to suppose God Corporeal: This was
the Opinion of this Author, whom I commend for explaining Scripture by
Scripture, but I wonder that a rational Man should endeavor to destroy Reason:
It is very true, that Scripture ought to be expounded by Scripture, so long as
there is doubt of the sense of the words, or of the meaning of the Prophets;
but when we have found out the true sense, it is absolutely necessary to make
use of our Reason and Judgment, to gain our assent and consent to it; for if we
must submit to Scripture, though our Reason be not at all convinced by it, must
we submit with Reason, or like blind Men without any Reason at all? if we
submit without Reason, we do it foolishly without Judgment; if we submit with
Reason, then it is by the command and dictates of Reason, that we believe and
embrace the Scripture, which we would not do, were it contrary to Reason. Who
can in his Mind believe, or consent to any thing which his Reason flatly
opposes? Denying a thing with a Man's Heart, is nothing else but the
gainsaying and dissent of a Man's Reason. I extremely wonder some Men should
subject that excellent gift and Divine Light, Reason, to Dead Letters, which
humane Malice may corrupt and mis-interpret, and yet account it no offense to
speak unworthily against Reason and the Mind of Man, whereon God has engraven
his Word, saying, Our Reason is blinded and lost, but in the mean time declare,
it is abominable wickedness to think any such thing of the Letter, which they
Idolize for the Word of God; they account it great Piety in a Man, not to trust
to his own Judgment and Reason, but great wickedness to doubt their fidelity,
who communicated to us the Sacred Volumes. Certainly such Men's Folly exceeds
their Piety: What troubles them? What is it they fear? Cannot Religion and
Faith be defended unless Men be professedly ignorant, and bid Reason farewell?
they that think so, do rather fear than believe Scripture. God forbid that
Religion should be a Servant to Reason, or Reason to Religion, both may with
great Peace and Concord preserve their own proper Dominion, which I will
presently prove, after I have a little examined the Tenet and Opinion of our
Rabbin Alpakhar; he, as I have said, would have us receive every thing for
truth which the Scripture affirms, and reject every thing as false which the
Scripture denies; and maintains, that the Scripture does no where in express
words affirm or deny, any thing contrary to what in another place it has
positively affirmed or denied; both which are very bold and rash Positions. I
will not press him with what perhaps he never took notice of, that the
Scripture contains several Books, that it was written by several Authors, in
several Ages, for the use of diverse people; and seeing upon his own Authority
only, he maintains, what neither Reason or Scripture ever said, he ought to
show, that all those places of Scripture, which do but by consequence
contradict others, may from the nature of the Language, and in respect of the
place, conveniently bear a metaphorical interpretation; and he ought likewise
to prove, That the Scripture is derived down to us, without any corruption or
adulteration. To come close to the business, I ask him concerning his first
Position, Whether we are bound to believe every thing to be true which the
Scripture affirms; and reject every thing as false which it denies, though both
be contrary to our Reason? If he answer that nothing can be found in Scripture
contrary to Reason, I press him with this instance. In the Decalogue, Exodus 34.
14. Deuteronomy. 4. 24. and in other places, it is said, That G^d is Jealous; but that
such a passion as Jealousy should be in God is contrary to Reason: Now if
there be other places in Scripture which suppose God not to be Jealous, they
must be metaphorically interpreted, that they may not seem to suppose any such
thing. The Scripture expressly says, That God came down upon Mount Sinai, Exodus
19.20. and ascribes to him other local motions, no where expressly declaring,
that God is not moved; so that all Men ought to believe it to be truth, and
therefore that which Solomon says of God in 1 Kings 8. 27. That he cannot be
comprehended, or contained in any place, though it do not expressly but only
consequentially declare, that God is not moved, ought to be in like manner
metaphorically understood: The Heavens also must be taken for God's Throne and
Habitation, because the Scripture declares positively they are. Many things of
this kind, are said in Scripture, consonant to the Opinions of the Prophets and
People, which Reason and Philosophy, but not Scripture say are false, all which
according to the Rabbi's Opinion, who in such cases will allow no consulting
with Reason, must pass for Truths. He affirms that which is not true, in saying
that no one place of Scripture expressly and directly contradicts another, but
only by consequence; for Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 24. expressly declares, That God is a
consuming fire, and directly denies that God is like any visible thing, Deuteronomy.
4. 12. Now if the Rabbi will have this latter Text, not directly, but only by
consequence to deny that God is Fire, and therefore must be so interpreted that
it may not seem to deny it; let him have his Will, and let us grant, that God
is Fire; or rather, not to be as mad as he, we will let this pass, and make use
of another example: Samuel directly denies, that God ever repents of his
Decrees, (1 Samuel 15. 29.) but Jeremy on the contrary affirms, ( Chap. 18. v. 8,
10.) That God does sometimes repent, both of the good and of the evil that he
purposed and decreed. Do not these two Texts directly oppose one another? Which
of these two must be metaphorically interpreted? both the Opinions are general,
and contrary to each other; what one directly affirms, the other positively
denies, so that the Rabbi, by his own Rule, is bound to believe one and the
same thing to be true and false: but what matter is it, though one place do not
directly, but only by consequence contradict another? If the consequence be
clear, and the nature and circumstance of the place will admit of no
Metaphorical Explication; of which many are to be found in the Bible, we have
spoke to them in the second Chapter, where we have shown, that several Prophets
had different Opinions, and particularly of those contradictions which I in the
9 th and 10 th Chapter have made appear to be in several of the Scripture
Histories; they need not be repeated, what I have said being sufficient to
confute the Absurdities and Falsities which must necessarily follow from the
Rabbi's Rule, and to show how unadvisedly and grossly the Author is mistaken.
The different Opinions of both Rabbis being confuted, I do again positively
declare, That Divinity or Theology ought not to be a Servant to Reason, nor
Reason to Theology, but both ought to maintain their own Dominion; Reason ought
to rule in things which relate to Wisdom and Truth, and Theology in matters
which concern our Piety and Obedience: The power of Reason does not so far
extend it self, as to determine, that Men only by Obedience, without the true
knowledge of things may be blessed and happy, but Theology dictates nothing
else, and commands nothing but Obedience, not intending or being able to do any
thing against Reason, as we have showed in the preceding Chapter: Theology
determins Doctrines of Faith, no further than is necessary to Obedience, but
how those Doctrines are precisely in respect of Verity to be understood, it
leaves Reason to resolve, which is the light of our Mind, and without which we
see nothing but Dreams and Fancies. But here by Theology, I mean only
Revelation, so far as it declares the scope and end to which the Scripture
aims, (namely, the reason and manner of living obediently, or the Doctrines of
Faith and Piety.) This is that which is properly the word of God, and does not
consist in a certain number of Books, as we have showed in the 12 th Chapter:
Theology taken in this sense, if we consider its Precepts and Instructions,
perfectly agrees with Reason; and if we consider its End and Design, in nothing
contradicts it; and therefore universally concerns all mankind. As for the
whole Scripture in general, the sense thereof, as we have showed in the 7 th.
Chapter, is to be determined by Scripture History, and not by the History of
Nature, which is the Foundation and proper Subject of Philosophy: Nor ought we
to be troubled or concerned, if after we have found out the true sense of the
Scripture, the Scripture in some places seem repugnant to Reason; for whatever
of that kind we meet with in the Bible, and of which Men may without any breach
of Charity be ignorant, does not at all concern Theology, or the Word of God;
and consequently, of such things, a Man may without sin think what he pleases,
and therefore we positively conclude, that Reason is not to be accommodated to
Scripture, nor Scripture to Reason. But seeing the fundamental point in
Divinity, of Men's being saved only by Obedience, cannot be demonstrated by
Reason to be true or false; it may by way of Objection be then asked, Why then
do we believe it? If we do it blindly without Reason, we act like Fools without
Judgment; if on the other side, we say this Fundamental Tenet may be proved by
Reason, then Divinity is a part of Philosophy, and cannot be severed from it.
To this I answer, That I do clearly confess, this Fundamental Doctrine of
Theology cannot be made out by Natural Reason, at least, no Man that I know
has ever done it; therefore Revelation was absolutely necessary in the case,
but yet we may make use of our Judgment and Reason, that what has been
revealed may with a moral certainty be believed by us; I say with moral
certainty, for it is not to be expected, that we can have any greater assurance
than the Prophets themselves had, to whom the Revelation was first made, and
who had no more than a moral certainty, as we have showed in the second Chapter
of this Treatise. They therefore are in a very great error, who endeavor to
prove the Authority of Scripture by Mathematical Demonstration, for the
Authority of the Bible depends upon the Authority of the Prophets, and
consequently, can be proved by no stronger argument, than the Prophets made use
of to persuade the people of theirs: Our certainty of the Scriptures Authority,
can be grounded upon no other Foundation, than that whereon the Prophets
founded their Certainty and Authority; and we have already shown the certainty
of the Prophets, consisted in three particulars. First, In a clear and lively
imagination. Secondly, In a Sign. Thirdly and principally, in a Mind inclined
and devoted to Justice and Virtue: nor could they give any other evidences of
their Authority, either to the people to whom they spoke in their own persons
by word of mouth; nor can any other be given to us, to whom they speak by their
Writings; the lively imagination of the Prophets, was an Argument only to
themselves, and therefore all our assurance concerning Revelation, does and
must consist only in the other two particulars, namely, in a Sign, and in the
Doctrine. The eighteenth Chapter of Deuteronomy commands the people to obey
that Prophet, who in the name of the Lord gave them a true Sign, but if he
prophesied any thing that was false, though it were in the Name of the Lord, he
was to be put to death; as he was who endeavored to seduce them from the true
Religion, though he confirmed his Prophecy with Signs and Miracles; as appears
in the 13 th Chapter of Deuteronomy; whence it follows, that a true Prophet was
to be known from a false, by his Doctrine and by a Miracle both together, for
such a one only Moses declares to be a true Prophet, and commanded the people
to believe him, without any fear of being deceived: But he declared those to be
false Prophets, and guilty of Death, who foretold any thing that was false;
though it were in the Name of God; or he that preached false Gods, though he
wrought true Miracles: We then are obliged to believe the Scripture, (that is)
the Prophets, upon account only of their Doctrine confirmed by Signs; because
we see the Prophets above all things commend Justice and Charity, and intended
nothing else; because with a sincere Mind without any guile or deceit, they
declared that Men by Faith and Obedience should be made happy, and confirmed
this their Doctrines with Signs. We therefore conclude and persuade our selves,
that when they prophesied, they did neither dote or speak unadvisedly; in which
Opinion we are the more confirmed, when we consider, that all their Moral
Doctrines, did perfectly agree with Reason; for it is very observable, that the
Word of God in the Prophets, is exactly consonant to the Word of God within us;
so that I say again, we are as much assured of these things by the Scripture,
as the Jews were by the Prophets preaching to them viva voce; for we have
proved in the end of the second Chapter, that the Scripture as to its Doctrine
and the principal Histories thereof, is derived down to us uncorrupted, and
therefore this Fundamental Doctrine of Scripture and Theology, ought with good
reason to be embraced by us, though it cannot be proved by Mathematical
Demonstration. It is very great folly not to believe a thing which has been
confirmed by so many Testimonies of the Prophets, and which is so great a
comfort to those who have but ordinary portions of Reason, which is so
beneficial to the public, and which may without any danger or loss be
believed: We can give no reason for our doubting or unbelief, but our not
having Mathematical Demonstration to prove it; as if nothing could contribute
to living virtuously and prudently, but that which is absolutely and apparently
true, in which there is not the least shadow or doubt, and as if there were
nothing of chance and uncertainty in our Actions: I confess, they who think
Philosophy and Divinity contradictory one to another, and therefore conclude
one of them ought to be dethroned and subjected to the other, do very well to
build Divinity upon a sure Foundation, and endeavor by Infallible
Demonstration to support it; yet I cannot but condemn those that make use of
Reason to destroy Reason, and by Certain Reason endeavor to prove there is no
certainty in Reason; while they are demonstrating the Verity and Authority of
Theology, and strive to deprive Reason of its power; they subject Theology to
the Empire of Reason, and allow it no other splendour, than what it borrows from
Natural Light: If they boast of relying upon the Internal Testimony of the Holy
Spirit, and say they make use of Reason only to convert Infidels, we ought not
to believe them, because it is evident, that the Holy Spirit bears witness to
nothing but good Works, which Paul, Galath. 5. 22. therefore calls the fruits
of the Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit is nothing else, but that Tranquillity
of Mind, and Peace of Conscience, which arises in us from doing good. But of
the truth and certainty of things merely speculative, no other Spirit but
Reason bears witness, Reason only can challenge the power of judging what is
true, they that pretend to any other Spirit, whereby to make themselves certain
what is true; maintain that which is false, and are either prejudiced with
their own Passions and Affections, or else fearing to be baffled and made
ridiculous by Philosophers and Men of Reason, fly for Shelter and Sanctuary to
that which is Sacred; but what Altar can protect him, who offends the Sacred
Majesty of Reason? I need say no more to such Men, having I hope sufficiently
proved, why Theology ought to be distinguished from Philosophy, and in what
each of them chiefly consists; that neither of them ought to be a Servant to
the other, and that both of them may exercise their own peculiar power, without
offending one another: Lastly, I have showed where there was occasion, what
Absurdities, Mischiefs and Inconveniences follow from Men's confounding these
two faculties, not knowing how exactly to distinguish and divide one from the
other. Before I proceed, I desire notice may be taken, that I declare the
benefit and necessity of Sacred Scripture; (that is) Revelation, to be
exceeding great, for seeing we cannot by Natural Light, perceive that Simple
Obedience is the way to Salvation, and that God's special Grace and Favor has
by Revelation only, and not by Reason, made it known unto us; the Scripture
must certainly be a great help and consolation to all mankind; because though
every Man may obey, yet in respect of the whole, there are very few, who by the
dictates and conduct of Reason live virtuously, so that were it not for the
Testimony of Scripture, we might doubt of most Men's Salvation.

CHAP. XVI. Of founding Commonwealths. Of every Man's Natural and Civil Right.
Of the Right of Supreme Powers.
HItherto I have carefully endeavored, to distinguish and divide Philosophy
from Theology, and have showed the liberty of reasoning which Theology allows
every Man; it is now time to enquire, how far this liberty of thinking and
speaking a Man's Thoughts, may in the best governed Commonwealths extend it
self. And that we may orderly examine the matter, we will discourse of the
Foundations of Commonwealths, and in the first place, of every Man's Natural
Right, without any relation either to Government or Religion.

By the Law and Institution of Nature, I mean nothing else, but those Rules of
Nature, according to which every individual Being, is naturally appointed and
ordained, in such a certain manner to be, and to act; (for Example) Fishes are
by Nature ordained to swim, and the greater to eat the less; therefore by the
Sovereign Right or Law of Nature, they possess and enjoy the Water, and the
greater eat the less: For it is certain, that Nature considered absolutely has
Sovereign Right to all things within its own power; (that is) the Right of
Nature may extend it self, so far as its Power can extend; for the Power of
Nature, is the Power of God, who has Sovereign Right to all things. But
because the universal Power of the whole frame of Nature, is nothing else but
the Power of every individual Being joined together; it follows, that every
individual Being has Sovereign Right to all things within the compass of its
Power; or the Right of every Individual may extend it self, so far as its
determinate Power will reach: And because the supremest Law of Nature is, that
every thing should endeavor as far as it is able, to preserve it self in that
state wherein it is, without having regard to any thing else but it self; it
follows, that every individual Being, has Sovereign Right to this
self-preservation; (that is) to continue its existence, and to operate as it
was naturally ordained: And in this respect there is no difference between Men
and other Individual Beings in Nature, nor between Men endued with Reason, and
others who know not the use of it, nor between Fools and Men in their right
Senses; for what every thing does by, and according to the Laws of its own
Nature, that it has in the highest degree right to do; because it acts as it
was by Nature appointed, and can do nothing otherwise; amongst Men therefore
considered living only under the Power of Nature, he that knows not what Reason
is, as well as he who knows not what Virtue is, has as much right to live
according to the Laws of his Appetite, as he who directs his life by the
Rules of Reason: My meaning is, That as a wise Man has right to all things
which Reason dictates, or that lives according to the Laws and Rules of Reason;
so likewise an ignorant or mere sensual Man, has right to all things, whereto
his Appetite leads him, or that lives according to the Law of his Appetite,
which is the same thing that Paul declares, who acknowledges that before the
Law (that is) so long as Men were considered living in the State and under the
Power of Nature, there was no sin.

The Natural Right therefore of every Man, is determined not by Reason, but by
Appetite and Power, for all Men are not naturally ordained, to act and operate
according to the Rules and Laws of Reason; but on the contrary, all Men are
born actually ignorant of all things, and before they can know the right of
living, and acquire the habit of Virtue, a great part of their Age, though they
be well educated, is spent and passes away; yet in the mean time they are
bound to live, and as much as in themselves lies, to preserve themselves by the
impulse of their Appetite, seeing Nature has given them nothing else wherewith
to do it, and has denied the actual use of right Reason; so that they are no
more obliged to live by the Rules of it, than a Cat is bound to live like a
Lion; whatsoever then every Man, as he is considered under the Power and Laws
of Nature, shall either by the dictates of Right Reason, or by the impulse of
his Appetite, think convenient and profitable for him; that by the Law of
Nature is lawful for him to desire, and either by force, deceit, entreaties, or
any other way he thinks most easy to get it, and may consequently take any one
for an Enemy, that endeavors to hinder him from having his desires.

From whence it follows, that the Law and Institution os Nature, under which
all Men are born, and for the most part live; prohibits nothing but what no
body desires, or is in no bodies power, nor does it forbid, Contention, Hatred,
Wrath, Deceit, or any thing absolutely to which a Man's Appetite inclines him:
Nor is this any wonder, for Nature is not bounded and shut up within the Laws
only of Human Reason, which designs and intends nothing but the real good and
preservation of mankind, but acts according to an infinite number of other Laws
and Rules, which regard the whole frame and eternal course of Nature, whereof
Man is but a small Particle, and all Individual Beings are by the necessity and
Laws of Nature only, ordained in such a certain manner to exist and operate; so
that if there be any thing in Nature, which seems to us absurd, and
rediculous, or evil, it is because we know things only in part, and because we
are for the most part ignorant of the Order, Course, and Coherence of Universal
Nature, and would have all things directed and governed by our Reason; when in
the mean time, that which our Reason thinks evil, is not so in respect of the
course and Laws of Universal Nature, but only in respect of the Laws of our
particular Nature.

But without doubt or dispute, it is very much for Men's advantage, to live
according to the Laws and Dictates of Reason, which, as I have said, intends
nothing else but the real good of mankind; and there is no body who does not
desire to live in safety and out of fear, which is impossible, so long as it is
lawful for every Man to do what he lists; and Reason has no greater privilege
than Hatred or Anger. He that lives where there is continual Enmity, Hatred,
Wrath, and Deceit, must live always in danger and fear, and therefore Men avoid
them as much as they can: When we likewise consider, that Men live wretchedly
and miserably without mutual Assistance and the conduct of Reason, as we have
showed in the fourth Chapter, it must clearly appear, that if Men will live
securely without fear, there is an absolute necessity of uniting themselves and
agreeing together, to transfer the Right which every particular Man has by
Nature to all things, upon the whole collective Body assembled and living
together in Society, which Right is to be determined and directed, not by the
strength and Appetite of every single person, but by the Power and Will of the
whole assembled together, which would however be a vain attempt, if that
Society would still follow the Dictates of sensual Appetite. By the impulse of
sensual desire, every Man is carried a several way, and therefore they must
steadfastly resolve, and firmly covenant to govern and direct all things,
according to the dictates of Reason, (which no Man will oppose that is not out
of his Wits) and must bridle all desires that are injurious to one another:
They must do nothing to others, which they would not have done to themselves.
And lastly, must defend one another Right, as they would their own: Why such
an agreement ought to be entered into, and ought to stand firm and inviolable,
is our next enquiry. It is the Universal Law of Human Nature, that no Man
should quit or neglect any thing, which he thinks to be for his good, unless it
be for the hope of a greater good; (that is) every Man of two goods ought to
choose the greatest, and of two evils the least; I mean, that which seems to
the Chuser the greatest, or the least; because things are not sometimes in
themselves what we judge them to be: And this Law is so deeply engraven upon
Human Nature, that it is to be reckoned amongst the Eternal Verities of which
no Man can be ignorant. From this Law it necessarily follows, that no Man does
ever sincerely promise, to depart from that Right which he has to all things,
and faithfully keep his Promise, unless it be for fear of a greater evil, or
for the hope of a greater good. Suppose a Thief force me to promise, that I
will give him all my Goods when he pleases to have them; now seeing, as I have
already said, that my Natural Right is only limited and determined by my own
Power, it is certain, that I may by falsehood and deceit, free my self from this
Thief, in promising what he demands, and by the law of Nature I may deceitfully
make him such a Promise. Suppose likewise, that I have, without any fraudulent
intention, promised a man not to taste Meat, Drink, or any other kind of
Nourishment, for the space of twenty days; afterward I perceive what a foolish
promise I have made, and that I cannot without the hazard of my life keep it;
in this Case, seeing I am by the Law of Nature obliged, of two evils to choose
the least, I may very lawfully break this promise, and do as if I had never
made any; and it is my natural right so to do: for whether I have in truth, or
but in mine own Opinion made an ill promise; yet since the evil is so great
which I fear, I am authorized by the Law of Nature, to take any Course to avoid
it: from whence we conclude, that no Promise or Covenant can have any
obligatory Power, unless it be upon a consideration, that some advantage or
benefit is to accrue by it; take away the Consideration, and the Covenant
becomes null and void. It is therefore perfect folly, to expect from any
Person, the constant keeping and faithful performance of his Promise or
Contract, unless at the same time things be so ordered, that he who keeps not
his Covenant, shall lose much more than he can gain by the breach thereof;
which is a Consideration that ought first to take place in the founding of any
Commonwealth: if all men would willingly submit to the conduct of Reason, and
knew what was necessary and profitable for the Public, every man would detest
fraud and deceit; and for the good and preservation of the Commonwealth, would
above all things faithfully perform his Promises, which is the Commonwealth's
only defense and security: but men are far from being guided by reason, every
man is led away by his Pleasure and Lusts, and men's minds are often so possessed
with Covetousness, Glory, Envy, Anger, and other Passions, that they have no
room left for Reason; and therefore though men may promise, with external Signs
of Faithfulness and Sincerity, and enter into Covenants to make good their
Promises; yet no man can be sure they will be made good, unless some benefit
and advantage attend their performance; seeing every man by the Law of Nature
may deal deceitfully, and break his promise, in hopes of greater good, or for
fear of greater evil: but because (as we have already shown) natural right is
determined by every man's particular power, it follows, that as much as every
man either voluntarily, or by force transsers of his own Power upon another,
from so much of his own right he parts with to another, and he has Sovereign
right over all, who has the Supreme Power, wherewith he may by Force and
severe Punishment which is Universally feared, keep all in subjection; which
right he shall no longer retain, than he can preserve the power of doing what
he will, otherwise he must reign precariously, and no man that is stronger than
he, is bound to obey him.

For this reason, without any repugnancy or resistance made by natural right,
may a Society be formed, and Covenants faithfully kept, if every particular
person do transfer all the Power which he has, upon the Society; which Society
by that means will have the Sovereign right of nature to all things, (that is)
will be possessed with the Supreme Power of Governing, which every one willingly
or for fear of Punishment will be bound to obey. The Right or Power of such a
Society, is called Democracy, which is a general Assembly of men, who in
fellowship have Sovereign right to all things within their Power; from whence
it follows, that Supreme Power is bound by no Law, but all ought to obey it in
all things; which obedience every one did in express words, or tacitly, and by
implication promise, when he transferred all his own Power of defending himself,
(that is) all his own natural right upon the Society: So that if any men
intended to keep any thing to themselves, at the same time they ought to have
provided, and taken care for the defense and safe keeping thereof; but if they
did not, nor could do it, without dividing, and consequently destroying the
Government and Commonwealth, that ought to be accounted an absolute submission
of themselves to the will of the Supreme Power; which being done absolutely,
and not only upon necessity, but likewise for very good reasons, unless we will
declare our selves Enemies to the Commonwealth, and act contrary to Reason,
which persuades us to defend the Commonwealth with our utmost power; we are
bound to obey all the Commands of the Supreme Power, be they never so absurd;
for even those, Reason commands us to obey, that of two evils we may choose the
least: Consider likewise, how easily every one may run into the danger, of
submitting himself absolutely to the Will and Arbitrary Power of another; for
as we have shown, Supreme Powers have no longer right of commanding what they
will, than they can keep that Power; for as soon as they lose it, they lose
likewise the right of commanding all things, and that right falls to him or
them that can get and keep it; therefore it very rarely happens, that Supreme
Powers command harsh and unreasonable things, for it very much concerns them to
look to themselves, to keep their Power, to mind the public good, and order
all things by the Rules of Reason. No violent Governments, says Seneca, ever
stood long: It is observable that in Democratical Governments, severe and
unreasonable Commands are never much to be feared; for it is almost impossible,
that the major part of an Assembly, if it be great, should agree in that which
is unreasonable and absurd; the Foundation and End likewise of that Government,
being only to avoid the mischiefs of boundless Appetite, and to keep Men as
much as may be within the compass of Reason, that they may live together in
Peace and Amity; which Foundation once taken away, down falls the whole
Fabric, against which Ruin to provide, is the duty of the Supreme Power: The
Subjects part is to obey, and acknowledge nothing else to be right, but what is
declared to be so by the Supreme Power. But some may think, that by this Rule,
I make Subjects Servants or Slaves, because they account him a Servant who acts
by Command, and him free, who only obeys his own Will; which is not absolutely
true, for he that gives himself up to his own pleasure and desires, and neither
sees or does what is for his own good, is indeed the greatest of Slaves; and he
only is free, who of his own accord lives according to the dictates of Reason.
Acting by Command, which is Obedience, does in some sort take away Liberty, but
it is the account upon which a Man acts, that makes him a Servant; for if the
end of the action be wholly and solely for the benefit of him that commands,
without any advantage to the Agent, then the Agent is a Servant, and
unprofitable to himself; but in a Commonwealth or Government, where the welfare
of all the People, and not of him that governs, is the principal and Supreme
Law; he that in all things obeys the Supreme Power, is not an unprofitable
Servant to himself, but is to be counted a Subject, and therefore that
Commonwealth is counted freest, where the Laws are sounded upon most Reason,
for there every Man, when he will, may be free, in living with his own entire
consent, according to the Rules of Reason: Though Children are bound to obey all
the Command of their Parents, yet they are not Servants, for the Commands of
Parents tend chiefly to the good of their Children, and therefore we
acknowledge there is great difference between a Servant, a Son, and a Subject,
who are thus defined. A Servant is he, who is bound to obey the Commands of his
Master which respect only the Masters benefit. A Son is he, that by his Parents
Command does that which is for his own good: And a Subject is he, who by the
Command of the Supreme Power, does that which is for the good of the Public,
and consequently, as he is one of that Body, for his own benefit: By what I
have said, I think I have clearly shown, what is the Foundation of Democratical
Government, of which, before all others, I choose to treat, because it seems
most natural, and comes nearest to that freedom and liberty which Nature allows
every Man; for in Democratical Government, no Man so transfers his own Natural
Right to another, as for ever after to be excluded from consultation, but only
transfers it upon the major part of the Society, of which he still makes one,
and upon this all remain as they were before, in their natural estate, equal.
Moreover, I purposely treated of this Government, because it best suited with
my Intention, which was to speak of the benefit of Liberty in a Commonwealth: I
will therefore have nothing to do with the Foundations of other Powers; nor to
know their Right, is it necessary to know whence they had, and often have their
Original; that is too manifest. From what I have declared, where ever the
Supreme Power is, whether in one person, in few, or in all, it is certain, that
they have the Sovereign right of commanding what they will, and whoever either
willingly or by compulsion transfers to another the Power of defending himself,
he has clearly parted with his Natural Right, and consequently must resolve to
obey him that has it in all things, which he continues obliged to do, as long
as the King, the Nobles, or the People can preserve the Supreme Power which
they received, which was the first Foundation of transferring Natural Right, of
which I need say no more.

The Foundations and Right of Government being laid open, it is easy to
determine, what is private civil Right, what is Injury or Wrong; what is
Justice, what Injustice in a Civil State. Lastly, Who is a Confederate or Ally,
who is an Enemy, and what is Treason. By private civil Right, no other thing
can be understood, but every Man's keeping and preserving himself in the state
wherein he is; which Liberty is limited and determined, by the Decrees and
Dictates of the Supreme Power, and defended by the sole Authority thereof; for
after every one has transferred to another, his right of living according to
his own Will, which only bounded his own power; I mean, his liberty of
defending himself; he is then obliged to live according to his Will, to whom he
has parted with that Liberty, and from him only must expect Protection. Injury
or Wrong, is when a Citizen or Subject is compelled to suffer loss or damage
from another, contrary to Civil Right, and the Decrees of the Supreme Power;
for there can be no such thing as Wrong or Injury, any where but in a Civil
State, nor can any wrong be done to Subjects by the Supreme Power, which may
lawfully do whatever it pleases, and therefore has place only amongst private
persons, who by Law are obliged not to offend one another. Justice is a
constant resolution of giving to every one, that which by the Law rightly
interpreted belongs to him: Justice and Injustice, are sometimes called Equity
and Iniquity, because they that are appointed to end Suits and Differences, are
bound not to have any respect to persons, but to look upon all as equals, and
equally to defend every Man's right; neither envying the rich nor despising the
poor. Confederates are Men of two Cities or Societies, who to avoid the danger
and inconveniences of War, or for any other advantage and benefit, mutually
covenant not to offend or hurt one another; but in case of necessity to assist
and help one another, both preserving their own Power and Dominion. This League
or Contract, will so long continue firm and binding, as the consideration of
danger or profit upon which it was founded continues; because no person
covenants, or is obliged to perform his contracts, unless it be in hope of some
good, or fear of some evil, which being the Foundation of all Contracts; take
away that Basis, Experience tells us, they all fall to the ground: For though
diverse Empires and Governments, do mutually covenant not to do any thing to the
prejudice or hurt of one another, yet it is always the endeavor of both, to
hinder one another from growing too powerful; neither do they believe one
another promises, unless they be fully satisfied, that the End of their
agreement be for the benefit of both; nor is there any wrong in the case, for
who but a Fool, ignorant of the right of Supreme Power, will give credit to the
words or promises of him who having Supreme Power, has right to do what he
will, and who is obliged by no other Law, but the public safety and benefit of
the people under his Government? we likewise observe, that Religion and Piety
signify very little; for who ever has the Supreme Power, cannot without
consequent mischief, keep his Promises which prove prejudicial and destructive
to his People and Government; or that he cannot perform them without breaking
Faith with his Subjects; by which Faith he is principally obliged, and which
usually with Oaths he solemnly and religiously promises to keep. An Enemy is
one that lives out of the Commonwealth, and neither as a Confederate or
Subject, will own its Power or Government; for it is not the hatred of a
Commonwealth, but its Right and Power, which makes a Man an Enemy; for the
Power of a Commonwealth over him, who will by no kind of Contract own its
Power, is the same that it has over him who does it harm, because it has
right to compel him one way or other, to yield and submit to it, or confederate
with it: Lastly, Treason in Subjects or Citizens, is only where they have by
express or implied Contract, transferred all their right to the City or
Commonwealth, and that Subject is counted guilty of Treason, who endeavors to
usurp the right of the Supreme Power to himself, or transfer it upon another; I
say, he that but endeavors it, for if none were to be condemned till after the
commission of the fact, the punishment would many times come too late;
therefore I say positively, he that by any means goes about to usurp, or take
away the right of the Supreme Power, making no difference whether the
Commonwealth shall be a gainer or loser by it, upon what account soever he
attempted or did it, yet he has committed Treason, and is justly condemned,
which every one also acknowledges to be just in War; for if a Soldier keep
not his station, but without his General's knowledge or command, assaults the
Enemy, though he beat him, and did it very advisedly, yet doing it of his own
head, he deserves death, having violated his own Oath and his Geneneral's
Authority: Now though Subjects do not see that their case and a Soldiers is
alike, yet in truth the reason is the same in both, sor seeing the Commonwealth
ought to be governed, defended, and preserved, by the Counsel only of the
Supreme Power, and all have absolutely covenanted that this right shall reside
only in the Supreme Power; if any Man shall at his own Will and Pleasure,
without the knowledge of the Supreme Council, make any public attempt, which
would certainly prove very advantageous to the Commonwealth, yet having
violated the right of the Supreme Power, he is lawfully and deservedly
condemned.

Now to clear all scruples, if any Man ask, Whether maintaining that a Man in
his Natutural State has Natural Right to live according to the Laws and
Dictates of his own Appetite, be not flatly contrary to the revealed Law of
God? Seeing every Man, whether he have or have not the use of Reason, is
equally obliged by God's Command to love his Neighbor as himself, and
therefore we cannot, without being very injurious, do any harm to another and
live according to our own Lusts. This Objection is easily answered; for if we
consider only the state of Nature; that state, and Nature it self, were before
there was any Religion; for by Nature no Man knows that there is any obligation
upon him to obey God, nor can he come to the knowledge of it by Reason; but
whoever knows it, must know it only by Revelation confirmed with Signs; and
therefore, before Revelation no body was bound by the Divine Law, of which
every Man must be necessarily ignorant. The state of Nature then, and the state
of Religion, must not be confounded, but considered apart, and as we have
proved by Paul's Authority, the state of Nature is understood to be without
Religion, without Law, without sin or wrong doing. Nor do we consider the state
of Nature as before, and without the revealed Law of God, in respect of
Ignorance only; but in respect also of that freedom and liberty in which all
Men were born; for if Men by Nature were bound by the Law of God, or if God's
Law were by Nature a Law, there was no need of God's making a Covenant with
Men, and obliging them by Oath and Contract. It must therefore be absolutely
granted, that God's Law took place, from the time that Men by an express
Covenant with God, promised to obey him in all things; by which Covenant and
Promise, they did as it were depart from their natural freedom, and transferred
their natural right upon God; in like manner as we have declared is done in a
Civil State. But of this I will treat more at large in the following Chapter.
It may by way of Objection be further demanded, how I can maintain, that
Supreme Powers still retain their natural right of doing what they will; when
Supreme Powers as well as Subjects are bound by the Law of God? To solve this
difficulty, which does not rise so much from the state, as from the right of
Nature; I say, that the same consideration which obliges a Man in the state of
Nature, to live according to the dictates of Reason; obliges him likewise to
God's revealed Law, namely, because it is better and safer for him so to do:
But however, if he will not, it is still but at his own peril, and therefore he
may live according to his own Will, and is not bound to live by any other Man's
direction, or to acknowledge any mortal Man to be his Judge, or upon any
religious account his Superior. And this is the Right and Power which I say
the Supreme Power still retains. Supreme Powers may consult Men, but are not
bound to acknowledge any Man their Judge, nor any Man but themselves the
Assertor or Protector of Religion, a Prophet only excepted; who confirms his
express Mission from God by undoubted Signs and Wonders; and then neither, do
Supreme Powers acknowledge Man but God to be their Judge; but if the Supreme
Power will not obey God in his revealed Law, it is at their own peril, no
Natural or Civil Right can resist them, for Civil Right depends upon the Decree
and Will of the Supreme Power, and Natural Right depends upon the Laws of
Nature, which do not respect Religion as it intends and designs the benefit of
mankind only, but were fitted and accommodated to the order and course of
Universal Nature, (that is) the Eternal Decree of God, whereof we are ignorant:
And this is what others mean, who do not so clearly express themselves, when
they say, that a Man may sin against the revealed Will of God, but not against
his Eternal Decree, by which he predestined and ordained all things: If any
Man ask me, when the Supreme Power commands any thing against Religion, and the
Obedience which we by express Covenant have promised to God, whether we ought
to obey God or Man? I answer very briefly, resolving to speak more fully of it
in the following Chapter, That above all things we ought to obey God, when we
have a certain and undubitable Revelation; but because Men are usually very
much mistaken in matters of Religion, and because of the diversity of their
Dispositions, have great contests about their own Phancies, as we find by woeful
experience; it is certain, that if no Man should be bound to obey the Supreme
Power, in things which a Man thinks concern his Religion; the Civil Right and
Laws of the Commonwealth, would depend upon every particular Man's different
Judgment and Affection; for no Man would be bound by any public Law, which he
thought contrary to his Faith or Superstition; and under this pretense every
one would be at liberty to do what he pleased: For his reason therefore,
Supreme Power, to whom by Divine and Natural Right, it belongs to preserve and
protect the Laws of Government, ought to have the sole power of judging,
determining, and establishing Religion; and all Men are bound by their Faith
and Allegiance, which God has commanded should be kept, to obey all the
Commands and Decrees of the Supreme Power which concern Religion; but if they
that have the Supreme Power be Heathen and Infidels, we must either make no
agreement with them, or suffer all extremities if we do covenant with them, and
transfer our Right and Power upon them; seeing we thereby deprive our selves of
defending Religion and our selves: We are bound to obey and keep Faith with
them, and may be compelled to it, unless it be where God by undoubted
Revelation has declared a person to be a Tyrant, or excepting the person by
Name, has promised his particular aid and assistance against him. We read,
that of all the Jews which were in Babylon, there were only three young Men who
were assured of God's particular assistance, that would not obey
Nebuchadnezzar; all the rest but Daniel, whom the King himself adored, were
compelled by the Law to obey him; perhaps believing in their Minds, that by
God's Decree they were delivered into that Kings Hands, and that by God's
appointment he was to be King, and keep the Supreme Power. Eleazer, on the
contrary, however it went with his Country, gave an Example of his constancy to
his followers, and would rather endure all extremities than suffer their Right
and Power to be transferred upon the Greeks, and tried all means possible to
avoid being compelled to embrace the Faith and Religion of the Heathen; which
is confirmed by daily experience. The Supreme Powers that profess Christian
Religion, for the security of their Government, make no scruple of entering into
Leagues and Covenants with Turks and Infidels, and command their Subjects who
live amongst them, not to use any greater liberty in Religion, or any other
Affairs, than the Articles of such Leagues, or the Country in which they live
allow; as appears by the Contract, which I have already told you, the
Hollanders made with the people of Iapan.

CHAP. XVII. It Is neither necessary or possible, to transfer all things upon
the Supreme Power: Of the Jews Commonwealth, what it was during the Life of
Moses, and what after his death before they chose Kings, and of its Excellency:
What were the Causes of the destruction of so divine a Commonwealth, and why it
could not subsist without Sedition.
THough much of what has been said in the preceding Chapter, of the right of
Supreme Powers, and transferring on them every Man's natural Rights, may upon
serious consideration be very agreeable to Practice; yet when all is done, many
things will remain in theory only, and be found absolutely impracticable: For
no Man can so far transfer his Power, and consequently his Right upon another,
as to cease from being a Man; nor was there ever any Supreme Power that could
do all that it would: It Is vain for Supreme Power to command a Subject to hate
his Friend and love his Enemy; or to command a Man not to be provoked with
Reproach and Contempt, or not to desire to be freed from fear, and other things
of the like kind, which necessarily follow from the Laws of Nature: this is
made manifest by daily Experience; for Men never so depart from their Right, or
so transfer their Power upon others, but that they are still feared even by
those to whom they have transferred it; for Government is many times as much in
danger of Subjects deprived of their Right, as it is of foreign Enemies; and if
Men could be so far divested of their Natural Right, as afterward not to be
able to do any thing but according to the Will and Pleasure of those that have
the Supreme Power; then indeed all sorts of Tyranny and Violence might without
danger be practiced on Subjects, which I believe cannot enter into any Man's
thoughts; so that it must be granted that every Man retains much of his own
Right, which still depends upon no bodies will but his own. Now that it may be
rightly understood how far the right of Government extends it self, it is to be
observed, That the Power of Government does not precisely consist in its being
able to compel men by fear, but also in all other means whereby it is able to
make men obey its Commands; for it is not the Reason of obeying; but actual
Obedience that makes a man a Subject. Upon what account soever a man resolves
to perform the Commands of Supreme Power, whether for fear of punishment, for
hope of benefit, for love of his Country, or any other affection; yet still he
acts by the Command of the Supreme Power, though it be upon deliberation with
himself. It is not therefore to be concluded, That a man who does any thing by
his own counsel and deliberation, acts by his own Power, and not by the
Authority of the Government; for being obliged by love, or forced by fear, he
still of his own accord acts to avoid some evil. Either there must be no such
thing as Authority and Power over Subjects, unless it did necessarily extend it
self to all things which make men upon deliberation submit to it; and
consequently whatever a Subject does agreeable to the Commands of the Supreme
Power, whether he do it for fear, love, (or, which is more frequent) for hope
and fear together, or out of reverence, which is composed of fear and
admiration, on, or for any other Reason; yet he still acts not by his own
Power, but by the Authority and Power of the Government: And hence it is very
evident, that Obedience does not so much respect external Actions, as the
inward Consent and Submission of the Mind; and he is most under the Power of
another, who with a willing mind, deliberately resolves to execute all his
Commands. That Power is always greatest, which reigns over the hearts of
Subjects; but if they should be accounted most powerful who are most feared,
how potent must they be, who are governed by Tyrants, who commonly dread
nothing so much as their own Subjects. Though there cannot be so great a
Command over men's Minds, as there may be over their Tongues, yet the Minds of
men are in some kind under the Dominion of Supreme Power, because it can
several ways bring it so about, that a very great part of the People shall
believe, love, and hate, whatever the Supreme Power pleases: And though this
be not effected by the direct Commands of the Supreme Power, yet Experience
tells us, it is often done by the Authority (that is) by the direction of that
Power: So that we may without any difficulty conceive, how men may believe,
love, hate, despise, and be carried away with any other Passion, to which the
Authority of the Supreme Power pleases to incline them.

But though upon this very account we may conceive the Right and Power of
Government to be very large, yet it is impossible that any Dominion should be so
great and absolute, that he or they who have it, should be able in all things
to do what they please: therefore, as I have already said, it is not my
intention to show how to form a Government that shall be perpetual; but my
purpose is only to take notice of those things, which Moses by Divine
Revelation declared were most likely to preserve and perpetuate a Commonwealth.
We shall then see what those things are, which for the benefit and safety of a
Commonwealth, are to be granted to Subjects by the Supreme Power.

Reason and Experience tell us, That the safety and preservation of Government,
depends chiefly upon the fidelity of Subjects, and their Courage and Constancy
in executing the Commands of the Supreme Power; but the way of teaching
Subjects to be constantly faithful and courageous, is not so easily found out;
because Governors, as well as the governed, are Men, and not caring for
Labor, are still prone to Lust. They think securing Government to be an
impossible Work, who have tried the mutable Humors of the Multitude, which is
never ruled by Reason, but by their own Passions and Affections, ready for all
rash Attempts, easily debauched by Covetousness and Luxury; every single man
thinks he knows all things, and judges every thing to be just or unjust, right
or wrong, as it makes for his profit or loss: Pride makes him scorn to be
governed by his Equals, still envying another man's better Reputation or
greater Fortune, which is never equal, desires and rejoices in his Neighbors
Misfortunes. There is no need of more Instances; all know how men's Minds are
agitated and possessed, and to what Mischief men are hurried headlong, by dislike
of their present Condition, by desire of Change, by Rage and contemptible
Poverty. To prevent all these things, and to constitute a Government wherein
there shall be no place left for fraud, and so to order all things, that all
People, of what Disposition soever, shall prefer the public good before their.
own private benefit, is the great difficulty. The Necessity of preserving and
securing Government, has much busied men's heads; but it has been hitherto
impossible, to put Supreme Power into a condition of being less in danger, or
in less fear, of Subjects than of Enemies: Witness the Roman Commonwealth,
never conquered by its own Enemies, but often oppressed and overthrown by its own
Citizens, and especially in that Civil War of Vespasian against Vitellius; as
may be seen in the Fourth Book of Tacitus, where he describes the miserable
condition of the City of Rome. Alexander the Great (says Quintus Curtius, in
the End of his Eighth Book) did more fear the Fame of a Subject than an Enemy,
because he was afraid his own People might ruin his Greatness. Distrusting his
own Fate, he thus bespake his Friends: Let it be your care only to preserve me
from the Treachery and Conspiracy of my own People, and then no hazards in the
War shall put me in fear. Philip was more secure in the Front of Battle abroad,
than in the Theater at home; he oft-times avoided the force of his Enemies, but
he could not escape the violence of his own Friends; and if you consider the
End of other Kings, you shall number more that have been slain by their own
Subjects, than by any Foreign Power (See Quintus Curtius, lib. 9.. 6.) This
was the Reason why Kings, who were Usurpers, to secure themselves and their
Dominion, endeavored to persuade the People, they were descended from the
Immortal Gods; because they thought, if their Subjects did not take them for
Men, like themselves, but believed them to be Gods, they would be the better
contented to deliver themselves up to their Power and Government. Augustus
persuaded the Romans, that he was descended from AEneas, the Son of Venus, one
of their Deities; he had Temples dedicated to him, and was worshipped by Flamens
and Priests, in the same manner that other Gods were. Tacitus in his First Book
of Annals, tells us, That Alexander would be saluted by the Name of Jupiter's
Son, which was not Pride, but Design, as appears by the Answer he returned to
the invective Speech made by Hermolaus: (In the Eighth Book and Eighth Section
of Quintus Curtius) Alexander speaks to this purpose: One thing is very
ridiculous which Hermolaus requires, That I should not own Jupiter to be my
Father, being so declared by his Oracle, as if the Answer of the Gods were in
my Power; he offered me the Name of his Son, which was very suitable to the
Designs I am now about; I wish the Indians would also believe me to be a God:
Success in War depends much upon Fame, and that which is falsely believed,
sometimes works the same effects which things do that are true. In which few
words, he very artificially endeavors to continue People in their ignorance,
and neatly insinuates the Design of his dissembling, which Cleo likewise did in
his Oration, whereby he endeavored to persuade the Macedonians to sooth and
flatter the King: for after he had with admiration spoken in praise of
Alexander, and reckoned up all his Merits, giving a color of Truth to the
Fraud, he shows the advantages gained by it, in words to this effect. The
Persians are not only prudent, but pious in worshipping their Kings as Gods,
because it was the Safety of Majesty; and then concludes, That he himself would
be the first, who at the King's entrance, would fall down upon the Earth, and
worship him; and that he thought the wisest amongst them would follow his
Example: (See Curtius in his Eighth Book,. 8.) But the Macedonians were wiser:
Nor can any but mere Barbarians be so grossly cheated, and of Subjects, suffer
themselves to be made Slaves, altogether unprofitable to themselves. Others
have, with more ease, persuaded the World, That the Majesty of Kings is Sacred,
that they are God's Vicegerents on Earth, ordained by God, and not established
by the Votes and Consent of Men, but preserved and defended by the particular
aid and protection of Divine Providence. This, and much more, have Monarchs
devised to secure their Government, with which I will not meddle, but proceed
to those things, which, for the preservation of Government, Divine Revelation
taught Moses.

We have already declared, in the Fifth Chapter, that after the Israelites went
out of Egypt, they were not subject to the Laws or power of any other Nation;
but it was lawful for them to Institute what Laws, and possess what Lands they
pleased; for when they were freed from the intolerable bondage of the
Egyptians, and were not bound by Covenant to any Mortal, they again recovered
their natural Right to all things which were in their Power, and every Man
might freely resolve whether he would keep his natural Right, or part with, and
transfer it to another. Being then in this natural State, by the Counsel of
Moses, in whom all had a very great trust and confidence, they resolved to
transfer their Power upon no mortal Man, but upon God only; and without further
delay promised, all with one Voice, to obey God in all things, and never to own
any other Power, but such as God by Prophetical Revelation should institute and
appoint. This Promise and Translation of their Right and Power upon God, was in
the same manner that we have supposed it to be done in a common Society, when
Men resolve to depart with their natural Right: For as it appears ( Exodus chap.
24. ver. 7.) they freely without any Compulsion, not terrified with any
threats, did by express Covenant and Oath, part with their natural Right, and
transferred it upon God; and that the Covenant might be firm and binding,
without any suspicion of fraud, God Covenanted nothing with them till after
they had made trial of his wonderful Power; by which they had already been, and
were afterward to be preserved; (see Exodus chap. 19. v. 4, 5.) for upon this
very ground of believing, that the Power of God only could save them, they
transferred all their Power of preserving themselves, and consequently all their
Right upon God. The Government then of the Jews was only in God, and therefore
by virtue of the Covenant was called the Kingdom of God; God was rightful King
of the Jews, and consequently the Enemies of that Government were Gods Enemies,
and the Subjects of that Commonwealth, who went about to usurp that Government,
were guilty of Treason against his Divine Majesty, and the Laws of that
Commonwealth were the Laws and Commands of God: So that in this Commonwealth,
Civil Right and Religion, which we have shown consists only in Obedience
toward God, were but one and the same thing: My meaning is, that the Doctrines
of Religion were Laws and Commands; Piety was Justice, and Impiety wrong and
Injustice: he that forsook the public Religion ceased to be a Subject, and
upon that very account was thought an Enemy; he that died for Religion was
thought to dye for his Country, and between Religion and Civil Right there was
no difference. Upon this account this Government might very well be called
Theocracy, seeing the Subjects thereof were bound by no Law but what was
revealed by God. But these things were thus, more in opinion then reality, for
the Jews did indeed still retain the Absolute Power of Government, as will
appear by what shall be presently declared, namely by the Form and Rules
whereby their Government was Administered, which is now my purpose to explain.

Seeing the Jews did not transfer their Power upon any other Man, but all
equally parted from it as is done in Democratical-government, and all cried
with one Voice, Whatsoever God himself (without any other intermediate Person)
shall speak to us, that will we do; it clearly appears by this Agreement, they
all continued equal, and the Power and Right of consulting God, of receiving
and interpreting Laws, was equal in them all, and the Administration of the
Government was in the whole Congregation. Upon this ground all equally at first
hearkened what God would say, and what he would Command; but in this first
meeting they were so terrified, and heard God speaking with so muh
astonishment, that every Man thought that day would be his last. Full of very
great fear they came again to Moses, and said, We have heard Gods Voice out of
the midst of the Fire: Now therefore why should we dye? This great Fire will
consume us, we shall dye if we hear the Voice of the Lord our God any more;
therefore go thou near and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak
thou unto us, all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, we will hear and
do it. By saying this they clearly abolisht the first Covenant, and transferred
upon Moses their own Right of consulting God, and interpreting his Laws and
Decrees; for here they did not as before, promise to obey all that God should
say to them, but all that God should speak to Moses; (See Deuteronomy. c. 5. v. 25,
26, 28.) so that now none but Moses, became the giver and interpreter of Gods
Laws, and consequently was the Supreme Judge, over whom no Man had power; he
only was Gods Vicegerent among the Jews, in him resided the Supreme Majesty,
seeing he only had the power of consulting God, of returning Gods Answers to
the People, and compelling the People to obey them. I say he only, for if any
Man, during the Life of Moses, had preached any thing in the name of God,
though he were a true Prophet, yet he had been a guilty Usurper. (see Numb. c.
11. v. 27, 28.) And here we ought to observe, that though the People chose
Moses, yet they had not the power of Electing any Successor in his place; for
at that very time when they transferred their Right and Power of consulting God
upon Moses, and promised to receive from him Gods answers, they lost all their
power, and whoever Moses declared should be his Successor, him were they bound
to accept as chosen by God himself; and had Moses chosen one who was to have,
as Moses himself had, the whole Administration of the Government; namely, the
Power of consulting God alone in his Tent, and consequently the Power of making
and abrogating Laws; of making War and Peace; sending Ambassadors; appointing
Judges; choosing a Successor, and ordering all other things that belong to
Supreme Power; the Government had been perfectly Monarchical, and there had
been no other difference between the Jewish and other Monarchies but this, that
other Monarchies are or should be Governed according to Reason, by Gods Decree,
of which the Monarch is ignorant; but the Jewish Monarchy, by Gods Decree
revealed only to the Monarch; which difference does not at all diminish, but
increase the Monarchs Power and Dominion over all, but the condition of the
Subjects in both Monarchies is the same: For the Subjects in both being
ignorant of Gods Decree, do absolutely depend upon the Mouth of the Monarch,
and he only is to declare what is right and what is wrong. And if the People
believe that the Monarch is to command nothing but by the will of God revealed
to him, in that very respect they are not the less, but the more subject to
him. Now Moses did not choose any such Successor, but left Successors, who were
so to Administer the Government, that it could not be called Popular,
Aristocratical, or Monarchical; but rather Theocratical: For the Power of
Interpreting Laws, and Communicating Gods Answers to the People, was in one
Person, and the Right and Power of Administering the Government, according to
the Laws already explained, and according to the Answers already made known,
was in another. (See Numb. c. 27. v. 21.) But that these things may be clearly
understood, I will, in order, declare in what manner the Government of the Jews
was Administered. First, The People were commanded to build a House, which was
to be God's, that is, the Palace of the Supreme Majesty of that Government; and
this was not to be built at any particular Persons cost, but the public charge
of all the People, that the House where Counsel was to be asked of God might be
Public and Common to all: The Levites were the Courtiers or Officers of this
Divine Palace; of these, the Chief next to God after the King, was chosen
Aaron, the Brother of Moses, whose Legitimate Sons succeeded him: He, as next
to God, was the chief Interpreter of the Divine Laws, returned the Answers of
the Divine Oracle, and made Supplications to God for the People; had he
herewith had the commanding Power, there had nothing wanted of his being an
absolute Monarch; but that Power he had not, and the whole Tribe of Levy was so
far excluded from having any hand in the Administration of government, that
they were not allowed to possess, with the rest of the Tribes, any Lands in
their own right, upon which they might live; but were to be maintained and
relieved by the rest of the People, as a Tribe dedicated to God. The Militia
was chosen out of the rest of the twelve Tribes, they were commanded to invade
the Country of the Canaanites to divide their Lands into twelve parts, and to
distribute the parts amongst the Tribes by Lot. Joshua was elected General and
Chief Commander of the Militia, who only in future Affairs and Emergencies had
the power of consulting God: not as Moses had alone in his Tent or in the
Tabernacle, but by the High Priest, to whom only God gave his Answers: The
power of passing those Answers which were delivered to the High Priest into
Laws, and the power of compelling the People to obey them; the Manner and Means
of executing those Commands; the choice of the Militia, or the choice of those
that should choose it; of sending Ambassadors in his own name; the whole power
of making and carrying on War, depended absolutely and solely upon the Will of
Joshua, into whose power and place no body did ever lawfully succeed, nor was
there ever any other chosen, unless by God himself, the Peoples affairs not
requiring any such choice; but all matters of Peace and War were under the
direction and government of the Princes of the Tribes. All from twenty years
old to sixty were commanded to bear Arms; the Army was formed only out of their
own People, who did not swear Fidelity to the General or Chief-Priest, but to
God and Religion, and were therefore called the Lords Host, and God, by the
Jews, the Lord of Hosts: For this reason the Ark of the Covenant, upon which
depended Victory or the loss of their Battles, was always carried in the midst
of the Army, that the People beholding as it were their King, might fight with
their utmost courage and strength. From these Commands of Moses to his
Successors, we conclude that he chose Administrators or Ministers of State, but
none that had absolute Power; for he gave to no body the sole power of
Consulting God when he pleased, and consequently not the Authority which he
himself had, of making and abrogating Laws; of making War or Peace; of choosing
Officers for the Temple, or in any of the Cities; all which do properly belong
to him that has Supreme Power. The Chief Priest indeed had power of
interpreting the Laws, and returning Gods Answers to the People; but not as
Moses, when he pleased, but only when he was called upon by the General or
Supreme Council to do it. On the other side, the General of the Army, and the
Councils, could consult God when they pleased, but could not receive God's
Answers from any but the High Priest; and therefore what God said by the Mouth
of the High Priest, was not a Law and Decree, as it was in the Mouth of Moses,
but only Answers; and when those Answers were received by Joshua and the
Council, then had they the force of Laws and Decrees. Moreover, the High
Priest, who received Answers from God, had nothing to do with the Militia, nor
had he any share in the Government; and on the other side, they that were
possessed of Lands had no power to make Laws: The Chief Priest Aaron, and his Son
Eleazer, were both chosen by Moses; but when Moses was dead no man had the
power of choosing the High Priest, but the Son still succeeded the Father. The
General of the Army was also elected by Moses, not by the Power of the High
Priest, but took upon him the Generalship or Supreme Power by virtue of that
Authority which Moses gave him; and therefore when Joshua dyed, the High Priest
chose no body into his place, nor did the Princes ask Council of God concerning
a new General, but every one commanded the particular Militia of his own Tribe,
and all the Princes, jointly together, had the same power over the whole Army
that Joshua had; and it seems there was no need of a General, unless when they
were to fight against an Enemy with joint Forces, of which there was constant
occasion and necessity in Joshua's time, when they had no fixed place of abode,
and all things were in Common: But after all the Tribes were by right of
Conquest possessed of Lands, which they were commanded to keep and divide amongst
themselves, and Property began; then there was no more need of a General,
because the several Tribes by that division, became not only fellow Subjects
but Confederates; they were in respect of God and Religion Fellow Subjects, but
in respect of one Tribes power over another, no more than Confederates. In all
particulars (that of the Jews public Temple excepted) like the States of the
seven United Provinces; for the division of that which is common into parts, is
nothing else but every Man's possessing his own part, and the rest quit the
right which they had to it. Moses therefore chose the Princes of the Tribes,
that after the Land and the Government was divided, every one might take care
of his own part; that is, that the Prince of every Tribe, should by the High
Priest ask Council of God, concerning the Affairs of his own Tribe; that he
should command the Militia of his own Tribe; build and fortify Cities; appoint
Judges in every City; fight against the Enemies of his own Tribe, and have the
absolute Power of Peace and War within his own Tribe; nor was he obliged to
acknowledge any other Judge over him, but God, or a Prophet whom God should
expressly send; and if he departed from the Worship of God, the rest of the
Tribes were to account him no Subject, but fight against him as a public
Enemy, that had violated the Faith of the Covenant made with God; of which in
Scripture we have several Examples. When Joshua was dead, the Children of
Israel, without any new General, asked Counsel of God, and when they understood
that the Tribe of Judah was first to assault the Enemy, Judah agreed only with
his Brother Simeon, to go up with united Forces, and fight the Enemies of both
their Lots; in which agreement none of the rest of the Tribes were
comprehended. (See Judges c. 1. v. 1, 2, 3.) But every Tribe, as that Chapter
declares, fought separately against its own particular Enemy, and spared the
Lives of whom they pleased, though they were commanded upon no terms to spare
any, but to extirpate all; for which Sin they were indeed reproved, but never
called to account for it. When the Tribes made War one upon another, and meddled
with one another Affairs in assaulting the Benjamites, it was because they had
justly offended the rest of the Tribes, by breaking the common Bond of Peace;
so that none of their Confederates could safely venture themselves amongst
them. This was the reason the rest of the Tribes invaded the Benjamites in a
hostile manner, and after the fighting of three several Battles having
conquered them, by right of War put all Nocent and Innocent to the Sword, which
they afterward repented too late.

That which I have said of the Power of every particular Tribe, is by these
Examples confirmed: But some body will perhaps ask, who chose the Successor of
the Prince of every particular Tribe? I find nothing certain in Scripture
concerning it, but seeing every Tribe was divided into Families, and the eldest
were the Heads of every Family, I suppose of these Heads, the eldest did by
Right succeed him that was Prince of these Seniors or Elders; Moses chose the
Seventy that were to assist him, who with him, were the supreme Council, and
after the Death of Joshua, had the Administration of the Government. By Elders,
often in Scripture, and amongst the Jews, are meant Judges; but this particular
not being much to our purpose, it is sufficient that I have proved, no person
after Moses's Death, executed all the Offices of Supreme Power; for since all
things did not depend upon the pleasure and will of one single person, nor upon
the Decrees of the Council or People, but some things were done by one Tribe,
others by another, by the equal Power, and joint Authority of every one; it
evidently follows, that from the Death of Moses the Government was neither
Monarchical, Aristocratical or Popular, but, as I have said, Theocratical:
First, because the Temple was the Palace of the Government, and upon that
account only all the Tribes were Fellow-Citizens. Secondly, Because all the
Citizens or Subjects, were to swear Fidelity and Allegiance to God their
Supreme Judge, to whom only they promised to yield Obedience. And lastly,
Because the Chief Commander, or General, when there was occasion, was to be
chosen by none but God, which Moses, in the Name of God, expressly prophesied to
the People ( Deuteronomy. 17. 15.) which likewise appears by the Election of Gideon,
Sampson, and Samuel; and therefore it is not to be doubted, but the rest of
their faithful Captains were chosen in the same manner, though it be not set
down in their History.

These things being thus laid open, it is time to enquire, how this Con by
poverty, sold his Land, when the Year of Iubilee came, it was e who did govern,
as of those that were governed, that neither the Subjects should become Rebels,
nor the Governors Tyrants. They that have Supreme Power, or the Administration
of Government, when they wickedly oppress and abuse their Subjects, they still
endeavor to make the People believe, that all their Actions are just and
legal, which may be easily done, when the Interpretation of the Law depends
only upon them. It Is this that makes them take so much Liberty of doing what
their Desires dictate, and think much of their Prerogative lost, when the power
of interpreting the Laws is in any but themselves; or when the Laws are so
perspicuously and clearly interpreted, that there can be no doubt or dispute
concerning them. The Jews therefore were very much secured against the
Oppression and Injustice of their Princes, by Moses giving the power of
interpreting the Laws to the Levites, ( Deuteronomy. chap. 21. v. 15.) who had no
administration or part in the Government with the rest; but all their Honor
and Fortune depended upon their truly and rightly interpreting the Law.
Moreover, all the people were commanded once in every seven years, to assemble
together in one place, where the High Priest read and expounded to them the
Laws; and likewise every particular person was obliged, constantly, with great
care, to read over the Book of the Law: (See Deuteronomy. chap. 21. v 9. and chap. 6.
v. 7.) The Princes and Rulers therefore, for their own sakes, were to take good
heed, that they did all things according to the known Prescription and Rules of
the Law, if they expected any Honor from the People, who would then reverence
them as God's Ministers and Vicegerents; otherwise they must expect the
Universal Hatred of the People, which was a sort of Divine Vengeance. Another
thing which very much bridled the Exorbitant Power and Lust of their Princes,
was their Militia's being formed out of their own People, none from Twenty to
Sixty excepted; it not being in the Prince's Power to levy, or keep in Pay any
Foreign Forces. This, I say, was a thing of great Consequence; for Princes
cannot possibly oppress their Subjects, without Forces in continual Pay; and
Princes fear nothing so much as the Power of their own armed Subjects, by whose
Valor, Labor, and Expense of Blood, the Glory and Liberty of a Kingdom is
purchased and secured. Therefore Alexander, when he was to fight a second Battle
against Darius, hearing Parmenio give Advice which did not please him, Quintus
Curtius, in his Fourth Book, says, Alexander would not check Parmenio again,
though he had upbraided Alexander more bitterly than was expedient, but fell
upon Polyperchon, who was of Parmenio's Opinion: Nor could Alexander oppress
the Liberty of the Macedonians, which he most feared, till after he had, out of
the Prisoners he took, formed Troops that out-numbred his own People; that
being done, he did what he pleased, being before restrained by the Liberty
which the best of his own Subjects enjoyed: And if this Liberty of Armed
Subjects in other Governments, be a Bridle to Princes, who ascribe to
themselves the Glory of all Victories, it was certainly a much greater Curb to
the Princes of the Jewish Tribes, whose Soldiers fought not for the Glory of
their Prince, but the Glory of God, and ventured no Battles till they received
an Answer from God. What is more to be observed, is, That all the Princes of
the Jews were associated and linked together by a Religious Covenant; so that
if any one forsook the public Religion, and offered to violate every man's
Divine Right, they might justly account him a public Enemy, and destroy him.

Thirdly, Another thing which kept the Jewish Princes within bounds, was the
fear of a New Prophet; For if any man of an unblameable Life and Conversation,
could by some certain signs, prove himself a Prophet, that Prophet had
presently Right to the supreme Power, in the same manner that Moses himself had
by Revelation; and not as the Princes who were to consult God by the High
Priest: and without doubt such Prophets could easily make the Oppressed People
of their Party, and by some little signs persuade them to what they pleased:
But when Justice was duly administered, the Prince could make such timely
provision, that the Prophet should so far submit to his Judgment, as to be
strictly examined, whether his Life and Conversation were good? Whether the
signs of his Mission were true? And lastly, Whether that which he prophesied in
the Name of the Lord, were agreeable to the Religion and Laws of the Country?
If the Signs he gave failed, or if his Doctrine were new, he might by the
Authority of the Prince, be justly condemned, or else approved and received.

Fourthly, The Prince could not claim the Power of governing, upon the account
of being more Nobly descended than others, but had Right to it only by
Seniority of Age and Merit.

Lastly, The Princes, and all the Army, had as much Reason to desire Peace as
War; for the Militia being composed only of Jewish Subjects, the same persons
that were Soldiers, managed Affairs in times of Peace; he that was a Commander
in the Field, was in the Tribunal a Judge; and he that was a General in the
Camp, was a Prince in the City: Therefore none could desire War for Wars sake,
but only to enjoy Peace, and to defend their Subjects Liberties. Perhaps the
Prince abstained, as much as was possible, from Innovations, that he might not
attend, and wait on the High Priest, which he might think beneath his Dignity.

So much for the Reasons which kept the Princes within bounds. Let us now see
what kept the People to their Duty. The Principles of the Government will make
this clear; for whosoever considers them, will find, they begot so much
Affection in the Hearts of the People, that it was impossible any man should
think of betraying or deserting his Country; but must be so much affected with
it, that he would suffer any Extremities, rather than be subject to any other
Foreign Government: For after they transferred their Power upon God,
acknowledging their Kingdom to be the Kingdom of God, and believed they only
were the Children of God, and all other Nations God's Enemies, believing their
mortal Hatred against them to be Piety: (See Psalm. 139. v. 21, 22.) They could
abhor nothing more, than swearing Fidelity, and promising Obedience to
Strangers; nor could any thing be thought so execrable and abominable, as
betraying their Country; (that is) the Kingdom of that God they worshipped. It
was counted an horrible Offense to go out of their Country to live, because
they would not celebrate the Worship of God, to which they were strictly
obliged, any where but in their own Land, which was therefore called, the Holy
Land, and every part of the Earth beside, esteemed by them profane and unclean.
Therefore David, being forced by Saul to fly his Country, complains in these
words, (1 Samuel chap. 26. v. 19.) If they be the children of men that have
stirred thee up against me, cursed be they before the Lord; for they have
driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, go
serve other Gods. This was the Reason (which is very worthy Observation) that
no Jewish Subject was ever condemned to Banishment; He that sins deserves to be
punished, but his punishment oughr not to be a sin. The Affection which the
Jews had for their Country, was not simply Love, but Piety, which, with their
Hatred to other Nations, was so augmented by their daily Worship, that it
became natural to them; for their daily Worship was not only different from,
but absolutely contrary to that of all other Nations, and was the Reason they
did not only live unmixt, but separate from them. Continual Reproach must
necessarily beget perpetual Hatred, and there is no Hatred so great and
lasting, as that which is grounded upon difference in Religion, and is believed
to be pious: There was no Reason why their Hatred should decrease; for all
other Nations did as mortally hate them.

Let Reason and Experience judge then, whether the Liberty of the Subject,
Devotion toward their Country, Absolute Power over all Nations, against whom
their Hatred was not only counted lawful, but pious; Singularity of Religious
Rites, and manner of living, were not powerful Arguments to persuade the Jews,
with great Courage and Constancy of Mind, to suffer any thing for their
Country? For while Jerusalem stood, they would never endure any other
Government; therefore was it called, the Rebellious City, ( Ezra chap. 4. v.
12, 15.) The second Government (which was scarce a shadow of the first, after
the Priests had usurped the Power of the Princes) was with great difficulty
destroyed by the Romans, as Tacitus tells us, in the second Book of his
History: Vespasian, says he, put an end to the Jewish War, by the taking of
the City Jerusalem, an hard and difficult work, because of the Peoples
Disposition and Obstinacy in their Superstition, and because the besieged had
Courage and Strength enough to suffer all Extremities. Beside all these things,
which only Opinion made dear and valuable, there was another thing in this
Government, which was a fingular and solid Argument to continue the People in
their Obedience, and take from them all thoughts of deserting their Country;
and that was Profit, which is the Strength and Life of all Humane Actions. In
this Particular, their Advantages were very considerable; for Subjects had no
where greater Right to any thing they possessed. The Jewish Subjects had an equal
portion of Land and Fields with the Prince; and every one was an eternal Lord
of his part; for if any man, forced by poverty, sold his Land, when the Year of
Iubilee came, it was to be entirely restored. There were likewise other
Institutions of this kind; so that a fixed Estate could never be perpetually
alienated: Where could poverty be more tolerable, than in a Country where every
man's mutual Charity, was that part of his Religion whereby he hoped to
purchase the Favor of God, who was his King: so that the Jews could never live
well in any Country but their own, and out of it were sure to meet with Injury
and Reproach. To keep them in their own Country from Civil War, and to take
away the Causes of Contention, their being subject to no Equal, but only to God
himself, contributed very much: so likewise did their mutual Love and Charity,
which was not a little increased by the general Hatred all other Nations had
against them. Another thing, which beyond all that I have mentioned, much
contributed to keeping the people within the Limits of their Duty, was that
strict Discipline of Obedience under which they were educated; for they were to
do nothing but according to positive prescriptions of Law; they could not when
they pleased, but only at certain times, and in certain Years plow, and that
but with one sort of Cattle; they had likewise prescribed Rules for sowing and
reaping; and indeed, (as we have shown in the Fifth Chapter, concerning the Use
of Ceremonies) their whole course of Life was but a continual practice of
Obedience, so that being accustomed to it, it seemed rather Liberty than
Servitude. This was the Reason they desired not what was forbidden, but that
which was commanded. At certain times of the Year they were to give themselves
up to Mirth, Pleasure and Ease; not to indulge their own Appetites, but to
serve God the more cheerfully: Thrice in a Year they were God's Guests, (see
Deuteronomy. chap. 16. v. 16.) Every Seventh day of the Week they were to cease from
all kind of Labor, and take their rest; at other set times, rejoicing; honest
Recreations and Feasting, were not only allowed, but commanded, which above all
things prevail upon men's Minds, especially that Joy which arises from
Devotion, (that is) from Love and admiration together. Their Worship prescribed
on Festival Days being short and various, kept them from loathing and
weariness. To all this add the high Reverence and Veneration they had for the
Temple, which was still preserved by the particular Worship they were to
perform in it, and by many things they were to observe and do, before it was
lawful for any one to enter into it: So that even now we cannot without great
horror, read that abominable wicked act of Manasseh, who caused an Idol to be
set up in the Temple. Nor was the Reverence much less which the People had for
the Law, which was religiously kept in the Sanctuary; so that no Rumors or
Discontents among the People were here to be feared; for no body could meddle
or pass any Judgment in matters of Religion, but every man, without consulting
Reason, was to do all things which God by his Answers in the Temple, or by the
Laws already given, commanded them. It now then appears under what manner of
Government the Jews lived, of which, I hope, I have given a very clear, though
but brief Account.

It now remains, that we enquire, Why the Jews did so often forsake the Law,
why they were so often conquered, and why at last their Government was totally
destroyed. Perhaps some will tell me, Their stubborn and rebellious Humor was
the Cause; That Is but a childish and frivolous Answer: Why was this Nation more
rebellious than any other, was it their Natures? Nature does not make Nations,
but only individual Persons, who are distinguished and divided into Nations, by
diversity of Language, Laws and Customs: From Laws and Customs every Nation
acquires a particular Disposition, a particular Condition, and peculiar
Prejudices and Opinions. If it must be granted, That the Jews were more
stiff-necked and rebellious than any other Nation, it must be because they had
Bad Laws and Evil Customs; and it is a certain Truth, That if God had decreed
their Government should have had a longer continuance, he would have given them
other Laws and Statutes, and another Administration of Government. Therefore
what can we say more, than that God was offended and angry with them, not only
as Jeremy says, from the building of their City, ( Ierem. chap. 32. v. 31.)
but from the very time he gave them their Laws, which Ezekiel testifies, (
chap. 20. v. 25.) saying, I gave them statutes which were not good, and
judgments whereby they should not live, and I polluted them in their own gifts,
in that they caused to pass through the fire all that opens the womb, that
is, the firstborn, that I might make them desolate, to the end, that they
might know I am the Lord. That these Words, and the Cause of their Destruction
may be rightly understood, we are to take notice, That God's first Intention
was to commit the Administration of all things pertaining to Religion, to the
Firstborn; not to the Levites, as appears, ( Numb. chap. 8. v. 17.) where God
says, all the firstborn of the children of Israel are mine, I sanctified them
for my self. But after all the People, the Levites only excepted, had
worshipped the Golden Calf, they were defiled and rejected, and the Levites who
sided with Moses, as appears, ( Exodus chap. 32. v. 20, 27.) were chosen into
their room: ( Deuteronomy. chap. 10. v. 8.) The Lord separated the tribe of Levi to
stand before the Lord, to minister him, and to bless his Name. Which change,
when I seriously consider, it makes me think of those Words in Tacitus: Illo
tempore non fuisse Deo curae securitatem illorum, fuisse ultionem: At that time
God took more care to be revenged upon them, than to preserve them. God was so
extremely incensed against them, that though Laws usually provide for the
Safety, Honor and Security of People, yet the Laws which God gave the Jews,
were with a purpose to punish, and be revenged upon them: so that their Laws
were not Laws; that is, the Peoples Safety, but their Plague and Pnnishment.
Consider how many things the People were bound to give to the Priests and
Levites, beside the Money that was to be paid for the Redemption of the
Firstborn: Consider likewise, that the Levites were only permitted to come
near whatever was accounted holy, which continually minded the People of their
Uncleanness and Repudiation; with which it is very likely the Levites might
often reproach them: for amongst so many thousand Levites, no question but
there were some troublesome pragmatical Fellows, who provoked the People; and
the People on their part, to be quit with the Levites, narrowly watched and
pryed into their Actions, who being but Men, were subject to many failings and
miscarriages, which, as is usual, were charged upon the whole Function, and at
last, especially when Provisions were dear, in all probability, the People grew
weary of maintaining so many lazy, idle and hated persons, who were no Kin at
all to them. No wonder then when the People were at ease, and public Miracles
ceased, if they who were in Authority became remiss, and the covetous incensed
Minds of the People grew careless, and neglecting the Divine Worship, of which
they began to be suspicious and ashamed, desired a new. It Is likewise possible,
that the Princes to keep the Commanding Power still in their own hands, might
court the People to take part with them against the Priest, and bring in a new
Religion. But had the duration and security of the Government been designed
when it was first instituted, things might have gone well, if all the Tribes
had had equal Honor and Power; for who would have violated the Sacred Right of
his Kindred? They would rather for Piety and Religion's sake, have maintained
their Parents, Brothers, and Kinsmen, seeing from them they were to receive the
Interpretation of the Law, and the Divine Oracles. The Tribes would have been
tied in a stricter Bond of Amity, if all had had equal Power of administering in
the Temple; at least, there had been less fear of Discord, if the Election of
the Levites had not been grounded upon the Wrath and Vengeance of God: But, as
I have already said, God was very angry with them, and that I may again use
Ezekiel's Expression, he polluted them with their gifts, in the redemption of
their firstborn, that he might destroy them. This appears by their Histories;
for as soon as the People began to be idle in the Wilderness, many, not of the
meanest sort, began to be offended with the Choice of this Tribe, believing
that Moses did not act by God's Command, but did all things as he himself
pleased; because he made choice of his own Tribe above all the rest, and made a
perpetual Settlement of the Priesthood upon his own Brother: So that a Tumult
being raised, they tell Moses and Aaron, that all the Congregation were every
one of them holy, and that they lifted themselves up above all the Congregation
of the Lord. No Reason could appease them, but they were all miraculously
destroyed, which occasioned a Universal Sedition amongst all the People, who
believed that they who perished were not destroyed by God's Judgment, but by
some Trick of Moses; after which followed a great Plague, which made the People
weary of their Lives. This was the end of the Sedition, but not the beginning
of any Amity or Affection; and God told Moses ( Deuteronomy. chap. 33. v. 21.) that he
knew the imagination the people went about, even before he had brought them
into the Land which he swear: and Moses a little after, Verse 27. says to the
People, I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck; behold while I am yet alive
with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the Lord, and how much more
after my death? And, as all the World knows, so it happened; great Changes, all
manner of Licentiousness, Luxury and Idleness, made them grow daily worse and
worse, till being often beaten by their Enemies, they brake their Holy
Covenant, and desired a Mortal King. The Temple became his Palace, and the
Tribes casting off the Divine Law and the Priesthood, his Subjects. The
Electing of a King was a great occasion of new Seditions, to reign
precariously, or suffer any Power to control theirs, was intolerable to their
Kings: They who from private Men were elected to the Throne, were contented
with the Dignity conferred upon them; but when their Sons came by Right of
Succession to the Crown, they began by degrees to make Alterations, that the
Supreme Power might reside only in them; which Power they had not, so long as
the Power of the Laws was not in their hands, but were interpreted and kept by
the High Priest in the Sanctuary. So that the Kings were still subject to the
Laws, and had not Authority enough to abrogate the Old, or make New. Moreover,
the Levites had power to keep the Kings, as well as the Subjects, under the
Notion of being profane persons, from meddling with Sacred Matters. Lastly,
Because all the power of their Kings depended upon the pleasure of any one who
was accounted a Prophet; of which they had an Example in Samuel, who with great
Boldness and Liberty commanded Saul to do what he pleased, and for one Offense
only transferred the Kingdom upon David, which indeed made the Government
perfectly precarious. To avoid this, their Kings consecrated other Temples,
that they might have no more need of consulting the Levites, and enquired after
others to prophecy, in opposition to those who were accounted true Prophets:
But yet they could never compass their Ends; for the Prophets were still ready,
watching their opportunity till a Successor came, and then the Prophets, by
their Divine Power, did sometimes set up some Famous and Worthy Person, who
being displeased with the King, did, under pretense of vindicating Religion,
endeavor to usurp the Supreme Power, or some part thereof. But neither this
way could the Prophets compass their Ends; for though they took away the
Tyrant, yet the Causes of Tyranny still remained, and they did, with a great
Effusion of the Subjects Blood, only purchase another new Tyrant. So that there
was no end of their Discords and Intestine Wars; and the Causes of violating
God's Law, were still the same; which could never end but with the Total
Destruction of the Commonwealth.

We have now seen how Religion began in the Jewish Commonwealth, and how the
Government might have been perpetual, if the Just Wrath of God would have
permitted it to continue; But because it would not, therefore it perished. I
have here spoken only of their First Government, the Second being but a Shadow
of their First, seeing they were still under the Power of the Persians. After
they obtained their Liberty of Cyrus, the High Priests became their Princes, by
usurping the Supreme Authority; the Priests having as great a Mind to the Crown
as to the Mitre. Of this Second Government I need say no more. Whether their
First Government, as it was conceived Durable, or Religious, be a Pattern that
may be followed, will appear in the next Chapter.

For the Close of all, I desire it may be particularly observed, That by what
has been declared in this Chapter, it is evident, That Divine Right or
Religion, had its Beginning and Rise from a Covenant or Contract; without which
there is no Right but that of Nature; and therefore the Jews were not obliged
by any Precept of Religion, to show any Kindness toward any other Nations, who
were not concerned in the Covenant, but only to those of their own
Commonwealth.

CHAP. XVIII. Certain Political Maxims Collected from the Government and
Histories of the Jews Commonwealth.
THough the Government of the Jews, as it has been described in the preceding
Chapter, might have been perpetual; yet it is an Example that cannot now be
followed, nor is it advisable to put it in practice; for if any Men would
transfer their power upon God, they ought to do it as the Jews did, by an
express Contract or Covenant; so that not only the mind of them that transfer
their power, but also the Will of God, upon whom the power is transferred ought
to be known; but God has revealed by the Apostles, that the Covenant of God
shall no more be written with Ink, nor in Tables of Stone, but shall by his
Spirit be written in our Hearts. That form of Government, under which the Jews
lived, might be very useful and convenient for them who lived alone, without
any foreign Trade or Commerce, who kept themselves within their own
Territories, and separated themselves from all the rest of the World; but it is
in no wise fit for People that live by trading with others, and consequently it
is to very few people that the Jewish government can be of any use or
advantage; but though it be a pattern that cannot be followed in all things,
yet there were in it many things very worthy of our observation, and which are
fit to be put in practice. Because my intention is not to treat expressly of
Government, I will pass many things by, and only take notice of those that make
for my purpose; Namely, That it is not repugnant to the Kingdom of God, to make
Majesty Elective; that is, to choose the Person or Persons who shall have the
Supreme Power of Government; for after the Jews transferred their Power upon
God, they delivered the Supreme Power of Governing to Moses, who thereby had in
God's Name, the sole Authority of making and abrogating Laws, of choosing sacred
Ministers, and likewise the sole power of teaching, judging, and punishing: and
though the Priests were Interpreters of the Law, yet they had no power at all
to judge the People, nor to excommunicate any person; for none could do that
but the Judges and Princes, who were chosen out of the People, as appears (
Joshua chap. 6. v. 26.) where Joshua adjured the people, not to rebuild
Jericho; ( Judges chap. 21. v. 18.) where the Elders of the Congregation
appointed what Women the Benjamites should marry, to propagate their Tribe, and
(1 Samuel chap. 14. v. 24.) where Saul commanded the People not to eat any food
till Evening. If we consider the Histories and Successes of the Jews, we shall
find other things very well worth our Observation:

First, That there were no different Sects of Religion amongst them, till after
the Priests in the Second Government usurped the Supreme Authority, and the
Power of making Laws. To make their Authority lasting, they took upon them the
Power which the Princes had, and at last, would be called Kings. The Reason is
apparent; for in the First Government, nothing was made Law by the High Priest,
because he had no power of decreeing any thing; his Business was only to return
those Answers to the Princes and Council, which were given by God: So that at
that time, their High Priests could not desire to make new Decrees, but only to
do that which was their known Duty; for they had no other way to preserve their
Liberty against the Princes, but by keeping the Laws free from Violation and
Corruption; but after the Priests got power of meddling with matters of
Government, and of Priests became Princes, then every one, as well in Religion
as other Affairs, would have all things determined by the Pontifical Authority,
daily making Decrees, which they would have to be as Sacred as the Laws of
Moses; so that Religion degenerated into horrible Superstition; the true Sense
and Interpretation of the Law was corrupted, and the Priests, after the
Restoration, attempting to get the Supreme Power into their hands, to gain the
People, so soothed and flattered them, that they approved of all they did, were
it never so wicked, and made Interpretations of Scripture suitable to their
Humors and Practices, which Malachy in express Words testifies, reproving the
Priests of his own time in this manner, ( Mal. chap. 2. v. 7, 8.) The Priest's
lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth; for
he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts: But ye are departed out of the way,
ye have caused many to stumble at the law, ye have corrupted the covenant of
Levi, says the Lord of hosts. And so goes on in reproaching them with
interpreting the Law as they pleased, with their respecting of persons, and
taking no heed to walk in God's ways. It is certain, that though the Priests
were never so cautious and wary, yet they were narrowly observed by the wiser
sort, who taking notice of the Priests Boldness, declared, That the People were
not bound to the Observation of any Laws, but those that were Written, and that
all Decrees made by the Priests, which the deceived Pharisees (chosen, as
Josephus tells us, out of the meanest of the People) called, the Tradition of
their Fathers, were not at all obligatory, nor to be obeyed. Without all doubt,
the High Priest's flattering the People, the Corruption of Religion, and the
Multiplication of Laws, became a great occasion of those Disputes and
Controversies which could never be ended; for when men in the heat of
Superstition begin to quarrel, and supreme Magistrates on one side or other,
concern themselves in the Dispute, the Controversy never ends, and there is a
necessity of dividing into Sects.

In the Second place, it may be observed, That the Prophets, who were but
private persons, sometimes by the great Liberty they used, in admonishing,
reproving, and reproaching the People, did rather provoke than make them
better, who notwithstanding, would with much greater patience, receive
correction and instruction from their Kings. Yea, the Prophets were sometimes
intolerable to very pious good Kings, by arrogating a Power of judging what was
well, and what ill done, and sometimes by reproving Kings to their faces, if
they suffered any thing to be publicly or privately done, which was contrary
to their Judgment. Asa, who was by the Testimony of Scripture, a good King,
imprisoned Hanani the Prophet, (see 2 Chronicles. chap. 16.) for too boldly
reproving and reproaching him, for the League he made with the King of Syria.
Beside this Example, there are others, which show, That the Liberty the
Prophets took, did sometimes more hurt than good; I need not instance the Civil
Wars, which were occasioned by the Prophets pretending to the Supreme Power.

A Third thing fit to be observed, is, That during the time the People
governed, there happened but one Civil War, which being ended, the Victors had
so much compassion for the Conquered Party, that their whole care and study,
was, how to restore them to their former Power and Dignity. But after the
People, not accustomed to Kings, had changed the Form of their Government into
Monarchy, there was no end of their Civil Wars; they fought such fierce and
bloody Battles, as almost exceed Belief; for in one Battle (which is hardly
credible) Fifty Thousand Israelites were slain by the men of Judah, and in
another, the Israelites slew a very great number, though not specified of the
men of Judah, took the King himself Prisoner, demolished a great part of the
Walls of Jerusalem; and, to show, that the Rage of War has no Moderation, they
destroyed the Temple, sacked the City, laden and glutted with the Spoils and
Blood of their Brethren, taking Hostages, they leave the King in his almost
ruined Kingdom, and more secured by the Weakness, than the Faith of the King of
Judah's Subjects, laid down their Arms. The men of Judah in a few years after,
recovering strength, come again into the Field, and fight another Battle,
wherein the Israelites were again Victors, killing an Hundred and Twenty
Thousand of the Men of Judah, and carried away Captives Two Hundred Thousand of
their Wives and Children, with a very great Booty; so that consumed by these
and other Battles, mentioned in Scripture, they at last fell a prey to their
Enemies. Before they had Kings, they sometimes lived in perfect peace Forty
Years together; and once, which is scarce credible, Fourscore Years without any
Foreign or Domestic War; but after they were governed by Kings, and fought
not for Peace and Liberty, but the Glory of their Monarch, we find them
continually embroiled, the Reign of Solomon only excepted, whose Wisdom and
Virtue better appeared in Peace than in War; the desire of reigning at last
became so excessive, that their Kings sometimes waded to the Throne in Blood.

Lastly, During the Government of the People, the Laws remained in their first
purity, and were constantly observed; for before Kings came in, there were very
few Prophets^ but after the Election of Kings, the Prophets grew very numerous.
We read, Obadiah hid at one time an Hundred in a Cave, to save their Lives. We
likewise find, the People were often deceived with False Prophets; the People,
before Kings had the Government, being as there was occasion, sometimes
haughty, and sometimes humble, did, when they were in Calamity, forsake their
evil ways, sought God, restored the Laws, and by these means freed themselves
from danger and distress; but their Kings, whose haughty Minds cannot without
shame stoop, obstinately persisted in their Sins and Vices, till the
Commonwealth was utterly destroyed.

By all this it clearly appears, First, How dangerous it is both to Religion
and Government, to put the Power of making Laws and governing, into the hands
of Priests, and that it is much safer to restrain them from meddling in any
Business, till their Counsel be asked, and to keep them from preaching and
teaching New Doctrines and Opinions.

Secondly, It is very dangerous to judge and determine of things merely
speculative by Scripture, or to make any Laws concerning Opinions, which are,
or may be in themselves disputable. That Government is very Tyrannical, where
Opinions are counted Crimes; it is a sign the angry Multitude are Masters.
Pilate, to gratify the incensed Pharisees, commanded Christ to be crucified:
It was usual with the Pharisees, when they had a mind to put Worthy Persons out
of their Places, and Offices of Dignity, to ask Questions concerning Religion;
this made them accuse the Sadduces of Impiety. According to the Example of the
Pharisees,, base and abominable Hypocrites, under pretense of Zeal for
Religion, persecute and traduce honest worthy virtuous men, whom for that
Reason they envy, and by publicly inveighing against their Opinions, stir up
the People against their Persons. This unworthy Practice, because it is cloaked
with Religion, can hardly be restrained, where the Supreme Powers have
introduced any Sect whereof they themselves were not Authors; for then the
Sectaries, not the Supreme Powers, are accounted Interpreters of the Divine
Law; that is, the Supreme Power makes Sectaries Interpreters of Scripture, and
then the Magistrates Authority signifies little with the People, who have great
Veneration for their Teachers, to whose Doctrine and Decisions they think even
Kings ought to submit. To avoid all these Mischiefs, nothing can be safer for a
Commonwealth, than to place all Religion and Piety only in Works; that is, only
in the Exercise of Justice and Charity; and for Matters of Opinion, to leave
every Man free to his own Judgment. But of this Particular more largely
hereafter.

Thirdly, We see how necessary it is, for the good both of Religion and
Government, to fix the Right and Authority of determining even in things
pertaining to God and Religion, and of judging what is right and what is wrong,
in the Supreme Powers; for if the power of judging Men's Actions, could not
without great danger to Religion and Government, be allowed to the Prophets,
much less ought it to be granted to Men, who can neither prophecy or do
Miracles. But of this Particular I will speak expressly in the next Chapter.

Fourthly, and lastly, We see how dangerous it is, for People never accustomed
to Kingly Government, and have Laws accordingly framed, to choose a Monarch; for
as the People cannot endure such a Government, so Kingly Authority cannot brook
Laws, or any Rights and Privileges of the People, Established by any others of
less Authority; and a King will have very little mind to maintain Laws, wherein
the Peoples Interest was more intended and provided for than his own: for in
maintaining such Laws, he will think himself rather the Peoples Servant than
their Master. A New Monarch will make it his business to make New Laws, framing
the Rules of Government to his own purpose, and will reduce the People to such
a Condition, that they shall not be able, with as much ease, to unmake as make
a King. But here I cannot pass by another Observation, which is, That it is a
very dangerous thing to take away the Life of a King, though it be evident to
all the World he is an Absolute Tyrant; Because when a Nation is accustomed to
Kingly Authority, and has been governed only by it, they will scorn and
contemn any Authority that is less; and when they have taken away one Tyrant,
they will be necessitated as heretofore the Prophets were, to choose another in
his room, who must be a Tyrant whether he will or no; for how can he behold his
Subjects Hands stained with Royal Blood, and approve the Fact, which was but a
president, to show how they might likewise deal with him? If he will be a King,
and will have the People acknowledge his Power, and not be his Judge, he must,
unless he intend to reign precariously, first revenge the Death of his
Predecessor, and make the People an Example, that they may not dare to commit
the like Parricide upon him. But how can he revenge upon the People the Death
of a Tyrant, unless he first defend the former Tyrant's Cause, approve his
Actions, and consequently tread in his steps? Hence it comes to pass, that
people may indeed change, but never destroy a Tyrant, or turn ancient
Monarchical Government into any other form. Of this the People of a Kingdom not
far from us, have given the World a fatal Example, who under color and form of
Law and Justice, took away their King's Life; and when he was gone, they could
do no less than change the form of Government; but after much Blood spilt, it
came to this pass at last, that another person was set up, not by the Name of
King (as if all the Quarrel had been for nothing but a Name,) who could not
possibly stand, unless he destroyed the Royal Line, and all that were suspected
to be the last King's Friends: He disturbed the Quiet of Peace, which breeds
Rumors, with new Wars, that thereby he might divert the Minds of the People
from reflecting upon the King's Murder; but the Nation at last finding they had
done nothing for the public good, by putting to Death their Lawful King, and
by changing the Government, had brought themselves into a Condition worse than
they were in before, they resolved to return from whence they had strayed; nor
were they quiet till they saw all things restored to their former state.
Perhaps some will object the Example of the People of Rome, who with much ease
rid themselves of a Tyrant; but their Example, I think, makes good my Opinion;
for though the People of Rome could easily destroy a Tyrant, and change their
form of Government, because the Power and Right of choosing a King and his
Successor, was in the People; and because the People (amongst whom were many
criminal and seditious persons) were not accustomed to Kings, for of Six they
killed Three, yet still they did nothing, but in the place of one Tyrant choose
many, who kept them always embroiled in Foreign and Civil War, till the
Government, under another Name, as it did lately in England, fell again to a
Monarch; but the States of Holland never, that we know, had Kings, but only
Earls or Counts, upon whom the Supreme Power was devolved: for the States, by
their Declaration published in the time of the Earl of Leicester, make it
evident, That they still reserved to themselves the Power and Authority of
minding those Counts of their Duty, and likewise kept continually in their own
hands the power of maintaining their own Authority, and defending their
Subjects Liberty; in case those Counts did at any time abuse their power, the
States had still Authority to restrain and punish them, that they could do
nothing without their Consent and Approbation. Whence it clearly follows, that
the Right of Supreme Power and Majesty always resided in the States, which
Power the last Earl endeavoring to usurp, the States could not possibly be
thought guilty of any Revolt or Rebellion, when they did only restore their
almost lost Government to its Pristine State: These Examples fully prove, That
ancient Forms of Government ought to be preserved, and cannot, without great
danger of total ruin, be changed.

CHAP. XIX. Religion, and all things pertaining to it, are subject to no other
Power, but that of the Supreme Magistrate. Public External Forms of Religious
Worship, ought to be accommodated to the Peace of the Commonwealth.
WHen I said, That they only who have the Supreme Power, have Right to all
things, and that all things depend upon their Decrees, I meant things Sacred as
well as Civil; that is, Supreme Magistrates are the Supreme Heads, Judges, and
Interpreters of all things both in Church and State, which is the particular
Point I intended to treat of in this Chapter, because there are many, who will
not allow Supreme Civil Magistrates to have any power over things Sacred, nor
will they own them to be Judges or Interpreters of God's Law, but with strange
Boldness accuse and traduce them; yea, sometimes (as heretofore Ambrose did the
Emperor Theodosius) Excommunicate them out of the Church. But, as it will
appear in the end of this Chapter, these Men have a mind to divide and share
the Government, or get it wholly into their own hands.

I will first show, That Religion has the Force of a Law, only from their
Decrees who have the Supreme Power; and that all External Religious Worship,
and Outward Practice of Piety, ought to be suited and accommodated to the Peace
of the Commonwealth; (That is) so ordered and regulated, as may make most for
the Quiet thereof, and consequently ought to be determined and settled by the
Supreme Power, to whose Judgment in all Causes, Sacred and Civil, we ought to
submit. But that I may not be mistaken, I speak only of the outward Worship and
Exercise of Religion and Piety, and not of Piety it self, and the inward
Worship of God, or of the Means whereby the Mind is internally disposed to
worship God in sincerity: for the inward Worship of God, and Piety it self, is
in every man's own power, (as we have shown in the end of the Seventh Chapter)
which power no man can transfer upon another. It appears by the Fourteenth
Chapter, what I mean by the Kingdom of God, where I show, That he fulfilleth
the Law of God, who exercises Justice and Charity, because God has commanded
it; from whence it follows, That the Kingdom of God, is where Justice and
Charity have the force of a Law and Precept. I think there is little
difference, whether God teach us the Practice of Justice and Charity by Natural
Light, or by Revelation, or whether God command it; for it matters not how it
was revealed, so as it obtain the Force of a Law, and become in the highest
Degree obligatory to Men. If I then prove, That Justice and Charity cannot
become a Law or Command, but by the Power and Command of the Supreme Powers, it
will be easily granted (seeing Supreme Power is always in the hands of the
Supreme Magistrates,) that Religion becomes a binding Law, only by their
Decrees, who have the Power of Government, and that God has no peculiar
Kingdom over Men, but by them who have the Supreme Ruling Power. That the
outward Practice of Justice and Charity becomes an obligatory Law by the
Command of the Supreme governing Power, appears by what I have said in the
Fourteenth Chapter, where I have declared, That in the State of Nature, Reason
cannot pretend to any greater power than Natural Appetite may; and that they
who live according to the Laws and Dictates of Natural Appetite, have as much
Right to all things within their Power, as they that live according to the
Rules of Reason: So that for this very Reason we cannot conceive, there can be
in the State of Nature any sin, nor can we think God to be a Judge punishing
sins, but all things carried on in their course, according to the Laws of
Universal Nature; to use Solomon's own Words, all things come alike to all,
there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the clean and to the
unclean, no place being left for Justice and Charity. But that the Dictates of
Reason (that is, as I have showed in the Fourteenth Chapter,) the Divine Law
written in our hearts, might obtain the strength and force of a Law, it was
necessary, that every man should part from his Natural Right, and transfer it
either upon all, upon some, or upon one; and that then we first came to know
what was Justice and what Injustice, what Equity and what Iniquity: Justice
therefore, and the Dictates of Right Reason, with Love to our Neighbor,
becomes a Precept and obligatory Law, by the Power and Decrees of Supreme
Magistrates; and because, as I have showed, the Kingdom of God consists in the
power that Justice, Charity, and true Religion have over us, by becoming a Law
to us; therefore it follows, that God has no peculiar Kingdom over Men, but by
those who have the Supreme Ruling Power. Whether we consider Religion revealed
to us by natural or prophetical Light, the Demonstration is Universal, seeing
Religion is the same, and equally revealed by God, which way soever it be
supposed to come to our knowledge; and therefore that Religion prophetically
revealed, might obtain the force of a Law among the Jews, it was necessary
every man should first part with his natural Right, and that all with one
common consent, should resolve to obey and submit to all things which should by
God be prophetically revealed to them; just as People do in Democratical
Government, where all with common consent resolve to live according to the
Dictates of Reason; and though the Jews did transfer their Power upon God, yet
they did it more in opinion than reality; for the Supreme Power really and
absolutely remained still in them till they transferred it upon Moses; who was
thenceforward an absolute King, and by him only God reigned over the Jews.
Moreover, because Religion became a Law only by the Power of the Supreme
Government, Moses could punish none before the Covenant was made, because then
no man had parted with his own Power and Right. They broke the Sabbath before
the Covenant was made, and were not punished, as appears ( Exodus chap. v. 27.)
but after the Covenant, when every man had parted with his Natural Right, he
that broke the Sabbath only by gathering sticks, was stoned, as appears ( Numb.
chap. 15. v. 36.) and the observation of the Sabbath when the People had parted
with their Power, became a Law by the Command of the Supreme Magistrate.
Lastly, Upon this very ground also, when the Commonwealth and Government of the
Jews was destroyed, Revealed Religion had no longer the Force of a Law; for
without doubt, as soon as the Jews transferred their Power upon the King of
Babylon, the Covenant of the Kingdom of God, and the Obligation of the Divine
Law ceased; for as soon as they were Subjects to the King of Babylon, the
Covenant whereby they promised to obey God in all things became void, and they
could no longer perform it: From the time they were subjected to the King of
Babylon, they were no longer in their own power (as they were in the Desert and
their own Country), but were in all things obliged to obey the King of Babylon
(as appears by what we have said in the Sixteen Chapter), and by what Jeremy
says ( Chap. 29. v. 7.) Seek ye the peace of that City whither I have caused
ye to be earried captives, and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the peace
thereof shall ye have peace. They could not seek or provide for the peace of
that City as Ministers of Government, because they were Captives; and therefore
they were to do it as Servants or Subjects, by keeping themselves free from
Sedition, and by observing the Laws of the Government, though very different
from those of their own Country: By which it is evident, that Religion among
the Jews obtained the force of a Law by the Command of the Supreme Power, which
Power being destroyed, Religion was no more a Law or Command of that particular
Government, but was to be accounted a general Dictate of Reason: I say, of
Reason, because Catholic Religion was not yet known by Revelation; we
therefore conclude, that Religion, whether it be natural or revealed, acquires
the Force of a Command only by the Decree of those who have the Supreme Power;
and God has no peculiar Kingdom over Men, but by the Supreme Magistrate. And
this is made more clear by what has been said in the Fourteenth Chapter, where
we have shown, That all God's Decrees imply Eternal Verity and Necessity; nor
can we conceive God as a Prince or Lawgiver to Men; therefore Divine Documents
made known to us by the light of Nature, or revealed to us by the Prophets,
have not the force of a Law immediately from God, but must necessarily receive
it from those, or by their means, who have the Power of commanding and making
Laws; and by their means only we apprehend that God reigns over Men, and
directs Humane Affairs according to Justice and Equity, which is also proved by
Experience; for we can find no Footsteps of Divine Justice, but where the just
reign: otherwise (to use Solomon's Expression once more,) the like event is to
the righteous and to the wicked, to the clean and to the unclean; which made
many doubt God's Providence, who believed, that God did immediately reign over
Men, and made Universal Nature only for their use. Seeing then both Reason and
Experience make it evident, that the power of the Divine Law depends upon the
Decrees of the Supreme Magistrate, it follows, that the Supreme Powers are
Interpreters of it. Upon what account we shall presently declare, but first we
will show, That the External Worship of God, and the Exercise of Piety, if we
will rightly obey God, ought to be performed and regulated in such a manner, as
may best suit with, and is most likely to preserve the Peace of the
Commonwealth.

Certainly a Man's Piety and Love to his Country ought to be very great; for
take away Government, farewell all hope of benefit or safety, all things are
presently in a perilous Condition, and the Reign of Rage and Impiety fills all
Peoples Minds with Terror and Confusion. Whence it must follow, that what good
soever I do to my Neighbor, if it be destructive to the Commonwealth, may be
counted Impiety; and on the other side, any hurt done to my Neighbor for the
preservation of the Commonwealth, ought to be accounted Charity; (for Example)
if a Man strive with me for my Coat, it is very great Charity in me to give him
my Cloak also; but where this may endanger the safety of Government, it is much
greater Charity to bring that Man to Justice, though I know he will be
condemned to death. Manlius Torquatus is celebrated in Story, for preferring
the Peoples Public Safety before his own Son's Life. If then Public Safety be
above all Laws, and all Laws, both Divine and Humane, have a special regard to
it; if it likewise be the Office and Duty only of the Supreme Power, to
determine what is for the Public Safety of Government, and to command whatever
it thinks is so, it is a necessary consequence, that no body but the Supreme
Power ought to determine in what manner a Man ought to show his Love to his
Neighbor; that is, in what manner he is bound to obey God. So that now we
understand why, and upon what ground the Supreme Powers are Arbiters and
Interpreters of Religion, and that no body can rightly obey God, if he do not
accommodate the Public Practice of Piety whereto every man is obliged, to the
public benefit and peace of the Commonwealth, by observing all Commands of the
Supreme Powers; for seeing we are all bound to practice Piety toward all men,
none excepted, and to do no man any Injury, it follows, That it is not lawful
for any man to do good to one, if thereby he hurt another; much less if he
thereby endanger the Commonwealth; and no person can, according to God's
Command, practice Charity toward his Neighbor, unless his Religion and
Charity be so regulated, as to promote the Public Good. Now no private man can
know what is for the Public Good, unless it be by the Decrees and Laws of the
Supreme Power, whose business it is to take care of the Commonwealth; and
therefore no man can rightly practice Piety, and obey God, unless he be
obedient to the Decrees and Determinations of the Supreme Power, which is
verified by common practice: for it is not lawful for any Subject to help or
assist any Man, whom the Supreme Power has judged worthy of Death, or declared
to be a public Enemy. Though the Jews were commanded to love their neighbors
as themselves, ( Levit. chap. 19. v. 8.) yet if any man had offended against
the Commands of the Law, they were bound to make it known to the Judge, and in
case he were condemned to Death, to kill him ( Deuteronomy. 13. 8, 9. and 17. 7.) That
the Jews might preserve their Liberty, and keep their Lands in their own
possession, it was necessary (as we have shown in the Seventeenth Chapter) to
accommodate their Religion to their Government, and separate themselves from
other Nations. It was therefore said, Love thy neighbor, but hate thine enemy,
( Matthew. chap. 15. v. 43.) But after they lost their Government, and were
carried away Captives to Babylon, then Jeremy bid them seek the peace of that
City: And because Christ knew they were to be scattered and dispersed into all
parts of the World, he taught them the Practice of Charity to all Mankind in
general; which evidently proves, That Religion was always accommodated to the
public benefit of the Commonwealth. If any man ask me, by what Right or
Authority the Disciples of Christ, who were but private persons, could preach
Religion? I say, they did it by Virtue of that Power they received from Christ
against unclean Spirits: (See Matthew. chap. 10. v. 1.) I have in the end of my
Sixteenth Chapter expressly declared, That all men are bound to keep Faith with
a Tyrant, unless it be such a one against whom God has by Revelation promised
his particular assistance; and therefore none can take Example from the
Apostles, unless he have also power to do Miracles, which appears by what
Christ said to his Disciples, ( Matthew. chap. 10. v. 28.) Fear not those who can
kill the body. Had this been said generally to all men, Government would be to
no purpose, and those Words of Solomon not at all to be regarded, ( Prove. chap.
24. v. 21.) My son, fear God and the King. We must therefore conclude, That the
Authority which Christ gave his Disciples, was in a particular manner given
only to them, and ought not to be drawn into example by others. I value not the
Reasons which are urged against this Opinion, by them that would have the Civil
Power to be in the Civil Magistrate; but all things pertaining to Religion in
the Power of the Church; their Reasons are so frivolous they need no
refutation; yet I cannot choose but take notice, how mightily those men are
deceived, who to maintain (pardon the Expression) their seditious Humor, urge
the Authority of the High Priest among the Jews; who, say they, was the sole
Administrator of all things that were sacred and concerned Religion: But those
men may remember the High Priests received that Power from Moses, who, as we
have proved, was the person that had the Supreme Power, and by whose Command or
Decree, the High Priest could at any time be divested and deprived of his
Power; for Moses did not only choose Aaron, but also his Son Eleazer, and his
Nephew Phineas, and gave them power to exercise the Pontifical Office; and
though the Priests always kept that power, yet nevertheless were they still but
the Substitutes of Moses; that is, of the Supreme Power: for as we have made it
appear, Moses chose no Successors, but so distributed all his own Offices, that
they who came after him, seemed but such Deputies as administer the Government
for absent, not deceased Kings. In the second Government the High Priests were
indeed the Supreme Magistrates, but that was after they had usurped the Regal
Power; but before that Usurpation, the Priests always depended upon the Decrees
of the Supreme Power, and their Kings had absolute power over all things
pertaining to Religion (as shall appear by what will be said toward the End of
this Chapter.) It Is true their Kings could not personally officiate as a Priest
in the Temple, because all men that could not derive their Pedigree from Aaron,
were counted profane and unclean, which is now no Obstacle in a Christian
Commonwealth; for in these days, the Priesthood not being entailed upon any
particular Family, but requiring only some particular Qualifications, Kings or
Supreme Magistrates, cannot be barred from meddling with Matters belonging to
Religion, upon any account of profaneness; but all is in their power, and no
body, but by their authority or allowance, has any Right to officiate in the
Church: for the Power of choosing Ministers, of settling the Church, of stating
and determining the Doctrines thereof, prescribing Religious Rites and
Ceremonies, judging of Men's Piety and Manners, the power of excommunicating and
receiving again into the Church, and of providing for the poor, are all in the
Supreme Magistrate; and these things are not only true, but likewise very
necessary, not only for the good of Religion, but also for the safety of the
Commonwealth; for all men know, how much the People esteem and depend upon the
Power and Authority of those, whose Function is accounted Sacred, they having
an absolute Dominion over their Minds. He then that endeavors to deprive the
Supreme Magistrate of this Power, goes about to share and divide, or else usurp
the Government; from whence must necessarily arise such Contention and
Discords, as were heretofore between the Kings and Jewish High Priests, which
could never be appeased. If this Power be taken away from Supreme Magistrates,
how can they determine of Peace or War, or of any other Business, if they must
be obliged to follow other Men's Opinions, by whom they are to be taught what is
good or evil? That Power is Supreme, and there can be none greater, which has
the Right of declaring and determining what is Piety, what Impiety, and what in
Religion is lawful or unlawful. All Ages have been sensible, how many Mischiefs
such a Power in any but the Supreme Magistrate, has produced: I will give you
but one Example: As soon as such a Power was granted to the Pope, or Bishop of
Rome, by degrees he became Superior to all Kings, and at last ascended to so
high a pitch of earthly Dominion, that whatever Kings or Emperors have since
done to lessen it, has been to no purpose; but they have rather much increased
it, and that which no Monarch ever effected by Fire and Sword, Churchmen have
been able to do only with their Pen; which is a plain proof of the Pope's
Power, and a convincing Argument to persuade Supreme Powers, to keep that
Authority he pretends to in their own hands. If we consider the Observations I
have made in the preceding Chapter, we shall find, that the residing of this
Power in the hands of Supreme Magistrates, is very much for the Benefit and
Advancement of Religion and Piety; for as I have already declared, the Prophets
themselves, though filled with Divine Power and Virtue, yet because they were
but private men, the great Liberty they took in admonishing, reproving, and
upbraiding the People, did rather provoke than amend them; who notwithstanding
patiently submitted to the Reproof and Chastisement of their Princes. Besides,
Kings themselves, because they had not the power of judging and determining
Matters of Religion, many times forsook the true Religion, and most of their
People with them; which has likewise, upon the same account, often happened in
Christian Governments. But here perhaps some will ask, if Supreme Powers should
chance to be wicked, who shall then have the Power and Authority of vindicating
and maintaining Religion and Piety? And who shall then be the Interpreters of
it? I ask them on the other side, What if Priests and Ecclesiastics grow
wicked and impious, must they continue Interpreters of Religion, and God's
Word? If they that have Supreme Power should do whatever they please, whether
they do, or do not meddle with Religion, all things without doubt, both Sacred
and Civil, are like to be in a very ill Condition; but in much worse, when
private men shall seditiously pretend to a Divine Right, of defining and
defending all chings which concern, or in any wise pertain to Religion. The
denying of this Power to Supreme Magistrates, must necessarily cause very ill
Consequences; for they will in all probability (as did the Jewish Kings, who
had not this Power absolutely) grow wicked and ungodly, and from that which is
but uncertain and contingent, will follow most certain Mischief and Ruin to the
Government. If then we have any regard either to the Just Right of Supreme
Power, to the safety of Government, or the advancement of Religion and Piety,
we must grant, that the regulating and determining all things concerning
Religion, and the Worship of God, depends upon the Decrees of the Supreme
Power; and that such only are Ministers of God's Word, who are authorized by
the Supreme Magistrate, to teach and instruct the people in those principles of
Religion and Piety, which they that have the Supreme Power, think most likely
to procure the public Good of the Commonwealth.

I have now no more to do, but to declare the Cause, why in Christian
Governments there has been so much dispute about this Power, when in the
Jewish Commonwealth it never, that I know, came into controversy. It is little
less than a Wonder, that a thing so necessary and profitable, should still be a
Question, and the Subject of continual Cavil; and that Supreme Magistrates
should never be able to exercise this Power, without contention, and without
fear of danger and prejudice to Religion. If the Cause of this could not be
found out, I would confess all I have said in this Chapter, to be mere
Theoretical Speculative Notions, of no use; but any person that will but look
back, and consider the beginnings of Christian Religion, may easily discover
the Cause of this Controversy. They that first taught Christian Religion, were
not Kings, but private persons, who contrary to the Will and Commands of those
in Supreme Power, whose Subjects they were, preached in private Churches or
Congregations, and instituted Forms of Worship, without any respect had, or
account given to the Government; and likewise regulated and determined all
things relating to Religion. Though Christian Religion, after many years, began
to be professed in Commonwealths, by those that had the Supreme Power, yet the
Ecclesiastics, who instructed Emperors and Kings in the Christian Religion,
were, without any difficulty, still acknowledged Teachers and Interpreters of
God's Word, Pastors of the Church, and God's Ministers; but that Christian
Kings and Princes might not afterward assume any such Authority to themselves,
Churchmen very warily provided against it, by forbidding the Chief Ministers
and the High Priest of the Church to marry, by multiplying the Doctrines and
Tenets of Religion to a prodigious number, and by so confounding them with
Philosophy, that it was absolutely necessary for the Chief Interpreter, and
Judge of Religion, to be a Philosopher as well as a Divine, and to busy
himself in unprofitable Speculations, fit only to take up private men's time,
who have nothing else to do. But it was far otherwise in the Jewish
Commonwealth; for their Church began with their Government, and Moses, who was
the Supreme Magistrate, taught the people Religion, settled their Forms of
Worship, and chose their Priests. This was that which made Kingly Authority so
much esteemed by the People, and put the Right and Power of all things
pertaining to Religion, into the hands of Supreme Magistrates; for though after
the Death of Moses, no Man governed so absolutely as he did, yet the Right and
Power of determining all things concerning Religion, as well as other Affairs,
still remained, as we have already proved, in the Prince; and the People, to be
instructed in Religion and Piety, were no more bound to go to the High Priest,
than they were to the Chief Judge, ( Deuteronomy. chap. 17. v. 9, 11, 12) Thou shall
come to the Priests, the Levites, and to the Chief Judge, that shall be in
those days to enquire; and he that will not hearken unto the Priest, or unto
the Judge, that man shall die. Though the Kings had not power equal to that of
Moses, yet the Priests and Levites were appointed and ordered to do what the
Kings thought fit; for, as it appears in (1 Chronicles. chap. 28. v. 11, 12.) King
David ordered how the Temple should be built, according to a Model he
prescribed; and as it appears in the 23 d Chapter of the same Book, David, out
of all the Levites, chose twenty four thousand to set forward the building of
the Temple, six thousand to be Officers and Judges, four thousand to be
Porters, and four thousand to praise the Lord upon musical Instruments: he
likewise divided the Levites into companies, and set Rulers over them, which
Companies were to serve and wait in their turns. For other particulars, I refer
the Reader to the (28 th Chapter of the 2 d Book of Chron. v. 13.) where it is
said, That King Solomon commanded Offerings to be made according as Moses
instituted: And ( ver. 14.) it is said, That Solomon, according to the order of
David his Father, appointed the Courses of the Priests and Levites to their
Service and Charges; and ( ver. 15.) the Historian says, They departed not
from the Commandment of the King, given to the Priests and Levites, concerning
any matter, or concerning the Treasures. By all which, and by other Histories
of their Kings, it is evident, that the whole Exercise of Religion, and all the
Service that concerned it, depended only upon their King's Command: And though
their Kings had not, as Moses had, the Power of choosing the High Priest, or of
consulting God without him, or of condemning the Prophets that prophesied in
their Reigns, the Prophets having power to choose a new King, and to pardon any
that had taken away a King's Life; yet, I say, the Prophets themselves had no
power to call any King to an account for breaking the Laws, or in any judicial
manner and form to proceed against or condemn him. And therefore if there had
been no Prophets who by particular Revelation could pardon the killing of a
King, Kings in the Jewish Commonwealth must have had absolute Power over all
things both Sacred and Civil, as Supreme Powers have in these our Days, who
have no Prophets, nor are obliged to receive any; being in no wise bound by the
Laws of the Jews Commonwealth. And this Power, though our Kings marry, they
absolutely have, and may keep, if they do not suffer Doctrines and Articles of
Religion to be multiplied, or mingled and confounded with Arts and Sciences.

CHAP. XX. In a Free Commonwealth it should be lawful for every Man to think
what he will, and speak what he thinks.
WEre it as easy to command Men's Minds, as it is their Tongues, all Supreme
Powers would reign securely, and no Government would be Violent or Tyrannical:
For then every Man would live according to the Will of those in Supreme Power,
and would think every thing true or false, good or evil, just or unjust,
according to their Determinations and Decrees. But it is impossible, as we have
observed in the beginning of the 17 th Chapter, that any Man's Mind or Thoughts
should be in another Man's power; because no Man can transfer, or be compelled
to transfer his natural Right of Reasoning and Judging of Things, upon any
other Man: And therefore that Government is counted Tyrannical, which would
reign over Men's Minds; and Supreme Powers do their Subjects wrong, and deprive
them of their just Right, when they command them to receive or reject,
according to their Prescriptions, whatever they declare to be true or false;
and positively appoint what Opinions and Notions Men in their Devotions shall
have of God; which is a thing wholly in a Man's own power, and from which no
Man, though he would, can part. I confess, a Man's Judgment may be so many ways
prepossest, that tho it be not directly and absolutely in another Man's power,
yet it may have such a dependence on him, as to be thought very much at his
dispose; but in spite of all that Art can do, Men will abound in their own
Sense, and there will for ever be as many diversities of Opinions, as there are
of Palats: Though Moses, not by Craft, but by Divine Power, had so prepossest the
Minds of his People, that they believed he said and did all things by Divine
Inspiration; yet he could not escape ill Reports and sinister Interpretations;
much less then can other Monarchs. Were the thing possible, it might rather be
done in Monarchical, than in Democratical Government, which is managed by an
Assembly of all, or the greatest part of the People; and the Reason I think is
obvious.

Though Supreme Powers have right to all things, and are believed to be
Interpreters both of Law and Religion; yet they could never keep Men from
judging of things according to their Reason and Capacities, nor from being this
or that way affected. They may indeed account all men Enemies who do not in all
things absolutely think as they do; but we do not here dispute of their Power,
but of what is most convenient and profitable. I grant, that Supreme Powers may
Reign Tyrannically, and put Subjects to death for very slight Causes, if they
please; but all Men will deny that this can be done with Reason or Prudence,
because it will prove dangerous and destructive to the Government: Yea, it may
be denied that Supreme Magistrates have absolute Power, and consequently have
not absolute Right to do such things as these; because we have proved, that the
Right of Supreme Magistrates is determined by their Power. If then no Man can
part with this Liberty of Judging and Thinking what he will, but every Man by
the Sovereign Right of Nature is Master of his own Thoughts. Supreme Powers in
any Commonwealth can never hope for Success, in prescribing to Men of different
Opinions, Limits and Rules for what they shall say: For if Wisemen cannot keep
silence, much less can the ignorant Multitude hold their peace, it being all
Men's Infirmity, though never so much Secrecy be required, to make others privy
to their Counsels: And therefore that Government is Violent, where every Man is
denied the Liberty of saying and declaring what he thinks; and that Government
is moderate and well ordered, where such a Liberty is allowed. It Is true, and
no Man can deny, but that Supreme Magistrates may be injured and offended by
Words as well as Deeds; and though it be impossible wholly to take away this
Liberty from Subjects, yet, on the other side, it will be pernicious to put no
Restraint upon it: So that now my Business is to show, how far this Liberty,
without any danger to the Peace of the Commonwealth, or prejudice to the Right
of Supreme Power, may and ought to be allowed; which was, as I have hinted in
the beginning of the 16 th Chapter, my chief Intention and Design.

From the Fundamentals of Government which I have already explained, it clearly
follows, That the ultimate End of Government is not to domineer, and keep Men
in fear and Subjection; but to free Men from Terror, that every Man may, as far
as it is possible, live securely; that is, may still retain his natural Right of
subsisting and acting without hurting himself, or any other person. I say, The
End of Government is not to turn Rational Men into Beasts or walking Engines,
but to suffer both their Souls and Bodies to do each their proper Duties,
allowing them the free Use of Reason, that they may not by Hatred, Envy, Anger,
or Deceit, become Enemies to one another: So that the End of Public Government
is indeed Liberty; and to the forming of a Commonwealth, it is absolutely
necessary, that the Power of making Laws and Decrees should be either in all,
in some, or in one single Person: For seeing in every Man's Opinion, though it be
free, there is difference and variety, and every Man is apt to believe that he
knows all things; it is impossible to make them all of one mind, or to agree in
their Discourse. So that they can never live peaceably, unless every one part
with his power of doing what his own Mind prompts him to. But though every one
part with the power of doing what he pleases, yet he does not part with his
power of Reasoning and Judging; so that though he cannot without offense act or
do any thing against the Decrees or Determinations of the Supreme Powers; yet
he may freely think, judge, and consequently speak; provided in what he simply
speaks or teaches, there be Reason, and no crafty malicious Design, through
Hatred or Revenge, to make, by virtue of his own Authority, Innovation in the
Commonwealth. For example, If a Man think a particular Law contrary to right
Reason, and therefore fit to be repealed; yet if he submit his Opinion to the
Judgment of the Supreme Power, (whose Right it is to make and repeal Laws) and
in the mean time do nothing contrary to the Tenor of that Law, he deserves well
of the Commonwealth; as does every good Subject: But if, on the contrary, he
speak against that Law purposely to accuse the Magistrate of Injustice, and to
render him odious to the People; or if he seditiously endeavor to abrogate
that Law, in spite of the Magistrate, he is a rebellious Disturber of the
Public Peace.

We see then upon what ground every Man, without prejudice to the Peace of the
Gommonwealth, or to the Right of Supreme Powers, may speak and teach what he
thinks, if he leave them the power of regulating Men's Actions, and do nothing
contrary to their Decrees, though he sometimes do contrary to that which in his
own Opinion and Judgment he thinks to be good; which notwithstanding he may
with a good Conscience, yea ought to do, if he will be accounted a good
Subject. For, as I have already shown, Justice depends upon the Decrees of the
Supreme Power, and no Man can be said to be Just, unless he live according to
the known Laws. Piety, as I have declared in the preceding Chapter, chiefly
consists in the practice of things which preserve the Peace and Tranquillity of
the Commonwealth; which cannot possibly be preserved, if every Man should live
as he pleases: And therefore it is Impiety in any Subject, to act contrary to
the Decrees of the Supreme Power; because, were it lawful for every Man so to
do, the total Ruin of the Commonwealth must necessarily follow. No Man can be
said to act against the Dictates of his own Reason, who submits to the Decrees
of the Supreme Power; because every Man by the persuasions of his own Reason
resolved to part with his Right of Living according to his own Will: And this
is proved by practice; for in Councils composed of the Supreme or Subordinate
Powers, it seldom happens that any thing is decreed or determined by the
universal Consent and general Vote of all the Members; yet the Results of those
Counsels, whatever they be, are always accounted as much the Decrees of those
who voted against, as of those that voted for them: So that by the very
Principles of Government, we see, that without any wrong done to the Rights of
Supreme Power, a Man may use the Liberty of his own Judgment: And it is very
easy from the Fundamentals of Government, to determine what Opinions in a
Commonwealth are to be accounted Seditious; namely, those which directly
nullify and destroy the Covenant, whereby every Man obliged himself to part
with his Right of Living according to his own Will. For example, If any Man
think the Supreme Power is subject to some other Power; that a Man ought not to
perform his Promises; or, that it is lawful for every Man to live as he
pleases: These, and the like Opinions, render a Man seditious, because they are
directly repugnant to the foresaid Covenant; not barely because they are his
Judgment and Opinion, but because such Opinions have in them a great deal of
Crime and Guilt: For even by so thinking, a Man tacitly breaks all the Bonds of
that Fidelity which he promised to the Supreme Power. Therefore other Opinions,
which contain no actual Breach of the Covenant, no Revenge, no Anger, etc. are
not to be accounted Seditious, unless it be in a Commonwealth where Reason is
depraved, and where ambitious and superstitious Men are grown to such a
height, that they cannot endure those that are honest or ingenuous, but will
have the People think their Authority greater than the Supreme Magistrate's. I
do not deny, but that there may be some Opinions, which though they seem to
intend nothing but simply to argue and judge, what is true, and what false; yet
they may be very maliciously propounded and divulged: Of these we spoke in the
15 th. Chapter, but so that Reason nevertheless should remain free. Lastly, If
we seriously consider, that every Man's Fidelity to the Commonwealth, as his
Faith toward God, ought to be judged and known only by his Works; namely, by
Charity toward his Neighbor; we cannot doubt but that the best Commonwealths
will give every Man the same Liberty of Reasoning, that they do of Believing. I
confess, by such a Liberty some Inconveniences may sometimes happen: But what
Wisdom and Prudence can prevent all Inconveniences? He that by Laws thinks to
prevent all, will sooner provoke then amend vicious Men. Inconveniences that
cannot possibly be prevented or avoided, must be tolerated; we must bear with
them, though we suffer by them. Of how many Mischiefs are Luxury, Drunkenness,
Envy, and Covetousness the Cause? Yet these are tolerated, because though they be
Vices, it is not in the power of Laws to restrain them. How much more then
ought Liberty of Judgment to be allowed, which is truly a Virtue, and should
not be suppressed? No Inconveniences can arise from it, which may not, as I will
prove, be avoided by the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate. Beside, this
Liberty is very necessary to the Advancement of Arts and Sciences, in which the
greatest proficiency is made by those men who have their Judgments free from
preoccupation. But suppose men's mouths may be stopped, and so awed, that they
shall not dare to utter any thing against the Determinations of the Supreme
Power; yet it is still impossible to keep them from thinking what they please;
and when men think ill of Magistrates, there breach of Faith soon follows; and
nothing is to be expected in such a Commonwealth, but abominable Flattery,
Perfidy, and the destruction of all ingenious Arts. It Is not so easy a matter
to keep men from talking; the greater care is taken to keep them silent, the
more many times will they talk. Perhaps Covetous men, Flatterers, and
meanspirited People, who place their chiefest Felicity in filling their Bags
and their Bellies, may hold their Peace; but virtuous honest men, who have had
Liberal Education, cannot be silent: Such is men's Nature, that nothing is a
greater Vexation to them, than to see those Opinions, which they verily believe
to be true, condemned; and themselves accounted wicked and sinful, for doing
that which they think is their Duty both toward God and Man. This makes them
detest the Laws, and count any seditious Attempts against the Magistrate lawful
and just. In Laws against Opinions, wicked men are seldom concerned; such Laws
are commonly made, not to restrain bad, but to provoke good men; and cannot be
defended without a great deal of danger to the Government: Such Laws are
likewise useless; for men cannot obey Laws which condemn those Opinions they
firmly believe to be true: And, on the other side, they who think those
Opinions false, take the Laws that condemn them, to be be their Privileges;
wherein they so triumph, that afterward the Magistrate, if he would, is not
able to repeal them. Lastly, The making of such Laws has often caused great
Schisms in the Church; for if men did not hope with the general applause of the
People to insult over their Adversaries, and get Preferment, by procuring the
Magistrate to favor, and the Laws to countenance their Opinions, Learned
Doctors would quickly leave their fierce Disputes, and bitter Contentions.
Reason and daily Examples tell us, That Laws which command what every man must
believe, and forbid speaking or writing against this or that Opinion, are
commonly instituted to gratify or give way to the Passions of those, who
rather than endure a Baffle from ingenious men, will with their stern and
morose Authority turn the Peoples Zeal into Fury, and hound them on upon whom
they please. But would it not be much better, to suppress the Anger and Rage of
the Multitude, rather than make Laws against men that love Virtue and Learning,
and bring the Commonwealth into such a Condition, that honest harmless men
cannot live in it? What can be more mischievous to a Commonwealth, than to send
Honest men like Rogues into Banishment, only because they are of this or that
Opinion, and cannot dissemble? Can any thing be more pernicious, than to treat
Persons of a free ingenuous disposition like Enemies, and for no Crime or
Wickedness put them to death, making the Scaffold, which frights none but
Villains, a public Theater whereon innocent Persons give such Examples of
Courage and Patience, as turn to the shame and reproach of the Supreme
Magistrate's Majesty? They that know themselves to be honest, never fear
Punishment, as the wicked do; neither will they by base whining Submissions and
Recantations endeavor to avoid it: Their innocent Minds are not troubled with
Guilt or Repentance; they do not think it shameful, but glorious, to die for
Liberty and a good Cause. To whom can their Death be a Terror? The base
ignorant Multitude know not why they suffer; honest men are their Friends, and
none but seditious Persons their Enemies; and all but base Sycophants and
Flatterers, are ready to follow their Example. That Faith and Honesty then may
be in greater esteem, than Flattery and Dissimulation; that Supreme Magistrates
may keep their Power, and not be forced to yield to seditious Persons, Liberty
of Judgment ought to be allowed, and men are so to be governed, that though they
be of different and contrary Opinions, they may however live together in peace
and amity. Without doubt this way of Governing is best, and subject to least
Inconveniences, seeing it is most agreeable to Men's Nature: For in Democratical
Government (which comes nearest to the State of Nature) all covenant to act,
but not to reason and judge by common Consent; my meaning is, because all men
cannot think the same things, they have agreed to make that a binding Law which
had most Voices, reserving still a Power of repealing that Law, when they
thought fit. And therefore where there is least Liberty allowed of Judging,
there men are farthest from their natural State, and the Government is full of
Force and Violence. To make it evident, that from this Liberty can arise no
Inconveniences which the Supreme Magistrate may not with ease avoid, and keep
men of contrary Opinions from hurting one another, I need not go far for
Examples. The City of Amsterdam has, to the wonder of all the World, and its
own great advantage, tasted the Fruits and Benefit of this Liberty; for in that
flourishing Commonwealth and famous City, men of all Nations and Religions live
together in peace; and when they would trust any man with Goods or Money, they
only desire to know whether he be rich or poor, or whether in his Dealing he be
a man of his Word, or a cheating Knave; they never enquire of what Religion or
Sect he is, neither is that regarded in any Court of Justice; there is no Sect
so odious, but has the Public Magistrate's Protection, if they do no man
wrong, live honestly, and give every one his Due. How great a Schism was there
occasioned not long since, by a Controversy in Religion, between the
Remonstrants and Contra-remonstrants? And it appeared by many Examples, that
Laws made to take away Disputes concerning Religion, did much more provoke than
pacify People, and made some take the greater Liberty. Schisms proceed not
from the study of Truth, that Fountain of Meekness and Moderation; but from an
imperious Humor of prescribing to others: And therefore they are rather to be
counted Schismatics, who damn other men's Writings, and stir up the waspish
Multitude against them; than those that write to Learned men, and call nothing
but Reason to their aid: So that they are truly Disturbers of the Public
Peace, who in a Free Commonwealth would take away the Liberty of men's
Judgments, which ought not to be suppressed.

We have now shown, First, That it is impossible to take away men's Liberty of
speaking what they think: Secondly, That this Liberty may without prejudice to
the Rights of Supreme Power be granted to every man, and that every man may use
this Liberty, provided he design no Innovations in the Commonwealth, and act
nothing against the known established Laws thereof: Thirdly, That this Liberty,
which every man may enjoy if he do not break the Public Peace, can cause no
Inconveniences which may not easily be restrained or remedied: Fourthly, That
all men may make use of this Liberty without being guilty of any Impiety.
Fifthly, That all Laws made concerning Opinions and Matters merely speculative,
are useless and unprofitable. Sixthly, and lastly, we have proved, That this
Liberty may not only be allowed, without any Danger to Public Peace, Piety,
and to the Right of Supreme Power; but ought to be granted for the Preservation
of all these: For where there are Endeavors to take away this Liberty, and men
are arraigned only for Opinions, without examining whether they have any evil
Intentions, there honest men are made Examples, and suffer a Martyrdom; which
does not at all terrify but irritates and moves the People to Pity and
Revenge. Learning and Arts decay, Faith is corrupted, Flatterers and perfidious
Persons are countenanced, Adversaries triumph in having their Will, and
prevailing on the Supreme Powers to embrace their Doctrine, which at last
inclines them not only to undervalue, but usurp their Authority, boasting they
are God's Elect, that their Power is from God, but the Magistrate's Authority
only from men, and consequently, the Magistrate's Power subordinate to theirs;
which absolutely destroys the very Being of all Commonwealths; and therefore,
as I showed in the 18 th. Chapter, a Commonwealths greatest Safety is to place
Religion and Piety in the Practice of Justice and Charity, and to make things
Sacred as much subject to Supreme Power, as things Civil, and to take
cognizance of nothing but men's Actions, suffering every man to think what he
will, and speak what he thinks.

I have now in this Treatise done what I designed; and I do again sincerely
profess, That I have written nothing which I do not freely submit to the
Examination and Judgment of the Supreme Powers of my Country: If they think any
thing I have said, be contrary to the Laws or Public Safety thereof, I recant
it. I know my self a man subject to Errors; but my chiefest Care has been to
write nothing but what is consonant to Reason, to the Laws of my Country, and
to the Rules of Piety and Good Manners.

FINIS.

