A SPIRITUAL RETREAT FOR ONE DAY IN EVERY MONTH. By a Priest of the Society of
Jesus, Translated out of French,

In the Year School

THE PREFACE.
THE design of publishing this Book is to furnish all sorts of Christians with
an easy method of Retreat; especially such whose business will not afford them
leisure for an Annual Retreat of eight or ten Days together.

It is hoped that the facility of making these Retreats will render them more
usual; and there fore for the help of those who (being wholly strangers to these
pious Exercises) stand in need of more particular directions, you will find
some Chapters in the beginning of the Book and before the Meditations, of the
necessity of Retreat, and of the methods of doing it well.

The Body and principal part of the Book consists of meditations on the great
Truths of our Holy Religion; In which I have endeavored to choose the most
proper subjects, and to put them in such an order and treat them so at large,
as may render them most capable of making a due impression on those who
attentively and seriously consider them. And because our design in these
Retreats ought to be to prepare our selves by a true change of Life for an
happy Death, I have repeated the Meditation of Death every month, and have
added a new exercise of Preparation for it: which may be very useful if we put
it in practice with such dispositions as it requires: And to render it more
easy I have been very particular in specifying the Sentiments we ought to
entertain, and in inserting the most suitable Prayers to inspire those
Sentiments.

The last Part contains Christian Reflections upon different subjects, to
supply the place of those Considerations whic are proposed in other Books of
Spiritual Retreat, for private Reading and entertainment. In the number and
variety of which Reflections every Reader will find some thing profitable,
according to his state and disposition.

A TABLE.
THE PREFACE.
CHAP. I. OF Spiritual Retreat, p. 1 CHAP. II. Of the great importance of
making one Days Retreat every Month, 9 CHAP. III. Of the dispositions in which
we must be to make the Retreat with profit, 21 CHAP. IV. How we are to spend
the Day in Retreat, 27 A MEDITATION, to prepare for Retreat, 37
JANUARY and JULY.
I. MEDITATION. Of Man's End, 50 II. MEDITATION. Of the means that which are
given us to attain our ultimate End, 65 III. MEDITATION. Of the Sentiments we
shall have at the hour of Death, 75 OF PREPARATION for Death, 102
FEBRUARY and AUGUST.
I. MEDITATION. Of the importance of Salvation, 133 II. MEDITATION. Of the
Motives which we have to apply our selves continually to the business of our
Salvation, 148 III. MEDITATION. Of the Sentiments we shall have at the hour of
Death, 158
MARCH and SEPTEMBER.
I. MEDITATION. Of the small number of those that are saved, 159 II.
MEDITATION. Of Sin, 175 III. MEDITATION. Of the Sentiments we shall have at the
hour of Death, 189
APRIL and OCTOBER.
I. MEDITATION. That we ought not to delay our Conversion, 190 II. MEDITATION.
Of the good use of Time, 205 III. MEDITATION. Of the Sentiments we shall have
at the hour of Death, 215
MAY and NOVEMBER.
I. MEDITATION. Of the un willingness of most Christians, and the insincerity
of their desires to be saved, 216 II. MEDITATION. Of Lukewarmness, 231 III.
MEDITATION. Of the Sentiments we shall have at the hour of Death, 244
JUNE and DECEMBER.
I. MEDITATION. Of Hell, 245 II. MEDITATION. Of the Fruits of penance, 262
III. MEDITATION. Of the Sentiments we shall have at the hour of Death, 275
CHRISTIAN REFLECTIONS.
Which may serve for matter of Consideration every Day of Retreat, 276 Of
Salvation, 276 Of the importance of Salvation, 277 Of our indifference for
Salvation, 278 Of the false pretenses of worldly men about Salvation, 280 Of
the facility of Salvation, 282 Of the ill use of the means of Salvateon, 283 Of
want of Faith, 285 Of the thoughts of Hell, 286 Of a miserable Eternity, 286 Of
the pretended Conversion of the Imperfect, 292 Of the false Idea which many
frame to themselves of virtue, 294 Of the little progress we make in Virtue,
295 Of the proper Virtues for every condition, 296 Of the World, 298 Of the
confidence we ought to have in the merits of Christ, 304 Of our indifference to
please God, 305 Of Confession, 307 Of Private Friendships, 310 Of the happiness
of a Religious Life, 313 Of the confidence we ought to have in the merits of
Jesus Christ present in the Eucharist, 318 Of true fervor, 319 Of voluntary
Poverty, 322 Of Aridity in the exercises of Piety, 321 Of the facility with
which we engage our selves in the world, 322 Of the false Idea's which we have
of holiness, 324 Of the Sanctity proper to every Station, 326 Of small Faults,
327 Of Fidelity in little things, 332 Of the source of our Imperfections, 333
Of the false complaisance which we have for others, 335 Of exactness, 336 Of
the Artifices of Self Love, 337 Of the tender Love of God to those who serve
him, 338 How far we are to imitate virtuous men, 341 Of insensibility
proceeding from careleness, 342 Of the thoughts of Death, 344 Of our
condescension to the Imperfect, 545 Of natural inclinations to Virtue, 346 Of
true Zeal, 347 Of sincerity in the Service of God, 348 Of submission of our
Wills, 350 Of the Love of Christ, 351
THE END OF THE TABLE.

NOs infrascripti Sacrae Facultatis Parisiensis Doctores Theologi testamur
nihil esse in hac traductione libri tui titulus Retraite spiuituelle pour un
jour chaque mois, aut fidei aut pietati dissonum.

Datum Parisiis die 22. Julii 1700. JOANNES INGLETON. THOMAS WITHAM.


FIDEM facio testimonium hoc cui subscripserant Magistri Joannes Ingleton and
Thomas Witham ejus esse authoritatis, ut ei facile credatur, and secure; ambo
sunt Angli, in Facultate Parisiensi Doctores, Pii and eruditi, quorum
Chirographum hic appositum probe novi.

Die Augusti prima 1700. PIROT.

A SPIRITUAL RETREAT FOR ONE DAY IN THE MONTH.
CHAP. I. Of spiritual Retreat.
OF all pious Exercises there is none more proper to convert a soul then a
spiritual Retreat: And it is perhaps the only one that is never unprofitable.
When every thing contributes either to pervert or distract us it is not at all
strange that the most awakening Doctrines of our Religion make but a light
impression: But when we retire our selves from the noise and disturbance of the
world, when we set our selves to meditate at leisure on those great Truths
which we had never seriously enough considered, and which appear to us then in
another manner, when our application enables us to penetrate the true sense of
them, and every thing helps to discover all their consequences, it is almost
impossible for us not to be affected with them: Especially since this is a a
Time wherein grace flows more abundantly, and wherein our hearts are best
disposed to receive it.

The experience of the miraculous conversion of so many hardened sinners, of the
establishment and Reformation of so many Religious Houses; of so many lukewarm
Christians recoverd from their tepidity and become in a few Days fervent
servants of God; is a sensible Demonstration of the benefit we may reap by
considering in order and in solitude the great Truths of the Gospel.

S. Xaverius, S. Charles Borromaeus, S. Francis de Sales, and almost all the
saints of these latter ages, have acknowledged that they owe their conversion
and their progress in holiness to these spiritual Exercises. And it is in
imitation of these Examples that they who apply themselves seriously to work
out their salvation, and all well regulated Community's, put themselves under
an indispensable obligation to consecrate yearly at least eight or ten Days to
the same Exercises.

Let us not flatter our selves, it is very hard to keep our affections pure in
the midst of a world where every thing conspires to defile them; We shall find
it very difficult to live long among so much corruption and not be some way
tainted with it. Time slackens the greatest fervor, and the most heroic virtue
stands in need of frequent supply's of strength: To which end it is absolutely
necessary to retire our selves from time to time, and if we would breath a
purer air we must seek it in solitude.

As too much worldly conversation alway's distracts, abates our fervor, and
makes all out virtues languishing and weak: so it is only by recollection and
retreat that we can recover our selves and regain new fervor.

The Holy Ghost descended visibly, only in the Desert, Quamdiu in exteriotibus
occupatus fui, vocem tuam audire non potui nunc autem reversus ad me ingressus
sum ad te ut possim ad te audire and tibi loqui. Loquere ergo misericordissime
quia audit servus tuus; loquere quia paratus sum audire. S. Bern. de inter.
dom. cap. 66.
and when the Apostles were in Retreat, and S. Bernard declares that he could
never hear the voice of God while he was taken up with worldly business; but as
soon as he came to himself he retired into solitude to converse at leisure
with his Divine Master, and to say with confidence, speak now my God for thy
servant hears, speak for Jam ready to obey thy will.

Can any man reasonably refuse to practice what is so much for his advantage,
and what he stands so much in need of? Yet many who are convinced of the
necessity of Retreat, pretend that they have not time for it; and this is the
common excuse of those who neglect it. But Good God! will this excuse be
received? Our business takes up all our time, is not the care of our salvation
a business? Can any thing in the world be of so great importance to us or
concern us so nearly? Alas! we have indeed no other business but this; we were
sent into the world only for this End; God has judged our whole Lives little
enough for this great work, and can we pretend that we are not able to spare
eight or ten days in ayear for it.

A Fit of sickness makes us quit all our business to look after our health; we
think our selves bound to lay aside all affairs for whole Months together,
rather then neglect a suit at Law, or hazard the loss of an Estate, or expose a
Friend or Relation to ruin who depends wholly upon our care and diligence: Are
we not as much concerned to recover out of a state of sin as to be cured of a
distemper? Is not Heaven worth more then an Estate? And what greater misery can
we fall into then to be visibly in danger of damnation.

But we hope to make use of the first leisure our business will allow us, to
think of our salvation; A las! if we don't resolve to find leisure for it, our
business will never allow us any: Let us be not less indifferent for salvation,
let us but look upon this as a real business, and we shall very easily find
eight or ten days to employ only in it, in this business of Eternity.

It Is very surprising that the most innocent souls who have the least need of
Retreat, never think themselves safe without it; The most Apostolical men who
live in the world only to sanctify it, are yet in continual fear of being
corrupted by it: Those holy souls who never loose the presence of God are yet
sensible of distractions even in the most fervent Exercises of their zeal: The
most Heroic Christians interrupt their labors from time to time, to recollect
themselves in solitude, and think it the only preservative, against the
corruptions of the world, and the most certains means to obtain new strength.

Even the most exact Religious whose whole Life is a continual Retreat, do not
find themselves enough retired: And yet men of a very slender virtue in
comparison of them, who are every moment exposed to the greatest dangers, who
live in a constant dissipation of mind, in the midst of a world which they
themselves own to be extremely wicked, and in which they confess it is very
hard to be saved; Can such men as these imagine that a Retreat of eight or ten
days is not fit for them? can they deceive themselves with the false execuse of
want of time? when they are even weary of idleness; when they don't know how to
employ themselves; when the greatest part of their Lives is spent in vain
amusements and diversions. Can such want time. Certainly if they would confess
the truth they must own that they want not time, but will.

Our Saviors Parable of the high way where the seed of the word of God is
trodden down and carried away by the Birds of the Air, is a just description of
these busy men, allways taken up with the affairs of the world: Now since we
cannot be saved if we do not make a right use of the Grace of God, since this
heavenly seed cannot spring up in an heart exposed to noise and tumult, It is
evident that we are under a kind of necessity either to retire our selves
sometimes from the world or to renounce all hopes of being saved.

But some object, what will people say if they see me go into a Retreat, to
think only on Eternity? How shall I be ridiculed and laughed at? Good God! How
long shall such idle apprehensions stifle the most most noble sentiments, make
men reject the grace of God, and abandon their best resolutions! what can they
say? that you have really a desire to be saved, and that you take the best
method for it: All wise men will esteem you, many will imitate you, none but
Libertines will blame such a truly Christian conduct; the rayllery's of such
are real praises and you ought not at all to be concerned' what they say or
think.

Men are not ashamed to pass whole days at play and in vanity, of which they
will certainly repent one day if they have not done it already; and can they be
afraid to spend eight days in the compass of every year, in preparing for
another Life? in securing their Salvation?

CHAP II. Of the great importance of making one day's Retreat every Month.
It Is not very hard to make men sensible that a spiritual Retreat is an
excellent means to amend our Lives and work out our salvation; but the
difficulty lies in persuading them that they may find time for it if they will:
Eight days seem very long to them, and indeed there are many who cannot spare
so much time together.

Multitude of business, the care of a family, want of health, the necessary
duty's of their callings, are the reasons or pretenses where by some excuse
themselves from making a retreat of eight days: but no man can pretend that he
his not able to allow one day in a month to that holy Exercise. Is any thing
more reasonable then this? He may choose what day he pleases which renders it
as easy as it is useful.

You are desired tospend one day in a Month to take care of what concerns you
more then all things in the world, to apply your selves to the great business
of your Life upon which Eternity depends: that when you have spent a whole
month in what you call business, and which is rather the business of others
then your own, you would give one day to the only business that regards your
self: that after having labored for the world, you would labor one day for
everlasting happiness.

Would any man refuse one day in a Month to serve his Friend? Alas! how many do
men loose every Month in vain pleasure, in play, in trifling folly'? you are
desired tospend but one for your soul; you must surely be very indifferent for
salvation, and very careless of what becomes of you hereafter if you refuse it.
Especially since the following Chapters will render this practice so very easy
that it seems impossible for any one reasonably to decline it.

How industrious are Merchants to improve every opportunity ofacquiring Riches?
How exact are they in stating their accounts from time to time, and observing
how they thrive, what they have gained or lost? Thus let us take one day at
least to examine carefully the state of our Consciences and what progress we
make in virtue.

The great benefit of this Christian practice is visible; all sorts of men may
find good by it; it is very efficacious to reclaim sinners from their disorders
and make them return to God, to confirm the virtuous and to elevate them to the
highest degree of Christian perfection.

Besides the usefulness of meditating on the most important truths of Religion,
it is almost impossible that a man who sets aside his most serious business and
retires from the world to employ one day every Month in the serious
consideration of the state of his soul, should not succeed. God who seeks us
with so much patience when we fly from him, and who is not weary of offering us
mercy not with standing our refusals, but calls on us even when our earnestness
after the world makes us deaf to his call, will never hide himself from those
who come so often to meet him in the midst of solitude: he will never refuse to
communicate himself abundantly to those who withdraw themselves from all
things to hearken to him.

Neither our condition nor our employements require this of us nor do we do it
out of custom or osstentation which is so inseparable from other acts of Piety:
none of all these lead us to Retreat; nothing but a sincere desire to work out
our salvation can bring us there; and can a sincere desire be ineffectual? Can
it be attended with small profit? It Is hardly possible that a man who sets a
part one day in a month to study the methods of living well, should live
disorderly: Nor is he in danger of being surpised by Death who so frequently
and so exactly prepares for it.

But the importance of this Retreat will appear much greater if we consider
the necessity we lie under to reflect often on the great verity's of our Faith.
It Is from the want of this Reflection that we see so few Christians live up to
the purity of their Profession. We see but few truly virtuous tho they are
obliged to be so in a very high degree, because men seldom reflect on the
divine Truths: they content themselves with submitting their Reason to Faith,
they think it enough to believe: But tho we do not find many infidels in the
Church, yet Jam a fraid we find fewer Christians who seriously consider what
they believe And this is the Reason that what we believe of the End of our
Creation, of the small number of the elect, of the pains of Hell, and of
everlasting misery, make so slight an impression on us. This want of Reflection
has allway's been and still is the usual cause of our sins, of our return to
them after we have resolved to quit them, and of our advancing no more in piety.

For as without reflecting on what we read, we shall learn but little by our
reading, so we shall make small progress in virtue if we do not frequently
reflect on what we believe. It Is generally from serious Reflections that great
Conversions spring, and without it the most terrible Doctrines of Christianity,
the most amasing accidents, and the most sensible Graces, will have no great
Effect on us.

Can a man who attentively considers the vanity of the world and all its
allurements, who reflects seriously on what he beleives of Hell judgment, and
Eternity, who is affected with its rigours, and who foresees its consequences.
Can such a man refuse to yield himself to the divine Grace, which allways
makes use of those happy moments? It Is these Reflections that have peopled the
deserts, that fill our Convents every Day, and that recall so many sinners from
their Evil ways. If we could once persuade men to reflect of ten, we should
find their lives reformed, we should see the ancient fervor of Religious
houstes renewed; this would be a sure way to prevent the greatest disorders,
and to make saints.

This is what you are to do in your Retreat; spend the day in reflecting
seriously on the great Truths of our Religion, in examining your life, and
meditating on the points of your Faith. It Is properly a Day Reflection which
you may easily see must needs be useful, and that it concerns you very much to
do it well. The Eight days retreat is for the same end, but besides that the
length of the Time is afalse Pretense to several for performing it very
carelessly, this must be more profitable, because that is usually made but once
a year, this every month.

This is no new Devotion, but the practice of the greatest saints of Latter
ages: It Is to this divine art that Saint Ignatius Founder of the Society of
Jesus confesses, he owed his progress in virtue, and therefore he was so
careful to recommend it to his Children. By these Retreats, Saint Stanislaus a
novice of the same Society preserved his innocence, and acquird that tender
devotion and that admirable Piety in a little time, which he practiced in an
ordinary way of Life. It Is by the same Retreats that Blessed Lewis Gonzaga more
illustrious by his sanctity then by his birth, arrived to that sublime
perfection for which we admire him. And it is without doubt from these Examples
that we see it so frequently practiced by those truly pious souls who desire to
advance toward perfection.

But the first and great Example of these frequent and short Retreats is Christ
himself who often withdrew from the multitude that followed him, and even from
his own Disciples, to some mountain or desert, and the benefit which is daily
received by this practice is an evident proof that it is pleasing to him.

We need not seek this solitude out of our own houses, we need not neglect our
business or omit any of the Duty's of our calling; How many Sondays and
Holidays are there in every Month? we may choose one of these, and that in
which we shall have most leisure: all that is desired of you is to retrench a
visit or two to deny your selves some hours of diversion, and such frivolous
occupations, that you may the better take care of your salvation. And can you
be so much your own Enemy as to think Eternal happiness does not deserve one
Day in thirty?

You must certainly think heaven worth very little, if it be not worth your
trying so efficacious and so easy a method to obtain it. In reality tho it cost
you never so much, you cannot buy the blessing of a good Conscience too dear:
that inward peace which surpasses imagination, that sweet confidence in the
mercy of God, and all those innumerable advantages which are the constant
fruits of this care of your salvation, can never be bought dear; is one day too
much for this great work? Can one ask less? It Is astonishing that we must
beforc'd to use arguments to persuade men to allow one day to make themselves
happy.

We must expect that the Devil who is the declared Enemy our souls, and who
knows how many have been delivered from his power by these Retreats will
certainly employ all his devices to hinder us from making them; to this End he
will not fail to throw rubs in our way, he will represent an hundred little
difficulties to our imaginations capable to dishearten an irresolute soul;
sometimes we shall imagine our selves indisposed, some times out of humor; he
will suggest to us a thousand false Reasons to persuade us to put it off till
another time, that he may bring us under a kind of necessity of not doing it at
all; for when he has once gained upon us to deferr it, we shall meet with a
multitude of trivial affairs which hall seem pressing, till by putting it of
from time to time we come at last to neglect it wholly. Let us then oppose a
generous and fixed resolution and good will to the artifices of the Tempter,
and all these seeming difficulties will soon vanish.

This useful and necessary devotion is proper for all sorts of Christians of
what state or condition so ever: It Is equally beneficial to Religious and
seculars, they who are not yet converted, they who begin to seek perfection,
and they who are already advanced in the way, will all find profit by it.
Especially the lukewarm careless souls can never find a surer Remedy; their
condition is already very dangerous and if this does not cure them, it is much
to be feared that they are past hopes.

Church men and Religious are obliged by their vocation to agreater perfection
then other Christians; this practice is an excellent means to obtain it, and
there is no sort of men who can with so much ease set apart one Day in a month
for it.

If after all this there be found among those who are consecrated to God, any
lazy soul who under pretense of want of leisure can not or will not find time
for this holy Exercise, he will do well to consider what Saint Augustine writes
to his Bishop Valerius on the same subject, what answer shall I give to God?
says that great Saint) shall I tell him that a multitude of Ecclesiastical
affairs took up all my Time so that I could have no leisure for Retreat to
seek perfection? Quid enim responsurus sum Domino judici? non poteram, cum
Ecclesiasticis negotis impedirer; si ergo mihi dicat, serre nequa^ si villa
Ecclesia.... vir ad dicendum agriculturam meam vacationem temporis tibi
defuisse causaris? quid respondeam, rogote? Aug. Epist. 148. ad Valerian.
but if he reply, O wicked servant! You would have found leisure enough to
absent your self to go to Law with any one that invaded your Rights, or that
offered to deprive your Church of part of that revenu which is only useful for
the relief of the poor, but you could not find time to retire for your own
sanctification, though you knew how necessary it was to enable you to assist
the Poor, and convert all sorts of people; what shall J answer to this
reproach? so what shall we answer to the question that will be put to us one
day, if we be now so indifferent for salvation as not to find eight or ten days
for serious meditation? But my God! what shall we answer if we refuse to spend
only one day in a month in-Retreat?

The pretense of business being inseparable from every Day will not hold here;
some days indeed you may be obliged to follow it you are therefore at Liberty
to choose what day you will: but if you object that it takes up every moment of
our time, I must then give you the same Counsel which S. Abrumpatur illa
in^erminabilis secularium negotiorum catena, primas apud eos curas quae prima
habentur obtineant, summas que sibi sollititudinis parts, salus quaesumma est
vendicet, haec nos occupet jam non prima S. Eucher. Epis. Lugd in Epis. ad
Valerian.
Eucherius gives to Valerian, Break that endless chain of business, the
business of your salvation is the first and greatest business you can have give
it hence forth your first and chiefest care, let it be not only your principal
business during your Retreat, but your only business which requires all your
application.

CHAP III. Of the Dispositions in which we must be, be to make the Retreat with
Profit.
THE benefit of all pious exercises depends very much on our motives, on the
dispositions of our souls, and on the means of performing them. We can have no
ill motive in so holy a practice, nothing but a sincere desire to amend our
Lives and to increase in virtue can lead us to retreat? it is not likely we
should have other motives; self Love and pride cannot please themselves here
because there is no noise or ostentation: Let us now take a view of the
dispositions and methods whereby we may receive most profit. A sense of our
want of it, and a persuasion that this practice may be very useful to us is one
good disposition.

The rest which we ought to have if we would receive benefit; are almost the
same which the Author of the retreat according to the spirit and method of
Saint Ignatius sets down in his Preface, and they are chiefly five.

The first is an unfeigned desire to think seriously of our salvation; a firm
Resolution not to flatter our selves, but to examine carefully and axactly
without disguising any thing, the state of our souls, what progress we make in
the way of Perfection, what benefit we receive by the sacraments, what ground
we gain, whether we be victorious over our selves, and whether we be insueh a
state as we would venture to appear before God in to give an account of our
Lives, In fine whether we be such now, as we would desire to be at the hour of
Death.

But all our examinations and discovery's will be to no purpose, unless we add
to them a firm resolution to correct what ever is amiss: this is not one of
those barren devotions which for the most part serve only to amuse the
imperfect and render them more faulty; they who have not a real design and an
earnest desire to walk with God, will find but little satisfaction in it; their
coldness and indifference will soon make them weary.

The second Disposition is an humble distrust of our selves, supported by a
firm confidence in God, knowing that salvation is chiefly his work, and that
without him we can do nothing; assuring our selves that since he has inspired
us with the desire of retiring once a month, he will not refuse us the
necessary graces to profit by it, And indeed this desire of making use of the
best means to convert our selves to God is an evident proof that he who
inspires it would fain have us turn and live; and we find by experience that
those unhappy men who dye in their sins are such as made but very little use of
this excellent means of Conversion.

The third Disposition is a free heart, that gives its self to God without
reserve, saying with Saint Paul, Acts. 9.6. Psalm. 56.8.
Lord what would thou have me to do; or with David, My heart is ready, O God
my heart is ready to do thy will. The want of this disposition is the cause
that the most pious practices are without effect.

For when we think of an entire conversion we are too often irresolute; we
will, and will not; we know not what we would have; and very often we imagine
that we desire what we really and indeed do not desire. We are for capitulating
with our maker, we are for retaining some part of what we promise him, we
deliberate on every thing he requires, we dispute with him on every occasion.
My God! what is it we fear? to throw our selves entirely on thee? we are
convinced that it is the best thing we can do, but we are unwilling to do it,
because we foresee that if we once give our selves to thee we shall soon grow
weary of the Creatures; The communications of thy self to us will not fail to
render us sensible of vanity, and make us loath them, and we are unwilling to
be made sensible of it, or to loath them; this is what we fear.

The fourth Disposition is a ponctual observance of the order and rule of our
Rerreat, an exactness in every part of it, neglecting nothing that can
contribute to our doing it well, judging nothing little that is capable of
advancing so great a work as our salvation, being fully persuaded of this
Truth, that the great profit of this devotion depends on exactness in the
least things. Whether it be that this carefulness is an evident proof of our
sincerity, or that it prevails with God to refuse none of his Graces to those
who neglect nothing to please him.

The Fifth disposition which is at is were the soul of all spiritual Retreats
is, a perfect solitude both inward and outward, keeping our selves in a
profound recollection and silence. And avoiding every thing that can any way
distract us.

When an indolent soul is eight or ten days in retreat the Devil easily finds
some occasion to disgust it with its holy employment: it thinks the time long
when it has none but God to converse with. When it does not find many spiritual
consolations in prayer, when its thoughts are almost continually distracted,
its want of fervor and the imperfection of its desires to be converted, render
the most holy exercises of devotion very unpleasant; Eight days in Retreat seem
an age, so that it counts all the hours and wishes for the last. But to these
dangers we are not exposed in one day's Retreat: it is but one day and if we
make a right use of it we may gain as much, and perhaps more profit then in a
longer Retreat; which ought certainly to engage us to neglect nothing whereby
we may improve such a precious season to the best advantage.

One Day in thirty is but a small matter, let us give it heartily and
cheerfully to God; let us be very exact in the performance of the spiritual
excercises that we may have nothing to reproach our selves. One day is quickly
over, and it will be our unspeakable comfort to have past it well.

CHAP IV. How we are to spend the Day of Retreat.
IT being left to every ones convenience to choose what day he pleases for this
Re^^eat; we should pitch upon the day wherein we may have the least
interruption, and which we can best have to our selves. If it be possible we
should receive the same day: Men of business and tradesmen would do well to
choose an Holiday, and Religious men some day wherein they can without
distraction give themselves entirely to this holy exercise.

We should endeavor to spend half an hour in Meditation the night before to
dispose us for the duty's of the day, at least, we should read attentively the
preparatory Meditation composed for that end, and if we have opportunity we
should at the same time and with the same design visit our Redeemer in the
Blessed Sacrament.

We must observe a profound silence during the whole Day, to which we must add
an inward recollection: we must spend it in exact solitude, as far as our
condition will permit, but we are not hereby obliged to neglect any of the
duty's of our calling, nor are Religious persons forbid their ordinary
recreations, and much less the Dutys of their vocation. We must make this Day
the three Meditations designed for each Month, and pass an hour in reflecting
on the practical Truths of Religion; our Confession should be larger and more
particular then ordinary that we may thereby endeavor to repair the faults of
former Confessions, and chiefly to excite a true contrition in our hearts,
wherein in all sorts of people and even the best Christians are too often
faulty.

We must hear Mass and receive as if were to be our last Communion, and we must
perform all the other exercises in the same disposition. Priests should examine
themselves particularly whether their Lives are suitable to the Holiness of
their Character, whether they celebrate with such affection as become men who
are really penetrated with what they profess to believe. Let them offer that
adorable Sacrifice with such a fervent Devotion that this Days Mass may be an
atonement for the faults they have been guilty of in all the rest, and be a
model of those they shall say for the future: making it their great business to
profit by this, more than they have yet done.

We must be very careful to keep ourselves retired, and to avoid every thing
that can possibly distract us: there us no danger of thinking the time long; we
shall find employment for every moment; and one day so filled up is soon passed
it is but a day, let us make it indeed a day of retreat; all the time we are
not in the Church, we should keep our selves shut up in our Chamber; and indeed
it would be well to do most of our spiritual Exercises in the Chamber, unless
we have convenience of being as much retired before the blessed Sacrament.

Because this Exercise is very useful to all sorts of men, and the great est
part cannot meditate, I have calculated these Meditations for the greater
number; to that end, I have made them long that they may find matter enough to
take them up for an hour together: that the very reading of them may be truly a
Meditation, and that they may be profitable.

Such as can meditate may make use of what part of them they find most for
their purpose; but these as well as the others must be very careful to avoid a
fault to which most who meditate on the truths of our Religion are too subject.
They must not content themselves with believing them, and think their work done
when they are once convinced; It is not enough to believe those important
Truths, the Devils believe as much, perhaps more then we and tremble. We must
not stop at speculation we must reduce them to practice. Our Meditations must
all tend to reform us. It Is not sufficient to read, and believe the Truth of
what we read, we must attentively consider every point and apply it to our
selves. We must examine its consequences, and make those reflections on them as
we would do if we were on our death bed, when we know we shall have little or
no time left to profit by them.

Let this be your way of Meditation; if you read, do it with attention; pause
upon each passage that affects you most, Put the question to your self, is
this true? have I lived up to these Rules? what is it they require of me for
the future? And then reflect seriously on the dismal consequences attending
your negligence, if this double discovery do not produce more fruit then your
former Meditations have yet done.

You need not trouble your self to read the whole Meditation; if one single
reflection take up all the hour provided you receive good by it you have spent
that hour well; And the rest of the Meditation may serve you to read some other
time of the day which is not absolutely allotted to some particular exercise.

A right consideration is very useful and therefore to be carefully performed.
It consists in reading with application the Reflections at the end of the Book:
you may pass lightly over those which are less suitable to you, and dwell
longer on such heads as you find affect you most; and which are most proper for
you.

Besides the hour usually spent after dinner in consideration, it would be well
to allott half an hour in the morning for Religious men to reflect on the
observation of their Rules, and others on the duty's of their particular
callings; observing exactly wherein they have failed, and prescribing to
themselves such methods as may be most efficacious for their amendment: if we
cannot spate half an hour we may divide the hour of consideration, one half for
general reflections, and the second for those that concern our particular Rules
and the duty's of our Callings.

And here we are always to remember that we must not content our selves in
these spiritual exercises to form good designs, and take strong resolutions of
changing our Lives; it is to no purpose to resolve though we seem to do it
never so sincerely, unless we likewise fix the particular means, and methods,
by which we may effectually practice, what we have resolved.

It is not our business to read much; let u^ read less and profit more; we
should choose to read only what is useful to us. It Is not sufficient to be able
to say that we have read some spiritual discourse, we must read with a design
to grow better by what we read.

We have already observed that Religious persons are not hereby dispensed from
the exercises of their Community's, nor even from their usual recreations; but
having discovered by their Examinations, the faults they are subject to in
those Exercises, and recreations, they should begin that very Day to reap the
benefit of their Retreat, by beginning to correct themselves and reform those
faults, carrying themselves in every occasion ^s men who are already changed,
And being careful, now more then ever, to lift up their hearts fervently to
God, and beg him to preserve them from that distraction, and dissipation, of
mind, which generally accompany'is conversation.

The great design of this spiritual Retreat being to prepare us for Death, I
have composed a third Meditation on the sentiments we shall have in that last
hour, to be read in every Retreat. And it being the most proper subject for the
End I proposed to my self, I judged the same Meditation might be renewed every
Month.

The chief benefit we are to receive by this pious Exercises being a
reformation of all the faults we have discovered in our selves since the last
Retreat, a more earnest longing for perfection, the getting the Victory over
our favorite Passion, a more ardent Love to our Redeemer, particularly in the
adorable Sacrament, and a greater exactness in all our Duty's, we are at the
beginning of each Retreat to propose these things to our selves as the end for
which we make it. And seeing it is a direct preparation for Death, we are to
come out of it in such a state, as we would desire to be in, if we were
immediately to dye. And we must be careful to keep our selves in the same
disposition.

General resolutions are commonly useless and to no purpose, our best way is to
pitch upon some particular fault, which may be the subject of our daily
Examination, and to regulate the means which we will every day employ, to
reform it, till the next Retreat.

And the better to preserve those Good dispositions we should first render
thanks to God for the Graces he has bestowed on us during the Retreat. We
should then offer up all our Resolutions to him, and renew them with more
earnestness; beseeching the Blessed Virgin to intercede for us with her son,
that he would give us his Grace where by we way be rendered faithful to the
End, and begging that she would undertake for our fidelity, which she can
obtain for us.

But after all these Resolutions, we must not rely so much upon them as to
forget our weakness; for nothing is more dangerous then too much security.

It very much concerns us, to be exact in our watch, the first three or four
Days; after this we shall find the difficulty'is lessen, so that we shall
execute our resolutions with Ease; The greatest difficulties are in the
beginning, and the surest way to maintain our fervor is, without any delay to
declare our selves for virtue.

A MEDITATION to prepare for Retreat.
THe subject of this Meditation is taken out of the Parable in the thirteenth
of Saint Luke: Lu^e. 23.6, 7. etc.
of the man who sought fruit on a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, and finding
none said to the dresser of the Vineyard, It is now three years that I come
seeking fruit on this Fig Tree and find none, out it down, why cumbreth it the
Ground? But his servant desired him to wait one year more that he might dig
about it and dung it, and if after all his care it should be still unfruitful
then he would cut it down.

FIRST POINT.
Consider with what care God has hitherto cultivated us that we might bring
forth fruit. We came into the world not only a barren tree but corrupted and
spoiled by original Sin, fit for nothing but to be cast into Hell Fire. The
singular Mercy of God has preferred us to many others, has planted us in his
Church by making us Christians, or in the fertile field of a Religious Life, if
by a greater effect of his Love he has called us to that state.

Have we ever truly known the advantage of being planted in this holy ground,
cultivated by the labors and watered by the sweat and blood of him who is both
God and man? This ground in which we are has produced those Hero's of
Christianity, and bears every day a multitude of saints, of all sexes, ages,
and conditions. Those excellent fouls with the same manuring, that is with the
same assistance that is given us, have and do every day bring forth fruit
worthy of Eternal Life. They had no other Gospel, no other Sacraments then we
have; The Grace of God abounds at all times; there Rules were not different from
ours, only they were more faithful to those Rules, by the exact observation of
which alone, they are become great saints. We have the benefit of their
Examples, and many proper helps which they wanted.

Add to these advantages, the particular favors we have received from God;
call to mind all the pains he has taken to make us fruitful; all the good
thoughts he has inspired us with; all the pious Resolutions he has excited in
us since we had the use of Reason; his favors have been innumerable since we
have been in his service: how often has he nourished us with the food of
Angels, his own flesh? how often have we heard him speaking to our hearts? how
often has he enlightened us? how many Graces have we received from him in our
Retreats, and ^ommunions? and and how many other favors has he heaped on us.

Half these are sufficient to make a great saint; nay there are many blessed
spirits now in heaven who never had all these advantages and yet they bare much
fruit: They made admirable use of their talents; their Lives were full of good
works, which have adorned them with merits whereby they now possess everlasting
happiness, a just reward of their Fidelity. Let us now consider seriously and
impartially, whether the same manuring and the spinkling of the blood of Jesus
Christ, have made us like bear much fruit.

SECOND POINT.
Consider that the fruits God requires of us, are not dry and barren devotions
and appearances of virtue, which serve for the most part only to amuse the
imperfect, who with all their pretended good works pass their whole Lives in
sloth and tepidity without growing better in any one point. Their specious
virtues are but leaves, but gaudy out sides which deceive men and themselves
too, making them take the effects of passion or humane respect, of Education,
or of their natural temper, for real virtues.

The Fruits which Saint John calls Fruits worthy of penance, Matt. 3.8. Gal.
5.22.23. etc.
and Saint Paul the Fruits of the spirit, are the effects of a true love to God
and a perfect charity toward our neighbor: They are such as a solid Piety
produces, an extreme horror for the smallest sin, a violent hunger after
Righteousness, an universal constant and continual Mortification; a profound
humility, a great exactness in all the duty's of our Calling; they are, an
exceeding a version for every thing our Savior hates, and an high esteem for
every thing he loves: The Victory over our passions, the reformation of our
Lives and conduct, are the Fruits that he expects from us. This is the meaning
of those words, Matt. 3.8.
Bringforth fruits worthy of penance, show by your works and by the whole
course of your Life that you are really converted.

Here let us examine our selves; Have we brought for^h many of these Fruits?
God has been careful to cultivate us these three, these ten years, that we
might be fruitful; many would have been saints with much less Graces, and yet
all have not perhaps made one good Religious, or one good Christian. It Is not
the fault of the ground in which Jam planted, it is holy ground and yields an
hundred fold, even many of my accquaintance with less advantages bring forth
much more fruit then I.

What benefit have I received by so many Masses? what am I the better for so
many Communions; One single Communion is able to elevate a soul to a sublime
perfection, yet I who have received it may be one or two hundred times have not
yet reformed any one fault. After so many Devotions am I more humble, more
exact, more mortifyed? Do I love my God and Savior more?

What is become of all the good thoughts I have formerly had? where is all my
fervor? what is become of that inward peace and true pleasure which I have
sometimes experien'cd in my Devotions? what is become of all my holy
Resolutions? and all my fair promises? alas! perhaps we find no traces of them
all but a sad remembrance which serves only to show us, how far we are from the
state in which we ought to be.

Has not our ingratitude toward God augmented proportionably to the increase
of his blessings? And does it not seem that his care to make us fruitful,
serves only to make us more unprofitable? But that which ought to humble us
more is, that after having spent ten or twenty years in the way of Perfection,
we should think ourselves happy to be as much advanced as as we were when we
began. Yet still the time passes, and the year draws toward an end, when the
owner weary of the barrenness of his Fig Tree after so much pains, is resolved
to cut it down and cast it into the Fire.

THIRD POINT.
Consider the danger to which we expose ourselves while we are unprofitable:
and what Reason we have to fear least we draw upon our heads the vengeance of
God and the terrible sentence of Reprobation which he has pronounced against
the Barren Tree.

How many Graces have we lost? Of how many have we deprived our selves? Those
Graces which we have made useless by our unfaith fullness, are the fruits of the
Death and of the blood of Christ were sufficient to convert the Heathens, and
increase the number of Saints in heaven, after having augmented the number of
true Christians on Earth. How many years together has the blessed Jesus visited
us to see if we would bring forth fruit, and has either found nothing but
leaves o^ such fruit as the Vale of Sodom produces, fair to the Eye but
rottenness and ashes at the heart? Has he not then just reason to say to us as
he did to his vineyard by the Prophet, Quid est quod debuultra facere vincae
me^^ and non feci? Is: 5.4.
What could I do more for my Vineyard that I have not done in it? After all my
care and pains to improve it, when Jexpected it should bing forth good grapes
it brought forth wil'd Grapes. May not our savior make us the same reproach?
we know it is too well grounded; what answer shall we give?

But let us fear and tremble when we come to consider the just vengeance which
he resolves to take on this unfruitful vine, Et uune vobis ostendam quid ego
faciam vineae: auferam sepem ejus, and ponam eam desertam; non putabitur and
non fodietur, and ascendent vepres and spinae, and nubibus mandabo ne pluant
super eam imbrem. x. 5.6.
And now I will show what I will do to my Vineyard, I will take away the hedge
thereof and it shall be eaten up, I will break down the walls there of and it
shall be trodden down; I will lay it wast it shall not be pruned or dig'd, but
there shall come brayars and thorns; and that its ruin may be without remedy,
I will command the clouds not to rain upon such ungrateful ground which brings
forth only bad fruit?

We may easily understand the meaning of these words; let us now apply them to
our selves; we have hitherto brought forth only leaves and rotten fruit, God
will therefore deprive us of those great helps which we render useless. When
that hedge is once taken away, that inward recollection once lost, our hearts
will run after every object, and we shall become a prey to our unruly Passions.
God will speak no more to our hearts: All the exhortations and Counsels of
wise and zealous Directors will make no impression on us; the source of Grace
will bedry'd up; and what will become of a soul in this wretched state? which
every one that continues barren and unprofitable must certainly expect.

Is there no danger of our being like a dead branch which cut off from its
trunk, withers and is good for nothing but the Fire? Let us remember, Matt.
25.26. etc.
the slothful servant was not condemned for losing his Talent but for not
improving it; and it is not only the tree that brings forth no fruit, Matt.
3.10.
but every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit shall be cut down, and burned

We flatter our selves that God will wait a little longer, Jam enim securis ad
radicem arboris posita est. Matt. 3.10.
but perhaps the ax is already laid to the root of the Tree: this perhaps is
the last offer of Grace, the last time that God will call upon us, the last
opportunity we shall ever have to become fruitful. God has already waited so
long, he has so often warned and exhorted us, he has so often looked whether
we began to bear fruit after all his care and pains, finding his expectation
not complied with, and justly incensed at our long barrenness he is it may be
ready to pronounce the sentence which was given against the barren fig tree,
Succide ergo illam ut quid terram occupat. Luc 3.7.
Cut it down why cumbreth it the ground: throw that unprofitable tree into the
fire: why should Isuffer it any longer to take up the place of a tree that
would bring forth good fruit.

This in consequence of this dreadful sentence, that so many who began well,
but did not faithfully correspond with the divine grace have ended so ill. That
so many who were called did not persevere, but have left their place and their
Crown to others, who became wise by their Example. Have not we reason to fear
it may be our case after all God has done to make us bear good fruit? have we
made suitable returns for all his pains? have not the few good works we have
done been spoiled by ill motives? And are we rich in virtues and merits?

O my God enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no man living is
innocent before thee. I confess that I have been hitherto not only a barren but
a rotten Tree, I have been unprofitable in such fruitful ground, and am good
for no thing but to be cast into the fi^e, Patientiam habe in me. Matt. 18.29.
but oh! have patience yet a little with me, not for a year but for one day,
and I trust by the assistance of thy grace to make such good use of this day
that I shall be no longer unfruitful.

I dare hope that thou would not have inclined my will to seek the
insolitude, thou would not have inspired me with the desire, nor afforded me
time for this retreat, were it not that thou art willing to deferr the
punishment I deserve for my unfaithfulness to thy Grace, and for making no
better use of thy assistance. Perhaps this is the last Day of thy for bearance,
and I have all the reason in in the world to apprehend that if I make not good
use of this day, thou have determined to delay my sentence no longer. But I
rely wholly upon thy infinite mercy, and am resolved so to spend this Day, that
if it should be the last of my Life, I may be able to appear before thee and
present thee the Fruits of it.

JANUARY AND JULY
FIRST MEDITATION OF MAN'S END.
FIRST POINT. Man was created to serve God. SECOND POINT. Man was created to
save himself in serving God.
FIRST POINT.
COnsider that we came not into the world by chance, God had an end in drawing
us out of nothing, and that end was no other then his own glory: he created us
only to know, love and serve him; we glorify him by knowing and loving him, we
show our love by serving him, and we serve him when we keep his Commandments.

This was his End and design in our Creation, he could have not created us, but
he could not create us for another End: the disorders of our Lives may indeed
make us forget our duty but it cannot change our ultimate End. Let us be never
so dissolute it will still be true, that we are not sent into the world to heap
up Riches, to acquire honors, to enjoy a multitude of pleasures and become
great, we are sent into the world only to serve God. Kings and their people,
the learned and the ignorant, the Rich and the poor are in the World only for
this End. Tho there be a great difference in men's conditions and a
subordination among them, tho some are born Masters and others subjects, they
are all made for the same ultimate End, and all agree in this point that they
are created only to know, to love and to serve God.

The fire is not more created to give heat, and the sun light, then man is to
love and serve God, who has made that almost in fin to number of Creatures only
to help us in attaining this End, there being not one among them all which in
its self does not fournish us with a means to know God, a motive to love, and
away to serve him.

We need only consult our own hearts on this subject, and we shall find that
the extreme desire to be happy which is implanted in our natures, and the
absolute impossibility of being so in this Life, are a sensible proof that man
was not made for any created object. He must elevate his heart to God, and he
will immediately find a full and perfect peace which alone fixes all his
desires; he feels a sweetness which he never felt any where else, Fecisti nos
Domine ad te and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te.
and which is an evident mark that God alone is his End, and he Center of his
Rest.

We are then in the world only to serve God, this is the End of all Men; but do
all men live for that End? this is the only thing necessary of which the son of
God speaks in the Gospel, do we look upon it as such?

How earnest are we to accomplish our designs? to acquit ourselves, well of our
employments, and to serve our Princes? Are we as earnest to serve God? do not
men generally act as if they valued every thing but him? How often is the title
of a man of the Gown or of the sword, preferred to that of Gods servant? How
often do the Maxims of the World get the better of the Duty's of a Christian?
Every one has his designs and seeks his own Ends, surely we are not persuaded
that God is our End seeing we take so little pains to seek him as such.

This Truth of Gods being our End is one of the first True h's we learn, yet it
is that which we think least of, and are least affected with when we do think
of it. We are used from our Cradles to hear that we are created only to serve
God, but we are not at all touched with the meaning of those words, which in
all probability we never truly understood much less foresaw their consequences.
For if be true that I live in this world only to serve God, then every one of
my actions ought to be directed to him, and it may be I have not in all my Life
done any one single action only for him.

This is the fundamental Verity of our Religion, do we live up to this
important Truth? The whole Gospel is founded on this as its chief maxim, but
who that examines our manner and our maxims can think that God is our ultimate
End? We think of every thing but God, as if we thought him nothing.

We find time for every thing except for loving and serving God, we are
delighted with riches, honors, and pleasures, God alone has no charms for us:
And yet where can we find any true pleasure but in him only? Thou Lord have
created us for thy self says Saint Augustine, and our hearts will be always
uneasy and unquiet till they rest in thee.

Have we not found this by frequent experience in those very things whereof we
have been most fond? were we satisfied when we had obtained them? has not the
very possession been sufficient to digust us with them, and make us slight
them? it is to no purpose to deceive our selves that we may sin with less fear,
these very disgusts these continual disquiets, are a secret voice which
admonishes us that we are not made for the Creatures, that every thing in the
world is bur vanity, amusement, and vexation of spirit, and that we are made
only for God.

We cannot choose or make any other End to our selves, he who gave us our being
has put us under an indispensable necessity of returning to him; If he had
left us at Liberty to make choice of God the infinite good for our last End,
could we have thought of any other? and now that he has subjected us to the
happy necessity of having no other, we are very little concerned to attain it.

Ungrateful men! are you not well enough provided for to have God for your last
End? Usquequo claudicatis in duas parts? si Dominus est Deus sequimini eum. 3.
R g. 8.21.
How long will you halt between two opinions? If the Lord be God follow him:
why will you be divided between God and the World? If God be your only master,
why do you not serve him alone?

My God! what do I stay for? am I too young? have I too much health? am I
afraid to serve thee too long if I begin so soon? I who am left in the world
only to serve thee.

Alas! I made no difficulty of spending the best part of my Life in
unprofi^able amusements in the service of the World, and now that I am
disabus'd and convinced of my folly shall I refuse thee the rest of my Life?
shall I balance one moment to love thee?

It Is strange that I stand in need of so many reasons and reflections to
resolve upon a thing of this importance, and of which Jam fully convinced, but
it is yet stranger that all these reflections do not make me resolve.

Do I stay till Jam at last Extremity? till Jam told that I have but a few days
left to think seriously of my Conversion?

No my God! it is resolved; thou have made me only for thy self, and for the
future I will be wholly thine: it is true I begin late to serve thee, but Jam
resolved to have this satisfaction in Dea h whenever it comes, that I did begin
to serve thee.

SECOND POINT.
Consider that God who has created us only to serve him, is pleased by a
singular goodness so to order it, that we cannot serve him without saving our
selves. He did from the beginning design our Eternal happiness in creating us
for his Glory; and seeing that Eternal happiness is no otherwise proposed then
as a reward, our whole life is given us only that we may deserve it by
obedience to those Laws and Commandments which he has made for that End. And
the desire of happiness which is natural to every man does as it were by
instinct advertise us in the midst of our disorders that we are placed in the
world only to work out our Eternal salvation in Heaven.

The Checks of our Consciences which are hardly ever quite stifled, cry loud to
us that we put our selves in danger of being lost when we forget our end never
so little. And are not the fears of hell, and of the dreadful judgments of
God, which shake the most hardened sinners, a sufficient monitor telling us
incessantly that we are in the world only to be saved?

This is the only business of all the world, this is our last End, we are not
here to obtain great Employments or dignity's, to render out selves excellent
in this or that profession, nor to establish a reputation by our good
qualities; You are raised to that dignity, you are put in that dignity, you are
put in that station, God has given you those qualitys, and made you successful
only that these may be helps to your salvation, may be the means to bring you
more easily to him your last End.

We are then created only that we may be saved, that we may avoid an Eternity
of woe in Hell, and obtain an happiness in Paradise which shall never end. We
are made only for Heaven, we are but banished men here, or at best but
travelers who should rejoice when they find themselves near the End of their
journey and of their banishment.

But do we look upon our selves as such? Have we these thoughts of Heaven?
would any one that examines our conduct think that we believe our salvation to
be our last End? Men easily find means to attain their ends, surely there are
but few who make heaven their great design since there are so few who take the
right methods to obtain it.

The End of a Merchant in his Trade, of a scholar in his study's, of a Courtier
in his carriage, of a soldier in the midst of dangers is easily known; but is
it as visible that every man in his station and employment seeks only God, and
the salvation of his soul as his last End.

Yet what does it profit a man to raise a great fortune to gain the whole world
and loose his soul? What is there in all the world that can make him amends for
the loss of that? It would have been much better for him not to have been born,
then not to be saved.

Let us remember that if we do not make God our sovereign happiness, he will be
our sovereign misery; we may be without every thing else but we cannot be
without this good; tho a man be poor, forsaken, despised or forgo ten, if he
save his soul he will be happy to all Eternity and want nothing; but let him be
never so rich, happy, and esteemed in the wo^ld, if he be damned he is
miserable for ever.

What are those great and extraordinary men who filled the world with their
brave actions, what are they the better for all the honor they g^in'd, if they
are damned? suppose you saw the richest man in the world on his Dea^hbed, one
who had enjoyed all sorts of pleasures, who had arrived to the highest pitch of
Glory and greatness, who had been successful in all his undertakings, and had
only neglect^d his soul; ask him, what do all your wealth, your greatness, and
your pleasures avail you? all these are passed and gone as if they had never
been, but your soul which you have lost, and those pains which are the sad
consequences, of that loss, will never pass away.

Let us consider what thoughts we shall have in those last moments: what shall
we then think of every thing that is now an obstacle to our salvation? How will
all our great designs and projects which took us up entirely, appear then?

We venture our souls ra her then disoblige a friend, then loose an opportunity
of enriching our Children, or of distinguishing our selves in the world. What
will our opinion of all this be when Death comes? will the remembrance of all
past greatness comfort a man who knows he is falling into Hell? Will those
pretended friends be much obliged to us for having ruined our selves to please
them? shall we be much obliged to them who are the cause of our damnation, and
for whose sakes we are lost?

Wretched Father! that labors and sweats, that ruins his health and shortens
his Life to get an Estate for his Children, and is damned for his pains; who
will thank him for it?

Who would not be rich if an earnest desire to be so were sufficient, we may be
saints if we will by the help of grace which is never wanting, and yet we are
unwilling to be so: And indeed if we are not saints it is because we will not.

It Is surprising that men who love themselves so much should reflect so little
on a matter of this consequence: that men who in all other things are wise and
prudent, should yet every day go out of the world without having once seriously
considered why they were sent into it, whence they came, and whither they are
to go after Death. And yet cheat themselves at last with an appearance of
conversion.

O Divine savior! where is that passionate desire of our salvation which moved
thee to do such great things? How long will thou suffer so many souls to be
lost, for whom thou have paid so great a price? Art not thou still our God, and
are not we thy people? Can thou ever forget that thou art my savior? I have
not indeed made a right use of my happiness in being designed only for thee, I
have forgot thee to place my affections upon the Creatures. I have wandered out
of the way that leads to my last End, and refused to obey the voice of the good
shepherd who called me. But now I see and repent of my wandering; however
unfaithful I have been, the sense thou have given me of my unfaithfulness,
makes me hope that thou will have mercy on me: thou lovedst me when I did not
love thee, and when I did all I could to make thee hate me thou sought'st even
when I fled most from thee. O my God! will thou refuse me now that I am
resolved to love thee? will thou hide thy self from me now that I seek thee? I
cannot fear this from so infinitely good and merciful a God.

I acknowledge that I was made only to love and serve thee, and I am resolved O
my God by the assistance of thy Grace that I will both love and serve thee. And
I hope in thy mercy that since thou have patiently born with my disobedience so
long thou will now be so gracious as to pardon and forgive it.

SECOND MEDITATION. OF THE MEAN'S which are given us to attain our ultimate end.
FIRST POINT Of the means common to all Christians. SECOND POINT The particular
means proper for each Christian.
FIRST POINT
COnsider that God not content to have created us for himself as for our
ultimate End, has out of his great goodness indispensably engaged us to seek
him, by those numerous means which he has given us to attain that End. Every
creature taken in its self is an help to our knowledge and Love of him; And
it is only our abuse of them that makes any of them hindrances. The happiness
and mis fortunes of our Lives, the chastisemens wherewith God corrects our
unfaithfulness, and our very faults, may be so many furtherances of our
Salvation. Even the devices and temptations of our mortal Enemy the Devil, may
be a means to save us.

Without grace it is impossible to attain our ultimate End; all our endeavors
without it are vain; It Is an article of Faith that we may be wanting to the
Grace of God: there is not one soul in Hell who is not damned by his own fault.

We are weak the occasions of sin are many, and our corrupted hearts are
violently inclined to it, but can we have greater assistance to prevent our
falls, and to raise us up again when we are fallen? Are we sensible of the
facility with which we may work out our salvation if we will have recourse to
those Excellent means which God has put into our hands? So many Sacraments
whereby all the merits of our Savior are applied to us, in which we are as it
were bathed in his blood, where in our souls feed on the Body and Blood of that
Divine Redeemer, are without doubt most effectual and easy means to attain our
great End.

It was easy for the Disciples to be saints who had their Divine Savior always
with them: And shall it be more difficult for us who have him continually
present in the Eucharist? their happiness consisted in having their requests
granted; what should hinder our obtaining of him as they whatever we desire.

Another very effectual means is frequent Prayer, for our Savior has solemnly
engaged his word that he will grant whatever we ask in his Name.

His promises are without exception, not limited to any Sort of men: Do but
ask. Every body surely is able to ask, and they who will not do most certainly
value Heaven at a very low rate since they think it not worth their asking.

If we had only the Sacrifice of the Altar, would nor our Salvation be sure?
what Grace, what assistance can we need which our Redeeme^ who gives himself
as an earnest of his grace cannot obtain? And how can we doubt his so often
reiterated promises that he desires our happiness? We are all debtors to the
justice of God, and stand in need of extraordinary helps; One Mass, one
Communion bestows on us a treasure sufficient to pay all our debts and supply
all our needs. Let us offer up that Host to his Eternal Father. Who we are sure
cannot but be pleased with it; It is sufficient to blot out the sins of all
mankind; and whose fault will it be, if it does not efface ours?

Certainly if God had left it to us to choose the most proper means of
Salvation, we should never have been able to find so many, so easy; and so
effectual; we should never have thought of proposing what Christ has done for
us. And yet what use have we hitherto made of those means? And what must we
think of our selves and of our unprofitableness under them? surely we have no
great mind to be saved if we lose our souls in the midst of so powerful and
such easy means of salvation; what excuse shall we invent what shadow of
pretense can we have to justify our selves, if we neglect them.

What shall we answer to the reproaches of the Heathens? What shall we answer
when our Savior himself reproaches and confounds us with the example of those
Pagans who only out of a vain desire of Glory, and for an imaginary recompense,
were such lovers of virtue such haters of vice, and even superstitiously
devout? what would they have done if they had enjoyed our helps.

What regret must a Christian have who is damned with all those advantages?
what shall I be the better for them if I be damned? And what must I expect if
make no better use of them for the future?

SECOND POINT.
Consider that besides those general helps common to all Christians every man
has some means proper for him, whereby he may easily become agreat Saint. His
temper, his education, parts? his very passions if rightly managed will much
contribute to it. The Grace of God commonly makes use of every one of these,
and whether our inclinations be good or bad, we may with alittle resolution
make them all serve to our progress in virtue.

Every sickness and unfortunate accident of our Lives, is sent on purpose to
bring us nearer to our last end, by separating us, or at least by weaning our
affections from sensible objects, which take up too much of our time and
thoughts.

But the surest and most effectual means are those which every man meets with
in the condition wherein God has placed him. Each state of Life is a different
way by which the divine Providence leads us to our ultimate End. It is a great
Error to think that we cannot attal. Perfection without doing something
extraordinary; we may be very eminent saints only by acquitting our selves
exactly of the duty's of our callings. The Virtuous Woman, that Heroine so
highly praised in Holy writ, acquired all those merits only by taking care of
her Family. And Jesus Christ himself for thirty years together, thought be
could do nothing more becoming him, then to discharge the duty's of that humble
and poor condition which he had chosen.

All o her ways are subject to illulusion; we deceive our selves by doing much
unless we do what we ought, he does what he ought who fulfills the will of God,
which we are sure we fulfill when we are exact in the smallest duty's of our
callings.

They who live in the world need not seek means of Sanctification out of their
ordinary course of Life, in the dutys of each day they will find matter enough
to make them saints; and they are inxecusable before God if they neglect those
means, since they take much more pains for the World, then he requires them to
take for him, that they may be saved.

Religious men find in their state, all, and indeed the only means of
perfection that are proper for them; which consist in a punctual observation of
their Rule and vows. Those Rules have already made the Saints that are honored
in their Order, and he who has embraced them can never hope to be a Saint by
any other means then the observation of the Rules.

Don't pretend that they seem of small consequence, that they do no^ bind you
under pain of fin; remember there is nothing little in the service of God. Did
you enter into Religion to seek perfection only when you were forced to it? How
will you distinguish your self from other Religious, if it be not by exactness
in your particular dutys? And how will you pretend to merit supply's of grace
proportionable to your necessity's, if it be not by this exact observation of
your Rule.

We need not wonder that so many Communions, and so many helps have no effect
on us; and that after all those advantages we are more lukewarm, and have more
reason to fear, tho we seem to have made great progress: it is because we
neglect the particular means which we have in our own hands, this renders all
the rest ineffectual: As the best Physic does us more harm then good when we
neglect the least precautions.

Let not a Religious man who is careless of observing his Rule expect any
benefit by his Communions; Let not a worldly person who has no care of his
family, who neglects the Duty's of his particular station, expect to be the
better for all his pretended good works, How should we like a servant that
means never so well, that does never so many good things, if he does not his
Duty: And how can he do his Duty who does not do what his Master commands?

Let us now reflect seriously on our conduct; what use have we made of the
means of salvation? have we improved the particular?

God will not only examine and severely punish the Evil we have done, but the
Good we have not done when it was in our power, and the good we have not done
well. Are we ready to give an account of our Lives immediately? all the actions
of our Lives should have God for their End, and can we find one among them all,
that was done only for him?

Let us inquire what can be the cause, that the Sacraments, and the spiritual
Exercises have hitherto done us so little good. Let us impartially examine what
use we have made of the means of perfection that are in our hands. If we be
engaged in the world, how have we discharged the duty's of our condition? If we
be Religious or Ecclesiastiques, how have we acquitted our selves of our
obligations, and observed our Rule? By this examination we shall be able to
excite an hearty sorrow for our past faults, and to make such Resolutions as
may be effectual for our future amendment.

THIRD MEDITATION. OF THE SENTIMENTS We shall have at the hour of Death.
FIRST POINT. The sentiments of a dying man who has lead a sinful, and lukewarm
Lfe. SECOND POINT. The sentiments of a dying man, who has lived a fervent and
virtuous Life.
FOr the better fixing your imagination, and to avoid distraction, suppose your
self upon your deathbed having but a few hours to live, reduced as you will be
one day, to the last extremity of weakness, almost motionless, continually
unquiet, your soul disordered with fear, your heart already seized by Death's
convulsions, your breath failing, a cold sweat spreading its self over your
whole body, which smells already like a dead Corpse, your cheeks hollow, your
color changed, your hair moist with a mortal damp: your eyes sunck, staring
frightfully, leaving you only sight to disover your pitiful condition, and just
ready to close themselves for ever. Suppose your self abandoned by all you
loved in the World, and upon the point of expiring in the Arms of some
Domestic, and unknown person.

Then for a second Prelude beg of God 'to assist you with his grace that you
may be throwly affected with the consequences of that important moment where on
Eternity depends, and so penetrated by it, that it may make the same impression
on you now, as it will do when you see it approach, and that you may be there
by incited to take the surest methods of Salvation.

FIRST POINT.
Consider how strangely a dying man is changed; he who a few days ago was
strong and in perfect health, enjoying his Riches and honors and contriving
great projects, is all on a sudden confined to his bed, reduced to extremity,
unable to help himself, incapable of pleasure, forced to abandon all, and to
be abandoned by all, My God! what is man? tho never so Rich and great; since a
few hours sickness are able to make him useless to all the world, and render
all the world of no use to him.

We think our selves happy when we have Riches enough to serve us many years,
but alas! what are we the better for many years, riches if we have not many
years, to enjoy them?

What is able to comfort a sinner in this miserable condition? when the
remembrance of past pleasures leave only a mortal regret behind them; and the
fear of future pains makes him already begin to feel them. When God and man,
when every thing in the world conspire to terrify and affright him. How do the
tears of Friends cut him to the heart, and the Assistants increase his
apprehensions? how sensible must the grief of his wife, the tears of his
Children, and the hurry of his servants be to him? with what fear has he
recourse to desperate remedies, and what a terror is it to find those remedies
ineffectual?

And when to calm his frights his Confessor approaches, can we think that the
sight of him allay's his trouble? he sweats and is quite confounded; and in
this agony he is to prepare for death, but is this a fit time, is he in a
condition to prepare? when fear and trouble has weakened and clouded his Reason,
how can he go about it? He speaks not his own thoughts or sentiments, he only
repeats what he hears his Confessor say, he neither knows what he says, nor
what he ought to say.

Even Jesus Christ himself whose presence in this last hour is the great
consolation of a dying Saint, visites the dying sinner only to upbraid him. and
make him more sensible of his impiety's. And indeed what benefit can he expect
from the last Sacraments being so ill prepared to receive them?

With whom shall he find ease? For as soon as he has received the rights of the
Church, his friends, and Relations retire. Let us now consider what his
thoughts will be when the Priest only stays to present him the Crucifix, and
inform him that there is no farther hopes of recovery, that now being bereft of
all Creatures, Jesus Christ alone must be his refuge and consolation. Jesus
Christ crucified must be now your only hope, you must seek strength in those
sacred wounds, against the fear of Death, for they are able to soften all its
rigours, to swee ten its bitterness: receive then Dear Brother this comfortable
Object, in whose Arms I leave you.

This is the End of all the vain projects, of all the greatness, and pleasures
of worldly men; In what a condition is a libertine who has neglected Jesus
Christ all his Life, which he has spent in sin and pleasure and in an extreme
carelessness of Eternity? what consolation can he find now in holding a
Crucifix in his hand?

If he has no ressemblance of a crucified Jesus: he was never sensibly affected
with the terrible verity's of our holy Religion, but laughed at the most
serious Exercises of Piety, what thoughts can he have when he has nothing but a
Crucifix to entertain himself withal?

He may indeed make a good use of the little time that is left; but alas! his
weakness and fears do compose his Reason, and do not leave him the Liberty
that is necessary to use it well.

Yet the Sick man dies and there is little hope that the prayers of the Church
should give him any consolarion, they are indeed full of comfort for those who
dye well, but what comfort can they afford a dying sinner whom every word
reproaches with the disorders of his Life?

What terror must it be to him to hear the Priest pronounce those words,
Proficiscere anima Christiana de hoc mundo.
Christian Soul go out of the world; to him who loved the world so much, who
perhaps never loved any thing else nor ever made one step toward Heaven? Go
out, there is no more to do; you must leave all your delights, tho you be never
so fond of them, and unwilling to quit them; you would leave nothing but you
must dye to all.

The Charitable recommandation, May thou enter into the habitation of peace,
Hodie sit in pace locus tous, and habitatio tua in sancta Sion.
and may thou dwell in the holy peace of Sion, can be no comfort to one who
knows they have no reason to make that prayer for him.

How can be expect any benefit from that petition, Miserere Domine gemituum,
miserere lachrymarum ejus.
pity O Lord his sighs, and let his tears prevail with thee? if his grief
proceeds only from his fondness of the world, and if he weeps because he is
forced to quit it and because he can sin no longer.

The priest go's on, Agnosce Domine Creaturam tuam non a Diis alienis creatam,
sed a solo Deo vivo and vero.
Look O Lord upon thy creature, made by thy self, and not by strange Gods, own
the work of thy hands; But if the dying man has always loved the Creature more
then his Creator, if his Life has not been at all conformable to the maxims of
Christ, how can he be like his Savior in this last hour? what must he expect
seeing he is not like him, and how terrible must his apprehensions be of what
is to come after Death?

Great God! in what a condition is a dying man, torn with grief and despair
without hope? If he have yet his senses left, every thing that presents its
self, every thing he hears, is an addition to his fear and trouble; and when
he has lost his fences, when external objects can make no more impression on
him, then the remembrance of all his Sins, of all the ill he has done, of all
the good he has neglected when it was in his power, or which he has done ill,
racks and torments him more.

How many are his Reflections? yet all to no purpose: he then sees his Error
but it is too late to reap any benefit by it: he repents of a great many
things, but that repentance adds new force to his torments, because he knows it
will do him no good. How dos he grieve for not having done his duty when he was
able? how does he despair of being able to do what he has left undone? he would
not reflect seriously on the great Truths of the Gospel while he might have
done it to good purpose, now he reflects, and reflects at leisure, but it is a
Cruel leisure, for all the fruit of those Reflections is despair and rage.

Now he is sensible of all the disorders of his Life, he is now convinced of
his Error, but its too late. Oh! what must the sentiments of a person
consecrated to God be, when he sees his Eternal condition ready to be decided,
and remembers how imperfect he has been in a state which requires so much
perfection? to what end did I make such a do in leaving the world and entering
into Religion? Was it to follow the maxims of the world there? God has called
me by his Grace to an Ecclesiastical or Religious state, have I made good use
of that Grace? I quitted all and chose that perfect way of Life, that I might
dye in peace by dying like a saint; but (wretched Creature that I am) did I
consider that an happy Death is the consequence of an holy Life? How often have
I taught others this doctrine? O! why have I made no better use of what I
taught? How have I been distracted in prayer? how many Masses and Communions
have done me no good? how often have I confessed my sins without leaving them?
how many graces have I rendered useless? how many good works have I lost for
want of right motives? O my God! why have I taken so much pains to lose my
self? have left my Relations? been insensible to their tears and all their
caresses? surmounted so many difficulties that I might secure my salvation?
And, by loving my ease too much, by setting my heart on trivial matters which
one would have been ashamed of in a secular state, I have been a lukewarm
Religious; I am now on my death bed torn with remorse, oppressed with fear and
trouble, and having cause to doubt positivly of my salvation. Oh! it is terrible
to pay so dear for such a Death.

And indeed what else can be the consequence of a careless Life? when we come
to consider seriously as we shall certainly do then, that the least grace we
have abused was sufficient to convert an infidel, and yet so many of them have
ve not made one good Religious, or good Christian. When we shall discover a
multitude of faults, which we took no notice of before, or which through the
violence of our passions, and our indifference we took for small ones, but
which now appear to be great sins. What comfort can an imperfect Religious find
then? Will he seek it from the saints of his Order? he has dishonored them by
his conduct. Will he seek it in his Rule? he has not observed it. Will he hope
to find comfort in God? he has offended and incensed him by serving him so
ill, after having received so many favors from him.

How dismal must his apprehensions be after an irregular Life? when he
reflects, I have but a few hours to live, If I be out of the state of Grace I
am lost for ever; and I have not only some reason to fear that I am not in the
state of Grace (which fear the greatest saints have) but cause to doubt
positively that I am not.

In this extremity all that he has heard of judgment, of Hell, and Eternity
come afresh in his mind and affright him in a terrible manner. It Is wonderful
that he who some few days ago was full of doubts and uncertaintys, is now fully
convinced of the truths which he was then so unwilling to believe. Behold his
fears, see how he trembles and quakes at the thoughts of Death and judgment.

We sometimes meet with men who turn the most serious exercises of Piety into
Rallery, and call the exactness of those fervent souls who are punctual in
performing the smallest dutys of their station, preciseness and weakness. Let
these men who imagine they have reason to censure and act thus, continue to
think so at this hour, and mantain their character of wits to the last if they
can. If they were in the right, let them please themselves now with calling
exactness, and devotion, preciseness, and scrupulosity. They have made a false
conscience to themselves, and under its shadow they lull themselves in a false
security, let rhem now maintain that imaginary systeme. Alas! it is the
remembrance of these very things that now drives them to despair.

While we are in health, our passions blind us, ill examples seduce us, we are
charmed with present objets, the hurry of business takes us up, and we
industriously avoid serious Reflections on the Truths of Religion, even our
Faith is half dead, stifled by the corruption of our manners, but at the
approach of Death it revives to terrify, and distract us, like the Faith of the
Devils, it makes us tremble but does not convert us.

Every body is convinced that when Death comes we shall repent our neglect of
mortification, our worldly voluptuous Lives, our having done so very few good
works, and having lived no better, and yet which is exceeding strange, after
all these reflections, after being fully convinced of them, how few take pains
to amend their Lives? My God! how long shall we make these useful rections, and
yet live so unlike Christians?

Death makes us see clearly; then our prejudices, and prepossessions vanish;
formerly we saw but were not sensible of the vanity and emptiness of every
thing in the world, but now we both see and feel it and wonder at our stupidity
in finding it no sooner, and in not discovering our double want. We find we
were deceived and at the same time find to our unspeakable an speakable anguish
that we are ruined by that Error, and that we cannot recover what it has made
us loose.

A Dead man is indeed a mournful, but an useful sight, very proper to disabuse
us, and to alienate our affections from the pleasures of this Life; the most
accomplished man in the World inspires horror when he is dead, immediately all
is silent, the Corpse is covered, the Curtains drawn, and every body retires:
where is now his beauty and good miene? where is his agreeable humor? what is
become of all his projects and great fortune? you see what is the end of all.
But what is become of his soul? and what must be done with this corrupted body,
which begins already to grow offensive? Not withstanding all its greatness,
notwithstanding all its charms, though the most Lovely in the world, every body
fly's it: Husband, wife, Children, Relations, Friends, neighbors, servants,
are all striving to be rid of it: those who loved it best are most desirous to
have it carried away, and most uneasy to hear it spoken of; Its nearest and
best friends hire men to throw it to the worms, they make have to nail it up,
they hide it in the ground, and we cannot without horror think of its
condition a few days after.

You are forgot as soon as buried, every one returns to his business, your
Friends seek other Friends, take new measures, and hardly think any more of
you. They concern themselves no more about you then if you had never lived, no
body fears your anger nor desires your favor, they often undo all you had
done, within a little time you are not so much as talked of.

At your Death indeed some tears may possibly be shed by your Relations and
Friends, for the loss of some pleasure or advantage which they expected from
you: tears are common, but the greatest part of those tears are only grimace:
they will soon be comforted; especially if they gain by your Death, and any
part of your Estate falls to them. We may guess what others will do for us, by
what we have done for others after their Death. Our grief for a friend and
Relation has been soon appeased, and though they were so wretched as to have
ruined their souls for our sakes, have we thought our selves much obliged to
them?

After all this can we make any great account of the world and its pleasures?
It Is indeed very surprising that we think so seldom of Death, but it is much more
surprising that we can think once of it, and not be converted. How many live as
if they were sure they should never dye, and were to dye more then once? as if
they should lose nothing by dying ill, or as if they could recover that loss
after Death? Is not this our case? And what will our thought, be on a Death
Bed, when we call to mind the reflections we now make, if we reap no benefit
by them?

SECOND POINT.
Consider how happy a thing it is to dye when one has lived well; Death is the
punishment of sin, it can therefore be a real trouble only to those who are
defiled with sin: It must needs be a subject of great joy and pleasure to those
who have led a virtuous Life. How can they dye unhappily? since they dye saints.

The Death of a Righteous man says the Prophet, is precious before God; and
consequently dear to him, for one always esteems and takes care of what is
precious. It Is no matter to a good man to dye destitute of all humane aid, tho
he dye suddenly, he never dies unprepared, God takes a peculiar care of him, he
dies happily because his Death is precious in the sight of his God.

Every thing ought to contribute to his consolation; how great must his joy
then be, when he reflects that he has lived like a Christian, and led a
penitential Life? The sight of what is to come will most certainly alleviate
the pains of his present condition.

He is now got over all the difficulties in the way to heaven; fasting,
mortification, labors, austerity, penance, all is over. What a satisfaction
is it in Death to know that the has done all the good that was required of
him, and avoided the ill which he might have done? especially when he thinks on
the remorse of Conscience which would have tormented him if he had done
otherwise.

The longest Life seems then but a moment; from the Cradle to the Tomb; what a
satisfaction must it be to a dying Christian, that instead of omitting he has
done his Duty? what would the greatest fortune avail me, says the dying man,
what good could powerful friends do me now? If I had spent my time in
pleasures, and followed the maxims of the world, of what use would they be to
me now? I therefore condemn now, and will condemn to all Eternity the maxims of
the world; all the Friendships on Earth cannot deferr my Death one moment; I am
for ever banished from all Company, all the pleasures of the world are not able
to moderate one of my least Pains, and if I had fixed my heart on them I should
now have nothing left, but the regret of having wearied my self for my own
ruin. He applauds himself for having been so wise as to contemn those
vanity's which would leave him now, whether he would or no, if he had not left
them. It Is sweet, it is comfortable at the hour of death, to think that one has
left them.

His great business was to save his soul, to make sure of an happy Eternity, if
he had been successful in every thing else and had not secured his salvation,
he would have done nothing; he was in danger of not doing it; and what would
beco^^ of him if he had not? He trembles with fear at this thought, but having
by the grace of God applied himself chiefly to that great work, the same
thought fills him with comfort.

Let us suppose that a man has taken a long journey about an impottant business
on which his fortune, His honor, and his Life depends; that he comes just time
enough to have audience of his Prince and to justify his conduct, and finds
that if he had staid an hour or two longer he would have come too late, have
lost his cause, and been condemned to Death. How glad is he that he did not
trifile away his time upon the road? But if by his diligence he not only saved
his life, but gained an Estate, honors, and dignitys, and became his Princes
favorite, would he repine because he had missed some little pleasures, and
neglected some conveniences, which he might have found in the way if he had
stayed for them? And by staying for which he knew several who came on the same
business with him, had lost their cause and their Lives? remembrance of past
dangers gives us real pleasure and we delight to talk of them, so the
difficulties we have gone through for the love of God, will be very sweet to us
at the hour of Death.

Did it ever come into a man's thoughts on his death bed, to regret that he had
not diverted and pleased himself enough in the World? We very often repent the
having pleased our selves too much; we regret the time we have thrown away in
vain and worldly diversions, while we neglected mortification Alas! are not all
our Lives full of nothing else but these very things of which we repent when
come to dye?

Did ever Religious man at the hour of Death, repent his having willingly and
meritoriously left his Relations, his wealth and the world which he must now
leave whether he will or no, and gain nothing by his leaving it? an imperfect
Religious will repent of his imperfections, but not of his being Religious.

The thoughts of Death terrify the stoutest, and make the wicked tremble, but
they fill the Saints with joy. He is A good man says S. John Climacus that does
not fear Death, but he is a Saint who desires it. Then it is that those who
have loved their Redeemer find a mighty sweetness in receiving the Viaticum,
being able to say, come Lord Jesus my heart is ready.

A crucifix must needs be welcome on a Death bed to a man, who has born the
Cross all his Life and lived by it. Proficiscere anima Christiana de hoc mundo.
With what pleasure does he hear himself invited to leave the world which he
values so little, and to take possession of the New Jerusalem after which he
has sighed like a Prince recalled to his throne; like a valiant soldier whom
his sovereign sends for, to come and receive the reward of all his fatigues and
combats.

It Is true the sight of his sins may justly make him fear, but the view of the
Crucifix, the prayers of the Church, the assistance of the Saints, and
especially of the Queen of Saints, and of Jesus Christ himself, inspires him
with confidence in the mercy of God, which no temptation or trouble is able to
disturb.

The sight of his good works makes him confident but not vain, being persuaded
that the divine goodness who has guided him by his grace during this Life, will
not leave him in this last hour, his tenderness and devotion to the Blessed
Virgin, and the remembrance of her past favors will afford him no less joy and
comfort. This fervent s^ul loved his Savior and longed to be with him, and now
rejoices in expectatien of that happy moment which will unite him to that dear
Savior for ever. What a sweetness does he find in pronouncing the name of
Jesus, whom he loved with so much tenderness, and fervor?

What a difference is there between the death of a Saint and the death of a
wicked man? a difference that is seen even after their Death. The Corpse of the
former inspires veneration: not with standing the natural horror we have for
dead Bodies, and for every thing about them, so that we are not unwilling to
come near them, neither the body of a Saint nor any thing about it frights us:
we are not afraid to enter into the Chamber where it lies, we are earnest to
get some thing that belonged to it, we kiss it, we strive to touch it: his
death is not only agreeable to him but to us to; such is the power of Holiness
that it takes away all the horror of a Corpse and renders it venerable, and
precious. We are all charmed with the Death of a Saint; Is it not then very
strange that our desire to dye like him does not excite us to live better.

We are all ready to say with the Prophet, Let me dye the death of the just and
let my latter end be like his: But to what purpose is this lazy wish while we
will not imitate his Life? Are we ignorant that the satisfaction which the
Saints find in Death is the ordinary fruit of the holiness of their Lives? we
should have lived like them, in a continual mortification of our passions, in
an entire renouncing and contempt of the world, an uninterrupted practice of
all Christian virtues, and an exact performance of the duty's of our station.

What is the reason that we take no more care to prepare for Death, seeing
there is nothing of so great importance, that all depends upon dying well, and
that if when dye ill we can never repair our loss? oh! it is a wretched thing to
be reduced in in the last moment of our lives to unprofitable regrets.

Tho you were the greatest admirer of the world, thou you were never so fond of
it there is no more world for you when you are once dead. what do you carry
away with you? what reward does the world give you for having been so long its
slave? what vexation, regret, and despair for having served it? They are truly
wise who leave the world first; who do not stay till it leaves them, but
despise it, before it despises them.

It Is a sad spectacle to see a man carried out of a great house which he had
newly built or purchased, and into which he never must return more. All his
riches, his goods; and what ever he had in the world is now in the possession
of another. Where are all those great men who made such a bustle in the world
and appeared in such splendour? They are gone, they are nothing now, and the
world who considers men no longer than they are useful, thinks no more of them:
they are in their graves, their flesh putrified, their bones calcined, their
whole body turned into dust. How little do we think of those who lived before
us, unless it be to blame their actions or publish their faults, And this is
all the recompense we are to expect even from those whom we have most obliged.
With what satifaction would men dye, if they did for God, but the hundred th
part of what they do for the world to no purpose?

My God! what benefit shall I reap by these Reflections? what thoughts, what
anguish shall I have upon a death bed if these considerations do not make me
fruitful? Am I so fully persuaded that there is no solid satisfaction but in
thee? and shall I seek it any where else, thou only can make me happy both
in Life and in Death?

The Saints were wise, hated themselves and kept their body's in subjection,
never sparing them while they lived, why then do not I endeavor to be wise
after their Example? They applaud themselves for having lived a mortified and
holy Life in opposition to the maxims of the world. My God! what good will
these pious reflections do me if I defer my Conversion any longer? I give thee
hearty thanks for affording me this time to prepare for death, I know that I
must begin by an holy Life, and Jam resolved to delay no longer, but begin this
very moment.

OF PREPARATION FOR DEATH.
SECT. I. OF THE NECESSITY OF preparing for Death.
ALL the world agrees that no thing is of so great concern as Death; that it is
the most difficult thing in the world to dye well; that we can never recover
our selves if we dye ill; yet there is hardly any thing for which men make so
little preparation as for Death.

If we could dye twice our imprudence would not be so great, we might have some
hope to repair our fault, by expiating a wicked Life and an unprepared Death
together. But we can dye but once, and we know that an Eternity of happiness or
misery depends on that once.

We are not only bound to live well (says an Eminent servant of God) but much
more to dye well for the most pious Life will avail nothing if it be not
followed by an holy Death. Have we labored for Heaven? have we lead an holy
Life? we are so much the more concerned to dye holily that we may not lose the
fruit of our pains. It Is true an happy death is the ordinary fruit of an holy
Life, but it is no less true that if we dye ill we lose all the merit of the
most Exact Life, and all those merits cannot secure us an happy Death.

Whence comes it then, that we take no more care to prepare for Death, then if
were certain that we should never dye, or that we should dye well, or that we
should dye more then once? whence is it that we act as if we could lose nothing
by dying ill, or as if it were a very easy thing to die well?

Can we be ignorant of the danger we run, of acquitting our selves ill of what
we never tried? especially when we don't know how to go about it? Can we be
ignorant that it is the hardest thing in the world to dye well? that if we
desert our preparation to a death bed, we put it off to a time that is too
uncertain for so great a work? The work is long, the time is short, and very
improper for a business so extremely nice and delicate; so that he who waits
for this time stay's till he is a dying to prepare himself for Death. We must
therefore (adds that holy man) prepare our selves betimes; We should begin this
moment, least if we delay any longer we begin too late; or least the time we
shall have then, prove as most certainly it will, altogether unfit to prepare
to dye in.

If a good Death consisted only in receiving the last Sacraments, in kissing a
Crucifix, or shedding a few tears, our imprudence would be more tolerable, but
how many with all imaginable helps have died miserably because they never
prepared for death?

He who dies well, dies in the state of grace, he dies truly penitent, which he
cannot do unless he hates sin above all things in the world, will it be easy
for a man who has loved and doted on sin all his Life and stays till death
tears him by force from the occasions of it, will it be easy for such a man
efficaciously to resolve against it? will it be an easy thing for him to make
sincere acts of Contrition, of faith, of hope, and Charity, who was never used
to them? when he is oppressed with pain and sickness, his soul troubled and
disordered at the approach of Death, will it be an easy thing for him to
regulate his family and his Conscience too at such a time? to make a general
Confession which requires so much leisure, and thereby repair all the faults of
his past Confessions? Is such a man who scarce knows what he does, in a
condition to dispatch in two or three hours the most difficult work in the
world which requires very much time, a perfect tranquillity of mind and the
greatest application?

If we imagine it easy to dye well and with so little preparation, we must
condemn the Saints who took so much pains, who spenr Their whole lives in
preparation, and yet after all were not free from a saving fear at their last
hour. Nay we must condemn our selves for acknowledging that they were truly
wise in what they did. We own that we cannot be too well prepared for Death! O
why then do we make so little preparation for it?

Our Redeemer forsaw our carelessness in this matter, and therefore he has
exhorted us more to this preparation than to any thing else. Matt. 24.42. Mar.
13.35. Luke. 21.35.
Watch (says he) for you know not the hour wherein your Lord will come; watch
because you know neither the day nor the hour; Be alway's ready and upon your
guard. And to let us see more clearly that this preparation is a sure way to
dye well, he adds, blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall
find watching, ready to run and open the door as soon as he knocks. This
preparation is necessary for all those who desire an happy Death; and it seems
that God the Sovereign dispenser of all Grace, has annexed the Grace of dying
well to the care we take in preparing for it.

This we learn by the Parable of the Virgins; the Virgins who had been careful
in feeding their Lamps, and had prepared them selves before hand to meet the
Bridegroom, went in with him to the wedding, from whence the foolish Virgins
were excluded because of their negligence and want of preparation.

This truth, that we have need of preparation to dye well, is universally
acknowledged: it is for this reason that we are so afraid of sudden Death; But
what does this fear produce? Has it awakened and excited us to prepare for
Death? Or do we wait for our last sickness? that is staying for Death, to
prepare to dye.

The wise men of the world are not so negligent in their temporal concerns; do
we our selves act in the same manner? do we undertake any thing of importance,
wherein our interest, our honor, or our pleasure is concerned without taking
our measures before hand? we will not venture to speak in public or to show
our capacity till we have taken time to prepare our selves for it; and with
what care and diligence do we improve prove that time? If we are to show our
skill in any exercise we always take some time for practice: what pains did
they take (says S. Paul) who strove for victory in the public games? how
carefully did they study all the flights necessary for their design? how did
they foresee the artifices their adversary might make use of to surprise them?
how did they avoid pleasure least it should enervate them? how temperate were
they in their diet? how great was their chastity for many years together? And
shall we who know that our Salvation, that our Eternal happiness depends on the
manner of our dying, be less solicitous to learn to do it well? we are then to
engage in a terrible fight, dare we venture before we have learned to make use
of our weapons and how to void being overcome? how can we hope for an happy
death if we de not learn to dye well, if we do not so much as know what we are
to learn?

How long shall we rely on out health, and youth, and on the facility of being
assisted on our death beds? do we know any thing more certainly then the
uncertainty of that last hour! who would venture his Estate upon the hopes of a
long Life? we may dye every moment, this for ought we know may be the last day
we have to live; we see men dye every hour, and yet we deferr to prepare for
Death, still we put it off to a another time: Good God! what time do we mean?

The time of sickness is no time of preparation, we should be ready then.
Estote parati. Matt. 24.44.
Be ready, says our Savior, he does not say prepare your selves, but be ready;
now common sense will tell us that we must prepare before we can be ready.

What should we think of a Captain of a ship who never enquires whether his
anchors and cables be in a readiness and fit for service, till he is just
perishing in a violent storm? what should we think of a Governor who neglects
to repair the breaches of his Town, and lets the magazines remain empty, till
he is close besieged and the trenches opend? Death (says the wiseman) is a
dangerous voyage, we sail from time to Eternity among Rocks and tempests. It is
a sudden siege, where our Enemy has shut us up in a moment; and can we think
this a fit time to prepare our selves to fight?

We are afraid that the thoughts of Death will disturb our joy and make us sad;
we deceive our selves, the thoughts of Death disquiet only those who are
unprepared and unwilling to think of it. After all our endeavors we shall
never attain a solid happiness in this Life by any other means, then those
which conduce to an happy death. He who has learned to dye well, (says a very
holy man) has learned not only to live well but to be happy, for the thoughts
of death are uneasy only to those who have cause to fear they shall dye ill,
it is the truest subject of joy and consolation to him that knows how to dye
well; he who is always ready to dye, cannot be afraid to think of dying.

I could not avoid insisting on the necessity and manner of preparing for
Death, because the chief design of this retreat ought to be to excite a
Christian to prepare to dye happily by living holily.

No practice of Devotion is more universally necessary then this; Every body
cannot fast; Solitude and austerities are not equally proper for all sorts of
men; but every age, rank, and condition is able to prepare for Death: nothing
can be a reasonable hinderance. Let us then examine how we have been hitherto
prepared? whether we do now prepare? And seeing we are now convinced of the
necessity of doing it, how will our souls be racked with despair when we come
to dye if we negiect it?

SECT. II. OF THE MANNER HOW we must prepare to dye well.
1. THe most general and most necessary Preparation is an holy Life; when we
begin that, we ought to begin to prepare for death the whole Life of a
Christian being indeed a preparation to dye well.

We are afraid to dye suddenly, but what good will that fear do us if we put
our selves under a kind of necessity to dye ill? for how can a man dye
otherwise who will not prepare till he is just going to expire?

And indeed what probability is there that a man who has lived ill should dye
well? that he should be able in two or three days to make reparation for the
wickedness of a long Life? When the greatest Saints after a perfect Life of
many years, have not yet been out of danger of dying ill. But we hope the we
shall have time; what time? A time that is no time for us, a time of which we
can make no use, a time when the time of mercy is past.

But we trust in the grace of God, and thus when hazard all by supposing our
selves sure of Grace, which God without any injustice might have refused to the
most perfect Saints, and the son of God has protested that they who deferr
their confession to the last shall dye in their sins. In peccato vestro
moriemini. Joh. 8.21.
And the Holy Ghost has declared by the pen of the wiseman, that when death
seizes you which you put so far from you now, when distress and anguish which
you did not apprehend come upon you of a sudden, In interitu vestro ridebo and
subsanabo vos. Prove. 1.26. Clamabitis ad me and non exaudiam vos. Pro. 1.28.
then he will laugh at the sinner he will mock at his misery, when he cry's for
mercy he will not answer, and will have no regard to his prayers.

It Is true we seldom see any dye ill who have lived well, but it is much more
rare to see any dye well who have lived ill.

2. A more particular manner of preparation, and which is most suit able for
this day of Retreat, is to do all the Exercises of the Day as if it were the
last Day of your Life, endeavoring to put your self into such a disposition
as you would desire to be in at the hour of Death.

To that end consider seriously at the close of each Meditation, what your
thoughts on that subject would be if you were just going to give up an account
to God of your whole Life. And particularly examine what it is that would most
trouble you if you were now a dying.

Three things usually disturb dying men. 1. Their neglect of the Duty's of
their station. 2. Their frequenting the Sacraments without profit. 3. Their
abuse of the means of perfection which they have enjoyed, and their having,
rendered useless the inspirations and graces which they have received. We should
examine strictly this Day (especially during the meditation on Death) whether
we have nothing to reproach our selves on these heads; how we have hitherto
discharged the duty's of our calling; whether we are punctual and careful now?
If we are engaged in the world, do we live in it like Christians, according to
our Saviors maxims? If we have the happiness to be Religious, are we exact in
keeping our vows and obseving our Rule? If we have the honor to be Priests, do
our Lives answer the holiness of our Caracter? In what ever station we are,
have we done our duty in it? are we satisfied with our condition? And should we
not be sorry if we were going to dye, that we have made no greater progress in
the way of Perfection?

Do not our frequent Confessions without any amendment, and our reiterated
unprofitable Communions fly in our faces? Jesus Christ has fed us with his
precious body and blood, do we grow stronger by that Divine food? what should
we answer to that impartial judge if we were now before him commanded to give
an account of his blood? Do we say or hear Mass with that piety and Devotion as
becomes a Sacrifice which is the holiest act of our Religion? Would a Priest
find comfort if he were now to dye in the Remembrance of the sentiments with
which he has so often celebrated? And could he rejoice before God in having
frequently offered that adorable Sacrifice?

Have we not made an ill use of those precious Graces which our Redeemer
purchased for us with his Blood? how many inspirations have we neglected? how
many good desires have we stifled? we must give an exact account of all these
favors, are we ready to do it if we were to dye this moment? Are we able to
show that we have improved our talents? We know it is not enough to keep them,
can we show that we have augmented them?

These should be the heads of our examination at the end of the Meditation on
Death; we should make our Confession as if it were our last, and endeavor to
repair what ever we have reason to fear has been amiss in our former. We should
do well to make some reflections on the state of our affairs, and order them
so as they may not disturb us when we come to dye. In short, we must endeavor
to end the Day in such a state as we would desire to be in the last moment, and
we must close up all with a sacrifice of our selves, our possessions, our
healths, our Lives to Christ, begging him to dispose absolutely of them for the
advancement of his Glory, and submitting our selves entirely and freely to
Death when ever he pleases. We must then devote ourselves wholly to the Blessed
Virgin, and beseech her to stand by us in this difficult time; we must address
some prayers to S. Joseph, to our Guardian Angels who are able to give us very
powerful succors, and sum up all our desires with begging the grace of
perseverance in some particular prayer as we judge most proper:

3. A third Method is to set one Day a part every year to prepare for Death; to
consecrate it entirely to that work, and do that Day what we must do when we
come to dye, what we shall then wish we had done, and what we shall not be able
to do upon a Death Bed.

The Evening before we must put our affairs in such order that we may meet with
no interruption next day: for the work of the Day requires an absolute Retreat
and a perfect tranquillity of mind: if we have convenience we should begin with
visiting the holy Sacrament, beseeching our our Redeemer by the merits of his
Death to give us grace to dispose our selves to dye well. Then we should
address our selves in a particular manner to the Blessed Virgin, whose
protection is so necessary in that last hour, to Saint Michael, our good
Angels, S. Joseph and the Saint whose name we bear; we should do well to say
the Vespers for the dead, and so close our preparation for the next Day with
half an hour of Meditation, on the improvement of Time, the means and Graces
which God has bestowed on us to work out our salvation, and the little pains
we have taken for it.

The Parable in the sixteenth of S. Read rationem villicationis tuae. Luke
16.2.
Luke is proper to be the subject of the Meditation, where the Rich man who was
disatisfy'd with his steward requires him to give an account of his conduct
since he took the charge of his affairs; or else we may choose the other
parable of the barren figtree which is already proposed for the evening before
the Retreat. Luke. 13.6.


We are to spend the rest of the Evening in solitude, retired from the noise
and distraction of the world, wholly employed in taking care of our salvation;
in making a general Confession of our whole Lives, or of one or so many years
as our Director thinks fit. And we must omit nothing that may serve to put our
souls into so good a state that we may have nothing to reproach our selves, no
scrupules concerning our past Life; that we may be able to look on the next Day
as the last of our Lives and to employ it as we would employ the last.

Let us begin the Day with blessing God who has been pleased to give us yet
longer time, and to inspire us with the design of preparing for Death: And
prostrate before the Crucifix let us offer up our selves, our health, our
goods, our Lives, an absolute Sacrifice to God: submitting our selves heartily
to whatever kind of Death he thinks fit to send, and accepting it in
satisfaction for our sins and in union with the Death of Jesus Christ.

Then let us meditate an hour on Death, on what we shall suffer, feel, and
think then: let us endeavor to become sensible that it is not far off; and to
put on such dispositions as we shall have at its approach.

Let us reflect seriously on the rigor of Death, how without any exception it
deprives us of all things; on the condition of our body's in the grave, and how
soon we shall be forgotten in the world; how little our Relations, our Friends
and acquaintance will think of us, as if we had never lived. Let us affect our
selves with the vanity of all that charms us here, with the folly of placing
our happiness or our hopes on the Creatures: Riches, honors, pleasures, all
vanish and are as nothing at the sight of Death; but above all let us press
home the importance of dying well; the danger of dying ill if we do not prepare
for it betimes, and that it will be to little purpose for us to put off our
preparation to a Deathbed.

This Meditation should produce sincere resolutions that we will immediately
begin to do what when Death comes we shall wish we had done sooner, and what we
shall not be able to de if we deferr it till then. And because external objects
very much contribute to render us more recollected, we may follow their
Examples who make their Chambers as obscure as they can, who have the
representation of Death before them, leaving only just light enough to discern
it. Others suppose themselves ready to expire and with a Crucifix in their
hands seek all their consolation from that amiable object. Others hang their
Chamber with mourning and endeavor by the sight of their winding sheets to
represent Death approaching. These funeral objects have a certain mournful air
which is capable of making agreat impression.

Our Confession must bu such as we would make if we were dying; we must omit
nothing, we must disguise nothing that may give us any trouble we must lay our
souls entirely open, that our Confessor may be as well acquainted with our
interior as we are our selves. We must show him all that passes in our hearts,
all that God sees there, and which he will one day expose to all the World if
we do not prevent that terrible discovery by a full and entire Confession. Hove
all we must be truly contrite, which is the point wherein we are oftenest
deficient.

Say to your soul, that you are working for Eternity, it is not a Ceremony you
are about; you are now to blot out all your past fins, to do this work in such
a manner that you may be in no need of doing it again were you immediately to
dye.

Examine your self carefully on these Articles; the restitution of your
neighbors goods; the reparation of his honor blasted by your censures; the
example you have given; the repidity and slothfulness of your Life; your
Enmity's and hatreds; your want of godly sorrow, of sincerity, and of
resolutions of amendment in your Confessions; the sins of your youth; those
which your interest has made you commit; the ill habits in which you have
indulged your self; the dangerous engagements you would not break; the next
accafions of sin which you would not avoid; the darling passion the beloved sin
which men hardly ever mortify, and which is the source of all their disorders;
your inordinate Love of pleasure; your wilful ignorance of the duty's of your
station; your abusive and scandalous railleries; the ill use of the Sacraments,
of time, of Grace: If you be Religious search into the violation of your vows,
your carelessness indischarging the particular duty's of your Calling.

These are the things which do generally disturb us on a Deathbed and make our
Salvation doubtful; when restitution, reparation of honor to those we have
aspersed, when quitting the occasions of sin, reconciling our selves to our
Ennemies precede our Confession, it is the best sign that our sorrow and
resolutions are sincere.

We should look upon this days communion as the Viaticum, and imagine that we
hear the Priest when he puts the blessed Host into our Mouths, says, Accipe
viaticum, Frater, corpus Domini nostri Jesu Christi, etc.
Receive Dear Brether the precious body and blood of Jesus Christ your Savior,
to be your viaticum in your passage to Eternity. The Acts following the
Communion must be suitable to the condition of a dying Christian, which we
shall not be able to make when we are indeed expiring.

Having regulated our Consciences let us then put our temporal affairs in
order, as if we were going to dye. Fac Testamentum tuu^ dum sanus es, dum
sapiens es, dum tuus es.
Make your will (says Saint Augustine) while you are yet in health, while you
have your senses free, while you are Master of your Time, and of your self. In
your last sickness (continues the same Father) you will be exposed to so many
flatteries, ^ In in^mitat blanditiis and minis duceris ubi tu non vis.
importunities, and surprises, that it will, not be your will, but the will of
those about you. Besides, your time will then be too precious, and too short,
to spend any of it in worldly matters: but you must be careful not to forget
your self while you provide for others, you forget your self if you give
nothing to the Poor.

Let the remainder of the Day be employed in good works, in a profound solitude
and recollection, and in reading some spiritual Book that treats of Death.
Father Colombiere's three discourses on that subject are admirable, and may be
very useful if we peruse them carefully: Or else we may read the foregoing
Meditation on the sentiments which we shall have at the hour of Death.

Let us pass one hour in consideration on the duty's of our private station,
especially on those particulars which may trouble us on a Death head; and we may
reap great benefit by being attentive to the prayers of the Church for dying
persons, either in the administration of the Sacrament of extreme unction, or
in the Recommendation of the soul to God.

It is evident that we ought to debarr our selves all manner of conversation
during the whole Day; we must speak only to our Director unless we visit some
poor sick or dying person, not only to comfort and assist them but also to
raise in our selves a more lively image of what we shall be one day.

We must close the Day with a Meditation on Judgment; on the different
conditions of a fervent and alukewarm soul going to appear before God.

The chief fruits of this Christian practice are these; we must be perfectly
weaned from every thing of which we know Death will deprivus; to which we must
add an exceeding horror of all mortal sin, Reformation of our Lives, and a
sincere desire to lay up a treasure of merits by the practice of virtue and
Good works.

SECT. III. PRAYERS, AND Ejaculations to help us to dye well.
THe time of our last sickness is the most precious season of our Lives,
wherein it concerns us most to improve every moment, and which we are least
capable of improving. Both our body's and mends languish on a sick bed, and
what we do is out of custom. We are not able to make long prayers nor
affectionate meditations, but we may and must make frequent acts of
Resignation, Love, contrition, and confidence in God; And how shall we do it,
if we never practiced them? Te do them well we must have used out selves to
produce them: This consideration has induced me to set down some short prayers
and fervent Ejaculation, taken for the most part out of scripture or the Holy
Fathers, They are proper to assist us in dying well, and may be very useful to
a Christian during his sickness if he were acquainted with the practice of them
before.

Lord he whom thou love is sick. Ecce quem amas infirmatur. Joan. 11.3.


Aegrotus sum, ad medicum clamo; miser sum, ad misericorduprope^o (...)
mortuussun^, ad vitam suspiro.

Tu es medicus, tu es misericerdia, tu es vita, Jesu Nazarene miserere mei.
Aug. Soliloq. cap. 2.


I am sick O my God, I come to thee my only Physician; I am miserable and there
fore I fly to thee who art the source of Mercy; I am dying and therefore I have
recourse to thee who art Life its self. Yes my Dear Savior, thou art my
Physician, thou art the fountain of mercy, thou art the Life of my soul, pity
my infirmity's.

Miserere me, Domine, quoniam infirmus sum, sana me, Domine, quoniam conturbata
sunt ossa mea. Psalm. 6.3.
Help O Lord my strength fails me; my soul is over whelmed with trouble, and
all my bones are broken with grief.

O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, Domine ne in furore tuo arguas me, neque in
ira tua corripias me. Ps. 27. Reminiscere miserationu^ tuarum Domine.

Psalm. 24.6.


neither chasten me in thine Anger; be mindful O Lord of thy tender mercy's and
pity me.

Nunquid oblivisci potest infantem suum, ut non misereatur Filio uteri sui? and
si illa obliviscatur fuum. Isai. 49.15.
I am quite cast down I suffer exceedingly but this is my comfort, that thou my
God wilt not forget me in the midst of my misery; Can a mother forget her Child
that she should not have compassion on the son of her Womb? yes she may forget,
but I have thy promise that thou will not forget me.

Tu nosti onus meum quale sit Domine; da mihi illud patienter f^rre, ut per
viam crucis extollar ad te.

Aug. Med. ca. 37.

Adauge laborem modo augeas patientiam. Aug.

Obsecro, Domine, fac misericordia^ tu^ cum servo tuo, dirige viam mea^, ut cum
salute revertar in domum Domini mei.


Thou know O my God what I suffer; Oh! do thou give me patience that I may
be able to go to thee by the way of the Cross.

c My sufferings are great but not great enough; I deserve much severer
chastisements; give more crosses, but at the same time give me more patience;
show thy mercy O Lord unto thy servant, direct my way, that I may at length
arrive at my Fathers House.

My God! if I had a thousand Lives I would devote them all to thee; Oh! that
the Life which thou have given me were more pure, and worthy thy acceptance:
but such as it is I give it thee without any repugnance; since thou requirest
it, I would not keep it tho it were in my power,

Yes my God! I am ready and willing to be deprived of every thing I loved upon
the Earth: and to lay down this Body which I have loved too well.

I accept willingly the hideous state to which I shall be soon reduced, when I
become meat for the worms, and am turned into rottenness. Oh! how happy should
I be if this destruction of my Body could repair the injury I have offered to
the Divine Majesty, by prefering my body to him, and its satisfaction to his
service?

Not with standing all my pains, I am ready to suffer greater if it be thy will
O God; My most acute torments are too slight and short, seeing they are the last
proof I shall ever give thee of my Love, and of my earnest desire to please
thee.

Tho thou should condemn me to all the pains of the next Life, tho they
should be never so violent and should endure to the end of the world, yet I
would submit to them. Glorify thy self O Lord inpunishing me; since I would
not honor thee, nor do thy will.

I believe O Lord! all that thou have revealed to thy Church, and I firmly hope
for those glorious things which thou discoverest to thy Elect in Heaven.

I acknowledge O my God! the enormity of my sins; I have committed more then I
am able to remember, my soul is grieved that I have served so good a Master, so
ill. But all my sins cannot lessen my confidence in thy Mercy's which are
infinitely greater then them all.

I trust that not with standing all my guilt thou will not suffer me to be for
ever miserable, for thou art infinitely good. I am not a fraid of Hell tho I
have deserved it, becaust my savior has purcthas'd Heaven for me. I hope in
thy Mercy O Lord, and all the Devils in Hell shall never make me relinquish
that hope. In spite of them I will sing eternal praises to thee, will adore
thy mercy and possess and love the for ever. Magna matter, suscipe Filium cum
tota ternitate luctantem. Just. Lips.


O Divine Mother, most holy Virgin, receive your unworthy child, who is now
struggling and striving with Eternity, and succor him in this hour of danger.
Maria matter gratiae, Matter misericordiae, Tu nos ab host protege, and hora
mortis suscipe.

Da misericordiam misero ac poenitenti, qui tamdiu popercisti peccatori.

Bernard.




Oh! Holy Mary, Mother of Grace and mercy, defend me from the assaults of the
Enemy, assist and help me, now and in my last hour, and receive my soul into
thy Arms.

Have mercy O Lord on this wretched sinner, thou who have so often for given
renewed offenses, make him partaker thy mercy, now he repents of them.

Peccavi, Domine, peccavi and iniquitates meas agnosco; peccavi super arenam
matis, sed misericordiae tuae etiam non est numerus. In orat. Manass.
I have sinned O God! I confess my iuiquities, they are more numerous then the
sand on the seashore but thy Mercies are never to be numbered.

Doleo, Domine Deus meus, doleo quod peccavi, and quia parum doleo, maxim
doleo. Aug.
I repent O Lord my God of all my sins; My soul is torn with grief because I
have displeased thee; and that which grieves me yet more is, that I do not
grieve enough.

Vae tempori illi, Domine, in quo non te amavi; vae tempori illi in quo te
graviter off mdi.
My God! I curse the Day that I neglected to love thee; I curse the Day wherein
I offended thee.

Dominus illuminatio mea and salus mea, Dominus protector vitae meae, a quo
trepidabo? Ps. 26.
The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
Protector of my Life, of whom shall I be a fraid?

Etiamsi-consistant adversum me castra non time bircor meum. Ps. 26.5.

Si ambulavero in medio umbrae mortis non timebo mala, quoniam tu mecum es. Ps.
22.4.


Though men should en camp against me, my heart will not be terrifyed; though I
walk in the midst of the shadow of Death I will fear no evil because thou art
with me.

Etiamsi occideris me, in te sperabo, Domine. Job. 13.15.
Though thou slay me yet I will trust in thee.

Sperantem in Domino misericordia circundabit. Ps. 3.10.
Mercy shall compass him about that hops in the Lord.

Adauge in me, Domine, fidem, adauge spe^, adauge charitat em.
Lord! increase my faith; increase my hope, increase my Love.

Paratum cor meum, Deus, paratum cor meum. Ps. 56.8.
My heart is ready O God! my heart is ready.

Sive morimur, sive vivimus, Domini sumus. Romans 14.8.
Whether we live or dye we are the Lord's.

Dominus est, faciat quod bonum est in oculis suis. 5. Reg. 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems good in his sight.

Si bona susceptimus de manu Domini, mala quare non sustinebimus? Job. 2.10.
We have received good at the hand of the Lord and shall we not also receive
evil.

Just patimur, Domine, quia peccavimus tibi. Jer. 14.25.
We suffery justly O Lord because we have sinned against thee.

FEBRUARY AND AUGUST.
FIRST MEDITATION. Of the importance of salvation.
FIRST POINT. The husiness of our salvation is the most important of all
business. SECOND POINT. The business of our salvation is our only business.
FIRST POINT
COnsider that no business is of so great importance to us as the business of
our salvation; an Eternity of happiness or misery depends on the success of
this. All other affairs are only permitted as they are subservient to this
great Work: If we lose this, we lose all, for we lose God who is all good; and
without whom there can be no good; if we fail in this, he is lost to us, and
lost for ever without recovery.

Salvation is our own business, every thing else is foreign to us; in other
things we do the business of our Children, our Friends, our family, our
Country, or of the Community to which we belong, and not precisely our own
business; every thing else is a business of Time, this of Eternity.

If we lose other business tho of the highest importance we may find a remedy,
or if we do not, we shall be no losers provided we succeed in this. The loss of
our souls is the only irreparable loss, Eternity its self will not be
sufficient to deplore it.

Shall we be able to comfort our selves with the thoughts that we have been
success full in all our other business of no consequence, and and have only
neglected this, which is the only business of Eternity? It Is no matter tho we
live obscurely and forgotten, without friends, or support, and dye poor,
provided we secure our salvation. But what will all our Riches and power, all
our knowledge and wisdom avail us, if we loose our souls? Tho all the world
should conspire together, they will never be able to deprive a man of Heaven
and make him miserable to all Eternity: Neither will they be able to make one
damned soul happy, Quid prodest homini si universum mundum lucretur, etc. Luc
6.25.
so much as mitigate his Torments. What will it profit a man to gain the whole
world and lose his soul, or what can he give in exchange for his soul?

Is it possible that this business of Eternity is the only business of
consequence we have to do, and that yet we should neglect this most, and lay it
least to heart?

We fancy that our studies, our trade, our diversions, that our visits and
conversation are of great importance to us, they take up all our time, we can
never find leisure enough for them, we are unwilling to deferr them; but when
we should think seriously of our souls, we make no difficulty, of deferring, we
imagine it is too soon, and that we shall have time enough, and yet (which is
still more surprising) we are never at leisure to set about it.

Certainly we must have odd notions of Eternal happiness, since we are so
carless of securing it; would we be content to take no more pains, and spend no
more time in our study's. and in temporal affairs, then we do in what concerns
ous Eternal salvation?

If our salvation depended on a another could he have so little zeal or charity,
as to neglect it more then we do our selves? Tho we know it depends wholly on
our own care. What pains does every man take in his calling? If we have a child
to provid for, if we have a design tojoyn in partnership with a Merchant, how
careful are we to inform our selves, to examine, to advise with our ffriends;
what measures do we not observe; what precautions do we not take? we think we
can never be too sure. But are we to spend a little time for salvation, we
think a very little too much.

Salvation is the business of Eternity, but it must be done in time; and we
have need of all our Time for it; God gives us our whole Life to think of it;
he judged it was all little enough, but we imagine it may be done inless.

If we spent in working out our salvation, the hundredth part of the Time and
pains we throw a way in worldy business, we should soon be great saints. This
is the only necessary business we can have, and yet we hardly allot a little
Time for it, nay we grudge it even that little.

By our proceedings one would think that we believe God our debtor, and obliged
to us for being saved.

If a man of business or Letters, pass one whole day in accquitting himself of
the duty's of a Christian, he looks upon that day as lost; But we spend whole
months in vain studys, or in worldly business, and call this spending the time
well.

Salvation is our great and chief business; now a man's chief business takes up
all his thoughts and hardly gives him time to think of any other; and if this
succeds he comforts himself for the miscarriage of the rest.

We commonly put off the care of our salvation our to our last sickness, that
is, we put of the business of Eternity, the most important business we have,
and which requires all our Lives, to a time when we are incapable of following
the slightest business in the world, when we are indeed in capable of any thing.

If God mistaken? who tells us, this only is of consequence. Is he deceived in
the disposition of his Providence, and in all his care which tends only to
this? Is he in whom are all good things, and who is all himself, so little to
be valued that we can be indifferent whether we lose him or no? Whence is all
that weeping, that cruel despair of the damned souls, if what they have lost be
not worth our seeking? If everlasting misery be so slight a business, why do we
tremble at the thoughts of Eternity? And if we believe it so terrible, how can
we be at rest while we are so careless about it, And in so much danger?

My God! how many day's of Grace have I abused? how many precious hours have I
let pass unprofitably? Wretch that I am to spend so much Time in doing nothing:
But how much more wretched shall I be, if I do not now at length begin
seriously to work out my salvation?

What do I stay for? For a proper time? Alas! that time perhaps is already past
for me. Do I stay till thou call me? Thou have never ceased to do it. Oh!
how long have thou solicited me to no purpose? shall this reiterated Grace
thou give me now be in vain?

How long shall I spend the best part of my Life in vain amusements which I my
self condemn; And do I condemn them only to aggravate my guilt, by losing
that time in the pursuit of them which I ought to employ for Heaven?

How long shall I fancy those things necessary, which are of no use for the
next Life? whill I neglect only the business of Eternity.

My God how great will my despair and confusion be upon a Death Bed, if I
continue to live as I have done hitherto? when all the means and opportunity's
I have had of securing my salvation, when this present opportunity, and the
thoughts I now have of doing it present themselves to my memory?

O my God since thou have not yet punished me, tho I deserved punishment, I
trust thou will not refuse me the assistance of thy Grace, tho I am unworthy of
it. Since this is the day designed for my conversion, the present resolution
shall not be like the rest. I believe, I am fully persuaded, I am sensible that
there is but one thing necessary, that Eternal salvation is the only business
that concerns me, and I am determined to begin this Day to apply my self
seriously to it.

SECOND POINT.
Consider that our Eternal salvation is not only the greatest, but the only
business we have, to which we ought to apply our selves entirely least we
should do it ill. What ever else we call great business is not properly
business, at least not ours, they concern others more then us, and we labor
more for our posterity then for our selves.

We may get others to do them for us, and we may let them alone without being
everlastingly unhappy, but we must work out our salvation our selves, and we
are lost without recovery if we neglect it. This is that one thing of which our
Savior speaks so often, this is our only business: only, because this alone
is of such mighty consequence, the success were of of depends on us: Only,
because no other deserves our care; Only, because it requires all our care,
(and because we may do it if we will.)

It Is equally the only business of all the world, of the King in the
Government of his Kingdom, of the Prelate in the administration of his Diocese,
of the Learned in their study's, of the soldier in the War, of the Merchant in
his Trade, of the Artisan in his calling. It Is not necessary for a man to be a
King, a Prelat, a Soldier, Porro unu^^ est necessarium. Luc. 10.42.
a Merchant or a Tradesman, a scholar or a man of business, but it is absolutely
necessary for him to be saved.

In other matters we have always some resourse in this Life or in the next, but
there is none in this; he who has not done this, has done nothing, and will
never be in a condition to do it again: he who is damned, is damned for ever.

What reception would an Ambassador deserve from his Master, who at his return
from his Embassy, should give an account of the great things he had done during
his absence, of the friends he had made, the reputation he had gained, the
riches he had acquired and how well he had diverted himself, in fine that he
had done every thing but the business he was sent to do?

God has sent us into the world only to work out our Salvation; this was his
sole design in creating us, this is his sole design in preserving us; will he
be satisfied with our telling him when we come to dye? Lord we have done great
things, we have been in great repute in the world, we have got large Estates,
we have, been instrumental in the salvation of our neighbors, we have
neglected nothing but our own savation; we have done every thing but that one
thing for which thou have sent us into the world. Ad yet this is all the
account the greatest part of mankind is able to give, because it is at this rate
the greatest part of mankind live. And if we were now to appear before God,
could we give any other account.

Is all this true? is there such an Eternity? is Life given us only to prepare
for it? If I loose my soul can I ever recover it? and shall I certainly lose
it, if I live as the greatest part of the world do, and as I have done
hitherto? shall I wish at my last hour that I had lived otherwise? that I had
done what I could and what I ought to have done? And will all those things that
take me up now, seem vain and trifling then?

My God! do we indeed believe this our great business? the Devils and the
damned have as good or stronger speculative belief then we, but do we reduce
our Faith to practice, which is the science of the Saints.

Is it possible that other men's business should take us up? that worldly
things, recreations and compliments should have all our Time? while the
business of our Salvation is the least minded as if it did not concern us?

What are we the better for being endued with Reason if we make no use of it in
the business of our Salvation for which alone God bestowed it on us? Alas we in
a manner wear it out in prosecuting trivial designs, we are proud of it in
matters of no moment; we value our selves upon our prudential conduct and wise
Counsels in business; but we neglect the real use of it, and we act in the
matters of Eternity as if we wanted common sense.

And (which is yet more surprising) we are all agreed in the importance of
Salvation, and in the vanity of every thingelse; yet we apply our selves only
to seek those vanity's, and are negligent in nothing but the business of
salvation.

We are all conceited of our wisdom and capacity in business; every man
pretends to understand it, we think ignorance in business or neglect of it
shows want of sense and breeding; and that our reputation depends upon it; but
if we neglect nothing but our Salvation, if we live as unconcernedly as if we
had no soul to loose, we are so far from blushing or hiding our carelessness,
that we glory in it, and tho we are never so indevout and irregular we pass for
very honest men; and if we understand the world and know how to be successful
in it we are accounted wise.

It Is an affront to tell a man that he does not understand his business, but
it is no disgrace to be accused of negligence in the business of Salvation;
surely we do not look upon it as our business; My God! when did this one thing
necessary cease to be so?

We can loose our souls with all the tranquillity in the world, and we are
reasonable Creatures in every thing that does not concern us; we do not deny
that the Saints were truly wise, yet all their wisdom consisted in preferring
their Salvation to every thing else; in esteeming it their only business.

Are we wiser them they, that our actions are so contrary to theirs? they spent
their whole lives in preparing for Eternity; to what end did they take so much
pains and spend so much time, for what we pretend to do with so much ease?
Miserable unthinking wretches that we are to allow so little Time for what
requires it all.

Have we found a new way to heaven whereof the son of God was ignorant? or is
the price of Heaven fallen? and is that happiness which cost the blood of
Christ to purchase become of less value?

What are now the sentiments of those famous states men whom we esteem the
greatest Politicians? of those extraordinary men who were alway's busy in
pacifying or troubling the world, which their heads were always full of. Those
men of Riches as the scripture calls them who lived without thinking on
Eternity, and who after an uninterrupted success in all their other business,
have miscarried only, in this great business of Salvation? They are not damned
for laziness and sloth, on the contrary they ow their ruin to too much useless
business; they were so busy that their very sleeps were broken by their Cares,
and they have lost themselves by laboring in what did not concern them, by
taking too much pains about nothing while they neglected their only real
business, And it is by this that the greatest part of mankind are lost.

And shall not I increase the number of the lost, if I continue to live as I
have done? what have I done for Heaven? what have I not done to deprive my
self of it? I have been careful of every thing but my soul, and I act as if
its ruin were nothing to me. But I trust in thy mercy O my God that the change
of my Life shall manifest that my heart is changed; I will save my soul; the
care of my Salvation requires all my diligence, and it shall have it all; I
humbly beseech thee to give me thy grace to recover what I have lost, as thou
have given me Time for it; I am sensible that this is my only business, I am
resolved to do it, let thy Grace make me successful.

SECOND MEDITATION. OF THE MOTIVES which we have to apply our selves
continually to the business of our Salvation.
FIRST POINT. The Motives which are common to all Christians. SECOND POINT. The
Motives which every one has in particular.
FIRST POINT.
COnsider what God has done for our Salvation; he is earnest and desirous to
render us happy as if his own happiness had depended on ours. Having made us
free and masters of our selves, what pains has he taken, what pains does he
still take to gain our hearts? He desires our hearts, he sollicites us to give
them, he is importunate with us for them; some times he promises, some times he
threatens, he leaves nothing undone to persuade us to love him; he takes all
this pains because he knows it is in our power to save or damn our selves, and
he earnestly desires our Salvation.

Did we ever duly consider, are we able to comprehend the mystery of our
Redemption? where the Almighty exerts all his omnipotence to show the greatness
of his Love to our souls, and with what earnestness he desires our salvation?
Could we ever have imagined that God should become man to the end that men
might be saved? Yet this he has done, and not content with this wondrous
miracle, he goes yet farther to engage us to love him; he passes a Life of
three and thirty years in poverty and sufferings, and he subjects himself to a
cruel Death. Such a value does God set upon our souls that nothing less than
the sufferings, the blood, the Life of this God and man could redeem them; and
shall we think it a small matter to loose them?

Shall we think that we do too much when God thought nothing too much to
purchase our happiness? Let us rather conclude that we can never do enough.
What does he get by our Salvation? yet what could he do more then he has done?
Is not all the profit ours? why then do we do so little for it?

How many are now raging and despairing for having neglected to do what I may
do if I will? and which if I neglect now, I shall one day feel the same regrett
as they. Can we have a more powerful motive to excite us to set about it
without delay and to pursue it continually?

Blessed be God we may yet work out our Salvation; we have yet time; God offers
us his Grace; these very thoughts proceed from that Grace; but this may perhaps
be the last moment wherein it will be offered us. Our Eternal happiness for
ought we know, our Predestination may depend on this one important moment: I am
certain that I may make my Salvation sure at present if I turn sincerely and
heartily to God; I have at least great reason to doubt that if I let slip this
occasion I shall never have a another, and can I wilfully deferr one moment?

Shall the Devil take more pains to destroy our souls then we will take to
preserve them? shall he value our souls at an higher rate then we do our
selves? The comparison is shameful but too true: tho his nature be much nobler
then ours, and his pride so great, yet he stoops to any thing that can ruin a
soul: he never gives over, the greatest resistance never weary's him, or
renders him less diligent in assaulting us; he cunningly makes use of every
little occasion to destroy us. Good God! must we learn of him how to prize our
souls? and do we stand in need of his Example to excite us seriously to work
out our Salvation?

Is nor all that thou have done sufficient? must we search for new arguments to
convince us of the worth of a soul for which thou have paid so so great a
price? Thou have redeemed me o Divine Savior, I am thine by a double title,
and am resolved that nothing in the world shall hinder my giving my self
wholly to thee without reserve.

SECOND POINT.
Consider how much Gods peculiar care of us obliges us to concur with him to
secure our Salvation; shall God himself act for us as if he had nothing else
to do, as if he could not be happy without us? And shall we stand in need of a
more powerful motive to excite us to diligence?

How does his infinite wisdom improve every moment from our births to make us
love him? How admirarable is the conduct of his Providence in bringing about
our Salvation? Do we count it a small Grace that we are born of Christian
Parents when so many are born of Infidels. Is it a small Grace to be educated
in the bosom of the Church out of which perhaps we should have still continued
if we had been bted in Error. How great a mercy was it to have a good
instructor in my youth, a companon who set me a good example, a good Friend to
advise me? We look on these things as common Accidents, but we shall one day
see, that the hand of Providence disposed them all; We afflict our selves for
the loss of a friend, for the death of a Relation, we are quite dejected with
Poverty, our want of capacity disturbs us, and we are troubled to find our
selves so little considered in the world, while perhaps these very things are
the cause of our conversion, and we shall one day find that we own our
Salvation to these seeming misfortunes.

Most men have been in some dangers, or sick and perhaps to extremity; God who
saw we should certainly be lost if we dyed then, being desirous to save us,
has given us more time: we have read some pious discourse only to pass away
the time, and have found our hearts touched by it; how many happy occasion have
we met with, which tho wholly unforeseen, were very proper to promote Gods
designs in our conversion? One inspiration, one sudden thought, one word spoken
without design, is frequently the first occasion of great Conversions.

If we have the honor to be consecrated to the immediate service of God, let
us call to mind all the circumstances of our vocation, and we shall find them
so many miracles of Providence; that we should come to such a place, at such a
time, and in such company; that when we thought our selves most wedded to the
world we found our selves on a sudden weaned from it, that the numerous
examples of worldings did not allure us, nor the love of our Friends retain us;
that we were not discouraged by the austerity's of a life which appeard so
terrible, but that we had resolution enough to surmount all rhese obstacles.

Nothing but grace could inspire this generous resolution to a person weary of
the world, tired out with Cross and terrified with the thoughts of approaching
Death: but in the heat of youth, when the world appears most charming, when we
are most eager in the pursuit of pleasures, when the hopes of a long Life and
the prospect of making a great fortune suggest other thoughts, what is a
miracle if such a conversion be not?

But whence proceed these pious sentiments at a time when I deserve them so
little? whence is it that among so many who would have been better then I, God
has inspired me only with this thought? And if others have entertained the
same sincere desires, and have had much greater merits, whence is it that they
are not chosen? how comes it that if they were chosen they did not persevere?
that God perhaps has suffered them to fall back that I might take their place?

Add to these distinguishing favors all the inspirations and powerful
assistances with which he prevents us daily, and if all these visible proofs of
his singular care of us do not prevail with us to love and serve him without
any reserve, we must be certainly the most ungrateful wretches living, and
deserve the severest and most immediate vengeance.

These are great subjects of meditation which require frequent and serious
reflections, they are the sensible effects of Gods particular Providence which
continually watches over us. They are the visible marks of his singular Love in
preferring us to so many others; and nothing is so capable of exciting in us a
lively faith, a firm confidence, an invincible resolution, and ardent Love to
him. And yet perhaps there are some who never thought of it.

My God! how do we employ our thoughts? How can we neglect these comfortable
and important Truths? surely it would be impossible to delay setting about the
great work of Salvation, if we did seriously reflect on what God has done, and
continues to do every day for us.

No wonder the Devil employs all his cunning to prevent our meditating on these
things; he knows how very proper they are to inspire a sincere desire of
serving God; but we are inexcusable to pass so slightly over, and be so little
affected with these pressing motives to endeavor after perfection in our
several stations.

Let us examine whether we have faithfully concurred with the Grace of God, and
whether we have complied with his designs in taking so much care of our
Salvation; Let us examine wherein we have been negligent, and penetrated with
this wonderful goodness of God who is so desirous to make us Saints, let us
deferr no longer, let us immediately correspond with his will who seeks our
good, and resolve on such measures as will make our Resolutions effectual. Then
we shall reap the fruit of this meditation and of this Day's retreat, if we be
careful to pursue our Resolutions, and not suffer them to be as so many have
already been, without effect.

THIRD MEDITATION.
OF THE SENTIMENTS we shall have at the hour of Death.

SEE, THE THIRD MEDITATION, For the month of January.

MARCH, and SEPTEMBER.
FIRST MEDITATION OF THE SMALL NVMBER of those that are saved.
FIRST PONINT. Our Faith teaches us that but few shall be saved. SECOND POINT.
Our Reason convinces us that hut few shall be saved.
FIRST POINT.
COnsider that then umber of those who shall be saved is very small not only in
comparison of above two thirds of mankind who live in infidelity, but even in
comparison of that vast multitude who are lost in the true Religion. There are
few doctrines of our Faith more clearly revealed than this, Strive to enter in
at the strait Gate (says our Savior) for wide is the Gate and broad is the
way that leads to destruction and many there be that go in thereat, but
strait is the Gate and narrow is the way that leads to Life, and few there be
that find it.

And in another place he tells us that many are called but few are chosen even
of those that are called; which he repeats in the same terms on another
occasion: And the Apostle speaking by the spirit of Christ compares the Body of
Christians to those who run a race where many run but one only gains the
prize, to whom he likens those that are saved; And to let us see that he speaks
of Believers he cites the example of the Israelites, you know my Brethren
(says he) that our Fathers were all under a cloud, and all passed through the
Red sea with Moses, that they did all eat the same spiritual meat: all these
miracles were wrought only for their safe passage to the promised Land, yet
how few of them arrived in it? of eighteen hundred thousand souls that came out
of Egypt, none but Ioshuah and Caleb entered into Canaan.

Isaiah compares the Elect to those few Olives that are left here and there
upon the Trees after the gathering; and to that small number of grapes that
remain after the diligent gleaning of the Vineyard.

Besides these examples and comparisons which the scripture uses to convince us
of this terrible Truth, we have the examples of all the world: there was but
one family preserved from the deluge; of five great city's only four persons
were saved from destruction, and we find but one sick man cured of the palsy
among the crowd of Paralyticks that flocked to the pool of Bethesda: This
dreadful truth which our Lord repeated so of ten to his disciples gave occasion
to that question, Lord are there few that shall be saved? To which our Savior
waving the Question least he should terrify them, answers, strive to enter in
at the strait Gate.

This is certainly the most awakening and terrible Doctrine of our Religion,
and yet how little are we affected with it?

Were I sure that but one of ten thousand should be damned, I ought to fear and
tremble least it should be my case; but alas! among ten thousand perhaps there
will hardly be one saved, and yet I am unconcerned and and fear nothing. Is not
my security a sufficient cause to fear? Does it not proceed from the blindness
and hardness of my heart? which renders me insensible of my danger, and thereby
less capable of preventing or avoiding it.

The news of one ship lost among ten thousand affrights many, every one that
has concerns at sea apprehends for himself; but though we know that the
greatest part of mankind shall be lost, that very few will arrive at the Port
of eternal happiness, how little are we sollicitous for our selves? and who has
told us that we shall arrive there?

If Jesus Christ had promised heaven to all Christians as positively as he has
declared that his Elect are but few we could not be more unconcerned then we
are. But does this security lessen our danger? And will this insensiblity
render us less miserable? Alas! if we had no other, this very tranquillity is a
sufficient cause to make us doubt of our Salvation.

We don't think of it; what is it employs our thoughts if Eternity does not? Do
we believe it; can we believe it and not fear it? and how can we fear it
without thinking of it?

How can we be unconcerned at the sight of so great a danger? the greatest
Saints were always afraid; Saint Paul himself was never exempt from this
saving fear, yet we are free from it; for it is impossible to fear truly and
not mend our Lives.

We Sacrifice our goods to preserve our selves from shipwreck; a merchant makes
no difficulty to throw his most precious wares the fruits of many years labor
overbord, to save himself; but we will rather hazard all than part with any
thing to secure us from damnation.

If the infection be in the City every body is afraid; with what earnestness do
we seek preservatives? with what care do we shun the best companys and condemn
our selves to solitude? and all this because we are afraid to dye. Are we not
afraid of being damnd? we believe that the greatest part of the world will be
lost, and yet we are unwilling tospare one day for retreat, we will do nothing
to make sure of Heaven.

Do we rely upon our vocation, upon the sanctity of our condition, upon the
talents God has given us, or upon the means of salvation which he affords us?
Alas! remember Saul had a true vocation to the Kingdom, Judas to the dignity of
an Apostle, yet Saul was rejected and Judas lost even in Christ's family.
Solomon the wisest of men has with all his knowledge left us in doubt of his
Salvation; and an infinite number of Christian Hero's who were exemplary for
their Piety during the greatest part of their Lives, have fallen at last. Their
too much security has ruined them in the end of their Lives, and they are
damned with all their pretended merits.

And yet O my God can I be without fear? This want of saving fear should make
me fear all things; I am certainly lost if I be not afraid of being lost, and
can I fear any thing so much as eternal perdition?

O my Dear Savior who have redeemed me with thy precious blood, and who art
graciously pleased to make me sensible of my danger, suffer me not to be lost
for ever. My God! let me not be found among the Reprobates. I confess that I
have hitherto walked in the broad way, but behold O Lord, I will now go into
the narrow way and will strive with all my might to enter into the straight
Gate.

Let others run in crowds to Hell, were there to be but one saved in this place
I am resolved to be he; and I depend on thy grace; I know it is my own fault if
I be not one of thy Elect. I have abused thy former graces but I have ground to
hope that this shall be effectual: for I am resolved let the number of the
Elect be never so small I will be one of that little flock whatever it cost me;
And I am persuaded it is thy will as well as mine since I could not form this
resolution if thou had not inspired it.

SECOND POINT.
Consider that if our Faith did not reach us this terrible truth our own Reason
would convince us of it; we need only reflect on what is required of us, and
on our manner of performing it, and we shall presently conclude that there will
be but few saved.

If we would be saved we must live up to the Rules of the Gospel; are there
many that observe them? we must profess our selves openly to be followers of
Christ; is not the great est part of man kind ashamed of that profession? if we
would be saved we must either actually or in affection renounce the world and
all we have in it, and bear our Saviors Cross daily.

The Pharisees had all the appearances of Piety, they were extremely mortified,
and their Lives were unblamable in the sight of men; and yet if our virtue be
not more solid and more perfect than theirs, we shall never enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

It Is agreat matter to stiffle our revenge, it is yet greater to for give
injury's, but this is not sufficient to obtain Salvation; if we would be saved
we must love even those who persecute us. It is not enough to abhor allwicked
actions, we must abhor the least ill thought; we are not only obliged not to
covet our neighbors goods, we must bestow our own on those who are in want.
True humility which is the essential Caracter of a Christian will not admit of
ambition or vanity; Tho you labor never so much, if God be not indeed the end
of your labor, you will have no thanks for your pains to all Eternity. Be as
regular as you please, God is not content with an outward show; he requires the
heart and that you should serve him in spirit and in Truth; that is sincerely
and uprightly. One mortal sin effaces in a moment all the merits of the longest
and best Life; and one hundred thousand millions of years in Hell will not be a
sufficient punishment for the sin of one moment?

It is an article of Faith that neither the proud, the covetous, the deceiver,
the slanderer, nor the unchaste shall ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; he
that enters there must either have always preserved his Innocence, or
recovered it by a sincere repentance; and do we find many who offer continual
violence to their inclination, without which we can never come there? where is
that exact purity? where is that continual penance? that hatred of sin? and
that ardent charity which is the caractere of the Elect? what is become of the
Primitive simplicity? does not interest govern? and is not Religion it self
made subservient to it? is not the General example the Rule of most men's
actions? who look upon it as a maxim that we must act like men while we live
among men; but we must act like Christians if we will be saved: we must lead a
Christian life in the midst of those who have only the name.

It Is likewise certain that the work of salvation is our greatest business;
that we are sent into the world for this end alone; that we must employ our
whole Lives in it, and that after all we cannot be sure of it; yet how few
Christians do indeed make this their great and only business?

We can never be saved without 'final Grace, it is an article of our Faith that
we can never merit that Grace, that God might without injustice refuse it to
the most perfect Saints; what reason then have we to expect it, who are so
imperfect and so lukewarm in the service of God?

These are not counsels only, they are the maxims of Jesus Christ; the
irrevocable Laws and indispensable conditions of salvation, which is not
promised to the knowledge but to the observation of them; to so exact an
observation, that the neglect of any one damns us to Eternity: Let us now call
to mind at what a rate men live, and then judge whether many can be saved. Let
us examine our selves and see whether we have any reason to hope to be of that
little number.

Hear what S. Chrysostom says to the great City of Constantinople; how many
(says he) do you think will be saved out of this vast City? (one of the
greatest and most populous in the world) I shall terrify you by my answer and
yet I am bound to tell you that of so many thousand inhabitants, there will
hardly be one hundred saved, nay I doubt even of the salvation of these.

And yet this Imperial City was then as well regulated as any of those wherein
we live, full of those we call honest men; its inhabitants were reputed devout,
frequented the Sacraments, and lived as we generally do: Let this great Saints
decision, who would never have spoken so positively without an extraordinary
light, give us an Idea of the small number of the Elect.

Is it possible that we can cheat our selves so grossly as not to see that we
are running headlong to damnation? and that if we continue to live at our usual
rate, our Religion obliges us to believe we shall be damned?

And certainly we could not believe our Religion true, if after having laid
down such strict Rules it allowed us to hope to be saved in the violation of
them; this would be to impose upon the world: but blessed be God our Religion
condemns most severely such an irregular conduct, and careless loose Christians
will not be excused because of their great number.

It is an Article of Faith that unless we be like our Redeemer wecannot be
saved; to be like him we must conform our wills, we must hate what he hates,
and love what he loves: Are there many who ressemble this great pattern? how
little do we our selves resemble him? and what will be come of us if we continue
so unlike him?

Now adays men content themselves with some outward appearances of Religion,
with a show of virtue; every man makes to himself a false systeme of
Conscience, with which he rests satisfied as to what concerns his Salvation;
yet we believe that Heretics are lost who have their system's too and who are
as exact observers of the external part of Religion as we and have very often
all the quality's of mere honest men: what ground have we for this imaginary
assurance? have we any new Revelation or particular Gospel? Do we build our
hopes upon the profession of the true Faith which Heretics have not? surely
unless we take pleasure to deceive our selves we must own that he who believes
little of what he ought to do, is in a much better condition, than the man who
does little or nothing of what he believes.

If believing were sufficient the number of the Predestined would not be
small, if we had liberty tolive as we pleased we should make no difficulty of
believing any thing; but Faith without works is dead; though you believe never
so well, you can never hope Salvation if you neglect to practice what you
believe. The Devils believe more than we, but their Faith is only speculative;
and woe be to us if ours be no more than speculative.

Are The sublime Sanctity -- of our Holy Religion, the admirable example of the
Son of God, the shedding of his blood, the efficacy of the Sacraments, the
communications of his Grace, designed only to make us keep some measures,
which serve only to encourage us to sin more boldly by disguising those faults
which are common to us with the Pagans? Were the Saints men of another
condition than we are? were they excepted in the universal Redemption of
mankind? was not the way to Heaven discovered in their Time? did they expect
any other recompense? how comes it that we are so very unlike them? they
resolved to be Saints, what do we resolve to be? And can we hope tobe Saints
without following their Example? what grounds have we to rely on the mercy of
God, when we make use of that mercy to hinder our Conversion? Jesus Christ has
expressly condemned lukewarm souls, yet does not this tepidity reign among
Christians?

Am I convinced that the number of the Elect is so small? and shall I do
nothing to be of that number? Yes, my God! were there to be but one soul saved,
since it depends on my will to be that soul, I am resolved to be saved.

I acknowledge that I have done nothing for thy service which can make me hope,
but my confidence is founded on what thou art doing now for me.

Thy design in giving me this opportunity, and in exciting me to this
resolution, was not to increase my guilt: I have no need of any other Argument
to convince me that thou desire my Salvation thanthis very fear which thou
have imprinted in my soul least I should not be of the number of thy chosen.

I have often rendered my best thoughts useless, but my God I have reason to
hope that this resolution which I now make to work out my salvation with all
the earnestness in the world shall be effectual. And because I have had too
much experience that these pious designs are easyly forgotten, I will begin
this moment to turn to thee, Dixi nune coepi, haec mutatio dexterae Excelsi.
Ps. 76.11.
and to devote my self entirely to thy service, and I rely upon thy goodness
for strength to persevere.

SECOND MEDITATION. OF SIN.
FIRST POINT. Of Mortal Sin. SECOND POINT. Of Venial Sin.
FIRST POINT
COnsider that all the calamity's and misery's that are in the world or have
been since the Creation proceed from mortal sin: this is the cause of wars,
plagues and Famines, of the destruction of City's by fire, and of men by
sickness: Eternal Damnation and Hell it self are the dismal effects of one
Mortal sin.

How can we comprehend the heinousness of mortal sin? seeing tho the Angels
were the most perfect part of the Creation, neither the nobleness of their
nature, nor all their perfections, nor their fitness to glorify their maker to
all Eternity, nor their being particularly designed for that end, could exempt
them from being plunged into everlasting flames, for one mortal sin of a
moment expressed in a vain thought.

For one act of disobedience Adam was deprived of his original justice, of all
his natural and supernatural gifts; by this one sin he lost the privilege of
immortality, became subject himself, and subjected his Posterity to those
innumerable misery's under which wegroan: so many thousand years are past, and
the Divine vengeance is not yet appeased, nor will be till the end of Ages;
it is the fire of this wrath that burns in Hell, and will never be extinguished.

The consideration of the terrible punishment inflicted on mortal sin is a
clear proof that it is the greatest of evils, since God who is goodness its
self, and whose mercy is exalted above all his works is so very severe against
one act of it.

How many persons eminent for virtue full of merits and arrived to a great
degree of sanctity, are now damned for one mortal sin?

If after three or fourscore years of penance after a long Life spent in the
exercise of the most heroic virtues, after having wrought miracles; if we
commit one mortal sin, all our penance, all our virtues will be counted for
nothing, we become Enemies to God, and objects of his wrath and vengeance.

By the severity of the punishment we may conceive some Idea of the crime, but
its enormity, and the hatred which God bears to it are more visible, in the
pains he has taken, and what it has cost him to destroy it. Those
inconcevable mistery's of the incarnation, the nativity, the Life; the passion,
and the Death of the Eternal Son were wrought only for the destruction of sin:
nothing less then all theblood of Christ could redeem one soul and after all
this soul shall be damni'd for one mortal sin: all the flames of Hell, those
Eternal flames could never cleanse the least sinful spot.

Can we believe this and live one moment in sin? and notwithstanding this
extreme danger continue to sin and to expose our selves every day to the
occasions of committing it? this is hardly to be imagined.

How shall we reconcile our Faith with our practice? how shall we make our
practice and our Reason agree? we refuse no pains to oblige a friend, we are
wonderfully exact in every punctilio of good breeding, but stupidly careless in
the important duty's of a Christian Life. We own that most afflictions are the
punishments of our sins; we are all afraid of Hell, yet we are not afraid of
sin which is the cause of Hell; how sensible are we of the smallest loss? how
uneasy, how sad? and often incapable of comfort? yet how insensible of the
greatest? of that irreparable loss which a million of worlds can never repair:
we sin but we are not sad, neither do we stand in need of comfort.

Tho we had committed but one mortal sin in all our Lives it would be a just
reason for continual humiliation; it would be a just subject of fear and
trembling to the last moment of our Lives. We have sinned, we are in danger of
renewing our sins, we are uncertain of their pardon, how can we be without fear?

Are we sure that we are in a state of Grace? or do we hope so, be cause of our
reiterated confessions? Alas! who has told us that our contrition was sincere?
that our sorrow was from a supernatural motive? how can we be satisfied with
our purposes and resolutions when we know by experience and by so many relapses
how ineffectual they have often been?

Since God spared not the Angels that sinned how ought we to tremble who have
sinned after the knowledge of their terrible punishment? After having seen the
son of God expire on a Cross to destroy sin, can I imagine that God will hate
sin less in me!

My God, and Savior! who have dyed for me which thou would not do for the
fallen Angels; I humbly beseech thee by the merits of thy Death to give me that
Grace which thou would not offer them: Give me an hearty sorrow for all my
sins, and incline my will to answer thy End in affording me this time for
repentance which thou have not given many others, and to begin immediately.

SECOND POINT.
Consider that venial Sins seem small only to those who have little faith and
less Love; they who love God truly look upon all sin with horror, and are more
afraid of it than of the grearest misery. A venial sin is indeed a small sin,
but it is not a small evil: as long as it is a sin it is agreater evil than a
general desolation of the whole Universe, and therefore the Saints of God have
always judged yt all the creatures ought to think themselves happy if they
could prevent one venial sin by the sacrifice of their very beings.

Moses his distrust in striking the Rock twice cost him his Life: Five and
twenty thousand Israelites dyed in one day at Berhshemeth for looking too
curiously into the Ark of God: David's vanity in numbering the people brought a
terrible Plague upon them: two and forty children were devoured by wild Bears
for mocking the Prophet Elisha; and Hezekiahis ostentation in showing his
treasures to the Ambassadors of Babylon could not be expiated by less than the
loss of those treasures.

Thus God whose wisdom is infinite punishes venial sins in this Li-Life; but in
the next where his justice is not restrained by his mercy, the punishments of
venial sins yield in nothing as to their violence to the torments of Hell, and
this he inflicts even on those souls whom he loves tenderly and who love him
above all things.

We shall find one Day that the Death of our beloved Child, the loss of such an
estate, such a distemper, the ruin of such a family, and public calamity's
are perhaps now as formerly the punishments of venial Sins. God indeed does not
alway's send visible chatisements, but then he reserves the sinner for severer
strokes.

For every venial sin we deliberately committ God withdraws some portion of his
Grace, and is the deprivation of Grace a small loss? Venial Sins do not indeed
make God hate us, but they make him love us less; they make him stop the course
of his bounty, withold his Graces, and suspend that particular Providence with
which he watches over those he loves, and that tender care whereby he preserves
them from danger, whereby he either keeps them from Temptations or enables them
to overcome them: Venial Sins render a soul languishing and insensibly disgust
it with Piety, till they have brought it into a lukerwarm disposition, the most
dangerous state a soul can be in. And God at length grows weary of our
ingratitude, and cannot suffer that we should believe that we auquit our selves
sufficiently of the infinite obligations we have to him, provided we abstain
from offering him the most outrageous affronts, tho at the same time we indulge
our selves in displeasing him everyhour.

Which of us would have the patience to keep a servant only for his honesty,
who had no other good quality, who did every thing with reluctance and by
halves, who treated us with disrepect and who never took care to please us,
under pretense that it was in things of no consequence? And can we expect that
God should suffer a servant whom we would not endure? It is true that venial
Sins do not renderus Enemy's to God; but it is as true that he who indulges
himself deliberately in many venial Sins does not love God.

Certainly the man that contents himself with barely not being Gods Enemy,
esteems his Love but little; the best that can be said is that he is afraid to
have God his Enemy; but very indifferent in desiring him for his Friend. The
wilful disobliging a Friend upon all occasions is a strange method to make him
love us: And I cannot see how we shall be able to reconcile our profession of
loving with our practice of wilfully displeasing him.

It Is no excuse that we offend only in little things, their smallness renders
us inexcusable, because we might more easily avoid them. If they be little
things we cannot pretend that we were discouraged by difficulties, or that the
violence of our passions hurried us away, it proceds only from an indifferency
for God whom we serve out of fear, and flatter our selves that we love him
because we dread his justice.

No wonder then if God be as indifferent for us, if he abhor our baseness, if
he withdraw his favors from such unworthy wretches, and refuse to communicate
him self any more to us. And indeed we can not expect those peculiar favors
which he bestow's only on fervent souls. Thus we run our selves into danger of
comitting greater faults, for an habit of venial sins is the high Road to
mortal ones; and God is in amanner obliged to deprive us of those divine
lights, of those strengthening graces without which we can never resist violent
Temptations. Hence proceed the surprising falls of many who were at first so
reserved; they began by allowing themselves little Liberty's, and so by degrees
fell into such disorders as before this unfaithfulness they would have trembled
to think of He who despises little things will most certainly fall by degrees:
For though venial sins can never be come mortal yet they dispose us for them:
if we once content our selves with not losing the Grace of God, we are sure to
loose it in a very little Time: these terrible falls startle us, but if we did
well consider the disposition in which venial Sins put the soul, we should be
Ies^ surprised.

Venial Sins are like the beginnings of a sickness the first indisposition
seems nothing at all, and we think it will easily be cured, yet by little and
little it undermines our health so that the least excess or unwholesome air
throws us in to a malignant feavour and from thence in to the Grave.

Though sometimes men dye suddenly, yet their Deaths are usually preceded by
some light indisposition which seemed of no consequence. Thus Venial Sins tho
never so deliberate and numerous, do not kill the soul but they weaken it, and
impair its strength, so that it languishes and does its duty's but by halves,
and with reluctance; every thing hurts it, Sacraments, Good works do it no
good. How can a soul in this condition remain long in a state of Grace being
thus exposed to so many impending dangers, deprived of its support and
strength, and every moment running its self farther in to danger.

This made an Eminent Saint say that we ought some times to be more careful to
avoid small sins than great ones: And it is the apprehension of not stopping
here, it is the fear of being deprived of strengthening grace in punishment of
those little infidelity's, and there by being left a prey to temptation, that
makes the Saints so incapable of comfort after a veniai Sin.

After all, is a Venial Sin nothing? is it of no consequence? what then shall we
count something, if it be nothing to offend God? wethink it a matter of
consequence not to disoblige a friend, we think it a matter of consequence not
to be rude to any man so much as by mistake and shall we think it a slight
thing deliberately to displease God? shall we think it nothing to lessen his
kindness to us? to stop the channel of his Graces? to diminish the fervor of
charity and to render all the Sacraments of no use shall we think our selves
affronted by a rash word, and shall we think that fault little which offends
God? which draws his indifference on us tho not his hatred? which will make us
loose those inestimable Treasures that are worth more than all the riches in
the world? shall we make nothing of disposing our selves to fall in to mortal
Sin, and of indulging our selves in those irregularity's which are often the
ginning of the Reprobation of many who appeared eminent for Piety?

Consider what are our thoughts of venial Sins? have we fully resolved in all
our confessions to mend them? for it is much to be feared that by frequent
confessing the same venial Sins we too oftenrender our confessions at best
useless for want of contrition. Let us no longer look upon them as little
things, there are but few things that we ought to fear so much; Let us examine
our selves strictly, and accordingly regulate our practice.

THIRD MEDITATION. OF THE SENTIMENTS We shall have at the hour of Death.
SEE, THE THIRD MEDITATION, For the month of January.

APRIL, and OCTOBER,
FIRST MEDITATION THAT WE OUGHT NOT to delay our Conversion.
FIRST POINT. If we delay our Conversion, we thereby put our selves into an
evident danger of being never converted. SECOND POINT. If we delay our
Conversion, we thereby put our our selves under a kind of necessity of being
never converted.
FIRST POINT.
COnsider that there is no Christian who has not some time or other desired to
turn sincerely to God; there are certain happy moments wherein by an inward
light we discover on a sudden so many faults in Creatures, we find so little
solidity in every thing on the earrh, and are so disgusted with what seemed
most charming, that we cannot avoid confessing that to neglect the service of
God is the highest degree of madness.

Our Reason is convinced but our passions are too strong, and wehave not
resolution enough to oppose them; there fore self-Love finds an expedient to
flatter both; it satisfy's our Reason by persuading us to resolve on
Conversion, and pleases our sloth by engaging us to deferr it and to retain our
former habits, but here it apparentiy deceives us for this delay puts us in to
an evident danger of never being convetted.

Time, Grace, and a willing mind are necessary to Conversiow; if we put it off
but for one day, how can we promise our selves that one day? if we have that
Day, are we sure that we shall be more willing to improve it? And who has told
us that we shall then be assisted with amore efficacious graee than that which
we have hitherto resisted?

Is any thing more uncertain than Time? how many have been surprised by Death
while they were deliberating? And would it not be a dismal thing to dye full
of designs for a future Conversion?

We think it is not now a fit Time to quit our dangerous conversations, to
avoid the occasions of sin, to reform our Lives and to live more retired and
more like Christians: alas! what time would we have? we are for staying till
the heat of youth is past, till age and experience have disabus'd us 'as to
those triffles which take us up now, and then every thing will contribute to
our conversion.

Thus the greatest part of mankind argue about their projects of conversion,
for no man pretends to dye unconverted, but do they reason well? do we find
many of these Resolvers converted before they dye? We accept (says S.
Augustine) their penance who deferr their conversion to the end of their Lives,
but we make no great account of such conversions. No my Brethren (adds that
great Saint) I dare not deceive you and therefore must declare that we make no
great account of them.

We refuse to be converted now, what grounds have we to believe that we shall
be more willing here after? If we find difficulties now, we shall meet with
greater then they increase with our passions, which will then, be stronger, and
instead of youthful amusements which take up our Time now, we shall then find
that multitude of business will be a greater hindrance. Do not flatter your
selves that you may be converted at any time; who has told you that you shall
at all times be capable of conversion? If we refuse to be converted when God
invites us now when our ill habits are but weak and few, can we reasonably
expect to be able to do it here after, when they are multiplied and grown
inveterate? God will be weary of waiting; his solicitations will diminish as
our resistance of his Grace increases; so that we are forced to own that we run
the greatest hazard in the woild by delaying, and yet we are not a fraid to
venture.

Was it ever heard that a condemne'd malefactor was unwilling to receive his
pardon, and desired it might be deferred to another Time? God offers us his
Friendship, he tenders his pardon to us, and we are unwilling to have it yet;
we desire him to stay till we are in humor to receive it. He sollicites us and
we bid him keep his Love for another Time; would we treat the last of men thus,
and how should we resent this usage our selves?

Every man promises him self Time for Conversion if Jesus Christ had promised
us with an Oath that we should have notice of his coming, we could not live in
greater security than we do, tho we know that he has sworn the direct contrary.

Did ever any Merchand when he had found an opportunty of recovering all his
losses put it off to another Time? and deferr the securing his fortune till the
next day? Would not we think a man distracted who being dangerously sick should
desire his Physician not to visit him till five ot six Day hence?

Am not I with all my pretensions to wisdom this distracted man, when I delay
my Conversion one Day? I am out of favor with God, my soul is dangerously ill,
the most efficacious remedy's do me no Good, my sickness increases, God
sollicites and beseeches me to be cured, he desires only my consent, and I
refuse his offer.

Has not the Son of God prevented all our excuses and all our false pretenses
by declaring that he will come when we are not aware of him? this is not only
the Counsel of a wise and knowing friend, it is the decision of the Lord of
Life and Death who knows the time in which he designs to call us. Let our
designs and projects be never so well laid, Death will come when we least
expect it.

Did we ever see a man dye, were we ever dangerously ill our selves without
resolving to turn to God? and yet we are still unconverted. Our last sickness
will put us on the same resolutions, but how can we be sure they will be more
sincere than the former, and why should we think that God will accept them?

Men tremble when they find themselves in danger of losing their Lives or
Estates; is it nothing to loose our souls by remaining unconverted? If the loss
of a soul be so small a matter why did Jesus Christ do and suffer so much to
redeem it?

My God! thou desire not the Death of a sinner, thou desire his Conversion;
so that it is my own fault if I be not converted. Am I unwilling? and how can I
pretend to be willing if I put it off from day to day?

One would think it were a great misfortune to be wholly thine, since men give
themselves to the, as late as they can; I am terrifyed by other dangers, is not
this of being lost for ever a much greater danger?

It is resolved O my God! it is resolved, I will deferr no longer; but tho I am
willing; it is thou alone that must convert me; Converte nos and convertemur.
Thron. 5.21.
Do it and then I shall be truly converted.

SECOND POINT.
Consider that by deferring our Conversion we are not only in danger, but
under a kind of necessity, of never being converted: when the Scripture exhorts
us to seek God while he may be found, it teaches us there is a Time when he
will not be found; what then must a man expect whom God has sought in vain
several years together and who has been insensible to all his Goodness?

Do we thinck our selves too young to be devout, and that we ought to stay till
we are older, and then be converted? This is as much as to say that we have not
sufficiently offended God, that when we have abused his goodness more and
driven our ingratitude as far as we can, we will then begin to serve him. Will
he accept of our service then? It Is true; God will never refuse a Sinner that is
really converted, but the difficulty lies in being converted; seeing we will
not be converted now when God desires it, can we be sure of doing it when we
shall have all the Reason in the world to doubt whether he continues to desire
it.

Could the Apostles reasonably expect a second call from Christ to leave all
and follow him, if they had delayed till next day to obey the first? could they
expect to have more courage next day? they who were invited to the supper in
the Gospel were but twiee invited and excused themselves but once upon very
plausible pretenses, Luc. 14.16.
which were yet sufficient to exclude them for ever from the Feast and to seal
their Reprobation.

The Difficulties and obstacles we meet with now, and which we pretend are
already invincible will augment in number and force every day; we say we cannot
be converted now, we shall be less able here after; the spiritual helps of
reading and meditating on the great Trutbs of the Gospel, the Counsels of a
wise Director, the frequentation of the Sacraments have no effect on us now:
upon what then do we build our hopes of Conversion? we would not yield at first
when we were touched with those truths, much less thall we yield our selves
when we are grown insensible.

We accustom our selves to every thing in time, the best advice and the most
terrible Truths, will make no impression on our affections and less on our
hearts; like those whoare continually about dying people we shall by degrees
loose all sense of what terrified us at first. By frequent slighting the
thoughts of Hell, we shall become little afraid of it; Do we expect to be
disabus'd then? Alas! we are already convinced of our danger; for why do we
intend to turn to God at last, if we be not persuaded that we are in a
dangerous state?

Suppose a longer experience should make us see our Error, and wean us from the
false pleasure, and the false Liberty of the world, so that we cease to esteem
them, we thall still retain them out of custom, interest, obstinacy, or
inclination. Though we glory no longer in being Libertins, in following the
maxims of the world and in not being devout we shall insensibly continue so
because we are used to it; Unless we are absolutely resolved to be deceived, we
can not propose to our selves to overcome so many multiplied obstacles all at
once; when with a greater assistance of grace than we can expect, and with less
guilt we have not courage to enough to conquer one single Sin.

We persuade our selves that at the hour of death, the sense of approaching
danger will make us turn to God; but how can we rely upon a Conversion to which
we are excited only by the presence of Death, and which must therefore
infallibly be the effect of Fear?

And for a clear proof that those Conversions are seldom sincere how many have
we seen truly converted after a great Sickness? besides it is an Article of our
Faith that the Son of man will come at an hour when he is least expected, so
that although the Death of the greatest part of mankind be not sudden yet it is
unforeseen; and Jesus Christ has declared with an Oath that he will be
inflexible to all the prayers of those who expect their last hour to turn to
him, so that we must either believe the Son of God mistaken, or that he had a
design to deceive us, or we must believe that the sinner who deferrs his
Repentance to a Deathbed will dye impenitent.

Our Savior does not Say that we shall continue obstinate to the last, that we
shall not beg him to forgive us, or that we shall not have Time, but I foretell
you (says he) that you shall dye as you have lived.

But we must all ways hope; true but that is no Christian hope which is
contrary to our Faith.

The merits of our Redeemer might indeed save us, if his word and his Gospel
had not already condemned us.

Can we imagine that the great work of Eternal Salvation which is the work of
our whole Lives, and for which Christ himself judged no less time necessary,
can be done in a few hours? that it can be done well in those last moments?
After all this: can we believe that when we have delayed it from one day to
another, we may easily do it not withstanding we put our selves under a kind of
necessity of not doing it at all?

Where Eternity is concerned we ought to hope only on solid grounds; The only
foundation of hope is the word of God, and yet we hope against this express
word.

How long has God solicited us to be converted? and yet how long do we
continue to resist his grace?

If we had no other motives than the assurance that Grace is offered us, that
God is ready to receive us, that we may be this very moment if we will in the
condition we shall wish for, when we come to dye the want of which will then
drive us to despair; do we need any other to make us resolve?

Would a damned soul delay one moment if he had any time, and the means of
Conversion that I have? those wretched Souls were once what I am, have not I
reason to fear that I shall be one day what they are? they deferred their
Conversion and are damned for it, am not I in danger of being damned for the
same delay?

It Is strange that we can put off our Conversion to the last; that is, to do
the most important and difficult work in the world: we wait for a season
wherein we shall be wholly incapable of any thing; wherein a man would be
thought mad or at least imprudent that should talk to us of business. Is a sick
or dying man in a condition to talk of business? And yet it is to this time
which we our selves acknowledge to very unfit for the most trivial affairs,
that we deferr the greatest business in the world, the business of Salvation,
and of Eternity.

How can we think of being converted one day and yet deferr it though but to
the next day? The design of being converted implies that we believe our Souls
in danger, that we are sensible of want of Love to God, that we do not serve
him faithfully. That we are out of his favor, and that we dare not dye in the
state in which welive. He who deferrs his Conversion wilfully lives in a
continual danger, by which so many perish every Day, he refuses to love God,
and is content to be out of favor with him: he resolves to live in a State
wherein he is afraid to dye, and this after serious reflection, and after
several designs to change his Life; he resolves to persist in enmity to God at
the very time when God tenders him his Grace and presses him to accept his
Friendship. Can any Christian, can any rational man make this reflection and
afterward deferr his Conversion one moment.

Alas my Dear Savior! I am but too capable of doing this; these reflections
and an hundred more will be to no purpose if thou do not convert me; Oh! do
it for thy mercys sake; as this is the day wherein I resolve to be converted,
so let it be the Day of my perfect Conversion.

SECOND MEDITATION. OF THE GOOD USE of Time.
FIRST POINT. That Time is very precious. SECOND POINT. That the loss of Time
can never be repaired.
FIRST POINT.
COnsider that nothing is so precious as Time every moment is worth an
Eternity; that the glory of the Saints, the Eternal joys of heaven which Christ
has purchased for us by his blood are the reward of the good use we make of
our Time.

Time is so precious that the smallest part of it is worth more than all the
honors and Riches in the world, and tho we employ but one moment to get all
those honors and Riches, if that be all we gain by it, God who judges
righteously will look upon that moment as lost If a damned Soul were master all
the Kingdoms of the Earth he would give them all, and all its Treasures for one
of those precious minutes which he for merly spent in folly and which we loose
every Day.

Comprehend if you can what Grace and the possession of God is; this Grace,
this God are the price of our Time, which is given us only to obtain more
grace and by its assistance to merit the enjoyment of God; and it is certain
that by every moment we spend for any thing else, we loose more than the whole
world can repay.

The Saints in Heaven by reiterated perfect acts of virtue to Eternity can not
merit a greater degree of Glory, yet this I can merit every moment if I will,
by one true act of Love to God: Reprobates will not be able to satisfy the
divine justice, nor to obtain the pardon of one sin by all their regrets and
tears, nor by an Eternity of dread full Sufferings, but I may do it every moment
by one sigh or one tear; by one act of contrition I may appease the wrath of
God.

Eternal happiness or misery will be the consequence of my use or abuse of
Time; I can work out my Salvation only while Time lasts; how then can men be
so much at a loss how to employ their time? how can they amuse themselves and
be taken up with trifles, only to pass away the time? You do not know how to
spend the Time. Have you never offended God? are you not obliged to him? have
you received no favors from him? Ought not you to adore and serve him? The
glorious Saints do not think Eternity too long to love, to praise, to bless,
and honor him, and shall we think an hour of a day too long?

You don't know what to do; have you no sins to grieve for? Don't you know that
Jesus Christ is in person on the Altar where he expects to be adored and is
adored but by few? and can you want employment for your time? we are never at a
loss, how to spend our time but when we have most time to serve and love God:
For we can spend whole days in business and vain pleasures, in offending God
and destroying our Souls, with hout being uneasy, or thinking the Time long.

Let us consider that we can secure our Salvation only while Time lasts, and
that all the time of our lives is given us only for this End, how careful ought
we then to be of improving it? every moment is precious; we loose all if we
loose our time.

But do we much value this loss? Do we think that there is such a thing as the
loss of time? we improve every moment for things of no consequence, we are cast
down at disapointments, and with all our care and diligence we are continually
afraid that we shall want Time.

But alas! a Time will come when we shall think otherwise, because we shall have
juster thoughts; a time will come wherein we shall regret those favorable days
and hours which we mispend now. A time will come when we would give all the
world to recall some of those precious moments which we now throw away and
wilfully loose; when we shall be torn with despair to find that they are all
lost, and that time is past.

Then you will cry out, Oh! that I were now in the condition I was in such a
Day of my Life; when I was meditating upon the improvement of Time: Oh! that I
had now the same health and strength; my God! what would I not do? but wretch
that I am, I foresaw this despair which torments me now for having lost my
Time; why did I make no use of that foresight, nor of that Time?

Time is short, it ends with our Lives; we have already passed the greatest
part of them, and to what purpose? what use have I made of this last year? how
much time have I lost in doing what I ought not, or in omitting what I ought to
have done? and how little of it have I spent in doing my duty? My God! what a
terrible account have I to give of my Time and of these present Reflctions?

How can I expect mercy from God if I make no better use of what is left? if I
deferr my Conversion any longer? how many are dead who were in better health
than I some months ago? how many seem now in their full vigor who will be in
the grave before the year is past? and how do I know that I shall not be one of
them?

Let us then work while we have time, we cannot expect it should be long, and
therefore let us not deferr our Conversion one moment.

SECOND POINT.
COnsider that you can never repair the loss of Time, that all you can do will
never recall one moment, and if you be capable of reflection and be seriously
desirous of Salvation, this will be sufficient to convince you of the
importance of redeeming time.

It is certain that all the moments of our Lives are counted, let us employ
them well or ill, we shall not increase their number, for it is fixed and
lessens continually. An hour ago we had so much more time to work out our
Salvation, an hour hence we shall have so much less.

Tho we live holily after the example of Sainr Paul and do not loose one moment
of what is left; yet it is most certain that a moment once gone will return no
more, and that if it be employed ill it is lost. If we employ the rest of our
time well we may escape the dangers into which our abuse of the past has
brought us, but we cannot undo what we have done; we have still lost so many
precious hours and with them all the graces which God would have bestowed on
us, and all the good we might have done in them.

My God! what a loss is this? so many moments lost since we had first the use
of reason, and with them so many graces beyond recovery.

When we spend hours and days in vanity we call it passing the Time, a phrase
very unfit for a Christians mouth: we pass a way, the time, Time it self passes
away, the Time so passed is lost, and neither it nor the graces we could have
merited in it will return any more.

The Grace of Predestination is in some manner annexed to some certain moments,
what will become of us if God has fixed ours to some of those moments that are
past and lost! The fear of having lost it is indeed a sure and sensible mark
that I am not yet deprived of it, but what must I expect if I let slip this
opportunity, and do not grow better by this fear?

We know time is precious and short, and yet we complain it passes slowly, we
are continually wishing for some time to come; whence proceeds this uneasiness?
are we weary of living? no; but we make ill use of our Time, and that loss
which we see and feel disturbs our quiet and makes us think the time long: All
our pleasures and diversions cannot free us from this uneasiness, which never
quits those who loose their Time. But they who improve it well for their
Salvation are not subject to this uneasiness, nothing is so easy so full of
peace as they. Many Saints have with Saint Paul desired to be delivered from
their Exile that they might perfectly enjoy their God and be out of danger of
losing him, but we never find that they were uneasy in the discharge of their
duty's in doing the will of God. So true it is that to be entirely satisfied
and contented we need only make a good use of time by yielding obedience to
the Divine Will.

But here let us examine what use we have made of our Time; its passed, and if
it be lost too, how great is our loss? how shall we repair it? If we had
improved those many moments, hours, and days as a Christian ought to do we
should now reap the fruit in spiritual consolations; instead of which we feel
nothing but regrett for having lost so much time, and terrible apprehensions
for the exact account we must give of it.

Let us therefore at least make good use of what is left, for the period of our
Life is fixed and we draw nearer it every moment, a time will come when we can
improve Time no longer because it will be followed by Eternity. Quia tempus non
erit amplius. Apec. 10.6.
Let us for the future improve the little that remains and not loose one single
moment.

THIRD MEDITATION.
OF THE SENTIMENTS we shall have at the hour of Death.

SEE, THE THIRD MEDITATION, For the month of January.

MAY, and OCTOBER.
FIRST MEDITATION OF THE WILLINGNESS of most Christians and the insincerity of
their desires to be saved.
FIRST POINT. He who sincerely desires to be saved, must make use of the
means. SECOND POINT. It is not enough to make use of some means, but we must
make use of all the necessary means of Salvation.
FIRST POINT.
COnsider that although every man pretends to be willing to be saved, yet there
are but very few truly willing. The most hardened Sinner will sometimes tell you
that he intends to be converted, the most unfaithful Religious believes
himself desirous of perfection, because no man is so mad or so much his own
Enemy as to be fond of ruin, and we know that without Conversion we are ruined
for ever.

But if we stop there and content our selves with saying we desire it, without
making use of the means, we have indeed the thought of Conversion but not the
will. If we consult either our faith or Reason the torments of Hell will mahe
us afraid, and the great Truths of our Religion will startle us: but we deceive
our selves if we take this for Conversion, it is only a conviction that we ought
to be converted.

A good natural disposition or Education may inspire us with an admiration of
virtue and an horror of vice, but the understanding has a greater their in
these Sentiments than the will, and it is much to be feared that such an
aversion to Sin is only an hatred of its dismal consequences, and such a love
of Piety is no more than an agreeable Idea of the happiness that attends it,
without any efficacious desire of Salvation.

Let us not deceive our selves we we shall not be judged according to the good
thoughts we have entertained, but according to the good works we have done:
Hell is full of souls who were as willing to be saved as the greatest part of
Christians are, and can we content our selves with no better a will than theirs?

We do not design to be damned; there is not one Soul in Hell that ever
designed it: but like a frantic sick man who says he would fain be well yet
will not take any thing to make him so, who satisfy's himself with thinking on
the benefits of health but will make use of no means to be cured; so we desire
to be saved, but we will not make use of the means of Salvation. Can any man in
his wits imagine that this is the way to Heaven? and what truth would there be
in our Religion if it were?

Can we fancy that a faint desire is sufficient to save us with out use of
means? all the damned Souls have had that desire? Can we entertain a thought so
injurious to the wisdom of Jesus Christ, and so unworthy of our holy Faith?
Christ will not have the most labourious careful Christians believe themselves
out of danger and sure of their reward, tho they have neglect'd none of the
means of Salvation, tho they have lived in a constant practice of all virtues:
and shall we think we make our Salvation sure while we do nothing for it, while
we are so plunged in the Love and pursuit of the world that we hardly remember
that we are Christians? If we can once believe that we may be saved without the
use of means, we must believe that Christ had a design to impose upon us, in
giving us such Laws; we must look on all the Saints as men who had lost their
Reason, for why should they think it impossible to be saved without living up
to the strictness of the Gospel, if none be damned but those who maliciously
and in cold blood resolve to be so.

One would think it impossible for any Christian to entertain so palpable an
error, for who can expect to attain an end without using the means? yet how
many are there who say the would be saved, that will not use the means? How
many Religious think their whole work done when they have left the world?
Castigo corpus meum and in servitu tem ^edigo, ne forte cum aliis
praedicaverim, ipse reprobus efficiar. 1. Cor. 9.27.
But Saint Paul did not think his Salvation sure tho he had left all for
Christ, tho he had labored and suffered so much for his service, and therefore
he tells us that he chastis'd his body and brought it into subjection, least
after having preached to others, he himself should he come a cast away.

We are engaged in an unlawful design, we retain our neighbors goods unjustly,
we nourish hatred and malice in our hearts; and though we are thus slaves to
our passions, though we do not know how to offer the least violence to our
inclinations, because the speculation of the blessedness and glory of the just
in Heaven makes us conclude that it is good to be there, shall we take this for
a sincere desire to be saved? surely we must renounce our Reason if we do.

How many do we see every day toyling and laboring for pleasure and gain,
their hearts entirely taken up with them and all their thoughts employed about
making their fortune with so much application, that they scarce think of their
being Christians; who because a solemn Holiday or some unusual accident revives
the impressions of Religion which they had received in their Childhood and
makes them spare a few moments for some confused refflections on those great
Truths: because the apprehensions of eternal misery makes them tremble for a
while, tho they go no farther, but immediately return with more eagerness to
their disorders; tho the first object effaces those impressions, tho they
themselves seek to forget them that they may not be disturbed in their
indifference and carelessness of Salvation, yet fancy that they are very
desirous to be saved. Alas! thy are no othewise desirous of it, than, the
damned in hell were before them.

SECOND POINT.
Consider that men are seldom so unreasonable as to expect to be saved without
making use of means; but they pick and choose, they will make use of some but
not of all; they will use those means that please them best, not those that are
most proper for attaining their End.

Like the sick man of whom S. Ignatius speaks, who chooses his Physic, not by
the Doctors advice but his own Palate; refuses those prescriptions which are
proper for his distemper, and takes only such as please his taste, can we think
that such a man is efficaciously desirous to be cured?

Is that desire of Salvation with which we please our selves, more sincere? We
rarely meet with men who resolve to observe neitver commands nor counsels: we
would be saved, and we are willing to use some means, provided we may choose
them: Among so many commands as Christ has given us, it is impossible that we
should have an aversion for all, we choose only those that please us, tho the
rest be never so necessary. Enormous sins fright us, but the reservedness so
necessary to preserve our innocence does not agree with us; we are ready to
give our selves to God, if we may have leave to retain our favorite passion.

If we find no difficulty in fasting we are easily convinced that we cannot
obtain Heaven without it: but because we find it less easy to mortify our
passions, to pardon injurys, and to observe a serious recollection; we think it
sufficient to fast, and that we may dispense with the rest, without danger.

Hence proceeds that monstrous mixture of virtues and vices in the-same persons
who make profession of Holiness, to the prejudice of true and real virtue:
hence it proceeds that we see so little amendment; we trust to those virtues
which we think we have, and take no notice of the greatest part of our faults.

We do indeed make use of some means but not of all, and those we choose are
generally the most improper to attain our End we do not examine whether they be
the best, but whether they be the easiest, the most suitable to our
inclinations, and which please us most. We are ready to quit this occasion of
debauchery, but we will not break off an accquaintance or renounce an
employment tho it be a continual Source of Sin.

Some are willing to give alms, but they are unwilling to enquire if they have
nothing that belongs to another, for fear of being obliged to restitution; some
are willing to make restitution but they will not think of pardoning an injury;
others are inclined to forgive, but they will not Sacrifice a criminal or
dangerous friendship to the care of their Salvation: A Religious man is
resolved never to return into the world, but the takes little pains to perfect
himself in his Station; he trembles at the thought of breaking his Vows, but he
slights the observation of his Rule, tho the keeping of his vows generally
depends on the strict observation of it.

These men have indeed some Reason to think that they are unwilling to be
damned; but it is certain that they do not really desire to be saved; it is
evident that they desire it only by halves, their desire is not sincere by
seeming to do some thing for Salvation they think themselves secure, while by
not doing all that is required of them they render their peril much greater.

Can that man be in earnest who says he desires to be saved, and yet refuses to
make use of all the means? when a sick man refuses to take all necessary
remedy's, have not we reason to tell him, surely you have a mind to dye? this
is just the case of most men who say they would be saved, yet will not use all
necessary means; may we not very well make them the same reproach, surely you
have a mind to be damned?

Where is our sincerity? Where is our Truth? can we impose upon our selves so
far as to think that we sincerely desire to save our souls at the same time
that we neglect them so strangely? While we are so earnest and diligent when we
desire to succeed in any worldly business.

What a difference is there between a man following his business or his study,
and the same man working out his Salvation? Were we as earnest for heaven as we
are for honors and Riches, we should soon be great Saints; for we cannot be
rich if we will, but we may be be Saints if we will.

We are not contented to make use of all necessary means to obtain our temporal
ends, we employ even those that are not necessary, and we justify all this care
and pains by saying that we would not have any neglect to reproach our selves;
do we observe this maxim in the business of our soul? shall we have nothing to
reproach our selves on a Death bed?

If we do not design to be saved why do we make use of any means? if we de
design it, why do we not make use of all? is it not because some are more
difficult than others? but to what purpose do we practice only those that are
easy, since they are all necessary? Are we ignorant that he who does not do all
he ought to be saved, is no more advanced than of he had done nothing?

Do we think some few and doubt full means sufficient in a business of
consequence? And would we venture its success upon such means as common
experience has found very improper for a business of that nature? certainly the
business of Salvation is a business of consequence.

Jesus Christ has declar'ed that he will have all or nothing, that he will
accept no divided heart, there is no medium, they who are not absolutely for
him, are against him. Yet notwithstanding we all know this, lukewarmness and
tepidity, this divided heart is the cararacter of most Christians at this day.

Thus we live; but did any of the Saints sanctify himself by such a Life? Do
not we our selves doubt of the Salvation of those who dye in such a State? What
shall we think of our condition if we don't take other measures after all these
Reflections? can we reasonably expect to be saved?

And that which makes our danger yet more visible, is that our Lives are a
manifest contradiction to our Faith; and yet we do not mind it: we are
convinced that it is necessary to Salvation to believe the mystery of the
Trinity, and of the Eucharist, notwithslanding all the difficulties that sense
and reason suggest, because God has revealed them: but has not the same God
declared that he who will be saved must abhor the maxims of the world, that he
m^st bear the cross daily, ad must make use of those very means which I
neglect? wedurst not pretend a desire of Salvation if we refused to believe the
least tittle of what Christ requires us to believe in order to be saved, how
then can I pretend that I desire to be saved if I practice only some part of
the means which he has clearly told were absolutely necessary to Salvation.

But our Religion is too sincere not to condemn this contradiction between our
Faith and manners; it teaches us that God requires all or nothing, and surely
he deserves very little if he does not deserve all: it would be better for us
to give him none, than not to give him all: such a division is exceeding
injurious to him; for infine, we carry our selves thus only to those whom we
neither respect nor fear; God abhorrs this conduct, he hates tepidity more than
coldness, and therefore cannot endure to be served by halves.

Absolute perfection is not necessary, but our Savior commands every one
efficaciously to seek perfection in his station; do not object that the number
of these men of good will is so very small that if this be true there will be
but few saved; who can doubt of it after what Christ has told us of the small
number of the Elect? Do we see many who love God with all their hearts? how can
we pretend that we are sinceeely desirous of Salvation while we do not obsewe
this first and great Commandment? while we make use only of some means and
neglect the rest and while we satisfy, our selves with some pretended good
works of our own choosing, and indulge our selves in our beloved passion which
is a continual Source of Sin.

I see now my God that I have not been truly willing; that I have hitherto
deceived my self with a false desire, which has kept me in ignorance of the
greatness of my danger; but I am now resolved sincerly to be saved at anyrate;
And I have some grounds to believe that I am truly willing; but it is thy grace
my Dear Savior that must render my desire efficacious, I hope for it through
thy mercy; I am convinced of the necessity of using all the means, this
conviction has disposed me to do whatever thou command; Paratum cor meum
Deus, para^um cor meum. Ps. 56.9.
command now whatever thou please (...) will make no difficulty, I will obey
without any reserve.

SECOND MEDITATION. OF LVKEWARMNESS
FIRST POINT. There is no state more dangerous than a Lukewarm state. SECOND
POINT. It is harder to recover out of a Lukewarm state, than from any other.
FIRST POINT
COnsider that by a lukewarm State is meant a certain disposition of the Soul,
in which it contents its self with avoiding heinous sins, but takes little
care to avoid small faults: it is negligent in spiritual duty's, its prayers
are distracted, its confessions without amendment, its communions without
fervor and without fruit; it is unfaithful to the divine grace and sins
without fear or remorse.

Such a soul grows indifferent to the greatest virtues, and soon after
disgusted with them: its affections languish in the service of God, so that the
yoke of Christ seems heavy and insupportable; its thoughts are distracted and
so very little taken up with God or its self that it fuffers them to rove
after every object: it dares not retire in to its self because it can find no
peace there: In this condition it makes no scruple of exposing its self to the
occasions of Sin, if it does any good it is only by fi^s if it performs any
duty's it is only out of custom: and provided is keeps some measures and avoids
the reproaches of those of whom it stand in awe it is not at all sollicitous to
please God, whom it offends almost by every action.

It makes no difficulty of committing all sorts of venial Sins with
deliberation, it performs with reluctance and uneasiness those devotions which
it cannot avoid: it enterrains an aversion for pious Christians because their
virtue is an uneasy reproach to it: it takes pleasures only in the imperfect,
because their actions countenance its carelessness

Hence proceed those pernicious friendehips to which so many pretended Friends
ow their ruin, those insipid rallerys on Christian exactness whereby they
stiffle the small remainders of their fervor; they are no sooner in this
wreched state of Lukewarmness but they frame to themselves a false Conscience,
under the shelter of which they frequent the Sacrements and do some good wocks,
yet still indulge themselves in secret aversions, in envious jealousies, in
criminal and dangerous engagements, in uneasiness and murmuring against their
Superiors, in self Love and in pride which influence almost all their actions,
and in an hundred other faults of the same nature in the midst of which they
live unconcerned, they persuade themselves that there is no great crime in all
this, and seek for excuses to palliate those faults which God condemns as
heinous sins, and which they themselves will condemn as such when they come to
dye, for then their passions will be no longer able to hinder them from seeing
things as they are in themselves; surely it is no hard matter to discover that
the Salvation of a man in such a state as this, is in great danger.

The State of a Soul in mortal sin is very dangerous, but our Savior judges a
lukewarm state to be yet worse, for he tells the Angel or Bishop of the Church
of Laodicea, I would 'thou were either cold or hot for because thou art
lukewarm and neither col nor hot, I will cast thee out of my mouth as tainted
and offensive.

Does Jesus Christ who bears with the greatest Sinners, who is always ready to
pardon them, who did not abhor even Judas himself; does he abhor a lukewarm
Soul? has he who is so tender toward Sinners, no tenderness, no love, for a
Soul that is neither cold nor hot? What hopes then can such a Soul have of
being saved?

We ought not to despair of the Salvation of the most notorious Sinner; though
his disorders and crimes have renderd his Conversion difficult we ought still
to hope, for he knows his Sins and is therefore more capable of being made
sensible of them and of hating them. Tell the grearest Sinner of the severe
judgments of God, of Death, and of the rigourf and duration of Eternal
Torments; the foree of these terrible verity's may alarm and convert him: but
all this makes no impression on a lukewarm Soul, his condition is without
remedy; because it abstains from crying and scandalous Sins which startle a
Soul that has any fear left, 'it does not mind Spiritual and interior faults,
it mingles them with some actions of Piety, so that they easily pass unregarded
by a Conscience that is not exceeding tender, and thus not knowing the
greatness of its danger it does noting to prevent it.

Nothing does a Soul Good in this condition; Prayers, exhortations, reading,
masses, meditations, Sacrements, are all fructless: whether it be that the
little benefit it has hithertho received by them gives it a disgust, and takes
away its desire to make use of them; or that being accustomed to them they have
less effect; that having heard these terrible truths discoursed of an hundred
times, and having as often discoursed of them its self to no purpose, they
make no impression on it.

It receives but few graces because of its unfaithfulness in those which it
does receive; its faults are always great because they are attended with an
higher contempt, a greater malice and a blacker ingratitude than the faults of
others: this odious mixture of good and bad which composes the caracter of a
lukewdarm Soul discovers clearly how injurious such a conduct is to God: the
seeming good works that it does are a convincing proof that it has not
forgotten God, but its careless and imperfect way of doing them shows how
little it stands in awe of that God whom it serves with so much indifference
and disgust: And indeed this disgust is mutual, it has an aversion to Christ
and Christ has an aversion to it; no wonder that such men immediately after
their communions are ready to return again to and renew their Sins as if they
had not received; the Opinion of their pretended good works tenders them proof
against all wholesome advice; they can hear it with all the coldness in the
world, and it is this that makes so many good thoughts and holy inspirattons
useless.

Hence proceeds the strange blindnefs of a lukewarm Souls, and that horrible
insensibility which is the heaviest of judgments, and the utmost degree of
misery: And there fore S. Bernard and S. Bonavente declare that it is much
easier to convert a worldling tho never so wicked than a Lukewarm Religious.

What hope is left for such a Soul? there is no remedy for it; it will not be
cured, because it is not sensible of its illness: It is a sick Creature whose
condition is the more desperate because it laughs at those who think its sick;
so that there is need of a greater miracle to convert a lukewarm Soul, than to
make the blind to see or to raise the dead to Life.

None but thou my God can do it, thou art able to cure the most inveterate
diseases; but thou hate Lukewarmness, and this makes me fear; I cannot pray
with that confidence as I would for the most scandalous sinner; I acknowledge
that I have been hirher to in a lukewarm State. But since thou have made me
sensible of it, I am persuaded thou desire to draw me our of it. Oh! let not
this renewed grace which perhaps will be last thou will ever Offer me, be
ineffectual: thou would have me be saved, I am resolved to be saved, what
then can hinder my Salvation?

SECOND POINT.
Consider that a lukewarm state is not only very dangerous, but which is more
strange it is almost impossible to recover a Soul out of it because he that
would recover must be sensible of his being in danger, which a tepid Soul is
not.

An heinous Sinner easily knows his danger; there are eertain favorable
moments where in by the help of grace he discovers so much deformity in his
Soul that he presently laments his misery, which knowledge and confession
render his conversion much less difficult.

But a lukewarm soul does not believe that ke is lukewarm; he that believes
himself tepid ceases to be so, for we are rarely sensible of our condition
till we beg^n to be fervent: this renders the conversion of the lukewarm almost
impossible, for which way shall one go about to persuade them that they are in
such a State? Blindness is the first effect of Tepidity.

Its unfaithfulness being gradual it is less sensible of them, then its faults
grow habitual, and at last it takes pleasures in them: nothing touches it when
it is in this condition, and it suspectes nothing: it is not sensible of any
new fault; it grows lukewarm without omitting one of its devotions; it is the
imperfections of these very devotions that give birth to its tepidity, and help
it to deceive its self by covering its real faults with a false appearance of
virtue.

God himself who so loudly a larms the Sinner is now silent and will not awake
him; but leaves him to dye in this mortal Lethargy: I will begin says he to
cast thee out, he does not do it all at once he throws him off by degrees that
he may not see it: the unhappy Soul is rejected and his reprobation sealed, and
he does not perceive it, nor is he in the least sensible of his wretched
condition.

And what hope can he have to be cured? how is it possible for him to recover
out of this dismal state? The advice of his true Friends, the pious counselli
of his wise director, and of his zealous Superior, and the best examples, are
all ill received: by his insensibility and hardness of heart he seems to be
enchanted, all his actions bear the visible marks of certain reprobation, and
that God has left him.

Saint Bonaventure observes that it is no extraordinary thing to see notorious
sinners quit their sins and become truly penitent, but that it is very
extraordinary to see a lukewarm Soul recover. And to this we may apply the
words of S. Paul in that terrible passage at which all those who grow cold
after having been fervent in the service of God should tremble; it is
impossible (that is extremely difficult) for them who were once enlightened and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost
preferably to many others, and of the swetneess of a Spititual Life, and of
saving Truths, if they fall away, if they grow weary of serving God and return
to their Sins, it is impossible to renew them again unto Repentance.

But my God what is all this to a lukewarm Soul unless by a miracle of mercy
thou art pleased to open his eyes and to make him see his dangers? he does not
suspect himself of being fallen away, nor will he suspect it till thou
discover it to him by an inward light; and what will it avail him to be
convinced of it, unless thou give an extraordinary supply of grace to
recover him from that wreched State?

Let us now examine if we have no reason to fear? The Lukewarm are exceeding
curious, they will try all Sorts of devotions, and therefore may possibly read
this meditation but let them not deceive themselves, this day of retreat may be
profitable if we examine impartially and diligently whether this dangerous
tepidity does not influence all our actions, whether the Sacraments are useful
to us, and whether we grow daily less imperfect by the Exercises of Virtue.

THIRD MEDITATION.
OF THE SENTIMENTS we shall have at the hour of Death.

SEE, THE THIRD MEDITATION, For the month of January.

JUNE, and DECEMBER.
FIRST MEDITATION OF HELL.
FIRST POINT. The damned in Hell suffer all the torments that can possibly be
suffered. SECOND POINT. The Damned suffer to Eternity.
FIRST POINT.
COnsider there is an Hell, that is a place of torments prepared for those Souls
who dye in their Sins; we are so used to hear of Hell that we are very little
affected with the thoughts of it; but if we were truly sensible what Hell is,
we should never think of it without more and more horror.

Imagine that you see in the center of the Earth a vast and bottomless lake of
fire and flames, the damned plunged and rolling in it, all covered and
transperc'd with fire, which they suck in with their breath, and which enters
at their eyes and ears; their mouths and nostrils casting forth dreadful
flames; their skin scorched, their flesh, blood, humors, and brains boiling
and bubling up with the violence of the burning, their bones and marrow all on
fire like a piece of iron taken red hott out of the furnace, all the parts of
their body on fire and the fire in every part of it.

How glad would these wretches be to suffer only from our fire, notwithstanding
the horror of being thrown into a burning gulf, but alas! there is no
comparaison between it and the fire of Hell: my God! what tourments! Ours is
lightsome, theirs dark; Ours is an effect of the goodness and bounty of God,
theirs is the product of his incensed Omnipotence, and of the infinite hatred
he bears to Sin: it is a fire which the Almighly does all he can to render
furious and raging; and alas! it is not their only torment, this fire makes
them feel at the same time all sorts of pains.

Represent to your self a man tormented with the gout or a violent colique;
what pains does he feel? how does he cry out? how willingly would he dye to put
an end' to his torture? and yet he suffers only in one part of his body, he
has the Liberty of complaining and the satisfaction of seeing himself pityed;
what would it be if every member suffered the same torment? if instead of
helping him the standers by abused him without suffering him to complain?

In hell, the damned do not only suffer the pains to which we are subject in
this Life, they suffer all these and infinitely more, their torments are
universal, violent, complicated, and all excessive, in one instant they feel
them all, and in the midst of all they cannot receive or so much as hope for
any ease, what would one drop of water be against a whole Sea of flames? And
yet that poor refreshment, that nothing is denied them.

The sick find some ease in tumbling and removing from one place to another,
but the damned shall be eternally in the fire, unmovable as a rock.

Yet all these dreadful torments are nothing to their despair when they look
back on the time that is lost, and the ill use they have made of it. The
thoughts of the damned will be employed to all Eternity in calling to mind the
vanity of those objects which made them forget God. I have plunged my self
into this abyss of darkness and everlasting flames for the love of a trifling
pleasure, of an imaginary honor; which I could possess but a moment, and of
which I have scarce any Idea left: where are now all those fantomes of glory
greatness, and reputation, which took up all my Time, and made me forget
Eternity? Where is that fortune to which I sacrificed my all? Where are all
those whom I loved so well? Where are those of whose vain opinion, censures,
and power I stood so much in awe? Yet these I preferred to the favor and love
of God and for these I have lost my Soul.

The opportunitys of Salvation which he has abused and the reward that he has
lost, will take up the thoughts of a damned soul to all Eternity: How easyly
might I have confessed such a Sin? God offered me his Love, he gave me warning,
he pressed and solicited me so long, and gave me so many years of health since
my fall; I passed for a wise man in the world: Oh! how came I to deferr my
conversion to the hour of Death? How often have I trembled at the thought of my
danger, at the apprehension of damnation? And yet am damned at last: I needed
only have done those good work which such a friend, such a companion, such a
Relation, have done; I began well, it would have cost me little to persevere,
and if it had cost me never so much, could I take too much pains to avoid
damnation?

Add to these inconcevable torments, to these cruel regrets, the the
irreconciliable loss of the supreme Good; the sense of a God ittated to
Eternity, of a God lost without recovery, lost for ever, this is the height and
perfection of their misery; they never cease to be the Victims of the Divine
wrath and vengeance; we must know what God is before we can be able to conceive
what it is to loose him without hope: tho we are solittle affected with it now,
they who have lost him have other thoughts. How insupportable will be the
remembrance that I had a Redeemer, but I slighted the price by which I was
redeemed? that my Savior loved me to such a degree, and that it is impossible
for me to love him, that I am hated by him, and that he will never have any
compassion on my misery.

O! my Dear Savior! who have suffered so much so recall me, who have bought me
with so great a price that I might not be lost; thou will take pleasure to see
me plunged into this fiery gulf: thou will heap everlasting misery on me
without mercy, thou will be no longer my Father, nor my Savior: no wonder if
Hell be a place of weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth, of despair and woe,
since the Almighty who made the world by one act of his will, does all he can,
seems to exert all his power and force to make a wretched Creature suffer.

There is an Hell, and yet there are Sinners; Christians believe there is an
Hell, and yet this hell is full of Christians.

There is an Hell; and at this very moment an infinite number of miserable
Souls are tormented in it: it is certain that many of those with whom we
converse, that many of those who read this, and who meditate on the torments of
Hell, will one day be cast into those everlasting flames.

And am not I like to be one of them? Divine Savior! thou have not bought me
to destroy me: but have not thou also shed thy blood for those that are lost?
This makes me fear and tremble; but what good will this fear do me if I loose
my Soul? Oh! my good Master! I will be saved what ever it cost me; I humbly
beseech thee by thy precious blood suffer me not to be damned; what will it
advance thy glory to shut me up for ever in that abyss of fire and flames? Non
mortui laudabunt te neque omnes qui descendunt in infernum. Psalm. 113.17.
They who do go down to Hell do not praise thy name, they do not love thee
there: if thou suffer me to fall into Hell it will only augment the number
of those who hate and blaspheme thee. My God! I will be saved, tho all the rest
of the world were lost; thou would have me be saved, I trust in thy mercy,
and hope that thou will place me among thy Elect.

SECOND POINT.
Consider that the torments of Hell are not only universal, excessive, and
dreadful, they are Eternal too; notwithstanding all their horror, there is no
hope that they can either end or diminish.

What must be the thoughts of a damned Soul when after infinite millions of
years she casts her eyes from that abyss of Eternity, upon the short moment of
her Life and can hardly find it after that vast number of ages which are past
since she came there? Life tho considered never so near appears but a moment;
the time past of it, seems but an instant to us who live, and when we come to
dye tho we have lived long we can hardly persuade our selves that there has
been any interval between the day of our births, and the prefent Day: all that
is past seems a Dream; what then will it be after Death? when so many millions
of years are over, when our descendants for many generations are all forgotten;
when time has ruined our houses, destroyed the Citys, and overturned the
Kingdoms wherein we lived: when the end of Ages shall have buried the whole
Universe in its own ashes, and infinite millions of Ages after?

This is dreadful, but all this is not Eternity; when a damned soul shall have
suffered all these while, and an hunded thousand times as much, it is nothing to
Eternity.

Were one of the damned obliged to fill the hollow of a man's hand with his
tears, and to drop but one single tear at the end of each thousand years, what
a terrible duration would this be? Cain the first of the damned, would have
shed but six or seven, Judas but one; but if he were obliged at the same rate
to make a brook or a river of his tears, to fill the Sea or the vast extent
between heaven and Earth, what a prodigious length of time would this require?
Our imagination is lost and confounded in so vast a duration; but all this
great and inconceva bleextent of time is nothing to Eternity: A time will come
when every one of those wretched Souls will be able tosay, one tear for every
thousand years that I have been in Hell would have drowned the Universe and
filled up the immense space between Heaven and Earth, and yet I have an
Eternity of unspeakable torments still to suffer; all I have suffered is
nothing to this Eternity; after millions of Ages as many times multiplied,
after an extensive duration in which our thoughts are lost, the fire of Hell
will be as violent and fierce, the damned will be as capable of torment, and as
sensible of their pains, and God as incensed and as far from being appeased as
the first moment.

Oh! dreadful, Oh! incomprehensible Eternity! were we only to burn for every
wicked thought as many millions of Ages as we have lived days, hours, or
minutes, our pains would have an end at last; but to know certainly that our
torments will never end; always to suffer, and be assured that we shall
always suffer, to be always thinking on the happiness we have lost, on the
torments we have brought upon our selves, on the means of avoiding them which
we have had; to have continually before our eyes the vanity of every thing we
have preferred to God, and the little while that our pleasures have lasted, the
unutterable sweetness we might have tasted in his service, the vast difference
between the pains we feared in the practice of virtue, and those which we are
now forced to suffer in the flames of Hell to have the thoughts of this
Eternity always present, and to burn, rage, and despair for ever: my God!
what misery!

If these reflections do not convert us, if the prospect of those Torments, of
this Eternity does not touch us, if the fear of this everlasting regret does
not wean us from Sin, and from our vain amusements, are we rational creatures?
are we Christians?

These terrible veritys have made so many Martyrs, have peopled the deserts and
daily fill the Convents; what do we think of these men? did they do wisely? did
they do well to neglect nothing, to do all they were able to avoid Hell?

Who would not give all he is worth to be freed from a dungeon? who thinks any
pains too great to prolong his Life? But Oh! what do we do, nay what do we not
refuse to do to avoid Hell?

The divine Justice is terrible; God punishes these that offend him with
Eternal torments in Hell; yet we offend him in the sight of this Hell;
certainly an Eternity of misery is not too severe a punishment for such malice;
if there were no hell already God should make one on purpose for such offenders.

The thoughts of Hell make us tremble; we are unwilling to think of it least it
thould affright us; and yet we are not afraid to run headlong into it: we are
afraid to think of the Eternal duration of those bitter torments, and yet we
will not make one step out of the road that leads to them.

There is an Hell and yet we delight in pleasures, and Sinh ath still charms
for us; we think the practice of virtue difficult, and there are still careless
and imperfect Religious, and debauched Christians: this seems as
incomprehensible as Eternity it self.

You object that perfection is not necessary to avoid hell; true it is not
necessary, but can you keep to far from a Lake of Fire into which so many
fail? Can you take too much care and too many precautions to preserve your
self from everlasting fire, rage, and despair?

How cruel must the thoughts of a damned soul be, who knows that he might have
been eternally as happy as he is eternally miserable, if he had pleased; that
he might have been a Saint with ease, and is not because he was not pleased to
be so: that his Brethren are in heaven, but he is in Hell: he laughed at those
who being afraid of the condition in which he is now, lived otherwise than he
did; and now, what would he not do to be what they are? I called an holy
exactness, melancoly; a Christian modesty and reservedness I called stupidity,
and scrupulousness; Oh! that I had been so stupid, so scrupulous and melancoly;
that exactness, that reserve has made many Saints who are now in heaven absorpt
in Joys; but what is become now that I am in flames, of all my mirth and good
humor which I affected to show by rallying every thing? If I had imitated such
and such of my acquaintance, if I had made good use of the divine inspirations
such a day; if I had been faithful to such a grace, if I had shunned such an
occasion of Sin, if I had practiced such a virtue, if I had mortifyed my self,
if I had been truly willing, I should be now in heaven instead of which I am
damned to Eternity, I am lost, and lost for ever. Oh terrible regret! And that
which aggravates my misery is the remembrance how often I have thought on the
pains I now endure, on that eternal regret I should one day feel if I were
damned.

Yet after all this, men damn themselves; Great God! thy vengeance is just:
they deserve it all.

Is it possible that we can avoid thinking on Hell? is it possible that we can
think on it and not be converted? Is it possible that we are converted, and do
not continue to think on it? we must have it all ways before our eyes after
our conversion to prevent our falling; the greatest Saints, those pure fouls
whose hearts were all inflamed with the Love of God thought it absolutely
necessary for them to meditate on Hell, and the apprehensions of it made them
tremble; and can any who pretend to virtue, can any Religious man imagine that
it is unnecessary to think on Hell? certainly such men dare not think on it;
they are conscious to themselves that they do not take pains enough to give
them ground to hope that they shall not be condemned; but have they less cause
to fear because they have a greater account to give? And how can they hope to
be less severely punished because they are under greater obligations?

Christ had good reason to tell us that Hell is the only evil we ought to
fear; for what is a man the worse for being hated and persecuted; for being
reduced to a mean and obscure Life, and for being mortified, if he escape being
damned?

My God! if thou art resolved to punish me for my Sins, chastise me in this
Life, but do not damn me. I will satisfy thy justice here, I will hope in thy
mercy, and will love thee; what satisfaction will it be to thee to see me in
Hell, sur rounded with flames, transported with rage and despair, hating and
cursing thee, and eternally blaspheming thy name?

My God! have thou given me time to think on the pains of Hell, only to
augment my despair one day, for being damned after having thought on these
pains? Remember I am sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, and it is through that
blood that I beg and hope for mercy; Thou have paid too great a price for me to
be indifferent whether I be lost or no. I will be saved; suffer me not to be
lost; Hic ure, hic seca, modo in aeternum parcas.
if thou will punish me do it in time, but let not my punishment be Eternal.

SECOND MEDITATION. OF THE FRVITS of Penance,
FIRST POINT. Penance is necessary for all sorts of men. SECOND POINT. What
the Fruits of that Penance ought to be.
FIRST POINT.
COnsider that mortification and penance is the only way to heaven;
Jesus Christ showed us no other way; and the Saints who from their infancy were
confirmed in grace, knew no other. It Is an error to imagine that penance is
necessary only for great Sinners, and no less an error to think that
mortification is the virtue only of the perfect; if we be Sinners we must do
penance to endeavor to appease the wrath of God, and to obtain mercy and
pardon; if we are so happy as not to have lost our innocence, penance is
necessary for us to preserve that precious treasure: we have sinned, we may sin
again, two powerful motives to do penance.

Since we all confess that men sin more frequently in the world, and that they
are more exposed to the danger of offending God than in a cloister, can we
reasonably believe that penance belongs only to Monastery's, and that none
but Religious are obliged to mortification? Do we consider that many of those
Religious whom we think indifpensably obliged to do penance, never lost their
innocence; and shall we who own our selves guilty of many Sins, and who are in
danger of committing more every moment, shall we think to persuade our selves
that mortification and penance do not belong to us?

It we had nothing but our own passions to overcome could we reasonably hope to
conquer them without the exercice of penance? and who can reasonably hope to
be saved without subduing his passions?

It is an article of Faith that none enter into heaven but those who do
violence to themselves; and yet we pretend to enter there without
mortification. The Life of man upon the earth is a perpetual warfare, for S.
Paul tells us that the desires of the flesh arc contrary to the desires of the
Spirit, and the desires of the spirit are contrary to those of the flesh; how
then can we hope to be victorious without the practice of Penance?

We please our sensual appetites in every thing, we are careful of our body's
even to excess, we follow blindly our natural inclinations, and in this
condition we live without fear in the midst of the world where we are exposed
to the greatest dangers. Certainly either we are of a different nature from the
rest of mankind, or the Devil stands in awe of us and respects us, or we are
confirmed in Grace, or else we are in danger (which is much more probable) to
dye in our Sins: Does heaven cost the most fervent and generous souls so much,
and can we expect that the lazy and imperfect should gain it with less pains?

Saint Paul chastis'd his body, he joined a continual penance to the cruel
persecutions he suffered, for fear of being perverted himself while he
converted others: And shall men who dare not pretend to be any thing near as
perfect as S. Paul, imagine that they have no need to practice mortification?

Were the Saints more frail than we? Did they expect another recompense? Did
they follow another guide? or serve another Master? Their lives were a
continual mortification, are ours like them? And can we call our selves the
Disciples of Christ while we neglect to do penance? Our Savior says, if any
man will come after me let him deny himself and bear his Cross daily.

True mortification is inseparable from true piety, not only because no virtue
can subsist long without a constant and generous mortification, but also
because no virtue is real that is not attended with it.

We have great reason to distrust our exercises of piety, our good works; every
thing is to be suspected in those whose passions are strong, and who are
unmortify'd.

It does not seem that we are afraid of the difficulty, we dislike the motive,
for what do we not suffer in the service of the world? Alas! if God required of
his servants, all that the world exacts of those who serve it, I am afraid he
would have but few servants.

How to we constrain our selves every day to please those whom our Interest
requires us to manage? what mortification so severe and so continual as a
Courtiers, a Merchants intent upon his trade, a Soldiers, or a scholars? Yet
they are not dis courag'd, they seem satisfied amydst all their sufferings; but
when God calls upon us to constrain our selves a little, every thing is uneasy,
we find his yoke heavy, virtue frights us, we are disgusted, and the sole
thought of mortification makes us loose courage.

But oh! we shall have other thoughts on a death bed; when the image of
Jesus Christ crucified is presented to us, will not the sight of it have a
quite contrary effect? it will upbraid our delicacy and increase our regret for
having lead so lazy, so sensual a Life, for having neglected penance and
mortification.

They present a Crucifix to the dying, but my God! do all the dying find much
comfort in contemplating a crucifix at their Death? is it possible, my dear
Jesus that the mortification which thou have rendered so easy, should seem hard
and insupportable only when we are to practice it in conformity to thy example,
and for Love of thee?

Oh! my God! what should I do, if thou had required of thy servants, if I
were bound to do and suffer as much for salvation, as I do and suffer to ruin
my self, thou requirest less than the world does, less than I do and suffer in
its service, and shall I refuse to do and suffer what is absolutely necessary
for salvation, what I have deserved by my offenses, and what all the blessed
Spirits in heaven have done and suffered that they might imitate thee?

God forbid that I should glory in any thing but in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Absit mihi gloriari in nisi in cruce Domini nostri Jesu Christi,
per quem mihi mundus crucifixus est, and ego mundo. Gal. 6.14,
by whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world.

SECOND POINT.
Consider that by the fruits of penance is meant not only macerating our
body's, but chiefly the mortification of our passious, and the Reformation of
our Lives; these are indeed the fruits which God expects from our Contrition
and penance: by these marks we may know whether we have made good use of the
Sacraments, and whether we be truly sorry for our Sins, and faithful to the
Grace of God.

The Exercises of Devotion, the frequentation of the Sacrements, and the
practice of good works are powerful means of perfection; but while we retain
our former passions with these powerful means, while we are as proud, as
impatient, as peevish, as envious, as difficult to be pleased, as cholerik, as
unmortify'd, as full of self Love as before, can we reasonably rely on these
pretended exercises of Piety?

Mortification of the body is an exercise of Penance, but that penance must
have its fruit, which consists in suppressing our passions, in regulating our
inclinations, and in repairing the disorders of self-Love.

To what purpose do we confess so often, if in a whole years time we have not
perhaps reformed any one of the faults that we confess? its is not enough for
us to detest our Sins, we must resolve to commit them no more, and how can that
resolution be sincere if we do not likewise resolve to avoid the least occasion
of Sin? The execution of this resolution is properly the fruit of penance. In
good earnest if we know the efficacy of this Sacrament of penance only by the
fruits we find of it in our selves, should we have an high Idea of it? It is
much to he feared that our using our selves by an unaccountable carelessness,
and especially by want of contrition to reap no profit by the Sacrament, will
render our disease incurable.

A Religious Life is a continual penance, but is there no danger of its being
unfruitful? What a miserable thing would it be for a Religious to have done
penance so long without any fruit? And what fruit can an unmortify'd Religious
who is of a worldly spirit, lukewarm and careless receive from all his
penance? He is very much in the wrong who bears the Cross, and will not taste
the fruits of it? he would not suffer more, nay he would suffer much less, for
those fruits are full of true sweetness.

It is certain that every body has very much to suffer in this life; we shall
meet with Crosses every where, they who live most at their ease are not
exempted: let us at least bear them patiently, let us unite our sufferings with
the sufferings of Christ, this will not augment them, but it will make us reap
fruit by them.

Another fruit of penance is a constant practice of mortification: My God!
what fruit may we not gather from this practice? Every thing in the world may
give us an opportunity to curb our inclinations, there is no place, no time
improper for it without deviating from the rules of good sense. Let him who
loves Jesus Christ truly make a good use of these little occasions; have we a
great desire to see any object, or to speak in some particular occasion? we may
reap great benefit by casting down our Eyes and holding our thoughts. If we
have an opportunity to gain applause by saying something very seasonably, or by
some witty piece of rallery, we have also an opportunity of making a great
Sacrifice. There is scarce an hour where in some subject of mortification does
not present it self are we sitting or standing, we may choose an uneasy seat,
or a painful posture without seeming to affect it. In fine, the inconveniences
of the place, of the season, the disagreableness of the company, born so that
we seem not to mind them, are indeed little occasions of mortification, but the
mortification its self is not little, in these small occasions. It is very
meritorious, and I may say that the greatest graces and the most sublime
holiness commonly depend upon a generous constant mortification in these small
matters. A punctual performance of the duty's of our community, an exact
observation of our Rule, a conformity to the common way of living in every
thing, without any regard to our inclinations, our employements, or our Age,
are precious fruits of a mortification so much the more considerable as it is
less subject to vanity, and more conformed to the Spirit of Christ.

These are the true fruits of penance, what hinders our bearing abundance of
them? But there is another fruit of penance yet more necessary, and without
which all the rest will avail us little for Eternity; and that is the
Reformation of our manners, the victory over our dominering passion; Let us
observe what passion is most powerful, which habit is strongest, to what sin we
are most subject, which is in some manner the source of all the rest, and of
all the false maxims we frame to our selves, in matter of Conscience. All
other fins may be strangers to us, but the domineering passion is our proper
caracter, the fruit of a true conversion is to retrench our reigning vice, to
conceive an holy detestation of that imperious passion, to fight against it
without ceasing. The Victory over this Sin alone will deliver us from the
strongest temptations: but we willingly attack our other sins and commonly
spare this: and this is the true cause of our receiving so little benefit by
our penance.

My God! what do we stay for to become fruitful? thou have cultivated us with
so much care, we are planted in a ground watered with thy tears and precious
blood; how long shall we be unfruitful? what do we get by bringing forth only
thorns? we feel their points, but we receive no benefit by our pain, because we
fly from the Cross. I am resolved my Dear Savior to neglect nothing that I may
not live such a barren Life: I can do nothing without thy Grace, I can do all
things with it, since thou give me this Time for penance, suffer me not to
abuse it any more; My God I am resolved to begin this moment to bring forth
fruits worthy of penance.

THIRD MEDITATION, OF THE SENTIMENTS We shall have at the hour of Death.
SEE, THE THIRD MEDITATION, For the month of January.

CHRISTIAN REFLECTIONS. WHICH MAY SERVE for matter of Consideration, for every
day of Retreat.
OF SALVATION.
ARe we fully convinced of the great Truths of our Religion? If we do not
believe them, we do too much, but if we do believe what we profess we do not do
enough. Dare we say that the Saints did more than was needful? tho at the end
of their Lives, when men's judgments are most impartial, they were troubled for
having done no more. How different are our Lives from theirs? Do we indeed walk
in the same way with them? Do we govern our selves by the same Rules? and yet
we pretend to arrive at the same place. Good God! have not we reason to fear
that we are out of the way? We admire the wisdom of the Saints for practicing
what they believed; but how little does our practice agree with our belief? And
shall we have cause to applaud our selves on a Deathbed for our past Lives?

Of the importance of Salvation.
What is this Salvation of which we talk so much? this soul? this Eternity? Is
it true that I am sent into the world only to secure it? is it true that I am
undone if I do not secure it, tho I should gain the whole world? is it true and
do I indeed believe that the business of my Salvation is the greatest business
I can have? That it is indeed my only business? That nothing else deserves my
care? that this requires all my applicerion, and alone depends on it? if I do
not believe this I am lost for ever; and if I do believe it, do not I deserve
to be severely punished for my indifference, which degenerates into a downright
contempt of Salvation? do I apply my self to this great business? am I much
concerned about it? And what ground have I to hope for success while I take so
little pains? should not I conclude a man ruined if he minded his temporal
business no more than I do this difficult, this important business of Salvation?

Of our indifference for Salvation.
Our indifference for Salvation is so great, that we must own that of all our
affairs we neglect this most and lay it least to heart. Whence proceeds this
unaccountable indifference for Eternal happiness? God gave us our lives only to
think on it, he judged them all little enough to succeed in it; Death for ought
we know is very near us; what part of our Life have we spent in this important
business? How few years, how few days, nay how few hours have we devoted to it?
Have we the confidence to reckon those we spend in the Church with so much
distraction and voluntary irreverence? Alas! have we made any great progress in
those hours? Can we have the face to mention the little time we have given to
hasty prayers without devotion, to Confessions without sorrow and without
Reformation, to Communions without fruit, or to a few pretended good works
which we have lost by doing them upon natural, or which were corrupted by bad
motives?

We are so taken up with superfluous cares and worldly business that we can
spare but a little Time to think of our Salvation, and we grudge the little
time we spend in thinking of it. What reason can we give for such an
unreasonable couduct? unless we will own that it proceeds from want of Faith.
If we believed that the enjoyment of God, that an Eternity of infinite
happiness, or misery (which includes and surpasses all other miserys) depended
on our diligence; if we did really believe what we repeat so of ten, that we
can not serve God and the world at once, that time is short, and that Death
approaches, that each moment for ought we know may be our last; if we did
indeed believe that Salvation is our own work and that we only can secure; it
that it is no matter what becomes of us here if we make sure of heaven, that we
loose all even temporal blessings by neglecting our Souls, and that if we be
truly careful of them we shall loose nothing not even worldly goods; if we do
seriously believe these things, how can we be careful, how can we be
sollicitous for any thing but Salvation?

Of the false pretenses of orldly men about Salvation.
It Is very surprising that men of Sense and wisdom who reason so well about
every thing else, should reason so very falsely when they are desired to think
on and work out their Salvation: they freely own that it is hard to secure it
in the world, they will make lively and pathetical deseriptions of the
Corruptions of the Age, they are very eloquent on the inevitable dangers to
which men are exposed in the world, and they readily conclude that they who
live in it stand in as much need of an Heroik virtue as the Religious in their
Convents; but when they are told that in order to Salvation it is necessary for
them to overcome themselves to mortify their passions, to follow the example of
Christ and his Saints they pretend that these virtues do not belong to them,
that it is not their business, that their condition does not oblige them to so
great a Sacrifice, and that none but Religious can live regulary, and
conformably to the maxims of Jesus Christ. Is it not natural to conclude from
hence that either the work of Salvation is not a secular Christians business,
(which is a most gross and damnable error,) or else that Secular Christians do
indeed renounce their Salvation?

Of the Facility of Salvation. Of the ill use of the means Salvation.
God could have put us under a necessity of seeking him continually as our
ultimate End and of never departing from him, but he must then have taken away
our Liberty; when we reflect on the vast number of Christians who loose their
Souls, we are ready to wish that he had subject'd us to that happy necessity of
working out our Salvation; that so we might not be tormented with the fear of
Hell. But could we desire him to secure our Salvation better than by putting
into our own hands? And because he has made me master of my destiny, of my
eternal happiness, shall I therefore be unhappy? Shall this render my Salvation
doubtful? shall this put me in greater danger? I might have reason to be aftaid
if it depended on another tho my best friend, but it depends only on me by the
help of grace which will never be wanting to me; yet this is the chief cause of
my ruin. O my God! if I do not secure my Salvation, now that thou have made me
master of it, I must own that I deserve judgment without mercy, and nothing
less than an Eteernal punishment.

Of the ill use of the means of Salvation.
Can we think of our unprofitableness under such powerful means, of our
slighting so many graces, and rendering them useless to us, without apprehending
least God should say to us as the Apostle to the Ie^vs, Vobis oporrebat primum
loqui verbum Dei. Act. 13.46.
the word of God was first spoken to you? You were born in the bosom of the
Church, you were transplanted into the fertile field of Religion, into a ground
cultivated by the Labors and watered with the sweat and blood of him who is
both God and man, How many means and helps have we had to enable us to fulfill
all the duty's of our Station, and to make us fruitful in good works? but
since these means and assistances which were so proper to have made us bring
forth an hundred fold, have been useless to us; have we not reason to fear
least he should add, But seeing you put that divine word from you, Sed quoniam
repellitis illud, and indignos vos judicatis aeternae vitae, ecee conver timu^
a^^ entes. v. 46.
and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting Life be hold we turn to the
Gentiles: This sentence is already executed on Syria and on almost all the
East, where Christianity first began, and a great part of the North,
particularly unhappy England; those nations formerly such good Christians and
who reckon among their Ancestors so many great Saints, have in these latter
times cut themselves off from the fold of Christ, while the Indians and people
of Iapan and many other barbarous nations are entered into the Church, and have
revived the primitive fervor and piety, equalling the generosity of the most
glorious Martyrs.

Of want of Faith.
Whence comes it that we make no difficulty of believing the mistery's of the
Trinity, of the Incarnation, etc. tho they are not only a bove our
understandings but seem to shock our Reason? Is it not because these mystery's
do not contradict our passions? but do we believe with the same facility the
other truths of the Gospel, the Doctrines of selfdenyal, of contempt of the
world, of love of poverty and humiliation? Yet my God! they are all grounded
upon the same infaillible Authority, thy holy word: for' it is as certain that we
shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven if we do not deny our selves,
subdue our passions, and love our Enemy's; as it is that we shall never enter
there if we are not baptized: Yet we rely very much on our faith, for every man
pretends to be one of the faithful, not considering that we have but a dead
Faith; and that we confound the knowledge of what we ought to believe with that
true Christian Faith which is allway's fruitful in good works, and without
which there is no virtue.

Of the thoughts Hell,
We believe that there is an Hell of fire and dreadful torments: and that one
mortal sin is sufficient to condemn a soul to Eternal pains; and yet are we
much afraid of mortal Sin? do we not fear Eternal flames and torment? Our
trembling at the thoughts of Hell shows we believe it, If the thoughts of its
pains be so terrible, what will it be to feel them all? how great will our
despair and anguish be when we call to mind that we would not avoid that Hell
at the thoughts of which we have so often trembled?

Of a miserable Eternity.
We talk very much of an unhappy Eternity, but do we know what it is? by often
speaking of it we use our selves to the thoughts, and so come to be very little
affected with it? A man that is accustomed to that continual vicissitude of
seasons, of years, of months, and days, amused by its variety and diverted by
its novelty finds himself in Eternity before he is aware; and in that instant
the Soul enters into an unchangable state, it is in the same condition and in
the same place where it shall remain to all Fternity: from that first moment it
suffers the same Eternal torments which it shall always suffer, so that every
minute it suffers an Eternity.

In this wretched Eternity all the different parcels of Time concur and unite
as in one point to make the damned miserable; it is a globe of an infinite
weight which bears on an indivisible point? it is a duration without end; here
these unhappy creatures suffer all the torments which the omnipotence of God
can inflict, they suffer them all at once without any intermission, and they
suffer them all perpetually without my hope of ease, without any hope that
their torments shall ever end, or they grow less sensible of them. My God how
dread full is this! If these pains were to end after as many millions of ages
as there have passed moments since the Creation of the woild, if every sinful
thought were to be punished only with an hundred millions of ages in Hell, and
a momentary act of Sin with a thousand times as many, the sinners madness would
be more tolerable tho incapable of excuse; tho they lasted long, they would at
length have an end; but to be everlasting; to be allways suffering and burning,
and certain to suffer and burn for ever without any diminution; my God! what
excess of misery!

Suppose a Soul condemned to the flames of Hell till he had filled this Chamber
with tears, at the rate of one tear in a thousand years, what a terrible extent
of time must he suffer? Cain has not yet shed above five or six but how much
more is required to fill the house? yet more to make several great Rivers, yet
more to fill the sea, and infinitely more to drown the whole Universe, and fill
the space between Heaven and Earth: Our imaginations are confounded and lost in
such a vast duration; the thought stunns us; yet alas! this though so terrible
and inconcevable is not Eternity; it is not so much as a part of Eternity; for
after all this Time is past Eternity will be still entire; And a time will come
when every damned soul shall be able to say that he might have filled and
drowned the whole universe by shedding one tear for every thousand years that
he has been in Hell, and yet he is still to undergo a whole Eternity of
sufferings; that dismal Eternity is not yet diminished one moment. Can we yet
find satisfaction in unlawful pleasures? Can we delight to sin? can Sin have
any charms for us?

My Gracious God! My good Master! my loving Savior! do not damn me, or rather
do not suffer me to damn my self; for I know thou will not condemn me till I
have by my repeated infidelity's and Sins renounced my title to Eternal
happiness. Am I worthy to be the object of thy incensed wrath, of so long and
so severe a vengeance? O my soul! arise and work, do all that is required of
thee to be saved; while it is in thy power save thy self tho all the rest of
the world perish: this is a terrible truth but it is a certain truth. We can
never comprehend this Eternity of torments, but we can much less comprehend how
a Sinner can believe it and yet live in Sin. Are we afraid to think of Hell?
'This true the thoughts of it have made the stoutest tremble, and the greatest
Saints quake; but will our not thinking of it take it away, or render it less
terrible? will our not thinking of it make us have less reason to fear
damnation?

The Fire of Hell is indeed dread full; yet an eminent servant of God observes,
that it is slight in comparaison of the stings of Conscience, of the remembance
of what is past, and of the time they have misspent; their thoughts will be
Eternally taken up with lively Idea's of the vanity of all those things which
drew them away from God, and they will incessantly call to mind, how easily
they might have been saved, how easily they might have confessed such a sin,
and have avoided such an occasion of falling. How many years of health did I
enjoy after my fall? Why did I deferr my Conversion to a death Bed? where was
all the wisdom for which I valued my self so much? I who was thought a
judicious man and capable of advising others well: I needed only to have done
what such and such have done; it depended only on me; I often designed and
resolved to do it. but I have not done it. Oh! that I had made these
reflections while I might have been the better for them: Alas! I did make them,
but unprofitably; I might have been a Saint if I would. I would not and am
therefore justly damned.

Of the pretended Conversion of the Imperfect.
Men consecrated to the service of God are often very little touched with
discourses of the necessity of being converted without delay: because they look
upon themselves as perfectly converted ever since they contracted at their
entrance into Religion, a greater obligation to be thoroughly converted; but they
do not consider that it is easier to change their state than their manners;
that a new sort of dress is not capable of subduing their passions, nor of
extirpating their vicious inclinations; this new form of Life, this outward
change dazles them at first, their passions are charmed by its novelty, the
grace of God which alway's abounds at such a time excites some good desires in
the most imperfect, in those happy beginnings every thing seems easy to them;
but it is this that so often deceives beginners; they take the common effects
of change and novelty for the effects of grace they are so satisfied with their
imaginary progress in the beginning that they persuade themselves the work is
done, that they have nothing to fear, and thus they lull themselves in a false
security, but when custom has inured them to this new course of Life, when the
chamns of novelty are over, then their passions revive with greater strength,
and are so much the more violent in that they find nothing to amuse them, and
that they have layn still and have been curbed so long: then their first
inclinations return, their natural temper gets the upperhand, and they being
careless and secure it is easy to imagine the ravage which such dangerous
enemies make in a soul that is not upon its guard. And this is the the cause
that so many Religious a^^ found more unmortify'd, more greedy of pleasures,
more fond of honors, less sensible of the eternal truths of our Religion, less
faithful to the Grace of God, and much more imperfect; after three or four
years, than they were the first day of their Conversion.

Of the false Idea which many frame to themselves of Virtue.
There is certainly some virtue a-among the greatest part of Christians, but it
is very much degenerated from the virtue of the first Ages of the Church; it is
a pliable complaisant virtue; it has so much of God as serves to gain a
reputation and to make its self esteemed; it allway's finds out a medium
between the maxims of Christ, and those of the world, and therefore it is
positively condemned by Jesus Christ and has nothing but the name of virtue.
My God! these half Christians are very unhappy, while they endeavor to please
both God and the world, they never please men and always displease God. Their
maxim is that we must be well bred, that we must have an easy indulgent virtue;
which agrees with what they call good sense, as if the spirit and maxims of
Christ were contrary to good sense. My God! how directly opposite is this
pretended virtue to the Gospel? and what abundance of souls does it ruin? Who
persuade themselves that they need not be so recollected, so exact, so modest,
that they are men and must live like men while they converse with them; Yes;
you are men but remember you are Christians, Church men, or Religious.

Of the little progress we make in Virtue.
We should be very much ashamed to own our selves or to be thought as ignorant
after ten and twenty years study of the sciences, as we were the first half
year; and much more ashamed to have it thought that we are contented to be so.
And yet how many who make profession of piety, whose great business it is to be
come perfect, are not ashamed to confess, and to have it believed, that they
would think themselves happy if after as many years study in the sublime
science of Salvation, they were but as fervent as mortifyed and as near being
Saints, as when they were but six months converted? they do indeed strive to
banish those thoughts by giving themselves up to the insipid pleasures of a
careless Life, but sooner or later Death will come, and what will their
thoughts be then?

Of the proper Virtues for every condition.
It would be a great imprudence and a dangerous error in Directors to exhort
all the world alike to the same degree of Perfection, and to conduct them by
the same methods: there are many mansions, Mansiones multae sunt in regno
Patris mei. Joan. 12.4.
many places, and diverse orders in the Kingdom of God, and tho all the
inhabitants of the Heavenly Jerusalem are fully content and perfectly happy,
yet they possess different degrees of Glory; There are Ser^phims and Angels,
and they who are not worthy of the same Rank with the Apostles, the Martyrs,
and the Virgins, may have a blessed place among the Penitents. Divisiones
gratiarum sunt. 1. Cor. 12.4.
As all do not receive the same measure of grace in this Life, so neither do
they recive the same weight of glory in the next; But it is no less dangerous
under this pretense to confine our desires and designs within the narrow bounds
of an ordinary virtue, when perhaps we have been favored with extraordinary
graces, and are called to a state which requires great perfection. It Is true,
all can not be equally perfect, but all are called to be Saints, and he that
would be a Saint must acquire and practice every virtue proper to his Station:
the same perfection is not required of all in the same Station; but the more
perfect our state is, the greater perfection is required of us; that virtue
which may be sufficient for a Layman is not sufficient for a Religious, they
who are called to Apostolical fonctions are indispensably obliged to a more
sublime virtue; and God requires a greater Sanctity in Priests than in those
who are not ordained.

Of the world.
Worldly men render themselves objects of pity when they endeavor to persuade
us that they are happy; tho they should always dissemble their vexations and
discontents, yet no man who knows of what sort of people the world is composed,
and what it requires of those that serve it, can believe a worldling happy. It
is composed of men who love nothing but themselves, who think no Law so
inviolable as their own interests, and pleasures; it is a confused medly of
people of different caracters and inclinations; where each man full of himself
is contented only with what he likes, and likes only what pleases him: One
(says an holy man) is pufft up with a vain title which he dishonours by his
actions, another is proud of his rich clothes which are yet unpaid; this man
values himself upon anohers merit, that man frets and pines away with vexation
because the world has not as good an opinion of him as he has of himself;
others break their rest to heap up Riches of which they have no need, of which
afterward they make no use. When they have ruined their health to yet an
Estate, they spend this Estate to recover their health; they must be always on
the watch against envy and jealousy, against the surprises of this Competitor
and the other Enemy; they suspect all the world, and indeed there are but few
real friends to be found in it.

What abundance of pains are daily lost in serving the world? when you have
labored with all the earnestness and diligence imaginable in its service, if
you are unsuccessful it gives you no thanks, you loose its favor, you shall be
whole years unfortunate without knowing it, and upon the first appearance of a
fault it decry's and disgraces you, and values you no more? It is not
sufficient to serve diligently and well, unless you have found the secret to
please which frequently does not depend on us; nay, which is yet more strange,
they who would not displease the world must not seem desirous to please; if it
once discovers that they have that design, it thinks it self exempt from all
obligation: it neither rewards the services of those who are not zealous enough
for it interest, nor the care and pains of those who make it their whole
business to gain its favor.

Do you rely upon your friends in the world? while you are powerful and in a
capacity of obliging many, you will never want a great number of friends, but
the moment you fall into disgrace, the moment you are no longer capable of
serving them, those pretended friends all disapear and apply thsmselves only
to him that succeeds you: and tho you were never so much a slave to a great
man, he thinks it a sufficient reward for all your services to send some
footman to enquire how you do when you are on your Deathbed.

How desirous are we to be taken notice of? but how can we expect to
distinguish our selves among such a multitude of pretenders, who all think
themselves endowed with some excellent quality, with some extraordinary merit?
what is this admiration of which we are so fond? (says the holy man before
cited) do you know that wise men admire no thing? that weak men don't admire
what deserves it most, because it is above their reach, and they are incapable
of judging? those qualitys which you think deserve most admiration seem very
indifferent to others; they have as great an opinion of their own wisdom,
virtue, and capacity as we have of ours; we think they are partial to
themselves, and they judge the same of us.

Yet the world is some rimes very free of its praises, because it sees every
body desirous of them; but if we reflect a little we shall find that those
great marks of esteem, those extraordinary praises, are the very same words of
course, which we use every day to those whom we esteem least, have we not
observed that they who are most lavish of their praises to a man's face, are the
first that speak ill of him when they are at Liberty to vent their thoughts.
Can we have so little sense as to imagine that we are the only persons to whom
men speak sincerely, and that although they praise all the rest of the world,
either out of rallery, or at best out of civiliry and custom, yet they are in
earnest when they praise us? Many believe that all the world admires them when
indeed all the world pitys them, They persuade themselves that all their
actions are taken notice of to their advantage, because they do not consider
that every man's thoughts are taken up with himself, and that he whom they
think their admirer, fancy's that they admire him.

Add to these the many cruel troubles and vexations which men feell
continually, but are forced to dissemble; how often in order to keep up their
reputation are they obliged to spend more than their revenue? how often do they
find their fortunes decaying, and yer dare not moderate their expense? They are
forced to laugh when their hearts are ready to break: the whole world is
nothing but outside and grimace, and he passes for the happiest man who can
dissemble his griefs best.

It Is the desire of Liberty that ordinarily engages men in the world; but can
men be in a greater subjection, and a more absolute dependence? not only in the
army, but in business, in every profession, we are continually subject to the
humors and will of others.

Certainly a worldling is the uneasiest man living, but it is his own fault; he
may render his troubles meritorious if he will; he need not suffer so much to
be a great Saint, if he would but suffer for God; Yes my God! the greatest part
of Christians would think thy yoke insupportable, if they were bound to do half
so much to please thee as the world exacts of them; they are certainly in the
wrong not to make use of those plentiful means of sanctification which they all
have, they need not go out of their own Station to find opportunity's of
meriting very much. They are incessantly complaining of the Vanity of the
world, yet they are every moment engaging themselves farther among those
vanity's, and grow every hour fonder of them.

Of the Confidence we ought to have in the merits of Christ.
The consideration that the merits and satisfaction of Christ belong to us is a
solid ground of Confidence; Let our wounds be never so dangerous we have a
certain cure for them; tho we were more in debt to the Divine justice than we
are, tho our debts be never so great, we are in a condition to pay them all,
for we find in the merits of Christ and in his precious blood, a treasure that
infinitely surpasses them; he had no need of them for himself, he has
bestowed them on us, so that though we should have been so unhappy as to have
committed the most heinous crimes, tho we saw the most terrible effects of the
divine wrath ready to fall on us, if we can but make one single act of true
relyance on the satisfaction of Jesus, and offer it up to thee my God, we shall
no longer need to fear our own sins, nor thy wrath, being sheltered from them
by our Saviors Cross, and washed with his precious blood, the merits of which
he is pleased to apply to us.

Of our indifference to please God.
When we value any ones friend ship we endeavor (says an eminent Servant of
God) to acquire and preserve our selves in his favor, by a thousand Services
by showing all the respect and zeal imaginable even in things to which our duty
does not absolutely oblige us, and by avoiding every thing which may in the
least displease him. The fear of punishment keeps us from attempting the Life
of the man we hate, we do neither good nor harm to those whom we think below
our notice; but when we deliberately and frequently affront a man it is an
evident sign that we neither value his Love nor fear his hatred; and if we do
not offer him the highest injury's it is not because we care for his aversion,
but because we fear his power, They who abstain only from great sins and allow
themselves a Liberty in every thing else, have reason to fear that charity is
absolutely extinguished in their hearts: and if they will examine themselves
they shall find that it is only the apprehension of the severity with which God
punishes heinous sins that keeps them from committing them: they would
willingly displease him if the sight of Hell did not stop them, they wish with
all their hearts they might sin without punishment. This is a fearful
disposition, yet it is the disposition of those who indulge themselves in
deliberate Venial Sins: God has no share in the motives that make them abstain
from great Crimes, and therefore he is not obliged to assist them; which
renders it exceeding difficult for a man who desires to avoid only mortal Sins,
to be long free from them.

Of Confession.
Tho Sacrament of Penance is an easy and efficacious remedy for all the
diseases of the Soul, and a certain means to obtain the pardon of all our Sins;
nothing is more easy than to declare all our Sins to a Priest who represents
Christ, with a true and sincere sorrow for having offended our good and
gracious God who has loved us so well. To what purpose do we confess our Sins
if we are not sorry for them and resolved to Sin no more? As it is easy, so it
is efficacious because all the merits of the Son of God are applied to us by
this Sacrament. But whence is it that we receive no more benefit by this Divine
remedy? Never were confessions more frequent, never was there less amendment,
custom brings us to Confession, and custom makes us return to the Sins we have
confessed, as if we had no other design in frequenting the Sacrament, but to
grow familiar with our Sins. If our coufessions be insincere we seem to have a
design of rendriug our selves more criminal by our confessions: we want
contrition, we content our selves with a slight and superficial Sorrow,
especially when our interest invites us to continue in our Sins, or when we
fancy they are common and small ones; we want resolution and vigorous purposes
of amendment; we content our selves with designing to committ the same sins no
more, but we will not avoid the occasions that have made us fall. Which is a
clear proof that our contrition is not sincere: are we ignorant that the want
of contrition is a grievous sin? or if we do know it, and pretend to strive to
raise it in our Souls, it is much to be feared that the Confessions of many are
null for all that? because the motive of this pretended Contrition is often
only the fear of being guilty of Sacrilege, and hence it is that as soon as
our Confession is over, and we are no longer in danger of committing
Sacrilege, we relapse again into the same faults as if we had never confessed
them: A man of sense who has seriously weighed the Reasons on both sides, is
not easily persuaded to change his design; and can we imagine that our frequent
falls were preceded by a sincere resolution to sin no more? had we no motives
to make that resolution? If God was indeed our motive, why did we so soon
change our minds? Did we take that generous resolution upon weak motives? Since
our motive subsists still why do we not continue in the same design? We ought
certainly to make but very little account of those confessions that are not
followed with amendment. My God! how will the remembrance of such confessions
trouble and torment us when w^ come to dye? One visible marl^ of true
connrition is, when we hate the occasions of Sin as much as Sin it self, when
we do indeed abhor the smallest Sins.

Of Private Friendships.
Saint Basile teaches us that there should be a perfect union between all the
Religious of the same Community, Basil in Constable. Monast. ca. 30.
but no particular Friendships; tho such private engagements may seem very
innocent, they are a for mall separation from all the rest of the body; who
loves one of his Brethren more than the rest shows by that preference that he
does not love the others perfectly, and thereby he offends and wrongs the whole
Community; Sermon. de instit. Monach.
These private unions (adds the same Saint) are a continual Seed of Discord, of
envy and suspicions, of distrust and hatred; they give occasion to divisions,
to secret meetings and cabals which are the ruin of Religion: In those
meetings, one discovers his designs, another vents his rash judgments, a third
complains, and a fourth reveals what he ought to keep secret; hence proceed
murmurings and backbitings, uncharitable censures and undutifull reflections,
upon Superiors, and by an unhappy contagion these ill dispositions communicate
themselves from one to another; and indeed the Devil has no temptation more
dangerous, and more capable of perverting the most fervent, especially young
men, than these particular friendships. As soon as one of these friends is
vexed and thinks himself ill used, all the rest share in his discontent; he
gives his passion vent and they approve it either out of complaisance or a
turbulent humor. By this means they break their Rules, and to show their
friendship act contrary to their duty: If such engagements were only between
the most virtuous, yet they ought not to be suffered because they are
particular. But they are seldom found among the truly virtuous, they are too
opposite to real piety, and are almost peculiar to the imperfect. Observe a
careless lazy Religious. you will soon find him see king some particular
Friendship contrary to the true spirit of charity and Religion. Familiaritates
aut colloquia ejusmodi haud exiguum detrimentum pariunt animae. S. Ephr. to* 1.
Saint Ephrem tells us that those unions and private conferences are very
prejudicial to the Soul and are great obstacles to true Piety; they destroy
insensibly the spirit of Devotion, and make the Soul weary of pious
conversation; they inspire a secret aversion for the fervent, and render their
very presence uneasy; it is in these particular friendships that the best
resolutions miscarry, in these the noblest sentiments which the Soul had
entertained in prayer, at the Communion, and at Mass are lost: in these all the
charitable remonstrances of superiors, and the saving counsels of Directors
are rendered useless, either by turning them into raillery, or by advancing
maxims directly contrary to the spirit of Jesus Christ. There are few virtues
proof against these occasions; Alas! how many who had begun well have split
upon this Rock, and been at last miserably ruined by these dangerous
engagements with their false Friends? Therefore this Saint advises carefully to
avoid such particular friendships, to lay this down as a principle that in
Religion we must have no such intimacy with any; Our friendships must be only
spiritual, not built like those friendships upon flesh and blood or any other
humane considerations, but founded only on God.

Of the happiness of a Religious Life.
How great is your Satisfaction O Religious Souls, if you have given your
selves without any reserve to Christ, you must be very unhappy if you, be not
content with so good a master. Every step you make in weaning your hearts from
worldly objects that you may fix them more absolutely on him, will be an
addition to your happiness. All you have to fear is least some part of your joy
should proceed from that natural peace and tranquillity which a Life undisturbed
with cares and noise affords; for then it would be a false joy: you must seek
the Cross, you must choose and love that Cross which is most uneasy to you, and
most thwarts your inclinations; you may easily find such a Cross every Day in
your convent, you will continually meet with something that contradicts your
humor, or displeases your fancy; you ought to be watchful to make good use of
these precious opportunitys of renouncing your own judment and will in all
things, without this submission your peace is imperfect, and will soon be at an
end. It Is a solid happiness to live in a Society where such perfect Piety and
so much Virtue reigns; tho the truly fervent soul who seeks only God, would
not be the worse although there were less Piety in his Community, because he is
so taken up with watching over and correcting his own faults that he has no
leisure to mind other men's: every thing helps those who have a good intention:
the bad examples which corrupt the weak, are so many incitements to increase
his Love to his Redeemer, that he may repair their negligence by his fervor
and by an holy fear preserve himself from imitating them- Yet it is a great
advantage to be sorrounded with good examples, to have always those excellent
models before our eyes to stir us up to diligence, and to make us a shamed
when we begin to languish. We shall always find such examples in numerous
convents; but if we have not living examples, let us profit by the dead; to
this end it will be very useful to read frequently and carefully the Lives of
those of your order, who by the practice of the duty's of your vocation arrived
to an eminent degree of Sanctity: but here you must have your superior's leave
for you had better do nothing than under take any thing without their
approbation; if they give you leave, you should be careful to observe in your
Reading, by what ways and methods those holy Souls arrived through the Grace of
Christ to such a degree of perfection; and you will find that having the same
graces you may easyly practice the greatest part of what they did. I have but
one thing more to add, but it is very essential, and I pray God it may never be
out of your thoughts, for I am sure if you observe it, you will find the
satisfaction of it all the rest of your Life; Remember you entered into
Religion only to save your Souls, and to prepare for the account you must give
to God when he shall think fit to call you; this ought to be your only care;
you will be examined how you have kept your vows and observed your Rule, be
always ready to answer. Let others live as they please, it is none of your
business, it is a dangetous temptation to trouble your selves with others men's
actions, it is enough for you to know what is required of you, to be persuaded
that what ever your Superious command whether you think it reasonable or no,
provided it be not sinful is indeed the will of God; this is as certain as the
presence of Jefus-Christ in the holy Sacrament. For that very thing which you
dislike is most infallibly in your circumstances, the means which God judges
most proper for your Sanctification: A superior may govern ill, but it is most
certain that God governs you well by his means, think seriously of this, for if
you do not absolutely lay down this principle, you loose all your Time: A
Religious Life is nothing but Obedience: No obedience can be meritorious that
is not rendered to God in the person of those whom he has set in his place, and
they who dispute, examine and condemn their orders, do not consider God in
them. If the spirit of God dwell in us he will give us the simplicity of a
little Infant, who thinks every thing good and reasonable, he will inspire us
with that celestial prudence which sees God in every thing, which finds him in
all persons, even in those who have least virtues, and but few of the natural
or supernatural qualitys which represent him. The greater your parts are the
more submissive you ought to be, because there is nothing more reasonable and
more advantageous than to be governed by God, in what manner or by what person
so ever he signify's his will; we can not begin too soon after our entrance
into Religion, to love Poverty; we shall find an inexpressible satisfaction to
be able to tell our Savior, my Dear Savior! I have nothing but thee; I have
no affection to any of those things which I have leave to use; if I should find
my heart inclined to any thing but thy self I would keep that thing no longer;
My God! what a satisfaction is it to dye with a Crucifix before us, after
having lived in conformity to a crucified Savior?

Of the Confidence we ought to have in Jesus-Chrtst present in the Eucharist.
It is our want of confidence in Christ that hinders our profiting by his
presence in the holy Sacrament, for he does not dwell among us to no purpose;
but our Faith is so weak, and we have recourse to him so very seldom, that it
is no wonder if we receive no more of those enlightening Graces and blessings
which he communicates to those who seek him as their Master, and who come to
him as to the fountain of all Perfection. It is no wonder that the Devil omits
no invention to keep Christians from frequent Communion and to disgust them
with it, or at least to make them have an indifference for our Savior in that
adorable Sacrament; for he knows that as love for Jesus in that holy Mystery is
the source of all good and of all graces, so the neglect of it is commonly the
cause of all the evil that we suffer.

Of true fervor.
It is much to be feared that we often take the privation of sensible
affections for a want of fervor, and look upon interior consolations as a mark
of it; by which means as soon as we find our selves dry and arid, we loose
courage a d committ faults which we take no care to correct speedily, and from
thence we degenerate into tepidity.

Besides we are apt to imagine that to live as holily as when we were full of
devotion we must needs endeavor to recover the same ardor that we have lost;
but it is just the contrary; we must begin with humbling and mortifying our
selves, as if we were warmed with sensible Graces; it is not our fervor that
renders us humble, charitable, regular, and mortified, it is a generous
exercice of humility, charity, regularity, and mortification; it is a constant
practice of these virtues that makes us fervent as we ought to be: this is a
very important lesson which if we would study well, and practice often, we
should soon find our selves very much advanced in the way of Perfection.

Of Voluntary Poverty.
My God! when shall I be sensible of the happiness of Poverty? when shall I love
it as well as thou love those who practice it? what will a vow of Poverty
avail us if we are continually disturbed with fears of being redue'd to want,
if we are unwilling to feel what it is to be poor? if we will needs be as sure
to want for nothing as the Rich themselves: who would not be poor at such a
rate? What merit can we pretend before God from a convenient Poverty? wherein
we are often better provided for, than we were before we owned to be poor; and
in which we want for nothing.

Of Aridity in the Exercises of Piety,
We are much in the wrong to disquiet and terment our selves for want of
consolations, and tender affections in Prayer; to labor after sensible gusts
in receiving, and in other Dutys; while we neglect little faults and small
observances, and let slip the occasions of denying our selves, of subduing our
wills. of conquering our fear of men, and of humbling our selves before the
world; if we were wise these things would take up all our thoughts, and we
should not make the least step toward pleasing our fancy's in spiritual
exercises; indeed it is only pleasing our fancy's for the true way of performing
our Devotion well, is humbly and patiently to suffer that aridity and the
deprivation of that pretended fervor of which we are naturally so fond, and
which the true Love of God despises and rejects with all its force.

Of the facility with which we engage our selves in the world.
We readily confess that they whom God calls particularly to his service are
happy; that being free from the vexations to which men who live in the world
are exposed, they enjoy a sweet peace and tranquillity of Conscience which is
the ordinary fruit of virtue: How often do the greatest worldlings own that a
Religious man is happy? yet no sooner does a young man design to quit the world
and to embrace this happy state, but he meets with a multitude of obstacles
from his friends and Relations, who suggest to him that he ought to spend some
years in trying the truth of his vocation; they make a lively description of
what he must expect to suffer in the state of Life which he designs to follow,
and they exagerate all the difficulties of if, One would think by their tears
that he was going to make himself unhappy, or at least to hazard his Life and
his Soul too. But if he has a mind to continue in the world, they do not think
so many precautions necessary, nor do they require so much time to resolve;
they know this vocation is much more perilous, yet they do not exact so long a
trial; instead of aggravating the difficulties, they study to disguise them,
and to palliate those real evils w^^ch they can not hide; with what pleasure do
they see an only son of great hopes, engage himself in the world? they never
trouble themselves to enquire whether he has thought sufficiently of it; on the
contrary, they fear nothing so much as his entertaining the design of leaving
it; what can be the cause of this? can Salvation be better secured in the
world? no certainly; but the true. Reason is that Salvation is generally the
last thing men think of, when they are deliberating what course of Life to
choose.

Of the false Idea's which men have of Holiness.
It Is exceeding strange; every man considers holiness with reference to the
Station in which he is not; and but few apply themselves to acquire that
holiness which is proper to their own Station; the Poor are taken up with
thinking on the opportunities the Rich have to be saved; and the rich are
persuaded that it is an easy matter to sanctify ones self, when one is free
from the obstacles that proceed from wealth; the young think no reason so
proper to work for Salvation as old Age; Youth say they is a time of pleasure
we will think of Salvation another time; And the Aged continually regret the
means of Sanctification which they enjoyed in their youth; and find themselves
incapable of many good works which they could have done then. Seculars place
holiness in the austerity's peculiar to a Religious Life, and from thence
conclude their condition unfit for it; and the Religious often loose courage in
the way of perfection which they have chosen because they consider Sanctity
only in hair shirts and sackcloth, and in those heroique actions which we
admire in the Lives of some great Saints. And thus by framing a false Idea of
Holiness the greatest part of Christians are disguisted with it, and live as if
there were no Sanctity proper for their Station. My God! how many mischiefs
proceed from this mistake.

Of the Sanctity proper for every Station.
Every man should examine what Sanctity is required of him in the Station to
which God has called him; Haec est voluntas Dei, Sanctificatio vestra. 1.
These. 4.2.
the will of God is that we should be Saints; but we shall never be Saints if
we are not exact in the discharge of those particular duty's which belong to
our condition. The virtue required of a General is not proper for a Tradesman;
the dutys of a magistrate or of a master of a Family are very different from
those which God expects from an Hermit; that virtue which is proper for
Seculars, will not suffice for Religious men; even their perfection has
different degrees, the virtue of a beginner differs exceedingly from that which
God exacts from the most perfect, the surest and most efficacious way to be a
Saint is to seek perfection only in our Station. It is for this end that the
Church sets before us the examples of great Saints of all ages and conditions;
The wise woman whom the Scripture celebrates with so much applause became a
Saint in looking after her family; Saint Louis upon the throne, Saint Isidore
at the plough, Saint Elzear at Court, and by the help of that grace which is
never wanting to us, every man may if he will, arrive to the perfection of his
state and Calling.

Of Small Faults.
He who despises little things shall fall by degrees, Qui spernie modica
paulatim decidet. Eceles. 19.^^.
says the Author of Ecclesiasticus, upon which an eminent servant of God
remarks, that the doctrine contained in those words is of great importance to
all the world, especially to those who aspire to perfection; for great matters
recommend themselves so that we are naturally more careful and exact in them,
but little things are easily neglected because we think them of no consequence;
but we deceive our selves, the danger is greater than we imagine, it is this
negligence in those small things that has hindered so many from becoming
eminently virtuous and perfect in their Station Saint Bernard observes that
they who commit the most horrid impyety's begin at first with little faults; A
minimis incipiunt qui in maxima proruunt, nemo repent fit summus.
no man is excessively wicked on a sudden; the diseases of the Soul are like
those of the body, contracted by degrees: if a little cold, a light
indisposition, had been taken in time when it was so easy to cure it, the dying
man had been now in perfect health; so when you see a servant of God fall into
some scandalous Sin, you may besure (adds that great Saint) that this is not
his first fault; it is rare to see a man wh^ has preserved the piety of an
innocent Life for a great while together, suddenly committ a grievous Sin, if
he had taken a little care at first he might exsily have prevented the progress
of Sin, but because men despised the danger while it is small, be cause they
slight and indulged themselves in little imperfections, hence proceed the
terrible falls of those who had lived so well before.

The consideration that so many souls are ruined by such small beginnings is
sufficient to make us wonder and tremble: would to God men were thoroughly
persuaded of this important Truth on which depends the Salvation, or at least
the perfection of the greatest part of mankind. The Devil is too cunning to
tempt a servant of God to a violation of essential dutys at first, he would
have but small success if he begun with soliciting a fearful Soul to commit a
mortal Sin, and therefore he insinuates himself by such small things till he
has got footing before the Soul perceives it: these infidelity's in small
things are always punished with the loss of some Grace, and by the loss of
that Grace it is deprived of many others, without whih it will certainly yield
to temptations in some occasions. This made S. Greg. 3. part. ad m^ral. 34.
Gregory say that little faults are in some respect more dangerous than great
ones: and S. Chrysostom speaks thus on the same subject; Tho the proposition
appear extraordinary and unheard of, yet I am not afraid to tell you that
sometimes it seems to me that we ought to take more care of avoiding small than
great faults: The enormity of these fills us with horror, but we easily grow
familiar with the others because we think them inconsiderable; And after all
this shall we neglect these little faults, of which the Saints were more afraid
than of heinous Sins? says Saint Augustine whether the ship be sunk by the
violence of the waves or by the negligence of the Mariners in not pumping out
the water that enters at a small leak: and he adds in another place, You are
upon your guard against great Sins, but what have you done to preserve your
self from little ones? Don't you fear them? have a care least after having
thrown your heavy lading over board to lighten your Ship, least after having
renounced every thing that seemed considerable at your entrance into Religion,
the sand in the Hold sink it, have a care least after having escaped the
violence of the storms in the tempestuous Sea of the world, when you are just
ready to enter into the port of Religion, have a care least you perish upon
little banks of Sand which seemed nothing, and which you neglected to shun, The
greatest Graces are commonly the fruit of fidelity in little things which is it
self the effect of a greater degree of Love to God, if we deprive our selves
by our coldness and want of care of those extraordinary helps, of those
singular favors which inspire so much courage against the strongest
Temptations; and which are so necessary in many cases, how often shall we be in
doubt whether we have not consented to temptation? what a great advantage
should we find at such a difficult time in having given our selves wholly to
God, and having thereby merited his special and free help, by which we are sure
to be enabled to resist all the efforts of the Tempter, and without which we
shall not only the exposed to danger, but we shall perhaps be overcome?

Of Fidelity in little things.
He that is faithful in little things will be faithful also in great things,
and indeed none but great Souls have this Fidelity. They are indeed little
things in themselves, but it is no little thing to be faithful to God in the
smallest matter: yet this fidelity will be worth nothing if we be negligent in
greater things; but we must own that this Fidelity in little things is very
great and noble; if we love much we shall neglect nothing that we know is
pleasing to those we love.

God did not choose the stoutest and boldest Israelites to overcome the
Midianites; one of the greatest victorys the children of Israel ever won was
gained by three hundred men who did not kneel down to drink in the River. In
trecentis viris qui lambuerunt aquas liberaho vos. Judic. 7.7.
What seems of less consequence than the holding up ones hands: Yet the victory
over the Amalekites depended so absolutely Cumque levaret Moses manus vincebat
Israel etc. Exodus 17.11.
on the lifting up Moses hands to heaven, that when ever he held them down the
Enemy prevailed. What do you mean Jo^sh cried the Prophet Elisha to smite the
Earth but three times, Si percussisses quinquies aut sexies, percussisses
Synain usque ad consumpptionem. 4. Reg. 13.19. Josu. 6.18.19.
if you had smote it five or six times you should have been master of all Syria
and have utterly destroyed your Enemies. How slight was the ceremony on which
depended the taking of Jericho, (O what a mock would our half devotes who
despise small things have made of it) when the walls fell down before the
people of God? Quia supes pauca fuisti fidelis, intra in gaudium Domini tui.
^^uit. 25.21.22.
Infine it is sufficient that Jesus Christ assures us, that heaven, eternal
hapiness, and God himself is the reward of fidelity in little things.

Of the Source of our Imperfections.
Though the greatest part of Christians pretend to aspire to Perfection yet
very few attain it, because they are not really willing to be perfect; they
readily believe the Doctrines of the Gospel, and the important maxims upon
which all true Piety is grounded, but they are not sincere in the application
of them. They do not dispute the necessity of doing violence to our
inclinations in order to obtain heaven, but they find out specious Reasons to
excuse themselves from that violence in certain occasions which require much
pains: they own themselves bound to subdue their passions, and they fight with
them, and frequently gain a kind of victory over them, but they do not meddle
with their reigning passions, and this is the cause that all their other
victory's signify nothing, for they should have begun with this. We must set a
continual watch upon our selves and upon every motion of our hearts that we may
suppress all our carnal desires, the many al most imperceptible but continual
selfish designs, which make us seek only, tho secretly, to advance our
interests, and a thousand other insinuations of self Love which surprise the
most virtuous, and mingling themselves with their best actions take away all
their merit, or at least diminish their Perfection.

Of the false complaisance which we have for others.
True Piety is never iucommode, it is full of Charity for all the world; a
solidly virtuous man is affable and obliging, never troublesome or uneasy, but
always in good humor, still ready to do service to others, and severe only
to himself; for the spirit of Christ is a spirit of Peace, and sweetness. This
Principle self Love which is ingenious in making advantage of every thing,
employs to deceive many who make profession of Piety, by persuading them to
draw consequences from it very different from the true spirit of Christ. Under
this pretense it would persuade us to please all the world, to displease no not
those who do not relish our Savior maxims; but how can we please him if we
pretend not to displease them? From hence proceeds that unhappy, that unworthy
complaisance which makes us so often ashamed to take Christ's part, and to
declare our selves boldly his Disciples, because we would be complaisant and
disoblige no body. But where do we find that a punctual observance of our Rule,
that modesty, recollection, and purity, and the doing our duty is disobliging?
If the imperfect are disobliged by these things we can not avoid displeasing
them, unless we are willing to betray our Consciences and displease God.

Of Exactness.
We are not afraid of being thought weak or scrupulous, for being very earnest
in pursuing our interests, exceeding careful in our wordly affairs, allway's
up on the watch to make use of every thing, to let slip no occasion of making
our fortunes, on the contrary, it is the way to be esteemed men of sense, able,
wise and prudent: but if we apply our selves seriously to the of Salvation, if
we carefully lay hold one very little opportunity of pleasing God and of
growing in virtue; If we be exact in discharging all the dutys of our Station
and faithful in the smallest matters, the world calls us weak and scrupulous,
it laughs at our care and blames our conduct: They who are most desirous to
please God are often less able to support this than any other difficulty in the
practice of virtue, they are better proof against any other persecution: My
God! if the earnest desire to please thee were condemned by the Infidels, it is
no more than we might exspect, but to meet with this difficulty among
Christians, among men who profess to be thy servants, this is one can hardly
imagine.

Of the Artifices of Self Love.
My God! how much pains would a little sincerity and truth spare those who
serve thee? we do not seek God with simplicity enough, we are not entirely
willing to please him, and we always seek our selves, nay too often we seek
only our selves, even when we pretend to seek him. My God! where is the danger
of giving our selves wholly and entirely to thee, that we take so much time to
resolve? It Is self love that spoils all and it is too true that the greatest
part of mankind is governed only by it. All the difference between ipiritual
men and those that are not so is, that self Love is barefaced in the latter,
and less visible and more distinguished in the former; and if we would take the
pains to reflect on the true motive of the greatest part of those actions which
seem least imperfect, we should find an hundred windings and turnings of self
Love which renders them all unfruitful.

Of the tender Love of God to those who serve him.
All the Sanctity and perfection of a Christian Life consists according to S.
Basil in Looking upon God as the cause of all things and in conforming our
selves entirely to his holy Will. If we were thoroughly convinced of this
important truth, what a real sweetness should we find in a spiritual Life? And
what perfect tranquillity should we enjoy being assureed that all that happens
in the World (except Sin) proceeds from a particular Providence of God who
loves us tenderly? All the world ought to have this Confidence in God, but much
more Religious men whom he has adopted in a peculiar manner and whom he has
inspired with the Sentiments which dutiful Chilldren should have for their
Father. Ps. 26.10.
My Father and my Mother have forsaken me but the Lord has received me, says
the Psalmist; Rodri. Tr. 3. c. 10.
it is an advantageous exchange to choose so good a Father in the room of him we
have left: so that now we have a right to say with confidence, Ps. 22.1.
the Lord takes care of me therefore I shall not want; J am poor and needy but
the Lord provideth for me, Ps. 69.6.
who can reflect that God himself provides for him, that his eternal
Providence watches over him with the same goodness and care as if he had no
other creatures to preserve in the whole world, who can think of this without
feeling himself transported with joy and love to God? We shall find reason
enough to love him and to abandon our selves entirely to him, if we do but
reflect on the obligations we have to his fatherly Providence, and on the
tender Love he bears us.

You believe that sickness is the effect of chance: You thought that that
humiliation, that mortification proceeded from the passions of men: They may
indeed act out of Passion, but do you know that God makes these very passions
serve to bring about his designs for your advantage? Men perhaps seek to
satisfy their revenge by using you ill, but God permits it only for your good.

When Joseph's Brethren sold him into Egypt they followed the dictates of their
vengeance, and designed his ruin, but God made their barbarous action a means
of Joseph's Glory? Since we have such powerful motives to excite us to put all
our trust in God, why do we rely no more upon him? it is because we are not
hearty toward him, we give him what he requires, only by halves, imperfectly
and unwillingly; we continually refuse him some part of what he demands, and
this is the true reason that our request are accompanied with so many fears and
so little Faith.

How far we are to imitate Virtuous men.
Good examples are a great help to us, we may easily be Saints if we converse
with Saiuts; the exercise of virtue is much less difficult in the company of
those who truly practice it: but we must have a care of taking any man for our
pattern, tho he seem never so virtuous; we must imitate his virtue, but we must
still remember that he who is eminently virtuous now may be perverted, and that
the most perfect is he that has fewest faults. When we propose to our selves to
imitate any man we are in danger of imitating his very imperfections: Our
opinion of his virtue makes us copy every thing he does, we follow blindly all
his examples, and very often we imitate his faults more than his virtues.

Of insensibility proceeding from carelessness.
How can a Religious man who lives carelessly or a Priest who is indevout, and
who dishonours his sacred Character by his manners, think without trembling on
the account they must give to God of all the graces they have abused, of all
the good which they should have done and of which they have rendered themselves
incapable, and of all the means of sanctification of which they would make no
use? These unhappy men are like those who after having served God fervently for
some time, grow careless and weary of his service: God usually punishes their
infidelity in this Life, and some times without delay by an insensibility which
often degenerates into hardness of heart; we have a terrible example of this
insensibility in Judas, who had without doubt received singulars favors from
Jesus Christ, no sooner was he grown careless and had perverted himself but he
fell into a strange insensibility which became incurable; he could hear his
Savior say the most touching things in the world without being at all
affected, when the blessed Jesus pressed his Conversion in the tenderest and
most loving as well as most forcible manner; Unus ex vobis trader me, Mare.
14.18.
when the son of God discovered the wicked intentions of that Traitor without
naming him, all the rest of the Apostles trembled for themselves, Judas only to
whom he spoke is unconcerned: when a soul is insensible it soon grows impudent;
Judas has the face to ask if his Master means him: Tu dixisti. Matt. 6.64.
Christ conceals it no longer, but this answer which should have filled him
with confusion makes no impression on his hardened heart; he hears coldly that
terrible threatening from his Saviors Vae homini illi per quem Filius hominis
tradetur. Matt. 26.24.
mouth. Woe to that m^^ by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed, and remains
insensible; Jesus condescends to wash his feet, to give himself to him in the
communion, to exhort and threaten him, yet nothing moves him, nothing can stop
him, he goes out and puts his impious design in execution, and accomplishes his
black and malicious ingratitude by a treacherous kiss. How should we tremble at
the thought of this insensibility? It is the most dreadful of judgments and so
much the more dreadful in that it is not perceived by those who lie under it?
The surest mark that we are not in that state is a fear least we should be in
it? nothing is so difficult as to convert those who are not sensible of their
want of Conversion.

Of the thoughts of Death,
The thought of death is a most powerful argument to convince us of the vanitys
of this Life: we shall easily be disgusted with the empty pleasures of the
would, its imaginary honors, and its false Riches for which we weary our
selves, if we seriously reflect where they all end; in a winding sheet, in a
Coffin; in a grave; in worms and dust, there are the end of all humane Pride
and greatness. Form as many vast projects as you please, rely upon your wisdom,
friends, and Riches, you must quit them all whether you will or no, and they
will all abandon you. Only thou o God! do never forsake those who serve thee,
I will therefore love and serve thee, and none but thee.

Of our condescension to the Imperfect.
It is surprising that men have so little consideration for fervent Christians,
while they have all the condescension in the world for the careless and
imperfect. But we do not see the special hand of providence who herein favors
those whom he loves most: is a man truly virtuous? we make no scruple of
excercising his patience, his desires are frequently crossed, and he is often
forced to do what he does not like, yet at the same time we refuse nothing to
the imperfect whether it be that we use them like sick men that are past
recovery whom we let have what they please or that God by a terrible judgment
lets them alone in this Life, and leaves them to their own imaginations.
However hard this distinction seems, it is much for the advantage of those who
serve God faithfully, and renders them much more esteemed by all who judge
wisely and who are animated by the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Of natural inclinations to Virtue.
Men of soft and peacable tempers who seem born with a natural propensity to
virtue are in great danger of being but indifferently virtuous and of making no
progress in the way of perfection if they do not heep a strict watch over all
the motions of their hearts; else their natural tranquillity will degenerate in
to an indolence which is very a greable to self Love, so that they will take no
pains to acquire great virtues and will content themselves with an obscure
Life, and with a seeming moderation not founded upon humility but the pure
effect of self Love, which is unwilling to take pains and chooses a moderate
virtue for fear of meeting with oppositions and sufferings in the pursuit of a
more sublime. But alas! they who satisfy themselves with an ordinary virtue
will in all probability live and dye destitute of all true virtue.

Of true Zeal.
It is a dangerous fault to be uneasy when others do as many or more good works
than we: would to God that all Preachers were eminent and successful; would to
God that every Director of souls had the gift of wisdom and discerning of
spirits, the zeal and solid piety which are so necessary for all Directors; so
God be glorified what matter it whether I or another be the instrument? when
the good success of others in the exercise of their Ministry is a real
satisfaction to us it is a sure sign that we seek only his Glory.

Of sincerity in the Service of God.
Many desire to be perfect, and from time to time endeavor after it, yet how
few attain it? That which hinders the greatest part from advancing in the way
of virtue is a want of sincerity in Gods service, some little affections which
they do not and will not renounce, it is self Love disguised under these
specious names of moderation, good sense, prudence, and civility; in fine it is
a certain secret pride which corrupts the greatest part of their best actions.
God will be served with a dove like simplicity, with an uprighteness of soul
that cannot stoop to those little arts of self Love which are so prevalent
every where; we seek an easy Director, we torment our brains to forge something
like Reasons to excuse our selves from some duty's which we know in our
Consciences God requires of us, but which we sind unpleasant, and are unwilling
to perform; Do we think to deceive God by these artifices? The number of those
who seck God in spirit is very small, who serve him with that true simplicity
which is necessary to Perfection; how many instead of endeavoring to pleasa
God, Study to persuade themselves that they may please their own Appetites in
every thing, without displeasing him? If they make him any little Sacrifice;
They presently find out some way to make themselves amends. How come so many
Professors of Piety to be so very sensible in the imaginary points of Honor?
The tone of a voice, a disobliging word disturbs them, Let them make as much
use as they please of the words Modest, and humble, true humility is
inseparable from Patience and sweetness. Many think that they are truly humble
because they have a mean opinion of themselves, but they deceive themselves if
they are not willing that others should have the same thoughts of them. It is
not sufficient to know that we have no true virtue or merit, we must be wiliing
to have others believe it too.

Of submission of our wills.
It is generally said, and perhaps not without appearance of Reason, that
devout men are fond of their own opinions; but it is an error to think that men
who will always follow their own Wills, and are obstinately conceited of their
own sentiments, can be truly devout. This submission of our Wills is that
renouncing of our selves which Jesus Christ requires so positively, and
commands so often in the Gospel, and without which we cannot be his Disciples.
And indeed we can never be truly virtuous without this submission both of our
Understanding and Will.

Of the Love of Christ.
If any thing (says agreat servant of God) could shake my faith in the Mystery
of the Eucharist, it would not be a doubt of that infinite power which God
exerts there: I should sooner stagger at the exceeding Love of Jesus in giving
himself there to us; for I am not able to comprehend how men can believe that
he is present on our Altars, and that they receive him in this adorable
Sacrament, And yet be indifferent and cold to him, be forgetful of and
disgusted with him.

Who would not expect that such a wonderful Prodigy of Love, should excite, at
least, a desire, an earnestness, and exceeding tenderness in the hearts of all
men? But Alas! it is just contrary; We act as if we should have loved him more,
if he had loved us less; I tremble, O my God! at the thought of the indignitys
and outrages which the impiety of bad Christians, and the fury of Heretics
have offered to thee in this August Sacrament; how Sacrilegiously have they
profaned thy Altars, and thy Churches? how impiously an'd scornfully have they
often treated the Body of Christ? Can any Christian call to mind these horrible
impiety's without being earnestly desirous to repair by all possible means
those barbarous outrages? And how can a Christian live, and not have that
desire?

Have I often thought on this? Do I think often on it? I who appear so seldom
at the foot of the Altar, and who am so unwilling to spare a little Time to
adore my Savior, a specially at those hours when the Churches are least
frequented.

My God! I will think seriously on it for the future, because I will now begin
to love thee truly; and certainly it is high time for me to begin: I have made
several resolutions to love thee and have broke them all, but I am confident
this will be effectual; Yes my Divine Savior, I am fully resolved to love
thee, and to love thee without any reserve: thou have loved me, and would
have me love thee, and therefore I am sure that thou will not refuse me thy
Grace to enable me to love thee; full of this hope and confidence I am bold to
say with thy Holy Apostle, Quis ergo nos separabit a charitate Christi? Certus
sum quia neque mors neque vita, neque Angeli, neque Principatus, neque
virtutes, neque instantia, neque futura; neque fortitudo, ^bque altitudo, neque
profundum, neque creatura alia, poterit nos separare a charitate Dei, quae est
in Christo Jesu Domino nostro. Romans 8.35, 38.39.
who shall separate me from the Love of Christ? I am certain that neither Death
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principality's, nor Powers, neeiher the sight of
things present, nor the prospect of things to come, nor greatness, nor
adversity, nor any Creature, shall ever be able to separate me from, ordeprive
me of the Love of God which is in Jesus Christ our Lord,

FINIS.
THE COMPOSER NOT understanding English, many litteral faults have escaped
correction, which the Reader will easily mend, as also the mistakes in the
Stops and points.
Such faults as spoil the sense, are here set down.
P. 5. l. 29. blot out, not. p. 17. the last line. r. of our. p. 25. l. 11. r.
their vanity. p. 26. l. 3. and 4. for at r. as. p. 29. l. 8. blot out, in p.
40. l. 13. r. like them. p. 58. l. 15. blot out, you are put in that dignity.
p. 73. l. 25. after Salvation, r. have we made good use of the general? p. 80.
l. 12. and 13. for, do compose. r. discompose. p. 97. l. 1. r. he is like. p.
98. l. 11. blot out, not. p. 112. l. 26. and 27. for confession. r. conversion.
p. 121. l. 28. for Hove r. Above. p. 153. l. 18. for own. r. owe. p. 171. l.
19. after. our wills. r. to his. p. 203. l. 9. for any. r. my. p. 208. l. 3.
for of. r. or. p. 216. l. 1. for OCTOBER. r. NOVEMBER. p. 216. l. 3. for
willingness. r. un willingness. p. 217. l. 24. for their. r. share. p. 227. l.
16. for, of. r. if. p. 238. l. 6. for. S. Bonavenre. r. Bonaventure. p. 258. l.
r. r. Sin has. p. 266. l. 22. for. to. r. do. p. 272. l. 1. for. thoughts. r.
tongues. p. 277. l. 21. for applicerion. r. application. p. 280. l. 17. for,
orldly. r. worldly. p. 282. l. 2. and 3. blot out, of the ill use of the means
of Salvation. p. 290. l. 16. for this. r. it is. p. 293. l. 9. for. chamns. r.
charms. p. 3e 1. l. 17. for owned. r. vowed? p. 325. l. 7. for. reason. r.
season. l. 8. for, for Salvation. r. out their salvation. p. 330. l. 16. r. It
matters not says S. Augustine, p. 332. l. 1. for the. r. be. p. 335. l. 23. and
24. for. to displease. no. r. not to displease any man, no. p. 337. l. 2. for.
one very. r. on every. p. 337. l. 20. after, is. r. What. p. 352. l. 20. for
aspectaly. r. especially.

There are some quotations omirted in the Margin, and diverse faults in those
that are inserted j it is needless to remark them for those who do not
understand Latin: and they who do, know how to correct them.


