THE ROYAL AND HAPPY Poverty: OR, A Meditation on the Felicities of an Innocent
and Happy Poverty: Grounded on the Fifth of Matthew, the third Verse. And
addressed to the late and present Sufferers of the Times.

Contabit Vacuus Coram latrone viator. Nec habeo, nec Careo, nec Curo. LONDON:
Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread Eagle, at the West End of Paul's,
1660.

TO THE READER.
WHat to others (skilful at fishing in troubled waters) has bin an opertunity
of enriching and aggrundizing themselves; Was to the Author of this discourse
the occasion of his Meditation: Who though he cannot boast the improvement of
his Fortunes, yet thinks he has gained som^thing by the Disasters of the
Times, in that acquaintance they have brought his thoughts with Poverty, And if
he have herein walked Antipodie to the humor of his Age, and in a time when the
thoughts of others were most studious and intent upon their gain and interest,
and floting on the golden sands of Pactolus; he has employed his another way,
he hopes it is without offense. And that (in an Age fuller of Wolves than Men,
more fruitful in the production of Monsters than Animals, and Prodigies than
Births: in which not only Government, but every thing else, both Civil and
Divine, has been exposed to violence, and the violent taken it by force: In
which men live more by spoil and rapine, than according to the Rules of Law, or
Dictates of Reason) a Meditation of this Nature will not seem impertinent or
unseasonable: especially to such, who either through Conscience or modesty are
ill adapted to jostle in a turbulent and tumultuous World, that had rather
sequester themselves than others, and entertain their thoughts with the
felicities of an innocent and Happy Poverty, than Projects of waxing rich by
wrongs and injuries.

That the Author came too late into the World to obtain a Part in the late
Tragedies, or was too young to Espouse a faction in the late unhappy Quarrels,
he is thankful unto Providence: But that the date of his Nativity was so timed,
as to render him a Spectator, though not a Gamester, to give him an opportunity
of improving his Reason, though not Estate; and gathering Experience though not
Riches, from the bitter root of our Public Evils, he numbers not amongst his
Misfortunes: not that he took delight in beholding the Tragedies of his
Country, or was pleased to see the place of his Birth become a Cockpit of
strife, a Scene of Blood, or Shambles of Slaughters and Villainies: But for that
as Solomon has said, its better going to the house of mourning than rejoicing.
He supposes it may in a like sense, be more advantageous to be born in a time
of affliction than prosperity. And if something either of Ingenuity or Honesty
excluded him from dividing the spoil, and sharing the Prey with the Nimrods and
mighty Hunters of the Age, he hopes he shall not be envyed the improvement of
his Poverty, by those who without his Envy possess the good things of the
Earth, it being the only and best advantage he was able to make of the worst of
times.

And if any be offended at either the Luxuriancy of Style, or Loosnesse of
Method in this Discourse, as judging them unsuitable to the gravity of its
Subject; they are desired to take notice, that it is not a Sermon but
Meditation, and therefore speak not the Dialect of the Pulpit, but University,
as being penned not by an ancient Theologue, but young Disciple; who though he
made use of a Text of Scripture as a Clue to guide his thoughts, through the
Labyrinth of his Discourse, the better to avoid confusion: yet intended not to
betray himself to the bondage of any Laws that should abridg the liberty of
using such style and method as should best correspond to the humor of his
Fancy, and suit with the Nature of an Essay or loose Discourse. If therefore
maturer Judgments shall discover any Lapses or Errata's, as may not be
difficult, in a work that pretends as little to perfection, as its Author to
Infallibility, he hopes they may be looked upon as the more veneal, by reason
immaturity of years may be some Apology for the same in judgment: The Heavens
are not altogether free from Corruption, and Modern Curiosity has discovered
spots in the Sun; and therefore it were the highest arrogance Worms are capable
to be guilty of, to undertake the projection of any thing should vye perfection
with those Celestial bodies, or pretend exemption from all manner of
Deficiency: it being the sole Prerogative of the inerring Councils of a Deity
to put forth Editions without Errata's, or become the Author of what can boast
an absolute perfection and immunity from all flaws and wrinkles that may stain
the beauty and symmetry of its proportions. I shall not longer detain you in
the Threshold, only give me leave to tell you, That Poverty is a better Guest
to a Man's thoughts than House, and is more comfortably entertained in a
Meditation than Family; and am persuaded were it oftener so treated, we should
seldomer be necessitated to receive it in the quality of a Domestic: But the
unhappiness of most is to have no other acquaintance therewith, than what is
acquired by an unfortunate Experience: and never to spend thought thereon, till
it comes upon them liks an armed man, till it comes to quarter and take up its
abode with them, to be their Inmate, and familier Companion. Which is but just
on those that would never know it as the Object of their Charity toward
others, while the day of their prosperity lasted. Now to such who through the
injury either of past or future times must expect the coming of this unwelcom
Guest to lodge and quarter with them, is this Discourse more especially
addressed; that they may know how to entertain, how to welcome, how to improve
and make good use of the worst of Evils: that they may be able to deceive their
misery, to supplant their misfortune, to thrive by their losses, and turn their
Crosses into Crowns. All which is to be obtained by that Poverty of spirit,
this Discourse recommends, that will fully compensate and make amends for the
injuries of Fortune, together with all other Afflictions that may befall them
while Providence continues their Pilgrimage in this Vale of Tears.

THE Royal and Happy POVERTY.
Being a Meditation on the fifth of Matthew verse 3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. WE need
not travel far for the coherence of these words, being lodged in the two next
preceding verses.

And seeing the multitudes he went up into a mountain, and when he was sat his
Disciples came unto him; and he opened his mouth and taught them, saying, etc.

Where we may take notice of 1 The Preacher, and that is Christ. 2 The
occasion, and that was his seeing the multitude. 3 The Auditory, and that was
mixed, consisting of the multitude, and his Disciples. 4 The place, and that was
a Mountain. 5 Lastly, the Doctrine, and that was the words of the Text: I shall
discourse briefly on these several particulars, by way of Preface, for the
better paving the way to what is designed for the chief Subject of this
Discourse.


1 The Preacher, and seeing the multitude, he went up into a Mountain, etc.
that is Christ, Hebrews 1. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners
spoke in times past unto the Fathers, by the Prophets, ver. 2. has in these
last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all
things, and by whom also he has made the World. Should God send us Heavenly
Treasure in Earthly Vessels, we ought not to refuse it: Should God speak to us
from the mouth of a Babe, or Suckling, we ought not to despise it, for out of
the mouths of such he has sometimes ordained praise: And therefore we are not
so much to look at the Messenger, as the message; it matters not much through
what pipes, or of what metal the Waters of Life are conveyed to us, though
through leaden pipes, the basest and most ignoble of all metals. If God send
us a message (as he sometime did Balaam) by the mouth of an Ass, we are bound
to receive it, to lend a willing and obedient ear unto it; with how much more
attention then ought we attend unto the preachings of the Son of God? It Is said
the Queen of Sheba came from far to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, to sit under
the Ministry of the King of Israel, to sit under the droppings and teachings of
that wise Kings lips.

Lo! here is one greater then Solomon, one greater then an Angel, not the
wisest of Kings, but the King of Wisdom, the Wisdom of God, the Fountain of
which, the wisdom of Solomon was but as a small drop, the Ocean of which, his
was but a shallow stream, or small rivelet; the Sun of which, his was but as a
little spark, or a faint and glimmering beam; the sum and substance of which,
his was but a dark type, and gloomy shadow; the consideration whereof should
quicken up our attention, for shall God bow the Heavens to speak unto us, and
shall not we lift up our hearts unto him? Shall Christ take so long a journey,
as to descend from heaven, and come of an Embassy from the Father to us, an
Embassy of Grace and Peace, and shall we not give him audience? shall Wisdom
it self charm us, and we like the deaf Adder stop our ears? Shall the Eternal
Son of God turn Divine, and become a Preacher to the sons of men, and not
obtain an Auditory? Shall Christ call unto us, and we not answer? Rather let us
say with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servants hear: And as it is in the parable
of the Vineyard, though we have buffeted the servants, and stoned those that
were sent unto us, yet let us reverence the Son, least we be cast out into that
place of torment we read those unworthy servants deservedly were.

Thus much concerning the Preacher; I thought not impertinent to premise, for
the better quickening and awakening of attention to what follows.

2 The occasion, and that was Christ's seeing the multitude. Christ sometime
said he had meat the world knew not of, for it was his meat and his drink to do
the will of him that sent him. He went up and down seeking occasion, and
arresting all opportunities of doing good: He could not see poor souls wandering
like sheep without a Shepherd, but the bowels of his compassion yerns toward
them, but his soul melts and dissolves in pity to them.

And herein he has set a Copy for our imitation; thus should we waylay (as I
may so say) occasions, and even court opportunities of doing good: Thus should
we endeavor after that hid Manna, making it our meat and drink to do the Will
of God: Thus should the bowels of our love yern toward our Brethren, and
whenever we see poor souls wandering like lost sheep, straying after their own
inventions, and wilderd in their own imaginations, endeavor to set them right,
and bring them back to the Fold of Christ.

In cases of necessity every man is to be a Physician, so may I say in some;
yea, in any cases, every man is to be a Divine, not that I would lay waste the
profession of the Ministry, by treading down any hedge, either Divine Right,
or Humane Prudence, has made to fence and enclose it: or encourage any one
rashly, and without a Call from God, to intrude and break into that Divine and
Sacred Function; no, I would not willingly prompt any to lay unhallowed hands
upon the Ark of God; as if the Ark of Religion could not stand, unless prop'd
up by irreligious presumption, or that the Heavens of Christianity were in
danger to fall, unless some profane and presumptuous Herculesses put under
their shoulders to bear them up, and become the Atlas, or Pillars, to support
them: No, I know its a dangerous thing to offer strange fire to the Lord, all
are not to meddle with the holy things of the Altar, least the fire of Gods
Wrath break forth upon them, as we read it sometime did not those that too
rashly and unadvisedly usurped the Priests Office, so dangerous a thing it is
to be too busy and presumptuous: There is a Sanctum Sanctorum of some
Ordinances, into which all must not enter, with which it may not be safe for
every one to meddle: But thus far we may safely go and own, as the duty of
every one that is called to be a Christian, to be continually exhorting and
admonishing one another: I say, whosoever has a gift, or talent from God,
ought to improve it to the utmost he can for Gods Glory: Let no man therefore
be ashamed to exhort his Brother, to preach unto his Neighbor, to instruct his
Family, for every one ought to be a King, Priest, and Prophet to himself, and
his own Family and with Job, offer Sacrifice for his own house.

Solomon, who best knew how to put a right and true estimate on Honor,
triumphed more in the single Epethite of the Preacher, than all his swelling
titles, as King of Israel, and therefore prefixes that before all others, to
imbellish and enrich his Name. It was a good custom of the best Kings of
Israel, to read the Law unto the people; and it is well known, that the
Imperial Purple of Great Constantine never blushed to see him preach unto his
Subjects: Let no man therefore be ashamed of the Gospel, as he would not have
Christ ashamed of him at the great Assizes of the world.

God under the Law required the first fruits, and the firstborn to be
dedicated to him, but its the custom of our Age to offer their youngest sons to
the service of the Altar; and do we not herein, like blind Isaac, give the
blessing to the youngest? And may we not say to our great Gentlemen, and Elder
Brethren, that wholly sequester themselves to any employment or profession,
rather than the Ministry, that like Esau, they sell their birthright for a
mess of pottage; or as Christ said to Martha, Martha, Martha, thy Sister has
chosen the better part: So may we not say to these Gallants, Your younger
Brethren have chosen, or rather gotten the better part; that Jacob has
supplanted Esau, and is gone away with the blessing.

In the Primitive and Virgin Age of the World, before it was deflowred and
debauched by ill customs, and therefore celebrated by the wanton pens of
Poets, under the name of the Golden Age; the Heads of Families both taught and
governed the rest of their Brethren, which as it was the first and original
Copy of Government, so may rationally be presumed the fairest, and less blur'd
with Tyranny, than those more imperfect modern Transcripts that latter Ages
have drawn in lines of blood.

It was a custom among the Romans, if any Soldier had saved the life of a
Citizen, to reward his val or with their Corona Civica, to bestow some special
mark of Honor on him: Of how great honor then may he be thought worthy, that
reprieves the life of a Citizen of the New Jerusalem, that saves a soul, not
from a natural, a temporal, but an eternal death?

The gratitude of Alexander, acknowledged himself no less beholding to his
Master Aristotle, than to his Father Philip, as having received from him
nothing but his being, and simply to live, whereas from Aristotle he had
received his well-being, and how to live well: I am sure we are more indebted
to our Spiritual Parents that have begotten us unto the Lord, that have been
the means and instruments of Regeneration, of forming the New Birth, and
bringing forth Christ in us, than we are to our Natural Parents, that brought
us into the world, into this vale of tears and misery.

Oh! its a glorious thing to save Souls, to snatch poor Souls like brands out
of the fire of Hell, to rescue a soul from the jaws of Eternal Death, to be an
Index Mercurius, to direct and show men the way to Sion.

This is a holy ambition, and worthy of the bravest spirit, to save one soul,
being more glorious than to conquer a thousand worlds.

The profane adulation of the Romans Deified their Emperors, and there being a
new Star discovered about the time of Julius his death, the credulity of their
Superstition prompted them to believe it Caesar's Soul: But we may without
either flattery, or Superstition, safely believe, that such Souls shall shine
as bright and resplendent Stars in the Firmament of Glory, the light of whose
Life and Doctrine, while here on earth, lead many to Christ. For certain, were
the Conversion of a Soul a slight business, there would not be such solemn
Triumphs in Heaven, such shoutings and rejoycings among the Angels, at the
Conversion of one sinner.

And that this may fall with more weight, and leave the greater impression on
our spirits, it may be worth our while to consider, that whenever we loose,
or let slip an opportunity of doing good, whenever we neglect reclaiming any
poor wildred soul, that is lost and entangled in his own inventions, and
straying after his own imaginations, if he die in his sins, and perish from the
way of Life; how if God should require his Soul at our hands.

Its said in the Law, By whosoevers hands man's blood is shed, his blood shall
be shed. Now if they that prevent not Murder, when its in their power, contract
much of the guilt, and become accessory to the crime, shall not we be stained
with the guilt, and become accessory to the Eternal death of our Brother, if we
put not forth our endeavors to convert and reclaim him, especially of such as
the hand of Providence has delivered over to our care, and as it were, put
under the wing of our protection? May not God thus require of Masters of
Families the blood of many that have perished, that have miscarried under their
charge; and of Magistrates, the blood of the People, and their Subjects? It
will not excuse us to say, that we are no Divines, Divinity is none of our
profession: Is it not enough that we pretend to be Christians, that we wear the
Livery of Christ's Name, that we make profession of the Gospel, ought not then
Divinity to be every one of our Studies, every one of our professions?

Did God require under the Law, that if our enemies sheep fell into a pit, we
should help it out? And will he not require, that if our Neighbor, our friend
fall, we should be so unchristian, so unnatural, so inhumane, as not to put
forth our hand to help him up? Can we do one another a more friendly office, a
greater kindness, a more rich, a more Noble, a more obliging favor than (like
the good Samaritan) to pour Wine and Oil into one another wounds, than to
wash, dress, and cleanse the spiritual soars of one another Souls? Can we any
way do a more charitable and Christian Office?

Its reported of a good Heathen, that whenever he had not gained a new
friend, or by some Noble Office of Love or Friendship, obliged someone or other
to him, so great was the generosity of his mind, he used to say at night, diem
perdidi, alas I have lost a day, as counting that day unworthy to be numbered
and reckoned to the Calender of his life, in which he had done no good: And
shall not we Christians sit down every evening, and take account of our selves,
what good we have done each day, and with Job, curse that day, and account it
as altogether lost, and unworthy to be numbered, in which we have gained no
opportunity of doing good.

Does God require we should honor him with our substance, and will he not
likewise expect we should honor him with our parts and faculties? Will he not
expect that all our talents should be put forth to use, that our whole stock
should be laid out and improved for bringing in some Revenue, some tribute of
honor to the Exchequer of his Name and Glory? though it be as small as the
Widows mite, it will be accepted.

Let every one therefore take heed of hiding his Talent, of laying it up in a
Napkin, of burying it under ground, least it be taken from him.

Does God require the seventh part of our time, and the tenth part of our
estates? and will he not likewise require some tithe of our gifts and
faculties? Has God opened to any one a door of utterance, given him the Tongue
of the Learned, bestowed on him the gift of Eloquence, let him not think he may
do therewith as he pleases, or that he can make a better use thereof, than by
becoming an Orator for God, to court and woe men to come in unto the Lord
Jesus, and accept of the offers and tenders of Love, Mercy, and Grace, that are
made unto them in the Gospel, as God shall put opportunities into his hand; for
is it not a Noble thing to be employed as a Labourer in Gods Vineyard, to be a
builder of the Church of God? which honor if any one refuse or despise, let him
know that God who at first opened, can as easily shut, and bar again the door
of his utterance, and give him a stammering tongue, in stead of the lips of
knowledge.

So if God has given to any man the illumination of his Spirit, and has
caused his Face to shine upon him, has given him any taste and experience of
his love, let him not think scorn to communicate of what he has received, and
help build up the walls of Sion, least God rob and plunder him of his
enjoyments, and eclipse the light of his countenance from him.

Will God require of us an account of our Stewardship in the outward things of
this life? Will God require of us his Flax, and his Wine, and his Oil, if we
waste, and abuse them? And will he not require a more exact and severer account
of all the gifts and Intellectual Endowments his Mercy has bestowed upon us?
Will he not much more require them at our hands, if we honor him not with them?

Has God promised the increase of his blessing, and the blessing of increase
on our outward mundane enjoyments, if we lay them out for his Glory? Has he
been pleased to acknowledge himself our Debtor, for our charity to the poor,
and said, He that gives unto the poor, lends unto the Lord? Has he been
pleased to become our Surety, to enter into Bonds and Covenants, to pawn his
Word, and engage his Promise, that if we cast our bread upon the Waters, after
many days we shall find it? And will he not become much more our Debtor for
our Spiritual Alms, for our Spiritual Charity, if we cast (as I may so say) the
Bread of Life upon the waters; if we deal to the poor of our Spiritual Food, of
our Spiritual Manna, if we relieve the hunger of poor starved souls? Shall not
he loose his Reward that gives a cup of cold water to a Disciple? and shall he
think you be without reward, that refreshes the poor, dry, and parched soul
with the Waters of Life, that draws waters out of the Wells of Salvation for
poor souls? Is our liberality of the things of this life so acceptable to God?
and will not our Spiritual Charity be much more?

Moreover, Is our Charity to the poor, and lending to the Lord of these outward
things, the best and greatest Usury, the best and greatest way and means of
improvement, God having promised to return an hundred fold? And is it not as
good husbandry, as good a way of improving the treasures of the mind, the
talents of Wisdom and Knowledge? If any have robbed the Egyptians, have stolen
from the Heathen any Earings or Jewels of Humane Learning, any Pearls of
Knowledge or Science, can he better employ them, than to adorn the Truths of
the Gospel with them, than to have them sanctified by the Altar? Is there any
better way to increase the stock of our Learning, to enrich the treasures of
our understanding?

But if this consideration seem slight, or will not prevail with us; however,
let the fear of loosing them, the fear that God may blow upon them, and cause
them to blast and wither; for, as was observed before, how justly may God
strip, rob, and spoil us of them, if we refuse to glorify him with them? How
justly may he eclipse all the light of our Knowledge, by infatuating our
understandings, and confounding our memories? How justly may he turn our Sun
into Darkness, and our Moon into Blood? How justly may he benight all our
faculties with ignorance, or cause them to set in a cloud of dotage and folly
before the evening, nay, in the very morning of our age? How justly may he turn
our wisdom into folly, and our prudence into madness? Oh! how many great Wits
have on this account been blasted, that might otherwise have been bright
Stars, Stars of the first Magnitude in the Firmament of Knowledge, and glorious
Luminaries in the Orbs of Learning, who through the just Curse of God upon
their parts, have either proved blazing Meteors, or flaming Comets, to fill the
World with wonder and amazement, and then extinguished in smoke and ashes, or
gone out like the snuff of a Candle, leaving nothing but the memory of their
wickedness to stink in the Nostrils both of God and man.

Let this consideration at least prevail with us, to write after this Copy,
Christ has set us, of arresting all opportunities of doing good, and to honor
God with all the faculties of our Souls, with all the gifts and endowments of
our minds, least he plunder and strip us of them, least he dethrone our
Reasons, and turn us a grazing with the Beasts of the Forest, as he sometime
did Nebuchadnezzar, and make us to eat thistles with the Ass.

I confess I have dwelt something too long on this particular, viz. The
occasion, but it yielded so fruitful an Harvest to my thoughts, that I knew not
how to crowd them into less room, or gather them into fewer periods.

The third particular is the Auditory, and that was mixed, consisting of the
multitude, and Christ's Disciples.

During the time of Moses's Administration under the Law, God had a peculiar
people, the Nation of the Jews, whom his Favor was pleased to pick and cull,
as a precious Jewel from the dross and rubbish of the rest of mankind, to whom
alone, of all the Families of the earth, the Oracles of God were committed; to
whom alone the Law and the Prophets were given: They only of the Sons of Adam
had the privilege to wear the Livery of Gods Name, to be called the people of
the Lord; they alone were permitted to tread the Courts of Gods House, to have
access to his Sanctuary, to approach his Altars, when as all the rest of the
World were prohibited under the dreadful penalty of an Anathema, with a procul
ite hinc, procul ite profani; time was, when they only were accounted the
Children of the Kingdom, and all the rest of the World as Aliens, and
Outcasts, as dogs unworthy of the very crumbs that fell from their table; as
Swine, to whom the precious Pearls of the Gospel might not be cast; time was,
when they only were accounted within the pale of the Church, the only place
wherein God was pleased to plant the Vineyard of his Church, the only spot of
ground his love had taken in and enclosed from the Wilderness of the World,
wherein to plant his fear, and the knowledge of his Name, while the rest of the
Earth lay neglected, as a rude Barren, and uncultivated Desert, ore-grown with
Atheism and Barbarism.

They were the Eden, the Garden, the Paradise of God, the Land flowing with
milk and honey, the place where God was pleased to make known the greatness of
his Name, when as all the rest of the miserable Off spring and Posterity of
Adam, lived as without God in the world; time was, when they were the only Sons
of Light, and when Palestine, or the Land of Canaan, was the only Goshan, on
which God caused the light of his Countenance to shine, when as all the rest of
the World, all the rest of the Nations of the Earth sat in darkness, in
Egyptian darkness, and as in the vale and shadow of death, when as all the rest
of mankind lay under an eclipse, and dark night of ignorance.

But now blessed be God, the Scene of things are changed, the Partition Wall of
Separation is now broken down, the Vale of the Temple is now rent, and its door
set open to all the Nations and Kindreds of the Earth: The borders of the
Church are now enlarged, and God has given to his Son the Heathen for his
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his Possession; the Bread
of Life is now dealt to all: The King, as it is in the parable, has now sent
his servants into the midst of the streets, to invite all to the Marriage
Feast: Time was, when Canaan was the Land flowing with milk and hone, but now
every one is invited to buy Wine, and Milk, and Honey, without money, and
without price: time was, when only the Jews were admitted to the Table of Gods
Ordinance, but now there is a Feast prepared of fat things, of Wine well
refined from the Lees, and Proclamation made, That every one that hungreth
after righteousness, may come eat, and be satisfied; and every one that
thirsts, is invited to drink of the Waters of Life freely; For God is pleased
now, under the Gospel, to keep open House, as I may so say, and to give
entertainment to all comers, to make welcome all that come unto him, and puts
none by, refuses none that offer themselves by Faith unto him.

The time is now come, in which the Son of Righteousness is to arise with
healing under his wings, and shine upon the whole earth, and enlighten all the
dark corners thereof, that the whole world may become a Goshan, a Land of
Light, in which the Saints are to be gathered from the four Corners, and the
four Winds, in which the fear of the Lord is to fall on all hearts, and the
knowledge of his Name to abound, and cover the face of the Earth, as the waters
cover the Sea.

God has now set open the door of his Mercy, and holds forth the Golden
Scepter of his love to all: He does now open wide, and stretch forth the Arms
of his Love, that he may receive the whole World into his Embraces: He has
now, as it were, pulled up the Sluices, and opened (as I may so say) the
Floodgates of his Mercy, that every one may drink thereof, and taste that the
Lord is gracious, that he may bathe and refresh every dry and parched Soul: He
does now open the Treasures of his Grace, and bring forth the riches, the
exceeding great riches of his Mercy. In brief, the Gospel is now tendered to
both Jew and Gentile, and the doors of the Sanctuary stand open unto all, so
that they are inexcusable that neglect, despise, or contemn the means of so
great Salvation, the offers and tenders of so great Love and Mercy. So much for
the Auditory, I now come to

4 The place; and that was a Mountain, not Mount Sinai, on which God appeared
clothed with Thunder, and encompassed with flames of fire, and Clouds of
smoke, the Mountain on which God appeared in the Majesty of a great Dictator,
giving Laws to the Children of Israel; the Mountain which trembled with the
presence of the Lord, and before which the hearts of the people of Israel
quaked, fearing they should be consumed from before the presence of the great
Jehovah: This was not the Mountain, on which God gave the Law in a voice of
thunder, when the Sons of Jacob desired the Lord might not speak unto them, but
by his servant Moses: No, this was Mount Sion, the Mount of Olives, the Mount
of Peace: When Moses had been awhile with God in the Mount, his Face had so
great a luster, that the Israelites were not able to behold it, and therefore
desired him to put a vail thereon: And when Paul was caught up into the third
Heavens, he was transported beyond himself; Whether in the body, or out of the
body, he could not tell: He then saw Visions, and had Revelations, which were
unutterable. So likewise our Savior, so soon as he came into the Mount, began
to preach, and bless the people; his lips began then to melt, and drop
sweetness, to let fall blessings on the people: Whence, by the way, we may
observe, that they only are fit to preach, who have seen God in the Mount, who
have had some rapture and ecstasy of spirit, who have had their hearts
elevated, and lifted up to God, whose affections have taken flight beyond the
Region of earthly enjoyments, and had some experience of the goodness of God
upon their Spirits: then they will be able to speak feelingly, then they will
speak experimentally, and say not the things we have heard, that we have
received from the hand of Fame, but what we have seen and handled of the Word
of Life, declare we unto you: Then they will be able with our Savior to say,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; and so we
are at length arrived at the subject of our Discourse: and am sorry we have
been so long detained in the Porch, viewing the coherence and structure of the
context; but I hope we have not much wandered from the road of our Text, or at
least kept within view thereof.

The text is the first words of our Saviors Sermon on the Mount, whose mouth
was no sooner opened, but his lips dropped like the honeycomb: This is not the
language of the Law, Do this and live: This is not the Dialect spoken on Mount
Sinai, but this is the Language of the Lamb, the sweet and still voice of the
Gospel; The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ.
Oh! how beautiful should his feet be in our eyes, that has brought these glad
tidings of the Gospel.

Blessed are the poor in spirit: Oh! these are comfortable words, these are
refreshing words, these speak Peace, these speak Life to a poor soul, these
drop oil and gladness into a wounded spirit, these are words able to rebuke an
enraged Sea, and calm the billows of a troubled Conscience, to restore
brightness and serenity to a clouded spirit, to a soul full of storms, clouds,
and tempests.

Blessed are the poor: Oh! how much does Christ's Dialect differ from that of
the World; we say, Blessed are the rich, blessed are the full, blessed are
those who know no want, whose Barns are full of corn, whose houses are full of
wealth, that can say with the rich glutton in the Gospel, Soul, eat and drink,
and take thy case, for thou have much goods laid up in store: We say, Blessed
are those on whom a Sun of Prosperity shines, on whom the favor of the world
smiles: But Oh how far, and how high, are Gods thoughts above ours! even as
high as the heavens are above the earth, so far are his thoughts, and his ways
above ours. I know this is a great Paradox to the Learning, a dark riddle to
the wisdom of the World: What, are the poor blessed? they that lie in the
dust, on whom all men trample, that are contemned, despised, and made (as it
were) the very offscouring of the earth? But God sees not as the World sees,
the byes of his Omnisciency see farther then the dark Optics of our flesh are
able to look: He sees through things, to the very pith and marrow of them,
whereas we see only the husks, the shells of things; we are able to look no
farther than outward appearances, than the Varnish Paint, and Gilt the World
has set on things; our eyes are detained on the superficies of things, being
able to comment on nothing but light and colors; whereas the Eyes of the
Almighty penetrate to the very heart and core of things, He looks to the
farthest end of them, and discerns what is behind the Curtain; Exitus actum
probat; its the End and Catastrophe of a thing that denominates it either good
or evil, that is well, that ends well, that is crowned with a good event, or
issue; as the Proverb says, Ante abitum nemo supremaque funera faelix, Could
the Heathenish Poet sing; it is our short-sightedness, the dullness of our
understandings Optics, that makes us often judge and envy those as happy, who
are the most miserable, poor, contemptible creatures in the world, and such, as
if we knew them aright, we should look on, rather as objects of our pity, than
our envy. Our eyes being dazzled by the outward pomp and splendour of this life,
which is nothing but a mere Pageantry of gaudy shows, judge those often the
Proprietors of the greatest felicity, who inherit nothing but misery.

But could we see those things (we so often make the objects of our admiration,
the idols of our desires) to the core, and within the inmost r^nd, we should
find they were but like the Apples of Sodom, beautiful to the eye, but such as
being touched, drop to ashes; or like the Fairies money, that turns to dust; or
those beautiful Sepulchers, of which our Savior speaks in the Gospel, that are
full of nothing but rotteness, and dead men's bones. This is a truth so legible,
that many of the Heathen Philosophers, by the dark twilight of their natural
reason, were able to spell it out; viz. that man's happiness consists not in the
enjoyment of these outward things, witness the Doctrine of the Stoics, who
placed the Spring of their Felicity in nothing without themselves, who though
they built not their Felicity on Christ, of whom it was their happiness to be
ignorant, yet were not so foolish, as to place it in riches, or any of the
other fading, withering, perishing enjoyments of this Life, but on Virtue: And
though Aristotle and the Peripateticks, whose weaker eyes were something more
dazzled with the pomp and splendour of Alexanders Court, and the Varnish of the
World, were content to admit these outward enjoyments, as Handmaids to wait and
attend on Virtue; yet did not like the brutish Epicures, that Phylosophical
Herd of Swine, place their Felicity in them, though they acknowledged they
might confer some ornament and luster, and it might receive some beauty and
splendour from them.

But we are here taught another doctrine by Christ, another Lesson in the
Gospel; Blessed are the poor in spirit. In the words, there is first a
Proposition, or an Assertion laid down, Blessed are the poor in spirit, (...)
of which a pregnant ground, or reason, follows in the next words; For theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven: (...) As if Christ by his Divine Logic had thus
argued, for the words do carry in their womb this Syllogism of which without
violence they may be delivered; they are blessed, whose is the Kingdom of
heaven, that are the Heirs of Salvation, that are the Sons of God, the Seed of
the most High, the Bloud-Royal of Heaven, on whom Heaven, Happiness, and
Eternal Life is entailed; but such are the poor in spirit, they are the Heirs
of Life, of Heaven, of Happiness, which is the minor; therefore they are
blessed.

I shall speak to the Proposition, and its Reason, severally: And first to the
Proposition, or Assertion, blessed are the poor in spirit; in which we shall
consider: First, the subject, Poor in spirit: Secondly, the predicate, Blessed.
And first for the subject, Poor in spirit, in the Original, (...) says Beza,
Est proprie mendicus i. e. ad extreman inopiam redactus; qui nil habet nisi
quod ostiatim acceperit, says Stephanus; the word signifies, one reduced to
extreme Poverty, or one that has nothing but what he begs from door to door.
But for the better and more methodical assoiling this Question, what is here
meant by poor in spirit, we shall first show negatively who these poor in
spirit are not, and then give the true Criterion, or Character, whereby to
discover who they are; therefore by poor in spirit, we are not to understand,

1 They that are poor, in respect of the fortunes of this life; for in respect
of this Poverty, it is said by the Prophet David in Psalm 37. 25. I have been
young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, or his Seed
begging Bread. For these outward enjoyments are also the gifts and blessings of
God, which he seldom denies his own people, in such a competency, as may
relieve the necessities of nature, and render their lives comfortable: And
though these outward blessings, these common favors, these mercies of the left
hand, are no distinguishing Characteristical marks of Gods special grace and
favor, though they are not the special pledges and Criteria of his Love, for
that the Sun of these common favors his goodness causes to shine upon the
unjust, as well as just, and the rain of these vulgar mercies to fall upon the
wicked, as well as the good, and perhaps in a more plentiful manner, in more
large and plentiful showers upon the wicked, then on the good, for their
portion is not in the things of this life, God reserves more rich, more choice
mercies for them, their happiness not consisting in having the Sun of an
outward prosperity shine upon them, but in the shining forth of the light of
Gods countenance: But however, he does not usually altogether withold these
outward enjoyments from them, though he commonly does not see it good for them
to riot in the like excess, as he often permits the wicked, least too rank a
fortune might cause their hearts to wax fat, and forget God; yet he usually
denies them not food and raiment, yea, he fills their hearts with food and
gladness, by blessing their small estates unto them, and giving them a
contented mind, which is a continual feast.

Therefore it is not the poverty of Fortune here meant, whether voluntary, or
through the tyranny of necessity, and it is not that poverty of Fortunes that
is upon compulsion and necessity, by reason such poverty is commonly the
Judgment of God, and produced of some enormous crimes.

1 As first, Poverty is usually the Daughter of Pride; its a common saying,
that Pride goes before a fall, that Pride brings men to a morsel of bread, is
the Usher and Beedle to beggary and misery. Thus God many times suffers men's
tables to become their suares, when their hearts wax fat that they forget him,
then he suffers their spirits to be elated above measure, to swell with Pride
(like the Toad in the Fable) into a bigness or grandeur disproportionable to
the model of their Fortunes, till they burst the Nerves of their estate, and at
length expire in beggary and misery.

2 But secondly, Poverty is sometimes the daughter of vanity, which betrays it
self sometimes in costly apparel, sometimes in sumptuous buildings; some wear
all their estates on their backs, and may say with the Philosopher, though in a
far worse sense, Omnia mea mecum porto; It is the Opinion of some, that the
non-reviving the ancient wholesome Statutes of this Land, for moderating the
excess of apparel, is a great cause of that poverty and penury that has crept
into many Gentlemen's Families, and brought their posterity to want and beggary.

Others bury their Estates under the walls of stately Fabrics, under the
foundations of sumptuous Palaces. The Italians count nothing a greater curse,
then a profuse humor of building; and therefore imprecate it to their greatest
enemies.

Now is it not just for God to stain the pride of such as are given to these
vanities, that are more studious of erecting for themselves stately houses, and
beautiful structures, then to do any thing for God; that more willingly lay out
their estates on walls and buildings, than the living stones of Gods Church; Is
it not just he should bring confusion on the estates of such, for the pride and
vanity of their Babel structures? that he should humble them, and cause them to
sit in the dust, that would build their nests in heaven; that the towering
pride, and foolish imaginations of such as would hide their heads among the
Clouds, and fix their names among the Stars, should bring ruin to their
estates, and bury their Fortunes under dirt and rubbish. Thus through the just
Judgment of God, does pride and vanity not un-often trip up the heels (as I
may so say) of many men's fortunes, and cast them into penury and misery, whose
fond ambition flattered them they should make their nests on high, and not be
moved.

3 Poverty is sometimes the daughter of oppression, covetousness and idleness
are said to be the root of all evil; when men wax covetous, and fall to
grinding the face of the poor, and to prey upon their neighbor, when they shut
up the bowels of their mercy from the necessities of their poor brother, and
stop the ears of their charity to the clamorous cries and importunities of
those that are in want, then God often blows upon their estates, and blasts
their Fortunes, sends the moth and canker into their wealth, causes the rust to
prey upon their gold, and devour their silver, causing their wealth to
moulder, and their treasure turn to dust.

Its reported of the Eagles Feathers, that being put among those of other
Fowls, whether by heat, or what other occult quality, they prey and devour the
rest, causing them to moulter and consume to dust. The same truly may be said
of wealth gotten by oppression and extortion, by any unjust or indirect means;
it is like the Eagles Feathers, or rather Pharoahs lean Kine, that will eat and
devour all their fat and plentiful Revenues, by drawing down the Curse of
Heaven on their wealth and substance.

4 Poverty is often the Daughter of Luxury, some bury their Patrimonies in
their bellies, drink down whole Farms, and Lordships, or perhaps the price of
Kingdoms (like that voluptuous Queen of Egypt, Cleopatra) at one draught.

Some drown their estates, together with all their parts and faculties, in a
deluge of Wine and strong liquor, and so swim down a torrent of filthy pleasure
to the Infernal Lake.

Others sacrifice their estates in the fire and flames of lust, at the Altars
of base and filthy concupiscence, till rottenness enters into their bones, and
their bodies be filled with sores and putrified boils.

Others suffer themselves (as it is in the Fable) like Lycaon, to be devoured
by their dogs, that is, to become a miserable prey to their pleasures and
inordinate desires, unravelling the whole clew of their estates in a pleasing
maze, or labyrinth of pleasure and voluptuousness, until they have left
themselves nothing but Poverty for an inheritance, and a stock of misery for
their possession, till they have entailed penury on their Families, and
bequeathed a name of obloquy and ignominy to their Posterity.

Lastly, Poverty is the Daughter of Ease and Idleness; its not enough to be
born to great Revenues, to make out a good title, or give a just claim to what
the love and providence of our Ancestors has bequeathed unto us, unless we
make them ours by our industry and diligence, in some profession, or honest
vocation, we are to eat our bread in the sweat of our brows, that is the sauce
we ought mix with all our dishes: God is said to hate an idle person; for that,
as I said before, idleness is the root and seeds of all evil.

Its a good custom of a wicked Nation, I mean the Turks, and worthy the
imitation of Ghristians, for every man, to the Grand Seignior, to make
profession of some trade or vocation, so that their very Palace, or Seruglio,
is like a Shop, or Exchange.

It was a custom among the Romans, for all the Citizens, on some certain
times, to wear the badg of their trade, or profession, and if any were found
without his badge, or that could show the Livery of no trade, he was severely
punished by the Censors. If the like custom were set a foot among us, I wonder
what badge or mark our Trepans, ranting Hectors, Kinghts of the Post, with many
other of that sort of Vermin, together with other Caterpillars, who may
without a metaphor be termed the very Pest and Plague of the Commonwealth; I
wonder, I say, what badge they would assume, as the Livery of their Company and
Profession. Its reported by Naturalists, that no creature can (...) upon the
air; and therefore what the credulity of Antiquity has delivered, as a
Phylosophical truth, concerning the Camelion, is now exploded as a vulgar and
fabulous error: But I am sure many of these live, if not on air, yet by a worse
merchandise of Wind, then that of the Laplanders, that are reported to befriend
Mariners with Gales tied up in Napkins; for whereas these traffic with the
Elements, they put to sale the wind of their oaths, as if they were no more
then small puffs of air, yet such by which many are, in a trice, blown out of
all their Estates and Fortunes, into a gulf of poverty and misery; and these
are those Camelions that can cast themselves into all shapes and colors, and
witness pro or con to any business.

But to balance this custom of Antiquity, our modern Ages delight rather to
show their Coats of Arms, and Achievements, taken out of the Heralds Office,
than the base badges of Mechanic Trades, and beggarly Professions, as if
nothing would so much taint the (...), and degrade a Gentleman, as an honest
employment.

But to proceed, there is the sweat of the mind, as well as the body; and to
speak truth of all labors, that of the mind is far the greatest, and of all
travel, that of the Soul is the sorest under the Sun; and therefore it is, that
Solomon so often lets fall such expressions as these; Of writing books there is
no end, and much reading or study is weariness to the flesh: Also where he
says, He that increases knowledge, increases sorrow, and the like; but as it
is the sorest travel, so it is the Noblest difficilia quae pulchra; the ways
that lead to Eminence are not strewed with Roses: Now its fit, that every one
should have his share and portion of the one or the other, of the sweat of the
body, or the travel of the mind, for man is born to labor, and travel, as the
sparks fly upward, Job 5. 7. And God has forbidden him to eat, that will not
labor; and therefore I wonder how such dare eat, the sweat of whose brows, in
some lawful employment, has not given them a right and title to what their
plentiful Fortunes has furnished forth unto their tables. Its a laudible
custom of some Countries, to make their children by some exercise of either
body or mind, to deserve, and as it were earn their meat before they give it
them, whereby from their very Infancy and Cradles they are inured to labor,
and made familiar with industry.

To conclude, no Patrimony, no Revenues, no Fortunes, are large enough; the
riches of the Indies, the wealth of Kingdoms, nay, the price of Worlds, would
fall short, and not be able to supply or recruit the Exchequer of such persons
expenses, as have no other employment their devise how to spend: which renders
industry no less our interest, than duty, business being no less the food and
entertainment of the mind, than meat is of the body: And as idleness is said to
be the Devils Pillow, and therefore none may expect Gods blessing that sleeps
upon it, so I am confident it is as uneasy, as unsafe and dangerous.

Now when men refuse all labor, and become unprofitable burdens to the earth;
when men live to eat, when as they should only eat to live; when men think they
are born wholly for themselves, to eat, and drink, and rise up to play; is it
not just with God to blast their Estates, and to send the Gout, the Dropsy, or
the judgment of some more sore disease upon the bodies of these Pigri ventri,
these slow bellies, that are good for nothing but to feed and pamper a rotten
carcass, that must after a while be a banquet for worms, that are good for
nothing, but like vermin, to devour the fruits of the earth, that live, as if
they had their Souls given them (as its commonly said of Swines) only as salt
to keep the flesh of their bodies from putrefying and stinking.

To conclude this particular, I am persuaded if greater entertainment and
encouragement were given to industry and diligence, it might prove the most
effectual means to crowd out that penury and poverty that has so long dwelt
amongst us, of which we need not look far for a President, so long as Holland
is so nigh a Neighbor, whose small spot of earth, did it not lie so low, and
in the midst of waters, I should liken to a Molehill, the Inhabitants being
those Pismires, from whom all the world might take lessons of industry and
diligence.

Now upon the account of all these reasons, from whence this poverty of
necessity usually springs, I am induced to believe this is not the poverty here
meant but that this is rather a Judgment, than a Blessing of God; for were
this the poverty that gave men title to the Kingdom of Heaven, none could make
a better claim, or produce fairer evidence, then a Prodigal Son that has
wasted and spent his Estate on Whores and Parasites, or some Bankrupt person,
that has split his Fortunes, and ship-wrack'd his Estate by ill husbandry,
gaming, or the like; no, Whoremongers, Adulterers, and dissolute persons, must
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: We ought to be diligent and faithful
Stewards, even of these talents, for of these also must we give an account; if
therefore God has trusted any one with a fair estate, a large and plentiful
Fortune, let him not think to spend it upon his lusts, but so demean himself in
his Stewardship, that he may give a good account in the day of his Audit, that
so he may reap comfort, and not shame, when the Harvest of the World shall
approach: Moreover, our English Proverb says, That God never sends mouths, but
he also sends meat; and that no man is so unfortunate, but at one time or other
has been courted by an opportunity of growing rich, at least in a competency:
God feeds the very crows and Ravens, and clothes the very grass and Lillies of
the fields in so rich Liveries, that they may vye with Solomon in all his
glory, and make the purple of our bravest Princes blush, to see their gallantry
so much out-stript by the native beauty of so contemptible a creature; and
shall we think that God, who is thus bountiful to the Lillies of the field,
will deny his own people food and raiment? But I would not have this
interpreted, to lock up the bowels of compassion, and bar the door of our
charity against such poor wretches that daily cry in our streets; for though I
think their poverty is commonly a Judgment of God upon them for some of the
forecited sins, yet this excuses not our charity and compassion; for since we
are all sinners, as Christ said of the woman taken in Adultery, who shall
presume to fling the first stone at them? should we not rather imitate the
goodness of God, that causes his Sun to shine, and his Rain fall upon the
wicked, as well as the righteous. Our English Proverb says, The Crows must
live; shall not then our poor Brother? And the Scripture says, A righteous man
is merciful to his Beast, then much more to those that are flesh of his flesh,
and bone of his bone. I am persuaded, when the sins of this Nation shall come
to be audited, and inquired into, our neglect of, and uncharitableness to the
poor, will make a great part of the Indictment against us. We have been so long
disputing about forms of Government in the State, and of Divine Worship in the
Church, that the noise of our janglings about these things has quite drowned
the cries of the poor, whose necessities should have been first relieved, had
we commenced our Reformation a right: and till this error be rectified, I know
little ground we have to expecta settlement, or that God will in the least own
and bless our Government, whatever we may set up and establish.

But to proceed, though it be commonly thus, that men's poverty and misery is
and proceeds from themselves, as being the Product of either pride, ease, or
luxury, as has been largely demonstrated; yet sometimes through the rapine and
oppression of the wicked, the righteous are stripped of all their enjoyments,
turned out of their possessions, and exposed as Pentioners to the cold charity
of the world: It is sometimes known, as in the Parable, that a poor and
righteous Lazarus, whose Soul shall have a Legion of Angels, as his Convoy, or
Lifeguard, to carry him into Abraham's Bosom, begs an alms at Dives Gates, at
the hands of a rich and wicked Miser, and has his sores licked by dogs; and
therefore, though we ought to do good to all, yet more especially to those of
the boushold of Faith, if any such objects of our charity are known unto us.

And although God can and often does interrupt the course of Nature, and work
Miracles for supplying the necessities of his Saints; though God sometime fed
Eliah by the Ministry of Ravens, and can cloth his Prophets as he does the
Lillies of the Field, yet that is no excuse, no Apology, for our withholding
any thing from them they stand in need of, or that their necessities call for
at our hands, though we have never so little, though our estate be but as the
Widows Cruse of Oil, God requires our mite, if we can do no more, we must cast
it in, if we expect to find that acceptance with God the Widows did, or desire
that blessing of increase on our estates, as fell on the Cruse of Oil, whereby
the Prophet was fed in a time of famine.

2 But secondly, by poverty of spirit, is not here meant (as the Papists would
have it) a voluntary poverty, or of vow, as when men for Religions sake, or
Righteousness sake, as they are pleased to guild it, do renounce the world, and
strip themselves of all their outward enjoyments, when men cast their whole
estates into the treasury of the Church, and intail their Revenues on the
Altar, when for the better disburthening themselves of the cares of this life,
and of this world, and that they may the better sequester themselves unto the
Lord, and devote themselves unto his service, they part with all for the Cross
of Christ, and wholly cast themselves upon the Providence of God.

Truly the taking root of this Opinion has brought forth much fruit, much
profit to the Church of Rome, many of whose voluntary Votaries, that under a
pretense of extraordinary devotion, and Holiness, sequester themselves from the
world, do but renounce those smaller Fortunes Providence has given them better
title to, in expectation of, and on design to inherit far greater riches, and
reap a more plentiful crop of gain from that blind charity, Superstition has
cheated the greater part of the World into an opinion of; and of these there
are several Forms and Classes in the Man of Sins School, as your Hermites,
Friar Mendicants, with diverse others, who instead of accounting (with the
Apostle) godliness great gain, do reap great gains from a counterfeit and
feigned godliness: These therefore are not the (...), on which the Kingdom of
Heaven is entailed, but rather swarms of Locusts and Caterpillars, that cover
the face of too great a part of the earth.

But this Opinion of Poverty (as I said) has been a rich Revenue to the Popish
Church, and wonderfully improved the Patrimony of St. Peter, has much
increased the Revenue of the Man of Sin, and entailed much Land upon his
Altars; this is a gallant devise to sell the Kingdom of Heaven to those will
bid most for it; and the Pope and Cardinal may well confer notes, as sometime
on another occasion, Quantum nobis Lucri peperit haec fabula de Christo: So,
Quantum nobis Lucri peperit haec fabula seu Doctrina de paupertate: What gain
has this fable of poverty brought into us: This is that has so much in riched
the Coffers of the Pope, that has filled the fat bellies of the Priests, and
clothed the Whore in Scarlet: Truly, I cannot but commend the zeal and
devotion of all such poor deluded souls, as out of a principle of Sincerity,
strip themselves of these outward enjoyments, thinking thereby to render
themselves more quick and less cumbersome in their journey toward Heaven; but
I cannot but therewithal pity their ignorance, and great pity it is so great a
heat of zeal should be without the light of Knowledge to direct it, that so
great Devotion should be the Daughter of Ignorance and Superstition.

No, this is not the poverty of spirit recommended to us by our Savior; and
therefore to the Proselites of this Opinion, we may say what is commonly said
of Self-murder, it is not lawful to quit our stations, for our souls to break
the prison of the Body, to anticipate our deliverance from the captivity of our
flesh, by a voluntary or violent dissolution: We may with the Apostle sue out
our Habeas Corpus, by sending up our sighs and desires to be dissolved, but to
break prison is Felony; we may say, Demittas (...), but we must expect till God
sends the Sergeant Death to bring us our Writ of Ease, our been decessit, and
to knock off the Fetters of our body: for our life is a warfare, and we are
here Militant in a Vale of Tears; and therefore may not desert our Colors,
till we are rude donati, and Milites Emeriti, till we have finished our
warfare, and are legally dismissed the Camp: Our Souls are placed as Sentinels
in the Body, and may not go off the guard till they are relieved, or the
Captain of our Salvation calls them off.

So may I say in this case, our wealth is not our own, but the Lords, and
therefore it is not lawful for us to quit, or resign our trusts, before the day
of our Audit; for we are Gods Stewards, and he will require an account at our
hands; our estates are the Lords, and we must be faithful in our office, and
distribute of our bread to the poor.

Christianity does not forfeit our right to the creatures, but rather enlarge
and strengthen it: It has been the custom in some places, when any Jew turns
Christian, to forfeit or s^^^ester his estate; but this is no condition of the
Gospel, this is not a Law that has any force or obligation in foro
conscientiae, in the court of conscience for our right, as I said, to the
things of this world, is rather commenced, than extinguished by our adoption
and new birth; for whose is the earth, and the fullness thereof, but the Lords?
and who then have better right unto it then the Sons of God? Or who may more
truly be called the Lords and Princes of the Creation, then they for whom the
world was made, and yet is not worthy of them? though I must confess it is most
commonly seen here, that servants ride on horseback, and the Princes go on
foot, etc.

Thirdly, This poverty is not any low and base abjectness of spirit, no
sordidness or despondency of mind; to be poor in spirit, is not to have little,
poor, narrow, and contracted souls, to have creeping and degenerate spirits,
that are always grovelling in the dust, that according to the curse of the
Serpent, creep on their bellies, and lick the dust of the earth, that are mere
muck, or dunghill worms, that have their heads and hearts bowed down to the
earth.

Os homini sublime dedit, says the Poet. This therefore is unworthy, and below
the generosity of a man, much more a Christian. Religion does not make men
fools and sheepish, but admirably blends the innocence of the Dove, together
with the wisdom and prudence of the Serpent: Religion is not that that clouds
the mind with black melancholic and sad apprehensions; if any think thus, they
seem guilty of the same absurdity with those Heathen, that Deified their
diseases, and erected Altars unto Feavours; or admit the like abuse that
Mahomets Disciples did, when they believed their Prophets Convulsions to be
Ecstasies, and Divine Raptures, this is to entitle our melancholy to Religion,
and guild ore the distempers and infirmities of Nature with the title of Grace;
which is something like the humor of the Negroes, who paint their gods black,
and the Devil white; whereas Religion is so far from being any morose, sower,
or tettrick thing, that what the Philosopher said of virtue, may with advantage
be affirmed of Religion, viz. that could it assume Corporeity, or render it
self visible, it would appear so lovely, so amiable, that it would at once both
enamour and ravish the Whole world into the admiration of her Features, and by
the sole attractives of her transcendent Beauty, and the powerful Charms of its
comely Graces, attract and captivate the hearts of all men, and command both
homage and affection from all that should behold her; she would then need no
other Eloquence than the silent Oratory of her own beauty to recommend her, and
invite the whole world unto her embraces. For is good nature a lovely thing?
there is nothing more improves, and meliorates men's natures, than the ingrafting
Religion therein: there is nothing more inlarges the spirit, and gives it a more
just and Noble Elevation, then that: there is nothing fills the mind with a more
Noble, with a more generous scorn and contempt of low, base, and abject things
than that; that is it that raises a man's thoughts from the earth, on which they
are naturally so apt to grovel and be bowed down unto, that is it that spirits
and enobles a Soul, that emancipates it from base slavish, and pusillanimous
fears, and fills it with a high and Princely ambition, and ambition more Noble
and generous then that of Alexanders, that so inlarges the heart, that not only
one earth, but the whole world is too little for it, is not able to fill or
satisfy it; this is that refines the affections, and causes them to fly a
higher pitch, than to be decoyed by any thing here below, than to stoop to any
thing on this side immortality and life, that causes the Soul to soar aloft
and mount up, as with Eagles wings, till it makes its nest in the very bosom of
God. They therefore disparage Religion, and cast a blot and scandal on the
Profession of the Gospel, who go all the day drooping and holding down their
Heads like a bulrush, there being none who have so much reason to be cheerful,
to have a merry heart and a cheerful countenance as Christians* There is no
reason why any ones face should shine so much as theirs who like Moses have
seen God in the Mount.

4 We are therefore by this poverty of spirit to understand something beyond
anything that has been yet mentioned; And without doubt its to be taken in a
like sense, as that place where Christ says, its harder for a Camel, or Cable
rope, as some interpret it, (for the same word in the Original signifies both)
to pass through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: Now we shall be best able to understand what is meant by
these Riches that bar our entrance into blessedness, and this Poverty on which
it is entailed, by comparing these with other places, one Scripture being the
best Key to unlock the sense of another. Our Savior says, Matt. 9. 13. That
he came not to call the Righteous but sinners to Repentance, and in another
place, the whole need not the Physician but those that are sick: So likewise
where he says He came to seek the lost sheep of the house of Israel: So
likewise that Parable of the Pharisee that made so nigh and familiar approach
to the Altar, and blessed God he was not as the Publicane that stood aloof,
afar off, and cried Lord be merciful to me a sinner, and yet according to the
virdict of Truth it self, went away more justified than the Pharisee that was
so pure and righteous in his own eyes. I say this Parable may lend some light
to the understanding of it. Also when our Savior took a little Child, and
setting him in the midst of his Disciples, said unless ye be as little
children ye cannot enter into the Kingdom Heaven: he seems to have given a
clear Comment on this Text: Also when he said Suffer little children to come
unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; he seems to Paraphrase on the
same Doctrine: From all which put together, I think we may safely collect and
spell out this or the like sense from the words, viz.

That poverty of spirit is a being little, mean, vile and contemptible in our
own eyes, to become as little children, without strength and without courage,
helpless and shiftlesse, without counsel and without advice, having neither
wisdom, prudence, discretion, nor understanding in our selves; they therefore
are the (...) the poor in spirit that are arrived at this resigned state or
condition, that have parted with their own strength, their own wisdom, their
own Councils, and their own Righteousness too, and are become sensible of
their own baseness, their own unworthiness, their own nothingness, that see
and acknowledge the sinfulness of their natures, the miserableness of their
conditions, how that they have no righteousness of their own, no holiness, no
purity, no Sanctity of their own, these I take to be the poor in Spirit here
meant.

Having thus discoursed on the subject of the Proposition, we are by the course
of our method arrived at the predicate, viz. Blessed; The word in the Original
is (...) quasi (...) non sorti non morti subjectus, a word in which the whole
of felicity is summed up, a word that reaches the Cul^en top or fastigium of
all happiness, a felicity that is not subject to the stroke of death, to the
since of time; a felicity which neither time shall wither, nor the hour or
approach of death be able to blast, and so we have finished the proposition,
and shall now hasten to the ground or reason of it, and that is For theirs is
the Kingdom of heaven. Christ said sometime to his Dischples Luke the 10 20.
verse, Rejoice not so much that the Devils are made subject to you, but rather
that your names are written in heaven, that your names are written by the blood
of Christ, and finger of the spirit in the book of Life, that your names are
enrolled and registered in the Archives of Heaven. Now from the words thus
anatomized and unbowelled, there seem naturally to spring these propositions.

1 That Poverty of Spirit is a royal and blessed state or condition, or in the
concrete, that the poor in spirit are blessed.

2 That the ground or reason of all true happiness or blessedness is founded
in an interest in the Kingdom of heaven, or that they only may be truly and
without Ironie termed happy, or accounted the real proprietors of all felicity,
whose is the Kingdom of heaven, on whom heaven and happiness is entailed.

1 Poverty of spirit is a blessed state and happy condition. I should rather
darken than illustrate the meridian brightness of this Truth, that is wrote as
with a sunbeam; should I bring a cloud of witnesses for its confirmation, it
needing no other proof than the Authority of him that spoke it, having
proceeded from the lips of him that is Truth it self, that cannot lie. But that
no truth, though of never so great evidence, might be without witness, the
whole scope and tenor of the Gospel seems to bear its testimony, and give in
evidence to the confirmation hereof; How frequent is it said in Proverbs,
besides other places, That pride is an abomination to the Lord; is not this the
language and dialect of the scripture throughout that the Lord will dwell with
an humble and contrite heart that trembles at his Word, but that he hates and
resists the proud? Does not almost every page and Chapter thorowout the whole
Book of God speak in the same Key? Does not God all along turn the edge of his
threatenings against high things, and high thoughts, against proud and towering
imaginations that exalt and lift up themselves, has he not denounced enmity
against proud and high things? has he not threatened to level and bring down
every high Hill, till he make it become a plain? Is not the quarrel of the
Almighty with the great things of the Earth? And has he not on the other side
pawned his Word and engaged his promise to exalt the humble, to give grace to
the humble, to lift up every valley, etc.

Has he not invited all those that hunger and thrust, all those that are weary
and heavy leaden, promising that he will feed them, that he will satisfy them,
that he will ease them, that they shall find rest unto their souls? What are
all these expressions but as so many proofs and confirmations of this
Proposition; it were endless to quote and cite places, and therefore shall
hasten to the Reasons, whereof.

1. The first is borrowed from a rule among Physicians, with whom it is
received as a Maxim, that primus gradus sumitatis est nosse morbum, the first
degree of health is to know the disease; for as our Proverb has it, a disease
that is known, is half cured. Now this poverty of Spirit, is a reflex act of
the Soul, discovering to men their wants, that they may go to Christ to be
supplied of his fullness, to receive of his fullness; Grace for Grace: It
discovers to men their own nakedness, that they may go to Christ to be clothed
with the white robes of his Righteousness, till Adams eyes were opened, that
he saw his nakedness and his sin; He had no shame nor sense of his guilt, but
so soon as his eyes were opened, he began to sow fig leaves together, to cover
his sin and hide his shame. This is the usual Method and progress of God in
the work of conversion; first to alarm and awaken the Soul by a clap of
Thunder, so to rouse him from the Lethergie and sleep of sin, to prick them to
the quick, and make them cry out like the Jailer in the Acts, men and brethren
what shall we do to be saved; This causes the scales to fall from off their
eyes, those scales of Ignorance with which their eyes were sealed, and then
they see their sin and their shame, and begin to loath and abhor themselves, to
cloth themselves with sackcloth and ashes, and sit down in the dust: Now when
a soul has thus seen its nakedness, it begins to think of a covering, of a
mantle, or a cloak to hide its sin, and begins first to sow together the Fig
leaves of its own Righteousness, of its own performances, and so long as it
thinks they will serve its turn, it looks no further, till at length a flash of
lightening comes and smutes all their righteousness, blacks all their beauty,
scorches their leaves, and burns up all their Hay and Stuble, and discovers a
new light unto them, that make they the borders of their own righteousness
never so broad, and let them with the Pharisees enlarge their Phylacteries
never so wide, yet they shall find the skirts thereof too narrow, too shallow
to cover them; then they begin to be out of conceit with themselves, to fall in
disesteem and disreputation with themselves, then they begin to let fall those
plumes and specious train that before they so much pleased and prided
themselves in. And indeed men will never desire to put on the Lord jesus, till
they have thus seen their own poverty, that their own righteousness is but as
dirty and menstruous rags; till they are thus come acquainted with their own
wants, how empty their own exchequer is, how low their own treasures run, they
will never desire to be supplied out of those treasures of Grace, God has laid
up in Christ for poor sinners; till men look up and discern the sword of
vengeance hanging by a small hair over their heads ready to drop upon them,
they will not be sencible of the desperate peril and danger of their natural
state and condition: till they see the filthiness, pollution and corruption of
their Natures, the Leprosy of sin that cleaves to them, they will never desire
the Angel may move the waters, or go unto the pool of Bethesda to the fountain
of Christ's blood, to wash and bathe their souls in Jordan: till they find and
feel their souls stung by the fiery Serpents of sin, till they feel the sting
of the guilt of sin stick in their souls and consciences, they will never by the
eye of Faith look up to the brazen Serpent, Christ Jesus that was lifted up
upon the Cross, that they may receive health and healing to their souls. Till
they are sencible of those breaches and ruins, the fall of Adam has made in
their natures, till they are sencible of those wounds and bruises, those
mortal wounds sin has given them, they will never go to the Physician of
souls for cure, to have the balm of Gilead applied to their wounds, to have oil
and wine poured into them. Till they are sencible of that issue of blood that
is upon them, and have in vain spent all their substance on other Physicians
and fruitless remedies, they will not press after Christ to touch the hem of
his Garment, to receive virtue and healing from Him. Till they are sencible of
the misery into which they are fallen, and the irrecoverablenesse of their
estate, they will never beg the putting forth of the hand of Gods mercy, and
the arm of his Almighty Power for their rescue and deliverance.

Till men are sensible of their blood-guiltiness, they will never fly to the City
of Refuge, to avoid the pursuit of Gods Vengeance, the pursuit of the Avenger
of Blood: Till they are sensible of their own vileness, they will not fly to the
Ark of the New Covenant, to be preserved from that deluge of wrath that is to
come upon the workers of iniquity. Till men are sensible of their own
barrenness, and unfruitfulness in all the works of holiness and righteousness,
and that the Axe of Gods Judgments is laid to the root of every tree that
brings not forth fruits worthy of repentance, and newness of life, and that
it shall be hewn down, and cast into the flames of Gods Vengeance, and become
the fuel of eternal fire, the fuel of his Eternal Wrath and displeasure; I say,
till by the Eye of Faith they discern and believe this, they will never desire to
be grafted into the true Vine, Christ Jesus, that they may receive sap and
influence from him, and so become fruitful, and abound in the works of
righteousness: till we are sensible that we are dead in trespasses and sins, we
shall never desire the quicknings and enlivenings of Gods Spirit: till we are
sensible of, and groan under the burden and weight of the guilt of sin, we
shall never desire ease of Christ: till we are sensible of that body of death
we carry about with us, of that Law in our members, rebelling against the Law
of our minds, of that power, dominion, rule and tyranny that sin has obtained
over us, captivating us into the obedience of the Law of sin and death, we
shall never groan to be delivered into the liberty of the Sons of God, that we
may serve him without fear, and be able to lead captivity captive.

For so long as men are of opinion with the Church of Laodicea, that they think
they abound, are rich and full, they will never acknowledge, that they are
poor, blind, and naked, and by consequence become Suitors at the Throne of
Grace, that they may receive Crowns and Thrones of Glory.

To conclude this particular, so long as men have any reeds of their own
righteousness to lean unto, though but broken reeds, and such as will rather
wound and pierce their sides, than yield any strength or support unto them;
they will never build their Faith on the Rock of Ages, Christ Jesus. So long as
they can fit and please themselves under the gourds of their own righteousness,
under the shadows of their own performances, so long as they have any thing to
skreen them from the heat, and scorchings of an inkindled conscience, I say,
till the Sun of Righteousness be arisen, and has scorched their Gourds, and
burnt up all their pleasant Bowers, they will very hardly be persuaded to take
shelter under the Cross of Jesus. And therefore upon this account, poverty of
spirit is a blessed and happy condition, for that it is an awakened state, and
gives men a true prospect and discovery of their estate and condition, for that
it brings them acquainted with their wants, with what they stand in need of.

2 Poverty of spirit is a fruitful state, your low and humble valleys are
crowned with the greatest plenty, are most rich and fruitful; the lowest trees,
and meanest shrubs have their boughs laded with the greatest increase, as
appears in the Vine, and other trees; whereas high mountains, tall trees, and
stately Cedars are commonly steril and barren, and their great bulk but a
burden to the earth: No man plants a Vineyard on the top of an hill, they are
the low and humble souls in which God delights, in whose hearts he plants his
fear, and ingrafts the Graces of his Holy Spirit, on whom he causes the
influences and Dews of Heaven to descend, and bestows the Watrings and
Sanctifications of his Spirit: These are those blessed Souls that the Psalmist
resembles to Trees planted in the Garden of God by the rivers of water, which
bring forth their fruits in season, and whose leaves shall never wither, never
fade, shall know no Autumn, no Winter, but always thrive and prosper; God has
chosen the mean, the weak, and base things of this world, to confound the wise
and mighty, that so no flesh might glory in his presence; that the wise man may
not glory in his wisdom, least it be turned into folly, nor the strong man in
his strength, least it be turned into weakness, nor the rich man in his
riches, least they be turned into poverty and penury, but that who so glories
may Glory in the Lord.

And this is that makes the Gospel such a Riddle, such a Mystery to the World,
that God raises a Worm, the Worm Jacob to thresh the Mountains, a little David,
a small young Stripling to discomfit a great Goliath, Goliath the Champion of the
Philistims; a small Rod to cleave in sunder a mighty Rock, as sometimes Moses
did in the Wilderness: to smite an Host of Philistims with the jaw bone of an
Ass: to cause the proud and stately Walls of Jericho to tremble and shake for
fear, and at length drop down to Rubbish at the blast of a few Ramshorns. Now
if you ask the reason of this, why God has chosen such weak contemptible
means, such despicable and despised instruments to accomplish and bring about
the great designs and purposes of his will, the grand Councils of his Mind? It
is his jealousy of his honor, that none may rob him of his Glory, that all
may acknowledge as sometimes the Magicians of Pharaoh, hic est digitus Dei,
this was the finger, this was the Hand of God; For by how much less of the
Wisdom, Power and Policy of man appears, by so much the more is God manifested.

3. A third Reason why poverty of spirit is so blessed a condition, may be
this, For that it is a sure estate; for according to that of the Poet, cui
jacet in terram non habet unde cadat, your highest Towers and tallest Cedars,
are most often smote with lightning, are most exposed to the Injuries and
Inclemencies of weather, to the rage and fury of Storms and Tempests; We have
often known a great and mighty Oak torn in pieces by the violence of a storm,
and made a trophy of the Winds fury, when as lessertrees and smaller shrubs
have Survived the Tempest and remained untouched.

Hills are precipices, and high places slippery and dangerous, on high places
our heads are apt to wax giddy; When Satan tempted our Savior, he took him,
and set him on a Pinnacle of the Temple.

High places are full of temptations, they command too far a prospect of this
Worlds glory, of the glory of this Creation, thus when the spirit of a man is
elated and raised, he is exposed to more danger, to more temptations, than the
humble soul.

Many other Reasons might be added as that axiom in Philosophy, which holds
true also in Divinity, that privation praeceeds habits, emptiness preceds
fullness; Its a common saying, That the way to heaven lies by the Gates of
Hell, and therefore this poverty is but as it were the taking of our Fees in
order to preferment, to the end we may take the higher, the farther leap, we
must be emptied of our selves, that is, of all vain and windy conceit of our
selves, before we can be filled with the graces of Gods Spirit.

It is the Devils policy to blow, and puff us up like bladers with the Wind of
pride and self-conceit, that we may not be capable of receiving the new wine of
the spirit; Now these bladers of pride must be pricked, this swelling wind of
conceit, this ventosity must be let out: and therefore it is, Christ calls so
often to us, to sell all, to part with all, if we will become wise Merceants,
and traffic for eternal life; if we will purchase that Pearl of price, (...)
that inestimable Pearl mentioued in the Gospel, Mat. 13. 6. We must part with
all and follow Christ if we will have him, or render our selves worthy of him;
This made the young man in the Gospel depart sorrowful, full of sorrow, he had
a good mind to Christ, but was very rich, had much wealth, was full of
substance, and had kept the commandments from his youth upwards. This is that
makes it so difficult for a rich man to be saved: Oh how difficult a thing it
is to stand still and see the Salvation of God, as the Israelites were
commanded at the red Sea, and as all Christians are now, that will pass through
the red Sea of Christ's Blood; this is that makes it easier for Publicans and
sinners to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, then the Scribes and Pharisees
that are cumbred with a great deal of Righteousness of their own, with a
multitude of Religious duties and performances; What must they part with all,
cast all overboard, make shipwreck of their Righteousness too? This is a hard
Chapter, durus sermo, a hard saying, who can bear it? but I would ask such
souls whether they think it a fitting thing that they should enter into the
Kings feast, to the Marriage of his Son, in the filthy menstruous rags of
their own Righteousness, and without the wedding Garment; Would it not be
construed an affront, would they not be thought to disgrace, reproach and
defile the Marriage, by so rude, so uncivil an Action? Would you sit down with
Princes, being clothed with nothing but dirt and rags, and yet be so morose
as not to accept of a Robe out of the Kings Wardrope, since it is his Royal
pleasure, to put so great an honor on you? Would you be Courtiers to the King
of Heaven, and refuse to wear his Livery; Let Us remember the end of him in the
Parable, the Catastrophe of his presumption, that intruded into the Nuptials
without a wedding Garment.

Moreover the way to Heaven is a narrow way, and the Gate that leads to Eternal
Life is a strait passage; we must not thinktherefore to carry our Lumber with
us, that will but clog and retard our speed, that will but cumber and trouble
us, and render our passage more difficult and uneasy; It was a fond and
ridiculous custom, ignorance and serperstition had introduced among some of the
Heathens, That when any person of High rank or great quality amongst them dyed,
to sacrifice many of his Servants, and great store of Cattle, to the end they
might wait and attend on him in the other world; But I presume we who have the
Light of Christianity are better informed, then to expect to carry a crowd with
us, or togo in pomp and state with a train at our heels; and therefore what
seoffing Lucian has said merrily concerning Charons Boat, how the passengers
were prohibited to bring any thing in with them, and commanded to strip
themselves stark naked, and leave all on the other side the bank, whether their
riches, Honors, Wisdom, Phylosophie or the like, may be seriously said to
those that would enter into the ark of the new Covenant, they must carry
nothing with them, if they would have a safe and a quick passage, a prosperous
voyage to Heaven, if they would shoot the Gulf and arrive safe in the other
World, or rather what Christ said to the Apostles, when he sent them forth to
preach the Gospel throughout the whole World, when he made them Catholic and
Universal Bishops of the Earth, to Preach and Teach all Nations, they were to
take no money in their purses, they might take no wealth with them, not so much
as to be cumbred with two Coats; So may we say to all those that would go unto
Christ, that would Learn the way to Sion; we need not meet God as Jacob went to
meet his iucensed Brother Esau, after he had supplanted and beguiled him of the
blessing; with great herds and flocks of Cattle before us, to be our peace
offerings, the price of our atonement, and to appease his wrath, for that is
pacified already, he having found out himself a Sacrifice, we must not
therefore go unto God with gifts, with Sumpter Horses of rich and costly
presents, thinking to gratify him for the redemption of our Captivity, for he
will say as sometime Abraham said to the Kings he had delivered when he rescued
his Brother Lot, it shall not be said you have made Abraham rich; alack, what
can we give unto God, are not the Cattle on a Thousand Hills the Lords? Is not
the Earth and the fullness thereof his, what shall we then do? Shall we marshal
up our performances and Duties, and set them in order to commend us to God, to
procure admission and acceptance with God. Will he be any better pleased
therewith, then he was with those Cattle Saul reserved for Sacrifice? Will he
not say as Samuel did, What means the bleatings of these Cattle? God takes no
Bribes, no, we may not carry so much as a Peter pence in our Mouths (as is the
absurd practice of some Papists) for Heavens Porter, for Peter to open the
door to us. No, there are none that take bribes in Heaven, there are no
Courtiers that expect Fees, no Orators that have manus occulatas, or bovem in
lingua as we say. And therefore hence it is, that we are invited to buy Wine,
and Milk, and Honey without Money, and without price; they that would drink of
the Waters of Life, must not think to purchase them, for they are no more to be
sold then that gift of the Holy Ghost. We know what was replied to Simon Magus,
that would needs have bought it, that would needs be cheapning and bidding
money for it, thy money perish with thee. This is the highest, the rankest, the
grossest degree of Simony, to think of purchasing Salvation; for what shall we
give the Lord, should we give our Bodies to be burned for the sin of our Souls,
should we give our Bodies a Sacrifice, a burnt offering, it profits nothing,
merits nothing, and God might cast back the dung thereof into the faces of our
Souls. The gift is of Gods free grace, Did not Christ overturn the Table of the
Money Changers, and whip the buyers and sellers out of the Temple? And shall we
presume to introduce them again.

I have read that the Kingdom of Heaven is to suffer violence, is to be taken
by force; but never that it was to be bought and sold. This was the stone of
stumbling at which the faith of the Pharisees fell; the Rock of offense on
which the Religious Jews split themselves, and ruined their Salvation; they
would needs lean to the broken reeds of their own righteousness, and thereby
wounded and pierced themselves: they thought to have purchased Heaven, by their
Alms, by their fasts, by their long prayers, by the tithe of their Mint and
Annis. And do not the Papists at this day run into the same Error, dos not
their Doctrine of Merits, of Pardons, of Indulgences, etc. set up the Tables of
the moneychangers in the Temple of God? Have they not introduced a Mart or Fair
into Religion, and turned the Temple into a Shop or Exchance, in which things
spiritual are bartered for Temporal, and things incorruptible for silver and
gold that is corruptible. Nonne fecerunt omnia venalia coelum, Christum, tot^m
denique Religionem? Have they not done by Heaven, as Hanibal is reported to
have sometime done by old Rome? viz. exposed it to sale; but we know he paid
dear for his presumption, it cost him the loss of his Camp. And I would advise
these to have a care, that make so bold with Heaven; that are so rich in works
of supererogation, that have merits not only for themselves, but others; that
are so rich they can purchase Mansions and Crowns of Glory, not only for
themselves, but others: That are able to purchase large Patrimonies, and whole
Provinces in Heaven: Nay, that can sell Heaven, Reversions of Glory, to
purchase vast Territories here upon earth. No, to entertain such thoughts as
these, so high an esteem of our own works, our own merits is no less than
madness and folly; Or to think that we shall not be welcome to God, unless we
bring our own entertainment with us: no, they that are invited to the marriage
Supper, to the kings feast must not bring their entertainment with them.

They that will be saved must suffer loss, the hay and the stubble of their
own righteousness, of their own works must be destroyed, consumed and burnt
up: We must not build our Faith and expectations of Heaven upon the old,
rotten, crazy, tottering foundations of our own performances, for this is but
sand: If we would have our foundation stand sure, if we desire the Pillars of
our Salvation should stand fast and not be moved.

But the last Reason, and that which leads us to the other part of the verse,
to the remaining words, and which are the Reason laid down in the Text, is
this, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven Their happiness does not consist in
their poverty, but in the Right and Title they have to the Kingdom, for that
they are the heirs apparent to the Crown of Glory, for that they are of the
blood Royal of Heaven, the most high born Seed of God.

Oh most blessed, most happy, most fortunate and Royal Poverty, on which is
intayl'd a Kingdom, that has the reversion of a Crown and Scepter. This life
is the nonage of a Saint, we are here under pupillage and wardship, under
Guardians and Tutors, the first Epistle of John 3. 2. Now are ye the Sons of
God, but it does not yet appear what ye shall be. A Saints portion is not in
this life, his Kingdom is not of this world; his happiness is in reversion.
Oh* who would not part with all he has for a Kingdom. Its reported that when
Cesars ambition courted the Romans monarchy, and began to bid for the Empire of
the whole Earth, that he left himself nothing but hope. Oh who would not part
with all he has for a Kingdom, so he may but retain not a bare uncertain hope,
but the sure reversion of a Kingdom. What, shall Caesar bid more for the bare
naked hopes of an earthly. Empire, than Christians for not the hopes, but
certainty of a spiritual a Heavenly Kingdom? Shall Caesar venture more for a
temporal Crown, than Christians for an eternal weight of Glory? Is he accounted
unworthy of terrestrial empire, that will not venture his life for it, and is
not he much more unworthy of a Caelestial Throne, that will not adventure and
part with his all for it.

It is reported of a fortunate King, that he accounted it his sole misfortune,
that he never had misfortune: and therefore being minded industriously to seek
and court that which other men endeavor most to shun and avoid, he cast a Ring
of great value into the Sea: and after a while found it in the belly of a fi^h,
served up to his table. I am sure it is the greatest the sadest misfortune of
the greater part of the World, that they have not this misfortune, to fall into
this poverty of spirit. And they that have it may justly take up the words of
him that said periissem nisi periissem, I had been eternally unfortunate and
miserable, had it not been for this misfortune. I know this has been an age
too skilful and ingenious in supplanting one another, in raising themselves by
the falls of others, in building their fortunes on the ruins of other men's: But
this is a far more ingenious thing to be able to supplant a man's own
misfortune, to raise himself by his own fall, to find a crown in his own ruins;
we know Saul found a Kingdom, as he was seeking his fathers asses, and this is
to find a kingdom in seeking poverty and want, this is to convert by an
excellent kind of Chemistry poisons into Cordials, losses into gains, crosses
into crowns, and the wounds and injuries of fortune into blessings and favors:
it is a being (in truth what the Philosophers so much talked of) beyond the
reach of fortune, and above the Empire of Chance. I believe during the time of
our late unhappy wars many that were skillful at fishing in troubled waters,
have with good success experimented the truth of this doctrine in the letter.

How many a poor broken trades man with others of ship-wrack't and ruined
fortunes, who being quite bankrupt and reduced to the extremity of want and
misery; Have by betaking themselves to the wars, thriven better, and raised
themselves to far greater and fairer fortunes than ever they could have
expected, with out a miracle in the way of their former vocations. I am sure
its no less true, but more safe in the spirit. For there was never any poor
broken spirit, that being ship-strack't and bankrupted in himself, that being
lost and ruined in himself, that being undone and beggard, that being naked,
humble and poor in spirit, betook himself to this spiritual warfare, and
entered into the Camp of the Saints militant: that lifted his name under the
Captain of our Salvation Christ Jesus, and served under the banner of the
Cross, but he was a gainer by it, but he thrive better, and raised his fortunes
to a higher pitch, than if he had grasped the Scepters, and possessed the Empires
of the whole Earth, so thriving a thing is this poverty, so great the
advantages that are to be reaped by it, so great the honor and dignities to
which it leads. For to speak truth they are our riches that ruin and undo us,
what we account our riches is our poverty, and our clothing is our shame, of
which till we are stripped its impossible for us to be either fortunate or truly
happy.

But to proceed, how much have many done and suffered upon the single account
of gratifying their ambition? with the expense of how much sweat and travail,
at the loss of how many nights sleep and repose, at the cost of how many cares
and sorrows, are men content to purchase a small Empire, a little province of
rule and dominion? Whereas it were but a poor, low and grovelling ambition, did
they with Ceser grasp at the whole Earth, or with Alexander mourn, for that
there is but one? For what is it that we should either with the one prize it so
much, or with the other grieve there are no more? Is it any other than a mole
hill, or any better than the dreges and sidency of the Creation, or is it not
infinitely below the worth and dignity of the least celestial body of the least
star that twinkles in the great vault of heaven? Is it not then to play at
small game a mere childish push-pin sport to contend for it?

Or can the great conflicts and struglings managed with so much passion and
animosity about it, amount to more or seem other in the eye of a truly soaring
and raised ambition, than a cock-fight or contest of fowls for the Empire of a
dunghill, or the bull rush encounter we meet with in the fable between the Frog
and the Mouse, or rather the stivings of those little animals we sometimes
observe in mole hills, so eagerly to contend for a grain of corn? For is not
the ambiency and circumference of the whole earth (which is so noble a prize in
the eyes of the sons of men, and so great a ball of contention among them) but
as a punctum a small point or atoms, in comparison of the dementions of the
first and lowest Heavens; And yet how much sweat, how much oil is dispended in
the quest and acquisition of a small particle thereof.

There are others that will suffer much upon the account of love and
friendship, that can freely espouse poverty, and court misery for the love and
company of a friend, that can sacrifice their lives, their honors their crowns
at the Altar, and feet of friendship: Can bid defiance unto Death, the King of
terrors, in honor of their friend. And to speak truth, since friendship in the
highest and most heroik degree thereof, is so strict a League and Union of
Souls that friends become a second self to each other: I know not whether he
may be thought worthy the title, or not to profane the name by his pretensions
thereto, that cannot pawn his life for the honor and safety of his friend.
Shall now a rash and blind passion, boast greater trophies, and be honored
with more victims than God? Shall the Martyrologies of love and friendship be
fuller than those of Saints? Shall the votaries of Cupid be more numerous than
those of Heaven? Shall men do more upon a principle of good nature, and on the
account of a natural passion of love and friendship to a creature, than those
that pretend to be saints by a principle of Grace, and on the account of a
Divine and Seraphick love to the Creator? Shall the flames of love kindled by
concupiscence and lust, have more heat and burn brighter than those lighted by
a beam of Heaven, and kindled at the Altar? Shall more boast the wounds they
have received in the lists of friendship, than those of piety? for the love of
a woman, than of God? for the sake of a friend, than of Jesus.

Others are very passionate in the quest of honor, and zealous of their
reputations, being willinger to loose their lives than the least punctilio of
credit. How many Gentlemen have sacrificed their lives on this score, and
offered up themselves, as victims at the Altars of this chimerical and feigned
Diety? How great a spur to valor is this notion of Honor; How great flames of
courage will the least spark thereof kindle in a valiant breast? With how great
resolution will it steel a soldiers heart, making him proof against the
greatest perils? What dangers will he not confront? What hazards will he not
attempt, if his honor, if his reputation be at stake? And how many of these
candidates of fame, these sons of renown do watch with more jealousy ore their
honor, than their souls? And are carefuller not to fully their reputations,
then defile their consciences; Now shall any one be willinger to sell his life,
to redeem his own honor, than Gods, to vindicate his own reputation, than the
Gospels? In defense of his Princes standard, than the banner of the Cross, or
to purchase the name of a valiant man, than that of a courageous Christian.

Again many have suffered much for the love of wisdom in the quest and pursuit
of knowledge. With how much hunger and cold, with the loss of how many nights
rest and sleep do men hunt after learning, and purchase to themselves a few
flight notions of things? How will men rack and serve their thoughts, torture,
and distress their apprehentions, with a problem or theorem in Philosophy? How
will many macerate and consume their bodies, spend and wast the taper of their
lives in watchings, abstinencies, and a thousand other austerities to gain a
superficial inspection into the secrets of Nature, into the nature of things?
How will many rob and defraud nature of its due, and pine away their bodies to
satiate their thirst after knowledge, to feed and gratify the inquisitive
searching humor of their minds? How has the eagerness of some men's thirst
after learning, drunk up their strength and the very marrow of their souls? How
has the fiery spirit and activity of their minds, fretted, consumed and eaten
up the flesh of their bodies, reduced them to Anotomies, and living Skellitons,
looking more like specter Ghosts or walking shaddows, than men? Some men's
souls being like a sword too sharp and keen for the scabbard of their bodies,
in which they are sheathed: Or like Mercury or Quicksilver, so penetrating and
acture, that nothing can contain them: And all this upon the sole account of
knowledge, to which their affections are kindled with such ardent desires, and
have conceived such sprightly flames as commonly soon reduces their bodies to
ashes, and rendes them the victims of their desires, causing them to expire
like the Phoenix, in their own flames. Its reported of (as I take it) Cleanthes
a poor Philosopher, that he pawned his nights rest, to purchase his days
studies, that he drew water by night to earn a small pension to maintain
himself in the muses service by day, to maintain himself in the study of
Philosophy. And of another it is reported, that having quitted and forsaken his
honse and possessions, to take a pilgrimage for the better improvement of his
stock of knowledge; and finding at his return all things through the injury of
time gone to decay, and his house almost buried under its own ruins, brake
forth into these expressions, sihaec non paeriissent ego paeriissem, had not
these perished I had perished, had I not made Shipwreck of my estate, I had
shipwrack'd and lost my self.

Now shall the sons of humane wisdom, the candidates of a little natural
knowledge, that but puffs up, and profits not, except sanctified by grace,
which will be but as a torch to light men to Hell. I say, shall men for the
love of what the Apostle calls vain Philosophy, be content to welcome
poverty, and entertain penury, without any assurance of better estate in
revertion, or future happiness to compensate and reward their former miseries:
And shall we grudge to do that for the wisdom which is from above, for a Crown of
Glory, which they do for the shadow of wisdom, for a wreath of withering and
fading palms, to obtain a name among the learned; Shall not we do that to be
made partakers of those Eternal fountains of wisdom and knowledge, that the
Heathen did, for the adorning their understandings with a little dark fading
counterfeit knowledge?

To conclude, the lower the foundation is laid, the higher the superstructure
may be raised. We have received on the credit of naturalists and those that are
best read in the observations of nature, that your tallest trees shoot their
roots deepest into the Earth, and commonly as far downwards toward the Center,
as their tops reach upwards toward Heaven: As if nature would teach us, that
the foundation of the best and surest fortune is laid low, is laid in the dust,
and the Scripture teaches us, that poverty is the way to a Crown, beggary to a
Kingdom. So that we see here the harmony and consent that's between the Book of
God, and that of nature, between the Scriptures and the greater volumn of the
World: And both of them giving in their evidence to this Truth, bearing
testimony to this Doctrine, commending and reading lectures to us of this
poverty of Spirit. Shall we now be so childish, as not part with our counters
for gold? With the menstruous rags of our own righteousness, for the glorious
princely robes of Christ's? Shall we prefer our coats of fig leaves, before the
righteousness of God?

And that this way and method of salvation may not seem strange to us, Christ
the Lord and Captain of our Salvation has trod it before us. For was not he
humbled, before he was exalted? Was not he poor not having where to lay his
head, before he received the Kingdom of his Father? Was not he crowned with
thorns, before he was crowned with Glory? Finally, was not he crucified before
he was Glorified? Shall we now refuse to drink of the same cup that he has
drunk before us? Do we who are but the children of Adoption expect a Kingdom, a
Crown, a Scepter, a Throne of Glory, on easier terms than the Heir, the son by
nature, and the first begotten, than Chrrist our Elder brother received them
on, should we not rather rejoice and glory in our poverty, for that we are poor
in Spirit, because to such is given the Kingdom of Heaven.

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, at the black-spread Eagle,
at the VVestend of Paul's.
THe Scripture Directory for Church Offices and People: Or, a Practical
Commentary upon the whole Third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the
Corinthians. To which is annexed, The Godly and the Natural Man's Choice upon
Psalm. 4. ver. 6, 7, 8. By Anthony Burgess, Pastor of the Church of Sutton
Coldfield in Warwickshire.

(...). The Temple of Solomon Pourtrayed by Scripture Light: wherein all its
famous Buildings, the Pompous Worship of the Jews, with its Attending Rites and
Ceremonies, the several Officers employed in that Work, with their Ample
Revenues: And the Spiritual Mysteries of the Gospel veiled under all, are
treated of at large by Samuel Lee.

The History of Diodorus Siculus, containing all that which is most memorable
and of greatest Antiquity in the first Ages of the World, until the War of
Troy: in Folio.

Renodaeus his Dispensatory, containing the whole body of Physic; discovering
the Natures, and Properties, and Virtues of Vegetals, Minerals, and Animals: in
folio.

Gadburies Doctrine of Nativities.

Doctor Pordages Innocence appearing through the Dark Mists of pretended guilt:
in folio.

Cornelius Agrippa, his Occult Philosophy in 3 Books in quarto.

Henry Laurence Lord President his Book Entitled, Our Communion and War with
Angels: in quarto.

Christopher Goad his Sermons Entitled, Refreshing Drops, and Scorching Vials:
in quarto.

Samuel Gorton his Exposition on the fifth chapter of James: in quarto.

Samuel Hartlib of Bees and Silkworms: in quarto.

Williams, his Book called the Bloody Tenet of Persecution for cause of
conscience: in quarto.

Doctor Gells Sermon Entitled Noah's Flood returning: in quarto.

Several Pieces of Christopher Blackwood, now public Teacher in Ireland: in
quarto.

Jacob Behem his Signatura Rerum, or Signature of all things: in quarto.

His Epistles explaining many things written in his other Books: in quarto.

Of Election and Predestination: in quarto.

His Book Entitled Aurora, or the Dayspring, lately printed in quarto.

Several Pieces of Isaac Penington Junior: in quarto.

The Spiritual Journey of a young man, a Piece translated out of Dutch.

Biggs of the vanity of the craft of Physic, or a new Dispensatory: in quarto.

Collier his Pulpit-guard routed: in quarto.

His Font-guard routed: in quarto.

Simon Hendon his Key of Scripture Prophesies: in quarto.

Mr. Parker his Answer to the Assembly, in large Octavo.

Several Pieces of Thomas Collier, in large octavo.

Tillom on the eleventh chapter of the Relations, in large octavo.

Henry Laurence Lord President his Book of Baptism in large octavo.

Reeves Sermons Entitled the Strait-gate: in large Octavo.

Several Pieces of H. N. in octavo, namely, Prophecy of the Spirit of Love.
Revelatio Dei, or the Revelation of God.

Introduction to the Glass of Righteousness. Evangelium Regni, a joyful Message
of the Kingdom, Spiritual Tabernacle. The first Exhortation. The Apology for
the service of Love: all in octavo.

Samuel Hartlibs Chemical Addresses: in octavo.

Thomas Butler his little Bible of the Man, or the Book of God opened in Man:
in Octavo.

Crooked Paths made strait, or the ways of God made known in lost sinners, by
A. Yeomans: in Octavo.

Laurences Gospel separation separated from abuses.

Simmons Saints like Christ: in Octavo.

William Sedgwick his eleven Sermons, entitled, Some Flashes of Lightnings of
the Son of Man: in Octavo.

A Word of Peace from the Prince of Peace, by J. Hatch: in Octavo.

Mysteries unvailed, wherein the Doctrine of Redemption by Christ is handled,
by Robert Gardner: in Octavo.

Purnel his good tidings for sinners, great joy for Saints: in Octavo.

Biscos glorious Mysteries: in Octavo.

The Confession and Fame of the Rosy Cross, by English Philalethes: in Octavo.

Larkhams Sermons in Octavo.

Bacons Catechism in twelves.

Corporations vindicated in their Fundamental Liberties, by Charles Hotham: in
twelves.

John Saltmarsh his Book of Free Grace: in twelves.

And his Book Entitled, Sparkles of Glory, or some Beams of the morning Star:
in twelves.

Dawnings of Light, in twelves.

Paracelsus his Aurora, and Treasure of the Philosophers. As also the
Water-stone of the Wise Men; describing the matter of, and manner how to attain
the universal Tincture.

The Errata.
PAge 2. line 26, for world read worlds. p. 6. l. 10. f. any r. many. p. 13. l.
10. f. we should be r. should not be. p. 31. l. 12. f. happiness r.
unhappiness. p. 35. l. 17. f. produced r. product. p. 39. l. 24. f. Lycaon r.
Actaeon. p. 64. l. penult. f. sumitatis r. sanitatis. p. 66. l. 13. f. smutes
r. smuts: p. 74. l. 11. f. cui r. Qui jacet etc. p. 80 l. ult. f. that r. the.
p. 82. l. 19 f. totum r. totam. p. 88. l. ult. f. sidency r. sedeney. p. 89. l.
26. f. atoms r. atome. p. 93. l. 23. f. acture r. active. l. penult. f. rendes
r. renders.

Besides the Errata's, the Reader is desired to take notice that there are
(through the negligence of the Printer) many mispointings, which rendering the
sense of the Discourse both difficult and dubious in diverse places, must
therefore be submitted to his Care and Judgment to be corrected.


