THE Gentleman's Complete Jockey. WITH THE Perfect Horseman, AND Experienced
Farrier.

CONTAINING, I. The Nature of Horses; their Breeding, Feeding and Management in
all Paces, to fit them for War, Racing, Travel, Hunting, or other Recreations
and Advantages. II. The true Method, with proper Rules and Directions to Order,
Diet and Physic the Running-Horse, to bring him to any Match, or Race, with
Success. III. The Methods to Buy Horses, and prevent being Cheated; Noting the
particular Marks of the Good and Bad Horses, in all their Circumstances. IV.
How to make Blazes, Stars and Snips: To (...) Horse with little Charge, and to
make him Lively and Lovely. V. The whole Art of a Farrier, in curing all
Diseases, Griefs and Sorrances incident to Horses; with their Symptoms and
Causes. VI. The Methods of Shooing, Blooding, Roweling, Purging, and prevention
of Diseases, and many other things, from long Experience and Approved Practice.


By A. S. GENT.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Nelme, at the Leg and Star, over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1697.

diagram of horse The Gentleman's Complete Iockey


THE PREFACE.
READER,
I Here present you with a Labored Work, containing all that is Excellent to
be known, relating to Horses and Mares, etc. the most necessary and useful
Creature to Man, in Peace and War; Enriching with their Labors, and pleasing
in their more nicer Industry and Management; and consequently, their
well-Breeding and Instructions, as to what they are capable, is necessary to be
known; therefore I have laid i^ down in such an easy, though perfect Method,
that the meanest Capacity may soon understand it, and the largest, sind Subject
Matter enough to busy it self.

That these Creatures have been highly Esteemed in all Ages, and their
Understanding very great, History makes frequent mention; So that their
Preservation was had in much regard: And Hypocrates, and other Eminent
Physicians, Studied it, next to Man's, laying down Rules and Methods to
discover and cure the Diseases incident to them. And this Example I have also
followed, that so generous a Creature may at no time be lost for want of
suitable Remedies in any matter that may besall him. The Station it has pleased
God to put me in, has led me to Experience in this Creature; and I have found
many things concerning them, to which, as far as I can perceive, the Ancients
were Strangers: I have put them into a suitable Method, and Incerted them in
this Book, besides what are taken from the Works of the most Expert Managers
and Farriers that have ever been made Public: So that I may without straining
a point of Modesty, truly say, it not only Answers, but much exceeds what is
promised in the Title Page, and is the best of its kind that has hitherto been
abroad in the World. To prove this, I could incert many Particulars, but they
being plainly to be seen in reading the following Pages; and Brevity (as I
conceive) always most commendable in a Preface, I draw to a Conclusion:

As well knowing that when all that I can say, is said, I must leave it to the
Censure of the Reader, and therefore will only desire one Favor, (which no
reasonable Man will refuse) and, that is, not to pass Sentence before you Read
and put in Practice so much of it as shall be suitable to your Occasion. And so
not fearing its coming to the Touchstone, to prove its real Worth and Value, I
remain, Reader,

Your Friend and Servant, to Oblige you in what I may, A. S.

THE Gentleman's Complete Jockey: WITH THE Perfect Horseman and Farrier.
Of the Natures and Properties of Horses.
HOrses, of all the unreasonable Creatures upon the Earth, are of the greatest
Understanding, having in them (as the Learned affirm) a certain natural
Instinct, not only of the knowledge of their Riders and Keepers, but also of
their own Generation and Descent, knowing their Sires and Dams, in such a
manner as they will refuse (as Pliny says) to couple or engender with them!
They are also Creatures the aptest to learn any Motion, and the readiest to
obey their Teacher, having a greater love to Exercise than any other Beast.
They are of an infinite great Courage, taking an exceeding delight in the Wars;
and (as some do affirm) have a certain foreknowledge of the Battle, and will
prepare themselves for the same. They will mourn for the loss or deaths of
their Masters; and are so apt to endure Labor, that it is written of the
Horses of the Samarans, That they will gallop a hundred Miles end-ways, without
rest or stay; they are naturally long lived, and by choice Keepers have been
brought up to fifty Years; but for thirty it has been ordinary with them: the
Mares are shorter lived, surviving till twenty or twenty five at the farthest.
They are of all Beasts the most beautiful of shape. They are fit for the Saddle
at four years of age for the Wars at six, for the Race at eight, for Hunting,
and extreme Matches, at ten or eleven. The Females bear their Foal full eleven
Months, and foal in the twelfth: the best time for their ingendering is March,
at the increase of the Moon, or in part of it; the Mare foaleth standing; they
are supposed to be so loving and kind to their Generation, that if a Foal lose
the Dam, yet the other Mares, which are with milch, will, of their own accord,
lend their teats, to feed and nurse up the Orphan foal. Horses are subject to
more Diseases then any other Beast; some write three hundred, or as many as
belong to Man.

The Means to make the Seed of the Horse perfect for Generation.
The Seed of the Horse ought to be hot and dry, so that all excessive moisture
of Seed must be abated and taken away: Now the means to make hot and dry Seed
for Generation, is Labor and spare Diet, the Digestion being made perfect,
through heat proceeding from Labor, so that the meat that the Horse and Mare
should feed upon, should be in quality of Nature hot and dry, and then
moderately taken: The seed does naturally partake of the quality and
temperature of the meat; his meat will increase an uniform Seed, so that the
Colt will be like unto the Siers: The meat should be old sweet Hay or
Wheat-straw, moderately given them; sweet Oats, winnow'd and cleans'd from the
dust and filth, mingled with old dried Pease or Beans, with a scattering of
Bay Salt and Anniseeds; the Provender, for their better digestion, may be given
them three times a day; their Water sweet and pure; and every day early in the
morning, when they are fasting, moderately exercised until they sweat, their
Stable cleaned, and then painfully dressed and rubbed dry, and thorough cold
before any meat be given to them; the which does not only perfect digestion,
and exhaust the moisture from the Seed, but also strengthens and cleanses
their blood and bodies from all raw and imperfect humors, whereby you shall
perceive them to exceed in pride and lust. About eight or ten days before they
come to action, add to their diet some sweet Wheat, equal in mixture and
quantity with the rest of their provender; for Wheat is a great (...) of the
Heart, and an increaser of the vital-spirits, which above all things for that
action is principally to be moved and stirred up; sometimes put in a pint of
White Wind, or a bottle of Ale, to abate the cold quality of their Water. These
Means being rightly used, you shall plainly discern the endowment of a good
temperature, to possess a sufficient power to shape a perfect body; which some
of the Gentry would give any rate for.

Observations for the better Directions in Breeding of the Mare.
There must be a great discretion used in feeding of the Mare, until she has
foaled, least by the long use of overbad Meats, the Colt in the Womb be
impaired from that quality and temperature it had from the Seed; therefore the
Mare may not so far eat of contrary Meats, least the Colt lose of those good
qualities, which it received (as has been said) of the Seed whereof it was
made.

Of what Age the Horse or Mare ought to be that B^get and Bring forth.
Observe every Horse until he be six Years old is a Colt, but never after, and
that is his first Age, and if after that time he lose any of his Teeth they
come not again, because the excess of his Moisture does then begin to abate,
being until then predominate in Moisture; and from five Years of Age until he
be ten, is counted his middle, youthful and perfect Age, for his vigor, spirit
and action, because he is then more Hot and less Moist; and from ten Years of
Age to fifteen is his declining because then Heat and Moisture do much decay;
and from fifteen Years of Age until twenty his old Age, because that then he is
cold and dry. The best time for their Ingendring is March, at the increase of
the Moon or in part of it; the Mare carries (as has been said) her Foal
eleven Months and foaleth standing in the twelfth.

To know whether a Mare has conceived, and how to order her after time of
Conception, until the time of Foaling, for the better Breeding and Nourishment
of the Colt.
If she cast not her Seed, but eats freshly when she comes to Meat, and so
continues, and does not neigh nor piss often, neither casts her eye gazing
after a Horse, and within a Day or two begins to be gaunt-bellied, because her
Womb in Conception and closing it self together in keeping the Seed, trusseth
up and makes it show less to the fight then before, as if she were suddenly
become lean, and her Hair lies very smooth, and brighter then before; as also
about ten Days after, offering her a Horse two or three Days before the Full,
and likewise before the New Moon, (and she abhors Copulation) it assures
that her Nature is satisfied, and are manifest Signs of her Comception. And as
touching her Keeping, let her not drink so much as Nature desires, and still
keep her with the same Meat and Diet for twelve Days after: Presently after her
Foaling milk the Mare as clean as you can, which will not only draw down her
Milk, but make the same increase, and also keep the Udder in a good temper,
that the Milk do not clod, which if it should, the Mare will quickly become
dry. Boil her Milk with the top^ of Lavender, bath all her Udder therewith, and
so continue till the clods and knobs in the Udder be dissolved. After foaling
give her a good Mash made of Malt, or Wheat-meal; let the Stable be open and
airy, and the Floor paved and not planked; in the Provender you may also put
the Powder of Brimstone, the Powder of the Roots of Enula Campana, of
Whitelilly-roots, of Polipodium of the Oak, of Saven, Marshwormwood, Tobacco,
Garlic chopped small, and such like, and when she goes to Grass, let her run no
longer then Bartholomew-tide.

Of Taming of Colts.
The yearly wintering Colts in the Stable, will make them tame and domestical,
as also bring many other benefits both to the Owner and the Colts, until they
come to be ^id^en, which should not be until five Years of Age, if you would
have them strong, sound and durable Colts. When the Colt is made gentle to
suffer the saddle and cruppler to be set on his back, shoes on his feet, and
also load to water; then take another gentle Horse, and ride upon him leading
the Colt in a halter; cross gird your Colt, and ride him a mile or two, and
make much of your Colt, and with this gentle usage the Colt will love and
desire your Company, and oftentimes when you are in the Stable with him, cause
some Drum to beat, or Gun to play or shoot to harden him, at which time stand
by and cheri^h him.

Of making of Colts to Amble, from the time of their Foaling.
Put on a halter, bridle and saddle, at your pleasure, on the Mare's head, in
the morning lead her forth, let the Colt follow her gently, as soft a pace as
she can go, into some even, plain, and hard Ground, and be sure that the Colt
be not enforced to go faster then you lead the Mare; then observe and you shall
find the Colt going by her, that he does altogether go and strain his Legs in
an Amble, after you have practiced several times, the Colt will increase in the
swiftness of the pace of his Amble, and then when you think fit, you may Back
him.

Of the Stable.
First, For the situation of the Stable, it should be on a dry Ground, so as
all the seasons of the Year, both Man and Horse may come and return from the
same clean and dry; also it should be builded and so placed that there be a
continual Current for cleansing and keeping the same sweet from all things that
are noisome. It should be cealed over the Horses, to keep both Horse, Rack,
Meat and Manger from all dust; it must not have any filthy Gutter or Sink near,
in, or under the same, neither any Privy, nor any other unwholesome savor of
Hogsti^s, Hen-houses, or such like. Some ancient Writers affirm, that the
strong air of a Privy will make a Horse blind; the Horse is naturally a proud
Beast, and delights in cleanness; the Rack should be set high and stooping,
that no dust or filth may annoy the Horses Eyes or Maine, or endanger his
Crest, by crooked or wry feeding; the Manger should be deep and strong, for
casting Provender out of it with the Horse's No^e, with posts and partitions,
as you may see in all well-ordered Stables; the Floor should be paved and not
planked for these Reasons: First, it is more durable and lasting, and less
charge, it makes your Horse more bold upon stony and hard Grounds, as also it
is an excellent convenieney for Colts being unshoo'd, for it hardens the Hoof
so as by continuance and custom, they will be as bold on the Stones as if they
were shooed. The Pavement should be even, not higher before, where the
fore-feet stand, for it will prove painful to the hinder Legs, so as the Horse,
unless necessity compel him, cannot stand strait or be bold in the Stable;
there should be diverse Windows, the which should be so placed, that the Stable
be therewith cleared with the Air, and to be close shut, or opened as occasion
shall serve, in the nightime, especially in the Winter, at other times it
should be kept something cold, for the Horse will feed and digest the better.
There should not be any dust or Loam-walls about or near the Rack or Manger,
for the Horse will naturally lick them to his great hurt. The ^ung must not by
any means lie close to the Stable. The Grooms should be lodged near to the
Stable to be ready at all times, and upon all occasions; and joining to their
Lodging should be a convenient Room, with a Press therein to set their Saddles,
Bridles, Girts, and such like; with all kind of necessary Instruments, to mend
such Furniture, with all things necessary for Shooing, letting of Blood, and
such like, together with Medicinable things, either for inward Diseases, or
outward Hurts. There should also to the Stable be annexed certain Sheds or
Rooms to lay Horselitter in, both new and old, for it is most unfit for the
Litter to be under the Manger, as commonly is used, left the Horse should
either feed on it, or be offended with the savor. Besides, there should be a
little enclosed Room, such as Horses, after their labor, might be put into, to
wallow themselves, wherein most Horses take exceeding delight, it being also
most healthful for them so to do, the which the ancient Writers affirm, does so
much comfort a Horse, that if they be tired, having afterward wallowed
himself, being clean rubbed, will courageously travel presently again, there
should also be Places or Sheds for the Horses to be cleans'd, ^^rry'd and
trimmed in, neither would I have any Horse having the Glaunders, or any other
Sickness, Hurt or Disease, to remain in the Stable at such a time, but kept in
a Shed for the present from the rest of the Horses, by which means, and all
other good Diet, there cannot be any great doubt of Health and long Life to the
Horses.

Of Shooing of Horses.
If the true knowledge of Hoofs were rightly understood, then shooing could not
be difficult: First, I will set down what is a perfect Hoof, it must be lean,
smooth, deep, tough, narrow toward the Toe, and conveniently broad in the
Heels, much like an Asses Hoff, for it should be round. A Hoof that wants the
deepness of the Coffin cannot be of long service; and because all the weight of
the Horse rests upon the Quarters and Heels of the Fore-feet, therefore those
Quarters, I mean the edge of the Coffin on the hinder part of the Forefeet must
be maintained and taken off as little as may be, for thereby the Horse treads
and bears equally, which is a special means to keep him from interfering
behind. Therefore the Farrier must to his uttermost preserve the hinder
quarters of the Forefeet, taking little or nothing away from the edge of the
Coffin, because, as we said, all the weight and burden of the Horse rests
upon the Quarters and Heels of the Forefeet, which few Farriers little think
upon; but the Toes of the Forefeet being naturally thick and hard, must by them
be always abated and pared thin as the edge of a Knife, whereby they make the
Hoofs of the Forefeet to be low before, and high in the Quarters. Therefore
when they do part the Coffins of the Forefeet, let them do it so even and plain
as the E^e can discern, that the Shoe laid upon the Coffin may seem to be
glewed thereunto, for that you cannot see the light betwixt the Shoe and the
Coffin in any part, otherwise the Shoe is not well turned or welded, or the
Hoof truly pared, but before it be nailed, be sure to amend the fault, so that
it may bear even and just upon the edge of all the Coffin; then before you let
the Farrier set on the Shoe, in both the quarters of the Coffin of every Foot
next to the Frush, let him cut out of the end of the corner of the Coffin, as
near to the quick of the Heel as may be, as much of the Coffin as you may lay
your Finger in it, whereby it shall never gather too near the Frush, to close
up, and become narrow in the Heels, so as when the Horse is shooed, you shall
have a very good distance betwixt the broad end of the Frush, and the sponge of
the Shoe, whereby all Gravel and Stones will wash and work out of the sponge
of the Shoe, being cut aslope; then when the Shoe is tacked on with nails,
set down the Horses Foot, and stand directly behind the Horse, and view whether
the Frush of the Foot be direct and of just proportion, even betwixt the Webs
of the Shoes, and whether the Horse stand right, and the Frush equally betwixt
the Webs or Sponges of the Shoe, and you shall be assured thereby that the
Shoe stands right, the continual use whereof will cause the Horse to tread
and traverse boldly and surely, because his Quarterns being the bearing place,
will be broad and even to support the whole Body. And for the true making of
the Shoe, all the Web should be strait and plain, not drawn in at the Heels
and Quarter narrow, or beaten to the Heels which many use to do, neither
hallowed, if the Feet be perfect but even and flat, with a broad Web, and the
Sponges thicker and more substantial than any part of the Shoe, to cause the
Joint to stand upright, and so wide in the Quarters as both sides may disbord
the coffin of the Hoof the breadth of a Straw, to guard and save the Coffin of
the Hoof, being the only strength of the whole Foot, and also the shoe so far
set back to guard the Heels, as may save the same from bruising and cutting
with Stones, and unless the Coffin be continually so kept open from hard
oppressing, and closing of the Tuel of the Foot, which is enclosed within the
Coffin, whereby the Tuel becomes bound to the great grief and lameness of the
Horse, but the Foot and Joint of the Horse maintained as a principal post to
support the whole Building, for otherwise the Horse will become Hoof-bound,
which many ignorantly call dry foundred, and also make the Joint to become
weak, lame, and full of Windgalls. And therefore when he comes to the piercing
of the Shoe of the Fore-foot, let him not spare to pie^rce it from the Quarter
to the hard Toe, but not backward to the Heel, and let the Shoe be so pierced,
as the holes be much wider on the outside of the Shoe then within, for the
holes of the inside of the Shoe should be no wider then the Shank of the Nail
may well fit, otherwise the Shoe will never fit fast and steady, and the
circle of the piercing more distant from the edge of the toe, then from the edge
of the Quarter, because every Smith knows that there is more hold to be taken
with less danger, in respect of the Tuel and Quick of the Foot, and all the
Nails would be untoled without Shoulders, which will so sink, and strongly fill
the Hole, as that the Shoe will be well fixed, and by cutting the Hoof a
little with the point of a Knife, let the Clin^h be clean hid, the which
shooing should always be done, eight or ten Days before you travel your Horse,
for by that time the Hoof will be grown to the Nails to hold the Shoe fast.
And for the helping of interfering, you must keep him full of Flesh, and always
preserve the Coffins on the inside of the Hoofs, without paring away more than
to make them even for the Shoes, and abate the outside of the Coffin of the
same Foot, and besides, make the Sponges of the Shoes on the inside of the
Shoes much thicker then the outside.

How to know a Horse that is durable, and of continuance in Journey, etc.
This observation must also be from his shape, the others follow: First, It is
to be considered that Strength is the cause of the continuance of Travel, then
consider in what part of the Body of the Horse that Streng^h prin^ipa^ly and
naturally rests, for as the Strength of the Bull is naturally in the neck, of
the Lion and Bear in the p^ws, of the Dog in the chops, so of the Horse in the
forepart, wh^re Nature has imposed the Burden, and th^^e is and must be his
principal force and strength, the whi^st forepart must be deep and broad from
the point of his too, or (...) to the Bottom of his chest or breast; hi^ (...)
the lid or cover of a trunck, whereby he will appear broad, full, round, and
bearing out in the chest or breast, with an evenness of chest and belly to the
flank, so as that his belly hung not deeper than his chest, nor his chest
deeper then his belly, with lean, upright, and strait pasterns, somewhat narrow
hoofed toward the toe, assure your selves such a Horse will be durable, and as
good almost at the end of his labor as at the beginning; if he be of a
contrary shape; then will his actions be contrary, namely, the longer he is
traveled, the more Jade.

How to know a free and perfect spirited Horse.
This powerful spirit proceeds from the vital spirit and arterial blood that
goes wandering through the whole body, to stir up the power of the Beast, to
give him force and vigor to work; and as this spirit is of substance most
pure, so when it is plentifully infused it makes and works all the Creature,
and quality of the same pure, so as Man not knowing or finding the reason,
cannot but wonder at the work and Workmaster. Wherefore, for the satisfaction
and confirmation of this Proposition, how to know a perfect, quick, and
free-spirited Horse, you must also still retain all the description of shape
before described, by all which discriptions you shall assuredly know his
qualities, only upon the view, as if you had made trial of him many years; but
if the Horse be defective in his shape, as I have described, then assure your
self that he wants that natural perfection I have referred the rule unto.
Observe then, I beseech you, that a perfect Horse by Nature is thus shaped,
viz. a lean slender head, broad forehead, great black eyes, full and plain
over the lids, slender, thin, and lean jaws, broad, thin, long, and a high
reared neck, the head set to the neck as naturally as a Ram's head when he
sighteth, high withers, and a deep broad chest or breast, his ribs of an equal
evenness from his chest to his flank, lean, upright pasterns, with a lean and
deep hoof; such a Horse, assure thy self, will be found in all his actions
naturally bold, loving, easy, sure-footed, durable, and free-going. But
because I know and do assure my self, that unus Men's no est capax tanti Motis,
that it is unpossible that one head should be so well furnished as to neglect
the opinions of the ancient Writers, I have therefore annexed their
Description, humbly submitting my self to the censure of the Experienced and
Learned.

Of the Shape of a Horse.
The last thing to know a good Horse is his Shape, which originally made by
God, was no doubt most excellent, for the works of God were all perfect. The
particular Observations and Descriptions of the perfect shape of a Horse are in
number 32, against which I question not but that there may be Objections
raised, which I will not trouble my self to answer, as being conscious that
what I shall write of this Subject, I have partly by experience, and partly
received from the most approved Authors. I will begin with the Hoof, and so
ascend till the whole Body be described.

First therefore, they say, That the Hoof should be black, smooth, dry, large,
round and hollow: Some write, That if it be soft and tender, and the Heel
broad, that is a sign of lightness, and that the Male will from her Foaling,
tread light upon the ground, being afraid to trust her Hoofs being tender, and
therefore straineth her Legs and Back the more.

2d Rule is, That the Hoofs should be small and heavy answerable to the Joint,
that it should be hairy, his Fetterlock to be good, in that it also answers
his nature.

3. That his Pasterns should be short, neither too low nor too high, and
therewithal strong beneath, nor apt to founder, the strength of the Pastern
being the uprightness thereof.

4. That his Joints ought to be great, with long Fetterlocks behind, this
greatness of his Joints must: also be answerable to the proportion of his Body.

5. That his Legs ought to be strait and broad.

6. That his Knees should be great, lean and plain,

7. That his Thighs should be full of sinews, tho Bones whereof to be short,
equal, just well proportioned; that when he stands with his Legs together,
they should be more distant one from another toward the Breast then beneath,
which proceeds from the fullness and breadth of the Breast, which causes that
distance.

8. That his Shoulders should be long, large, and full of flesh proportionable
to his Body.

9. That his breast should be large and round.

10. That his Neck should be rather long than short, great toward the Breast,
bending in the midst, and slender toward the Head.

11. That his Ears should be small, sharp, and upright.

12. That his Forehead should be lean and large, that largeness to be both of
breadth and length, according to his natural proportion.

13. That his Eyes should be great and black.

14. That the hollowness of his Brows be well filled and shooting outward.

15. That his Jaws should be slender and lean.

16. That his Nostrils should be open, and puffed up that you may see the red
within apt for Air.

17. That he ought to have a great Mouth.

18. And which is strange, that his Head should be like a Sheeps-head: I
answer, That Sheeps-heads being as other Beasts, are of diverse Shapes it cannot
be directly answered, for if I should conceive the shape thereof contrary to
the Writers meaning, I should wrong them, and therefore leave it, having
already given my description as to my own knowledge, but if you take it
according to the proportion of most Sheep, it is a good Shape.

19. That the Main should be thin and long, which betokens strength, and the
thinness, aptness to be taught.

20. That his Withers and Walleys should be sharp pointed, right and strait, so
that a Man may see from thence the Posture of his Shoulders.

21. That his Back should be short, even and plain.

22. That his Sides should be long and large, with small space betwixt the
hinder Rib and the Huckle-bone.

23. That his Belly should be long and great, orderly hidden under his Ribs.

24. That his Flank should be full and not grant, with natural frizled hair on
both sides, and the higher such hairs mount the better.

25. That his Rump should be round and plain, with a large space betwixt the
Huckle-bones.

26. That his Thighs should be large and long, with Bones well proportioned and
full of flesh.

27. That his Hams should be lean, dry and strait.

28. That his Hoofs should be large and crooked like a Heart, which should be a
sign of swiftness.

29. That his Tail be full of hairs, long, down to the the ground: or as some
write, lean and crisp.

30. That his Truncheon should be of a measurable bigness and well couched.

31. That his Stones and Yard should be small.

32. That he be proportioned like a Stag, lower before then behind.

Of the Colors of Horses.
Now we proceed to the examination of the certainty of the knowledge that might
be taken from the Horse's color, which most Men do so embrace, my purpose is
to name those which they call the best, viz. brown, bay, dappled, black full of
silver hairs, black like the Moor; the roan, bright bay, dark bay, bright
sorrel, flea-bitten, whitely yard, etc. The ancient Writers tell us that every
Horse is colored as he is complexion'd, and according to the complexion he is
good or evil dispositioned, as he does participate of the Elements so he is
complexion'd; affirming that if he have most of the Element of Fire, then he is
choleric, and therefore light, hot and fiery, and of no great force, as the
bright sorrel; but if of the Element of Water, then dull, slow, heavy, cold of
Nature, and such are most commonly milk-white; but if of the Element of the
Air, then more full of blood, sanguine, pleasant, and of color bay; but if of
the Earth, then melancholy, faint-hearted, sad and heavy; the colors of these
are dark, dun, russet or black. the Learned say, there are four Complexions, as
there are four Elements; but Horses do almost yearly alter their colors, the
Mare at the time of her foaling; Opianus says that the colors of Horses were
chosen and maintained for the hunting of wild Beasts; if a Horse be of a brown
bay, which the Frenchmen do call Bayarie, loyal trusty Bayard, which they
account to be the Captain of all colors, if withal this brown bay have a white
star, white foot, and such like, he is valued oftentimes more then he is thrice
worth. Thus has many Ages taken that for a cause which is no cause.

Of the Horses Marks.
The Italian Writers have drawn particular Names, from whom the People borrow
their Opinions, and therefore when a Horse has a white-foot or a white-mark,
which the Italian calls Balzano, if the white extend high and large (they say)
it pretends debility, because whiteness betokenth weakness, dullness, and the
like, and that they call Balzani, they tell us of Calzoti, Arteglio, Travato,
Trustravato, Rapicano, Attusuato, Guzzo, Zuino, etc. and sure I am that neither
with foot, white star, white list, struck, snip, phillet in the forehead, white
rump, black and red flea-bytings, ostrick-feather, where it cannot be seen,
meal-nose, meale-slank, bearded under his chops like a Goat, black and long
fetterlocks, long main, black tail, black list, and such like, are not to be
depended on as the assurant of a good Horse, for undoubtedly you shall find
good and bad of all colors, but to overcome Custom, is a hard fight.

How to know a Horse that is bold by Nature.
A Horse that is fearful by Nature may, by compulsary means, after long use
make little or no show of fear, as being in a Ship upon the Sea, where are
trumpets, guns, and the like, not having means to avoid the same, by use and
continuance thereof, seems not fearful. But the physogmony of a Horse is much
more certain, for he cannot keep secret or conceal as Man can, but being in
perfect health remains ever one and the same in countenance, To conclude and
make the truth hereof appear, choose a Horse with a broad forehead, a great
black full eye standing out like a Hare's, and a high reared forepart, and be
assured that by Nature he is bold, and to give you a farther assurance, mark a
Horse with a narrow forehead, little eyes and low forepart, which is mere
contrary, and assure your self by Nature, that he is starting and fearful, and
to seal up the truth thereof, the trial will confirm you.

How to make a white Scar or white Spot in a Horse's Face, or in any other
place.
Take two or three Apples, the sowrest you can get, and roast them at a quick
fire, then being extreme hot, take one of them in a cloth, and having cut off
the skin, clap the hot Apple to the Horse's forehead, and hold it hard
thereunto till the heat be assuaged, then try if the hair will come off, which
if it will not, then take another hot Apple, and do as you did before; then
when the hair is come off, as broad as you would have it, then take another hot
Apple, and clap it to the scalded skin, holding it hard to, till all the skin
blister and come off as well as the hair; then anoint the sore place twice a
day with Honey, and the next hair which comes will be white.

To keep your Woollen Horse-cloaths, Breast-cloaths, Rubbers, and the like from
Moths.
When you turn your Horse or Horses to grass, take all your Woollen Clothes, of
what kind soever, and first wash them clean and dry them, then hang them in the
Sun, dust them, and brush them, then lay them on some Fleaks or some other open
things, a pretty distance from the ground, and spread all open; then take the
hoofs of Horses and Kattel, and chopping them in pieces, burn them under the
Woollen things, so as the smoke may come to them in every part; then, being
thoroughly smoked, fold them up handsomely, and between every fold strew the
powder of Walnut tree-leaves well dried, and so lay them up in a Chest, and you
shall never be troubled with Moths, which are very unwholsom for the Horse, and
troublesome to him. Others use to rub their Clothes on the wrong sides all over
with the tops and tender parts of Wormwood, with the same effect.

How to defend a Horse from Flies.
This is a noisome offense in the Summertime; therefore when you find the
trouble thereof, take Arse-smart, and keep it in running Water, and make it
exceeding strong of the Herb, and therewith sprinkle and wash the Horse all
over, and no Fly will touch him a second time. The Ivy, Rue, or Herb of Grace
will do the like.

Observations in the Electing of Horses, and the Uses.
That which gives the noblest Character to a good Horseman, is, the
well-electing of Horses for that use and purpose he intends to employ them; and
in this Device there is no better nor readier a way than the knowledge of Races
and Strains from whence the Horses descend; for (as I have already intimated)
it is certain, that the Climate, Heat, and Cold, are the three excellent
Elements in a Horse's Composition. As to the election of Horses by their shapes
and proportion, by their color and complexions, and by their marks and other
outward semblances, I have already written sufficiently, and intend to iterate
nothing. To come then to the election of Horses, according to their Races,
Breeds, and Climates; if you will elect a Horse for service, of martial and
warlike Employment, then these are best: the Neapolitan, the Sardinian, the
Almain, the French, or any of these bastardiz'd in themselves, or with fair
well-shap'd and well-metal'd English Mares. If you will elect for Swiftness and
Service, then the Arabian, the Barbary, the Spanish, the Grecian, or any of
these bastardiz'd in themselves, or with our best English Mares. If you will
choose for long Travel and Service, then the English, the Hungarian, the
Swedstand, the Poland, the Irish. If you choose for Draught or Service, the
Flanders, the Friesland, or any of the Netherlands, either bastardiz'd in
themselves, or with our English races; and these are excellent for Coach, for
Cart, for Pack, or for any Burden.

I shall end this Discourse of Horses of several Countries with a general
Observation I have entertained of the Properties of Horses: A Horse has two
Properties of a Man; the first is, to have a proud Heart; and the second is, to
be bold and hardy. He has two Properties of a Badger, the first is, to have a
white raze or ball in his Forehead; the second is, to have a white Foot. He
has four Properties of a Lion, the first is, to have a broad Breast, the
second, to be stiff-docked; the third, to be wild in the Countenance; the
fourth is, to have four good Legs. He has nine Properties of an Ox; the first
is, to be broad Ribb'd; the second is, to be low-brawn'd; the third is, to be
short-pastern'd; the fourth is, to have great Sinews; the fifth is to be wide
betwixt the Challet; the sixth is, to have great Nostrils; the seventh is, to
be big on the Chine; the eighth is, to be fat and well fed, the ninth is, to be
upright standing. He also has nine Properties of a Hare; the first is,
stiff-ear'd; the second, to be greeney'd; the third, the eyes round; the
fourth, to have a ^ean Head; the fifth, to have lean Knees; the sixth, to be
light of foot; the seventh, to turn upon a light ground; the eighth to have a
short Buttock; the ninth, to have two good Fillets. He has nine Properties of
a Fox; the first is, to be prick-ear'd; the second, to be little eared; the
third to be round-tided; the fourth, to be side-tail'd; the fifth, to be
short-leg'd; the sixth, to be black-leg'd; the seventh, to be short-trotting;
the eighth, to be well colored; the ninth, to have a little Head. He has nine
Properties of an Ass; the first is, to be small mouthed; the second, to be
long-rein'd; the third, to be thincrested; the fourth, to be streight-back'd;
the fifth, to have small Stones; the sixth, to be Lath-leg'd; the seventh to be
round footed; the eighth, to be hollow footed; the ninth, to have a rough Foot.
He borrows ten Properties of a Woman; the first is to be lightsome, and of a
merry cheer; the second is, to be well-paced; the third is, to have a broad
Forehead; the fourth is, to have well-siz'd Buttocks; the fifth, to be hard of
Ward; the sixth, to be always busy with the Mouth; the seventh, to be chewing
of the Bridle; the eighth, to be good at a long Journey; the ninth, to be easy
to leap upon; the tenth, to be stirring under a Man.

My Reader may perceive, that I descend to those familiar Instances, the better
to inculcate the shape of a perfect Horse into his Mind, without which there
can be nogood nor safe Election, let the Horse be of any Country whatsoever.

To fatten a lean Horse in a short time.
Take him from Grass and Soil, bring him into the Stable, curry and rub him, so
as to loosen the Skin, and chafe it with Neatsfoot-oyl; give him three times a
day, for a week, Mashes made of boiled Oats, Beans, and Bran, to a good
quantity; after this, for a week, make up Balls of Barly-meal, Honey, Enula
campane beaten into powder, the Juice of sweet Fennel, and Cummin-seeds; make
these up into Balls with new Ale, and give him three of them a day as big as
Pullets eggs for a week, and after each half a peck of Oats and two quarts of
split Beans. This done, give him only Oats and Hay; and in a month, unless very
old, he will be in extraordinary good case.

A certain way to know the Age of Horse by his Teeth, Eye^ Eyebrow, Hoof, etc.
A Horse's full number of Teeth are accounted Thirty four, though there are some
few that never arrive to that number, having only Thirty, or Thirty one; and
the times they come are these: A yearling Colt has six on either side above and
below, and at three years old, ten in the same mmanner; and half a year after,
those that are ill shaped, called Dog-Teeth, drop out; and between that and six
years, others spring up in their room; and at full six they have as many as
they will have, the great Cheek-Teeth and Eye-Teeth, in that space, falling out
and receiving others in their stead, being altogether hallow.

These perfected black marks or Specks appear in the fore Teeth, and continue
till eight; at twelve the sides of his Teeth turn black, and so grow longer as
his years increase, except he feeds upon very hard Meats, and be ^rong Jaw'd,
to wear or keep them at a stay; and after ^welve his Age is not to be found in
his Mouth.

Then observe his Temples, to be satisfied in it, which are ^ss or more crooked
and hallow, as he increases in years.

The next is his Hoof, which is seamed one over another; and if upon paring off
a piece of the Hoof you find brittle, dry and crusty it denotes great Age.

His Tail likewise denotes his Age; feel it with your finer and Thumb, close to
the setting on, and if the Joint ^e knobby, and sticking out more than in other
parts of it, ^^ the bigness of a small Birds-egg, he exceeds not Two ^ears.

His Eyes standing out, full, round, and sparkling, not ^nking in the pits,
appearing even with his Temples, and ^ot wrinkled, and not none apearing in his
Eyebrows, then ^e is a young Horse; but the contrary denotes him old.

If his skin come up easy and fall smooth when let go, denotes him young; but
if he be of a dark color, and ^he Hair of his Eyebrows turn gray or grisled,
or it be so under, it betokens Age: Or if a white Horse have a ^^ack or red
Mannel over his Body, it signifies the same.

If the Bars of his Mouth be large and deep, rough in ^andling, then he is
aged; but if the contrary, then young and fit for Service.

^urther general Rules necessary to be known by the Horseman and Farrier, from
warrantable Experience.
A Mare's best breeding-time for a race of good Horses, between three and ten
years, and in suffering her sooner ^o take the Horse, she will produce weak and
sickly Colts, ^r such dull ones as are not worth rearing. Put your Stal^on to
her in close warm Pasture, and feed them well; ^t great care be taken of the
Mare when she has con^eiv'd, often housed, and fed with warm Mashes. The
^tallion ought not to exceed her in Age above a year, to ^e firm limbed,
strorngly chested and crested, free as pos^^ble from Diseases and Sorrances:
Ride the Mare some^^mes, but gently till she has quickened, and the Colt be
come to some perfection; House her in rainy, damp, a^ cold weather; let her
Litter be easy, and cherish her w^^ dry Meats, scattering in a few
Cummin-seeds.

For gelding Colts, the Spring and Fall are the b^times, the weather being open
and warm; do this in t^^ wain of the Moon, the Sign being either in Aries or
Virg^ Some geld them at nine days; but I hold it much bet^^ at half a years
end, then they will be more strong, livel^ and metalsome. Wean them at a year,
or sooner, it yo^ find your Mare ^ickly, or deficient in Milk; then p^^ them
out of the hearing of their Dam, that they may the sooner forget her, and not
pine after her; but after he seven months old, let him not have his fill of
suck, abo^^ once in two days: Feed him with Pollard, boiled Barl^ and put him
in short sweet Pasture every day.

Back him not till three years old, lest you make hi^ weak in the Loins, or
sway-back; besides, it hinders h^ growth, and generally renders him lame in his
Limbs, the you may make him familiar with you, that when yo^ come to do it, it
may be done with little trouble: A^^ then consider for what exercise he is best
proportioned and to that chiefly adapt him. In managing him to ^^ Paces, and
other Exercises, and in all, it is requisite ^^ should have a good Mouth, trot
freely, amble smoothl^ lifting up his Legs in trotting neither too high nor to
low; that he gallop strongly, be in motion swift, and r^^ ground apace.

Directions for the better Ordering a Horse designed for Exerciseas, Hunting,
Travel, etc.
In these cases, the day and night before the day you intend to set out, give
him a due proportion of Provinder, litter him very well, and let him be clean
rubbed down; lead him not abroad, but give him warm Wate^ in the Stable; rub
and chafe into his Joints, Neats-^oo^ Oil, Trotter-oyl, Dogs-grease: In the
morning let him have Oats and Beans, but no Hay: if he be brisk and lively,
Water him not before you ride him out of the^ Stable, then ride him a mile or
two a wracking pace, and when well heated, ride an Amble, Trot, or other Pace,
at ^^r discretion; and coming in to your Inn or Stage, ^pe off the ^^eat before
you rub him down: This Knife ^y be made of a piece of a Scyth or broken Sword:
then ^e him a proportionable allowance of Provinder, some^at more than usual.

If he be any thing ho^, give him warm Water, other^^ ^old Water will do as
well; and bringing him home, (...) ^he like measure^; put on his Cloth, and
tuck dry ^^ps betwe^n his Girts and Body; let him stand in the ^dle (...), then
toss a Knop of Hay into the ^ck, and soon (...) him about two quarts of Oats ^^
split Beans, (...) which scatter a little Hempseed ^l cleansed, and when he
come^, to the last Bait, give him ^^m Water and Oatmeal, light up his Litter,
and let ^^ take his rest: And thu^ ordering, if he be not a de^^ive Horse, he
will perform what you put him to, to ^^r content.

^inions as to Saddling and Bridling a Horse, much approved.
^f the Horse be wild and skittish, impatient of the Sad^^ and Trench, and when
they are offered to make him ^iliar with the sight of them, always hang them
near ^ in the Stable: Offer it till you see some willingness in ^ to accept it;
girt the Saddle on gently, and put wisps ^ween his Body and the Girts; put on
an easy Bridle ^t, and so a harder by degrees; in a fair day carry him ^^lain
ground, trot him round you, and sometimes che^^ him with your Voice, strike him
a little with your and, and lay your weight on the Saddle without mount^^,
shake and strike the Stirrups against his sides, and do ^uch other things as
may usually happen in riding; by ^ means you will become familiar with him, and
he with ^: Then take off the slight and easy Bridle you first try, ^^gi^d the
Saddle hard; wash his Mouth with Ale and ^eacle, and put into it a full-mouthed
Trench Bit, so ^wing the Reins over his Head, lay them on the Saddle, ^e them
now and then a g^ntle pull, that he may feel it, ^ champ on it; fasten then
Martingals from the Chaulbands to the Girts, yet with some slackness, unless he
apt to startle and toss up his Head, then fasten a bro^ piece of Leather about
his Neck, at his Withers, and before the middle of his Windpipe, about six
inches benea^ his Throple, between which and his Neck draw the Ma^tingals, to
prevent his ducking down his head; and the will make him him carry his Neck
Archwise, like a Swa^ and add much to his comeliness. And thus use hi^ nine or
ten days before you actually attempt to ba^ him,

The best Method for Backing a Horse.
Having made your Horse patient of the Saddle a^ Trench, carry him abroad, then
make many offers ^mount, by putting your Foot in the Stirrup, at leng^ leap on
his Back, sit fast, and keep your Legs close ^ his sides, give him a little
head, and draw him on ^ Ploughed Ground, where let him run till he sweat^ then
breathe him again, then cherish him; shake yo^ Legs and Stirrups, keep his head
straight, and his Ne^ Archwise, yet venture not to ride him far before he ^
Familiar; after this feed him with Bread or Grass, if ^ will take it out of
your hand. Having thus done t^ or three Mornings or Evenings, lay by the Trenc^
Caveson and Martingals; let another ride out before you, on a well managed
Horse, and ride him slow or fa^ as you see him disposed, letting him go equal
with the ^ther Horse, but not before him, till well perfected to be^ his
Burden.

THE Complete Horseman: OR, TRUE ART of Horsemanship, In all its Parts and
Perfections; Under sundry Heads.
And first of all, ^ Brief Introduction to this Undertaking, to render it more
apt to be understood by the READER.
BEfore I come to speak of the Action, wherein the true Understanding hereof is
most proper, I purpose to give a little further Instruction; and first of the
Voice: When you mind to help your ^orse therewith, it must be with a most mild
and cheerful ^e; as to say, Hey, hey; hola, hola; so boy, so; hup, hup; ^ough,
enough, no more; and many other suchlike; but a ^orrection is clean contrary,
when with a terrible and ^undering Voice; whereas in cherishing, the most mild
^d sweet Voice is used, as, My good Boy, so my good boy, ^th an Inclination of
tending your Body to him, and ^h-like Encouragements. So as also the sound of
the Voice to be used, as well as a Voice pronounced, by givin^ a chirk with the
Tongue, which may be called clacking, i^ pronouncing whereof the tip of the
Tongue strikes the roof of the Mouth: And so also there is another sound o^
the Voice, as Hah halo. The next is the Hand, the true use and government
whereof is the Ground of the whole Art; and as for the Bridle and the Rod, they
are but dead and senseless Instruments, without all use, when they are not
appointed for the right one, of the temperate and steady Hand bearing upon a
firm and moderate stay neither too much slacking, nor too much drawing in,
every good Horse causes a true and just Rein, bearing a staidness, with a
light and sweet Mouth in all actions; so a^ whatsoever the Horse does, is both
easy, ready, and perfect, and being done with delight, must of necessity be
best done, because it best pleases both Man and Horse, neither of them being
moved to any perturbation, grief, o^ pain, and as for the rod and wand being
instruments onl^ for the hand, how and when they are to be offered, use^ or not
used, and for the Bridle which the Italians properly call, Il manico deltimone,
the handle of the stern, w^ shall for the present pass them by.

The third thing is the Legs, wherein the use of the calve^ of the Legs, the
Heels, the Stirrup, and the Spur are to b^ handled, I shall, to avoid
repetition and all manner of tediousness, refer them also to their proper
places, and at present divide this our immediate concernment into certain
general Grounds or Rules, to follow which the Rider may have daily use in
teaching the whole Art to his Horse.

For as a young Scholar is to be taught, so a young Horse in the beginning is
to be managed, whereby all their Actions might bring delight and admiration to
the Beholder^ and this must be done by mild and slow teaching, not to^ much,
for a Horse may be wearied with long teaching ^^ one time, but giving him often
breath, high keeping ^^ courage, often rewarding, cherishing, using great
famili^rity, and observing he has no change of the Rider till he ^^ perfect, no
change of bit, nor rough bit, no cutting or ga^ling of his nose or mouth, but
gentleness to render hi^ easy, no beating nor whipping, no violence or
passion, but proceed with all manner of immitation of Nature's delight, this
makes all the Horses actions more then wonderful, because Nature has a
natural love to it self, and an innate hatred to all things that are Enemies to
the same, which is plainly testified by that natural sympathy and antipathy,
which may be observed in all Creatures, as the Lamb which never had experience
of the Wolf's cruelty, yet at the first sight of him does tremble and fly for
fear,

Of Correction.
Secondly, That the Rider never correct his Horse, but when gentle means and
cherishing will not prevail, for no doubt but that he will willingly yield by
gentle means, if it be made sensible unto him, what, how, and when to do, but
that Horse that will not be moved by gentle means, let the Rider assure himself
that he is of a bad Nature, but if any thing shall happen wherein of necessity
correction is to be used; but if he offend, in the instant that he erreth,
correct him, wherein how many do offend, all Men's eyes are Witnesses, beholding
the common Horse-breakers, and ignorant Rider to minister violent correction,
when the Beholder cannot so much as find a cause, nor himself express the
reason, but error evermore takes that for truth which is false, so as it
plainly appears, that when a Horse has been taught, and yet notwithstanding
erreth in his discipline, correct him for error, but not for ignorance, which
renders the Rider either to be mad, or as ignorant as the Horse.

Teaching, not fit for such Horses, as Nature has not framed sit to be taught.
Thirdly, That all Riders lose no time in teaching of good Horses, but as for
club-headed, distorted, ugly-countenanced, fleshy, gouty-limm'd, short
thick-necked, fleshy-chopped, having their heads set to their necks as a hog,
low fore-parted, narrow, shallow-breasted, and evil-shap'd Jade turn them
either to the Cart, Plough, or other fervile I^ployments, for every particular
Nature, (that is the ten perature of the Elements in every particular Body,
without all contradiction) causes and maintains the particular action of the
Body wherein it is; and such shaped Horses were never compounded or framed of a
true temperature of the Elements, and therefore impossible to be reduced to
perfection of Action, otherwise than by abuse and great force, which Nature
abhors, and that is but for a small time, such as these made use of do fully
the glory of the Kingdom, disparage the judgment thereof, discourage many
Gentlemen, either to become Breeders, Riders, or Maintainers of Horses, and
cast mists over the perfections of our English Riders.

Of the Bridle, Saddle, and bringing the Horse to the Block; the mounting and
seat of the Rider, and of the Ring and first entering on that Exercise.
When the Horse is made gentle, familiar and fit for the Rider to teach, put on
a head-stall or cavetsane over his nose, with a pair of strong reins, but so
lose and easy for his nose, as may neither hurt nor abate his courage, or his
quick and fresh feeling, and in a most gentle manner set a saddle upon him,
with an upright short pommel, so as that the true use of the Hand may not be
hindered or injured, the holsters whereof should be broad in the top, to
enclose the thigh, and yet to bear so slope that the knee be not pinched,
neither the thigh kept from the true resting place; the seat whereof should be
of a reasonable length and largeness, the bolsters behind bearing forward to
enclose and support the thigh to the foremost bolsters, the straps broad and
strong, with broad girths, and very strong and broad buckles, cross girded, so
as the saddle may rest firm on his back, whereby the seat will be easy, sure
and certain without motion, leaving the near stirrop-leather almost half a hole
longer then the right stirrup, and although the Horse be gentle, yet because he
has a new Master and Rider not known unto him, being neither assured of
himself, nor of that his Rider would have him to do, so as it may be truly
said, he is not himself, but that he is troubled in mind, therefore to keep him
from fear and perturbation, I would have a quiet staid Horse also sadled to be
rid before him, and then bring them both to the Block, ^ut the old Horse first,
and then the Colt, at which time let ^he Rider use all the mild and gentle
words to the young Horse, making the reins of the bridle even and just, holding
them in his left hand, not stiff, nor altogether remiss or loose and as soon as
he is mounted on his back, let him sit quiet^ there a while, least any sudden
motion should breed any ^erturbation in the Horse, until the Rider has settled
him^^lf in the saddle, his nose directly answering the Horse's ^retop betwixt
his ears, his legs hanging strait down, nei^^er thrusting down the toe, nor
lifting up the heel, but ^ith his foot with such evenness in the sturrop, as if
he stood upon the ground, the sturrop-leathers rather short then ^ng, winding
his toes something nearer to the Horse's ^de then the heel, holding the reins
even with his crest, and the point of the withers, a little above the main,
with ^s thighs and knees close to the saddle, and his feet rest^g in the
sturrop in due place, not too far thrust into the ^urrop, with an upright and
strait body; his ridge-bone ^^swering the ridge-bone of the Horse, so as the
Horse ^d Rider may ever seem to be as one body in all motions, ^^ring which
time let the Rider claw the Horse with his and, to remove from him all fear or
hard conceit of his ^^ing, that done, let him go forward about two paces ^re
and softly, and stay again, making much of him, and ^ softly and quietly to the
place where he intends to ^ead out a ring, all which must be done by the
Rider, ^^dly and without fear; and as he must be thus used in ^ing forward, so
must he be used in treading and pacing ^t the Ring, in some new plowed ground,
that is most ^ep of mould; where first let the old Horse enter betwixt ^o
furrows, so far as the Rider may have space and mould ^ugh, and follow with the
young Horse close to him, which ^l cause him the willinger to go, because he is
directed ^^ guided by the old Horse, by which means he will not ^ any way
discouraged; then let the old Horse (the young ^^se following) enter on the
right Hand, overthwart the ^^ows, and tread out twice together a round ring,
con^ing in a circuit about thirty paces, and being come about the second time
where he began, let him tread out the like ring on the left hand, and after he
has gone twice about, let him begin again on the left hand, and so continue
until he has gone four times about the left ring, and the righ^ six times, that
done, let him go fare and softly out of the self-same furrow where he began,
about thirty or forty paces, and there stand still, keeping his head and his
body right in the path, remembering always to have one go by, to signify his
true performance, and to help if need be, and then let him go very gently back
from the place he came and there let the Rider alight, and make much of him, by
coying him, giving him a little grass, hay, or bread in hi^ mouth, to procure
and win love, and thus let him be used for two days, with a Horse before him,
and after him; let him then lead and begin himself, to tread and pace the ring
in this gentle manner for the space of ten days, keeping a temperate, staid and
firm hand upon the reins, with a swee^ feeling stay, carrying his forehead as
Rams do, when they go to fight, whereby he will not only rein well, but bea^
his head staid, just and right, and when he knows what to do, and that for it
he is always cherished, he will strive to do it faster and faster; through the
Rider's continua^ keeping of his hand steady, the Horse will do it with a
wonderful pride and delight, by giving him liberty, but a to^ hasty treating of
the Horse will work the contrary in hi^ exercises, etc.

Of Trotting in the Ring, and other Paces to be taught Horse, to bring him to
be manageable and fit for prope^ Services, etc.
In the pacing of the ring, the Rider must not carry an^ over hard hand to dull
the sense, but so temperately a^ the feeling may be always fresh, otherwise by
the violen^ haling and much galling his Nose, where he would willingly have ease,
to avoid it, he will set his head and his neck awry, the true use whereof is,
that standing in the furrow just an^ straight with his Body, the Rider moves
him gently to g^ forwards, and in the very motion turns him on the righ^ hand,
by drawing very softly the right rein shorter with h^^ right hand, low under
the pommel of the Saddle, whereunto if he yield (as no doubt but he will)
especially having trod the same before; let the Rider presently make much of
him, neither drawing nor slacking the rein: At which time of his doing, both
for the ease of the Rider and the Horse, if need shall be, let some skilful
Person, his Keeper were most fit, come on his left side to his fore Shoulder,
and thrust him in by little and little, and the Rider also by the Calf of the
left Leg, and the cluck of his Tongue to be a help to make him go forward: If
the Horse be such an one as I have described, he will do it; but if he should
not in the very motion of the turn, then let the Rider draw the Rein with his
Hand as before, whether it be on the right hand, or on the left, all which must
be done by gentle dealing, so as the Horse may hope for rest and quietness,
whereby he will be ready to do whatsoever his Rider will; but if he be a Jade,
or of an evil disposition by Nature, for my own part, I esteem him not of any
worth, not fit to be kept.

Having spoken of pacing the Horse in the Ring, it follows, that after ten
days expired, the Horse be taught to trot the Ring, which must be begun in as
slow and as gentle a trot as he was in his first beginning of pacing; increase
his Ring-turns by two and two every day, until he make ten turns for the left
Ring, and twelve for the right, which will augment his swiftness, whereof he
should be restrained, until he be most perfect, and then he will do is with the
greatest grace and pride that may be imagined, which is the true Property and
Quality of all Art, evermore to affect and to effect Perfection; during which
time of beginning of trotting, he may not be ridden with a Wand, nor wear any
Bit, until he be most perfect in his trot, stop, and turn well on both hands,;
and not by any means suffered to gallop, until that he can also perfectly
^dvance: By taking of this course he will be just in his Pace, and trot and
stop with a staid Head and Neck, being the chief luster and goodness that
Nature and Art affords.

Wherefore when you begin to trot the Ring, be sure that at the first he is
moved thereunto as gently an^ quietly as you can devise, and so in every Action
whatsoever, upon a restrained, temperate, and firm hand, with a sweet Stay, and
with a true Rein, that is, that his Nose be just under his Forehead, neither
too much out, nor too much in, which is the just placing and setting of his
Head, and will make him have a pleasant Mouth, when he comes to wear the Bit,
in which consists the chief point of Horsemanship, because he is so to be
maintained in all his Actions: This is most easy to be done and continued, if
the Horse be of perfect shape and spirit; but if he should make resistance, for
that he is either rammage or evil broken, then trot him swiftly with quickness
of Voice, Rod and Spur, for the time of his troting is the fittest time to make
him forget his Toyls, and to attend his way; and ^^ an this will not help, ^hen
spare not to gallop him; and if this fails, then be sure he will be a Jade from
the beginning to the end, for a Horse of a good temper and perfect shape can
never be of so bad a nature and quality.

I shall next tell how to make the Rider perfect in Stop. After he has ended
the number of his Ring-turns, which is, to trot his Horse right out in the
middle Furrow, betwixt the Rings, until he come to the place of stop, and there
to make a pretty stay, keeping his Body right in the path, wherein if the whole
Body or any part stand overthwart, seek not at first to correct him for it
through your too much Passion, but let a a Footman direct him to stand right in
the Path, as we said before, by thrusting in that part which stands out of
order, or that he may cause the Horse to go farther in the same Path, and stop
him, holding that Rein streighter on that side whereon he most forces his Head
than the other, which will enforce him to keep right; which when he yields,
ever cherish him; and after it will be convenient to trot and stop him on a
Ground that is a little steep, which something falls, and immediately rises;
but when he is perfect then he may do it on a Ground very steep. But to teach
him to go back, you must keep a firm staid hand on him, without giving him any
Liberty, and then gently striking him on the Neck with his Rod, in that instant
say, Back, back; but if he refuse, let a Footman with a rod gently strike him
on the Knees, and so, by the gentle puiling in of the Rider's hand, and fair
means, oblige him to it.

The proper Use of the Wand, Bit, and Spur, for the well teaching a Horse, and
to bring him to his Pacings and Management.
Having showed how to ride a Horse without a Wand, Bit, or Spur, I will now
show you how to manage all three, together with the true Use of the Hand upon
the Bit, one of the principal pieces of Horsemanship.

First therefore, when he that rides with a Wand, let him take it warily, that
the Horse be not frighted therewith; and to ascertain the Horse thereof,
presently after he has received it, toy and scratch him about the Neck with the
end thereof: And for the carrying it, it must be in the right hand, with the
Joint upright, and when he must use it, let the point fall close unto him as
occasion shall require; but in his management of of it, let him lay his hand on
his right Thigh, and the Wand across the Horse's Neck; and when he has made
his course, and turned on the right hand, then before the end of his second
course, when he is almost ready to turn on the left hand, let him lift up his
hand and rod, and hold the point right forward on the right side against his
Eye, and as he changes turns, so let him change his rod of the one side and of
the other; but if his Horse will not turn on the side he would have him, let
him strike him on the contrary side; and when he is any way disordered, let him
carry the Wand on the contrary side; and when he would have him carry his fore
part right, strike him on the Shoulder or Forelegs; and when he would have him
light behind, strike him on the rump and hanches. And thus much for the Use of
the Wand, as occasion shall serve.

Now for the use of the Bit, which is an Instrument only guided and directed by
the hand, and because the Ground of the Art, of Riding depends wholly upon the
use and true government of the hand; being guided by Reason and Discourse, so
as the Horse, in all Motions and Actions, ^ and ought to answer to that Motion
which the hand moves; I must not pass it over lightly.

First therefore, let the Bit that you first bit your Horse withal be gentle
and pleasant, yet so, that the gentleness cause him not to despise the Rider,
nor the hardness drive him to despair; for you must understand, that Knowledge
always presupposes Reason, and Reason Sense and Sense and Reason; all which
consists in a true mediocrity; and therefore amongst the most learned Precepts
that were written in the Temple of Apollo in Greece, this was in the second
place, Nothing too much.

For, if you press him with the Bridle, if he carry his head well, yet must you
presently ease your Bridle-hand, and make much of him, because he shows
himself obedient to you and whenever he does any thing well, and with
delight, you must be very careful not to vox him, but ever so to win him, that
he may be willing to please you.

So likewise when he bears a firm hand with a stay, that thereby the Horse
brings in his head, and yields to his hand, yet he must shorten the Reins of
his Bridle till his head be settled in its due place, that is, neither to carry
his Forehead too much out nor too much in, and still to maintain him in that
form in all his doings, yet not so that it exceed mediocrity or temperature,
but remain light on the hand with a sweet mouth.

Thus having showed the Rider, that it must be done by keeping this order, I
proceed.

Let him stay his Horse temperately upon an even hand, as his resistance shall
require, without giving any other Liberty, then with his Rod to strike him
gently upon the bowing of the Neck, provoking him mildly with the Spur on that
side on which he most wryeth his Buttock, to the and that he may go just, until
he draw back one of his fore Feet, which if he do, make much of him, and then
stay a while and do the like, drawing only the Bridle, for the former
cherishing will make him to understand, and then (...) go lightly back with
both the fore Legs, when he is touched on the Neck with the Rod, saying with a
loud Voice, Back; at which Voice, with the feeling of the Rod and drawing of
the Bridle, he will go back to the Rider's desire: And always after, when he is
out of the due and true stay upon the Bridle, let him do the like, that is, to
go back in form aforesaid; and although some disorder be committed, let not the
Rider despair, for he shall find him easily won to a good Mouth, by this use of
a temperate and firm Hand, which is by the mediocrity of slacking and drawing,
properly named a sweet Stay, making him light upon the hand, champing the Bit
with great pleasure, and a stayed Head in due place, the true Tokens whereof
are just Reins, staid, and a light-born Head with pleasure on the Bit, being
Properties inseparable in every perfectshap'd Horse's Actions. But because it
may seem very difficult to have a continuance of Perfection in every action,
although it is common upon stop, or standing still, to be in order, yet perhaps,
upon motion, he will leave playing upon the Bit, and bear upon the head,
especially upon the main courier, which proceeds from the want of true
Knowledge how to maintain and continue the hand just and firm with a sweet
stay, so as that he may take pleasure on the Bit: And therefore how to maintain
a Horse both in furious and quiet doings, is to be considered of: If then that
at any time he make any disorder, note it diligently, so stay him, and make him
go backward; for in going back, he will bring himself to his right order again:
Then presently make much of him, and forthwith move him forwards fair and
gently, till he come to the place of stop. And as he must be thus used in going
forward, so he must be used in treading of the Rings, first gently upon the
pace, upon the trot, and upon the gallop, in practicing whereof he must
precisely observe that it be done with a temperate, staid, and firm hand,
otherwise he will gape, thrust his Tongue upon the Bit, or over the Bit, to
defend himself, thrust his head out suddenly, pluck it in disdainfully, or else
shaking or moving his head one way or other, to be freed from the pressing of
the intemperate hand, which is to him uncouth and contrary to Nature the which
Art should evermore labor to please. The true form and practice of drawing the
Bridle is also to be learnt; which is, that being mounted in the Saddle, let
the Rider draw the Reins equal; and if the Horse know not the Bit, then let the
Bit be very slack, and let him hold the Reins in his left hand, with the little
finger and Ring-finger between, under the Pummel of the Saddle, as near the
Withers as he can, and then with the right hand draw the Reins softly and
equally together through the left hand, so as the Standers-by can scarcely
perceive it, the which he must not remove until he feel the Horse to stay upon
the Bit, and there hold them without slacking or further drawing, until he
perceive whether the Head stand in true form; which if it be not, then let him
a little yield his left hand again, and standing so a pretty while, bring his
left hand to his former place again, where the Horse made the first stay upon
the Bit; then let him draw the Reins with his right hand somewhat more through
the left, as before, but so little and gently, as, scarcely to be perceived,
for so must all the motions of the Hand be, and then keep it firm and staid a
pretty while, and if he yield, though very little, let him keep his hand still at
one stay, neither slackening nor drawing it, whereby he will feel the ease that
he has got by yielding; and then presently make much of him: But if it so
happen, that the Reins fall slack, let him not remove his left hand, but draw
them through his left hand, as before, for they must not be slack until they
stay again upon his right hand, whereunto whenever he yields, make much of
him, continuing still in this manner to solicit him till his Head be in its
due place, that is, neither too much out, nor too much in; after which, if he
bear not light, let his Rider strike him gently on the Knees of his fore Legs,
to make him to go back, whereby he will bring in his head, and then will the
Bit move, and his Hand find ease; but let him be very careful at that instant
to keep his hand so firm as that he neither slack nor draw in, to the end he
may feel and receive the ease of his own motion of yielding, which willingly he
will not loose, it being delightful to his nature, but take some pleasure to
stir the Bit in his Mouth, and go backward with it; the which when the Rider
finds, are tokens of the winning of his Mouth, which to his great satisfaction
being won, with observation of good order, he may be brought to a more
continued Perfection.

Thus I have showed the expert Rider so much as the Art may help him; but if
the Shape and Nature of the Horse be opposite and repugnant, as in the greatest
number of Horses, it is to no purpose; howsoever, for a time it may seem to be
taught, yet questionless it cannot be of any continuance.

But because in the whole Art of Riding there is no one thing more difficult
than to make a Horse trot just: And that the Perfection thereof is the
Perfection of all other of his Doings I purpose to give further Rules.

Particular Rules and Directions for the Management of a Horse, to train him up
to a good and commendable Trot, being the Foundation of all.
1. Let the Rider observe, that when he is teaching his Horse herein, or any
other Lesson, that he do not trouble him with any other thing at that time,
neither suffer him to begin to learn any other.

2. That he do not suffer any other to ride him until he be perfected by
himself in such Lessons as he taught him, lest he should be confused by the
diversity of Teachers, and their manner of Teaching.

3. That when he is brought to a just Stay of Head, and assurance of the Bit,
that then the Rider is to maintain him therein to a full perfection.

4. When he is out of order, then let him stay him, and make him go back, as
before was mentioned.

5. When he is in order, then let him make much of him, and stay not long, but
with a firm hand gently put him into his Trot again.

6. If he continue in his good order, cherish him, guiding his Body, with a
pleasant and gentle motion of the Calves of your Legs move him to do it more
expeditiously, which if he be of a good nature, he will speedily perform;
always remembering to keep a firm hand, unless he bring in his Head.

7. if his Trot continue not light upon your hand, stay him, and cause him to
go back, which will bring him in order again, and then gently put him into his
Pace, and so to his Trot, as before; which being well done, cherish and delight
him with all the sweetness that may be, so that the Rider may ever win his Love
thereby; guide him home by some leading Lines, and give him a little Grass or
Hay out of your hand; tickle, scratch him, and speak to him most loving words,
which will make him at his next Exercise do all things to his Rider's greatest
content, and within twenty days, or thereabouts, he will Pace and Trot in such
order, as that the Rider may always afterward trot him most swiftly in the
Rings or in the Manage.

8. In his swift Trot, by all means keep your true Seat and firm Hand, so that
he lose not that excellent form and grace before prescribed; but do not Gallop
him till he be just and perfect in his swift Trot, and then out of that trot,
to put him to a swifter gallop in the large Rings, even to the Stop: But beware
you draw not your hand hastily to you, but by a little sway of your Body, Back
and Hand together, and stay your hand there until he retreat a step or two, and
there stay him, and suffer him not to go forward, and at that instant to make
much of him, and so let your hand and body reassume the same place again.

9. If he should then offer to go forwards, stay him with the like sway, and
then alight, and lead him home, making much of him, as you did before.

10. I dare to assure the Rider of the right use of what has been said, and of
the success thereof, therefore let him follow his Practice, and continue it;
let him pace his Horse overthwart some deep Fallow as fast as he can for half
an hour, but suffer him not by any means to trot, keeping his hand in a firm
and temperate stay, as before, and if he still find his head in due place, his
carriage light and pleasant upon the Bit, he may assure himself that he has
gained the perfection of the Hand, and the true use thereof, for the teaching
and making of a young Horse; wherein observe, that if he be of a perfect shape,
his Head will be in the due place, and light upon the Bit.

Of the Managed Horse, with further Instructions, etc.
I now intend to discourse a little of the Horse that is already taught, and
brought to perfection; with him the expert Rider has small need to make use of
any Rod, or other help, but to keep his true, just, and perfect Seat, because
his Horse, by the least token of the Bridle or Spur, will do all things in such
time and measure, as the Beholders will judge the Man and Horse to be but one
Body, one Mind, and one Will: And therefore, how the Reins should be carried,
placed, and used, is the only thing to be spoken of: The Reins he must hold in
his left hand, placing the little finger betwixt the two Reins, and the thumb
close upon the Reins, so as the hand remove not from the Crest of the Horse,
for by the motion of the hand it is signified to the Horse which way you would
have him turn, slacking it on the other: The Order and Manner whereof has
been, and is yet diversely used of the best Horsemen, and therefore I leave it
to every man's use, as he finds it most fit. But in the running at the Tilt,
where the Horse neither does nor can turn, the Rider must not draw the Bridle
toward the Tilt, but only strain the Rein that is next the Tilt, to make him
carry his head toward it.

(1.) Because the true shape and goodness of the nature of the Horse, is it
that Art attends and works upon, in those Horses the Rules of Art have
Perfection with continuance; so as the Horse that is of perfect shape, and well
trught, shall not endanger Wind, or Limb, or Deformity of Body.

(2.) His Person shall never be in peril by rearing or running away.

(3.) Nor shall the Rider never be grieved with heavy bearing upon his hand,
but perform all with great delight. Neither shall he need Canetsan, Musrole, or
Martingale, or suchlike, but only false Reins.

(4.) And lastly this Teaching will manifest the difference betwixt the true
Knowers and ignorant Riders, which will be perceived by the Doings the Horse
does represent and express when he would appear most beautiful, and thereby
render both the expert Reader, not the ignorant, and himself, to appear most
nobly, with such delight to the Beholders, that they will seem to be ravished
with it; all which is attained by Discretion, taking of Time, with Moderation
and Temperance, which is little regarded, and of very few, who will rather
choose to ride out of order, and that with such extremity of Spur and Rod, that
for want of Breath they commit many strange Disorders, whereby the poor Horse
is cruelly tormented, having no other to ride him than one without Discretion.

After your Horse has perfectly learned swiftly to trot, and to stop, and as
well to go back, then ought he to be taught rightly to advance; which is by
lifting up both his fore-Feet just and even together, like to a Goat, somewhat
above the Ground, and so to let them fall even and just twice or thrice
together, the true doing whereof will cause him to make a just perfect manage,
and a ready and true turn: for the attaining whereof, trot him gently forty or
fifty foot in some plain way, then give him a just stop, which he will truly
perform, because be has before perfectly learned the same; let him always keep
a steady, pleasant, and perfect hand on the Bridle, then instantly, with a mild
Voice, say, Hup, hup, striking him at that instant with his Wand on the right
Shoulder, and also with both the Calves of the Legs together, but spur him not,
if possibly without it he will advance; and this with a little labor and
patient teaching, no doubt but he will attempt to do twice or thrice together,
which if he do, then in that instant make much of him (although he did it very
meanly) then let him pause a little time, and give him breath, and trot him
again in the same manner the like distance of ground, and as before, so gently
use him again; but if he do not better every time he is taught, he must be
still solicited until he do better.

And after that he can in plain ground perfectly advance, then teach him
gently, upon the hanging knole of a Hill, to bring him perfectly to stop, and
run sliding upon his Buttocks or hinder Legs, which is very handsome, beautiful,
and graceful for Manage and Turn; and therefore let him do it before he is
taught any other Lesson then what is shown; and when he will do it upon a soft
trot, upon the swift trot, and afterward upon a soft gallop, and not before,
but never upon a swift gallop, until he be perfect both in Turn and Manage. If
he advance too high, and not just and even, with a good grace, as he ought,
then may the fault speedily be found, and easily amended by immediately
correcting him with one even stroke over his Legs, the Wand again ordered and
conveyed out of his sight, with a sweet staid hand on the Bridle: Few Trials
will soon amend and perfect what is amiss in the Horse.

And whereas some appoint many helps for Horses that are harder to turn on the
one side than on the other, (although I confess their general Desire is more
apt to the left hand than to the right) yet to a Horse of good Nature and
perfect shape, a little Art will speedily teach him to teach others.

Of Half-turnings, Doubles, Chambetta, Manage, Coureir, etc.
It now remains to show when to make the Half-turn, and the Double, the
Chambetta, the Manage, to pass a swift Coureir, the Corvet, and suchlike.

After he is very perfect in those I have set down, he is to make a true and a
just half and double turn, which should be in this manner: First, when the
Rider has gently trotted, stopped, and advanced his Horse the length of a
short Coureir, let him teach him gently and midly to make the half turn,
(beginning always on the right hand) that is, for the Rider to turn him with
the help of his left Leg, that his Head may stand that way which before his
Tail stood; it is called a half-turn, because he makes but half a circle; but
if in the turn he set his Head that way it stood at the first, that is a whole
circle, and therefore called a whole-turn: But let him first do the half-turn
perfect, which must be done by helping him with his Voice and Calf of his Leg,
and not at first by any means to have him spurred, if he can be otherwise
brought unto it, because a Spur is a correction which is not to be used, but at
that instant when he has committed an Error, and not while he remains ignorant
what to do, by which means undoubtedly, being a sensible Creature, he will
perceive his Errors and Offenses, whereby with little correction he will easily
amend any Fault: Let the Rider never go about to make him despair, but
continually encourage him; for having formerly attained a perfection of a just,
even and swift Trot in the Rings, (the very true ground of all other Lessons,)
he will easily turn on the right hand, setting his Head that way his Tail
stood; the which being perfectly attained, then close it up with another
half-turn on the same hand, with the perscrib'd helps, setting his Head and all
his Body in the same way it was at first; so give him Breath, and make much of
him, then mak^ him do as much on the left hand, and to change from hand to
hand, leaning always on the right.

1. In the doing whereof, observe whether he bring on the contrary Leg orderly.

2. That he do it after the first bound of advancing, and after the second or
third bound.

3. That the Rider always, as has been said, begin on the right hand, and end
on the right.

4. That after he is perfect in doing of the whole turn, that he make him to do
it swiftly and roundly, without stop or stay of the half-turn, and speedily in
closing of every whole-turn, and in as narrow a compass as may be.

5. After he is perfect, as aforesaid, give him on each hand three whole turns,
whereof let the first be very fair and softly, beginning at the right hand, and
ending at the right; in performing whereof, the Rider must always help him with
his Tongue, his Rod and his Leg, by which continual use, before he teaches him
any other Lesson, (which should never be done, unless he be perfect in the
Lesson he is learning) so that the Rider shall in the end, with discreet and
temperate teaching, bring him to an ^^mirable Perfection, keeping time and
measure, that the one be not swifter than the other; if either, the last, which
for the most part is as speedy as perfect.

Now, to proceed to the Managing of a Horse, the true signification whereof i^
to be rightly understood, by such as intend to be expert in Horsemanship, for
to be ignorant of the Terms, is to be ignorant of the Art; I take it to be a
compound word of the word manus and ago, (the Hand in this Art being the
Instrument of Instruments) does guide and govern the Horse to every Action, and
therefore may fitly be said Mannagere, or as the Italians properly call it,
Maneggiare, which is as much as skilfully to handle.

And therefore when the Rider shall exercise the Horse perfectly and gracefully
in his place, Trot, Stop, Advance, Double or Single-turn, Coureir, Gallop,
Leap, Caperiole, Corvet, Assault, or whatsoever the Hand, being the principal
Order, or prime moter, may truly and aptly be called Manage; which cannot so
rightly be done without the general knowledge of the Practice of the Precepts
of the whole Art.

And although many worthy Horsemen have and do only rest and refer Managing to
Galloping, and to bring a Horse to and fro in one self-same path, by half-rest,
whole-rest, and when the Rider manageth with a half-rest, causing the Horse, at
the end of every managing path, after he has stopped, to advance twice
together, and at the second bound to turn and rest one bound; does not the
Rider therein exercise the Trot, the Stop, the Advance, and the Turn, which he
formerly learned, and according to the same manner? Or, when he manageth with
the whole-rest, and turns him at the third bound, or manage him without the
rest, by turning him immediately upon the Stop, without any tarryance or rest
at all, which only is most common with us in England; and yet the managing of
the half-rest is most necessary for the attaining of perfection; does not the
Rider keep and maintain the Horse in one path, one place of stop, making him
keep his Ground, and therein became his Head, Neck, Legs, and his Body just,
closing his turn roundly, and in a narrow room, with true time and measure in
every action, as he has been formerly taught? How then can managing be
properly referred to one only Action, when it is the perfect acting of every
action and Lesson he has learned, wherein when the Rider's Horse is most ready
and perfect, he may increase the often doing of his Lessons as he will, and
make an alteration of his Turns and Exercises, to find out the truth of his
Obedience: and when they are first artificially, and then exactly performed,
then may the Rider be truly said to be a perfect Manager.

Sundry principal things yet remaining to be known, by such as would be Expert
or Complete Horsemen, relating to the True Managing.
Now are to be showed what are the principal things that are to be observed in
the true Managing of a Horse.

He is to be taught his Manage with a soft Trot, and not with a Gallop; my
reason is, because thereby he may be at the first sensible of Apprehending what
he is to do, and how to do, and that gracefully, by the bowing of his Hoofs
behind, by turning round with the Chambetta, which is by holding up the fore
foot on the side he should turn, whilst he brings over the contrary Leg, and
sets it not down until he have closed his turn, so as thereby he shall carry
both his fore-feet above the ground, not trayling upon the ground, which is
disgraceful.

When the Rider teaches his Horse (which is after he can stop well) let him
advance before, and turn readily on both hands, then with a soft Trot come to
the place of stop about twenty paces in length, and make him advance twice
together, and at the second bound turn him on the right hand, (for on that hand
you must always begin) helping him so, that by bowing his Hoofs behind, he move
his forepart orderly, then immediately in a gentle manner trot him back to the
place that you came from, and then there, after he has made his stop, at the
second bound of his advancing, turn him on the left hand, observing the like
order until the Rider has gone ten or twelve times, and at the last cause him
to advance twice together. And thus much for the half-rest, which is to advance
thrice, and at the third bound to turn; but be sure he be perfect in one Lesson
before you teach him another.

In all the Rider's Managings, let his body still accompany his Horse with a
good Grace; and when that he has very perfectly learned his Manage on a soft
Trot, then he may manage him with a Gallop, giving him on each hand one single
turn; and a little before he is turned, let the Rider hold his Wand on the
contrary side, whereby he will know on what side to turn; and at the stop let
the Rider make him to advance, either with his Voice, Rod, or Spur, always
being careful to give him breath, evermore beginning with a gentle Gallop until
he be perfect; but I wish the Rider so to use and exercise his Horse, that he
may be long Master of a good and perfect Horse, and not to spend or spoil him
in a little time, in teaching him needless toys, as some ignorant Persons use
to do.

After the Horse is perfect in such Lessons as have been formerly taught, and
is grown to his full and perfect strength, then let the Rider begin him with a
short Coureir, in a fair sandy way, and with a lively Voice put him forward,
forcing him to run swiftly, roundly, and smoothly, with a steady Head, and
lightly to stop himself on his Buttocks; then let him turn him on the left
hand, and softly pace him to the other end of the Coureir-path, and there stop
him, and turn him again to the right hand, and so leave off and rest him. And
as this passing Coureir or swift Gallop must never be done or taught, until the
Horse be most perfect in all the Lessons; so must it be done very sparingly and
seldom, as once or twice in a month at the most. of

Of the Bound, Leap, and Yerk.
Some have a desire for to have their Horses to Bound, Leap and Yerk; and though
I know it might be most axactly done by the best-spirited Horses, but tending
altogether to their destruction, and a matter rather of foolish delight than of
any use, I leave it to the disposition of the Owner, wishing much rather to
have such dangerous Exercises omitted than practiced, unless that there were
more plenty of Horses that are fit for the same, or to be spared to be utterly
spoiled: Therefore let not my Reader admire that he meets here with so short
Remarks on them.

Of the Caperiole and Corvette.
The difference betwixt these two, is, that the Caperiole, or Goats-leap is
always in going forwards, and the Corvette still in one place: These are to be
learned and taught by one Order, but neither of them will ever be learned, and
therefore never exactly done, unless the Horse be very perfect for to stop,
which must be much bending of the Elbow of the hinder Hoofs or Heels of the
Horse. Now the Corvette may, in some sort, resemble the dancing of the Bear at
a Stake; for when he danceth and pranceth up and down in one place, lifting his
forefeet even and just together, seeming to turn if he might be suffered; that
of the Bear is a proper resemblance of the Corvette, the which is never well
done, unless the Horse be just and steady of Head and Body, bowing the hams of
his hinder Legs, as if he would sit or slide on his Buttocks. And the Caperiole
is in the same manner, but still going forwards, seeming as though he would
yerk behind, by advancing his rump, but does not; and as he does it forward, so
will he do it backward and side-long.

Now the Rider need not to teach his Horse either of these, until, as has been
said, he be absolutely perfect in those Lessons formerly mentioned, because
these Lessons are only learned by stopping and advancing; the which if he have
once perfectly and long practiced, the Trot him sundry days upon some hanging
Ground, and upon the knole of the Hill on the same ground; make him to advance
twice together, the which he will do, and then help him with the sound of your
Lips, to trot two paces farther, and there to stop and advance twice together
at the end of the two paces all the length of a hanging Hill downwards, still
remembering to cherish him when he does well, and to give him breath, that all
his Performances may be done with delight. And if he be helped with the word,
saying, hup, and with the Rider's Rod, by striking him upon the forepart of
his Shoulders, he will go from stop to stop, advancing both the fore Feet and
hinder Loins, with time and measure, as often as the Rider pleases, and in such
a just, even and staid a manner as will be very pleasant to the Beholders.

Now, because I would not have the young Rider to begin any Lesson, but by the
direction of a perfect Master, and in that course to continue, so must the
young Rider endeavor with himself to know the reason of all his Practices; and
therefore he must be sure to be present at the Exercises of tho most skilful
Horsemen, and, as Solomon says, Let his Foot tread often upon their Threshold;
let him be acquainted with the best Practitioners, and when he is able rightly
to judge, and to make a true difference between good and bad, then let him
practice as often as he can, and never doubt to become a Perfect Horseman, so
as to be able to teach whatsoever is fit for a Horse to do, and a Young
Gentleman to know.

Short Infallible RVLES to be Observed and Practiced by every Horseman.
I. DO not gallop your Horse before he can stop well.

II. Do not run him before he can stop in his Gallop.

III. Do not swiftly gallop him before he can stop.

IV. Do not make him a Runner before he be six or seven years old.

V. In all his doings, form the beginning to the end, keep his Reins true, and
his Head steady; for this Rule is the Foundation of all other Rules.

VI. In the morning early, when he is empty, before he eat any thing, teach and
exercise him until he be perfect; and after, twice or thrice in a week is
sufficient.

VII. In all his teaching and exercise, do it moderately and temperately, and
leave him, always after the well-doing of his Lessons, both in breath, and with
a good Mouth.

VIII. After he is perfect in his Lessons, let the Rider exercise him not
always in one place; neither let him confine himself to a just and certain
Instant of Time, viz. neither more nor less, neither longer nor shorter.

IX. In managing of his Horse, set him not gallop him swiftly at the first, but
with a soft pace, and seldom with a gallop.

X. In correcting of his Horse for an Error, let him correct him even in that
instant he commits it.

Other Ways and Methods for the Management of a Horse for War, Travel, Hunting,
Racing, etc.
Though these I have mentioned are by all expert Horsemen accounted the best
for training up Horses to their exact Paces and Management, because herein
native Freedom without Shackles is the most agreeable; yet since some use
another method, I shall give a brief account of it, and leave them both
indifferently to the choice of those that are to practice herein, viz.

When you are to teach your Horse the true Amble, which is the Ground of all
others, ^ead him a wracking pace in your Hand, and observe the Motion he is
most inclinable to, whether Trot, running, bastard-Amble, or others; so mount
and wrack him deliberately, by the help of his Mouth-weeks, with his Snaffle
smooth and large; and when you have brought him to some Management, to endure
the Tramel without stumbling or flying out, form it in this manner:

Take strong Packthread, and twist it into a Cord about the thickness of a
Jack-line, so firm, that it will not give the least way; let your Hose or Parts
fastened about the Legs be close, soft and immovable, the Backbands light and
somewhat broad, that they may not injure the Horse's Fillets; the length of the
side-ropes thirty six inches, but if the Horse be of a long reach, you may add
an inch; more: Place the Hose on the small of the fore-leg, and upon the hinder
just above the Fetlock, made of fine Girthweb made of Cotton, Flannel, or some
suchlike soft matter, fastened with Neats-Leather Tabs of even lengths,
^uppl'd with Tallow, and diverse holes punch'd in them ^t an even distance, to
pass through the Nooses that are to ^e on the side-ropes, so that by buckling
the Ropes, may ^e drawn up or let out at pleasure, the Tabs not exceed^ng ten
inches, nor the holes in them four; then let the Backband that are to hold up
the Side-cords, if you tramel ^ll your Horse's Legs, be made of Girthweb lined
with ^lannel; but if only two Legs, Filleting or strong Tape; ^ut observe it
keep the side-cords even in a line, without ^ither twitching up or suffering it
to fall, for rising shortens ^he side-cord, and falling makes it apt to
entangle the Horse.

The Use of the Tramel.
The Tramel well made, proceed to use it in this man^er, viz.

Bring your Horse into a place, that is even free from Clumpers or Stones, and
put on the Tramel, your Horse ^tanding a^ even as may be, not straining forward
nor crimp^ing inward, but in a just and even proportion; then laying ^our hand
on the Bridle, by gently straining his Head, ^blige him to move forward, compel
him to Amble about ^he Ground chosen very leisurely, using him with much
^entleness, and often cherishing him with your Voice, till ^e ^eel the Tramel,
and begin to be acquainted with what ^e is to perform: And by this means,
though at first he ^ip or stumble, he will be brought to it more at leisure,
and become familiar with it, if your harshness hinder it ^ot: Though it is not
amiss, if at first, when he begins to ^arn, you permit the side-ropes to be
longer than the measure mentioned, to prevent his twitchings; but when he
begins to be perfect, have them ever of a constant length, lest the over-length
render him a slow Ambler, and the over-length cause him to halt or shuffle.

Times proper to alter the Tramel, and convenient to Mount, etc.
When the Horse can Amble pretty well by hand, change the half-Tramel, by
removing it from one side, and placing it on the other; and so, as you see
occasion, put on the whole Tramel, till he run pretty swift, without the
motions of snapping or stumbling; then try him upon uncertain and uneven ways,
up and down hill, and in such Roads as you think you shall after have occasion
to ride him: Then having inured him to it, mount on his Back, or set another to
do it, whilst you stay his Head, and keep him from any inconveniency, and
observe well how he treads: After that your self may mount, cherish him often,
and so oblige him to mend his pace, till he move with as much agility as you
can desire; and forget not between whiles to put on sometimes the half-Tramel,
and at other times the whole, shifting often from one side to the other, lest
he forget his pace; and in so doing twice or thrice a day, he will in a month
or six weeks be brought to good order, and then without a Tramel ride him on
the Road, without choosing the Way: Have with you also a half-Tramel, so that if
he faulter, alight, and put it on; which will quickly mind him of what you
intend he should do.

How to Stop in a full Career, Advance, etc.
To make Horses stop in any Pace, draw suddenly your Bridle hand, straight and
steady, Hard and Sharp, and by that means, he will stop Firm and Close, also
Even: But if after you have drawn in your Hand he turn Side ways, or more
Forward, put him to it again, and when he stops well, attempt to make him
Advance upon your stop; that is, rise with his Forelegs, which is done by a
sudden clapping the Calves of the Legs close to his Sides, forbearing to touch
him with your Spur, but shake your Whip or Switch over him, which will add much
Grace to his stopping; and try him till he well understands, an^ will perform
it.

How to oblige Horses to Retire, and endure the various sorts of Bits.
To make him do this, draw him back with a steady Rein, that with his Legs
lifted up as in a Trot he may retire, he may suddenly retreat three or four
Pace^; which in case you design a Horse for War, i^ a very commendable thing,
and indeed in any other, on several Occasions; observe herein to make him do it
in a direct Line, not turning to one side or the other, nor suffer him ^o
Shuffle in his retiring, but to take his Legs up even and clever from the
Ground.

Having brought him to this, if you design him so War, take away his Trench and
Martingal; leave only the Cavezan of three or four Pieces or Joints to be used,
viz. A Joint in the middle, and a strong Ring fastened to it, and on each side a
Joint with Rings before them, and fasten to them diverse Reins, in drawing of
which you may use your Horse at command: Or, if this be too hard, put into his
Mouth a common Bit, made up with a French Check, fitted to the proportion of
the Horse's Neck, for if it be otherwise, there can be no true Management, for
the long Check lifts up the Horse's Head, and the short one pulls it down.

Turnings, and strait Turns, etc.
The Turnings are when the Face of the Horse in the motion is kept to the
Center or Post, or though he wheel with his Buttocks swiftly, yet keeping his
Face properly to the Enemy.

The strait Turns are when he keeps his Buttocks inward, or close to the Center
or Post, and bearing about, makes the Circumference with his forepart
advancing a little toward the Enemy, that would avoid him.

To do the first, called the strait Turn, fasten a Rein to a ring in the middle
of your Cavezan, about three Yards in length, and to the other two Rings two
Reins somewhat shorter; so Bridled and Sadled bring him to the Post; put the
Reins over the Saddle-bolster, and fasten them at such straightness to the
Pummel that he may feel them, and if you be then desirous to turn to the Right,
take the short Reign on the left hand of the Cavzan, and bring it under the
Saddle fore Bolster up to the Pummel, and fix it at such a straitness that may
rather sway his Head from, than to, the Post, his Eyes looking to the Right;
then let a Stander-by hold the Rein on the right side of the Cavezan at the
Post, moving it so, that the forepart of your Horse's Body may at full turn
about; then take the long Rein in your own Hand, causing the Horse to bear his
hinder parts inwards, which may be done by gentle striking him on the outward
Shoulder and Buttock, as occasion is found, causing him to turn about the Post,
his hinder part being the Center, the forepart in motion, making the
Circumference. Thus use him on the one hand till indifferent perfect, then
change the Rein to the other on the outward ring of the Cavezan and so in the
like manner teach it him on the other hand; and by so doing Morning and
Evening, you may soon bring him to it with a touch of your Switch; observe as
he swiftly Trots round, that he place his outward fore-Leg over the inward, and
so by degrees, in his Wheeling, oblige him to mend his pace swiftly and
distinctly, and in as direct a Compass as can easily or conveniently be
performed, till at last he fly with such celerity, that his fore and hinder
Legs move equal.

This Lesson perfectly learned, Mount, and let one hold the long Rein, and
another the short one, and then with the motion of your Hand upon the left Rein
of the Cavezan and Bit, bearing him Head from the Post, and by the motion of
the Calves of your Legs and Switch upon his outward Thigh, cause him to bear
his hinder parts to the Post, and Exercise him till he perform it as well with
you on his Back as he did before; then take away the Cavezan, and Exercise only
with the short Rein: And so having brought him to do it at the Post, he will be
induced to do it in the open Field without one.

The strait Turn in keeping his Face to the Post as the Center, and swiftly
flying about with his hinder parts, the Reins both long and short, must be used
as before, only you must not give the short Rein any scope, but darw it nearer
to the Post; still as he moves about, follow his hinder parts with the long
Rein, and observe in his motion whether he bear his hinder Legs one over the
other, a^ is expressed by the four Legs. By the help of your Rod making him
bring his hinder part swiftly round the Post, and when he is perfect, Mount
him, and cause him to move swift or slow, sometimes at the Post, and then in
open Ground, as you see convenient: These will accomplish him for the Wars,
Racing, Hunting, and other Matters.

Particular Observations on Ambling, Racking and Galioping.
Observe as to the fitness of pace, the Horse's motion of his Legs when he
takes them from the Ground, and you will perceive in his cross moving what he
is properly designed for. Viz. If his hinder and fore Leg move together then at
one and the same instant, and in this motion the nearer he takes up his Limbs
from Ground, the opener, evener and shorter is his Tread; but if he do it
uneasy, slovenly, and in a shuffling manner, that denotes Stumbling, Lameness,
or some such Imperfection. If he tread Cross or Narrow, it signifies he is
subject to Interfering and will hardly be enduced ever to Tread sure. If he
takes his steps Askew and Uneven, it denotes him subject to Faint and Tire,
unable to perform long Journeys or hard Service. If he treads Long, it
signifies him subject to Strains and Over-reaches: And therefore a moderate
even pace, and the clever carrying of a Horse's Legs is to be chosen, that your
labor in Teaching may mot be thrown away. But to Particulars.

As for Ambling.
If you choose your Horse for Pleasure and Ease, then none is more suitable than
this, it being opposite to Trotting; as thus, both the Feet on one side must
have equal motion, viz. The far fore Leg and the far hinder Leg which must move
just Even, Smooth and Swift, for if the Horse tread false or a wry, it takes
away much of the easiness of his Pace; and if Short, then no more Ground is
ridded than if he went a round Foot-pace: If he treads Rough, it denotes
Rouling in a shuffling manner, and is a false Pace, which had been taught him
by an Unskilful Hand, and he will be apt to fall out of it into a Trot, or in a
short time forget it.

As for Racking.
This is a Pace most used in Hunting or riding Post, being between a Pace and
full Gallop, by some termed a full Speed, yet little differs from Ambling,
except in being more Swift and of a shorter Tread, though in Ambling the Ground
is better ridded, yet this pace is more easy, and highly approved by many
expert Horsemen, who use particularly to teach it, though I find no certain Rule
to it, but conclude it a Motion natural to most Horses that are brought to the
Amble.

As for the Gallop,
It is most appropriated to the Trotting Horse, for falling out of his Trot, he
has no other pace but the Gallop, as likewise a Horse well used to Racking,
will naturally take this Motion; but the Pace is very awkward to be brought to
it, although in a while, with good Usage and Gentleness, he may be brought to
it; and the reason why this is at first irksome to him, is, because having been
trained to a set Pace, when he is forced to a Motion somewhat of the like
nature, (though much swifter) by straining to swiften his pace, he scambles with
his Legs; but in a Month's time understanding the alteration, he will be apt
enough to take it with little trouble; however, beware that you Gallop him not
too often, nor to Excess, lest it spoil his pace, rendering it hard, coming
something near the Trot, by reason of Straining.

Observe in the cleverness of Galloping, that your Horse raises his Feet nimbly
from the Ground, but not too high, that neither he rouleth or beats himself,
but stretching forth his Forelegs, his hinder Legs keep Time cleverly and
swiftly, that he cuts not his Knee, nor crosses or strikes one Foot against
another, but still leads with his far-Foot. If he Gallop short and round, his
fore Feet well rising, denotes him Strong, but not Swift, and so consequently
fitter for War than Racing If you perceive he takes up his Legs consusedly as
if he did it in pain, he will never make a good Galloper, for it denotes the
Sinnews to be shrank, that with little Travel, he will often be subject to
Halting and Lameness. As for the Trot, it i^ natural to all Horse's; but the
loftly prancing Trot is for War accounted the best, and that for Travel that
rids most Ground with least pain to the Horse, he taking up his Feet cleverly
and even from the Ground without Interfering.

The Running Horse, or Racer, how to Manage, Feed, Physic, bring to the
Post-start, etc.
Having spoken pretty largely as to what hitherto relate^ to this noble
Creature in many Particulars, I shall now, for the Accommodation of Gentlemen
and others, who have much desired it, give Directions Plain, Easy, and with as
little Charge as possible, how to Order and Manage a Horse for bringing him to
run a Race, or more properly, to be Matched: I know that there were some who
aver, It is impossible it should be done under six Months; others allow five,
and none of past times under. This I look upon as a design not so much to rob a
Gentleman of half a Year's Pleasure, as to put him to treable Charges, to the
advantage of such who undertake to look to, and order Running-Horse's; and
therefore I thought fit to Undeceive such as have been Imposed on, by plainly
laying down a nearer, less Chargeable, and more easy Method, altogether as
safe and Effectual. Viz.

If you design to Match your Horse, consider well the State of his Body, and do
it not inconsiderately; and this may be observed in three Particulars.

(1.) If he be Foul or Fat, or newly taken from Grass or Soil.

(2.) Note; If he be very Poor or lean by over-Traveli^g, Infirmity or hidden
Cause, you cannot at present discover.

(3.) Take notice, if he has had good Usage, moderate Exercise, and be in good
Estate and Plight;

And from these observe in the first Case, to take a longer time for Keeping,
Matching, and bringing him into good Order, fit for Running, which indeed if
long, is the most violent of Exercise; in this case get two Months, or if you
can something more.

In the second Estate of the Horse's Body, you need not take so long a time,
especially in case only of Leanness, because the Grease cannot injure him, and
you may exercise him with his Feeding, that is, at all seasonable times.

In the third Estate, which I consider as a Mean between the other Extremes, he
may be Dieted for the Match in a Month or six Weeks. But to come nearer to my
purpose, I allow two Months to be a sufficient time to prepare a Horse under
any of these Estates of Body to run a Match; and these for the better leading
to the end of what I purpose, may properly be divided into shorter Periods of
time, viz.

The first Fortnights Ordering the Running-Horse, etc.
If the Horse be Fat or Foul, newly taken from Grass or Soil, and you have, or
intend to Match him, bring him to a clean dry Stable Litter him well, and over
Night give him two Quarts of splent Beans and as many dry Oats, Rub him down
and Litter him well with dry clean Wheatstraw, and early in the Morning rouse
him, if laid; dip his Bit in Beer and put on his Bridle, dress him and cleanse
him in all Parts; if the Weather be cold, have a large strong Body-cloath of
Kersey, but in warm Weather Cotton, or such light Matters will do, (for in
Heats you must be very careful he take no Cold or Surfeit) fold this well about
his Body plaee on his Saddle, bring close the fore-most Girt, but the other
leave so loose as to thrust a Whisp between it and the Horse's Body; let your
Breast-cloath cover his Shoulders, and washing his Mouth with ^eer ^eave him
for an Hour, then lead him forth and Rack him gently in even Ground a Mile or
more, then Gallop moderately up some Hill, so Rack or Walk him down again, then
Cool him a little, and ride him to some pleasant River or Spring, and let him
Drink, which if he refuses, Exercise him again till he will do it; When he has
drank, Rack him Home and put him cool into the Stable fresh Littered, having
first, if possible, made him on the foul outcast Litter void his Urine and
Dung.

Being in the Stable, tie him to the Rack, and with hard Whisps let his Legs be
rubbed down, and all his Parts the like, taking off his Saddle, and clothing
him warmer or lighter, as the Season requires, so Whisp him round, cleanse his
Feet, and throw into the Rack a knop of Hay well dusted* to tear whilst he
stands on his Bridle, which may be half an Hour; then give him a Quart of the
whitest and heaviest Oats, and if he seem desirous of more, you may give him
another like quantity, then leave him to his Rest till eleven a Clock; then
Visit again, and rub him over gently, give him three Pints of the like Oats,
and close the Stable as dark as may be; at two Hours end Visit him again with
the like quantity of Oats as before, Rub him gently and remove the Excrements;
give him a Bottle of Hay, and leave him for 3 Hours more, if in Summer, but if
in Winter, only two and an half; then wash his Mouth and the Muzzle of his
Bridle with Beer; Saddle him and bring him forth, having well rubbed him down,
then endeavor to make him empty on the old Litter; Ride him forth and give him
gentle Breathings by some pleasant River or Meadow, that he may take delight in
it, but upon a full Stomach Gallop him not up a Hill, left it endanger his
Wind; heat him both before and after Water, and in the approach of Dark, bring
him home; so by early and late Airings the foulness will be deminished, and the
gross Humors dispersed: Use him in Stabling as before, and visit him three
Hours after with a like quantity of Oats; toss up his Litter and let him rest
till Morning.

Things proper to be observed in Heats, etc.
Two Heats in a Week, if they be through ones, are sufficient for any State of
Body. If the Match be made for Running on a Tuesday, then let the Heating days
be Tuesday and Saturday in each Week, and the Greatest on the ^u^sday: but in
rainy slabby Weather, you may shift these days, and choose those that are fair;
or the hours in those days may be changed where necessity requires it: If the
Weather be dull, heavy, dripping or cold, it will be convenient when abroad, to
have a Hood with large Ears on our Horse, to keep out the Rain or Damp, the
Nape of it ^hickned with a Lineing, that the Wet may not easily pen^tra^e, lest
the wet falling on his Ears Neck, or Fillets, sub^^ct him to Diseases, and
hinder his Performance; carry him never to Heats before day, nor keep him out
after it is dark.

Rules for the second Fortnight's Keeping.
Use him in Littering, and Dressing as before, only what Hay ^e has let him
take i^ out of your Hand to be the more Familiar; when he has eaten his portion
of Oats, Bridle him, Ride out, Air and Water him, as in the foregoing
^ortnight; and when you return, you may give him near three pints of Oats; let
him take Hay out of your Hand, Litter him well, and so leave him and order him
as before: Then observe to make him a Diet-Bread in the following manner.

Grind three Pecks of Beans with one of Wheat, dress them through an
indifferent fine Rag to a fine Flower, then put Ale. Yest and fair Water to
make the Dough; Kneed it exceeding firm, then let it lie till it rise and
bec^me Light, then Kneed it again and make it into six penny Loaves, let them
soak well in an Oven, and being hot, turn the Bottoms uppermost and let them
cool, and three days after Baking use them in the following order.

Cut the Bread into thin slivers, and lay it a while to dry, ^^umble it small
among the Oats, and give it the Horse, not exceeding a pound to half a peck of
Oats; This do first in the Morning, and about Eleven repeat it again, then let
him rest two Hours, and feed him then the like again, and so at distant spaces,
as his Appetite best serves him, keeping every thing clean about him; Let his
Heats Airings and Waterings be the same, unless in foul Weather, as I have
said; but when he is led to his Heats, give him Oats only, and when he is
returned and Fed, put on his Muzzle washed in Beer. This use of the Muzzle is
to prevent the Horse from feeding on his Litter, biting or gnawing the
Rack-staves or Mainger, licking Loam, and many other Inconveniences: They may
be made of Leather, Pack-thread, or double Canvas, though the latter with Lattice
is preferable, the Leather being the worse, by reason of its Scent, yet these
must be kept clean, lest offensive smells nauceate and sicken the Horse's
Stomach.

For the rest of this Fortnight, observe he be duly Clothed, and Dieted as is
requisite according to the Season; then put a new-laid Egg whole into half a
pint of new Ale, and oblige him to swallow it, so lead him forth, and cause him
to Empty, by smelling to the Litter or old Dung, which will oblige him to it;
then Rack him gently for a Mile or two, so by degrees mend his pace till he
come to a full Speed, and bring him to the Starting-post, if any such be
appointed, or if none, than to some other Postnear the place where the Race is
to be performed, then alight, take off the Body and Breast cloth, place on the
Saddie, Mount him, let him smell to, and grow Familiar with the Post, as
likewise to the wagling-post, and so run him three quarters Speed, from the
beginning of the designed Race, to the end, if you find he will endure it
without pain or loss of Wind; but if it be Irksom to him, then slacken your
pace, and by degrees he will come to it with Delight; and particularly remark
on what Ground he most naturally affects to run, whether So^t, Hard, Smooth,
Hilly, Dauk or Dry, and make it to your advantage in the Race.

This done, bring him under some Hay or Corn Rick, Hedge, Pit, or dry Ditch,
and there scrape off the Sweat with your Glazing-knife, and rub his Ears, Head
and Crest, clap on his Clothes and the Saddle on them, and ride him gently so
that he may cool before you bring him to the Stable, but keep such a pace that
he may not cool too fast, or all on a sudden: Having Stabled him, tie his Head
to the Rack, and having the following Scowring in readiness, give it him as
shall be directed.

First Scowring.
Take an Ounce and fix Grains of the transparentest Roach-Allom, a pint of
Malaga, in which dissolve the Allom; to these put three ounces of Olive Oil
very sweet, mix them well together with an ounce and an half of brown
Sugar Candy in Powder, these set on a gentle Fire till pretty hot, and upon the
Horse's return from the first thorough Heat, give it him in a Drenching-horn,
and it will infallibly bring away the Molton Grease and bad Humors, or other
Obstructions that remain in the Body, and would make him unfit for this
Exercise.

Directions to Order him after the taking this.
When you have given the Horse this Scowring, rub him well all over with Whisps
and a Curry-comb; follow these with a Brush, and dust him well, then rub him
with a dry Cloth till no Sweat appears; put his Cloth on again, and truss
under the Cloth warm Wisps, let him fast for the space of two Hours, and keep
him in continual motion that he sleep not, that the Humors may disperse and
evacuate, then give him a handful of Wheat-ears: If upon handling him under the
Ears and near the Heart, you perceive no more Sweat arises, but if he be faint
or sickish, after the expiration of the time, toss up his Litter, t^ke off his
Bridle, and let him rest for the space of two Hours, and he will be well again,
then give him Wheatears gradually, and rub him down; after that, let him feed
on Hay out of your Hand, and an hour after crum three shivers of the Bread
mentioned, with a quart of Oats and a pint of split Beans; let him rest after
this three Hours; that expired, Visit him again, and before you Dress him, give
him a like quantity of Oats, Beans and Bread, then Ride him, his Clothing
being on, a little way, but suffer him not to Water till about an hour and an
half after; then wash a pint of Oats in Beer and give them to Cool him, and in
so ordering leave him till Morning with a little Hay, and continue after, his
usual Feedings and gentle Breathings.

Thus having ordered him, observe the other three Heating days, to improve his
Speed, and give him the aforesaid Scowring, and he will be very Pleasant and
Lightsom.

The third Fortnight, how to Order him.
Having thus far proceeded, mingle half a Bushel of the best Wheat, and a like
quantity of Beans, grind them very small, so that the Flower be finer than the
former, and make it up into Loaves the same way, and it being Baked, after
three days cut the Crust away, slice it out and crumble it as before with Oats
and Beans the same quantity, and let the feeding be as in the foregoing
Fortnight, and his Heats must be more moderate, lest you overstrain him: omit
likewise the Scowring, not giving any more after his Heats, lest being empty of
Humors, his Body open, cold and watery Humors enter at his Vents and Pores; but
when at any time he is moderately heated, bring him home and cool him by gentle
Racking before he comes to the Stable, giving him Cordial Balls according to
the following Receipt.

Cordial Balls for the third Fortnight.
Take Carthumus Seeds, Anni-seeds, Fennel-seed, Elecampain Roots and Coltsfoot
Leaves, each two Ounces, dry them well, that when bruised, they may become a
Powder, sift it thorough a Lawn Sieve, add two Ounces of the flower of
Brimstone, an Ounce of ^i^orice-Juice, put these into a pint of White Wind,
Chemical Oil of Anniseeds, Sugar in Syrup, and Sallad-Oil, each half a pint,
and being well mingled, mix them with so much Wheat Flour as they may reduce
it to a Paste; make it up into Balls as big as French Wall nuts, or
pullets-Eggs; these increase his Wind, expel Cold, purge away Molten Grease,
and produce good sound Flesh; he may take one of these in the Morning, and
another at Night, whole, or dissolved in a pint of warm Ale.

Rules for the fourth and last Fortnight.
This requires more Caution than any of the preceedent, let his Bread therefore
be finer than any hitherto, three pecks of Wheat to a peck of Beans, and
Boulted as fine as may be; make it up with the Whites of twenty Eggs, and
New-milk instead of Water; let the Oats you give him with it be well Winowed
and Sifted, and the split Beans clear from Husks, tho the quantity you give him
may not differ from what has been Directed. In the first Week keep the Heating
days as before, but in the next, which is the last, bate one of them, so that
he may for five days be at ease, to recover his Spirits and Strength, yet you
may give him considerable Airings to keep his Wind in good Length, however,
give him no Scowring, but the better to expel the Fumes or Vapors, burn
Albanum Storax, or Frankincense, in the Stable, when close shut, on a
Chasing-dish of Charcoal; sometimes sprinkle a little Muscadine on his Meat, at
least twice a day, and give him once a day h^lf a pint of that Wine, with the
whites of two or three Eggs beaten in it, omiting the Hay, unless a small
quantity after his Heating.

The Muzzle may be laid aside the last Week, unless the three days before he
Runs, except he be a foul Feeder, and prove to eat his Litter, etc. Let him be
well fed before and after Airings.

The day before the Wager is to be run, Water as fermerly, yet a fourth part of
his Meat must be with held, and in your Evening Airing bring him home sooner
than usual, even before Sunset, and this day let him be well Shooed, and every
thing that is necessary done to him, that nothing may be new to him, or trouble
him the day he is to Run.

On the Morning the Match is to be run, come early to him, take off his Muzzle
and rub him well, especially his Head, Ears, Neck and Withers; make him a Mash
with Muscadine, Bran, Oats and Bread, made as directed; if he refuses this,
give him dried Oats, and after them a pint of Muscadine, with three new-laid
Eggs in it, then wash his Muzzle with the same Wine, lead him out, and
endeavor all you can to make him Empty; lead him among ^reaks, Stubble, or the
like, let him smell to old Dung, etc. which will provoke him to it, which
emptying is a great advantage in Running: You must bring him covered, his
Saddle and Girths lightly on him, that he may not feel any weight; wash his
Mouth if he Foam, and gently cherish him with your Hand and Voice, etc.

Note, If you are to Ride with a Person, who, by reason of his being Lighter
than your self, or who gives you any advantage, that there must be Way-bits in
the case, be sure to order them, that you are not deceived in the Management;
so make your Agreement if you can, That he who Rides against you, carries not
the Weights in his Saddle, for then they are in a manner as if he carried none,
and the Disadvantage, is yours, for they neither disadvantage the Horse nor
Rider, unless great Odds be given in the weight of the Riders, which seldom
happens; but if he carry them about him, then is the Advantage much to your
purpose, for they will both hinder the Horse and his Management.

As for the Ground, you must (as I hinted) observe which your Horse takes best
when you give him his Heats and Airings, and in the Race choose the most
agreeable, as well as the Place and Opportunity will give you leave, but throw
not your self out in being too curious in this matter, if it be not easily
gained from those that Ride with you, for by such Niceties many have lost
topping Matches.

Stars, Snips and Blazes for Beautifying a Horse, how to make them.
To make a white Star, Snip or Blaze, in a White or Sorrel Horse, cut a piece
of Led flatted and smoothed proportionable to your Fancy, then the Hair being
shaved off in the place intended, open the Skin with a Lancet, so hollow, that
you may thrust the Led in when dipped in Spike Oil, close it up and anoint it
with Oil of Mallards and Cammomil, laying over it a Plaster of Beeswax; when
it has been there four days, take the Led out, clap the skin close, and Anoint
it as before, and when the Hair (which it will soon do) grows again, it will be
Milk-white.

Red Stars on a White Horse are done in the like manner, in forming your Led,
shaving and opening the Skin; but you must use to cause the Color, Oil of
Cassia, Soot and Vermilion, finely tempered together, and the Lead anointed
with it: Take out the Lead at the same days as the former, and anoint the sore
place with Ointment of Tobacco and Marshmallows.

A black Star in a white Horse, make as the White, only the Ingredients must be
Soulters Ink, or Lamb-black, and Oil of Tartar; and in this manner you may make
Feathers or Marks on any part of the Body for Beauty and Ornament, tho too
frequently used by some, who do it by way of Disguise, that a Horse ill come
by, may not be Discovered. And thus one Star, Snip or Blaze may be taken out,
and one of a different Color put in.

Things to be observed when you put your Horse to Grass.
Having spoken many times about dry feeding, it will not be amiss for the
Horseman to know how he should be Ordered at Grass for his Health sake, and to
keep a comely proportion of Body, for in the knowledge of this there is much
Advantage.

When he has stood in the House and you intend him for Grass, abate or change
his Clothes, putting him on daily thinner, that by degrees he may be weaned
from them, and, in the end, wearing none, take no notice of it, or be
prejudiced with Cold, or blasts of Wind abroad.

This done, let him Blood twice or thrice, there being a day or two's respit
between; give him heartning Meats; by degrees lessen his Allowance; and in the
end let him for two or three days before you send him out, feed on Hay alone,
and put not any valuable or tender Horse into wet Pastures, where Foggs, Damps,
and unwholsom Airs arise, from Fens, Marshes, Ditches, Rivers, Bogs, or the
like. However, the better to fortify him against Sickness or Lameness, give
him the following Drink very warm three Mornings and Evenings.

The Drink to be given before Grass.
Take Bay Berries, Myrrh. Gentian, Aristilochia, and the shavings of Ivory,
each an Ounce, bruise them when dried, so that they may be reduced to Powder;
give him half an Ounce at a time in Muscadine, Malago, or for want of it, sweet
Wort, a quart of either pretty warm.

Thus having fitted him for the Field, put him out in a warm dry day, that the
cold weather may seize on him by degrees, so that shutting the Pores, he may be
hardened against it with little damage to himself.

How the Horse is to be used when taken from Grass.
Observe in taking him up you do it in a dry day, the Horse by the Heat and Air
freed from damps or wet; and this is best done about Bartholomew-Tide at
farthest, unless the Weather be exceeding clear and warm, and then he may run
to the first of September, but not conveniently longer; and for a Week or two
after taken up, give him no immoderate Heats, nor over-Travel him, lest you
melt his Grease, for the Fat gotten at Grass is exceeding tender, and apt to be
dissolved by any violent Motion, whereby if the Blood happen to be Inflamed, it
will endanger his falling into mortal Sickness: A day after he is Stabled,
bring him forth into the Air, and bleed him well; cleanse his Feet, and Shoe
him well, and give him the Drink in proportion before prescribed for going to
Grass.

Other material Direstions.
Three days after your Horse is taken from Grass, if the Weather be fair, ride
him abroad, and after a gentle Heat, bring him home, smooth down his Hairs and
sleek them with Soap rubbed in the Palms of your Hands, but let not any Soap
get into his Eyes, Nostrils, or Mouth, cleanse him then with some warm Water
and a linen Cloth; after that dry him well with a woollen Cloth till no wet
remain about him: And being thus cleansed from Dust and Filth, cover him as
warm as is usual in cold weather, and this will make him Slick and Lively, and
seem not to be the same Horse, for his color will be somewhat altered.

Blood-letting, on what occasions it ought to be used.
Opening the Temple-Veins is proper to ease pains in the Head, if caused by
cold Rheums, Fevers, Drowsiness, Clavers, Distempers in the Eyes, and other
Maladies proceeding from afflictions of the Brain, or any Swellings or
Inflammations about the Head, or Throat; and for these you may give him some of
the Blood to drink mixed with Bay Salt. Opening the weeping Veins under the
Ears is very proper to prevent Blindness, and cure Distempers in the Eyes:
Opening the Palate Veins prevents or cures the Lampas, Slavers, Anticor,
Yellows, Drowsiness, Surfeit, Tireing, etc. The Vein in the side of the Neck is
proper to disburthen the Body of gross blood, ease the Heart of Oppressions,
Anticor, Faintings, and the like: Opening the Breast-Vein is proper for
Moor-foundring, occasioned by molten Grease, contracted in the body by hard
Riding, preventing Diseases in the Liver, Lungs, and other internal Parts, and
is convenient to be done in any Sprain or Hurt in the Shoulder, to prevent
Lameness.

Opening the Thigh Veins prevents foundring in the Fore-feet, Screwzing-bone,
Mallender, or the like excressential Infirmities. To bleed on the four
Shackle-Veins before, is good against the Crown-scab, Quitter-bone, etc. To
open the Spur-veins is good against Moor-foundring, Farcine in the Side,
Swelling under the belly, or the like. The Toe Veins being opened, help
fretting-foundering, Hoof-bound, or any grief occasioned by the beating the
Horse's Hoof upon any hard stony way.

The bleeding the two Thigh Veins behind, ease grief in the Kidneys, swelling
in the hinder Legs, Swellings, Scratches, Pissing blood, Foundring, etc. To
open the Shoulder Veins behind, prevents pain in the Feet, Foundering,
Uneasiness, etc. Open the Flank Veins in case of a Fevor, swelling of the
Stones, Poorness, or the Tielt-Worm.

The Tail Vein opened, prevents the Mange, Scab, Itch, and falling off of the
Hair. And these blood-lettings prepare a Horse or Mare the better for Physic,
and greatly enliven him.

What Season is best to let Blood in.
If present danger require letting blood you may wave Critical times, and do it
immediately, otherwise observe the following days, viz.

The Third and Fifteenth of January. The Fourth and Ninth of February. The
Sixth and Tenth of March. The Fifteenth and Twentieth of April. The First and
Thirteenth of May. The Fifteenth and Nineteenth of June. ^n July and August,
forbear letting of blood, unless on some ^urgent occasion. In September, bleed
the Eleventh and Twenty eighth. October, the Eighth, and Twenty third.
November, the Fifth and Sixteenth. And in December, the Fourteenth, Sixteenth
and Twenty sixth. These days by the most Skilful, are held to be safer and
better than others ^^n sundry regards, but especially in that of the Signs, who
then Govern.

Viz. Aries, the Head; Taurus, the Neck; Gemini, the Shoulders; Cancer, the
Stomach; Leo, the Heart; Virgo, the Guts and belly; Libri, the Reins and
Buttocks; Scorpio, the privy Members; Sagitarius, the Thighs; Capricorn, the
Knees, Aquarius, the Legs, and Pisces, the Feet. From which, Note, that it is
not at any time safe to let Blood in that part at the time the Sign is
predominant or governing in it.

^bservations on a Horse, as to the Brain, Sinews, Veins, relating to Health,
Strength, etc.
He that will be expert in Ordering a Horse, must not be unskilful in knowing
the parts from whence Defects and Diseases chiefly arise; the most material I
shall briefly Enumerate.

First. Consider the Seat of Life to be in the Brain, Heart and Liver, from
whence it contributes to, and disposes every Member, and for that cause, those
are called the Three principal Members; to which, some would add a Fourth, viz.
The Stones: But that Addition by the wisest Practitioners has been rejected,
because if taken away, Life still remains, which it is impossible to do if any
of the other be removed.

Secondly. The Sinews, which are these, viz. Two white Sinews or Tendons,
beginning at the Nose, and passing through the Neck and Back, branch into the
Forelegs, and end in the hinder Legs, taking their Ligaments in all the four
Feet. Two Sinews called the main Sinews, which descend from the Brain, and
passing down the Cheeks, fasten the Jaws. Three from the Shoulder to the first
Joint of the Arms or forelegs, besides two other great Sinews. Four great
Sinews from the Knees to the Pasterns, with the same number in the hinder part
above. As well within as without the forepart of the Breast, are ten Sinews
small and great. From the Reins of the Back to the Stones, are four great
Sinews or Ligaments, and another great Sinew running to the end of the Tail. To
conclude, a Horse has great and small, Twenty Nine; or, as some will have it,
Thirty.

Thirdly. The Veins through which the Blood Circulates the whole Body, are
many; yet seeing they center in the Liver, the Seat and Fountain of Blood,
distributing it into every part; diverse are of opinion, that all other Veins in
the Horse's Body, are but branches of the Median Vein, proceeding directly from
the Liver, and whenever that is afflicted with Wind, has the Blood corrupted
in it, or is subject to any other Infirmity, it afflicts all at once, the whole
Body of the Horse.

Those Branches that ascend to the Head and upper parts of the Body, are called
Ascendants; and those that run down into the Legs and other parts of the Body,
Descendants: And through these branches, sleeping and waking, the Blood
continues its Course, Ebbing and flowing like the Ocean, by the course of the
Moon.

The things herein chiefly to be considered, are the Branches properly to be
opened, as I have directed in Bloot-letting, Page 64.

The Bones that frame a Horse's Body, their Number, and how they are Placed.
In the Body of a Horse, the Bones, not accounting the Teeth, which are
visible, thus are Numbered, viz.

His Head-bones, comprehending the Crooks and handle of Skull, are (although
they are compiled of parts and parcels of other Bones) likewise two flat
handles, which form the Palate and Fork, or Throat, have Five. His Breast Bone
and his Chine, Fifty two other Bones. His Ribs, long and short, are Thirty six.
His Forelegs and fore-Feet, contain Forty four. The hinder Legs and Feet,
Forty. So that the whole Structure of the Body of a Horse, comprizing his
Teeth, consists of 177 Bones.

Of the Four Humors in the Body of a Horse, etc.
As Fire, Air, Water and Earth produce and give Life and Nutriment to all
Living Creatures, so the Humors, viz. Choler, Blood, Phlegm, and Melancholy,
are the principal Agitators in the Bodies of all Creatures, and, as it were,
Compose, or at least Preserve them: Choler, by reason of its heat being alluded
to Fire: Phlegm, by reason of its Moisture and Coldness, to Water: Blood, by
reason of its heat and Moisture, to Air: And Melancholy, through its cold and
dryness, to Earth.

Choler has its Seat near the Liver, which by reason of its heat and dryness
accords with the Blood which has its Fountain in the Liver, and from thence
disperseth it self through the Body.

Phlegm has its chief Seat about the Brain, which is a principal Seat of Life,
and frequently afflicts when out of temper, with Rheums, Colds, Coughs,
Catarrhs, etc.

Melancholy has its Seat about the Spleen, being the gross and earthly part of
the Blood and Choler. As for the Offices and Dispositions of these Humors,
they are four; viz.

Choler causes Concoction and voiding of Excrements; Blood Nourishes the
Body; Phlegm gives Motion to the Joints; and Melancholy disposes to Apetite,
Creating a good Stomach.

The Humors or Constitution of a Horses Body to be taken from the Color, etc.
The Humors are to be known, that a Farrier or any skilful Horse-Doctor may
the better prepare the Medicine which I am hereafter to prescribe; and this may
be done diverse ways, and particularly by the Color of a Horse, Sympathizing
with the Humors; viz.

If a Horse be Cole-black, and has nothing of changeable about him, then Choler
is predominant in him; and by reason of the great heat in him, he is incident
to Inflammations of the Liver, Yellows, and Pestilential Fevers; and in that
case he must have suitable Medicines to allay Heat, and purge out the
superfluities of Choler; yet these Medicines must not be of a quality too much
operating, lest they impair his Strength; for the choleric Horse, though he be
fierce and fiery, has nevertheless no great Strength.

If your Horse be Dark or bright Bay, neither scouling Countenance, bad
Mouthed, white Flanked, white Fleabitten, white Lyard like, Silver or black
with a white Star, white Rash, with a black Foot; then he is Sanguine, and the
Diseases to which he is most subject, are the Consumption of the Liver,
Glanders, Leprosy, and such other Distempers caused by Infection. Those of
this Complexion are very strong and will endure strong Medicine without
impairing strength. If these Medicines are not compounded of extraordinary hot
Ingredients to over-heat the Blood.

If your Horse be perfect White, Yellow, Dun, Kite color, Mous-dun, or the
like in mixture, then is the prevailing Humor in him Phlegm; and such are slow
of Nature, subject to lose his Flesh, also to cold Rheums, Headache Coughs,
Staggers, and many other Distempers proceeding from cold watery Distillations;
and therefore he must have hot Medicines, viz. Simples of a hot and strong
working nature, that may effectually operate on the Mass of Phlegm.

If a dark Bay color, having long White Hairs, called Goats-hairs, on his
Legs, Russet, Chestnut, Ash-colored, o^ Gray; Then Melancholy is predominant,
and his Distempers are Inflammations of the Spleen, Frenzies, and other the like
dull and Melancholy Distempers, and Require col^ and moist Medicines; for those
of a hot or drying quality are very hurtful.

These Horses are very strong, though they appear no^ so; and consequently, are
fit for fervile Labors; and when you find a Horse mixed with many, or all of
these Colors, then he, little or more, (as the Colors are more or less on him
of one or the other kind) participates of the Humors; and Medicines must be
tempered accordingly; as also to the Nature of the Sickness, if it has
continued ^ong, and he is enfeebled thereby, then you must not give him over
strong Potions: but more of Medicines hereafter.

How to prepare a Horse to receive Medicines, if any Distemper has seized him.
Observe twenty four hours before you intend to administer the Medicine,
(whether Powder, Pills, or Drench, composed of Simples, etc.) that you restrain
him from eat^ng Hay or Straw, or any hard Meats that admit not of easy
Digesture, thereby to hinder the Operation of the Physic; and for twelve hours
before keep him fasting, for the Emptiness of Stomach gives a free Operation to
any Purge, when Fullness hinders greatly the working of any Medicine, much
obstructing it, and thereby frequently injuring the Horse, by turning the force
of it on the Vitals.

The safest Meat to prepare him, is, either Rye, or Wheat Bran, mixed with
white split Beans, Wheat flower mixed with white Oats, and his Drink, warm
Water; into which dust a little fine Bran.

What Purgations, with the least Danger, may be given to a Horse.
The most Effectual and gentlest Purgations are Pills; but it must be
considered, as is said, according to the state of the Horse's Body; And, for
Example, to make the gentlest Pill against Pestilential or Infectious Diseases.

Peel twenty Cloves of Garlic, bruise and well temper them with a pound of
fresh-Butter, Roll them up in balls as big as Walnuts, give four or five of
them, one soon after another; and if the Contagion have not seized the Heart,
Brain, or Liver, it will work it out.

Approved Rules to be observed by such as either Travel or Exercise Horses; for
want of the due Observation whereof, many excellent Horses have been lost;
though hereby they may be kept from Sickness.
First, when your Horse is lusty, pleasant and clear in ^ody, then he is fit
for Labor or any Exercise: but if he be sad, heavy, or dejected in
Countenance, do not Labor him until you have found the Cause, and removed it.
Secondly, let not your Horse eat any thing for two or three hours before you
travel him, and then not much until you come to your Lodging; for baiting at
Noon is naught and hurtful, except you rest four or five hours, so as that he
may not travel upon a full Stomach, and let his Bit be small, and be sure he
never wear a rusty Bit or Snaffle, for fear of the Canker. Thirdly, let your
Travel be moderate, except necessity (which cannot be limited) enforce it; then
be sure not to let your Horse either eat or drink until he be very cold; and if
it be in Wintertime, be sure to cloth his Head and Breast very warm after
your Travel; and every Morning either squirt a little Vinegar into his
Nostrils, or else rub them with Oil of Bay, with a Cloth nointed therewith
fastened to the end of a Stick, and thrust up and down him Nostrils to purge his
Head. Fourthly, neither wash nor Water your Horse (especially in the
Wintertime) for when he is very hot, to walk him in the cold Air is dangerous,
and washing is a speedy Preparative to bring him to some dangerous Disease; for
there is no desperate Disease incident to a Horse, but the fame proceeds from
the Causes of too much Heat or Cold; and none more dangerous then this. Fifthly,
when you travel, alight often from your Horse (if Cause of Necesity enforce not
the contrary) and lead him to some place of Grass, Straw, or Brakes, and there
stay and whistle until your Horse Piss, which he will hardly do except it be in
such places, because the sprinkling of his Water will scald his Legs. Sixthly,
if your Horse be very hot, let him not drink cold Water, but rather at some
House give him a quart of good Beer, or a pint of Wine; and if you do Water him
by the way, let him not drink until he have washed his Mouth, which is done
when he thrusts his Head into the Water, presently pull up his Head which
will cleanse his Mouth; and if you are forced to let him drink, ride him so
that he may be sure to keep the same Heat he was in before. Seventhly, After
his Labor, if you can have a convenient place, let him wallow himself, for it
is no less delightful then comfortable to his Body. Eighthly, If he happen to
fall sick in your Travel (which proceeds commonly either from eat^ng or
drinking too much at a time, or otherwise) give him a pint of Sack or Malmsey,
a quarter of a pint of Aqua-^ita, with six penny worth of the best Treacle, and
a quar^er of a pint of the best Olive-Oil, brew them well together, and give
him a draught, and then take a new laid Egg, and pull out his Tongue, bruise
the Shell, and thrust ^t into his Throat, and then let go his Tongue; do this
^wice, then let him blood in the Pallet of his Mouth, and ^ub it well with
Salt, and afterward order him as he should ^e in the Stable.

Another Excellent way, to the like purpose.
If you cannot get Sack-Wine, or Treacle, give him a ^int of Aqua-Vita, or any
other comfortable Water, with ^wo Eggs, in the form aforesaid, to comfort his
Heart. first, at night give him a good comfortable Mash, if he ^ill eat it, and
clean sweet Provender, such as he will eat; ^athe his Legs with Butter and
Beer, cleanse his Feet, and ^op them with Caw-dung, and after he is
sufficiently fed; ^^ve him plenty of Sweet Litter, shut him dark in the Sta^e,
and early in the Morning let him be thoroughly dressed ^^d rubbed, and before
you ride, two hours, let him eat ^^lf a Peck of old sweet Oats, with a pint of
the strongest ^le, Beer, Malmsey, or White Wind for his Breakfast. ^^condly, If
your Horse be young, that you do travel ^^on (which is the Overthrow of all
fine mettled Horses) ^^en you come home, and may let him rest, then let him ^ke
his Ease and bleed; and if you find his Blood hot ^^d dark colored, spare not
to let him bleed until there ^^me perfect Blood; after three or four days keep
him ^th god Mashes, and give him the purging Drink be^^^e mentioned, with a
pint of White Wind, an ounce of ^es dissolved into powder, half an ounce of
Agarick, ^^ a spoonful of the Powder of Liquorice, made blood-^^m, and well
brewed together, and let him not drink ^^ Water for four or five days after,
and in his Provender put the Powder of Brimstone, Enula Campana, and Polipodium
of the Oak, well mingled together, a spoonful at ^ time, two or three hours
before his Watering, and he will remain a healthful and sound Horse, if he be
thus used ti^^ he be eight years old; for then the chief danger is past.

The Order of Curing Horses that are Diseased* The Causes, the Signs, and the
Cure^ thereof.
Of the Ague or Fever in Horses.
THE Learned do hold Three gential Kinds: First When the Vital Spirits are
inflamed, wherein he^ is predominant more than Nature requires. Secondl^ When
the Humors are distempered by heat. Thirdl^ When the firm parts of the body
are continually hot, ^ that the Ague comes by the excessive heating of the
Hors^ and thereupon a sudden Cold, or by fullness of bad H^mours, which
principally grow from foul, full, and ra^ feeding, and too much rest; and for
that reason it taken the Horse either hot or cold, and to keep due hours to
mak^ him shake and tremble as a Man; also we may know ho^ the same appears
from the Inflammations of the Stomac^ which scaldeth and makes the Tongue raw;
there another causes, viz. by spare feeding, not clean feeding, a^dry feeding,
and for want of moderate labor. The Cu^ shall be when you perceive his
dejected Countenance, a^ that he begins to tremble, enforce him into a Heat,
a^ give him this purging Drink: Take a quart of White-Win^ put therein an Ounce
of Aloes small beaten: Of Agar^^ half an Ounce, of Liquorice and Anniseeds half
a Dra^ and some Honey warmed a little on the Fire; and the ride him until he be
hot, and let him sweat moderately ^ the Stable, and take a special care of him;
wash his Tong^^ with Alum water, Vinegar and Sage, and give him swe^ Straw to
eat, and a Gallon of old sweet Oats,; at Nigh^ give him a good Mash, and the
next Night after let him ^l^ed a quart; and if his Blood be very thick, dark,
yei ^ow, let him bleed two Quarts, and afterward keep him warm from the Air
for three or four days, and give him warm Water to drink, and a little
Saliet-Oyl in it, if he will drink it.

Another of the same.
Let him blood, take of Garmander Four ounces, of Gum-Dragon^^, and of dead
Roses, of each an ounce: Of Oil ^live Four Ounce^; put them into a quart of
strong Ale, and give it warm to the Horse to drink, then ride him un^il he
sweat, and cl^ath him, and keep him warm as afore^aid.

Of the Ague in the Head.
The cause of (...) Disease, proceeds either from cold, or ^aking of too much
heat, or of a raw imperfect Digestion of the Stomach, which proceeds
principally also from full and foul f^^ding; for betwixt the Stomach and the
Brain ^s such Assinity, as that they do equally communicate their ^amage^: The
Signs are these; The hanging down of his ^ead, his Eyes will swell and run with
Water, and he will ^orsake his Meat. The Cure is, to let him blood in the
^allet of his Mouth, and rub it with Salt to make it bleed well; then take a
^tick with a Linnen-cloath fastened to ^he end of it, well anointed with the
Oil of Bay, thrust it ^p and down his Nostrils, thereby to open and purge his
^ead: Also p^rfume him with the smoke of Garlick-stalks ^roken into small
pieces: Also air him with the smoke of ^rankincense, belding the same in a
Chafingdish under his Nostrills, with a great Cloth cast over his Head, and
let be done Morning and Evening: Keep him with spare ^yet and moderate
Exercise, the which will cleanse his ^^omack, and make it empty, then his brain
will not be ^quieted. Afterward let him blood, and give him good ^^^hes to
drink for two days, and no cold water; as I ^^all write down the Causes of some
Diseases that are most ^^known to the people; so for those that they are so
well ^^quainted with, I shall only set down the Cures.

Of the sudden Sickness of a Horse.
The cause is, for that the Heart, which is the Chariot o^ Life, wherein the
Soul of the Horse lives, wanting the use of the Veins and Arteries, to carry
the vital spirit o^ heat to all the parts of the body, to give the Horse
feelling and ability to operation, by reason of some obstructions of Humors
and Cold, which, for want of Heat, cannot be dissolved, for that the nature of
Cold is to bind and conglutinate together, and keep them from their natural
Course, proceeding from some violent Exercise, and immoderate Feeding and Rest.
The sign is, the sudden dejectment of his Countenance. The Cure is, to let him
blood on both sides of the breast, next the heart, whereby the Veins and
Arteries being evacuated and emptied, the* may begin to do that office
whereunto Nature has appointed them: Let him bleed the quantity of two quarts
then give him a comfortable drink, to stir up the vital Spirits to actions,
viz. Take a quart of the best Sack, and burn it with Grains, Cloves and
Cinnamon, and a quarte^ of a pound of the best Sug^r, and burn it altogether
with half a pint of Sallet-Oyl, and Four pennyworth of the bes^ Trea^le, then
ride him very gently till he begin to sweat and so turn him into the Stable,
and let him stand ^^^ Meats, but beware you do for him there, according t^ your
direction, and be sure you cloth him not too warin^ for the Drink will
thoroughly warm him, and make hi^ sweat; let his drink be warm water, wherein
boil Mallow^ and a handful of Watercresses, of Fennel and Parsly-seed, o^ each
an Ounce, and twice in a Morning or Evening, when he is most fasting, ride him
gently a mile or two.

Of a Horse that cannot Piss.
Take a Pint of white Vinegar, half a pound of Gimgree^ bruise it small, and
wring out the Juice, take a handful ^ Fennel, a handful of Fox-Gloves, the
Leaves or the Flower^ two ounces of Grommel-seed, and half a pint of sweet
Honey stamp them well together, and strain them into Vinegar, le^ him stand
without Meat and Drink Twenty four hours.

Of the Pains in the Head.
Take a Pint of Malmsey, Five new laid Eggs, a head of bruised Garlic, small
Pepper, Cinnamon, and Nu^megs beaten fine, give it him to drink three days
together, and let him fast five hours after.

To bring Hair again.
To bring Hair again, take the Dung of Goats, some Honey and Alum,, and the
blood of a Hog, boil them together, and being hot, rub the place therewith.

Of the Stone and Cholick in a Horse.
Take a Pint of White Wine, half a Pint of Burr-seed, and beat them small, two
ounces of Purs^y-seed, half a handful of Hop, half a handful of new-set ^eeks,
and ha^^ a handful of Watercresses, half an ounce of Black-Soap, and mingle
them together, stamp and strain them, but put the Burr-seed and Parsley-seed to
it after it is strained, and then warm it, and give it him to drink.

Of killing the Fire, either in Burning or Shot.
Take Varnish, or Oil and Water beaten together, and ^noint the place with a
Feather.

Of a Horse that stumbleth, which is called the Cords.
This is called the Cords: The Cord is a Sinew that ^reedeth amongst the
Sinews, the one end comes down ^o the shankle Vein, and so up thorough the
Leg, goes ^ver the inner side of the Knee, and so over the Shoulder, ^^d so
along the Neck by the Wesant, and it goes over ^he Temples under his Eye, down
over the Snout, betwixt ^oth the Nostrils, and the Gristle, there knit the
length ^f an Almond; take a sharp knife and cut a slit even at ^^e Top of his
Nose, just with the point of the Gristle; ^pen the slit, and you shall perceive
a white string, take ^ up with a Boars Tooth, or a Bucks Horn, that is crook^d,
or some crooked Bodkin, and twine it about the ^rait, and cut it asunder; you
may twine it so much as that you may rear his foot from the ground, and then
stirch up the slit, and anoint it with Butter, and the Horse doubtless will be
cured.

Of the Canker.
The Cure is, let him blood abundantly in the Veins that be next to the Sore,
then take of Alum one pound, of white Coperas a quartern, and a good handful
of Salt, boil them together in fair running water, from a pottle to a quart;
this water being warm, put part thereof into a dish, and with a Clout wash the
same till it begin for to bleed, and let it dry; then take of Black-Soap one
pound, and of ^uick-silver half an ounce, and incorporate them, till that the
Quicksilver be not seen, and always after you have washed the same with a
slice, cover the Ulcer with this Medicine till it be whole, but he sure still
to let the blood he about the Ulcer for many days together, and when it is
killed, then cast upon it the powder of unslack'd Lime, or of Brimstone.

Of the Farcin.
This Ulcer is not unknown to any that have enjoyed Horses, and yet unknown
almost to all; I mean the true cause of this Disease, and the Cure; some say it
is a corruption of Blood, some an outward hurt, as of: pur-galling, biting of
Ticks, Hogs-Lice, or such like; some say an infi^mity bred in the Breast near
the Heart, and in the side Vessel^ and God near the Stones, many evil humors
congealed together, which afterward disperse themselves into the Thighs, and
sometimes into the Head, and do send forth wa^ry humors into the Nostrils, and
then it is called the ^unning Farcin. Indeed if the true Cause of a Disease be
known, the Disease it self is easily cured. The Mange, the Lep^^sie, and this
Disease of the ^arcin, are most perni^ions to a Horse, for oftentimes it
falls out, that many Horse^ infected therewith, though they live, and the
Disease ^^^meth to be healed, yet are they rendered of small or no use: For my
own part I conjecture the cause of this Disease grow^ either from abundance of
bad Blood, or by a great Dis^^mper of the Blood, through a violent heat,
changed into a sudden cold. To cure this Distemper, first let him blood on both
sides of the Neck, three quarts at least, for it is most certain that the Loins
which is then the Fountain of Blood, is corrupted, and so sends the Fume into
every part of the Body, as to become loathsome to behold: Then give him this
drink; Take a Gallon of fair water, put into it a good handful of Rue, a good
spoonful of Hemp Seed, and a handful of the inner Rind of green Elder, bruise
them in a Mortar together, and sees it till it he half consumed, and being
cold, give it him to drink: Evermore continue to let him blood in that Vein
which is nearest to the sore place, a great quantity, as you see occasion; let
his Diet be thin, but very clean and sweet, then take this approved Medicine
following; which, though the Disease be never so foul, it will undoubtedly ^ure
it. Take of Herbgrace a handful, Fetherfew a handful, of Chick-weed of the
House, a handful, of Kikswood, a ^andful, of Heart-Robert, a handful, keep the
residue thereof in a Pipkin close covered in the earth, stop the mouth thereof
close with Herb-grace and Dock-leaves, and a green Turf laid upon it, no air to
come in, and every third day untye his Ears and dress it, and so continue it
till all the Facine be dead; for undoubtedly at three or four dressings it will
kill it; wash all the Herbs so clean that no dirt nor filth be on them: Boil
Chamberlye and Bay Salt, with a little Copper as and Strong-Netties to wash the
Sores if need be; but beware of burning them either with Fire or other
Corrosives, for although it may kill the Ulcer, yet being dispersed, it will
burn and scorch the Horses skin; for burning does purse the Skin, and makes it
run together, so as the Horse will never after prosper. I would have you get
cases of Leather, fastened to a head-stall, made hollow like the shape of a
Horses Ears, or make them lank-eared, which thing the Sadlers will help you in;
for many times, by long binding, the Ears are spoiled, so as that they must be
cut off. After that you see the filthy Ulcer killed and dead, yet you must know
whether the Blood is still putrified and corrupted, therefore you must at least
let him blood, but always in several places; And when you see the Blood fine
and pure, then give him some good scouring Drink, a quart of White Wind, a
quarter of an ounce of Rhubarb in very thin s^^ices, and laid in steep all
night; an ounce and an half of Alloes in powder dissolved therein, half an
ounce of Agarick, an ounce of Sena steeped in the Wine all night, and Three
Races of Ginger, sliced and laid also in steep all night, and two ounces of
Syrup of Roses; but the Ruburb, Sena, and Ginger, take out of the Wine before
you put in the other Simples, and then make it blood warm, and give it the
Horse, and so let him rest all that day, giving him nothing but Wheat-Straw at
night, and the next day following a Bottle of sweet strong Wort, and a quarter
of a pint of Treacle, and keep him warm. After all this wash his Body with
Bucklye, and Black-Soap, and after cloth him and give him a sweat, and he will
recover.

Of the Fistula.
This is a filthy Ulcer also, bred from some Ulcer not thoroughly cured. The
Remedy is to search the depth thereof, with a Quill, or some o^^er Instrument
of Lead, for unless you find the bottom it is hard to cure, and having found
the bottom, if it be in a place where you may cut with a Razor, make a slit
against the bottom, so wide that you may boldly thrust in your Finger, to feel
if any Bone or Gristle be perished, or spungy, or loose Flesh, which must be
gotten out, then boil a quartern of Honey, and an ounce of Verdegrease in
Powder, stiring it continually until it look red, then Tent therewith and
Boulster with Flax that it get not out; but if the place be where the Tent
cannot conveniently be kept in, fasten on each side of the hole a Shoe-makers
Thread over the Bolster, to keep the Tent in, renewing it every day until it
leave Mattering, and make the Tent lesser and lesser, and sprinkle thereon a
little slack Lime: But if you cannot come to tent it to the bottom, then take
strong Lie, Honey, Roch-Alom, Mercury, and sees them together, and apply them
to the bottom of the Fistula. If the Fistula be in the Head, take the Juice of
Houseleek, and dip a lock of Wool in it, and put the same in his Ears, and use
it every day till it be whole.

These Infirmities are Cured by this following Medicine; all broken Bones, all
Bones out of joint, swaying of the Back, weakness in the Back, Horse-hipped,
Horse-stifled.
The Bones being placed in their true and proper places, according to the form
of the number, you shall first bath the grieved place with warm Patch-grease,
or Piece-grease, then clap about it a binding Plaster of Pitch, Rosin,
Mastick, and Sallet-Oyl, well mixed together, and molten on the Fire; then fold
the Limb hard about with fine Flax, and splint it with broad, flat, strong, and
soft Splints, and remove not the dressing for the space of Fifteen days, except
that you find the Rowlers to slacken, which is a very good sign, and then you
may straiten them again, or if you find the Member to increase in swelling, and
that the Rowlers grow straiter and straiter, then you may give the Member eas^;
for it is a sign that it was rolled too strait before; and thus you shall dress
it but twice in Thirty days, or thereabouts, in which time the Bones will be
knit; but if through the breach of Dislocation, you find any gross substance to
appear about the grieved place, then you shall twice or thrice a day bath it
with Patch-grease, and that will take away the Eyesore in a short space.

Of Leporsie and universal Manginess.
The Horse that is infected with this Disease, will be full of Scabs, Rawness,
and S^urvey, continually scratching. The Cure is, first for to let him blood on
one side of the Neck, and give him a quart of New-Milk, and half a handful of
the finest powder of Brimstone, thoroughly strained together, for that will
expel the Mange; in all his Provender and Mashes, continued for Five or Six
days, give him Brimstone and hot Grains; but if he will not eat it, give it him
with Milk, and new Ale-wort: Then the next day let him blood on the other side
of the Neck, at each time a good quantity; within two days after let him blood
in the Breast-Veins; within the other two days in the Flank-Veins; within two
days after under the Tail, so as that he becomes weak therewith: Keep his
blood in a Pail, then sees Chamber-Lye and Bay Salt together, and let it be
strong of the Salt, then take a quantity of the blood and stir them together,
that the same be thick, and let him be rubbed all over with a Pease-wisp when
he is hot, and let it dry upon him as much as may be, and the next day more of
the same upon the old, that it may be as it were plaistered with the same; the
which being done in the Sun, will easily be performed. After he has rested
upon the same two days, take Buckly and Black-Soap, being very warm, and wash
all his body, ^^d give him a quart of Sack, and half a pint of the best ^^^cle
to drink; and anoint his body with this same Ointment in every place. Take of
Lamp-Oyle a quart, of fine Powder of Brimstone, a pint of the best Treacle to
drink, and anoint his Body with this Ointment in every place.

Another of the same.
Take of Lamp-Oyl a quart, fine Powder of Brimstone a pint, two pounds of
Black-Soap, a pint of Tar, a pint of Barrows-Grease, and so much of Soot in the
Chimney, a^ will thicken it; compound them well together, anoint him all over
with the same, being very hot, so let it rest till it fall off from him, then
when it is all gone, wash him clean with Soap-suds, and thoroughly dry him, then
cloth him and put him into a Sweat, and after d^y him again, and keep him
warm, and he will be in perfect heal^h; and remember within a Month after, to
let him bleed a ^ottle at least, give him a Purging Drink, and with your best
convenience put him to Grass.

Of the Running of the Frush.
The Cure is, pare away the corrupt places, until you see it raw, and where the
Issue is, then take a handful of Soot, and as much Salt, and the White of three
Eggs, and beat them together, and having made the Shoe hollow, and tacked on,
stop the Feet therewith very hard, and renew it every day for Seven days, and
let not the Horse touch any wet, and when he is whole, be sure after Travel to
keep that Foot clean from the Gravel.

To make a Horse that he shall not Neigh.
Tie a Woollen List about the middle of his Tongue, and he shall not Neigh so
long as it remains.

To make a White Mark on a Horse.
Take a Tyle and burn it to Powder, take Daisy-Roots, and the Roots of
White-Bryer, of each alike, dry them, and make Powder thereof, then shave the
place you will have white, and rub it very much with the Powder, then wash the
place with this Water: Take a quantity of Honey-Suckle-Flowers, and a quantity
of Honey, and the water that Moles have been sod in, and wash the place, and
rub it very sore therewith; do this five days, and it will be White.

To ripen an Imposthume.
Take Mallow Roots, and Lilly Roots, and bruise them, and put into them
Hog's Grease, and Lynseed-Meal, and Plaster-wise lay it too.

Of a Farcin, or sudden breaking out in any part of the Body.
Take this Ointment, and have it ready in your Stable: Three ounces of Quick
Silver, put it into a Bladder; and two spoonfuls of the Juice of ^imonds and
Oranges, shake them together, then take a pound of Hog's Grease, and of Verjuice
an Ounce, beat them all in a Dish, and work them thoroughly together; and take a
pound of fresh Hog's Grease, and anoint the same therewith, and slit the same if
need be, then wash it, and put into his Ears the juice of Ruge-weed, and he
shall recover.

Of sinking a Fistula, or Wind-gall.
First sear the Fistula, and then take Rozen, Sheeps-Tallow and Brimstone, boil
them together, lay it on hot with a Cloth, and it will sink down.

Of a Wrench in the Fetter-lock, or any other Joint that is suddenly done.
Take of Narvile, and Black-Sope, and boil them together a little on the Fire,
and anoint it therewith.

Of a Blister.
Take the Juice of Ground Ivy, so much Brimstone, a quantity of Tar, and some
Alom, and lay it to the Blister.

Of a Wind-Gall, that it shall not grow again.

When you have cut the Skin, take a Spoonful of Oil-de-Bay, a Spoonful of
Turpentine, One pennyworth of Verdigrease, the white of an Egg, and a quarter
of an Ounce of Red-Lead, boil them together to a Salve, and lay the same to the
place.

Of Curing a sudden Hurt.
Take Wax, Turpentine, Rozen, and Hogsgrease of the like quantity, and half so
much Tarr as any of the other Simples, melt and boil them together, and keep it
ready for any accident. Lay it Plaister-wise.

Of the dangerous Galling of a Horse.
Take a Pottle of Verjuice, Two Pennyworth of green Copperas, boil it into a
Pint and half, wa^h and search the Hole therewith, and fill it with Red Lead,
so let it remain three days untouched, then wash it with the same, and fill it
with Red Lead, this will heal it, though it be galled to the body.

Repairing a broken Hoof, to make it grow again.
Take of Garlick-heads seven Ounces, of Herb-grace three handfuls, of Alum
beaten and fif^ed, of Barrows-grease that is old Two pound, mingle all these
with a handful of Asses-dung, and boil them together, and anoint the Horse
therewith.

Of Fretting of the Guts.
Take in the Morning a quart of good Ale, Four Ounces of Fennygreek, Seven
Ounces of Bay Berries, as much Long-pepper, and an Ounce of Ginger, Two
handfuls of Watercresses, a handful of Sage, another of Mint, beat them
altogether in the Ale, then strain it, and give it him blood-warm; rope all his
Legs, and tie him that he lie not down, put him into a sweat, keep him warm,
give him no cold Water for Three days after, and feed him with dry Beans and
Oats for his Provender.

To make a Horse follow his Master.
Take One pound of Oatmeal, a quarter of a pound of Honey, half a pound of
Lumary, and make a Bag thereof, and bear it about you next your Skin, and
labor therewith till you sweat, and wipe the sweat with the Bag, and keep the
Horse a day and a night fasting, and give it him to eat, and also use to give
him Meal and Bran, and he will follow you.

Of Bones out of Joint.
The Cure is, bind all the Four Legs together, and to cast him on his back, and
then to hoyst him from the ground with his heels upwards, so shall the weight
of his Body cause the Joint to shoot in again in its right place.

Of pulling out of Shivers or Thorns, and of Swelling.
The Cure is, to pull it out if it may be seen; but if it swell and cannot,
then take Wormwood, Paretory, Bears-foot, Hog's Grease, and Honey, boil them
together, and being hot, make a Plaster; it is excellent for any Swelling, so
also is Wine-Lees, Wheat Flour and Cummen boiled together; and when it is at a
head Lance it.

Of a Spungy Wart.
The Cure is, if it be long enough, to tie a Thread about it very hard, and it
will eat it off, or else take it off with a hot Iron.

Of the Sinews cut and bruised.
Take of Tar, Bean-flower, and Oil of Roses and lay it hot to the place: Of the
same effect are Worms and Sallet-Oyl fried together: So is the Ointment of
Worms, which you may have at the Apothecaries.

Of the Curb.
This is commonly known; the Cure is, take a pint of Wine-Lees, a Porringer
full of Wheat Flour, of Cummin half an Ounce, and stir them well together, and
being made warm, charge the sore place therewith, running it every day once,
for the space of Three or Four days, and when the swelling is almost gone, then
draw it with a hot Tron, and cover the burning with Pitch and Rosin molten
together, and laid on warm, and clap on Flocks of his own color, and let him
rest, and come in no Water for the space of Twelve days.

Another for the same.
Take an Iron, and make it red hot, and hold it against the Sore as nigh as you
may, but touch not the Sore, and when it is warm, then take a Fleam and wet it
in Six or Seven places full of Nervil, then take a Spoonful of Salt, and a
penny-weight of Verdigrease, and the White of an Egg, and put all these
together, and take a little Flax and wet it therein, and lay it to the Sore.

Of Wind Galls in Horses.
This Grief most Men know. The Cure is, wash the places with warm water, and
shave off the Hair, then draw it with a hot Iron, in this manner *; that done,
slit the middle Line which passes right down through the Windgall with a sharp
Knife, beginning beneath and so upwards, half an Inch, and thrust the Jelly
out, then take also Pitch and Rozen molten together, lay them on hot, and
Flocks upon them.

Of the Pipes, or Crutches in Horses.
This is a frettish, waterish Matter, bred in the Pasterns of the hinder Legs,
sometimes by foul keeping, but principally of liquid and thin humors resorting
to the Joint, whereby the Legs will be Swollen, Hot, and Scabby: The Cure is, to
wash the Pasterns with Beer and Butter, which being dry, clip away all the
Hair, saying the Fetterlock, then take of Turpentine, Hog's Grease and Honey, of
all a like quantity, mingle them in a Pot, and put unto them a little
Bole-Armony, the yeolks of two Eggs, and as much Wheat-^lower as will thicken
them, then with a Slice lay it on a Cloth, make it fast to go round about the
Pastern, and bind it fast, renewing it every day, let him not come into any
wet, but stand still, some will wash it only in Gunpowder and Vinegar.

Of the Gravelling of Horses.
The Cure is to pair his Hoof, and get out the Gravel, then stop it with
Turpentine and Hog's Grease, molten hot, and then with Tow, and beware he come
not out of the Stable till he be well.

The Ring-bone in Horses.
This is a Gristle growing about the Cornets of the Feet. The Cure is, to fire
the Sore with the right Loins from the Pastorn to the Coffin of the Hoof, in
this manner, I. I. I. and let the edge of the Drawing Iron be as thick as the
back of a good thick Knife, burn it so deep that the Skin may look yellow, then
cover it with Pitch and Rozen molten together, and lay thereon Flocks of the
Horses color: Some will eat it away with Corosives, as the Splent.

Of the Crown Scab.
This is a filthy stinking Scab, growing about the Cornets of the Hoofs: The
Hair will Stair like H^gs bristles, and be always mattering, anoint when the
Hair is shaven away, with the Ointment for the pains, Page 76. and keep it from
wet.

These Infirmities are cured by the following Medicines, viz. Splints, Spavins,
Curbs, Ringbones, Quinterbones, and all other Boney Excressions.
Take White Wind, Arsnick, or Mercury, ground to Powder, and make a little slit
upon the head of the Excression, the length of a Barly-corn, and down to the
Bones: then raise up the Skin with a sine Corner, and put in as much of the
Arsnick or Mer^^ry as will lie upon Three half pence, then bind upon the Sore,
a little hard Flax-hurds; which done, tie up the Horse's head to the rack so as
he may not bite the sore place, and let him stand for the space of Two or Three
Hours, for in that time the anguish will be gone, and the Medicine shall have
done working, then put the Horse to his Meat, either in the House or Abroad.
And the Concression will fall away of it self; which seen, you may heal up the
Sore.

Of the Retreat or cloging the Foot with the pick of a Nail.
The Cure is Turperntine, Wax, and Sheeps-Suet, moulten together, and pour into
it melted and hot.

Of Surbaiting.
The Cure is, take off his Shoes, and make his Feet very clean, but pare no
hoof away, then tack a hollow Shoe on, and take half a pound of the Sword of
Bacon, a quarter of a pound of White-Soap, a handful of Burnet, a handful of
Bay Leaves, and Four or Five Branches of the Herb Grace, stamp them well and
fry them, and lay them to his Feet as hot as you can, both under and over the
Foot, and keep him dry, renewing the Cure as you find occasion, Four or Five
times till it be perfected.

Another.
When you find your Horse to be Surbaited, presently clap to each of his Fore
Feet two new laid Eggs, and crush them therein, and then upon the top of them
lay good store of Cow Dung, thus stop him four hours, and he will recover.

Instructions in giving of Fire, or using of Corrosives, which heal all sorts
of Farcies, Cankers, Fistulas, Leprosies, Mangies, Scabs, etc.

There are two ways to give Fire, the One actual, and the other potential; the
First is done by Medicine, either Corrosive, Putrefactive or Caustic. The
actual Fire stops the Corruption of Members, and stancheth blood, provided
the Sinews, Cords, and Ligaments, be not touched; the best instruments to
Cauterize, or Sear with, are of Gold or Silver; the second best are of Copper,
the worst of Iron. The Potential Fires, are Medecines, Corrosive, Putrefactive
or Caustic (as we said before) Corrosives are simple or compound, the simple
Corrosives are Roch-Allum, burnt and unburnt, Red Coral, Mercury sublimed, etc.
The Compound Vnguintum, Apostolorum, Vnguintum Aegiptiacum, and Vnguintum
Coroceum, with others. Medicines Putrefactive, are your Arsnick, Resalgar,
Chrisocolo, and Aconitum. Medicines which are Caustic, are strong Iye, Lime,
Vitriol, Aquafortis, and the like. Corrosives are weaker than Putrefactives,
and Putrefactives, are weaker than Causticks. Corrosives work in the fost
Flesh, Putrefactives in ihe hard, and Causticks break the sound Skin. Thus you
see the Use of these things, you may apply them at your Pleasure; for these
cure all sorts of Farcies, Cankers, Fistula's, Leprosies, Maungies, Scabs, and
such like poisonous Infections.

Of a Horse that is pricked in the Foot with a Nail, or otherwise.
The Cure is, Cut the mouth of the Hole where the Prick is, as broad as a
Two-penny piece, and search it clean, for else it may prove very dangerous; for
Remedy take a handful of red Nettles, and beat them in a Mortar, put thereinto
a spoonful of red Vinegar, and a spoonful of black Soap, and three spoonfuls of
Boars-Grease or salt Bacon, beat them altogether, and make a Salve thereof, and
thrust as much into the Sore as you can, and stop it from falling out; let it
take no Wet, and it shall never rot farther.

Of the Quitterbone.
This is a breaking out of the top of the Cronet of the Hoof, commonly on the
inside, and it comes by pricking or gravelling; it will break forth with
Matter, or a little deep Hole like a Thistle. The Cure is, To burn it about
with a hot Iron, then take of Arsnick the quantity of a Bean, beaten into fine
Powder, and put into the bottom of the Hole with a Quill; stop the mouth of the
Hole close with Tow, and bind it so that the Horse may not come at it with his
Mouth, and so let him rest that day; the next, if the Hole look black it is a
good sign, then tent it with Hog's Grease and Turpentine molten together with a
Tent of Tow, and cover it with a Bolster of Tow dipped in that Ointment; continue
so to do till you have got out that Core, and then see whether the loose
Gristle in the bottom be uncovered, and feel with your Finger or a Quill if you
be nigh it, and if you be, raise it with a crooked Instrument, and pull it out
with a pair of Nippers, and then tent it with the said Ointment, and after take
Honey and Verdegrease boiled together till it look red, and heal it therewith,
laid upon Tow. Take heed that it heal not too soon, or close up too suddenly.

Of the Hoof-bound.
This is a shrinking together of the whole Coffin of the Hoof, whereby the Tuel
of the Foot, which is enclosed in the same, is so pinched, that the Horse is
very lame therewith, and especially after Travel; and if you knock them they
will sound a little like to an empty Bottle; and if both Feet be not bound, you
shall apparently see the Hoof that is bound to be less than the other. This
proceeds from suffereing the Feet to remain dry after great Travel. This
Distemper is also common with a Fennets or Asses Hoofs, for that only wrinkleth
and waxes brittle, and by reason of the breadth and shallowness of the Hoof it
cannot enclose the Tuel of the Foot, to strengthen it; and yet it is the worst
Hoof. The Cure is, to open the Feet in the Quarters very much, so that you may
well lay your Thumb betwixt the Frush of the Foot and the end of the Coffin
where it principally binds; then raise both the Quarters of the Hoof with a
Drawer from the Cronet unto the Sole of the Foot, so deep as you see the Dew
come out, and also two rases of each side; then open the Foot within, and let
him bleed in the Toes; if it be old, the Blood will be as cold almost as Water,
f^r that it has not been fed with Blood, wherein the vital Spirit is; and that
is the cause of the Coldness, whereby it i^ apparent that the Hoof has not
prospered, but starved, for you shall see the Frush and all the sole of the
Foot shrunk up and starved; then take away the sole of the Foot, and stop it
with Nettles and Salt bruised gently together, not over hard, renewing it once
a day for nine days, and be sure every day twice to anoint the Cronet of the
Hoof; and at the end of the nine days, be sure every day twice thoroughly to
anoint the Cronet of the Hoof; and after the nine days end, let his Feet be
stopped with Bran and Hog's Grease boiled together, bound too as hot as may be,
but still anoint the Hoof; and when you put him to Grass, let him not wear any
Shoes, but put him into a Marsh or Meadow, deep of Grass, whereby his Feet
will be always wet, and so enlarged again. Some ignorantly call this
Dry-Foundering, when as all Foundering in that Foot proceeds from the
descending of the Humors to the Feet, and this is clean contrary; and my
Experience has cured Horses that have been Hoof-bound four or five Years.

Of the Loosning of the Hoof.
Thi^ Grief, if it be loose round about the Hoof, then it comes by Foundering;
if it be in part, then by some other Anguish: if it come by Foundring, then it
will first break into the Fore part of the Cronet, against the Toe; but if a
^hanel Nail or Prick, then the Hoof will loosen equally round, but if other
Hurts, then right about the place that is offended, which should be well
observed of the Farrier; but what Cause soever it is, be you careful for to
keep open the h^le in the bottom of the Foot, and restrain it above with the
restrictive Plaster of Bole-Armony, Bean-^^ower and F^gs, mentioned in the
Cure of the Prick of the Foot. You may take three spoonfuls of Tar, a quarter
of a pound of ^osen, a handful of Tansy, a handful of Rue, a handful of Mint,
and as much of Southernwood, beat them altogether with a pound of Butter, and
one pennyworth of Virgin-wax, and so make a Plaster, and bind it too for
seven days, and it will be whole.

Of the cas^ing the Hoof.
The cure is, Take of Turpentine one pound, of Tar half a pint, of unwrought
Wax half a pound, of Sallet-Oyl half a pint; boil all these together, until
they be thoroughly incorporated, then make a Boot of Leather with a strong Sole,
fit for the Horse's Foot, to be buckled about the Pastern, then take a good
quantity of Flax or Tar, and lay this Salve upon it for to cover the Foot, so
as that the Boot may not any way grieve the Horse, renewing it every day until
it be whole; then let him stand in the Stable upon a Bed of Cow Dung and Snails
beaten together, which will increase the same, for fifteen days, and then put
him to Grass. This Ointment should be in a readiness to anoint the Horses.

For Foundring, Fretezing, or any other Imperfection of the Feet, or Hoofs of a
Horse.
First pare thin, open the Heels wide, and shoe large, strong and hallow, then
take a good quantity of Cowsdung, half so much Grease or Kitchinstuff, a like
quantity of Tar, and a like quantity of Soot; boil all these very well
together, and when boiling-hot as may be, see you stop your Horses Feet
therewith daily; and it will not only take away all Anguish, but also
strengthen the Hoofs, and make them to endure any Labor. But when you journey
or travel the Horse, (as Exercise avails much for this Cure) then put in the
aforesaid Stopping cold, the first night after his Labor, and add unto it the
White of an Egg or two, for that will take away from the Heat and beating of
the former days Labor, and will keep the Frush strong and dry. But in time of
Rest, let it be boyling-hot as aforesaid. Now if the Heat be naturally brittle,
or by Accident broken, or by the former Infirmity dried up and strained, then
to enlarge it, to make it tough, and to make it to grow swiftly, take of
Pigs-Grease, or of Hog's Grease, of Turpentine, and of Mastick, of each a like
quantity, and half so much Lard as of all the rest, melt all but the
Turpentine, and being melted, take it from the Fire, and put in the Turpentine,
stirring it about till it be well incorporated together; then put it into a
Pot; and when it is cold be sure you cover it close. With this Salve twice or
thrice a day anoint the Cornets of the Horse's Hoofs, close by the Hair, at the
setting on of the Hoof: it will make it shoot fast, and grow rough and large.

For Hurts upon the Cornets of the Hoofs; as, an Overreach, Stub, or Prick, etc
First take of Soap, and of Salt, of each a like quantity, and ^ixt them
together like a Past; then having cut out the Overreach, or Hurt, and laid it
plain, first wash it with ^rine and Salt, or Beer and Salt, and with a Cloth
dry it, ^hen bind on the mixed Soap and Salt, renewing it once in ^wenty-four
hours; and thus do (if the Wound be great) for three or four days; then having
drawn out all the Venom *as this Salt will quickly do) take a Spoonful or two
of Train-Oyl, and as much Ceruse (which we call White Lead) and mix it together
to a white Salve, then spread that upon the Sore Morning and Evening until it
be whole, which will be affected suddenly: for nothing does dry up ^ooner, nor
is more kindly and natural for the breeding of a ^ew Hoof than this, as you
shall find by Experience.

To help the Surbating or Soreness of the Feet.
When you find your Horse to be surbated, presently ^lap on each of his Fore
feet two new-laid Eggs, and crush them therein; then upon the top of them lay
good Cowdung: thus stop them for four hours, and he will recover.

Of the Dry Spavin.
The Cure is, to wash it with warm Water, and shave off the Hair so far as the
Swelling is, then scarifie the place, that it bleed, and take of Cantharides a
dozen, and of Eufirbium half a spoonful, break them into a Powder, and boil
them together, with a little Oil of Bay; and being boyling-hot, with Feathers
anoint the Sore and tie his Tail for wipeing it, and within an hour after set
him in the Stable, and tie him so that he lie not down that Night (for the
rubbing of the Medicine) and within a day after, anoint it with butter, for six
days, then draw the ^ore place with an hot Iron; take a sharp one like a
bodkin, somewhat bowing at the Point, and so upward be^wixt the Skin and the
Flesh, and thrust it in at the nether end of the middle Line an inch and a
half, then anoint it with Turpentine and Hog's Grease molten together, and mad^
warm, renewing it every day once, for the space of nin^ days: but remember,
that after this burning, you take u^ the Master Vein, which must be done in
this manner: Ca^^ the Horse upon some Straw, then having found the Vein^ mark
well that part of the Skin which covers it, and pul^ that aside from the Vein
with your left Thumb, to the intent that you may slit it with a Razor, without
touching the Vein, and cut no deeper then through the Skin, an^ that longest
wise that the Vein goes, and not above a^ inch, then will the Skin return
again to the place over the Vein, with a Cronet uncover the Vein, and make it
bare ^ thrust the Cronet underneath it, and raise it up, and put ^ Shooe-makers
Thread underneath, somewhat higher then the Cornet standing, slit the Vein
long-ways, that it may bleed ^ and having bled somewhat from above, then knit
it with ^ sure knot somewhat above the Slit, suffering it to blee^ only from
beneath, a great quantity, then knit up the Vei^ also beneath the Slit, with a
sure Knot, then betwixt these two Knots cut the Vein asunder where it was Slit,
and fill the Hole with Salt, then lay on this Charge. Take half a pound of
Pitch, a quarter of a pound of Rosen, a^ quarter of a pint of Tar, boil them
together, and being warm anoint all the inside of the Joint, and clap on Flocks
of the Horses Color, and turn him to Grass, if it may be, ti^^ he be perfectly
whole, and the Hair grown again.

Another for the same.
Cut the Skin over the Veins, as aforesaid, and slit the Vein and cut it as
aforesaid, then where the Spavin is highest, with a small Chissel of the
breadth of a penny, strike off the quantity of an Almond, and no more; then
take two penny worth of Verdegrease, another of Narvil, beat them small, and
put it into the Spavin, and three days after wash the Corsey, with Bark-water
or Vinegar: then take Colman and Diaconum upon a Linen Cloth, and lay it to
the Spavin every day, and for seven days after, a new Plaster; then draw it
with a hot Iron, as aforesaid, and also a Change, and Flocks, as is before
recited.

Of the wet or blood Spavin.
This Disease also is commonly known, and some call it the ^horough Spavin, it
is fed by a thin flexible Humor, by the ^laster Vein. The cure is, to shave
off the Hair, and to take ^p the Vein in every part, as I shall describe in the
Cure of ^he Bone Spavin, and then cut the Vein asunder, and draw it with a hot
Iron, charge it and put on the Flocks, and it will perfectly heal and cure it,
for I have proved it certain.

All these Distempers are cured by the Medicine following. All Watery Eyes. All
Blood-shotten Eyes. All Dimness of Sight. All Lunatic Eyes. All Cankers in the
Eyes. The Pin and the Web in the Eye. All pearls or Spots. All Fistula's in
the Eyes. The Haw in the Eye.
Take true Ground Ivy, which some call Alehoof, or the ^rdinary Ground Ivy, and
beat it well in a Mortar and if it ^e very dry, drop a little White Rose Water
into it, or a little ^f the Water of the Herb Eyebright, then drain it well
into a ^lean Glass, and with that Juice wash, anoint, or tent the ^ores in the
Eyes at least three or four times in a day: As ^or the Haws or Haggs in a
Horse's Eye, every common ^mith knows how to cut them away, and that easily.

For a Wrench or Sprain in the Pastern.
Take a Quart of Brine, sees it till the scum arise, and ^hen strain it, and
put into it a handful of Tansy, a handful ^f Mallows, a Sawcer full of Honey, a
quarter of a pound ^f Sheeps-Tallow, beat them together, and set them on the
^re, till they be well sodden, and then lay it hot to the Taint, and sew a
Cloth fast about it, and so let it rest five ^ays: and if this prevail not,
wash the place, and shave ^way the Hair, saving the fetterlock; scarrifie it,
and lay ^antharides to it, and heal it as the Splint.

Of a Horse that is Hipped.
The Horse that is hipped, is when his Hip-Bone is out ^f the right place; it
may come by Stripe, Stretch, Slip^ing, Sliding or Falling; he will go sideling
and the low^^ Hip will fall lower than the other. The Cure is speedily to take
of Oil de Bay, of Dialthea, of Nerval, of Swines-grease, of each half a pound,
melt them together, stirring them continually until they be thoroughly mingled
together, and anoint the sore place against the Hair with this Ointment every
day once a day for fifteen days together, and make the Ointment to Sink well
into the Flesh, by holding a broad bar of Iron over the place anointed, to make
it enter into the Skin; and if at the end of those days it does not mend, then
slit a Hole downward into the Skin, and inch beneath the Hip-bone, make the
hole so wide that you may easily thrust in a Rowel with your Finger, and then
with a little broad slice of Iron, loosen the Skin from the Flesh above the
Bone, and round about the same, so broad as the Rowel may lie flat and plain
betwixt the Skin and the Flesh; which Rowel should be of soft Calves Leather,
with a Hole in the midst, like a Ring, having a Thread tied to it, to pull out
when you would cleanse the Hole: and if the Rowel be rowelled about with Flocks
fast tied on and anointed with the Ointment of Hog's Grease and Turpentine
boiled together, it will draw so much the more. That done, tent it with a long
Tent of Flax, dipped in Turpentine and Hog's Grease made warm, and so renew it
every day for fifteen days; and before that you dress him, let him be walked
every day a quarter of an hour, and as it heals, make the Tent every day less
than the other; and as soon as he is whole, draw a hot Iron cross his Loins of
eight or nine inches long, right over against the Hip-bone, so as the rowelled
place may be in the midst thereof, and burn him no deeper, but so as the Skin
may look yellow; then charge all the Skin over all the Buttocks with this
Charge: Take of Pitch one pound, of Rosin one pound, of Tar half a pint, boil
them together, and being well warmed, spread it with a Clout tied to a Stick,
clap as many Flocks on the Horse as will stick, that he may travel the more at
his own Will.

Of Stifling, and Hurts in the Stifler
This is when the Stifling-bone is removed from its right place; but if it be
not removed, then the Horse is hurt, and not stifled. The Cure is in all Points
like to the Shoulder-Pight, saving that the Pins need not to be so long because
the Stifling-place is not so broad; and standing in the Stable, let him have a
Pastern with a Ring upon his Fore-leg, and thereunto fasten a Cord, which Cord
must go about his Neck, and let it be so much strained as may bring his
Fore-leg forward; then the other to keep the Bone from starting out: but if it
be but a Hurt with some Stripe or Strain, then the bone will not stand out, but
perhaps the place may be swollen, then anoint it with the Ointment last mentioned
in the Receipt going before, every day for fifteen days; then rowel him with a
heme Rowel, and cleanse the Hole every day, by running the Rowel anointed with
the said Ointment.

Of Wounds.
The Cure is, Take of Turpentine, of Mel Rosarum, of Oil of Roses, of each a
Quartern, and a little Unwrought Wax, and melt them together, stirring them
together continually; and so use the Tent or Roll, as occasion shall serve.

A Receipt for any extraordinary Cold or Cough, or Pursiness in a Horse, which
the weak Farrier calls Broken-Winded.
I will here set you down the Secrets of my Knowledge, in some ready, easy,
approved Receipts, which I never ^ound to fail. When you find your Horse taken
with any extreme Cold, or dry Cough or Pursiness (which ignorant Farriers call
Broken-winded) you shall take three quarters of an ounce of the Conserve of
Elecampane, and dissolve it in a pint and a half of the best Sack, and so give
it to the Horse with a Horn, in the Morning fasting, and ride him a little
after it; and this you may do diverse Mornings together until you perceive the
Infirmity decrease and wast away. The Simple Conserve of Elecampane is of
excellent use; it takes away any ordinary Cold, or Stopping, it ^omforteth the
Lungs, enlarges the Wind, purges the Head of all filthy Matter, and
dissolveth many other Obstructions, yet is not the best Conserve, nor works
the best Effect, if the Infirmity be old and dangerous, or if ^here be any
Attainture in the Lungs or Liver, therefore in that Case you shall fly to the
compound Conserve, which is made in this manner: Take the best candy Roots of
Elecampane that can be procured, and beat them in a Mortar with the Syrup of
Coltsfoot till it be brought to a very thin Substance, then with the finest
refined Sugar thicken it, till it be reduced to the true Body of a Conserve;
then keep it close in a Galley-pot, and use it with Sack. I have known by the
daily Use of this Conserve, diverse dry (and supposed incurable) Coughs that
have been taken away, together with the Heaving of the Body, and the Wind so
enlarged, that albeit the Motion was before swift, like the broken-winded, yet
it has come to a moderate and slow Temper, and the dry Cough which did
accompany it has been quite gone. Now if you find any Difficulty in making or
proving of these Medicines before showed, or that the Infirmity not being great
or dangerous, you may possibly think a Medicine of less force, and easier to
compass would accomplish it; then you shall take of the Syrup of Coltssoot an
ounce, of the fine Powder of Elecampane, of Anniseeds, and of Liquorice, of
each half an ounce, of brown Sugarcandy an ounce, divided into two parts, then
with as much Sweet Butter as will suffice, work all the former Powders, and one
part or a half of the Sugarcandy, and all the Syrop into a stiff Past, then
divide into two or three Balls, and roll them into a round form, or of the
Fashion of an Egg, and after roll them all over in the other half o^ part of
the Sugarcandy, and then give the whole quantity at one time to the Horse in
the manner of a Pill, and give them in the Morning fasting; then ride the Horse
half an hour after the giving, and let him fast two hours at the least after he
comes in, and let him be warm clothed, and stopped, and his Limbs well
rubbed, especially his Head; let him by no means drink any cold Water, but so
as that he may have Exercise after, and let his Exercise be moderate, and not
violent; let his Hay be a little sprinkled with Water, and his Cats with Beer
and Ale; as for the Bread, it is of it self moist enough; and let all his Meat
be generally well dusted, ^i^ted, or chipped, for nothing is more offensive to
a Horse than Foulness and Dryness, nor more comfortable than Cleanness,
provided that your Corn be not green and unsweet in the Mow or Reek, nor your
Hay rank or rotten. Thus you shall do several Mornings till you find Amendment,
neither shall you spare any Travel or Occasion, but, having Medicine about you,
use it in your Journeying, for this does not take away any thing to weaken
Nature, but adds to the Force thereof.

For any dangerous Bots or Maw-worms.
Take as much Precipitate (which is Mercury calcined) as will gently lie upon a
Silver Twopence, and lay it on a piece of Sweet-Butter almost as big as a Hens
Egg, in the manner of a Pill; and then in the Morning Fasting, the Horse having
stood on the Mussel or empty Rack, if it be possible, or otherwise (if the
Extremity of the Disease compel you) at any other time, draw forth the Horse's
Tongue, and make him to swallow the Pill, then chafe him a little up and down,
and after set him up warm, making him fast full two hours after, and it will
kill all manner of Worms whatsoever; yet in the Administration hereof, you must
be wondrous circumspect and careful, for in the Precipitate there is a strong
poisonous Quality, so that by no means there must be taken more than is
prescribed, except with good Caution. Again, If you mix the Precipitate with a
little Sweet-Butter, as much as a Hasel-Nut, before you lap it up in the great
Lump of Butter, it will be the better, and allay much of the evil quality. But
this I leave to your own Discretion, assuring you, that there is not any thing
comparable to this for this Infirmity.

To heal or dry up any old Ulcer or Cancerus Sore.
Take Mastick, Frankincense, Cloves, Green Coperas, and Brimstone, of each a
little quantity, of Myrrh double as much as of any one of the other; beat all
to a fine Powder, then burn it on a chafing dish of Coals, but let it not
flame; then as the Smoke arises, take a handful of fine Lint, or Tow, and hold
it over the Smoke, so that it may receive all the Perfume thereof into it; then
when it is well perfumed, put the Lint into a close Box, and so keep it: When
you have occasion to use it, first wash the Sore with Urine, then dry it, and
lastly, lay on some of this Lint, or Tow; and thus do twice a day, and it is a
speedy Cure. And as this is sovereign for any Horse, so it is sovereign for any
Man also.

For any Sore Eyes in Horses.
Take the Shells of seven or eight Eggs, and cleanse away from them the Slime,
then put those Shells between two clean Tiles, and so lay them in hot glowing
Embers, and cover them all over, and on every side, and so let them lie a good
space, till that the Shells be all dried, then take them up, and beat the
Shells to a very fine fearst Powder, then with a Goose's Quill blow this Powder
into the Horse's Eye that is offended with Pin and Web, Film, or any other of
those Distempers, and it is a certain Cure; and thus do Morning, Evening, and
at Night. But if it be a watery or inflamed Eye, for any Bruise, Stripe, or
descending Humor, then take a spoonful and a half of fine fearst Powder of
White Sugar Candy, and being mixed together with as much May-Butter, (if you can
get it, or for want thereof, the best Sweet-Butter) work both these Powders
into a gentle Salve, and therewith anoint the Horse's Eye Morning, Noon, and
Night, for it cleanses, purges, comfort, and cools.

For an old Strain or Lameness in the Joints sinewy.
Take Boars-Grease, Belearmoniack, Black-Soap, and Nerve-Oil, of each a like
quantity, boil them altogether, and then apply it hot to the Grief, rubbing and
chafing it in exceedingly, and also heating it very well, either with a hot
Brickbat or hot Fire-shovel: thus do once a day until the Pain be gone.

Of a Back-Sinew Strain, or any other Strain.
Take an ounce of Turpentine, and two or three spoonfuls of Aqua vitae, and
beat them together in a Bladder, or other vessel, until they come to a perfect
Salve; then anoint the Strain very well therewith, and heat it in, either wi^h
a hot Brick, or else a Bar of Iron; and thus doing three or four times, it will
take away the Strain.

For any desperate Strain in the Shoulder, or other hidden Parts, or any
Fistula, Pole-Evil, or other Impostumation and Swelling.
Take a large Earthen Vessel of a Gallon, and almost fill it with the Herb
Arsmart and Brooklime equal in quantity, and equally mixed; then put to them as
much of the oldest and strongest Urine that can be got, as will cover the Herbs
all over, and fill the Vessel full; then cover the pot close with a Stone,
Board, or such like thing, and so let it stand, for this can never be too old.
Now when you have occasion to use it for any Grief aforesaid, you shall take an
Earthen Pipkin, and put thereinto both of the Urine and of the Herbs, so much
as shall be convenient for the Grief, and you shall boil it well upon the Fire:
Then if it be for a Shoulder-Strain, you shall take an old Boot, and cut off
the Foot, so that you may draw it over the Horse's Foot, and about his Knee,
almost to the Elbow of his Shoulder, keeping the nether part of the Boot as
close and as strait about his Leg as may be, but the upper part (which covers
all the Shoulders) must be wide and spacious; into this Boot thrust all your
Mixture as hot as the Horse can suffer it, and lay it fast and close about the
Shoulders, especially before and behind; then driving up the upper part of the
Boot, so fusten it to the Main of the Horse, that it may be no means slip down,
but keep constant and firm: and thus you must do once or twice a day, till the
Grief be gone. As for the Effect thereof you shall find it, for this is the
most violent of all Medicines; so that if there be any soul Matter that must
come forth, this will in an instant bring it to a Head, ripen, break it, and
heal it; if there be no such things, then in as short a time it will drive away
the offending Humors, take away the Swelling and give present Ease. Yet would
I have you to use this but in Extremity, because for the time the Torment is
almost insufferable, and indeed not to be endured but only by Horses. Now if it
be a Fistula, or any such like Impostumation or Swelling, then you may spare
the Boot, and only lay on the Medicine in the manner of a Poultis, and it will
be as sufficient.

Of a False Quarter.
This is a Rift most commonly on the inside of the Hoof; it comes by the evil
paring of the Hoof; the Horse will halt, and the Rift will bleed. The Cure is,
Cut so much away on the side of the Shoe where the Grief is, so as that the
Rift may be uncovered, then open the Rift with a Drawer, and fill it with a
Roll of Toe, dipped in Turpentine, Wax, and Sheeps-Suet molten together, renewing
it every day till it be whole. When the Rift is closed, draw him betwixt the
Hair and the Hoof with a hot Iron overthwart the Place, whereby the Hoof will
shoot all downward, and ride him with another Shoe till he be thoroughly whole.

For an Overreach on the Heel.
Take the White of an Egg, and Bole-Armony, mingled together with a little
Flax, and renew it for four or five days.

For an upper Taint or an Overreach upon the Back, Sinews of the Shank,
somewhat above the Joint.
This is a swelling of the Master-Sinew, which proceeds from this, that the
Horse does overreach, and strike that Sinew with the Toe of his Hinder-Foot,
which causes the place to swell, and the Horse to halt. The Cure is, To wash
the place with warm Water, and to shave off the Hair as far as the Swelling
goes, and to scarifie every place of the Sore lightly with a Razor, that the
Blood may issue ^orth; then take of Cantharides and Euforbium half an ounce,
mingle them together with half a quartern of Soap, and with a Slice spread some
of the Ointment over all the Sore, and let him rest for an hour after; let him
stand without Litter, and the next day dress him so again; the third day anoint
the Sore with Butter, and continue so to ^^ for nine days after; then take
three handsuls of Mallows, (...) of Sage, and a Rose-cake, and boil them in
Water, and when they are soft, put a pound of Butter, and half a pint of
Sallet-Oil, to the Water; and being warm, wash the place four or five times
together therewith.

Of the Nether Joint.
This is a Bladder full of Jelly, like to a Wind-gall, not apparent but by
feeling, growing in the midst of the Pastern, above the Frush. It proceeds from
some Strain, Wrench, or Overreach; the Nether-Joint toward the Fetterlock
will be hot, and somewhat swollen. The Cure is, Tie him about the Joint with a
List somewhat hard, and it will cause the Bladder to appear to the Eye, then
lance it, and thrust out the Jelly; then take the White of an Egg and Salt
beaten together with a little Tow, and bind it unto it, renewing it once a day
for five or six days.

Of the Serew, or Serow.
This is like a Splint in manner of a Gristle, as great as an Almond; it
grows on the Foreleg. The Cure is, Take an Onion and pick out the Core, and
put therein a spoonful of Honey, a quarter of a pound of unslack'd Lime, three
pennyworth of Verdegrease, and roast the Onion, and bruise it, and lay it hot,
having first cut the Skin.

All these Infirmities are cured by this Medicine following: Fevers in general,
the Pestilence, the Falling-Evil, the Pa^s^e or Shaking-Evil, the Nightmare,
the Hide-bound, all Consumptions, the Breast-grief, all Tiredness, the Loathing
of Meat, casting out of drink, all Sursits, the Hungry-Evil, the sick Liver,
sick Gall, sick Spleen, sick Kidneys, the Yellows, the Dropsy, Costiveness in
the Body, the Bo^s, all Worms, Pissing Blood, mattering of the Yard, shedding
of the seed, Falling of the Yard, Earing of Hens-dung, the falling of the Crest.
If the Horse has been brought weak by Sickness, and that you find it
proceeds from some inward Infection, or Corruption of Blood, you shall give
him in the Morning, fasting, two spoonfuls of the Powder of Diapente, well
brewed with four spoonfuls of Honey, tossed to and fro in a pint of White Wind,
or Muscadine, and Malmesey, and ride him afterward an hour in the Su^; then
set him up warm in the Stable, and let him fast an hour; give him such
^rovender he will eat, and his Hay sprinkled with a little Water. But if his
Sickness proceed from any cold Cause, or from any riding and too sudden
cooling, or from washing when he was hot, or such like; then you shall give the
same quantity of Diapente and Honey in Sack, or other hot Wine in the manner
aforesaid: But if his Sickness be less contagious, or that Wine is not ready to
be had, then you shall give the same quantity of the Powder and Honey, either
in a quart of strong Ale, or a quart of strong Beer, observing all the
Instructions formerly declared. Now for as much as this Powder of Diapente may
be be many times wanting, or at least hard to be got on the sudden, as we have
formerly said, therefore in case of such Extremity you shall take a good
handful of Celandine Roots, Leafs and all, and having picked and cleansed them,
you shall take of Wormwood and Rue, of each half a handful, boil these in a pot
of strong Ale or Beer till the full half be consumed, then strain it, and dress
the Herbs, and dissolve into the drink, half a pound of Sweet Butter, and an
ounce and a half of the best Treacle; being no more but lukewarm, give it the
Horse to drink in the Morning fasting, and walk him an hour after, then set him
up warm, and let him fast another hour; then give him meats as aforesaid: And
do this diverse Mornings, according to the greatness of his Sickness. Now for
this Cure you must by no means forget to let the Horse blood in the Neck-Vein,
an hour or two before you give him the first drink, and let him bleed till you
see the corrupt Blood change, and begin to look pure; to know which, you shall
save the first Blood and the last Blood in two Sawcers, and as they cool they
will easily show you the difference. Now if your Horse happen to fall suddenly
Sick upon you as you travel, when there is no Town nor Help near you, then you
shall presently alight from his Back, and with a sharp pointed Knife, or
Bodkin, or for want of both, with a sharp-pointed strong Tag, you shall let him
Blood in the Roo^ of the Mouth, amongst the Bars, somewhat near to his
uppermost Teeth, and make him bleed well, walking him forward, and suffering
him to champ and eat his own Blood; which is very wholesome for him at that
time, and almost a present cure. Now if the Blood stanch of it self, (as
commonly it will) then you shall presently piss in his Mouth, and so ride him
with all Gentleness and Ease homeward; and being set up warm, wash his Mouth
and Nostrils with Vinegar, and the next Morning let him Blood in the Neck-Vein,
and give him either of the Drenches before prescribed, and no doubt but you may
hold on your Journey without danger. Now if in the pricking of the Mouth, you
either stick your knife too deep, or else cut the Vein asunder, whereby you
cannot stanch the Blood (as many times it happens) in this case you shall put
some big round piece of Wood into the Horse's Mouth (to keep him from biting,)
and then take a little of the fine Down of a Hare's Skin or Cony-Skin, or (for
want of them) the fine Lint of any Woollen or Linen cioth, and hold it hard to
the Wound; and it will stanch it, such care being taken, as that it be not to
be licked away with the Horse's Tongue.

For the Malender.
This is a Scab growing in the form of Lines or Streaks over the Bend of the
Knee, in the inside of the Leg. The cure is, wash it with warm Water, and shave
the Scab clean away, then take a spoonful of Soap, as much Lime, and make it
into a paste, and spread as much on a Clout as will cover the Sore; bind it
fast, renewing it every day for three days together, then anoint the same with
Oil of Roses, to cause the Crust to fall away, and then wash it with Urine, and
strew on the powder of Oyster-shells.

Another of the same.
Take a Barrel'd Herring with a soft Row, and two spoonfuls of Black-Soap, half
an ounce of Alum, and bruise them together, and lay it to the Sore three days.

Of the Splint.
This Soreness is known to most Men: The Cure is, Wash it with warm Water, and
shave off the Hair, and lightly scarify all the sore place with a point of a
Razor, so as that the Blood may issue forth; then take of Cantharides half a
spoonful, and of Euforbium as much, beaten into fine powder, and mingle them
together with a spoonful of Oil de Bay, and then melt them in a little pan,
stirring them well together, so that they may not boil over; and being so
boiling-hot, take two or three Feathers, anoint all the sore places therewith,
and let not the Horse remove from the place for two hours after. Afterward
carry him away, and tie him so that he cannot touch the Medicine with his Lips,
and also let him stand without Litter that day and a night, and within two or
three days after anoint the Sore with Butter for nine days.

Another for the same.
Take an Onion and pick out the Core, and put therein a spoonful of unslack'd
Lime, and four penny weight of Verdegrease, and half a pound of Lavender-seed,
and roast the Onion until it be soft, and then cut the Skin a little, that the
Medicine may enter to fret the Malady out, and let the Hair remain, and the
Medicine lie to it three days.

For Foundring.
Before I enter to express the Cure, I would have you diligently to note the
cause of this Disease. The Causes of Foundring are either from superfluous and
overmuch Eating and Drinking, or from immoderate and extreme Labor, or
abundance and fullness of Humors. The undoubted and infallible Cure is, Garter
each Leg immediately one handful above the Knee, (and with a List good and
hard) then walk him, chafe him into a Heat, and being somewhat warm, let him
Blood in both the Breast-Veins, 2 or 3 Quarts, and reserve the same,
continually stirring it with your hands together, to gather out the clods
thereof: then ta^e thereof two quarts, of Wheat Flour half a peck, six Eggs,
Shells and all, and of Bole Armony half a pound, of Sanguis Dragonis half a
quartein, and a quart of strong Vinegar, mingle them altogether, and charge all
his Shoulders, Breast, Back, Loins, and Forelegs, therewith, and walk him upon
some hard Ground, suffering him not to stand still; and when that the Charge is
dry, refresh it again; and having walked him three or four hours together, lead
him into the Stable, give him a little Mash of Malt, and some Hay and
provender, and then walk him again, for four or five days, renewing the Charge
upon him as it dries, so long as it lasts, and keep it warm, with a thin
Diet: but if you see the Horse to be afraid to set his Hinder-feet to the
Ground, and to be so weak behind, as to stand quivering and shaking, and
coveting to lie down, Garter him also about the Hoofs, on the Hinder-legs, and
let him Blood also in the Thigh-Veins, to the quantity of a Pottle, and so
double your Charge in quantity, and therewith charge both Hinder-legs, Reins
and Flanks, and all against the Hair; and if you find him feeble, by drawing so
great a quantity of Blood, give him a quart of Malmsey, and a little Cinnamon,
Mace, and Pepper, finely beaten into a Powder, made lukewarm, and let him be
walked and chafed up and down, if he be able to go; but if he be not able, than
tie him to the Rack, and let him be hanged with Canvis or Ropes so as he may
stand upon the Ground on his Feet, and not suffered to lie down; then pare all
his Feet so thin, that the dew come forth, and tack on the Shoes again,
Stopping the Feet with Bran and Hog's Grease boiled together, as hot as he can
endure it, and wrap them in Clothes even to the Pasterns, tying the Clouts
fast. Let his Diet be thin, and give him no cold Water, and so soon as he is
able, let him almost be continually walked, unless he be so long gone that his
Hoofs begin to loose, ^^ that it break forth at the Cronets of the Hoofs; then
take two Eggs; as much Bole Armony and Bean-flower as will th^^^en the same,
and mingle them well together, and make thereof a plaster, such as may close
each ^oot round about, somewhat above the Cronet, and bind the same fast that
it fall not away, or be removed for two days together; let the Soles of his
Feet be cleansed and stopped every day once, and the Cronets but every two days,
and not walked for loosing his Hoofs: but when he amendeth, walk hi^ upon some
soft Ground fair and softly; but if it break out above the Hoof, then take all
the fore-parts of the Sole clean away, leaving the Heels whole, then stop him,
and also dress him about the Cronet, as aforesaid; if this Grief (tho it be
very dangerous) be espied in time, it may be cured.

For the Shoulderpight.
This is when the pitch or point of the Shoulder is displaced; which if it be,
the point will stick out farther than his Fellow, and the Horse will halt
downright. The Cure is, To make him for to swim in a deep Water eleven or
twelve turns, to try if he be able to make the Joint to return to his right
place, then make two tough Pins o^ Ash-Wood, of the bigness of your
Little-singer, sharp, and thrust in one of the Pins from above downward, so as
both the Ends may equally stick without the Skin; and if the Pin of Wood will
not easily pass through, make it way with an Iron pin, then make two Holes
cross to the first Holes, so as the pin may cross the first pin right in the
midst, with a right Cross; the first pin should ^e somewhat flat in the midst,
to the intent the other being round might pass the better without stop, and
close the Inster together; then take a piece of a Line, somewhat bigger than a
Whipcord, and at one end make a Loop, which being put over one of the pins
ends, so as it may lie between the pins ends and the Skin, fasten the least end
with a Pack-Needle and Thread unto the end of the Cord, so as it may not slip;
but first anoint both the pricks and Cord with Hog's Grease, then bring him into
the Stable, and let him rest the space of nine days, but let him lie down as
little as you can, and put a Pastern on the Fore-leg, so that it may be bound
with a Cord unto the Foot of the Manger, to keep the Leg in the Stable more
forward always than the other: and at nine days end pull out the pricks, and
anoint the places with Diathea, or Hog's Grease, and turn him to Grass.

For a Frothy Hoof.
First with an Instrument make hollow the Extremities of the Hoof on the
outside till the principal Vein break: ^et the Blood run forth, then fill up
the Hole with fine Salt and Hurds steeped in Vinegar, and then bind them so
that they shall not fall off: This is a sure way to make a hard and a sound
Hoof.

For the blasting of the Hoof.
You must first cut the Hoof round about the outside, then pull away the Sole
of the Foot, then let the part bleed well, then put in a Tent of Whites of
Eggs, bind the Foot about with a Band; after two days wash the ^ore in Vinegar
somewhat hot, fill it with fine Salt and Tarta beaten together, cover it with
Hurds steeped in strong Vinegar. Probatum est.

For a Pinch or a Gall in the Withers.
First cut out the dead Flesh, and make a Tent with the White of an Egg, and
then wash the part with warm White Wind, and afterward anoint the sore place
with White sweet Suet.

A present Remedy for the Staggers.
When you find your Horse distempered in his Head, then take a piece of Woollen
Cloth and bind it fast to the end of a stick, being well rubbed with good
Barbary-soap, and then put it into both his Nostrils with as much ease as you
can, and withal draw it forth very gently again. This is a perfect Remedy.

For the Strangles.
First, when you see the Strangles growing, prick them under the Throat in the
Morning, and after cover the Horse's Head with a Linen Cloth, and then rub him
often under the Throat with Fresh Butter on the sore place.

For the swelling of the Forelegs.
This Distemper comes after great Pains and Labor; the efficient Causes are
many, but principally, that he was traveled when young, before he was cleansed
from his Humors; that he has been traveled when he was full; that he might
also have too much Rest, and was not kept with moderate Diet; that he fed too
much on green Meat; that he washed after Labor, and such like. But if the
Horse be naturally fleshly-limbed he will never be free, but as soon as he is
cured upon Travel he will swell again, and therefore such Jades should be gelt
and put to Cart, and never suffered to get Colt. The Cure is diverse; Take of
Mallows three or four handfuls, Rose-cake and Sage a handful, boil them in
Water, and thereunto put half a pound of Butter, and half a pint of Sallet-Oyl;
being made warm, wash him twice a day for three or four days.

Another for the same.
Take Hemlock and stamp it, and mingle it with Sheeps-dung and Vinegar, and
having made a Plaster, lay it all over the Swelling.

Another for the same.
Take Wine-Lees and Cummin, and boil them together, and put thereinto a little
Wheat Flour, and charge all the Swelling therewith, and walk him often and
apace to heat him; and if this will not serve, then take up the great Vein
above the Knee, on the inside, suffering him not to bleed from above, but from
beneath: If he be clean and lean-limbed, use him, as I have expressed, to a
little Butter and Beer warmed, and his Feet well stopped with Cowdung is
sufficient after his Travel; but if he be so fleshly-limbed that this will not
help, cut his Throat, and wash him with his own Blood, and he will never after
swell.

All these Infirmities are Cured by this following Medicine: Impostumes in the
Ears. Ulcers in the Nose. All Wens whatsoever. The Colts-Evil. The Swelled
Stones. Incording or Bursting.
For any of these outward Remedies or Swellings, you shall take a penniworth of
Pepper beaten to fine Powder, a spoonful of Swine-grease, the Juice of a
handful of Rue, two spoonfuls of any Wine Vinegar, and mix them well together;
then if the Swelling be about the Horse's Head, Face, or Throat, you shall take
Flax-burds, and steep them therein, and stop it hard into the Horse's Ears, and
stitch the Tops together with a Needle and Thread, renewing it once in two
days, till the Swelling go away: but if it be in any other part of the Body,
then with this Ointment you shall anoint the grieved place twice a day, till
the Infirmity consume away. Now for the swelling about the Cods, or
Privy-Members, it shall be good before you anoint them with this Ointment, to
bathe them with cold Water, as either by trotting the Horse into some deep
Pond, or else by taking a pail of cold Water, and dipping a Cloth into the same
to bathe, clap and wash the Cods therewith; then drying them with another clean
cloth, lay on the Ointment, which is a present cure.

For a Grief in the Shoulder, that has been there a long time.
The cure is, Give him a slit on both sides, an Inch under the Shoulder-bones,
then with a Swan's Quill put into the slit, blow up first the one Shoulder, and
then the other, as big as you can possibly even up to the Withers, and with
your hand strike the Wind equally into every place of the Shoulders, and when
they are both full, then beat all the windy places with a Hasel Wand over all
the Shoulders, then with a flat slice of your Iron loosen the Skin from the
Flesh; that done, rowel the two slits or cuts with two round Rowels of Leather
with a hole in the midst, that the Matter may issue forth; and let such Rowels
be three Inches broad, and so put in, that they may be plain and flat within
the Cut: Then take of Pitch, and of Rosin, of each a pound, of Tar half a pint,
boil these together, and when it is somewhat cool, draw all the Shoulders very
thick therewith; that done, clap on as many Flocks as will stick, of the
Horse's color, and every day cleanse both the Wounds and Rowels, and put them
in again, continuing thus for sixteen days; then take them out, and heal up the
Wounds with Hog's Grease and Turpentine molten together, renewing it until the
Wounds be whole; but let the Flocks lie until they fall off, and let the Horse
run at Grass at least half a year.

Of the Wrinching of the Shoulder.
This may proceed from a Fall, sudden or short Turning, rash running out of
some Door, or by some sudden stop, Stripe of a Horse, or such like; which being
done, he shall trail his Legs to him close as he goes. The cure is, To let him
blood in the Breast as soon as it is perceived (and the sooner the better)
three pints at the least, and to keep all the same blood in a pot, and
thereinto put a quart of strong Vinegar, six Eggs broken, shells and all, and
so much Wheat Flour as will thicken that Liquor; put thereinto one pound of
Bole-Armony, beaten into powder, and two ounces of Sanguis Dragonis, so as the
Flower may not be perceived; and if it be too stiff, soften it with Vinegar,
then with your hand da^b all the Shoulder from the Main downward, and betwixt
the fore-bowels, all against the Hair; and let not the Horse remove until the
Charge be surely fastened to the Skin; then lead him into the Stable, and suffer
him not to lie all that day, keeping him with a spare Diet at least fifteen
days together; and let him not remove out of his place, but only lie down all
that time, and every day refresh the Shoulder-point with this Charge, laying
still new upon the old; and at fifteen or twenty days end, lead him gently, to
see if he be amended; the which if he be, let him rest for the space of two
Weeks without Travel: but if he be nothing amended, then rowel him with a
Leather-Rowel upon the Shoulder-point, and keep him rowelled for the space of
fifteen days, renewing the Rowel, and cleansing the Wound every other day: walk
him up and down very gently, always turning him on the contrary side; and if he
go well, pull out the Rowel, and heal up the Wound with Turpentine and
Hog's Grease, and a Tent of Flax. But if the Hurt were so violent, that all this
will not help him, then draw him chequerwise with a hot Iron over all the
Shoulder-point, and let him go to plow two hours every day in soft ground,
where he may not be overmuch strained; and if it be possible, let him be let
blood as soon as he is hurt in those place Veins, and also in the place, or as
near as is possible, where the Hurt or Blow is, to the intent that no Blood do
congeal there, or that it tarry till the Flesh become black with the Bruise.

Of Splayting of the Shoulder.
This also may proceed from some Slip, whereby the Shoulder parts from the
Breast, and so leaves a Rift or Rent in the Flesh and Film under the Skin,
which causes him also to trail his Leg after him. The Cure is, to put a pair
of strait Pasterns on his Fore-feet, and to let him stand still in the Stable;
then take of Dialthea one pound, of Sallet-Oil a pint, of Oil de Bays half a
pound, of Fresh-Butter half a pound, and melt them together, anoint the grieved
place therewith round about the inside of the Shoulder, and within two or three
hours after all the Shoulder will swell; then with a Pleam strike all the
swelling places, or with a sharp hot Iron, the head whereof should be an Inch
long, to the intent the Corruption may run out: and still anoint the same very
often with the said Ointment; and if it gather to a head, then lance it where
it is most soft, and tent it with Hog's Grease and Turpentine, and a Tent of
Flax.

A Remedy for the Spavins.
First, When the swelling appears first in the Ham, lift up the Thigh, and
strike the principal Vein with a Fleam, let out the Blood till no more will
come, and then burn the Spavin long-ways and a cross: Heal the Burn as you do
for the swelling of the Pastern.

For the Colt-Evil.
The Cure is, Wash the Sheath clean with lukewarm Vinegar, draw out his Yard,
and wash it also, then. ride him to some running Stream up to the Belly, to
allay the Heat, and do this lustily for a quarter of an hour, and so every day
after for three or four days.

For the swelling of the Cods.
Take strong Vinegar, white Chalk well powdered, stir it well, and make a
Paste, mingle good store of Salt finely powdered, and with that Paste anoint
the Cods of the Horse about three times a day; and in few days this will help
him.

For the Mattering of the Yard.
Take a pint of White Wind, boil therein a Quarter of Roch-Allum, and with a
Squirt thrust it up very far into his Yard, squirt the same three or four
times, to pierce and cleanse the bottom from the Filth; and thus continue until
he be whole.

For the Tetter.
Before you meddle with the place, first draw Blood from his Legs, and then
strike the Veins of his Legs on the outside and on the inside, but not on the
place where the Hoof comes forth: then wash the place with White Wind, and
mingle the Juice of Prunella with Powder of Galls and clear Water, and with
this Liquor beat the Hog's Grease and Liquid Pitch, that all become like Honey;
and having so done, anoint the Tetter, and in six times dressing this will be a
present help.

How to remedy the Wind-gall.
Cauterize or burn them five times with a large hot Iron on both sides, and
then open them overthwart only once: but if there be occasion to use it under
the Knee on the forepart of the Leg, then you may cure it as they do other
Burns.

An excellent and speedy Help for the Glanders.
First, you must take one ounce of Fenugreek, boil it in Water till it split
and open in tw^, and after that mingle it with the Decoction, and two pound of
Wheat-Meal, and give it the Horse to drink twice a day; keep him fasting. Prob.
est.

An excellent Remedy for the Haw in the Eye.
First, take up the Haw with a little Ivory Needle or Penknife, and then cut
it all away with your Scissers; for the way to cure it, is to cut it out.

A rare Medicine for a sore Back, be it never so wrung with a Saddle.
Take of Sheeps-dung to the quantity of three parts of your Plaster, and the
fourth part of Dry Wheat and Rye-Flower, and mingle them well together, and let
them boil a quarter of an hour in good fair Water; and then lay it on warm, and
at two or three times applying it will cure the Back. This is a tried and
approved Plaster.

An excellent Cure for the Scab and the sore Crupper.
You are to take a little Frankincense, Nitre, Tartar, and the Bark of Ash,
Vitriol, Verdegrease, and Helebore white and black, Round Birthwort, and stamp
them altogether with Yolks of Eggs and ordinary Ale; then after that boil them,
and anoint the sore place.

For the Foaling of the Yard.
The Cure is, To wash the same with warm White Wind, and anoint it with the Oil
of Roses and Honey mingled together; then put it up, and with a Codpice or
Truss keep it up still, and dress him every day once till he be whole.

For the swelling of the Cods or Stones.
The Cure is, To let him Blood on both sides in the Flank-Veins, then take of
Oil of Roses and Vinegar, of each a pint, half a quartern of Bole Armony beaten
into Powder, mingle them together, and being lukewarm, anoint the Cods
therewith with two or three Feathers, and the next day ride him into the Water,
and give him two or three turns, then bring him to the Stable, and when that he
is dry anoint them again, and so continue until that he be whole, but if the
Cods do swell through any Hurt, then cover them with a Charge of Bole-Armony
and Vinegar wrought together, renewing till the swelling go away, and if it
will then break, then tent it with Melrosarum, till it be whole.

For a bony Excression arising upon any Member of a Horse.
Take the Root of Elecampane well cleansed, and wrap it in a Paper and roast it,
as you would roast a Warden, in hot Embers, as hot as the Horse can suffer it
(for you must not scald him;) after you have rubbed and chased the Excression,
clap this thereunto, and bind it on hard, and in once or twice dressing it will
consume the Excression; also in a Morning and* Evening you must rub the
Excression with the Oil of Origanum, which will consume away the Hardness.

To cure the running Frush, or any Impostumation of the Sole of the Foot; to
dry Scratches, Pains, and such Ulcerous Sores.
Take old Urine, and burn it with good store of Alum, and keep it in a close
Vessel by it self; then take a good handful or two of green Nettles, strong and
keen, and spread them on some Plate, or other Vessel, and dry them either
before the Fire, or in an Oven (after the Household Bread is drawn) then crush
and bruise them into a very fine Powder, and look what a quantity of Powder
there is, and take the like quantity of Pepper beaten also into a very fine
Powder, and mix both very well together; then keep this Powder in a close
Bladder, and when you have occasion to use it, first wash the sore place with
the Urine and Alum, made very warm, and the Sore thoroughly scowred; after dry
them with a very fine Linen Cloth; and lastly, strew the Pounce of the Powder,
so as that it cover all the Sore. And thus always do after Travel, or once a
day in the time of Rest.

For Incording or Bursting.
This is, when the Rim that incloseth the Guts is broken, so that they fall
into the Cods of the Horse, which is apparent to the sight and feeling: The
Cure is, to put four Pasterns on his Feet, as the Horse-gelders use, then bathe
his Stones with warm Water and Butter, then raise them up from the Body with
both your hands, being closed by the Fingers fast together; and so holding the
Stones in your hands, work down the Gut into the Body of the Horse* by stroking
it downwards with your Thumbs, one after another, until that side of the Stone
be so small as the other* then having returned the Gut into its right place*
take a Woollen List of two fingers broad, thoroughly anointed with Fresh Butter,
and tie his Stones both together, or so nigh his Body as may be, not over hard,
but that you may put your finger betwixt; that done, in all Quietness take the
Horse away, and let him not be stirred three Weeks after, but the next day
unloosen the List, and take it away, and every day after, twice or thrice a
day, cast cold Water upon his Cods, to make him shrink up his Stones, and at
three Weeks or a Months end, to geld him of that Stone; which done, let him eat
little, and continually drink Water, but a little at a time, till three Weeks
be ended.

For the Botch in the Groins of a Horse.
The Cure is, To take of Wheat Flour, Turpentine, and Honey, of each a like
quantity, stirring it to make a little Plaster, lay it to the Sore to break
it, and then lance it, and tent it with Turpentine and Hog's Grease as before.

All these Infirmities are cured by this following Medicine: All Headache, all
Frenzies, the Lethargy, the Staggers, the Posse, all Colds, all Coughs, wet or
dry, all Shortness of Breath, Broken-winded, Rotten Lungs, the Glanders, the
Mourning of the Chine, the Lux or Looseness, the Bloody Flux.
For any Diseases of the Head, or Lungs, or other parts of them offended, you
shall in any wise first let the Horse blood in the Neck-Vein, and let him bleed
much, that is to say, until you see the Blood change, and that the Corruption
comes to Pureness; than stanch the Vein* and take of Assafaetida as much as a
Hasel-Nut, dissolve it in a Sawcer of strong Wine-Vinegar, and then take fine
Flax-hurds and dip them therein, then stop the same hard unto the Horse's Ears,
and with a Needle and Thread stitch the Horse's Ears together to keep the
Medicine in from shaking out; then take of the white cankerous Moss which grows
upon an old Oak-Pail, or other Oaken Wood, a good handful or more, and boil it
in a Pottle of new Milk with a Root or two of Elecampane, till one half be
consumed; then strain it, and press the Moss exceedingly; it being lukewarm,
give it the Horse to drink fasting in the Morning, and ride or walk him an hour
after it gently; then set him up very warm, and having stood an hour, offer him
Meat, which he will willingly accept, and eat heartily, and in any case
sprinkle, his Hay with Water. But if you shall perceive that he casts foul
and filthy Matter at his Nostrils, then you shall every Morning as soon as you
have given him the Drench, take of Auripigmentum, two drams, of Tussilage or
Coltsfoot, made it into Powder, as much; then with Turpentine work them to a
stiff Paste, and make little round Cakes or Troches thereof, of the compass of
a Groat, but much thicker, dry them a little, then set a Chafingdish on the
Coals, and laying one or two of th^se Cakes thereon, cover them with a Tunnel,
such as you ^un Wine or Beer into Bottles with, that the Smoke may ascend
through the same; and having made the Horse's head fast, put the Smoke to his
Nostrils, and perfume him well with the same; and though at the first he be
somewhat coy to take Smoke, yet having once felt the Smell thereof, he will
take such delight therein, that he will of his own Accord thrust his Nose to
the same. As soon as you have perfumed your Horse, you shall ride him forth
till he begin to sweat, then set him in the Stable, and do as aforesaid; and
let him not for a great while drink any cold Water either in his Sickness or
out of his Sickness, but when you ride him after it; but if your Occasions will
not permit you to do so, then you shall heat a Bottle of Water on the Fire
scalding hot, and put it into a Gallon or two of cold Water, so that it may
only take the Coldness away; then cast a handful or two of Ground-Malt, or
Wheat Bran into the same, and so give it the Horse to drink.

For surfeiting with Provender.
When a Horse has eaten more than the Stomach can well digest, he is in such
pain, that he is not able to stand, but lies and walloweth, as if he had the
Bots. The Cure ^s, to let him blood, and to draw his Yard and wash it; ^o put a
piece of a Clove of Garlic into it to make him ^iss; also to rake him behind,
and to give him a Glister.

For the Navel-Gall.
The Cure is, Take Soot of a Chimney and Yeast mixed together, and Plaster it
once or twice a day.

Another Remedy for the same.
If it be sore, Take a Pottle of Verjuice, three pennyworth ^f Green Coperas,
boil it to the one half, and wash the Sore ^herewith, then fill the Sore with
Red-lead, and let it not ^e dressed again in three days; then you may dress him
as ^ou shall see cause.

Another Cure for the same.
If it be inflamed, cut it round about with a sharp Knife, ^ven to the Bone,
leaving no rotten Flesh behind; then ^ake the White of an Egg and Salt beaten
together, and lay ^^ upon Tow, Plaisterwise, renewing it so for two days
together; then take a quarter of a pint of Honey, and an ^unce of Verdegrease,
beaten into a Powder, and boil them together, stirring them till it look red;
and being warm, make a Plaster thereof with Tow, and wash the ^^me with
Vinegar or White Wind, and lay that Plaster on ^^; and when it begins to heal,
scatter the Powder of burnt ^yster-shells on it, or else the Powder of Honey
and slack'd ^ime, being made in a Cake and baked, to dry it up.

For the sweying of the Back.
The Hurt comes by some Strain. The Cure is, That ^s soon as he begins to
complain, which is by reeling or ^owling in the hinder Parts, which is easily
discerned, ^^en take a Sheeps-skin as hot as it can be taken from the ^heep,
and clap the fleshy side along his Back, and pre^ently put many Cloths upon it
to keep his Back as warm ^s may be, and so let him continue till it begin to
smell, ^hen prepare another in like manner, and take away the old, and so
continue him for twenty one days at least, and let him not be traveled, but
still rest. And if this help him not, then draw his Back with a hot Iron right
out, on both sides of the Edge of his Back, from the pitch of the Buttock, to a
handful within the Saddle, and then overthwart; and let not the Strokes be
deep, but so burned that they may look yellow; then presently lay on this
Charge. Of Pitch a pound, of Rosin half a pound, of Bole Armony half a pound,
made in Powder, and half a pint of Tar, and boil them together in a pot, until
they be thoroughly mingled; then being lukewarm, daub it very thick upon the
Burning, and clap as many Flocks, of the Horse's Color, ^^ you can make to
abide and let them remain till they fall off*

Of the Guarded of foul swelled Legs, or other Parts, by reason of the melting
of the Grease, or other Accidents.
First, with the Fleam prick the Parts that are swelled take a pint of
Wine-Lees, of Cummin-seeds, and a handful o^ Wheat Flour, and boil them
together till they are thick then apply this Poultis very hot to the swelled
parts, renewing it but, once in 24 hours; then if this, in two or three times,
draw it to a head, lance it and heal it, either with a Plaster of
Shoomakers-wax, or else with the Yolk ^ an Egg, Wheat Flour and Honey beaten
all to a Salve. Bu^ if it do not draw to any Head, and yet the swelling
continue, then take of Pitch a quarter of a pound, and as much Virgin-wax, of
Rosin-half a pound, of the Juice of Hys^ half an ounce, of Deers-Suet half a
pound, of ^opuleon ha^^ an ounce, of the drops of Storax half an ounce, and
boil all together in an Earthen pot; and after it is cold, tak^ of Brimstone
half a p^^nd, of Armoniack an ounce and ^ half, of Costus as much, beat these
in^o a ^ine Powder, an^ then incorporate them with the other, and boil them a^
over again very well; which done, pour the whole Mi^ture into cold Water, then
roll it in seven big Rolls, Plaisterwise; afterward spread this Plaster upon
a piece ^^ Leather, and fold it about the swelled Member, or lay i^ upon the
swelled part; and if any thing will do it, th^^ will assuage it, and afford
much Strength to the Sinew You shall by no means remove this Plaster, as long
as it will stick on. This Plaster, I must confess, is costly, and curious to
make; but that Horse that has it applied to his Limbs when he comes from
Travel, shall never be troubled with swelled Legs, or ever throw out
Wind-galls: but if you will not be at such Cost, then continually both before
and after the travel of your Horse, when he is in the House, several times in a
day, lave and wash his Limbs or other swelled parts, with the coldest and
clearest Fountain Water that you can get, and sometimes let the Horse stand in
some cold clear River for the space of a quarter of an hour or more, up to the
Knees, and Lamterels, but no farther. This Medicine, how poorly soever you may
look on it, is of infinite Virtue; and though I write of cold Water, yet is the
Operation hot and fiery; only this you must take to your Remembrance, that this
Application appertains not to Impostumations, but to Strains and Swellings,
which are without much Anguish.

How to keep a Horse or a Jade from Tyring.
If you ride on a tyring Jade, and fear the perplexed Cruelty of this lazy
Beast, then be sure to carry about you, the fine scarce Powder of Elecampane,
and when others Bait their Horses, or that you come to the place of Bait for
your Horse, the first thing you are to do, is, to set him up warm, and do not
walk him. After he has been well rubbed, take a quart of strong Ale, and put
thereunto half an ounce of the Powder of Elecampane, and brew them together,
then give it the Horse with a Horn; which ^^one, tie his head to the Rack, for
you need not care for Provender till Night, at which time Provender him well,
and in the Morning give him Oats, or Bread, or both, in ^ plentiful manner; and
being ready to back him, give ^im the former quantity of Ale, and the Powder
aforesaid, and doubtless you shall find him to travel with great Cou^age and
Spirit. Also, take a bunch of Pennyroyal, and ^ye it to the Mouth of your Bit,
or Snaffle, and you shall and it very comfortable to him. Now if your Horse,
notwithstanding all this, do happen to tire, then you shall take off the
Saddle, and with the Herd called Arsmart, rub his Back very hard, then laying
Arsmart also under the Saddle, so ride him; and if there be any Life in him, it
will make him go, for this is a notable Torment, and the Smart is almost
intolerable.

Two sorts of Balls to cure any violent Cold, or Glander, to prevent the Hearts
sickness, to purge away all molten Grease, to recover a lost Stomach, to keep
the Heart from fainting with Exercise, and to make a lean Horse to be suddently
fat.
Take of Anniseeds, of Cummin-seeds, of Fenugreek-seeds, of Cathanus-seeds, of
the Powder of Elecampane-Roots, two ounces, beat them and searse them to a very
fine Powder, then add to them an ounce of the Flower of Brimstone, and take an
ounce of the best Juice of Liquorice, and dissolve it in half a pint of
White Wind; which done, take an ounce of the Oil of Anniseeds, and as much of
the Syrup of Coltsfoot and of Sallet-Oyl, and of fine Life-honey a pint, then
mix all this with the former Powder, and with as much fine VVheat-flower as
will bind them together, then work them into a stiff Paste, and make thereof
Balls somewhat bigger than French Walnuts, and to keep them in a close
Gallipot, for they will last all the Year; and when you have occasion to use
it, take one and anoint it all over with Sweer-Butter, and so give the Horse
every Morning one, in the manner of a Pill, and ride him a little after it,
then feed or water him abroad or at home, according to your usual Custom; and
thus do (if it be to prevent Sickness) for three or four Mornings together; but
if it be only to take away an Infirmity, then use it at least a Week or more;
if it be to take away molten Grease or Foulness, then instantly after his Heat,
or in his Heat only; but if it be to fatten a Horse, then use it at the least a
Fortnight, or more. Now if you find any difficulty of the giving of it as
Pills, you may then at your Pleasure dissolve one of those Balls either into
sweet Wine, Beer, or Ale, and so give it the Horse to drink with a Horn. But if
it be to fatten, and take away Infirmity, as, the running Glanders, or such
like, then besides these Balls, you may make these second Balls. Take of
Wheat Flour six pound, or more, as shall suffice to make stiff the Paste, then
take of Aniseeds, of Cummin-seeds, and of Cathanus, of Fenugreek, and ordinary
Brimstone, of each two ounces, Sallet-Oil a pint, of Honey, of White Wind a
Pottle, beat those hard Simples to a fine Powder, and searse them, then with
the rest make them into a stiff Paste: then of this Paste take a Ball as big as
a Man's Fist, and dissolve it into two or three Gallons of clear cold running
Water, by washing and laving the Paste therein, and so give it the Horse to
drink at the ordinary watering times, or any other times when he is disposed to
drink, which cannot be too often; then ride and warm him a little after it: then
when the Water is spent, do not cast away the Bottom, but filling up the Vessel
again with new fresh Water, dissolve another Ball therein; and thus do for
fourteen days together at least, and you shall see wonderful Effects arise.
This Water scowreth, cleanses, and feeds in an admirable manner. And the
other lesser Balls first spoken of, purge the Stomach or Intrails of all
Foulness, void molten Grease, fortify nature so powerfully, that it leaves
behind it no evil in the Body. And this small Ball (if it were for my Life)
would I give to a Horse immediately upon his drawing forth, if he went either
to run, to hunt, to use any violent and extreme Labor.

Another way how to fatten a Horse suddenly.
There is another way to fatten a Horse suddenly, which I have found to be both
good and certain. Take of Elecampane, of Cummin-seeds, of Turmerick, of
Aniseeds, of each two ounces of (...) an handful, boil all these very well with
three Heads of Garlic, cleansed and stamped in a Gallon of strong Ale, then
strain it well, and give the Horse a quart to drink lukewarm in the Morning
fasting, then ride him that he be warm, set him up warm, and thus do for four
or five Mornings, and then turn the Horse to Grass (if the time of the Year be
suitable thereunto) and he will feed heartily. But if the time of the Year
serve not for Grass, then you must keep him in the House, and over and beside
the drink before showed, you shall take sine Powder of Elecampane, and the fine
Powder of Cummin-seeds, a like quantity, mix them well together, then every
time you give your Horses Provender, which should be at least thrice a day, in
the Morning, Noon, and at Night, take half an ounce of this Powder, and
sprinkle it by little and little into his Provender, for fear of Offense, till
it be all eaten up. And thus do for fourteen days together at the least, and
you shall see the Horse prosper in a wonderful and strange manner.

For the Hide-bound.
The Cause hereof is sudden Cold after great Heat; when the Pores are open the
Cold enters, and makes an Attraction of the Sinews, so as the Horse seems
to go or Travel with great Grief, his Skin being as if it were starched, being
shrunk and clinging to his Ribs. The Cure is, to let him Blood in both the
Flank-Veins, being next the girding place and the Flanks: then take a quart of
good White Wind, and put thereunto three ounces of Sallet-Oyl, and of Cummin,
one ounce, of Aniseeds two ounces, of Liquorice, two ounces beaten into a
Powder, and give it him warm, then let him be rubbed half an hour together;
cover all his Back with a Sack, thoroughly soaked in a Tub of Water, and the
Water wrung out of it, and upon that cast many Cloths, and gird them fast unto
him to bring him to a Sweat, which is the only and chief thing to recover him,
and keep him good Mashes, and every day let him be so used; for seven or eight
days together, give him much sodden Barley and Beans for his diet, and green
Malt on the floor, and after the eight days let him Blood in the two breast
Veins, about a pint; then give him a pint of Sack, and quarter of a pint of
Sallet-Oyl, four penniworth of the best Treacle, and ride him until he sweat,
then presently set him in a warm Stable, and cloth him very warm, and at Night
give him a good Mash of Malt, with the Powder of Brimslone to the quantity of
two spoonfuls.

For the Navel-gall.
The Cures thereof are diverse, and so they ought to be; for Medicine is to be
ministered according to the hurt, as it may be more or less. If it be but
galled, take Soot of ^ Chimney and Yest mixed together, and Plaster it once or
twice a day.

Another Remedy for the same Sore.
Take a Pottle of Verjuice, three penniworth of Green Coporas, boil it to the
one half, and wash the Sore therewith, then fill it with red Lead, and let it
not be dressed of three days, then dress it as you shall see cause.

Another Cure for the same.
If it be so hurt as that it swell and is imposthumed, the^^ lance it on the
nethermost part of the Ulcer, so that the matter may have issue downward, for
if you should lance it aloft, then the Corruption that remains will
fistulate; if you find the Concavity deep, then make a Tent of Flax, and dip it
in this Salve. Take of Deers-Suet, of Wax, of Tar, and of Turpentine, of each
three ounces, and one ounce of Rosin, mingle them together, and tent the Wound;
and if you see any dead Flesh grow in it, then sprinkle the Powder of
Verdegrease upon it, lay upon the Head of the Tent a Plaster of a Yolk of an
Egg, Honey, and Wheat Flour, and thus dress it Evening and Morning until it be
whole.

For the Worms.
They are engendered of raw and evil Humors: there are three kinds of them; the
Worm, the Bot, and the Trencheon. The Horse will lie down and wallow when they
feed on him, his breath will stink, and his Mouth be clammy. The cure is for to
give him a quart of new Milk, and half a pint of Honey in it Blood-warm; this
will make them rest from gnawing of him, because they will suck thereof until
they are ready for to burst; then the next day give him this drink following.
First take a quart of wort, or of the strongest Ale, then take a quarter of a
pound of Fern, half a pound of Savin, half a pound of Stonecrop, stamp them,
and put them together with two spoonfuls of Brimstone, and as much Chimney Soot
beaten to Powder, and let them lie in steep two hours, then strain them and
give the Horse a little warm; bridle him and let him stand six hours after
without Meat, and there is no doubt but the Horse will be quiet, for the
strength thereof is such to strain the Maw, as that the Bot will not meddle,
but fly from it, but it does not kill them. After these former Drinks given
him, the third day make him purging Pills, viz. Take of Lard a pound, laid in
Water two hours, take nothing but the clean Fat thereof; stamp it in a Mortar,
and thereunto put of Liquorice, of Aniseeds, of Fenugreek, of each beaten into
Powder three ounces; of Aloes in Powder two ounces; and of Agarick an ounce,
knead them into a Paste, and make six balls thereof, then the Horse having
fasted over night, give him the next Morning three of these Pills, anointed
with Honey; when you have opened his Mouth, catch hold of his Tongue, hold it
fast till you have hurled in one, and thrust it down his Throat with a
rolling-pin, and then let his Tongue go till he has swallowed it down, and so
do with the rest, and keep him close from all Air, and at Night give him a
strong Mash, and warm Water three days after; my reason is, for that these
Balls will purge out of his Body all the Bots and Worms, and all the Humors
that breed and cherish them; so as that your Horse will be perfectly clean: and
you shall find most of the Bots alive, when they are purged; for you cannot
kill them with Medicine, but only make them to forbear vexing of him; for so
long as his Maw rests so bitter and stinking, they dare not feed on it, but
upon other Humors.

For the Lax.
Take of Bean-flower and Bole Armony, of each a quatern, mingled in a quart of
red Wine, give it him lukewarm, and after it let him drink warm Water, with
Bean-flower, but if that will not stay him, then give him half a pennyworth of
Alum, beaten into Powder, and Bole Armony beaten small, in a quart of Milk,
stirring them till the Milk be all of a Curd, and this will stop him.

For Costiveness or Belly-bound.
Take of the Decoction of Mallows a quart, put it to half a pint of Oil, or so
much Butter, an ounce of Benedick Luxature, and pour it into his Fundament with
a little Horn, and hold his Tail close to his Fundament, whilst another does
lead him, and so keep it in him as long as you can, and after keep him warm and
give him warm Water to drink.

All these Infirmities are cured by the Whey only contained in this following
Medicine: The Bloody-Rifts, the Bladders, the Lampus, all Mouth-Cankers, all
Hurts in the Mouth, The Tongue-hurt, the Paps, the Toothache, the Shedding of
Hair, the Fetter-worm.
Take of New-Milk three quarts, a good handful of Plantain, let it boil till a
full pint be consumed; then take six ounces of Alum, and an ounce and a half
of White-Sugar-candy, both being made in a very fine Powder, six spoonfuls of
strong Wine-Vinegar, and put them into the Milk; then let it boil a little till
it have a hard Curd, then drain it, and save the Whey wherewith you shall first
bathe the Sore; the Whey being warm, then with a clean Cloth dry the Sore, and
apply this Salve to it: Take of Turpentine, Yellow-wax, and Hog's Grease ground
to a fine Powder, and ounce and a half; mix all these together on a soft Fire,
and then put it in a Gally-pot, and let it cool; but in case where the Bruise
is not broken, nor is likely to break, you must apply another Medicine, which I
shall hereafter acquaint you with.

For the Yellows.
The Cause hereof is also the abundance of bad Humors; the Cure is plain, let
him Blood, if you see it yellow, a Pottle, then give him a quart of White Wind,
of Saffron and Fenugreek of each half an ounce, and the juice that is wrung out
of two handfuls of Selandine, and being Blood-warm, give it him, and keep him
warm, and with good Mashes, wherein put two spoonfuls of the Powder of
Brimstone: some will give in this drink the green ordure of Ge^se strained.

For the Surfeiting and Foundring of the Body.
The Cause of this Disease is overmuch eating after Labor, whilst the Horse
is hot, whereby his meat not being digested, breeds evil Humors, which by
little and little do spread through all the parts of the Body, and at length
oppress the whole Body; and so do take away his Strength that he has not power
to go or move his Joints; and being laid is not able to rise, whereby he
wants the use of pissing, as also of dunging; Nature being overcome, then
does the Humor rule the body to the destruction of it: In like manner it is
when the Horse being over hot with Travel drinks so much as the Cold thereof
suppresseth his natural Heat: the Cause is, that the evil Humors being
predominant according to their Nature, being heavy and moist, immediately fall
down into the Horse's Legs and Feet, and there rest, which if not prevented
will make great gordy Limbs, as the Pains, Cratches, Spavins, Wind-galls,
casting of the Hoofs, and such like. The Cure hereof must be according to your
Effects that are wrought in the Horse, if it be perceived, as when the Hair
begins to stare, that he will be chill, and shrug for Cold, forsake his
Meat, hang down his Head, quiver after cold Water, and after two or three days,
begin to cough, which is a sign that his surfeit is not great, and that he may
be thus cured; Cover his Belly with the Glister last mentioned, and give him
this Drink: Take of Malmsey a quart, of Sugar half a quatern, of Cinnamon half
an ounce, of Liquorice and Aniseeds, of each two spoonfuls beaten into ^^ne
Powder, put into it Malmsey, and give it him Blood-warm, keep him warm, let him
drink nothing but warm water, four or five days after let him Blood.

For the Colic.
The Cause of this Disease is twofold; either it proceeds from abundance of
Humors, or of Wind; and although it be Wind, yet I judge the Original to be an
Obstruction of Humors which will not suffer the Wind to have its free passage,
which otherwise Nature would expel as his Enemy. The Cures may be diverse, and
because it is a Disease that few Farriers understand, I will set down several
Cures, that if one thing cannot be speedily procured, another may. First, it
may be an Obstruction, for that the Horse has the stone, and cannot stale: for
this take a quart of White Wind, half a pint of Bur-seed beaten small, two
ounces of Parsly-seed, of Smallage, Saxafrage, the Roots of Philapendula,
Gromwel-seed, and Broom-seed, of each two ounces, beaten to fine Powder, a good
handful of Watercresses, and lay them in steep all Night, and in the Morning
strain them clean, and put into it a little Black-Soap, and a little Butter,
and ride him until that he begin to sweat; then set him in a Stable with a
great quantity of sweet Litter under him, and cloth him warm, and so let him
stand Meatl^ss seven or eight hours; then give him dried Oats and warm Water,
with a quantity of Sallet-Oyl to drink; and before he have this Drink let him
fast all Night.

Another Cure for the same.
Take a pound of Malmsey, of Cloves, Pepper, Cinnamon, of each an ounce, of
Sugar half a quartern, and give it the Horse lukewarm, and Labor him upon it
an hour that be dung and stale, keep him to warm Water; but if he be a stoned
Horse, there is not any better thing than for him to have his full desire with
a Mare.

Another for the same.
If you think that it proceeds chiefly from Wind, it may be so occasioned when
he is ridden hot and set up cold; he will pine away, and forsake his Meat; keep
him empty all Night, in the Morning take a quart of White Wind, four ounces of
Fenugreek, seven ounces of Bays, as much Cor^ Pepper, an ounce of Grains, an
ounce of Ginger, two handfuls of Watercresses, a handful of Sage, a pound of
Seagreen, and wring out the Juice; Another of Mint, stamp them and put them
into a pint of White Wind, and let them stand on the fire till they boil,
strain them out, and give it him Blood-warm with a little Honey.

For Surfeiting with Provender.
When a Horse has eaten more than his stomach can well digest, he is in such
pain, as that he is not able to stand, but lies and walloweth as if he had the
Bots, the danger whereof I have written. The Cure is, to let him Blood, and to
draw his Yard, and wash it, put a piece of a Clove of Garlic into it, to make
him piss; also to rake him behind, and give him a glister with the Water of
Sodden-Mallows, Fresh-Butter and Sallet-Oyl; keep him harm, and let him eat
very little for four or five days.

These Infirmities are cured by the following Medicine: All Convulsion of
Sinnews, all Cramps whatsoever, your Neck-crick, the Shoulder-Splat, all
swelled Legs, the Overreach of the Back-Sirew, all Wind-Galls, Wrenches in the
nether J^in^s, all Bruises unbroke, all Strains whatsoever.
Take strong Vinegar or Patch-grease, or Peece-grease, of each a like quantity,
and boil it on the Fire; then with Wheat-Bran make it into a hot Poultis; and
being so warm as the Horse may endure it, apply it twice a day to the grieved
place; but in case that the soreness be where you cannot bind any Poultis unto
it, then you shall only take Patch-grease, and being molten very hot, with the
same bathe the Horse twice a day, and give him very moderate Exercise before
and after his dressing; it will not only take away all Pain and Anguish, but
also remove all Swellings, Guordings, or any other Sore whatsoever.

For the Wens or Knobs in the Body.
The Cure is, Take of Mallows, Sage, and Red-Nettles, of each a handful, boil
them in running Water, put thereunto Butter and Honey a little quantity, and
when that the Herbs are soft, bruise them, then put thereunto of Oil of Bays
two ounces, and two ounces of Hog's Grease, and warm them together over the
Fire; which being well stirred and very hot, make a Plaster as big as the Wen,
upon a piece of Leather, and so renew it for the space of eight days, always
laid as hot as may be; and if it come not to a head then lance it very deep,
afterward heal it with very clean washed Turpentine, the Yolk of an Egg, and a
little Saffron, well wrought together, with a Tent of Flax, well rolled
therein, renewing it every day.

Another Cure for the same.
Take a pound of strong Lie and Soap, a quarter of Vitriol Roman, an ounce of
Sal Armoniack, as much of Roch-Allum, and boil them together till they are
thick, and use it for an Ointment.

Another remedy for the same.
Take Gipsiaecum, the strongest, and lay it on with Cotton three or four times,
and it will take it away.

For the falling of the Crest.
The Cure is, First let the Crest be supported to stand upright; then on the
contrary side that it falls, draw his Crest the depth of a Straw with a hot
Iron, the edge of which Iron should be half an Inch broad, and make your
Beginning and Ending somewhat beyond the Fall; but the first Draught must go
all the way upon the edge of the Main, even under the Roots of the same,
bearing your hand right downward into the neckward, then answer that with
another Draught beneath, and so far distant from the first as the Fall is
broad, compassing all the Fall; and betwixt these two Draughts, right in the
midst, draw another Draught, then with a Button of an Inch about, or else
crossing the same with your Iron, burn at each end a hole, or else cross the
Spaces betwixt the Draughts; the Reason is, that by the pursing up and
shrinking of the Skin on the contrary side, the Crest may stand upright: Some
will afterward anoint the same with Fresh Butter, or something to assuage the
Heat; but this is a way to enlarge the Skin, and for my own part I hold it best
until nine days are past, then to take away the Scab will not be amiss.

For the crick in the Neck.
There are many Opinions how this should come ^^ a Horse, and therefore many
means ought to be used before any extreme means be used; first therefore, if
the Horse have such a Crick that he holds his Neck straight, and cannot have
the use to lift it up and down as was usual, then let two Men on each side rub
his Neck, rub him stoutly; sparing no pains till his Neck be grown very hot;
which being done, put a Bit into his Mouth, and make trial if he can or will
rein in any seemly Proportion; the which if he do, then it is to be concluded
the same came by some Cold or some Strain; and then I would have him let blood
on both of the Breast-Veins, and all his Neck thoroughly anointed and labored
with Aquavitae and Nerve-Oil, that it may drink into the Skin, and two
Sheepskins wrapped about him with the Wool next to the Neck to keep it in a
great Heat, and so to rest twenty-four hours; and if he do not by this means
amend, but carries his Head still down and feeds slowly, then make a hole in
his Forehead close under the Foretop, and thrust in a Cronet to raise the Skin
from the Flesh a handful deep, then take a Goose's Feather well anointed with
Hog's Grease to keep the hole open that it may run ten days together, and every
day twice let the Feather be cleansed and new anointed, and let his Neck be
still labored with rubbing, covered very warm to keep it in a Sweat, and if
you perceive no Amendment, then draw him with a hot Iron from the Root of the
Ear on both sides of the Neck through the midst of the same, even to the
Breast, a straw deep, that both ends may meet on the Breast; but if he carry
his Neck awry on one side, then only draw the contrary side with a hot Iron,
and fail not every Morning when he is fasting to ride him with a Bit till he
sweat, and the hotter he is, the more pull in his Rein, and when he comes to
the Stable, cool him moderately, and rub him thoroughly.

To draw the Wolves Teeth.
These are two little Teeth growing in the upper Jaw next to the great grinding
Teeth, which hinderr the Horse from grinding his Meat, so as he will let it
fall unchewed, and sometimes you shall see some Teeth so long and over-hanging
in his Jaws, that they race and cut his Cheeks, so that he cannot feed. The
Cure is, Tie the Horse's Head to some Raster or Post, his Mouth being opened
with a Cord, so as you may see every part thereof, then take a round Iron Tool
half a yard long, made at the end like a Carpenpenter's Gouge, and with your
Left Hand set the edge of that Tool at the foot of the Wolves Teeth, on the
outside of the Jaw, turning the hollow-side of the Tool downward, holding your
hand steadily, then with a Mallet in your Right Hand strike on the head of the
Tool, a pretty hard blow to loosen it, and make it bend inward, then wrench the
Tooth outward with the inside of the Tool, and thrust it out of his Head; and
do the like to the other Tooth, and fill the holes with Salt; and if any Tooth
do over-hang the nether Teeth, to the Prejudice of the Horse, then with your
Mallet and Tool pare the Tooth, or as many as over-hang for hurting the Horse's
Mouth.

For the swelling of the Gums.
The Cure is, To make him to bleed well in the Palate of the Mouth, and also
to scarifie the Gums that the rank Blood may come out, and then rub them
thoroughly with Vinegar and Salt.

Of the Rifts, or Corruption in the Palate of the Mouth.
Take sharp Vinegar and Salt and wash the same, and then anoint it with Honey.
For the Lampus or Hadders in a Horses Mouth, every Farrier can cure it.

For the Cumey in the Mouth.
This proceeds from the eating of filthy Hay, that Cats, Dogs, and other
Vermin have pist upon, which will cause the Horses mouth to he surred or
clammy, so that he will not eat. The Cure is, to let him blood in two great
Veins under the Tongue, and to wash his mouth with Vinegar and Salt, and to
give him new Bread that is not hot.

For the Heat in the Mouth.
Turn up the upper Lip and jag it with a Lancet, that it may bleed, and wash it
with Vinegar and Salt.

For the Canker in the Mouth.
Wash the sore place with strong Vinegar, made thick with the Powder of Alum,
two or three days together, to destrroy the exulcerate matter; then take a
quart of fair Water, of Alum four ounces, of Honey four or five spoonfuls, of
Maudlin Leafes, Sage Leafes, and Columbine Leafes, of each a handful; boil all
these together till half be consumed, and then every day being warmed, wash the
same two or three times a day, and it will heal it.

For the Barbels or Paps under the Tongue.
The Cure is, to clip them away, and to wash them with Vinegar and Salt.

For the Hurt of the Tongue with a Bit.
The Cure is, To wash it with Allum-water, then take Black Bramble Leafes, and
chop them with Jard, and put them within a Clout, and make them as round as a
Ball; then dip the same in Honey, and anoint the Tongue therewith until it be
whole.

For the Giggs in the Mouth.
They are Swellings with black Heads, growing in the inside of the Lip. The
Cure is, to slit them and thrust out the Corruption, and to wash the same with
Vinegar and Salt.

These Infirmities are cured by the Medicine following: Manginess in the Main,
Manginess in the Tail, the Mallander, the Sellander, the Pains, the Scratches,
all kibed Heels. The Leprosy, the Farcyn, the General Scab, all Lice or Nits,
or other Vermin.
First, in any wise you shall let the Horse blood in the Neck-Vein, and suffer
him to bleed very well (because the Corruption of the Blood is the only Breeder
of these Infirmities) having with a Knife, Lancet, Curry-comb, Hair-cloth, and
such like, opened the Knots and Pistules, and rubbed away all Scurf and
Filthiness, laying the Sores open and raw, as it were ready to bleed; then you
shall take of Yellow Arsnick or White Mercury beaten to a fine Powder, or
Belagar and clarified Hog's Grease, of each a like quantity, and beat them well
together till they come to a perfect Ointment; then having tied the Horse's
Head up fast to the Rack, in such wise that he can neither lick nor bite
himself, with this Ointment anoint all the Sores and other offended places very
well over, holding some hot Bar of Iron, or Fire-shovel, heated against the
same, that the Ointment may the better and speedier soak in; and being thus
anointed, let him stand the space of two or three hours at the least tied as
aforesaid; which done, take of the strongest Urine you can get, and with the
same wash away all the Ointment, wheresoever it was laid, and then untye the
Horse, and put him to his Meat; and thus do once a day, till the Sores dry up
and begin to waste away.

For the Bleeding at the Nose.
This may be derived from many Causes which cannot be truly known, as
proceeding from within the Body, and therefore I shall only direct how to cure
the same. Take a pint of Red-Wine, and put thereinto a quarter of Bole-Armony
beaten into a fine Powder, and put the one half into his Nostrils that
bleedeth, holding up his Head, and this may do well if in the Nostril or Head
there be the original Cause; the next day give him the rest into his body, and
that will surely bind his Body, and it may help the bleeding inward.

Another Remedy for the same.
Let him blood in the Breast-Veins, of each a pint, for that is most likely to
turn the Course of the Blood; take two or three spoonfuls of his Blood, and put
it into a Sawcer, and boil it until it be dried to a powder; then take the
Powder thereof, and blow it into his Nostrils, h^d if it come of a Wound; put
it into the same, and it will presently stanch it; as also Horse-dung,
Asses-dung, Hogs-dung, Sage-Leases bruised and put into the Wound; or take of
Frank^ncense an ounce of Aloes half an ounce, and beat them into a fine Powder,
and mingle them thoroughly with the Whites of Eggs until it be as thick as
Honey, and with soft Hares-hair thrust his Nostrils so full, as that it cannot
fall out. And lastly, some will throw cold Water upon him against his Hair, and
it is likely that the over-cooling of him that way may stop the Flux thereof:
And this a worthy experienced Friend of mine did use to do, if at any time such
a sudden Accident did happen.

Of the Vines.
This Distemper proceeds from the Corruption of Blood: The Cure is, Draw them
with a hot Iron rightdown the midst, from the Root of the Ear so far as the Tip
of the Ear will reach being pulled down, and again under the Root of the Ear,
with a hot Iron draw two strikes on each side like this Figure,; then in the
midst of the first line lance them with a Lancelet or Razor, taking hold of the
Kernels with a pair of Pinchers, but beware that you touch them not with your
bare Fingers; pull them so far out with your Pinchers as that you may cut the
Kernels out without hurting the Vein; then fill the Hole full of Salt.

Another Cure for the same.
Take Aegremony, Honey, and Violet-Leafes, stamp them together, and slit the
Sinew under the Ear, and lay a Plaster thereunto two or three days.

For the Canker in the Nose.
This proceeds from corrupt Blood, and consumed Flesh, which makes it raw
within, and in the end will eat the Gristle thereof; it will also cause the
Horse to bleed at the Nose, and to yield a filthy savor. The Cure is, take of
green Coperas and Alum of each a pound, and of white Coperas, one quarter of a
pound, boil these in a Pottle of running Water ^^il it ^^ ^alf consumed, then
take it off, and put into it half a part of Honey, hold up his Head with a
staff, but not too high, and with a Squirt, squirt the Water, being lukewarm,
three or four times together into his Nostrils, and give him liberty to blow
out the filthy matter least you choke him; and with a Stick and a Rag wash his
Nostrils twice a day until he be whole.

Another Cure for the same.
If you see the Canker be of great heat and burning in the Sore, with exceeding
Pain, take the Juice of Purslane, Lettice, Sorrel, and Nightshade, and wash
the Sore with a fine Clout, and with a Squirt, wash the same, and this will
kill it.

For the Canker of the Eyes.
This proceeds from the Corruption of the Blood, by reason whereof you shall
see many red Pimples both within and without the Eye, and through Inflammation
the Eye will look red, and be full of Corruption. The Cure is, To let him Blood
(on the side of the Neck that you see the Eye is grieved) a Pottle or more, if
you see the Blood very foul, and the Inflammation great, then take three pints
of fair Water, and Roch Alum, and green Coperas, of each half a pound, and of
white Coperas an ounce, and boil them until half be consumed, then once a day,
being made warm, with a fine Cloth cleanse the Eye, so that it look raw; and
this do every day until it be whole.

For the Impostumes in the Ear.
This may proceed from some Blow or evil Humors: The Cure is, Take Powder of
Linseed, and of Wheat Flour, of each half a pint, of Hog's Grease one pound,
warm them in a pot on the fire, until they be thoroughly incorporated, by
continual stirring, then take a piece of white Leather, somewhat bigger than
the Impostumation, and spread it, being very warm, as far as will cover the
swelling, and renew it every day until it break, then lance it, so as the
Corruption may go downward, and tent it to the bottom with a full Tent of Flax,
dipped with this Ointment following: Of Melrosa^um, of Oil of Life and
Turpentine, of each two ounces, and mingle them thoroughly, then make him a
Biggin of Canvas to close in the Sore, so as the Tent and Ointment may abide
within, renewing it every day once until it be whole; but if the pain be in the
Ears without any great swelling, which may be only with Cold, then take
Blackwood dipped in the Oil of Camomile and thrust it into his Ears.

These Infirmities are cured by this Medicine following, all Light Galls, to
skin Sores, to dry up Humors.
First, bathe the Sore place with hot molten Butter; then strew upon it the
Powder of Rosin for a day or two: lastly, Take a spoonful or two of very thick
Cream, and with the Soot of a Chimney bring it to a very thick Paste; then
spread it upon the Sore, and it will heal, dry, and Skin in a short space.

Of the Pole Evil.
This proceeds likewise from the same Causes, and grows like a Fistula
betwixt the Ears or the Nape of the Neck, you shall perceive it by the
swelling; if it be not broken, ripen it with a Plaster of white Hog's Grease,
as though you would scald it therewith, and make him a Biggin to keep him very
warm, and renew the Plaster twice a day very hot and it will ripen the sooner;
then where it is softest, and where the Corruption may best issue forth, with a
round hot Iron as big as your little-Finger, two Inches beneath the soft place,
thrust it upwards, so as the point of the Iron may come forth at the ripest
place, then Tent it with Flax dipped in Hog's Grease, and lay also a Plaster of
Hog's Grease on the same, renewing it four or five days; then afterward take
half a pound of Turpentine clean washed and dried from the Water, with two
Yolks of Eggs and a little Sasfron, and mingle them together; then with a Quill
search the depth of the Hole, and tent it with a Sponge so big as the Hole to
the bottom, and so thrust it with a Quill into the Wound to the bottom, and a
warm Plaster of Hog's Grease to cover it, renewing it twice a day; but when the
swelling cease use no Plaster.

For Impostumes in the Ear.
This proceeds from some Blow or evil Humors. The Cure is, ^ake a Powder of
Linseed and of Wheat Flour of ^ach half a pint, of Hog's Grease one pound, warm
them in a Pot on the Fire, until they be thoroughly incorporated, by continual
stirring; then take a piece of white Leather, somewhat bigger than the
Impostumation, and spread it, being very warm, as far as will cover the
Swelling, and renew it every day until it break; then lance it, so as the
Corruption may go downward, and tent it to the bottom with a full Tent of Flax,
well dipped in the Ointment following; of Melrosa^um, of Oil of Li^e and
Turpentine, of each two ounces, and mingle them thoroughly, then make him a
^iggen of Canvas to close in the Sore, so as the Tent and Ointment may abide
within, renewing it every day once until it be whole; but if the Pain be in the
Ears, without any great swelling, which may be only with Cold, then take Black
Wool dipped in the Oil of Camomile, and thrust it into his Ears.

For the Canker in the Eye.
This proceeds from the Corruption of Blood, by reason whereof you shall see
many red Pimples both within and without the Eye, and through Inflammation the
Eye will look red, and be full of Corruption. The Cure is, to let him Blood,
(on that side the Neck that you see the Eye is grieved) a Pottle or more; if
you see the Blood very foul, and the Inflammation great, then take three pints
of fair Water, and of Roch-Allum and Green Coperas of each half a pound, and of
White-Coperas an ounce, and boil them until that half be consumed, then once a
day being made warm, with a fine Cloth cleanse the Eye, so as it look raw; and
this do every day until it be whole.

For the Haw in the Eye.
This Distemper is known unto all Farriers; no doubt but it is engendered from
some gross Humor descending out of the Head: the Cure thereof is, to pull both
the Eyelids open with several Threads stitched with a Needle to either of the
Lids, then catch hold of the Hair with the stich of another Needle and Thread,
and pull it on so far as you may stay it with your Finger, to the intent it may
cut all round to the breadth of a Penny, and leave the black behind, for by
cutting away so much of the fat and black of the Eye, the Horse many times
becomes bleer-eyed, and therefore you must spare the Fat which is the wash of
the Eye, and the Film, wherein the Eye grows, but cut between the Film, and
the Crush, and then squirt in a little White wine or Beer.

For Lunatic Eyes.
For as much as they are so called, I am content so to continue the name; and
it is said that the Horse becomes blind at certain times of the Moon, and
thereupon most Men do gather that his Sight is good or bad, according to the
natural Course of the Moon; but the Truth thereof is from the natural Sight of
the Eye, which is a blueish Eye or Sight; and all Horses that are so sighted,
after extraordinary Heat and Travel, will be blue, and have a Film overgrow the
Sight, so as he cannot see, although he be cured, but upon the like occasion
will fall blind again. An experienced Friend of mine always cured this Disease
by thrusting Tu^ty into the Eyes with his Finger: But if you lay upon the
Temples of his Head a Plaster of Pitch, Rosin, and Mastick, and then with a
sharp Knife make two slits on both sides of his head an inch long, somewhat
toward the Nose, a handful beneath the Eyes, not touching the Vein, and with a
Cronet loose the Skin upwards, the breadth of a Groat, and thrust therein a
round piece of Leather, as broad as a two-penny piece, with a hole in the
midst, to keep the hole open; and look to it once a day, that the Matter may
not be stopped, but run ten or eleven days, then heal it with Turpentine,
Hog's Grease, and Wax boiled together, with Flax dipped in it, and take not the
Plasters off till they fall away; then burn him with a small hot drawing Iron,
made like a Star, with a hole in the midst in each Temple-Vein where the
Plaster did lie, in this manner * *: and if this help not, set him to Cart:
Beware you breed no Colts of Horses that are so ^^ed, for upon every hard
Travel they will be blind.

These Infirmities are cured by this following Medicine; All Wounds in general,
all Sinews cut, all Wounds with sbot, burning with Lime, Mad-dog biting,
Foundring, Fretizing, Surbaiting, all loose Hoofs, casting of the Hoof,
Hoof-bound.
Take of Turpentine, Wax, Hog's Grease, of each a like quantity; first melt the
yellow Wax and Hog's Grease, upon a soft fire; then take it off, and dissolve
the Turpentine into it, and stir it very well together; then put it into a
Gally-pot and let it cool; and with this Salve tent or plaster any Wound or
Sore, and it will heal it. Also with the same anoint the Cronets of the Horses
Hoofs, and putting Wheat-bran unto it, it being boiled hot, stop your Horse^
Feet therewith, in case either of Founder, of Frettize, Surbait, or such like
Infirmities.

For the Staggers.
The Cause of this Disease is, for that the Brain and the Stomach are united
and chained together with certain Sinews, and thereby interchangeably
communicate their damages, so as when the Stomach is oppressed with the gross
and tough Humors, or some strong Vapors, as when the Horse has eat some
strong Herb, as the wild Parsnips, or such like, by the strong vapouring
Spirits proceeding out of the Stomach to the Brain, oppressing the same, as the
strong vaporous Spirit of Wine, Aquavltae, and such like, do the brain of Man,
he is dizzy, and reeleth as if he were drunk; at the first he does only reel
and stagger as if his Back were swayed, and will eat his Meat, but afterward
he will forsake it, and not be able to stand. The Cure is, let him blood in the
Temple-Veins, one handful under the Eyes, then take Garlic, Herb-grace, a
little Leaven and Bay Salt, stamp them together, and then put thereinto a
little quantity of Aquavitae, and put it into the Horse's Ears, and bind them
close, and so let it remain twenty four hours, and wash his Tongue with Vinegar
and Salt; let him not drink any cold Water, and once a day gently walk him.

Another for the same.
Take Bitter Almonds one once and a half, of Ox-Gal^ two drams, of Black
Hellebore stamp one half pennyworth, of Groins, of Castorum, of Vinegar, of
Varnish five drams; sethe them together until the Vinegar be consumed; strain
it, and put it into his Ears, as aforesaid: but bind them with a Woollen List,
not with a cutting String.

A Sovereign Medicine called the Emperor of all Medicines concerning Horses.
Take of Wheat-meal six pounds, or as much as will bring all the Simples
following to a stiff Paste: of A^i^eeds two ounces, of Cummin-seed six drams,
of Carthamus one dram and a half, of Feaugreek-seed one ounce and two drams, of
Brimstone an ounce and a half, and of Sallet-Oyl one pint and two ounces, of
Honey one pound and a half, of White Wind four pints; and all this must be made
into a very stiff Paste, the hard Simples being pounded, and searsed to a fine
Powder, and so mixed with the sweet Simples: After this Paste is made, it must
be kept in a very clean Cloth; and when you have occasion to use it, you shall
take thereof as much as will make a round Ball as big as a Man's Fist; and this
Ball you shall by continual washing, laving, and squeezing, dissolve into a
Gallon of running Water, to give it the Horse to drink, either after his Heats,
or any violent Labor or Exercise, or when he is sick, poor, lean, or inwardly
diseased, and full of foul Surfeits; and then you shall suffer him to drink
thereof as much and often as he pleases; the Color of the Water will offend
him to take it, therefore at the first offer it him in the dark, of which when
he has but once tasted, he will then sorsake all. Water whatsoever to drink of
this only. Now touching the Virtues which appertain to this Medicine, they are
these: First, if your Horse be never so poor, lean, surfeited, and diseased, if
you give your Horse of this Water with the Ball dissolved in it as aforesaid,
it will in fourteen days not only cleanse and scour him, but also purify the
Blood, enliven and quicken him in a wonderful manner. Secondly, it will be a
means to prevent any Sickness for a long time. Thirdly and Lastly, ^t will make
him continue in good Case, feed lustily, and ^gain Flesh apace, though before
he was very Lean.

A safe Purge to prevent Sickness.
Take a quarter of a pound of red Saunders, and the like quantity of fresh
Butter, make them up, and give them as the former; or Rosemary Leafs bruised
and mixed with Butter or green Figs, so ordered; and let those that undertake
the Cure of Horses, observe particularly these five things:

1. To what Diseases Horses are inclinable. 2. From what Cause they proceed. 3.
By what means the Causes do accrue. 4. The Tokens by which any Distemper is
known. 5. And how to apply apt and seasonable Remedies.
For the Cramp, or Convulsion of the Sinews.
The cause of this Disease, is over much Fullness, or very great Eating and
Feeding, much Rest, want of moderate Exercise; or by overmuch Bleeding,
extreme Labor, or extreme Cold. That which proceeds from great Fullness and
Rest, comes suddenly. That which comes by Emptiness, or Penury, goes on by
little and little. I have seen a Horse had his Head awry, and Neck so stiff, as
if he could not bow any manner of way, nor the strength of Men open his Jaws,
or Mouth, without breaking of them: His Eyes hollow in his Head, and the fleshy
parts thereof turned backwards: His Tongue so henumed, that he could not eat
nor drink, but by sucking of his drink by little and little, with his Lips: All
which came by a full and foul Feeding, and too much Rest; b^ing,
notwithstanding, exceeding Fat when he Died. The cure of this Disease is, to
take a great quantity of Blood from him; rake him behind, and give him a
Glister of Mallows, Cammomile and Fennel, boiled in Milk.

How to order him after this, for the Recovery of his Limbs, etc.
Let him be rubbed by two or three lusty strong Men, and keep him in a very
warm Room; then take two quarts of strong Ale, and two pound of black Soap, and
boil them together till they look like Tar, and anoint and rub all his Body
therewith, so as that it may drink it in; then Cloth him, and stuff his Head
and Neck close, and all the parts of his Body, to bring him into a great Sweat;
give him a pint of White Wind, two ounces of Alloes, and half an ounce of
Agarick infused therein, beaten small, putting therein three spoonfuls of
clarified Hog's Grease; and, if that will not do, give him every day a Glister;
keep him warm, and well rubbed; then give him small Ale to drink, wherein
Mallows and Liquorish have been boiled; let his Diet be small, but sweet and
good.

For a cold in the Head.
The cause hereof, proceeds from some Heat, or standing too much still; or from
having some Air piercing his Head when he is hot; or from some Humors
congealed after long Rest, and full Feeding; or through his wanting of moderate
Exercise to expel the same. The Signs are, a continual distilling Rheum,
waterish Eyes, or his short drawing of Breath at the Nostrils, when the Canes
and the Passages of the Breath are stopped. The Cure is, Put upon his Head a
double Hood, and every Morning when he is Fasting, ride him; take two Goose
Feathers dipped in Oil of Bay, and thrust them up into his Nostrils; through
the ends whereof, with a Needle, put two Threads, to fasten the same to the
Head-stall, so as the Feathers cannot fall out; and to the Snaffle or Bit, that
he is ridden with, fasten a root or two of Polypodium of the Oak, which has
been steeped all Night in Spike Oil, and every time you ride him, anoint the
same with the said Oil; and when he comes home, put on his Head the double
Hood, and Perfume him hot with Frankincense, casting a Cloth over his Head.
Use him thus nine days together, and give him warm Water, or good Mashes,
during the said nine days; for all Rheums having continuance, are dangerous,
and many times (having continuance) Remediless, and leave behind them a worse
Disease than themselves.

These Infirmities are cured by the Medicine following. The Poll-Evil: The
swelling after Blood-letting: The Weathers hurt; galled Backs: Sit-fasts: The
Navel-Gall: Fistula's: Biteing with Venomous Beasts, or Worms.
For any of these filthy Impostumations, Galls, or Swellings, you may take the
Earth-loam of a Mud-wall, which has no Lime in it, but only Earth, Straw, or
Litter, and you shall boil it in strong Wine-Vinegar, till it become very
thick, like a Poultess; then, being very hot, apply it to the Sore, renewing it
once in Twelve or Twenty four hours; and it will not only ripen and break it,
but also Draw it, Search it, and Heal it most perfectly; as Experience will
manifest.

For the Glaunders.
The original cause of this Disease, is the Rheum, which being an abundant
Moisture, and naturally very cold, at length congealeth, (according to the
nature of Cold) and then proceeds to Kernels, and so to Inflammations; which
become so great in the end, that they seem to strangle and stop the breath of
the Horse; from whence he is said to have the Strangles; and by continuance of
time, the same perish either the Liver or the Lungs, by a continual distilling
of putrified and corrupt Matter: The Signs are apparent to every Man that has
Sight, and the diversity or Medicines, infinite. The beginning always of this
Disease, is taking of Cold, after too much Heat; the which cannot be avoided
from a Horse that has full Feeding, and great Rest; more especially, if his
Diet be naught; or by the use of continual Travel upon a full Stomach; or,
before his Body be made clean after long rest; for the standing Pool is ever
Muddy. The Cure is, First, Clear his Head, as is prescribed for the Cold of the
Head, in every part, (if he be able to be Rid or Walked) that he may receive
Breath; then give him this Drink: Take a pint of Malmsey, and six pennyworth
of the best Treacle, and a quarter of a pint of sweet fresh Butter; then
presently rub him under the Jaws with plenty of Hogs Grease, and leave it thick
anointed; then make him this Poultis: Take two handfuls of Mallows, a handful
of Wormwood, as much Rue, and as much Smallage; a quart of Wheat-bran, and a
quart of Hog's Grease, boil them together, and stir them continually in the
boiling, until the Hog's Grease be almost consumed; and being as hot as may be
suffered, bind it under his Jaws and Thropel, and wrap all his Head very warm,
leaving Air for his Mouth and Nostrils; then Air him again with Frankincense,
and keep him warm in the Stable, and so let him rest with that Poultis twenty
four hours: The next Morning give him a quart of the best New-Ale, with a
spoonful of the Powder of Liquorish, and Aniseeds, and a good piece of Butter,
blood warm; then rub his Nostrils with a clout bound to the end of the Stick,
well anointed with Oil of Bay and Butter; then remove the Poultis; and if you
find the Kernels and Inflammation to be very soft, Lance them through, and stop
the holes full of Hog's Grease and Turpentine, boiled hot together, and soft Tow
boiled therein; then warm some of your Poultis and bind it on, as before, but
not altogether so hot, and so let it remain until the next day.

How to order the Horse after this, for a perfect Cure.
Keep his Head warm, as before. If he will eat, give him clean sweet Oats,
steeped in New-Ale, or Maimsey, if he will eat them; and Wheat straw, but no
Hay: Give him no cold Water for nine days, but good Mashes, if he will take
them: Keep him in a spare Diet, and every day, g^ntly walk or ride him, if he
be able; then keep him warm after it; and if it be possible, let him sweat
every day a little, and after rub him very dry, and let him not drink in his
sweat. In his Provender, Take of the root of white Lilly, of the root of Enula
Campana, and of the root of Polypodium of the Oak, very finely cut or chopped,
the quantity of two Spoonfuls, every Morning that you give him Provender, and
be sure that he be hungry and eager of Provender when you give it him, and so
continue for Nine days; and besure that you keep him very hungry, and (as has
been said) with spare Diet. At the Nine days end, give him his purging Drink:
Take a quart of White Wind, or of strong Alewort, an ounce and an half of
Alloes, beaten into Powder; half an ounce of Agarick; two spoonfuls of the
Powder of the Root of Enula Campana; three spoonfuls of Honey; brew them well
together, give it him blood-warm; and keep him warm: Within six days after, let
him blood, and if it be good, take but a quart; but if very bad, take two
quarts at least. After this, use him both in Feeding and Labor, moderately,
and he will afterward be in perfect Health.

The Mourning of the Chine, its Cause and Cure.
The Cause hereof, is great Heat, and afterward taking of Cold: And, First, It
begins with Rheum; then the Glaunders; and afterward the Mourning of the
Chine; (^s it is usually termed) but more truly and essentially, it begins
with the Rheum, which proceeds to Inflammation of the Liver and the Lungs, by
continual distilling upon them; then to the Glaunders, which is the
Imposthumation thereof; and lastly, to an Exalaration, which abruptly, and
untruly, is called the Mourning of the Chine. The Signs to know the Disease,
are these: 1. The continual distilling of Rheum in the Head. 2. The continuing
Knobs betwixt the Jaws. 3. The keeping of his Hair without casting. 4. The
continual running of thick stinking Matter at the Nose. 5. The fastening and
growing of a knob as big as a Walnut, to the inside of one of the Jaws; which
if so, commit his Carcass to the Crows, for he is past all help. The Cure for
such a Horse as may be curable, is to follow these Directions. For the First,
which is Rheum, the cure I have mentioned for the Cold in the Head. For the
Second, which is a congealed substance, gathered into two knobs betwixt the
Jaws, it is cured as the Glaunders. For the Third, which is k^eping still his
Winter Coat, and not casting off his Hair, let him Blood often, until you see
that he has pure and fine Blood, and give him good Mashes, made very strong
with Malt; and put in his Provender, Polypodium of the Oak, small cut; the root
of the White Lilly, small cut, of each a good quantity, if he will eat; and
shred in also, a quantity of Liverwort; and, if he be a Horse of value, at
every time, a six penny weight of Rubarb; and every Morning, being Fasting,
give him a pint of the Drink prescribed for the preservation of the Lungs, and
keep him only with Wheat-straw, (but not Hay) and old sweet and clean Oats.

The manner of Ordering him after this.
Every Morning, after he has taken that clean Drink, ride him two or three
Miles. For the Fourth, which is the thick running at the Nose, continually
clear his Head, as has been prescribed for the Cold in the Head; and so in
every part, as the rest are prescribed, only adding of purging Drinks; viz.
After all these prescribed Orders, give him two several Mornings, a pint of
White Wind, an ounce and an half of Alloes, half an ounce of Agarick, two drams
of Liquorish and Aniseeds, and a spoonful of pure Hog's Grease, warmed and well
dissolved together; and after he has Purged, the next day let him Bleed in
both the Breast-Veins, the quantity of a quart, and still keep him with good
Mashes, and moderate Travel: Give him every Morning fasting, for Nine days
after, a pint of that Drink which I prescribed for the clearing of the Lungs.
For the Fifth, If you find no amendment, but a knob grown to his Jaw, then you
must give him a Purge with Pills, as I have prescribed; and if that help him
not, then without all doubt, he is Remediless.

These following things are most excellent to put into Horses Provender, to
preserve them from Diseases.
The Powder of Wo^lfs Liver; the Powder of Enula Campana; the Powder of
Polypodium of the Oak; fine cut pieces of Ruburb; the Powder of Brimstone, made
fine; the Powder of Liquorish; Aniseeds, Fenugreek, Turmerick, Bay Berries,
Long-Pepper, Agrimony, Cammomile, Wormwood, Saven, Linseed, Smallage, Parsley,
Rue, Hysop, Coltsfoot, Horehound, and such l^ke.

Broken Wind, the Cause.
The Causes why a Horse draws his Breath very short, may be many; as Sickness,
great Fullness, or violent Exercise: But the reason of the cause is, For that
the Heart being the only hottest part of the Body, from whence the Arteries and
Veins do carry the heat thereof to every part of the Body; (and therefore it is
truly said, to be the Chariot of Life) when that by Sickness, Fullness, or
vio^ence of Exercise, is choked, and as it were, smothered with great heat,
then do the Lights, being the Bellows to draw Breath, according to that Office
that Nature has or^ained them unto, presently labor with all Violence, to
draw it, to cool and comfort the Heart, and so consequent^y, all the Members
and parts of the Body, to fill all the ^mpty corners with Air, which naturally
and in predomi^ant Qualities, is moist; and when they have drawn suf^cient
Breath, the dryness and heat, by the moisture of the Air, is quenched; which
being so, then does the Creature ^raw Breath leisurely and coldly, and not
before; but so ^ong as the Heart is oppressed by the violent heat of Sick^ess,
or by great Fullness, or violent Exercise, the Canes, Pipes, and Passages for
the Breath, are almost stopped and choked up; then do the Lungs labor very
extreme ^^ick, to preserve the life of the Creature, which is the Heart; and
therefore it is said to be the first thing that Li^eth, and the last that
Dies. And to make the same a lit^e plainer, Observe a Horse that is
Broken-winded, (as ^he usual term is) and you shall find, that he setcheth his
^reath much shorter, when he is kept in the Stable only with dry Meat, than
when he goes to Grass; and the ^nly reason is, the coldness of the moist Food,
which ^epeth the Heart and all the Body in coolness, because ^^e Humors that
proceed from the digesture of Grass, are ^ool and moist, according to the
natural qualities of Grass and raw Herbs.

For a broken Wind; the Cure.
Take the Dung of a Boar dried to Powder, a spoonful; Diapenthe, two ounces;
the juice of Spanish Liquorish dissolved, an ounce, in a quarter of a pint of
Ale; put these into a pint of new Milk, and give it him warm fasting; repeat it
for five or six Mornings, and ride him a gentle pace after it, if the Weather
be warm, or any ways seasonable, without letting him water, or eat any thing;
then put him into a warm Stable, give him a Mash of Oats and split Beans, and
keep him clean Littered, and free from any noisome Scents: And the Lungs by this
means, as also the Wind pipe, being cleansed, the Breath by degrees, if you do
not over labor, heat, or ride him in too much rainy Weather, will return to
its former easy and moderate Breathings.

A most Sovereign Drink to preserve a Horse's Lungs and Liver clear; the most
excelling Knowledge in a Horseman or Farrier.
Take the Tartar of White Wind Lees (which is no other than the Lees of
White Wind dried to Powder) an ounce and a half, of Isop two handfuls, of
Coltsfoot two handfuls, of Horehound one handful, of Enula Campana-Roots an
ounce, four Liquorish-sticks bruised, Aniseeds an ounce, Red Sugarcandy four
ounces, boil them all in a quart of Ale; and when it is half boiled, put to it
of Hysop-water twice Distilled, one pint, boil them again, then strain it, and
give it him very warm to drink; the charge hereof is very small. If you have a
delicate Horse, and have Cleared him, and Dieted him, (for I would not have the
Master to be at any extraordinary Charge with a Jade) then every Morning that
you shall Hunt him, or Exercise him, give him Fasting, a pint of this Drink,
and so continue him, until you find him clean and in perfect Breath. The Lungs
most principally ought to be kept clean, as they continually draw fresh Air to
them, filling all the empty corners with Moistness; and that is the reason why
Horses are broken winded, because the Lungs are imperfect to do their Office.
And likewise your broken-wined Horses, when they are kept only with a dry sort
of Meat, do draw their Breath much shorter than when they go to Grass, because
Grass is naturally Cold and Moist; and thereby his Heart being the more cold,
the Horse draws his Breath much better, and more at length: But if the Horse
be clear, empty, and sound in Body, then does he always draw his Breath alike:
From which ground of Reason, three things may be collected and observed: The
First is, That the Horse's Head be kept clear from all Obstructions, (the which
evermore comes of Cold) which greatly hinders the drawing of Breath in the
Body. Secondly, That the Skin of the Horse be kept clear and open, to draw
Breath at the Pores of the Skin into the Body. Thirdly, That the Canales
Pulmonis, the Pipes or Lanes of the Lungs, be not opilated or stopped through
viscuous Phlegm, or tough Humors, like Bird-lime, or with Imposthumation in
the Pipes, and so become Putrified; every one of which, in continuance of time,
will destroy the Horse.

Of the Signs of the inward Sicknesses of Horses.
To know the true Signs of the Sicknesses: If they proceed from the first
occasion, which is Heat, then the Signs are these, First, heaviness of
Countenance, swelling in the Limbs, Scowring, or Looseness of the Body, in the
beginning of the Sic^ness; and Dryness, or Costiveness in the latter end; short
Breath and hot, with a loathing and forsaking of his Me^^. If it proceed from
the second occasion, which is Col^, then the Signs are also heaviness of
Counteran^e; either dull, or else closed up Eyes; hard Bo^^s o^ big ^ustles
betwixt the Chops and the root of the Tongue; and sometimes a hard swelling up
from the Chops to the roots of the Ear; a rotten and moist Cough, the Horse
ever chewing some loose filthy Phlegmatic Matter in his Mouth, after his
Coughing, which in one respect is no evil Sign, because it shows a rotten
Cold that is but newly gotten, and soon to be cleansed; whereas, to cough clear
and hollow, and not to chew after it, shows a dry Cold, that is of long
continuance, sore, festered, and hard to be recovered. Lastly, His Body will
fall away, and when he drinks Water, it will issue forth at his Nostrils; his
Eyes will be ever mattery and running, and his Hair rough and stirring. If it
proceed from the Third occasion, which is the Surfeit of Meat and Drink, either
natural, or un-natural, then the Signs are these: First, Heaviness of Head and
Countenance, in such a violent manner, that the Horse can hardly lift his Head
from the Manger; a dull and dead Eye; a staggering and reeling Pace, and (if
the Disease be far grown) a frantic and mad Behavior, as biting the Rack and
Manger, and at such as shall come about him; sometimes biting at himself, and
beating his Head against the Wall, Boards, or Ground, and other frantic
Passions: But if the Disease be less contagious in the Brain, but more inwardly
settled at the Heart, then the Signs are Yellows in the Whites of the Eyes, and
in the inside of both the upper and the nether Lips; (if the Disease be far
gone) then a Yellows over all the Skin, and a continual faint Sweat does break
forth: And therefore by all means remember, that though the alteration of Colors
is unnatural, yet withal you must understand, that it is not so in all cases:
If the Dapple-gray, in process of time, turn to White; the dark Iron-gray, to a
bright color; the Black, to an Iron-gray, and such like, that this is a
natural, and no unnatural alteration, and so no signs of Sickness: And
therefore not to be deceived at all, or to be doubtful, acquaint your self with
the true color and complexion of your Horse, which you shall best discern when
he is at the pride and hight of Lust; when he is wanten, proud of flesh, and
smooth, sleek, shining: And when you shall see this Complexion alter in part,
or all, then ever expect some Sickness. As you thus acquaint your self with the
Complexion of your Horse, which I include in the Colors, so you must also have
a settled knowledge of his Countenance and Gesture; and to that end, you must
be careful to mark and note them, in all his Actions and Motions, as well
within doors as without, as well in his play, as in his rest; at his times of
Feeding, and at his times of Exercise: You shall note the cheerfulness of his
Eye, the carriage of his Head and Neck; which are his angry Characters, and
which be his pleasant; and when he biteth for Wantonness, or Offense: And these
you shall best find out in his Feeding, in his Exercise and Playing in his
Dressing; and if at any time you find any of these Characters fail on a sudden,
and that his Gesture is more lumpish-heavy, then call your self to an account
of what you have done, either in Exercise, Feeding, Airing, or Ordering; for
there is no doubt but there is Distemperature and Sickness approaching, if it
be not prevented.

Observations to be taken from the Horse's Feeding and Dung, as to the State of
his Body, etc.
Having thus acquainted your self with Complexion and Countenance of your
Horse, so you must also not be ignorant, but observe diverse other outward and
inward Qualities, for they are the greatest Light that can be, both to Health
and Sickness; and to this end, you shall especially mark his Filling and his
Emptying; that is, his manner of feeding, and the manner of discharging his
Body. In his feeding, whether he eats with a good Apperite, or a weak Stomach:
The first is Healthful, the latter unwholsoma: For if he eat with a good
Appetite, he will Neigh and call for his Meat before it come: when either he
sees his Keeper, or a preparation for feeding, as sifting the Oats, chipping
of the Bread, or the like; he will receive it cheerfully and greedily, shaking
his Head, and showing other signs of alacrity and rejoicing; which Qualities
after he has used, if on the sudden he refrain, and so receiye his Meat dully
and unpleasantly, it is a great sign of Sickness. As in his feeding, so you
shall mark his Qualities in emptying; as, the time, the place, the substance.
The time, as whether he emptyeth in the night time better than in the day: The
place where he emptyeth, better in the House, or Abroad; or when you are
Mounted, whether before you begin Exercise, or else after some gentle motion,
or stirring; whether at the Stable-door, or at some unusual places by the way,
or in the ground where you give him his Exercise. Lastly, For the substance,
whether it be much or little; if it be much, you must forbear Exercise, and
make him empty the oftener; if it be little, then you may fall to labor at
pleasure: Whether it be good or bad, and that commonly falls out according to
the Food he eats.

Things to be inferred from the before going Observations.
If it be clear, firm and pale, with white Grains, in complexion like sweet
Soap, then it is wholesome; if it be Black, it shows Heat in the Body; if
Greasy, then it shows Foulness; if Red and hard, it shows Costiveness; if Pale
and loose, then inward Coldness. And as you thus observe his Ordure, so you
must also observe his Meine, whether High, Low, etc. As these qualities of
Feeding and Emptying, so you shall note his qualities in Rest and Watchings;
that is, in his lying down and standing up; what hours and times he observes
for either, and how long he continues in them: And if at any time you find
sudden or gross alteration, then be assured of some Sickness approaching; and
thus do of any other particular Quality in your Horse, (which you shall observe
in his Health) for it is impossible to nominate all; and if you find them
suddenly to surprise, it is doubtful that there is some Sickness following. As
you thus observe the Complexions and Qualities of the Horse, so you must
observe his natural Customs and Conditions, and how in his livelihood and best
health, he stands affected: To particularize or name them, I cannot, because
they proceed most from hidden Inclinations, or else accidental Apprehension,
which, by continuance of time, grow to natural Habits: And any of these, when
they shall increase, or fail, are true prognostications of Distemperature and
Sickness. Many other signs of Sickness there are; as the not casting of the
Coat in due time; Hide-bound: Continual dislike and Leanness, where there is
good Feeding. But on these I shall enlarge my self hereafter.

Some other choice Observations, for the preventing of all inward Sicknesses.
The preventing of inward Sicknesses, consists in two special Observations
and Considerations: First, To prevent it before it come, that it may not offend
at all. The Second is, To take it at the first appearance, and so to prevent
it, that it arises not to any great danger or hazard. To prevent Sickness,
that it offend not your Horse at all. Though I have already treated on this
Subject, yet I shall not omit to write what is of excellent concernment to the
Practitioner. When you put your Horse to Grass, every three or four days before
you turn him out, take blood from his Neck-Vein, then the next day after, give
him a pint and a half of Muscadine, and half an ounce of the Powder of
Diapenthe, or three quarters of an ounce of the Horse-Mithridate, and then by
degrees to abate his Clothes. You shall also observe, when you let your Horse
blood, to proportion the quantity you take from him, according to the goodness
or badness of the Blood, for the loss of good Blood, is unwholesome, and does
hurt; and to preserve ill Blood, is dangerous and noisome. Also, if you observe
when you take Blood from your Horse, to receive it into a Vessel, and stir it
about continually, as the Horse bleedeth, to keep it from clotting; then having
bled him, take the Blood and besmear it all over the Horse's Back and Body, you
shall find it wonderful wholesome to him, for it comfort his Body, clears
his Skin, and breeds a rejoicing in all the Horse's internal parts. Now if
you have no determination to put your Horse to Grass, and yet you would prevent
inward Sickness, then you shall observe once in two or three Months, (when you
have the best leisure to rest your Horse after it) not to fail to give him
Muscadine and Diapenthe, and Horse-Mithridate, as was before showed, and not to
let him Blood at all; for this very Potion is the greatest purger and purifier
of the Blood that can be, and voideth all that yellow Choleric Matter, and
other evil and undigested Humors, which corrupt the Blood. Now you are to
observe here, that although I only prescribe Muscadine, wherein you shall
dissolve your Powder, or Mithridate; yet know, that when you cannot get
Muscadine, or other sweet Wine, that then you may take strong Ale, or Beer, but
in a greater quantity; for whereas you take but a pint and a half of Wine, you
shall take of Beer or Ale, a full Ale-quart; as for the Powder of Mithridate,
you shall keep the first quantity already presc^^bed; and if you warm your Beer
or Ale a little on the Fire, it will not be amiss, but better. Now to take a
Sickness at the first Approach, and to prevent it, that it may not arise not to
any great danger, you shall by all means observe to look well into the
Occasions of Sicknesses, which are already showed, and into the Signs of those
Occasions; and if you find your self guilty of any of them, or that the Horse
disco^ered any of the former Signs, then presently let him Blood, and three
several Mornings after, give him the Drink or Potion before prescribed, and
undoubtedly it will prevent all the force of Sickness, and restore the Horse to
his Strength, and good estate of Body.

To refine the Blood, and save the Liver from Infection.
Take of Polipodium of the Oak, made very clean, cut it into small pieces, then
take a handful of Liver-wort, cut it in small pieces, together with six-penny
weight of Rheubarb cut small, and every Morning, for three or four days in a
Month, give it the Horse in his Provender, very early, two or three hours
before his watering; and once in half a Year make trial of his Blood how pure
it is, and accordingly Minister help if need be. This Medicine is highly
esteemed of by those that have experienced it.

Of Bleeding in any Heart-Sickness, or in any ordinary inward Sickness.
I will now descend to the Cure of these inward Sicknesses: And though every
several Sickness have a several Cure, yet I will draw all here into one sudden,
but certain and infallible proved Method, ever found prosperous and* fortunate.
Whensover, by Signs before rehearsed, or other Accident or Knowledge, you shall
find your Horse grievously pained with inward Sickness, the first thing you
shall do open his Neck-Vein, and receive some of the first Blood into a Pewter
Porringer, which, if you set it in cold Water, will presently discover the
Foulness and Putrefaction; then let the Horse bleed well till the Blood change;
neither must you be nice or tender-in this Action, because you must understand
that all inward Sicknesses in Horses draw their Effects from the Putrefaction
of the Blood only. And this is the Reason. It is certain that the Horse, of all
other Creatures, has no natural Vessel into which to receive the scummy and
putrefied matter which arises from corrupt and Choleric Blood, but it is
either voided in Excremental Humors, or moderate Exercise and Sweats, or else
by immoderate Exercise and violent Labor. By too much Repletion and Fullness,
by unwholesome Food and evil Diet, or by some other natural Defect, this
Choleric Corruption increasing and overflowing, it presently, and in an
instant overspreads the whole Body, having its Course through every Vein, and
so discoloureth the Skin, and makes all the outward parts yellow, especially
the Eyes and inside of the Lips; also mixing with the better Blood, and
confounding the Strength and Virtue thereof, it brings a general Fairness over
the Body, and in the end suffocateth the Heart; of force there must follow
sudden and certain Mortality; and hence proceeds those sudden Deaths of Horses,
for which our weak Farriers can give but a foolish and idle Account. But to
return to the purpose; after you have taken away good store of Blood, and (as
you imagine) all, or at least, the most part of that which is corrupt, then set
him up in the Stable, tying his Head to the Rack gently, and at Liberty,
neither so high that he shall be compelled to rest his Head upon the Bridle,
nor yet so low, that he may thrust hi^ Head into the Manger; and thus you shall
let him stand at least two hours.

How to prepare your Horse after bleeding to receive what is necessary for
remedying dangerous Sickness.
If the Sickness be not contacious and dangerous; administer not any Potion to
him that day, because the Vein being opened, and all the ^^m^^ous Powers and
Faculties of the Body disturbed, it will be a double Vexation to his Spirits to
go also through the working of the Potion; therefore in this case, the Sickness
not being violent, you may forbear farther Administration and only after the
Horse has ^asted you shall give him such Food a^ he will eat, whether it be
Hay, Bread, or Corn; and always provide that it be strong, savory, sweet, dry,
and clean dressed; as for the Quantity it matters not, for a small Pittance at
that time will maintain him; besides Emptiness is no great Displeasure. At high
Noon you shall give him a sweet Mash of Malt and Water made in this manner:
Take half a peck of good Malt well ground, and put it into a Pale by it self,
then take a Gallon of fair clear Water, and set it on the Fire; then when it is
come to the hight, that it is ready to boil, put as much of it to the Malt as
will moist and cover the Malt all over, and stir them exceeding well together,
crushing the Malt with a flat Rudder as much as you can, ever and anon tasting
it with your Finger, till it be as sweet as any Honey, and then cover it over
as close as you can, and so let it stand and stove for two or three hours at
the least; then the hour being come in which the Horse is to receive it,
uncover the Mash and stir it about; but finding it to hot, then put to it some
clear cold Water, that may temper and allay it, but in any wise not so much as
may take away any part of the Sweetness; and in this tempering, with your hand
crush and squeeze the Malt as much as you can; the Mash being lukewarm, give it
to the Horse to drink; and if he eat of the Malt, let him take thereof at his
Pleasure. This is the best manner of making of an ordinary Mash, or
Horse-Caudle, for it is of that nature and quality; and to that purpose that a
Caudle is administered to Man, is this given to a Horse; for you must
understand, that in these contagious Diseases, nothing is more pestilent than
cold Water, and especially when that Exercise cannot be used. The ruder
Farriers and Horse-Grooms, do make the Mash another way, putting the Malt to
the Water at the first, and so boiling them both together; but this is
unwholsom and naught, and that every good Ho^swife can witness; for this long
boiling over-scalds the Malt, and takes away the Strength and Sweetness, and
gives a harsh and unsavory Taste, which is offensive to the Horse's Nature. If
your Horse be coy, and refuse to take the Mash, as many are, partly for want of
Use and Custom, and partly for Weakness of Stomach, than you shall strain the
Water from the Malt exceeding hard, and so give him with a Horn to drink; then
take the Grains which you have so strained, and put them in the Manger before
the Horse, on which, whether he feed or no, it matters not; for if he but smell
and snuffle his Nose upon them, it is sufficient; for the Fume thereof is
wondrous wholesome for his Head. After you have given him the Mash, see that
he be warmly clothed, as namely a good Woollen Body-cloath to come round about
his Heart, a large Cloth or two to come over it, and to be wispt round about,
with soft, thick, and large Whisps; for the little, hard, and neat Wisps,
though they are comely to the Eye, yet they are unwholesome for the Body, for
Hardness and Smallness makes an Impression into the Horse's sides, causes him
to forbear to lie down, when Nature and Rest requires it. The Horse being thus
warm clothed, you shall then cause one or two to rub all his four Legs from
his Knees and Lamtrels downwards, with very hard Whisps, and to rub them as
hard as may be; and whilst his Limbs are thus in rubbing, take a coarse Rubber
or two, made of new hardened temper Cloth, and warming one after another over a
pan of Coals, with them rub the Horse exceedingly much in the Nape of his Neck,
and the Pole, just betwixt his Ears, and on the Temples of his Head; for there
is nothing that is more wholesome than these Frictions and Chasings, for they
dissolve Humors, and revive all natural Heat, being a cheerful Nimbleness to
the Limbs, and purge the Head of gross Cold, and rough Matter, cleansing and
purifying the Brain, by which the Members and other Faculties are fortified,
and the whole Body reduced back to its full Strength and Ability. As soon as
you have ended this Friction of rubbing, you may then let the Horse take his
Rest for two or three hours, and only leave a Lock or two of sweet Hay in his
Rack, and no more; for the least quantity of any thing is too much, and soon
cloys a sick Horse.

An Excellent Perfume for Inward Sickness, etc.
In the Evenng come to your Horse again, and having rubbed all his Limbs and
Head, as you did before, then perfume his Head in this manner. Take of the best
and purest Olibanum an ounce, as much of Benjamin and Rax, and bruise them all
together; I do not mean bruise them to small Powder, but only break them in
small Lumps, and mix them well together, and so taking them up between your
Fingers, you may not take up one Ingredient alone, but some of all; then take a
Chafing Dish, if you have one, let it be after the manner of the perfuming
Chafing-dishes, which are wide below where the Fire is, and narrow at the top,
where the smoke avoideth; and in this Chafing Dish put well-kindled Wood-Coals,
or small Charcoal, then take some of the aforesaid Perfume, and lay it upon the
Coals, but in any wise so that it may not flame, but smoke; then hold the
Chafing Dish to the Nose of the Horse, and let the smoke go into his Nostrils,
and thus perfume him well for the space of a quarter of an hour, or half an
hour at the most. Now it may be the Horse may seem coy to receive this at the
first, because it is strange to him; but do you continue the Action, and
cherish him; for be you well assured, after he has once received the Smell
into his Head, he will be as greedy to have it, as you are willing to give it,
for there is nothing that delights a Horse more, or more rejoices his
Spirits than sweet savours, and odoriferous Smells, of which this Perfume is
one of the chiefest; the Effects which this Perfume works is, that it purges
the Brain of all filthy and corrupt Matter, (as you shall find by experience in
the working) it dissolves tough Matter into Water, and brings it away in such
abundance, that it is sometimes ready to extinguish the Fire as it falls. It
is the greatest comforter of the Brain that can be, and from thence sends such
Cheerfulness to the Heart, that it rejoices the whole Body.

An excellent Receipt, with Directions for Ordering a Horse in extreme Sickness
and danger of Life.
After your Horse has been well Perfumed, as aforesaid, let him rest for a
quarter of an hour, and then give him such Food as he will eat, either Bread,
or Oats, how little he eats it skills not, for it is to be intended that his
Stomach is now at the weakest. After he is fed, you shall toss up the Litter;
for you must know, that he is to stand upon the Litter all night and the next
day: Besure to have him Fasting, and then the next Morning early, you shall
take half an ounce of the Powder of Diapenthe, as the Greeks call it, because
of the number Five: Take half an ounce of this Powder, and put it into a pint
of the best Muscadine, and Brew them well together in two Pots, tossing it to
and fro, because otherwise the Myrrh will clotter and lump together; and after
it is well brewed, give it the Horse in a Horn, then, if he have any small
strength, mount his Back and walk him up and down in some warm or Sunny place
for an Hour, then set him up in the Stable warm and well Littered, and tying
his Back to the Bridle, let him so stand, and Fast for another hour, or more;
then give him Meat, and so let him stand till betwixt Twelve and One of the
Clock in the Afternoon; at which time rub him as formerly, then Perfume him, as
was before said: Both them Works being finished, give him a sweet Mash, and so
let him rest to the Evening, at which time, offer him Meat, but in a little
quantity, as handful by handful, and let him rest till Eight of the Clock at
Night, at which time again Perfume him, then give him Meat, and cloth him
warm, make clean his Stable, and leave him to his Rest that Night.

A closing Method to perfect the Cure of dangerous Sickness in a Horse,
pursuant to the former Rules.
The next day, being the third day, you shall do all things as you did the
second day, already rehearsed; at first, you shall give him his Potion of
Diapenthe and sweet-wine, then Air him: At Noon give him his Mash: At the
Evening and Night, his Perfume, with all observations that were before
declared. The next day, which is the fourth day, there is no dou^t (with the
blessing of God) but you will find alteration, and health approaching; you may
know it by his Stomach, and by his more cheerful Countenance; as also by other
outward Gestures: And finding that Health is coming, you may then forbear to
give him any more Potions, only attend him with good Food, good Dressing, and
moderate Exercise: Neither shall you give him any more Mashes; for though they be
wholesome in the extremity of Sickness, yet being any thing too much used, they
will take away the Horse's Stomach, and bring him to a Loathing of other Meat;
and therefore instead thereof, in the Morning when the Horse is well rubbed and
dressed, take a Pottle of fair Water, and heat it scalding hot, then put it into
a Gallon or two of clear cold Water, that it may take away the extreme coldness
thereof, and then, being scarcely lukewarm, give it the Horse to drink: You
may, if you please, throw a handful of Bran, or a handful of Wheat-meal into
the Water, for it is good. As soon as the Horse has drank, Back him, and ride
him forth gently for an hour or two: At Noon, Perfume him: At Evening Water
him, as you did in the Morning, and ride him in the like manner: Feed him at
usual Hours, as in the time of Health: And thus do for two or three days more:
then finding his strength increasing, you may by degrees (according as the
Season is) abate the Clothes; you may also Water him abroad at some clear
River, or Spring: Gallop him after his Watering; and draw every thing to the
same custom as you did in his best Health*

An Excellent Medicine for any violent Sickness, if the Horse be at the point
of Death.
If you have a Horse in this extremity and desperate case, then the first thing
you do, shall be to open his Neck-Vein, and let him blood very well; then two
hours after his bleeding, take two ounces of the Powder of Diapenthe, and beat
it in a Mortar with as much clarified Life-Honey as will bring it to a
substantial Treacle: When this Confection is made, take half an ounce thereof,
or more, and dissolve it in a pint and an half of Mus^adine, and so give it to
the Horse to drink with a Horn, and if he have so much ability of Body, walk
him up and down for half an hour, either in some Sunny place, or close Barn, or
empty House; then set him up, and let him fast another hour: At Noon give him,
if you can get it, a Gallon, or near thereabouts, of the first running of the
strongest Ale, before it be put to Barm, when it is clear, strong, and carries
a Royal on the top: But when this is not to be had, then give him a sweet Mash,
Perfume, Rub, Cloth, Diet, and Order him in all respects as were showed you in
the former Cure. And thus you shall do for three days together without fail,
and then no doubt but you shall see Health approaching.

How to Order your Horse after receiving the foregoing Medicine, to perfect
his Recovery.
At the end of three days, forbear all sorts of Mashes of both kinds, and
follow all the Prescriptions before declared. Now, if during the Cure, either
through the violence of Medicine, or the foulness of the Horse's Body, you
shall find any hard Pustles to rise up betwixt the Horse's Chaps and at the
root of the Tongue, then you shall first clip away the Hair as close as may be;
then you shall take a Wax-candle, and therewith burn the Swelling, till you
scarifie the Skin, then take a piece of Leather somewhat larger then the
Swelling, and having pricked it all over with the point of your Knife, s^read
thereupon thick, your black Shoo-makers Wax that is well seasoned and new; then
warming it upon a few Coals, laying it upon the Swelling, and remove it not,
till either it fall off of it self, or else the Sore breaks; then renew the
Plaster, and with it heal up the Sore. This Plaster for the cheapness and
meanness, will hardly gain credit with those that are Curious; but I dare
assure you, that there is not a more excellent or sovereign Plaster which
belongs to a Horse; for it ripeneth and breaks any Impostumation whatsoever:
It asswageth any hard Swelling or Tumor, whether in the Joints, or any other
fleshly parts, and it heals what it breaks, or ripeneth; and with its heat,
dissolves all manner of Humors that are knit together, or occasion pain and
swelling.

To help a Horse that cannot Dung, after having been Sick.
There is another Accident which attends the Sickness of Horses, and that is
Costiveness, or Belly-binding, which makes a Horse that he cannot Dung, or
avoid his Ordure. This Accident, when at any time it happens, it shall be
good for you first to rake him, then anoint your Hand all over with sweet
Butter, or clarified Hog's Grease: Some use Oil of Bay; but it is too sharp and
too hot, and many times (if the action be used too roughly, or unadvisedly) it
breeds an exulceration or soreness in the I all and inward parts: Therefore
either take sweet Butter or Hog's Grease, and your hand being all besmeared
therewith, thrust it up into his Tuel until you feel his Ordure, then draw out
as much thereof (if it be black) as conveniently you can; also, take a great
Candle of three or four in the Pound at least, and cutting off an Inch or two
at the upper or smaller end, with your Hand anoint as before, thrusting the
great end forward, put it up into his Tuel so far as you can get it; then
suddenly drawing out of your Hand, and leaving the Candle behind you, clap down
his Tail close to his Tuel, and drawing it up between his Legs, hold it with
your Hand hardly and constantly for the space of an hour or more, in which time
the Candle will dissolve in the Horse's Body, and so separate and break his
Ordure, and upon the letting loose of your Hand, he will presently Dung. This
you may do in every case of Extremity, but not otherwise: And believe it, you
will find this the most excellent Suppository of all other; and there is no
Glister that can work with greater efficacy or more wholsomeness.

Of the danger of Laxativeness in a Horse, and how to Remedy it.
There is another Accident which attends the Sickness of Horses, and this is
quite contrary to that before rehearsed, and it is called Laxativeness, or
Looseness of the Body, which is expressed by a vehement and violent Scowring:
This, if at any time it shall happen, you shall at first note the violence
thereof, and the continuance thereof. The violence is known by the thinness or
sharpness, and the often and speedy voiding of the Excrements. The continuance
is known by the unchangeableness of the Infirmity, and by the process and long
continuance of time, contrary to all natural and wholesome custom; for you are
to observe, that a Horse may have a Scowring for a day, or a little more, and
this is not unwholesome, but natural and good; and if after, it stay of it self,
then it works no evil effect; but if it continue longer, and bring the Horse
into an extraordinary weakness of Body, then seek to stop it in this manner:
Take a quart of Milk, putting thereto a good spoonful or two of fine
Bean-flower, and as much Bole-Armoniack finely beaten to Powder, boil
altogether till the Milk thicken, and then being made lukewarm, give it the
Horse with a Horn; and doing thus a Morning or two, no doubt but that it will
Bind the Horse; which if it does not, then you shall take a quart of Red-wine,
and put thereunto a handful of the Herb called Shepherd's Purse, and half so
much of Tanner's Bark, and boil all very well together, till the Herb and the
Bark be soft; then strain it, and put thereinto of the Powder of Cinnamon, and
being made lukewarm, give it to the Horse to drink with a Horn; and this do a
Morning, two or three, if need require.

The means to help and preserve Horses from inward Diseases.
There are four ways and means to keep Horses from inward Diseases, viz.
Purging, Sweating, letting of Blood, and Vomiting, whereof in Order. First, Of
Purging; which may be said to be twofold, Outward, and Inward: The time of
Purging or cleansing the Horse, must be presently after the taking of the Horse
from Grass, into the Stable, which should be at or before the Feast of St.
Bartholomew, by reason of the great moisture and cold that then happens, and
to be taken up very gently, for fear of Over-heating of him, lest his Humors
thereby should be dissolved by the Veins and Arteries, into every part of the
Body. And that every Horse at such times are full of Humors, apappeareth in
the best Spirited Horses, if you then perceive their Actions, how heavy they
perform them at such times. The manner of purging and clearing the outward
parts of the Body, should be in this manner. First, shave his Ears, and a
little place behind, for the Head-stall to lie flat and even; then take Soap
and anoint his Head and Jaws therewith; and then take warm Bucklie and wash and
cleanse the same in every part, so clean as is possible, from all Sweat or
Scurf, and presently rub his Head and every part with clean Linen Clothes, and
after with Woollen Clothes very dry; then put thereon a double Hood or Biggen,
made on purpose to keep all the parts of his Head very warm: If it be a fair
warm day, in the Sun, in like manner wash, purge and cleanse all his Body, and
every part thereof, especially his Main, Tail, and Cods: Then rub him and clear
him very dry; Cloth him and stuff him very warm, and give him plenty of sweet
and clean Litter; then anoint all his Hoofs (having first washed them and made
them dry) with this Ointment; Take of Turpentine and Sheeps-fuet; half a pound
of unwrought Wax; a quartern of Allem; of Sallet Oil, half a pint; of Tar, a
quarter of a pint: Boil them altogether until they are well Incorporated; keep
it in a Pot, and every day (his Feet being clean) anoint his Hoofs therewith;
neither let him go to Grass (if he be a Horse of worth) above one Month in the
Year.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
OF the Nature and Properties of Horses. Page 1 The Means to make the Seed of
the Horse Perfect for Generation. 2 Observations for the better breeding of a
Mare. 3 Of what Age the Horse or Mare ought to be that Beget and Bring forth.
ibid. To know whether a Mare has Conceived, etc. ibid. Of Taming of Colts. 4
Of making of Colts to Amble from the time of their Foaling. 5 Of the Stable.
ibid. Of Shooing of Horses. 7 How to know a Horse that is durable in a Journey,
etc. 9 How to know a free and perfect spirited Horse. 10 Of the Shape of a
Horse. 11 Of the Colors of Horses. 13 Of the Horses Marks. 14 How to know a
Horse that is bold by Nature. ibid. How to make a white Scar or Spot in a
Horse's Face, etc. 15 To keep your Woollen Horse-Cloaths, etc. from Moths.
ibid. How to defend a Horse from Flies. 16 Observations in Electing of Horses,
and the Uses. ibid. To fatten a lean Horse in a short time. 18 A certain way to
know the Age of a Horse by his Teeth, etc. ib. Further general Rules necessary
to be known by the Horseman and Farrier, from warrantable Experience. 19
Directions for Ordering a Horse defigned for Exercise, etc. 20 Opinions as to
Sadling and Bridling a Horse. 21 The best Method for Backing a Horse. 22 The
Complete Horseman: Or true Art of Horsemanship, etc. 23 Of Correction. 25
Teaching not fit for such Horses as Nature has not framed fit to be Taught.
ibid. Of the Bridle, Saddle, and bringing the Horse to the Block; the Mounting,
and seat of the Rider, etc. 26 Of Trotting in the Ring, and other Paces, etc.
28 The proper Use of the Wand, Bit, and Spur, for the well Teaching a Horse. 31
Rules and Directions for the Management of a Horse, etc. 35 Of the Managed
Horse, with further Instructions. 37 Of Half-turnings, Doubles, Chambetta,
Manage, Courier. 39 Sundry principal things yet remaining to be known by such
would be Expert or Complete Horsemen, etc. 42 Of the Bound, Leap, and Yerk. 44
Of the Caperiole and Corvette. ib. Short infallible Rules to be Observed and
Practiced by every Horseman. 45 Other ways and methods for the Management of a
Horse, etc. 46 The use of the Tramel. 47 Times proper to alter the Tramet, and
convenient to mount. 48 How to stop in a full career, Advance, etc. ib. How to
oblige Horses to Retire, and endure various Bitts. 49 Turnings, and strait
Turns, etc. ib. Observations on Ambling, Racking and Galloping. 51, 52 The
Running Horse, or Racer, how to Manage, Feed, etc. 53 The first Fortnights
Ordeeing the Running-horse, etc. 54 Things proper to be observed in Heats, etc.
55 Rules for the second Fortnights Keeping. 56 Directions to Order him after
this. 58 The third Fortnight how to order him. 59 Cordial Balls for the third
Fortnight. ib. Rules for the fourth and last Fortnight. ib. Stars, Snips and
Blazes for the Beautifying a Horse, how to make them. 61 Things to be observed
when you put your Horse to Grass. 62 The Drink to be given before Grass. ib.
How the Horse is to be used when taken from Grass. 63 Other material
Directions. ib. Blood-letting, on what occasion it ought to be used. ib. What
Season is best to let Blood in. 64 Observations on a Horse, as to the Brain,
Sinews, Veins, relating to Health, Strength, etc. 65 The Bones that frame a
Horse's Body their Number, and how they are placed. 66 Of the four Humors in
the (...) Horse, etc. 67 The Humors or Constitutions (...) ^orse's Body, etc.
ib. How to prepare a Horse to receive Medicines: if any Distemper has seized
him. 69 What Purgations with least danger may be given to a Horse. ib. Approved
Rules to be observed by such as either Travel or Exercise Horses. ib. Another
excellent way to the like purpose. 71 The Order of Curing Horses that are
Diseased: The Causes, the Signs, and the Cures thereof. 72 Of the Ague or Fever
in Horses. ibid. Another of the same. 73 Of the Ague in the Head. ibid. Of the
sudden Sickness of a Horse. 74 Of a Horse that cannot Piss. ibid. Of the Pains
in the Head. 75 To bring Hair again. ibid. Of the Stone and Cholick in a Horse.
ibid. Of killing the Fire, either in Burning or Shot. ibid. Of a Horse that
stumbleth, etc. ibid. Of the Canker. 76 Of the Farcin. ib. Of the Fistula. 78
These Infirmities are cured by this following Medicine; all broken Bones, all
Bones out of joint, etc. 79 Of Leprosy and universal Manginess. ib. Another of
the same. 80 Of the running of the Frush. ib. To make a Horse that he shall not
neigh. 81 To make a white mark on a Horse. ibid. To ripen an Imposthume. ibid.
Of a Farcin, etc. ibid. Of sinking a Fistula, or Wind-gall. 82 Of a Wrench in
the Fetter-lock, etc. ibid. Of a Blister. ibid. Of a Wind gall that it shall
not grow again. ibid. Of Curing a sudden Hurt. ibid. Of the dangerous Galling
of a Horse. ibid. Rep^ring a broken Hoos, etc. ibid. Of ^retting of the Guts.
83 To make a Horse follow his Master. ibid. Of Bones out of Joint. ibid. Of
pulling out of Shivers or Thorns, etc. ibid. Of a Spungie Wart. ibid. Of the
Sinews cut and bruised. ibid. Of the Curb. 84 Another for the same. ibid. Of
Wind-galls in Horses. ibid. Of the Pipes or Crutches in Horses. ibid. Of the
Gravelling of Horses. 85 The Ring-bone in Horses. ibid. Of the Crown-Scab.
ibid. These Infirmities are Cured by the following Medicines, viz. Splints,
Spavins, Curbs, Ring-bones, etc. ibid. Of the Retreat or clogging the Foot,
etc. 86 Of Surbaiting. ibid. Another. ibid. Instructions in giving of Fire, or
using of Corrosives, which heal all sorts of Farcies, Cankers, Fistula's, etc.
ibid. Of a Horse that is pricked in the Foot with a Nall, or otherwise. 87 Of
the Quitter-bone. ibid. Of the Hoof-bound. 88 Of the Loosning of the Hoof. 89
Of the casting the Hoof. ibid. For Foundring, Fretezing, or any other
Imperfection of the Feet, or Hoofs of a Horse. 90 For hurts upon the Cronets of
the Hoofs, etc. 91 To help the Surbating or Soreness of the Feet. ibid. Of the
Dry Spavin. ibid. Another for the same. 92 Of the wet or Blood-Spavin. 93 All
these Distempers are ^ured by the Medicine following. All Watery Eyes. All
Blood-shotten Eyes, etc. ibid. For a Wrench or Sprain in the Pastern. ibid. Of
a Horse that is Hipped. ibid. Of Stifling, and Hurts in the Stifler. 94 Of
Wounds. 95 A Receipt for any extraordinary Cold or Cough, etc. ibid. For any
dangerous Bots or Maw-worms. 97 To heal or dry up any old Ulcer or Cancerous
Sore. ibid. For any Sore-Eyes in Horses. 98 For an old Strain or Lameness in
the Joints, etc. ibid. Of a Black-Sinew Strain, etc. ibid. For any desperate
Strain in the Shoulder, or other hidden Parts, or any Fistula, Pole-Evil, etc.
99 Of a Flash Quarter. 100 For an Overreach on the Heel. ibid. For an upper
Taint or an Overreach upon the Back, etc. ibid. Of the Nether Joint. 101 Of
the Serew, or Serow. ibid. All these Infirmities are Cured by this Medicine
following: Fevers in general, the Pestilence, etc. ibid. For the Malender. 103
Another of the same. ibid. Of the Splint. 104 Another of the same. ibid. For
Foundring. ibid. For the Shoulderpight. 106 For a Frothy Hoof. 107 For the
blasting of the Hoof. ibid. For a Pinch or a Gall in the Withers. ibid. A
present Remedy for the Staggers. ibid. For the Strangles. ibid. For the
Swelling of the Forelegs. ibid. Another for the same. 108 Another for the
same. ibid. All these Infirmities are Cured by this following Medicine:
Impostumes in the Ears. Ulcers in the Nose, etc. ibid. For a Grief in the
Shoulder, etc. 109 Of the Wrinching of the Shoulder. 110 Of Splayting of the
Shoulder. 111 A Remedy for the Spavins. ibid. For the Colt-Evil. ibid. For the
Swelling of the Cods. 112 For the Mattering of the Yard. ibid. For the Tetter.
ibid. How to Remedy the Wind-gall. ibid. An excellent and speedy help for the
Glanders. ibid. An Excellent Remedy for the Haw in the Eye. 113 A rare Medicine
for a sore Back, etc. ibid. An excellent Cure for the Scab and the sore
Crupper. ibid. For the Foaling of the Yard. ibid. For the swelling of the Cods
or Stones. ibid. For a bony Excression upon any Member of a Horse. 114 To cure
the running Frush, or any Impostumation of the Sole of the Foot, etc. ibid. For
incording or Bursting. ibid. For the Botch in the Groins of a Horse. 115 All
these Infirmities are cured by this following Medicine: All Headache; All
Frenzies; the Lethargy, etc. ibid. For surfeiting with Provender. 116 For the
Navel-Gall. 117 Another Remedy for the same. ibid. Another Remedy for the same.
ibid. For the sweying of the Back. ibid. Of the Guarded or soul swelled Legs,
or other Parts, etc. 118 How to keep a Horse or a Jade from Tyring. 119 Two
sorts of Balls to cure any violent Cold, etc. 120 Another way how to fatten a
Horse suddenly. 121 For the Hide-bound. 122 For the Navel-gall. ibid. Another
Remedy for the same Sore. 123 Another Cure for the same. ibid. For the Worms.
ibid. For the Lax. 124 For Costiveness or Belly-bound. ibid. All these
Infirmities are Cured by the Whey only contained in this following Medicine:
The Bloody Rifts, etc. 125 For the Yellows. ibid. For the Surfeiting and
Foundring of the Body. 126 For the Colli^k. ibid. Another cure for the same.
127 Another for the same. ibid. For surfeiting with Provender. 128 These
Infirmities are cured by the following Medicines: All Con^u^sions of Sianews,
all cramps whatsoever, etc. ibid. For the Wens or Knobs in the Body. ibid.
Another cure for the same. 129 Another Remedy for the same. ibid. For the
falling of the Crest. ibid. For the Crick in the Neck. ibid. To draw the Wolves
Teeth. 130 For the swelling of the Gums. 131 Of the Rifts, or corruption in the
Palate, etc. ibid. For the Cumey in the Mouth. ibid. For the Heat in the
Mouth. ibid. For the Canker in the Mouth. 132 For the Barbels or Paps under the
Tongue. ibid. For the Hurt of the Tongue with a Bit. ibid. For the Giggs in the
Mouth. ibid. These Infirmities are cured by the Medicine following: Manginess
in the Main, Manginess in the Tail, etc. ibid. For the Bleeding at the Nose.
133 Another Remedy for the same. ibid. Of the Vines. 134 Another Cure for the
same. ibid. For the Canker in the Nose. ibid. Another Cure for the same. 135
For the Canker of the Eyes. ibid. For the Impostumes in the Ear. ibid. These
Infirmities are cured by this Medicine following, all Light Galls, to skin
Sores, to dry up Humors. 136 Of the Pole-Evil. ibid. For Impostume in the Ear.
137 For the Canker in the Eye. ibid. For the Haw in the Eye. ibid. For the
Lunatic Eyes. 138 These Infirmities are cured by this following Medicine: All
Wounds in general, all Sinnews cut, etc. 139 For the Staggers. ibid. Another
for the same. 140 A Sovereign Medicine called the Emperor of all Medicines
concerning Horses. ibid. A safe Purge to prevent Sickness. 141 For the Cramp,
or Convulsions of the Sinews. ibid. How to order him after this, for the
recovery of his Limbs, etc. 142 For a Cold in the Head. ib. These Infirmities
are cured by the Medicine following. The Pool-Evil: The Swelling after
Blood-letting, etc. 143 For the Glaunders. ib. How to Order the Horse after
this, etc. 144 The Mourning of the Chine, its Cause and Cure. 145 The manner of
ordering him after this. 146 These following things are most excellent to put
into Horses Provender, to preserve them from Diseases. ib. Broken Wind, the
cause. 147 For a broken Wind, the Cure. ib. A most Sovereign Drink to preserve
a Horse's Lungs and Liver clear, etc. 148 Of the Signs of the inward Sicknesses
of Horses. 149 Observations to be taken from the Horse's Feeding and Dung, as
to the state of his Body, etc. 151 Things to be inferred from the before going
Observations. 152 Some other choice Observations, for preventing of all inward
Sicknesses. ib. To refine the Blood, etc. 154 Of bleeding in any
Heart-Sickness, etc. ib. How to prepare your Horse after Bleeding, etc. 155 An
Excellent Perfume for inward Sickness, etc. 157 An Excellent Receipt, with
Directions for Ordering a Horse in extreme Sickness, and danger of Life. 158 A
closing Method to perfect the Cure of dangerous Sickness in a Horse, pursuant
to the former Rules 159 An excellent Medicine for any violent Sickness, etc.
160 How to order you Horse after receiving the foregoing Medicine, to perfect
his Recovery. 161 To help the Horse that cannot Dung, etc. 162 Of the danger of
Laxativeness in a Horse, and how to remedy it. ib. The means to help and
preserve Horses from inward Diseases. 163


FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
SETS of Cuts for Bibles, in Folio, Quarto, and Octavo, curiously engraven on
Copper, containing near two hundred Plates, are now sold to Booksellers at a
cheaper Price than usual, viz. The Folio at 9 s. The Quarto at 7 s. 6 d. The
Octavo's at 6 s. Also various Bibles of the several Volumes, fit for the said
Cuts to bind with: By Henry Nelme, at the Leg and Star in Cornhill.

Where Gentlemen, or others, may be furnished with the said Bibles ready bound,
either with, or without Cuts: Also Common Prayers with the best Cuts extant.

At the said place may Country-Chapmen be furnished with all sorts of Bibles,
Common-Prayer-Books, Testaments, ^salters, Primmer^, Horn-Books; or other
Saleable Chapmen's Books.

BOOKS newly Published, and Sold by Henry Nelme, at the Leg and Star in
Cornh^ll.
FAmiliar Letters on several Occasions: Written by Mr. Dryden, Mr. Wycherly,
Mr. Congreve, Mr. -- Mr. Dennis, with some Passionate Love Letters, and a
Translation of Voiture's Letters; by Mr. Dryden, and Mr. Dennis. ^rice bound 2
s. 6 d.

An Essay on the Agreeableness of the Christian Faith with Natural Reason: By
way of Dialogue. Written in Latin by Sebastianus Castellio, with his Apology
for himself: Englished by C. B. Price bound 1 s.

Hugo Grotius's second Part of the Truth of Christian Religion: or, the
Confutation of Paganism, Judaism, and Mahometism. Translated by C. B. a Divine
of the Church of England: Exemplified by Memorials of the truly Pious and
Christian Lives of Alderman Whitmore, Bishop Wilkins, Bishop Reynolds, Alderman
Adams: By the same Author. Price bound 1 s.

Alcander and Philocrates: Or, the Pleasures and Disquietudes of Marriage. A
Novel. Price bound 1 s.

Love in Distress: or, the Lucky Discovery. A Novel, Written by the Honorable,
the Lady -- Price bound 1 s.

The Husbandman, Farmer, and Grazier's Complete Instructor, in feeding,
breeding, buying and selling Cattle; with approved Remedies for all Diseases
and Grievances incident to them; viz. Bulls, Cows, Calves, Oxen, Sheep, Goats,
Hogs, and all other domestic Cattle and Poultry, with the Experienced
Vermin-killer. Price bound 1 s.

Vox Corvi: or, the Voice of a Raven, that thrice spoke these words distinctly,
Look into Colossians the 3d. and the 15th. To which is added, Serious Addresses
to the People of this Kingdom; showing the use we ought to make of this Voice
from Heaven. By Alex. Clogie, Minister of Wigmore, etc. Price 6 d.

The Mystery of Husbandry: or, Arable, Pasture and Wood-Land improved: By
Leonard Meager, Price bound 1 s.

The new Art of Gardening, with the Gardener's Almanac: containing the true
Art of Gardening in all its Particulars. 1. The site of a proper Plat of Ground
for planting Fruit Trees; with the manner of Planting, Grafting, Imbudding,
Inocula^ing, and ordering all sor^s of Fruit Trees, and Fruits in all seasons.
The Art of making Cider, Perry, and Wines of diverse sorts of Fruits. 2. Of the
Kitchen-Garden, and what things are proper to be done in it, as to Herbs,
Plants, Roots, Berries, Fruits, etc. 3. Of the Flower-Garden, how to order it,
and rear choice Flowers, Slips, Layers, sow Seeds, make Off-sets, and plant
them in their proper Earths, Seasons, and due Waterings; with the Names and
Descriptions of the most material ones. 4. Of Greens, how to order and preserve
them; with Rules for the Conservatory and Green-house. To each Head is added an
Almanac, showing what is to be done every Month in the Year. By Leonard Meager.

A True Exact and Impartial History of the Horrid and Detestable Plots and
Conspiracies, carried on by Papists, and other wicked Persons, for the
compassing the Death and Destruction of His Sacred Majesty King William III.
and Introducing Popery and Slavery, by an Invasion from France. With the manner
of its Miraculous Discovery, when ripe to be put in Execution. Also, an Account
of the Trials, Speeches, Confessions, and Executions of those that have
suffered for it; with their Characters, from the first of them, to Sir John
Fenwick, who was Beheaded on Tower Hill, on an Act of Attainder, with the Paper
he left behind him: And many other things, worthy of particular Remark, for
informing the present and future Ages. The Second Edition, with Additions.
Price bound 1 s.

The Secretary in Fashion: or, Instructions for Writing Letters. Price bound 2
s.

A Dictionary of hard English Words, with their Interpretation. By E. Coals.
Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Complete English Schoolmaster, or the most natural and easy Method of
spelling English. By E. Cole, Author of the English Dictionary. Price bound 1 s.

School-Books Printed for H. Nelme.
More English Examples to be turned into Latin, beginning with the Nominative
Case and Verb, as it is varied throughout all the Moods and Tenses, and after
sitted to the Rules of Grammar. To which are added, Cautions for Children to
avoid mistakes in making Latin, etc. By Edw. Leeds, Scool-mast^r in Bury St.
Edmunds.

Seneca's ^^agedies. Printed at Oxford.

Greek Testament in 24, of a large Print. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

Lucius Florus, in 24.

Quintus Curtius, in 24. Price bound 1 s.

Books of Divinity Printed for H. Nelme.
Certain Sermons, or Homilies appointed to be read in Churches, in the Time of
Queen Elizabeth, in Folio, of a large Roman Print. Price bound 6 s.

Christ's Famous Titles, and a Believer's Golden Chain, handled in diverse
Sermons; together with his Cabinet of Jewels, or a Glimpse of Sion's Glory; As
also, Christ's Voice to London. The great Day of God's Wrath. The necessity of
Watching and Praying, with a Treatise of Death. By W. Dyer. Price bound 1 s.

Supplications of Saints, a Book of Prayers and Praises, in four Parts: By T.
Sorocold. Price bound 1 s.

The Sinner's Tears, in Meditations and Prayers: By T. Fettiplace. Price bound
1 s.

The Child's Instructor, leading to true Spelling and Reading English; with
useful Counsel, and weighty Arguments, persuading them to remember their
Creator in the days of their Youth. Also a Confession of Faith, and Catechism
for younger People: By B. Keech. Price bound 4 d.

Clavis Bibliorum: The Key of the Bible, unlocking the richest Treasures of the
Holy Scripture: By Fran. Roberts, D. D. Price bound 7 s.

Sion in distress: Or, the Groans of the Protestant Church, for many Ages past,
under the cruel Tyranny of Popish Persecution, and merciless Torments. As also
the Marks of the Antichristian Romish Church; the Arraignment of the Scarlet
Whore, and the Complaints of the Persecuted Nations against her, from the
Primitive Times, down to the Year 1680. with her final Doom and Sentence. To
which is newly added, Sion's Relief, and Joyful Triumph over all her Enemies,
under the Reign of His Sacred Majesty, King William III. Price bound 1 s.

Mr. Rutherford's Letters, the Third Edition. Now divided in three Parts: The
first containing those which were written from Aberdeen, where he was confined
by a Sentence of the High Commission, drawn forth against hi^ partly upon the
account of his declining them, partly up on the account of his Nonconformity:
The second and third, containing some which were written from Anworth^ before
he was by the Prelates Persecution thrust from his Ministry; and others upon
occasions afterward, from St. Andrews, London, etc. By a Well-wisher to the
Work and People of God. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.

Index Biblicus: Or, an exact Concordance to the Holy Bible, according to the
last (...): By J. Jackson (...) bound 4 s.


