Imprimatur.

W. CANT.
March 27, 1689:
THE Bishop of Rochester's SECOND LETTER To the Right Honorable The Earl of
Dorset and Middlesex, LORD-CHAMBERLAIN OF His MAJESTY's Household.

In the Savoy: Printed by Edward Jones, MDCLXXXIX.

THE Bishop of Rochester's SECOND LETTER To the Right Honorable The Earl of
Dorset and Middlesex, etc.
MY LORD,
I Cannot in Good Manners make my Address to your Lordship in another Letter,
without premising my most Humble Thanks for your favorable Acceptance of the
former; and for your kind Recommendation of my Plea, to Men of Honor and
Goodness, by the Powerful Authority of your Approving it.

And now, My Lord, since you have in so generous a Manner, admitted me once to
be your Client, I am come again to put my whole Cause into your Hands. For it
was my Chance, I know not how, to have such a share in One or Two other Public
Affairs of the late Times, as obliges me to make a Second Defense. Though I
have always thought, that, next to the committing Offenses, nothing can be more
Grievous to an Ingenuous Mind, than to be put upon the necessity of making
Apologies.

However, upon the Encouragement your Lordship has given Me, I take the
boldness to say, that in the Matters about which I trouble you this once more,
I trust, I have good Ground for an honest and open Vindication of my self. The
One was, My Part in King Charles the Second's Declaration, touching the
Conspiracy; the other was, My acting in the Commission for the Diocese of
London, during the Suspension of my Lord Bishop.

But then my Lord, after my Apology, I shall crave leave to add that which
needs None, I mean an Account of what past between King James, and some of the
Bishops, a little before the late wonderful Revolution; which though the
Circumstances of it are not so generally known as they ought to be, yet, I am
sure, had a very considerable effect for the benefit both of Church and State,
in that Critical time. And therein I may presume to say, that I had some part:
So that when I come to that, perhaps I shall be able to Speak more freely, and
shall venture to insist upon it, as a manifest proof to the World, that the
Bishops had then as difficult a Post to Maintain, and Maintained it as firmly,
as any other Order of Men in the Kingdom could do Theirs, for preserving the
Liberties and Properties of the Subject, as well as the Interest of the
Protestant Religion.

First, my Lord, as for the Book of the Conspiracy, it is true, I have often
heard, that some Noble and Eminent Persons, whose Kindred or Friends were
unhappily concerned in the Subject of that History, had entertained a prejudice
against me thereupon. But to them I shall make this equitable Request, that
they would suspend any farther Censure of me for what I did write, till they
shall be fairly informed how much there is that I have not written.

I will not deny, that it was at the Request, or rather the Command, of King
Charles the Second, that I drew up a Relation of that Plot: And, to that end, I
had free liberty to consult the Paper-Office and Council-Books, whence I was
plentifully furnished with such Authentic Materials, either of Papers Printed
by Authority, or of Sworn Depositions and Confessions, as have been always
thought the best Ground for an Historian to work upon.

But now, my Lord, I can still allege, That though a vast heap of such Matter was
immediately supplied to my hands; and though I often received earnest Messages,
and some Sharp words from that gentle King to quicken my Slowness, yet more
than twelve Months had past, before I could be brought to put Pen to Paper; out
of my Natural Aversion to any Business, that might reflect severely upon any
Man; my own Inclination rather leading me to the other Extreme, that is, Rather
to Commend too much what in the least seems Well-done, than to Aggravate what
is Ill-done by others.

However, upon King Charles's frequent Commands, and continued Importunity, I
did at length obey; and the rather, because I had formerly somewhat incurred
that King's and his Brother's Displeasure, by my declining to write against the
States of Holland, during the time of the First and Second Dutch-Wars.

Being thus over-persuaded, I made my Collections, and Presented them to that
King: Which his Majesty having himself perused, was pleased to direct me to put
them into the Hands of the Lord Keeper North, who carefully Read and Corrected
what I had done, and added diverse matters of Fact, which had escaped my
Observation.

Thus the Work stood in Preparation for the Press, when the deplorable Death of
that King happened. And shortly after, King James the Second calling for the
Papers, and having read them, and Altered diverse Passages, caused them to be
printed by his own Authority, as is to be seen before the Book.

But now, my Lord, I can truly declare, that during my composing those
Collections, I earnestly requested King Charles the Second, (and your Lordship
knows as well as any Man, how agreeable such a Request was to the Benign Temper
of that King) I requested him I say, that few or no Names of Persons should be
mentioned, whatever probable suggestions might be against them, but only such,
upon whom public Judgment had passed, which it could be to no purpose for me to
conceal,

I could indeed have wished, that my Lord Russel's, and some other Names of
Persons of Honor, might have been of the Number to be omitted, upon that very
account. But 'twas none of my fault that they were not. I could not hinder, nor
did I in the least contribute to their Fall. Nay, I lamented it; especially my
Lord Russel's, after I was fully convinced by Discourse with the Reverend Dean
of Canterbury, of that Noble Gentleman's great Probity, and Constant Abhorrence
of Falsehood. But that was a good while after. All that I did, was the
Publishing, or rather indeed the putting together methodically, what before was
sufficiently published in printed Papers that were Licensed: And out of them,
to draw the Substance of a Declaration of State, in Vindication of that, which
the Authority of the Nation, at that time, called The Public Justice of the
Kingdom.

But, my Lord, to return to what I was saying, King Charles having granted my
desire of Concealing diverse Names; according to this Allowance I proceeded;
leaving out some, and abbreviating others; endeavoring all along to spare
Parties and Families, and particular Persons, as much as would be allowed. All
which may be demonstrated from the Copies of the Depositions, as they went out
of my hands, where there were several Names visibly marked by my own Pen, to be
passed by in the Publication. So that if some Indifferent Man should now
compare the Informations as they are in Print, with the Originals in the
Secretary's, or the Paper-Office, he would, it may be, be apter to suspect Me
of Connivance; than of Calumny on that side.

If I have now given your Lordship any satisfaction touching my fair Dealing in
My Part of that Book, I doubt not but what follows will give you more; when I
shall assure you of my having refused to Write a Continuation of the same
History. For, my Lord, it was some time after the Duke of Monmouth's Overthrow
and Execution, that King James the Second required me to undertake such another
Task, and presently to set about a Second Part. To that purpose His Majesty
gave me a sight of multitudes of Original Letters and Papers, together with the
Confessions of several Persons then taken in England and Scotland; who did
indeed seem all to outvy one another, who should reveal most, both of Men and
Things relating to the old Conspiracy, as well as to the Duke of Monmouth's,
and the Earl of Argyle's Invasion.

But finding the Innocence of diverse Persons of Worth and Honor, touched in
those Papers, and by that time beginning vehemently to suspect things were
running apace toward the endangering of our Laws and Religion, I must say, I
never could be induced by all his Majesty's reiterated Commands, to go on with
that Work. Instead of that, though I had all the Materials for such a Narrative
within my Power, for above three Years, and might easily have finished it in a
Month or Six Weeks space, yet I chose rather to Suppress and Silence, as much
as I could, all that New Evidence; which, if openly produced, would have
blemished the Reputation of some Honorable Persons.

Give me leave, My Lord, only to add, That I am confident, there are several
Original Papers still in being, which would be more than enough to convince all
impartial Men, how Moderate and Tender I was in that Cause.

Next, My Lord, having mentioned my being concerned in the Commission for the
Diocese of London in that I had the good Fortune to be joined with an excellent
Person, my Lord Bishop of Peterborough. And we can both truly say, that as we
entered into that Commission with my Lord of London's Good Will, so we acted
nothing in it, without the greatest Respect to his Interest.

It is well known we continued all his Officers in the full Profits and
Privileges of their Places. We faithfully maintained the Rights of his
Bishopric, and once in the Kings own Presence, against his Majesty's express
Inclinations, in a Business of no less Concernment than my Lord Mayor's Chapel.
We never Invaded any of my Lord Bishops Preserments that fell void in that
Interval; We dipos'd of none but according to his own Directions. We used his
Clergy with the same affectionate Care and Brotherly Love, as He himself had
done; Who was on that Account, as Dear to them, as any Bishop in Christendom
was to his Diocese.

And we Appeal to them, whether we might not rather expect their Kindness and
Thanks, than suspect their Ill Will for all our Transactions with them. Nor can
this be thought a vain Boast to any Man, who shall seriously reflect on the
terrible Aspect of Things from Court upon the London-Clergy, during the whole
time of our exercising that Jurisdiction. The Remembrance whereof, makes me not
doubt to affirm, that if my Lord Bishop of Peterborough and I, had not then
stood in the Gap, but some other Persons, who were prepared to be thrust in,
upon our leaving that Commission, had got it absolutely into their Power, it is
possible the most Learned and Pious Clergy in the World, had been somewhat
otherwise employed than they were; and had been too much taken up in defending
themselves from the violent Persecutions of the Popish Party, to have leisure
to confute and triumph over the Popish Cause; as they entirely did in their
admirable Writings, to the Glory and Establishment of the Church of England.

My Lord, to the truth of what I have here said concerning the Commission of
London, I have the Bishop of Peterborough ready to attest. I should indeed be
glad I could claim as just a share in another of his Lordships Meritorious
Services to the Public, as I may do in this. But in that I cannot, for it is
Evident the Seven Bishops, whereof he was One, had such an opportunity put into
their Hands by God's Providence, for the overthrow of Popery and Arbitrary
Power, by Their Sufferings for delivering their Sense of King James the
Second's Declaration, as it is likely never any of the Episcopal Order had
before, and it is to be hoped, will never have again.

This however I will say, I had certainly added my self to their Number, if I
had then understood the Question, as well as I did afterward upon their Trial,
where I was present in order to be a Witness in their behalf, at the same time
your Lordship and many other Noble Lords were there, to give Countenance to so
Good a Cause.

There it was, My Lord, that I was first convinced of the false Foundations and
mischievous Consequences of such a Dispensing Power, as that on which the
Declaration was grounded. So that I have ever since been persuaded, that from
that Petition of those Bishops, so defended by the invincible Arguments of
their Learned Council on that Day; and so justified by the honest Verdict of
their Undaunted Jury on the next Day; from thence I say, we may date the first
great successful step, that was made toward the rescuing of our Laws and
Religion.

For my Part I must own, I was so fully satisfied by the excellent ^leadings of
those great Lawyers at that Trial, that I confess I never had till then so
clear a Notion, what unalterable Bounds the Law has fixed between the Just
Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Legal Rights of the Subject. And therefore
from that very Day I hastened to make what Reparations I could for the Errors
occasioned by my former Ignorance; and to act for the future, what I always
intended, as became a true English Man.

Nor was it long after, that I met with a Signal Opportunity to put this my
Purpose in practice. For perceiving the Rage of the Popish Party against the
Church of England was rather heightened than abated, by my Lords the Bishops
being acquitted; and fearing the Ecclesiastical Commission was next to be
Employed, to wreak the Papists Revenge on the Orthodox Clergy, when
Westminster Hall could not do it; I presently resolved to Desert that
Commission; from whence I had often before Labored and Entreated in vain to be
fairly Dismissed: And immediately I sent the Commissioners the following
Letter; whereof Your Lordship may remember I then presented you with a Copy: as
knowing how much You would be pleased, with my other Friends, at my forsaking
that Board upon any Terms.

To the Right Honorable My LORDS, His Majesty's Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Affairs, etc.
MY LORDS,
I Most humbly entreat your Lordships favorable Interpretation of what I now
write, That since your Lordships are resolved to proceed against those, who
have not complied with the King's Commands in Reading His Declaration, it is
absolutely impossible for me to serve His Majesty any longer in this
Commission. I beg leave to tell your Lordships, that tho I my self did submit
in that particular, yet I will never be any ways instrumental in Punishing
those my Brethren who did not. For as I call God to witness, That what I did,
was merely upon a Principle of Conscience; so I am fully satisfied, that their
Forbearance was upon the same Principle. I have no reason to think otherwise of
the whole Body of our Clergy, who, upon all occasions, have signalized their
Loyalty to the Crown, and their Zealous Affections to His Present Majesty's
Person in the worst of Times. Now, my Lords, the Safety of the whole Church of
England seeming to be exceedingly concerned in this Prosecution, I must
declare, That I cannot, with a safe Conscience, Sit as Judge in this Cause,
upon so many Pious and Excellent Men: With whom, if it be God's Will, it rather
becomes me to suffer, than to be in the lest Accessory to their Suffering. I
therefore earnestly request Your Lordships to intercede with the King, that I
may be graciously dismissed any farther Attendance at Your Board, and to Assure
His Majesty, That I am still ready to Sacrifice whatever I have to His Service,
but my Conscience and Religion.

MY LORDS, I am Your Lordships Most Faithful, Humble, and Obedient Servant,
Tho. Roffen.
Bromley, Aug. 15. 1688.

Your Lordship, seeing what I have said in this Letter, concerning my
Submitting in that business of the Declaration, upon a Principle of Conscience,
as I then thought, You may expect my Reason for doing so.

I must frankly confess, I had then a Doubt in my Mind, arising from a Rubric
in the Common Prayer, (which is, as much as any other, a Law of the Land)
whether a Bishop could lawfully deny the Reading of whatever the King should
Ordain to be Read in Churches. And 'twas merely upon that Mistaken Scruple of
Conscience, I was induced not to Oppose that Command of the King in Council: I
say, not to Oppose it: Farther than that, I still say, I went not in that
Business. For it is most true, That the Orders of Council, for Publishing that
Declaration in Churches, were dispersed through the Places of my Jurisdiction
immediately from the Kings Printing House, without my Injunction, or so much as
my Knowledge.

And after they were sent abroad, tho I did not, it is true, Revoke them, as not
being then well determined in the Case, yet I no where insisted to have them
obeyed. Nay, both in my own Diocese of Rochester, and in that of London, where
I had then very unwillingly some Inspection, there is no one Clergyman can
upbraid me, for Urging any Man to Read, or Reproving any for not Reading the
Declaration.

If it shall be objected, that I permitted it to be Read in Westminster-Abby, I
desire it may be also considered, what dreadful Apprehensions this Royal Church
and School were then under, from our Neighbors the Jesuits at Court; who lay
in wait to take any Advantage, whereby they might stir up the King to Ruin us.
Besides that a Quo-Warranto was then actually Issued out against us, and we
were every Day threatened, that as we were the nearest, so we should fall the
first Prey, into the Hands of the Popish Priests.

But to go on, I need not Remind your Lordship, what Wrath and Indignation this
Letter to the Commissioners produced against me, from the Jesuited Party at
Court: For which yet I esteemed my self abundantly Recompensed by the Peace it
gave me in my own Mind, and I hope I may say, by the good Will it Revived
toward me in the Hearts of Good Men; especially of my Lord Archbishop and the
other persecuted Bishops, with whom I ever after acted in perfect Conjunction
for the Public Good.

That, My Lord, is the last particular whereof I promised to give your Lordship
and Account. And I come to it more cheerfully than I did to the rest, because
this is the only matter of all I undertook to Speak of, wherein I am not
Conscious to my self, that I need any Excuse.

It was therefore some time after the Trial of the Seven Bishops, and after my
leaving the Commission, when upon the Kings sudden return from Windsor, and the
first Alarm given of the Preparations in Holland, my Lord of Canterbury, and
some of his Suffragan Bishops, whereof I had the Honor to be One, were sent
for by express Letters dated September the 24th, to attend his Majesty at
Whitehall. Accordingly all of us that were in Town, except my Lord Archbishop,
who was then very ill, waited on the King the Friday following being the Day
appointed. But little or nothing passing betwixt his Majesty and us, at our
first Attendance, beyond general Expressions of his Favor, and our Duty, we
entreated my Lord of Canterbury, to procure for us a Second, and more
particular Audience; wherein we might all deliver our plain and sincere Sense
of Things, as we saw the dangerous Condition of the Church and State then
required from Men of our Character. And on the Sunday after, my Lord
Archbishop, obtained of the King that we should be admitted to a full Liberty
of Speech with him the next Tuesday Morning.

All Monday we spent at Lambeth, in preparing the Humble Advice we thought fit
to offer the next Day. But the King being otherwise accidentally diverted on
Tuesday Morning, our Attendance on him was put off till Wednesday. Whereas had
we been admitted to his Majesty that Tuesday, we could not have failed of
getting some Credit to our selves, and to the Church, for having Requested him
to Restore the Charter of London among other Charters. For from the very
beginning of our Consultations, we had fixed upon that to be One of our
Principal Petitions. Whereof his Majesty perhaps having had some private
Intimation; thought so more for his Service to prevent us, by making it an Act
of his own Grace. This is certain, that very Tuesday in the Evening, he first
declared publicly in the Council, to diverse eminent Citizens, his purpose to
restore the City Charter. So that when we came the next Day, we found nothing
left for us to do toward that great Affair, but only to turn our intended
Request into Thanks, as we did.

However, on Wednesday Morning, we had our Second Audience, when my Lord of
Canterbury delivered our Free and Honest Advice, with such a becoming Meekness,
Gravity, and Courage as indeed was Admirable.

Now because there has been hitherto only an imperfect Relation Printed of what
passed at that Meeting, I think it may not be unacceptable to the Public, to
give here an exact Account of our whole Proceedings with the King in that
Affair; as it was drawn up by my Lord Archbishop himself. And it had been
Happy, if all Addresses to his Majesty had been alike Faithful to the King's
and the Kingdom's Interest.

For his Grace the Ld Archbishop of Canterbury,
MY LORD,
THE King thinking it requisite to speak with Your Grace, and several others of
the Bishops, who are within a convenient distance of this place; His Majesty
commands me to acquaint you, that he would have you attend him upon Friday
next, at Ten in the Morning.

MY LORD, I am Your most Faithful, etc. Sunderland P.
Whitehall, Sep. 24. 1688.

Letters to the same purpose, and of the same Date, (or about that time) were
sent to the Bishops of London, Winchester, Ely, Chichester, Rochester, Bath and
Wells, Peterborough, and Bristol; all which ( but London and Bristol) came to
Town; and all, but the Archbishop, waited on the King at the time appointed.
The next day the Bishop of Winchester went out of Town, and the day after that,
the Archbishop waited upon the King, alone, and by His Appointment, on
Wednesday, October. 3. all, who remained in Town, went together to His Majesty,
to whom (in the Name of the rest) the Archbishop spoke, as follows.

May it please Your Sacred Majesty,

WHen I had lately the Honor to wait upon you, you were pleased briefly to
acquaint me with what had passed two days before, between Your Majesty and
these my Reverend Brethren: By which, and by the Account which they themselves
gave me, I perceived, that in truth there passed nothing, but in very general
Terms, and Expressions of Your Majesty's Gracious and Favorable Inclinations
to the Church of England, and of our Reciprocal Duty and Loyalty to Your
Majesty: Both which were sufficiently understood and declared before; The
Bishop of Bath and Wells.
and (as one of my Brethren then told you) would have been in the same State,
if the Bishops had not stirred one foot out of their Dioceses. Sir, I found it
grieved my Lords the Bishops to have come so far, and to have done so little,
and I am assured, they came then prepared to have given Your Majesty some more
particular Instances of their Duty and Zeal for your Service; had they not
apprehended from some Words, which fell from your Majesty, that you were not
then at leisure to receive them. It was for this reason, that I then besought
your Majesty to Command us once more to Attend you All together; which your
Majesty was pleased Graciously to Allow and Encourage. We are therefore here
now before you, with all Humility, to beg your Permission, that we may suggest
to your Majesty such Advices, as we think proper at this Season, and conducing
to your Service, and so leave them to your Princely Consideration. Which the
King being pleased graciously to permit, the Archbishop proceeded, as
follows. Our First humble Advice is;

I. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to put the Management of your
Government, in the several Counties, into the Hands of such of the Nobility and
Gentry there, as are legally qualified for it.

II. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to Annul your Commission for
Ecclesiastical Affairs; and that no such Court, as that Commission sets up, may
be Erected for the future.

III. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased, That no Dispensation may be
granted, or continued; by Virtue whereof, any person, not duly Qualified by
Law, has been, or may be, put into any Place, Office, or Preferment, in Church
or State, or in the Universities, or continued in the same; especially such, as
have Cure of Souls annexed to them: And in particular, that you will be
graciously pleased to restore the President and Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen
College in Oxford.

IV. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to set aside all Licenses or
Faculties already granted; by which, any Persons of the Romish Communion may
pretend to be enabled to teach Public Schools; and that no such be granted for
the future.

V. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to desist from the Exercise of
such a Dispensing Power, as has of late been used; and to permit that Point to
be freely and calmly Debated and Argued, and finally settled in Parliament.

VI. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to inhibit the Four Foreign
Bishops, who style themselves Vicars Apostolical, from farther Invading the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which is by Law vested in the Bishops of this
Church.

VII. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to fill the Vacant
Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Promotions, within your Gift, both in
England and Ireland, with Men of Learning and Piety: And in particular, (which
I must own to be my peculiar Boldness, for it is done without the privity of my
Brethren:) That you will be graciously pleased forthwith to fill the
Archiepiscopal Chair of York, (which has so long stood Empty, and upon which a
whole Province depends) with some very Worthy Person: For which (pardon me,
Sir, if I am bold to say) you have here now before you a very fair Choice.

VIII. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to supersede all farther
Prosecution of Quo Warranto's against Corporations, and to Restore to them
their Ancient Charters, Privileges, and Franchises; as we hear God has put it
into Your Majesty's Heart to do for the City of London; which we intended to
have made, otherwise, one of our Principal Requests.

IX. That if it so please Your Majesty, Writs may be issued out with convenient
speed for the Calling of a Free and Regular Parliament, in which, the Church of
England may be Secured according to the Acts of Uniformity; Provision may be
made for a due Liberty of Conscience, and for securing the Liberties and
Properties of all Your Subjects; and a mutual Confidence, and good
Understanding, may be Established between Your Majesty, and all Your People.

X. Above all, that Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to permit Your
Bishops to offer you such Motives and Arguments, as (we trust) may, by God's
Grace, be Effectual to persuade Your Majesty to return to the Communion of the
Church of England; into whose most Holy Catholic Faith you were Baptized, and
in which you were Educated, and to which it is our daily earnest Prayer to God,
that you may be Reunited.

These (Sir) are the Humble Advices, which, out of Conscience of the Duty we
owe to God, to Your Majesty, and to our Country, we think fit at this time to
offer to Your Majesty, as suitable to the Present State of your Affairs, and
most conducing to your Service, and so to leave them to your Princely
Consideration. And we heartily beseech Almighty God, in whose Hand the Hearts
of all Kings are, so to Dispose and Govern Yours, that in all your Thoughts,
Words, and Works, you may ever seek his Honor and Glory, and study to preserve
the People committed to your Charge, in Wealth, Peace, and Godliness; to Your
Own both Temporal and Eternal Happiness. Amen.

We do heartily Concur. H. London. P. Winchester. W. Asaph. W. Cant. Fran. Ely.
Io. Cicestr. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Bath and Wells. Tho. Petriburg.

It is for others Information, not for yours, My Lord, that I have been so
Punctual and Minute in the Circumstances of this Business, wherewith your
Lordship was fully made acquainted, just after the very time, at Copthall, as
much as my Lord of London's and my Memory could Serve us to do it.

But one thing farther I must observe as very Remarkable in this Affair, that
if the exact time of this our Address to King James at Whitehall, shall be
compared with the Day of the Prince of Orange his present Majesty's setting
forth his First Declaration in Holland, they will both be found to bear very
near the same Date. For our Address here, was formed at Lambeth on Monday,
October the First, and should have been delivered on Tuesday the Second, and
was actually presented on Wednesday the Third. And that Declaration was Signed
there on the Tenth of October, which, considering the Two Styles, makes little
or no Difference.

And if I might presume to compare Small Things with Great, in the Matter of
them as well as in the Date, I would venture to say, that most of the very same
Grievances, which his Highness insisted on in his Declaration, except One or
Two, that were too high for us Subjects to meddle with, were so early
represented by us to the King in that Petition, as Things necessary to be
speedily Redressed.

And, My Lord, I cannot but add, that this we did in a time when the King
thought of nothing less than Victory; when in all Humane probability, he was
the strongest both by Sea and Land; when as yet there was no appearance of such
a Prodigious Alienation of his Subjects Affections; when at least his Army was
thought to be still firm to him; when the very Winds and Seas seemed hitherto
as much on his Side, as they all afterward turned against him.

After that, My Lord, as I remember the next Solemn time of our Waiting on King
James the Second, was occasioned by the Interception of the Prince of Orange's
Declaration here in London, some short time before his Highness's Landing, For
upon Reading that Expression in it, That the Prince was most earnestly Invited
hither by diverse Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen and
Others of all Ranks; the King forthwith sent for some of the Bishops, who were
nearest at hand, and required us to Justify our Selves to the World, as to our
Part in that Invitation. To this end, His Majesty fixed a Short Day, whereon He
obliged us to present him a Paper under our Hands, signifying our Abhorrence of
the Prince of Orange's intended Invasion.

My Lord, the Day came; and great Throngs there were at Court, expecting the
Issue of that Conference: We saw both the Friends and Enemies of the Church of
England, equally impatient, to know what we would do in that difficult Moment.
The King himself had affirmed to us, He thought his good Success exceedingly
depended upon our Ready Compliance with his Command of Abhorring. A Declaration
was then in the Press against the Prince of Orange the present King, and was
only stopped for our Paper of Abhorrence to be inserted into it: And there
happened to be but Four of our Number, my Lord of Canterbury, my Lord of
London, my Lord of Peterborough, and my Self, who were present upon the Place
to endure that terrible Brunt.

In short, as soon as we were come into the King's Presence, His Majesty with
great Earnestness called for our Paper; We with all Submission entreated to be
Excused from writing any thing of that Nature, and from making a particular
Defense to a general Accusation; left we should give the First Precedent of
that kind, against the Privilege of Peers. Besides that, our Profession being
to promote Peace, We thought it belonged not to us to declare War, especially
against a Prince so nearly Allied to the Crown.

But the King still more Insisted, Argued, and Expostulated with us; insomuch,
that if ever in all my Life I saw him more than ordinary vehement in Speech,
and transported in his Expressions, it was at that time.

However, we still made good our humble Refusal, in as dutiful Terms as 'twas
possible: Among many Arguments, urging chiefly, That as we were joined with our
Brethren, the other Lords Spiritual, and with the Lords Temporal, and with the
Gentry of England, in the Accusation; so we beseech'd him, we might not be
separated from them in our Justification: Concluding all with an earnest
Request to His Majesty, that He would be pleased to Condescend to the Calling a
Free Parliament: Wherein only he could rightly understand, what was the General
Sense, and True Interest of the whole Kingdom.

At last, when neither the King would bearken to our Zealous Motion for a
Parliament, nor we could be prevailed on, to Subscribe an Abhorrence of the
Prince of Orange's Design, His Majesty parted from us with Indignation. And
thereupon the Jesuited Party at Court were so violently enraged against us,
that, as we were credibly informed, one of the Chief advised in a heat, we
should all be Imprisoned, and the Truth should be extorted from us by Violence.

I told your Lordship, the Conclusion of that our Serious De^^^^ with the King,
was on our Side (...) begging him to call a Free Par^^^ment. The truth is, a
Free Par^^^ment was the main Point, and t^ last Result of all our Requests to
His Majesty, from the First Day of his admitting us to give him our honest
Advice, till the time of his leaving the Kingdom.

I need not put your Lordship in mind of the Petition we presented him to the
same purpose, which was Signed by diverse of the Spiritual and Temporal Lords,
and, among others, by your Self; and was afterward Seconded from several Parts
of the Nation; especially by the Noblemen and Gentlemen Assembled at York, and
by the Fleet under the Command of my Lord Dartmouth, and by the Lord Bishop,
and the Clergy, and the Citizens of Bristol. As it had been also soon followed
by the rest of the Kingdom, had there been time enough for the doing of it.

But having mentioned that Petition for a Free and Regular Parliament, I hope
it will not be thought Presumption in me, if I suggest, I had the Honor to
have it Considered, Agreed on, and Signed, at my house at Westminster: And that
I was one of the Four Bishops (the Two Archbishops and my Lord of Ely being the
other Three) who ventured to deliver it to the King, after we heard he had
protested he would take it highly Ill of any Man that should offer him a thing
of that Nature. Nevertheless we did it, and thought our selves bound in Duty to
God and Man so to do.

Your Lordship perceives, all that I have said on this last Subject, concerns
only some few Particulars that passed in Three or Four Conferences between King
James the Second, and some of the Bishops, who happened then to be within Call.
Tho we had afterward the Concurrence of our Absent Brethren. And we may now
appeal to all the World, whether we did not Demean our Selves in those
hazardous Occasions, with that Zeal against Popery, and for the Legal
Establishment both in Church and State, as became the Station we hold in Both.

If your Lordship's Leisure would permit me to look farther back, and to
recount what was Written, Acted, or Suffered, by the Members of the Church of
England in general during that Reign; 'twere easy to recollect so many
Memorable Instances of unshaken Truth and Courage in the Nobility, Gentry,
Clergy, and Commonalty of our Communion, in maintaining our Religion against
Rome, and our Laws against unlimited Power, as might well furnish sufficient
Materials for an ample Relation.

I know it was formerly a popular Objection of diverse misguided Dissenters from
the Church of England, that our Principles were too Monarchical, and that we
carried the Doctrine of Obedience farther than might be consistent with the
safety of a Protestant Church, or the Privileges of a freeborn People,

But it is now to be hoped, that the strongest Argument of all others, which is
Experience from undoubted Matter of Fact, has put this Objection for ever out
of Countenance. Since it is undeniable, that during that whole time, when our
Civil and Spiritual Liberties were in so much Danger, the greatest, and most
considerable stop, that was here put to the Arts of Rome, and Intrigues of
France, was Put by the steady Resolution of the true Sons of the Church of
England.

I pretend not to upbraid any Party or Sect among us, for any undue Compliance
in that Time. But this I will Assert, that generally Speaking, the whole Body
of the Church of England, both Laity and Clergy did not Comply.

Nay, it were Infinite to reckon up the Examples, we then saw every Day, of Men
of all Conditions, from the highest to the lowest, All Members of the Church of
England; who preferred the saving of the Established Government in Church and
State, before any Temptations of private Profit or Interest.

Not to say any thing more of the Learned and Unanswerable Writings of that
time against Popery: For in that Merit, I suppose none of any other Persuation
will enter into any Competition with the Orthodox Clergy: But I now only Speak
of those many Honorable Self-Denials, which the Church of England-Men then
Practiced, for the Sake of the true English Liberty, and Reformation.

What Officers and Commanders were there almost in the whole Army, besides the
Sons of the Church of England, who chose to be Discarded from those very Troops
and Regiments, which their own Interest and Money had raised, rather than
contribute to take away the great Fences of our Liberty and Religion? What
Officers in the Courts of Justice, and in the several Branches of the Revenue?
What Members of Boroughs, Corporations, and Cities, in Comparison of those of
the Church of England, endured the loss of their Places of Trust and Profit,
for not Consenting to Abolish the Tests and Penal Laws against Papists?

What eminent Nobility and Gentry in all Counties, submitted cheerfully to be
flighted, and deprived of all Authority and Power among their Neighbors, in
Peace or War? Were they not generally, and almost to a Man of the Church of
England?

Was not a considerable Part of the Court it self turned out? Did not diverse
Persons of the highest Titles and Dignities there endure to lose their Princes
Favor, upon this very Account? Did we not see the most Advantageous, and most
Honorable Offices, the very White Staves, and the greatest of them, not valued,
but easily parted with, when Religion came in Question's.

I need not go on to recite more particularly all these Things, especially to
your Lordship, who were your Self one of the Noble Sufferers in the same Cause.
'Twill be sufficient to affirm once for all, that the main Body of those, who
made so brave a Stand, were all of the Church of England; and the Principles on
which they stood, were all Church of England Principles.

My Lord, it was by these Persons, and these Principles, that ^opery was stopped
in its full Career; by these it was then hindered from Conquering, and put into
a Condition to be shortly after Conquered it self in this Nation.

After having troubled your Lordship so long with my own Private Cause, and
having said something too, in the behalf of what is much more dear to me, the
Public; pray let me conclude with that, which, in this Juncture of Affairs, may
be counted well high another Public Cause: Let me Present you with my Humbly
well-meaning Opinion, what Moderation is to be shown toward those, who
happened to be employed in the late Times.

My Lord, 'twould be great Presumption in me, having been my self too far
engaged, to offer at an Apology for other Persons concerned then, either with
me in the Commission, or in any other Public Business; particularly for some of
your Lordships Acquaintance, whose Cause may be more Defensible than mine; and
I am sure their Abilities to defend it, are much greater. Only in general, I
will take the freedom to say, That I make no Question, but diverse Good Men, who
were then in Employments, did in Prudence, submit to some things in Order to
hinder Worse. I doubt not but many Acted then not to Increase, but to Mitigate
the Violence of those Times. Some were in such Stations, which perhaps 'twas
well done of them, not suddenly to Desert, lest worse Men should come in, to do
that which they designed to prevent. I believe, some being, as it were, in the
middle of the Stream, when the Tide turned so Violently against our Established
Church and Laws, were driven down lower than they expected, before they could
resist the Current, or get to Shore. Wherefore, considering all Circumstances,
'twas well so many mistook not the true Interest of the Nation. 'Twas happy so
many preserved their Integrity; so many had the honest Hardiness to stand
unmoved by the Importunity of their King, whom they were bred up to Honor, and
in all things else to Obey.

And in common Sense of human Frailty, are not many Infirmities at such a time
as that, to be overlooked now, by wise and good Men? Do not many false Steps so
made, deserve to be pitied? May it not be thought some kind of Merit, or some
degree of Innocence at least, not to have made more, in such a slippery Ground
as we then trod on?

If, my Lord, every Failure of that Time, should be esteemed a Criminal
Compliance, every Compliance should be judged unpardonable, Who then, that
remained under the Government, can be counted Innocent? Who shall be able
justly to throw the first Stone? What Place will be then left for the
Offender's Hope, or for a Prince's Forgiveness, the Noblest and most Divine
Part of Power?

My Lord, the constant Experience of all wise Times has showed, that all Civil
Dissentions and Quarrels are best ended by the largest Acts of Indemnity and
Oblivion: In England especially, where Good Nature is soon apt to have
Compassion upon the Afflicted. Here perhaps scarce any thing can be more
dangerous to the Party that is uppermost, than to put Englishmen upon pitying
those that suffer under it. And certainly this Revolution, if ever any, should
be Mild in the Event, since it was Bloodless in the whole Course of it, in a
time, when there was most danger of Effusion of Blood.

I will say no more, my Lord, but this, that after great and unexpected
Changes, That has been always found the firmest Settlement of any State or
Government, where the Prevailing Party has looked but very little backward,
and very much forward; where Private Animosity and Revenge have wisely given
way to the greater Benefits of Public Pardon and Indulgence.

Perhaps, toward the Beginning of great Reformations, a VVarm impetuous Spirit
may have its use; but to Compose Things after sudden Commotions, to Calm Men's
Minds for the future, to Settle Affairs in a secure and lasting Peace, most
certainly a Gentle, Generous, Charitable Temper, is the best: And to say all in
one word, Such a Temper as is your Lordships.

MY LORD, I am Your Lordship's Most Faithful, Humble, and Obedient Servant,
Tho. Roffen.
Westminster, Mar. 26. 1689.
FINIS.

