Imprimatur, October. 19. 1692. Edmund Bohun.

A RELATION Of the Late Wicked Contrivance

Of STEPHEN BLACKHEAD and ROBERT YOUNG, against the Lives of several Persons,
by Forging an Association under their Hands.

Written by the Bishop of Rochester.

In Two Parts:

The First Part being a Relation of what passed at the Three Examinations of
the said Bishop by a Committee of Lords of the Privy Council.

The Second being an ACCOUNT of the Two abovementioned Authors of the Forgery.

In the SAVOY: Printed by EDWARD JONES. MDCXCII.

A RELATION of the late Wicked Contrivance of Stephen Blackhead and Robert
Young against the Lives of several Persons, by Forging an Association under
their Hands, etc.
I Think it becomes me, as a Duty which I owe to my Country, and to the
Character I have the undeserved Honor to bear in the Church, to give the World
some Account, how my Innocence was cleared from the late Wicked Contrivance
against me: In hopes that this Example of a false Plot so manifestly detected,
may be, in some sort, beneficial to the whole Nation on the like Occasions for
the future: However, that the Enemies of the Church may have no Reason to cast
any Blemish upon it, from the least Suspicion of my Guilt: And that this
faithful Memorial may remain as a poor Monument of my own Gratitude to Almighty
GOD, to whose immediate Protection I cannot but attribute this extraordinary
Preservation.

Perhaps my Reader, at first view, will look on this Relation, as too much
loaded with small Particularities; such as he may judge scarce worth my
remembering, or his knowing: But he will pardon me, if I presume that nothing in
this whole Affair ought to appear little, or inconsiderable, to me at least,
who was so nearly concerned in the event of it.

I have therefore made no scruple to discharge my weak Memory of all it could
retain of this Matter; Nor have I willingly omitted any Thing, though never so
minute, which, I thought, might serve ^ to fix this wonderful Mercy of GOD the
more on my own Mind; or d^d any way conduce to the saving of diverse other
innocent Persons Lives, as well as mine.

I cannot indeed Promise, that I shall accurately repeat every Word or
Expression, that fell from all the Parties here mentioned: Or that I shall put
all down in the very same Order, as it was spoken, having not had the
Opportunity to take Notes of every thing as it passed. But this I will say; if
I shall not be able to relate all the Truth, yet I will omit nothing that is
Material: I will as carefully as if I were upon my Oath, give in all the Truth
I can remember, and nothing but the Truth.

What I Write I intend shall consist of Two Parts. The First, To be a Narrative
of the plain Matter of Fact from my first being taken into Custody, May the
7th, to the time of my last Dismission June the 13th. The Second, To contain
some Account of the Two Perjured Wretches that were pleased, for what Reasons
they know best, to bring me into this Danger.

For the Truth of the Substance of what I shall recollect on the first Head, I
am bold to appeal to the Memories of those Honorable LORDS of the Council, by
whom I was thrice Examined. And touching the second, I have by me so many
Original Papers, or Copies of unquestionable Authority, (which I am ready to
show any Worthy Persons, who shall desire the Satisfaction) as are abundantly
sufficient to justify all that I shall think fit for me to say against
Blackhead, and Young; especially against Young.

It was on Saturday the seventh of May of this present Year 1692, in the
Evening, as I was walking in the Orchard at Bromeley, Meditating on something I
designed to Preach the next Day; that I saw a Coach and four Horses stop at the
outer Gate, out of which two Persons alighted. Immediately I went toward them,
believing they were some of my Friends, coming to give me a Visit. By that time
I was got to the Gate, they were entered into the Hall: But seeing me hastening
to them, they turned, and met me about the middle of the Court. The Chief of
them perceiving me to look wistly on them, as being altogether Strangers to me,
said, My Lord, Perhaps you do not know me. My Name is Dyve, I am Clerk of the
Council, and here is one of the King's Messengers. I am sorry I am sent on this
Errand. But I am come to Arrest you upon suspicion of High Treason.

Sir, said I, I suppose you have a Warrant for so doing; I pray let me see it.
He showed it me, I read it; and the first Name Highted on being the Earl of
Nottingham's; I said, Sir, I believe this is my Lord Nottingham's own Hand, and
I submit. What are your Orders how to dispose of me? My Lord, said he, I must
first search your Person, and demand the Keys you have about you. My Keys I
presently gave him. He searched my Pockets; and found no Papers, but some poor
Notes of a Sermon, and a Letter from Mr. B. Fairfax about ordinary Business.

Now, says he, My Lord, I must require to see the Rooms to which these Keys
belong, and all the Places in the House, where you have any Papers or Books. I
straight conducted him up Stairs into my Study. This, Sir, said I, is the only
Chamber where I keep all the Books and Papers I have in the House. They began
to Search, and with great readiness turned over every thing in the Room, and
Closets, and Presses, shaking every Book by the Cover, opening every part of a
Chest of Drawers, where were many Papers, particularly some Bundles of Sermons;
which, I told them were my proper Tools; And that all that knew me, could Vouch
for me, it was not my Custom to have any Treason in them. They read several of
the Text, and left them where they found them. But in one corner of a Press,
which was half open, they met with a great number of Letters filled up. I
assured them they were only Matters of usual Friendly Correspondence, and most
of them were of last Years date. Mr. Dyve looking on some of them, found them
to be so; and said, If he had time to view them all, he might, perhaps, see
reason to leave them behind; But being expressly Commanded to bring all
Letters, he must carry them with him. I left him to do as he pleased; so they
sealed them up.

Then they went into my Bedchamber, and the Closets adjoining, doing as they
had done in my Study, feeling about the Bed and Hangings, and knocking the
Wainscot in several places, to see if there were any private Hole, or Secret
Conveyance.

After that they came down Stairs, and searched the Parlour and Drawing Room on
that side of the House with the like exactness. In all these Rooms I observed
they very carefully pryed into every part of the Chimneys; the Messenger
putting his Hand into every Flower-Pot: Which I then somewhat smiled at: But
since I found he had but too much Reason so to do.

When they had done searching in all those Rooms, and in the Hall as they were
going out, and had taken with them what Papers they thought fit; they carried
Me away in the Coach that brought them. By the Way we met my Servant Mr. Moor
coming from London. I called out to him, Have you any Letters for Me? He gave
me three or four, which I delivered to Mr. Dyve to open: Who found nothing in
them, but Matters of private Concernment, or ordinary News. And so, between Ten
and Eleven at Night, we arrived at Whitehal, and I was brought to my Lord-
Nottingham, whom I found alone in his Office.

My Lord, said I, I am come upon your Warrant; but certainly there must be some
great Mistake, or black Villainy in this Business. For I declare, as in the
Presence of God, I am absolutely free from any just Accusation relating to the
Government. His Lordship told me, He himself was much surprised when he heard
my Name mentioned. I entreated him I might be Examined that Night, if any
Witnesses could be produced against me. He said, That could not possibly be,
because the Lords, who had the Management of such Affairs, were separated, and
gone Home: But that I was to appear before them the next Day; and in the mean
time, all the Civility should be shown me, that could be expected by a Man in
my Condition.

My Lord, said I, I hope, it being so very late, you will suffer me to lie at
my own House at Westminster. He replied, You shall do so; But you must have a
Guard of Soldiers and a Messenger with you. A Guard of Soldiers said I, My
Lord, methinks is not so necessary to secure one of my Profession; I should
rather offer, that I may have two or more Messengers to keep me, though that may
put me to greater Charges. My Lord, said he, I, for my own part, would be glad,
if I might take your Parole; But I must do what I may answer to others; and
therefore I pray be Content.

At this I acquiesced; only adding, My Lord, here are diverse Papers brought up
with me, which, upon my Credit, are but of common Importance; yet, because they
are most of them private Talk among Friends; there may be some Expressions,
which no Man, if it were his own Case, would be willing to have divulged; and
therefore I desire your Lordship will take Care they may not be shown to the
Prejudice of any. He answered, You have to do with Men of Honor: And you shall
have no Occasion to complain upon that Account.

And so I was conveyed Home to Westminster by Mr. Dyve, and Mr. Knight the
Messenger, in the Coach with Me, and a Guard attending on each side. After we
came to the Deanery, Mr. Dyve having diligently surveyed my Lodgings, and the
Avenues to them, left Me about Midnight, with a strict Charge to the Messenger
and Soldiers, not to give me any unnecessary Disturbance; but to watch
carefully at my Bed-Chamber-Door till further Orders, which they did.

The next Day, being Sunday, May the 8th, Mr. Dyve came again to me about Noon,
to acquaint me, That I was to attend the Committee of the Council that Evening
by Six of the Clock. And, says he, My Lord, I suppose you have here also at
Westminster a Room where you keep the rest of your Books and Papers. I told
him, I had. Then, said he, I have Commission to search there likewise;
particularly in your Cabinet. I showed him my Library and gave him the Keys. He
opened all the Presses of Books, and viewed particulary every Shelf, and
examined every Drawer in the Cabinet: But finding nothing there of a late date,
or that might afford any the least shadow of a Traiterous Correspondence, he
went away without removing any one Paper thence.

At the time appointed I was brought by the Messenger and Guard to Whitehal,
where a select Number of the Lords of the Council were assembled at my Lord
Nottingham's Lodgings. There were present, as I remember, the Earl of
Devonshire Lord Steward the Earl of Dorset Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of
Nottingham Secretary of State, the Earl of Rochester, the Earl of Portland, the
Lord Sydney Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and Sir Edward Seymo^.

When I was entered the Room, and come to the end of the Table, my Lord
Nottingham began. But now, for the greater perspicuity of the whole
Proceedings, and to avoid the too frequent repetition of, said I, or said such
an one, or said they, I will henceforth give all the Questions and Answers, and
the rest of the Discourses, in the Name of every Person, as they spoke, and by
way of Dialogue.

Earl of Nottingham. My Lord, You cannot but think it must be some
extraordinary Occasion, which has forced us to send for you hither in this
manner.


Bishop of Rochester. My Lord, I submit to the Necessities of State, in such a
Time of Jealousy, and Danger, as this is.


Earl of N. My Lord, I am to ask you some Questions, to which we desire your
plain and true Answers.


Bishop of R. My Lords, I assure you mine shall be such; as, I hope, I have
been always taken for a Man of Simplicity and Sincerity.


Earl of N. Have you Composed a Declaration for the present intended Descent of
the late King James into England?


Bishop of R. I call GOD to Witness, I have not.


Earl of N. Did you ever draw up any Heads, or Materials for such a
Declaration?


Bishop of R. Upon the same Solemn Asseveration, I never did.


Earl of N. Were you ever solicited, or applied to by any Person, for the
Undertaking such a Work?


Bishop of R. I never was.


Earl of N. Do you hold any Correspondencies abroad in France?


Bishop of R. I do not hold any.


Earl of N. Have you ever signed any Association for Restoring the late King
James?


Bishop of R. I never signed any.


Earl of N. Do you know of any such Association? Or any Persons that have
subscribed one?


Bishop of R. Upon the Word of a Christian, and a Bishop, I know of no such
thing; nor of any Person, who has subscribed any Paper of that Nature.


Sir Edward Seymour. My Lord Bishop of Rochester, We have examined the Papers
that were seized in your Closet at Bromley. We find nothing in them, but
Matters of ordinary and innocent Conversation among Friends; only we have one
Scruple, That there are few or no Letters among them witten since Lady Day last.


Bishop of R. Sir, I suppose there may be some of a Date since that Time in the
Bundles. If I had preserved more, they would have been of the same Nature with
the rest that you have, that is, concerning common Intelligence, and the Talk
of the Town; not any Secrets of State, or against the Government. My Lords, I
hold no Correspondencies of that kind. When I am in the Country, I desire some
Friend or other here to let me know how the World goes, that I may inform my
self, and the Neighboring Gentlemen, of the Truth of Things, and prevent the
spreading of false News: And afterward I file up such Letters according to
their Dates, (as you may perceive I did these,) that at any time I may have a
present Recourse to them to refresh my Memory in any past Transaction.


My Lords, Those are all I thought worth keeping of this kind these two last
Years. And I hope the Clerk of the Council has done me the Justice to acquaint
your Lordships, how I was apprehended, out of my House; and how narrowly I my
self, and my Study, and Lodging-Chamber, and other Rooms, were searched: So
that it was impossible for me to have suppressed or smothered any one Writing
from you. And really I believe there was not a Note, or least Scrip of Paper of
any Consequence in my Possession, but they had a view of it.

Earl of Devonshire. But, my Lord, it is probable a Man of your Interest, and
Acquaintance, must have received more Letters since, than are here to be found.
We see here are many concerning Affairs that passed just before that time.


Bishop of R. My Lords, A little before the Conclusion of the last Session of
Parliament, I obtained Leave of the House of Lords to retire into the Country,
for the Recovery of my Health. During my abode there, as long as the Parliament
continued, I was somewhat curious to learn what passed in both Houses, and
therefore, as your Lordship has observed, Letters came thicker to me about that
time. But when the Parliament was up, very little happening that was remarkable
in that interval, I was not so mindful to preserve the Letters that came to me,
whilst all Things, both abroad and at home, were rather in Preparation than
Action.


Besides that, since the Time your Lordships speak of, I was twice or thrice in
Town for several days together; once especially upon a public Occasion, the
Annual Election of Westminster School; which detained me here about a Week. And
these are the True Reasons why you find so few Letters to me since the Date of
Time your Lordships have mentioned.

Earl of N. Will it please your Lordships to ask the Bishop of Rochester any
more Questions?


They being all silent, I said, My Lords, I cannot imagine how it comes to pass
that I should be thus suspected to be guilty of any Contrivance against the
Government; I think I may appeal to all that know me, I am sure I may to all my
Neighbors in the Country where I live, that there has no Man submitted to it
more peaceably and quietly than I have done ever since the Revolution; and I
must own, I did it both upon a a Principle of Conscience and Gratitude. Of
Conscience, Because I cannot see how the Church of England and the whole
Protestant Religion can be preserved but upon this Constitution; since an
Invasion from France cannot but be destructive to Both. And of Gratitude,
Because, as you all know, I happened to be, in the late Reign, engaged in an
Affair, which since I have been taught was Illegal. And though, I may say, I
stopped betimes, and did no great hurt, but hindered, as much as I could, whilst
I Acted; yet I Acted so long, that I might have expected to be severely
punished for what I did. But the King's and Queen's Part, in the General
Pardon, was so Gracious and Benign, in making it their own Act, and not
excluding me out of it, that Their Majesty's have thereby laid upon me an
Obligation never to be forgotten.

Upon this I was bid to withdraw; and about an Hour after, the same Clerk of
the Council was sent out to tell me, The Lords had Ordered I should return to
my own House, and be under the same Confinement as before, of a Messenger, and
a Guard of Soldiers: And there I should shortly hear what their Lordships would
determine concerning me. He likewise told the Messenger, and the Guards, That
he had a strict Command to them to use me, with all Respect; only to take Care,
that I should be safely kept, and forthcoming. Nor indeed had I any thing to
object against their Behavior. For, as Mr. Dyve demeaned himself always to me
like a Gentleman, and the Messenger was very Civil, so the Soldiers themselves
were as easy and quiet to the rest of my Family, as if they had been a part of
it.

The same Evening Mr. Dyve came home to me, and brought me all my Papers,
telling me, That the Lords had heard him read them over; and, having no
Exception against them, had sent him to return them all safe to me again.

Thus guarded, I continued from that Day, till the 18th of May, under the
Custody of a Messenger and of four Sentinels, who watched Day and Night, and
were relieved every Eight and forty Hours.

But then, having heard nothing in the mean time from the Lords, I wrote this
Letter to the Earl of Nottingham.

My Lord,
AS I have all this while, according to my Duty to their Majesty's Government,
with Patience and Humility, submitted to my Confinement under a Guard of
Soldiers, and a Messenger; so now, fearing that my longer Silence may be
interpreted as a Mistrust of my Innocence, I think it becomes me to make this
Application to your Lordship, earnestly entreating you to represent my
Condition and Request to the most Honorable Board, where I was examined. I
entirely rely on their Justice and Honor, that, if they find nothing real
against me (as God knows, I am conscious to my self they cannot) they would be
pleased to order my Enlargement. I am forced to be the more importunate with
your Lordship in this Business, because it is very well known, in what a
dangerous Condition of Health I went out of Town toward the latter end of the
Session of Parliament: And I find my Distemper very much increased by this
close Restraint, in a time when I was just entering upon a Course of Physic in
the Country.

My Lord, I am Your Lordship's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant; Tho.
Roffen
May 18. Westminster.
To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Nottingham, Principal Secretary of State.
This Letter was read in the Cabinet Council that Day, and it had the Desired
Effect; for thereupon I was ordered to be discharged that Evening; which
accordingly was done about ten at Night, by Mr. Shorter, a Messenger of the
Chamber, coming to my House, and dismissing the Messenger, and taking off the
Guard.

The next Morning, being May 19th, to prevent any Concourse or Congratulations,
usual upon such Occasions; I retired early to Bromley, where I remained quiet
till June the 9th, little dreaming of a worse Mischief still hanging over my
Head.

But that Day, being Thursday, as I was upon the Road, coming to Westminster,
to the Meeting of Dr. Busby's Preachers, who assemble once a Term at my House
there, I was stopped by a Gentleman that brought me this Letter from my Lord
Nottingham.

White Hall, June 8. 92. My Lord,
I Must desire your Lordship to be at my Office on Friday Morning by Ten of the
Clock.

I am Your Lordships Most Humble Servant, Nottingham.

For the Right Reverend, the Lord Biship of Rochester, at Bromley.
I asked the Bearer, whether he had any farther Orders concerning me: He
answered, No: But was forthwith to return. I desired him to acquaint his Lord,
that I was now going to Town upon other Business, but that I would presently
wait on him at White Hall. Accordingly from Lambeth I went to his Office. When
my Lord came to me, I told him, that having met his Lordship's Letter
accidentally in my Way to Westminster, I thought it best to come presently to
know his Pleasure.

Earl of N. My Lord, There is a Mistake, I gave you Notice to be here to morrow
Morning: And that is the Time you are appointed to appear before the Committee
of the Council.


Bishop of R. However, My Lord, being in Town occasionally, I thought it became
me to present my self to you as soon as I could. And I now make it my Request,
If your Lordships have any thing farther to say to me, I may be convened before
you this Day.


Earl of N. I fear you cannot be so, for there is much Business to be this
Afternoon, both at the great Council, and the Committee: But I will send you
Word to the Deanery, if you can be called this Evening. In the mean time you
have your full Liberty to go where you please.


Thus I went home; but having no Notice from my Lord that Night, the next Day,
being June the 10th, about Ten of the Clock, I came to his Lordship's Office;
where were met the same Lords as before; only, I think, the Earl of Portland
was not there, and the Earl of Pembroke, Lord Privy Seal, was.

When I was called in, besides the Privy Councillors that sat about the Table,
there was standing against the Wall a very ill-favored Man, who afterward
proved to be Blackhead; with whom I strait perceived I was sent for to be
confronted.

For, as soon as I was in the Room, my Lord Nottingham said, My Lord, Do you
know that Person?

Bishop of R. My Lord, I have seen this Man's Face, but I cannot immediately
recollect where.


Earl of N. I pray view him well. Has he never brought you any Letters from one
Mr. Young?


Bishop of R. I do call to mind, he has brought me a Letter. I cannot in a
moment remember from whom it was.


Earl of N. He says it was from one Young.


Bishop of R. I think it was at my House at Bromley, that he delivered it me;
but I verily believe, it was not from any of the Name of Young.


Blackhead. I was with the Bishop of Rochester at Bromley: I brought him a
Letter from Mr. Young, and I received an Answer to Mr. Young back again from
the Bishop.


Thus far, during the beginning of this Examination, I stood with my Face
against the Window, and my Eyes being so very tender and feeble as they are, I
had not a perfect View of Blackhead; but he so confidently affirming, That he
had of late carried Letters between me and one Young, I changed my Station, and
got the Light on my Back; and then immediately, having a true Sight of his very
remarkable Countenance and Habit, and whole Person, and being also much
assisted by his Voice, which is very loud and rude; I did (by Gods Blessing)
perfectly call him to mind; and said, Now, my Lords, by the Advantage of this
Light, I do exactly remember this Fellow, and part of his Business with me at
Bromley. What he says of Young cannot be true. I know not for what purpose he
affirms this; but upon my Reputation, it is utterly false, that he ever brought
me a Letter from one Young.

Earl of N. My Lord, He says particularly, it was upon a Fast Day.


Bishop of R. My Lords, I do remember this Fellow was with me at Bromley on a
Fast Day: By the same Token, I told him, he should stay till after
Evening-Prayers, and must expect only a fasting kind of Meal. But then I would
return an Answer to his Business.


Blackhead. It was upon a Fast Day. I did eat with the Bishop's Servants; and I
received an Answer from his own Hand, to the Letter I brought him from Mr.
Young.


Bishop of R. My Lords, This that he says of Young, is a wicked Lie; All my
Correspondencies are so innocent (as I hope your Lordships can testify) that,
if I had received a Letter from any Mr. Young, I should have no reason so
positively to deny it. I beseech you, examine this Fellow thoroughly, and I
doubt not but you will discover some impudent Knavery. I stand to it; I am sure
there is no Person whose Name is Young, with whom I have of late years
maintained any Intercourse by Letters.


Earl of Devonshire. My Lord, Is there no Person of the Name of Young, a
Clergyman, with whom you are acquainted?


Bishop of R. Oh! My Lord, There are two excellent Persons of the Name of
Young, both Clergymen, to whom I have the good Fortune to be very well known:
The one was your Brother Ossery's Chaplain, and is now Prebendary of
Winchester; the other was Canon of Windsor, when I was a Member of that Church,
and is there still. But I suppose, neither of these are the Youngs, whose
Correspondence this Man objects to me. I should take it for an Honor to
Correspond with them. But in Truth it has so happened, that I have neither
written too, nor received one Letter from either of them these many Years, to
the best of my Knowledge.


Blackhead. The Bishop, if he please, may remember it was Robert Young, from
whom I brought him a Letter.


Earl of N. How long ago say you, it was?


Blackhead. It was about two Months ago?


Bishop of R. I have indeed, my Lords, some obscure Remembrance, that some
Years ago, there was one writ to me out of Newgate, under the Name of Robert
Young, pretending to be a Clergyman; and I recall something of the Contents of
his Letter. It was to tell me, That He and his Wife lay in Prison there upon a
False Accusation, of which he hoped they should be speedily cleared. In the
mean time, he desired me to recollect, that he had Officiated some Weeks for
the Chaplain at Bromley-College, and had Preached once or twice in the
Parish Church there. He entreated me to give him a Certificate of this, because
it would stand him in much stead in order to his Justification: And withal,
that I would send him something out of my Charity, for his and his Wifes Relief
in their great Distress.


This, my Lords, I dare say, was the whole Substance of that Letter, and this
was two or three Years ago at least.

To that Letter I am sure I made no Reply in Writing. Only, having not the
least Remembrance of him my self, I inquired in the Neighborhood, and among the
Widows in the College; intending to have sent him some Alms suitable to his
Condition and mine, had I found him worthy.

But upon inquiry, I received from all Hands, so very ill a Character both of
this Young, and his Wife, that I resolved to give him no Answer at all; and I
have never heard any thing more of him to this Day.

But now, I beseech your Lordships, to give me leave to speak to this Person my
self: And they intimating I should do as I thought best, I said to him;

I Conjure you, in the Presence of these Noble Lords, and especially of the
Great LORD of Heaven and Earth, that you will declare the Truth of what I am
going to ask you.

When you came to my House at Bromley, upon a Fast Day it was, I think the
first Fast of this Year; Did not you desire to speak with me, as having a
Letter for me? When I came to you into my Hall, Did not you first kneel down,
and ask me Blessing? Did you not then deliver me a Letter, affirming it was
from a Country-Minister, a Doctor of Divinity? Did not you tell me, You were
his Servant, or Bailiff? And that your Master had sent you on purpose, many
Miles to receive an Answer your self to that Letter from my own Hand?

Blackhead. I never brought a Letter to the Bishop of Rochester from a Country
Minister; I know no such Doctor of Divinity: Nor ever was Servant to any: I
only brought a Letter to the Bishop from Mr. Young.


Bishop of R. My Lords, What I say is most certainly true. This Man had never
any other Business with me, but in relation to that Letter, pretended by him,
(for now I find it was but a pretense) to be written to me by an Eminent
Country Divine in Buckinghamshire, a Person of a Considerable Estate, as he
told me. My Lords, I cannot yet call to Mind the Doctor's Name: But the
Business of the Letter I am in great part Master of, and it was to this purpose:


That there was a Person, (naming him,) who had applied to him to be his
Curate; but that he had Reason to suspect he had Counterfeited my Hand and Seal
for Holy Orders: Therefore he desired me to send him Word under my own Hand by
the Bearer his Man, Whether I had Ordained such a One, in such, or such Years:
That if I had, he would Encourage, and Entertain him; if not, he would take
care, he should be punished for his Forgery.

Now, My Lords, upon the receipt of so Friendly a Letter, by this very
Messenger, I bid him stay a little, and I would give his Master Satisfaction
out of my Books, Whether I had Ordained any Man of that Name; which I thought I
had not. Accordingly my Secretary, and I did severally turn over all my Papers
relating to such Affairs, as carefully as we could; and finding no such Man's
Name in them; in which we could not be easily deceived because I keep
Methodically (as no doubt every Bishop does) all Recommendations,
Subscriptions, Testimonials, and Titles of those I admit into Orders; I wrote
the supposed Author of the Letter, as civil an Answer as his seemed to deserve.

That I was extremely pleased, and thankful, that a mere Stranger to me should
be so careful of my Reputation: That my Secretary, and I, had diligently
examined all the Books, where such Things are Recorded: And I could assure him,
I never had Ordained any such Person either Priest or Deacon, within the space
limited in his Letter, or at any other time: That I should look upon it as a
signal Service done to the Church in general, and a special Favor to me in
particular, if he would, as he promised, cause the Counterfeit to be
apprehended, so that the Course of Law might pass upon him.

This Letter, my Lords, all, Written with my own Hand, I delivered to the
Person here present: And he went away with it, asking me Blessing again upon
his Knees; and promising I should speedily be made acquainted with the Success.

Earl of Devonshire. I pray, My Lord, how was the Letter Superscrib'd you sent
back by this Man?


Bishop of R. My Lord, It was to the same Person, with the same Superscription
as he Subscribed himself, and directed to the same Place, where he said he was
Minister; though the Name of Place or Minister I cannot yet recover. But let that
Letter of mine be produced, and it will put an end to this whole Controversy.


Blackhead. The Letter I received from the Bishop, was Superscrib'd to Mr.
Young, and to no other.


Bishop of R. My Lords, This is a Horrid Falsehood. I well remember now, this
Fellow was at my House a second time, some Weeks after the first. When he came,
I was in the Garden with some Gentlemen my Neighbors; where, first asking me
Blessing, he told me, His Master the Doctor had taken up the Person who had
Forged my Orders: That the Man stood upon his Vindication; but that his Master
was bringing hint up to London; and then I should hear farther from him:
Adding, That his Master was a Man of such a Spirit, and such a plentiful
Estate, that whenever he suspected a Man to be a Rogue, or a Cheat, he would
spare no Pains to discover him, nor think any cost too much to get him
punished. These, my Lords, I well remember were the Knaves very Words: And I
hope your Lordships will likewise deal with him in the same manner. I took this
second Message still more kindly, and ordered my Servants to entertain the
Messenger very civilly.


Blackhead. I brought no such Message. All my Business with the Bishop was from
Mr. Young, which I suppose was of another Nature.


Bishop of R. What I say is so true, that I am confident several of my Servants
do remember the Particulars. For this Man stuck not to Declare his Business
before them all; very much Magnifying his Master, and his Housekeeping, and
Vapouring what an Example he would make of the Counterfeit Priest; without
putting me to any Trouble, or Expense.


Earl of Devonshire. Has your Lordship none of those Servants near at hand:


Bishop of R. My Lord, some of them are in Town; and one, my Secretary, Mr.
Moore, by an accidental good Fortune, came hither with me: He was without, when
I was called in. I doubt not but he will satisfy your Lordships what was this
Man's Errand to me: He is a young Man, of Great Honesty, and, I believe, would
not tell a Lie to save my Life: I am sure I would not have him.


Whilst they were calling in Mr. Moore, I added, My Lords, I appeal to the
Great God of Heaven to judge between me and this Wretch, touching the Truth or
Falsehood of what we say, and to deal with us both accordingly at the last Day
of Judgment: And I dare also appeal to your Lordships to judge between us by
what appears to you; For did you ever see greater Villainy, and Consciousness of
Guilt in any Man's Countenance than in his?

By this time Mr. Moore being come in, I said, Moore, Apply your self to My
Lord Nottingham. I charge you, Do not, for any Consideration of me, speak any
Thing which you cannot justify for Truth.

Earl of N. Mr. Moore, Do you know that Person there? Pointing to Blackhead.


Mr. Moore. My Lord, I do know him so far, that I have seen him once or twice
at my Lords House at Bromley.


Earl of N. What Business had he at Bromley?


Mr. M. The first Time he brought a Letter to my Lord.


Earl of N. From whom?


Mr. M. My Lord, It was from a Country Minister in Buckinghamshire, a Doctor of
Divinity, as he wrote himself, his Name was Hook.


Bishop of R. My Lords, I now very well remember that was the Name, Hook, or
something very near it. There may be the Difference of a Letter: I will not
stand upon that, or can it be expected I, or my Servant, should be positive as
to every Letter of a Name, in so sudden a Question.


Earl of N. Mr. Moore, What was the Business of that Letter?


Mr. M. My Lord, it was concerning one that offered himself to be the Doctor's
Curate, whom he suspected to have Counterfeited my Lord's Letters of Orders.
The Doctor desired my Lord to look into his Books, whether he had Ordained any
such Person. My Lord and I did thereupon search all the Places where the
Memorials of such Affairs are kept, and we found no such Name; and so my Lord
himself wrote back to the Doctor, by this very Man that stands here.


Earl of N. Mr. Moore, Will you take your Oath of all this?


Mr. M. I am ready to take my Oath of it, if you please to give it me.


Earl of N. What say you Blackhead? You see here is a young Man, the Bishop's
Secretary, comes in by chance, and confirms punctually what the Bishop had said
before, concerning your Message to his Lord: And he offers to take his Oath of
it. If you did bring a Letter from one Doctor Hook, Why do you not confess it?
It can do you no hurt.


Blackhead. I know of no such Divine as Doctor Hook; nor any Thing concerning
one that Counterfeited the Bishops Orders. The Letter I brought was from Mr.
Young.


Mr. M. My Lord, This Fellow cannot but know, that what he says is shamefully
false; I assure you, I have the Original Letter at home to produce: And doubt
not but diverse of my Lords Servants remember him and his Business as well as I
do: For he was a second Time at Bromley some Weeks after.


Earl of N. What was his Business then?


Mr. M. He said, He came to acquaint my Lord, That his Master, Doctor Hook,
had seized on the Person who had forged his Orders. My Lord asked him, Whether
he had also seized the False Instrument? And if he had, desired it might be
transmitted to him. This Man answered, He believed his Master had got it: That
he was coming up to London, and bringing the Cheat with him; and had been there
sooner, had he not sprain'd or hurt his Leg: But when he was come, the Doctor
would give my Lord Notice, or himself wait upon him. My Lord was much pleased
with this second Message; and gave Orders to have the Bringer of it well used.
He was so; and freely discoursed with the Butler, and the other Servants,
touching his Business there. So that I am verily persuaded several of them
remember all these Circumstances of it, and perhaps more than I do.


Upon this, Blackhead, being again urged by the Lords with so plain a
Testimony, perfectly agreeing with what I had said; and he still persevering
obstinately to deny every part of it; I and Mr. Moore were ordered to withdraw,
Blackhead. staying behind.

As I was going out, I said, My Lords, I cannot comprehend to what purpose this
Fellow persists in this Lie; I am sure he can never prove that I have injured
the Government, in Word, or Deed, or Writing. Then I could not but again
observe to the Lords, what visible Marks of Falsehood and Treachery there were
in Blackhead's Face. For, indeed all the while he looked as if he would have
sunk into the Ground: Though, as I was told afterward, before I came into the
Room he had appeared very brisk, and bold, and full of Talk. But upon my first
coming in, his Complexion, which was naturally very sallow, turned much paler
and darker; and he was almost Speechless, saying nothing to any purpose, more
than what he thought was necessary to keep him firm to the main Lie, That he
had brought me a Letter from one Young, and no other.

But after my being withdrawn, about half an Hour, I was called in again, and
Blackhead sent forth.

Earl of N. Now, my Lord, the Business is out, the Fellow has confessed he
brought the Letter to you, Written not in the Name of Young, but as from one
Doctor Hooks, Hooks was the Name, not Hook, your Lordship was in the right,
in saying, you would not stand upon a Letter.


Bishop of R. My Lords, I could not trust my Memory so far as to a Letter. But
one Thing I was sure of, That was the only Letter this Rascal ever brought me;
and it was not from any whose Name was Young.


Earl of N. Well, that Business is over, he has confessed it; and now, my Lord,
Pray take a Chair and sit down.


Earl of Devonshire. Pray, my Lord, sit down.


Bishop of R. No, my Lords, I desire you to excuse me.


Earl of N. My Lord, we have some few Questions to ask you, and therefore pray
repose your self.


Bishop of R. If you please to permit me, I had rather answer what your
Lordships have farther to say, standing thus as I am at the Table.


Earl of N. Then, my Lord, we shall ask you. Have you ever written to the Earl
of Marleborough within these Three Months?


Bishop of R. I think I may safely affirm, I never writ to my Lord Marleborough
in my Life: But I am certain, and upon the Faith of a Bishop, I declare, I have
not written one Word to him these Three Months.


Earl of N. Have you received any Letter from my Lord Marleborough within these
three Months?


Bishop of R. I protest solemnly, I have not received any.


Earl of N. Have you received any Written or Printed Papers from my Lord
Marleborough within that space of Time?


Bishop of R. As in the Presence of God, I declare, I have not. My Lords, I
have had some Acquaintance with my Lord Marleborough, both in King James's
Court, and in the Parliaments since; but I cannot call to mind, that ever I
wrote to him, or he to me.


Earl of N. Then, I think, my Lords, we have nothing more to do, but to wish my
Lord Bishop a good Journey to Bromley.


With that they all rose up, and saluted me, testifying their great
Satisfaction, that I had so well cleared my self, confounded my Adversary. More
especially Two Noble Lords of the Company, to whom, I said I would now
particularly Appeal, gave me an Ample Testimony of their belief of my Innocence
in this Accusation, and of my Dutiful Disposition to the Government.

My Lord Nottingham then told me, in the Name of all the rest, They had no
farther Trouble to give me. I entreated them to suffer me to add a few Words:
They permitting me, I said;

My Lords, I heartily thank you for Confronting me with this Fellow; else I
could not so well have made out my Innocence: But I might still have lain Under
a Suspicion, whereof I had not known the least Ground. Had this been a Trial
for my Life, I should have been glad to have such Honorable Persons for my
Judges. But now I have much more Reason to bless GOD, that you have been my
Compurgators: That you are Witnesses, as well as Judges, of the Detection of
this Villainy against me; whereof, I must acknowledge, as yet, I do not fathom
the bottom. Wherefore I must entreat, That I may put my self under your
Protection for the future. For although this Fountain of Wickedness has been
now stopped in this Particular, as to my self; yet it seems to run under Ground
still: And unless special Care be taken, it may break forth again in some other
Place, on some other Occasion* to the Ruin, if not of Me, yet of some other
Innocent Person.

Earl of Devonshire. No, My Lord, You need never fear this Fountain can break
forth any more, to do you, or any other good Man, any Prejudice; He having been
so palpably Convicted of Knavery and Lying.


Bishop of R. My Lords, I hope so: As for my Self, I take my own Innocence to
be abundantly Vindicated, by this your general Declaration in my Favor. I make
no question but your Lordships will next Vindicate your Selves, and the Justice
of the Government, by bringing this Wicked Man to Condign Punishment, and by
examining the main Drift of his Design, and who have been his Accomplices.


They all assuring me, I might rely upon them for it, I withdrew.

All this while I had not the least Conjecture, or Imagination, who this Young
should be, with whom Blackhead pretended I held so close a Correspondence.

But my next Appearance before the Committee of the Council, will clear up what
remains of the whole Wicked Mystery.

In the mean time, returning Home that Evening to Bromley, I presently met with
a plentiful Concurrence of Evidence from most of my Servants, of their
Discourse with Blackhead, and their Knowledge of his Business, in reference to
Dr. Hooks Letter.

First, The Butler Thomas Warren told me, That according to my Order to use him
kindly, he had done so both times has was with us: Particularly the second time
he had entertained him with one of the Petty Canons of Windsor, who came
thither by chance, in the Parlour next the Garden: That thence he brought him
down into the Cellar, where Blackhead Drunk my Health with Knees almost bended
to the Ground: That then he earnestly desired him to show him my Study; saying,
I have heard your Lord has a very good Study of Books: My Master Hooks has a
very good one: He often lets me go into it, and I doubt not but you have the
same Liberty: I pray let me see his Books. The Butler answered, My Lord has but
few Books here, only such as he brings from time to time from Westminster for
present use, and they are locked up in Presses, so that I cannot show them if I
would. I pray then, said Blackhead, let me see the Room, I hear it is a very
fine one. The Butler said, He could not presume to do it without my leave.
Then, said Blackhead, let me see the rest of the House. The Butler excused his
not being able to do it then, because there were some Ladies with his Mistress.
The same Request, he assured me, Blackhead repeated almost twenty times: But
still he denied him.

Then Thomas Philips my Coachman, and John Jewel my Gardener, confirmed most of
what the Butler had said: All of them agreeing, that both the times he was at
Bromley, especially the second, he had talked publicly with them of the
Business he came about from his Master Dr. Hooks: Enlarging much in
Commendation of the said Doctor, what a Worthy Man he was; What Hospitality he
kept; And how he would never rest, till he had brought to Punishment the Knave
that had forged my Hand and Seal for Orders. They added, That, after I had
dismissed him, he lingered about, in the Garden, the Hall, and the great
Parlour, a long time; and was full of such Discourses.

Moreover, the Gardener, and William Hardy the Groom, and Thomas French, and
one or two of the other Servants, who remained at Bromley whilst I was in the
Custody at Westminster, did all assure me, that this Man, who brought first the
Letter, and then the Message from Dr. Hooks, had been a third time at my
House, whilst I was under Confinement. That it was upon a Sunday which by
Computation proved to be Whit-Sunday, May 15th, That they found him in the
midst of the House, before they knew he was entered. He told them that, passing
that way, he came to Condole for my Mishap, and to enquire what the Matter was;
hoping it was not so bad as was reported at London. They answered, They knew
nothing of Particulars; yet doubted not but I was innocent. That he then again
desired to see the House. But all the Doors were locked, except the great
Parlour, which has no Lock upon it. That he would have enticed them to Town to
Drink with him; which they refused, but made him Drink there; and he coming
after Dinner, they persuaded a Maidservant to provide him some Meat: Which she
did, but unwillingly, telling them she did not like the Fellows Looks; That
perhaps he might come to Rob, or to Set the House, now so few Servants were at
Home: That he rather looked (as indeed he did) like some Knavish; broken
Tradesman, than an Honest Rich Clergy-Man's Bailiff, or Steward, (as he also
called himself;) and it has proved since, that her Conjecture was true.

All this, and more, my Servants repeated to me, touching Blackhead's Behavior
in my House, and his Discourse concerning his Master Dr. Hooks. And they
offered to depose it all upon Oath. And, above all, the next Day, being
Saturday, June the 11th, Mr. Moore coming from London, immediately found the
Original Letter, that Blackhead had brought me from the pretended Doctor.

Wherefore, being furnished with all these fresh Materials, especially with the
Letter it self; and being not a little surprised to hear that the Rogue had,
the second time of his coming, been so earnest to get into my Study, or any of
the other Rooms; and that he had the Diabolical Malice against me, to come to
my House a third time, on pretense of Condoling my Misfortune, which I then
thought, it was probable, had chiefly proceeded from his Malicious Perjury
against me: All this considered, I resolved to go to London on Monday Morning
with these Servants, and to carry the Letter that he brought me as from Dr.
Hooks, to lay the whole Business before the Lords of the Committee, and to
desire their farther Examination of Blackhead upon these Particulars.

Accordingly on Monday; June the 13th, I went, and attended the meeting of the
Lords that Morning in the usual place. When there was a full Committee, I sent
to them by a Clerk of the Council, entreating that I might have a short
Audience. After some time, I was introduced. There were present (besides most
of the Lords beforementioned,) three others whom I had not seen there since my
first Appearance before them, the Marquess of Carmarthen Lord President, the
Lord Godolphin, and Sir John Lowther.

When I came into the Room, and was just going to propose the Business that
brought me thither: My Lord Nottingham prevented me, and said;

My Lord, Do you know that Person there? Pointing to a Man, who stood behind
the Privy Consellors, near the Door which leads into the public Room.

Bishop of R. My Lord, I do not know him.


Earl of N. My Lord, I pray observe him well.


Bishop of R. Upon my Credit I never saw this Man before in my Life, to the
utmost of my Knowledge.


Then the Person standing there looked boldly upon me, and said, Do you not
knom me, my Lord? Do not you remember, that I officiated some Weeks at
Bromley-College, for Mr. Dobson, in King James's Time? And that I Preached in
the Parish Church there once or twice?

Bishop of R. My Lords, I solemnly affirm, I do not know this Man: I never saw
him before: I never knew that he Officiated in Bromley-College: I never heard
him Preach in the Church there: He is a mere Stranger to me: He may have served
for the Chaplain of that College in King James's Time: But I was not then
concerned who Officiated there. He may have Preached in the Church, and I not
have heard him: For about that time I was Clerk of the Closet, and was seldom
or never at Bromley on Sundays, by reason of my Attendance on the Princess Anne
of Denmark, either at Whitehalt, or Windsor, or Hampton Court, or Richmond.


The same Person presently took me up, with insolent Confidence, You will know
me better when Captain Law appears: I warrant you don't know Captain Law
neither.

Bishop of R. My Lords, if any of your Lordships please to ask me any Thing, I
shall answer with all Respect. But I do not understand that I am bound to
satisfy this saucy Fellows Questions: Yet, because he has asked me so
familiarly, touching my Acquaintance with one Captain Law, I assure you, I
know not any such Man in the World as Captain Law.


But, my Lords, by this Person's Discourse I am induced to believe, he may be
the Young, with whom the other Knave Blackhead pretended the last time that I
held a strict Correspondence by his Means.

Earl of N. This Man's Name is Young, Robert Young.


Bishop of R. Then, my Lords, because my Lord President, and some of the other
Lords, were not here then, I must beg leave of those that were, that I may
repeat what I then remembered concerning one Robert Young. Whereupon I
recollected the Substance of what I had said, of a Letter I had received some
Years since, dated at Newgate; from one of the same Name, who pretended himself
to be a Clergyman.


I added, It seems, my Lords, by his own Confession, this is the very same
Young. But as I never saw him before he was in Newgate, so I declare, upon the
Faith of a Christian, I never saw, or heard from him since that Letter: However
I am very glad you have him now: I make no doubt but he will be found in the
end such another Villain as Blackhead was proved to be on Friday last.

But, my Lords, said I, the Business that brought me to wait on you now, is to
entreat you to take that same Blackhead into farther Examination, and to
inquire a little more into his Part in this Wicked Contrivance, whatever it is.

My Lords, since I went to Bromley, my Servant Mr. Moore has had the good
Fortune to retrieve the very Original Letter that Blackhead brought me from his
Counterfeit Master Doctor Hooks. Then I delivered the Letter at the Table, and
my Lord Nottingham read it aloud. And to show with what a Treacherous
Insinuation, and plausibility of Style it was written, to draw from me an
Answer under my own Hand, I here set down the very Letter it self Word for Word.

My Lord,
BEing destitute of a Curate, one Mr. James Curtis came to me, who produced
Letters dimissory (bearing Date, March 13th, 91.) and likewise Letters of
Orders under your Hand and Episcopal Seal. Now, my Lord, willing I am to employ
any that your Lordship shall recommend, and give him all the Encouragement
imaginable; but being since, by his own Words, suspicious that his Instruments
are forged, I have therefore on purpose sent my Man to know the Truth thereof,
and in order thereunto, I humbly beg your Lordship to give an Account in yours
by this Bearer, promising, for the Church of Englands Credit, and likewise your
Lordship's Honor, that, if he be an Impostor, I will see him brought to condign
Punishment for such his Forgery; but if he be not, I beg your Lordships Pardon
for this Trouble, occasioned by my candid Affection for your Lordship and all
Clergymen, being not willing to have them imposed upon.

I am your Lordship's Most Obedient Servant, Robert Hooks, D. D.
Windgrave, Apr. 6.-92.

Now, my Lords, proceeded I, I thought it would be for your Service to acquaint
you, That I have received, from diverse of my Servants, a farther Account of all
Blackhead's Demeanor, the first, second, and third Time he was at my House at
Bromley; for he was there a third Time also, which I knew not of, before I went
home on Friday.

Then I summed up what it has been said before, my Servants were ready to
depose to that purpose: Concluding thus, My Lords, my Servants are attending
without; I pray that Blackhead may be brought before them Face to Face, and
that they may be admitted to give in upon Oath, what they have to say
concerning him.

Upon this, several of the Lords said, Send for Blackhead; and he was sent for.

But before he came, they called in Mrs Young, the Wife, it seems, of the
aforesaid Robert Young; but what a kind of Wife, and which of the two Wives he
had at one and the same time, will appear in what follows.

When she was come in, my Lord Nottingham said to her, Mary Young, Whence
received you this Paper? Taking up a Paper that lay upon the Table.

Mary Young. I had it from Captain Law.


Earl of N. What did he say, when he gave it you?


Mrs. Young. He bid me deliver it to my Husband.


Earl of N. What did he say it was?


Mrs. Young. He said it was a Sociate, or some such Word.


Earl of N. What! Did he deliver you a Paper of this Treasonable Nature, in the
manner as it is, to be given to your Husband, without Sealing it up, or
enclosing it in another Paper.


Mrs. Young. Yes, my Lord, he did.


Earl of N. Did he tell you any of the Names to it.


Mrs. Young. Yes; He said, there were the late Archbishop of Canterbury's, the
Bishop of Rochester's, and some other Lords Names to it.


Earl of N. What passed afterward between you about it?


Mrs. Young. I gave it my Husband, and when Captain Law came for it again, my
Husband said, No, These Lords, whose Names are subscribed, have not been so
liberal in their Relief of my Wants as formerly; and therefore I will make
another Use of this Paper: And so locked it up.

By this time Blackhead was brought in, and the Woman ordered to withdraw, and
to be kept by her self.


Earl of N. Blackhead, The last Time you confessed you brought the Bishop of
Rochester a Letter from Robert Young, under the false Name of Doctor Hooks.


Blackhead. Yes, I did.


Earl of N. Can you know that Letter when you see it?


Blackhead. I cannot tell, I doubt I cannot know it.


Earl of N. Here it is; (and it was given into his Hand;) Is that the same
Letter you delivered the Bishop?


Blackhead. I am not sure it is.


Earl of N. Consider it well; look on the Superscription, you cannot but
remember that. You began to be somewhat Ingenuous last Friday; if you relapse
it will fare the worse with you.


Blackhead. Yes, this may be the Letter; This is the very same Letter.


Earl of N. And you received an Answer to this from the Bishop for Doctor
Hooks, which you carried to Robert Young?


Blackhead. Yes, I did, I own it.


Earl of N. But, What made you, when you were at Bromley the second Time, so
earnestly to desire of the Bishop's Butler, and his other Servants, that you
might see the Rooms in the House, especially his Study?


Blackhead. No, I do not remember that I desired to see the Study: The House I
might, out of Curiosity.


Earl of N. But here are some of the Bishop's Servants without, who are ready
to swear, that you pressed very often to get a sight of his Study; saying, you
had the Freedom at your Master Hooks, to show any Stranger his Books, and you
doubted not but the Butler could do the same there.


Blackhead. I cannot deny that I did desire to see the Bishop's Study: The
other Rooms I am sure I did.


Earl of N. What Reason had you to be so importunate to see that, or any of the
other Rooms? Had you any Paper about you, that you designed to drop, or leave
in any part of the Bishop's House?


Here Blackhead stopped, as very loath to out with it; till diverse of the Lords
urged him to tell the Truth. At last he went on, though with much Hesitancy.

Blackhead. Yes, I must confess I had a Paper in my Pocket, which I designed to
put somewhere in the House.


Earl of N. What did you with it?


Blackhead. I did leave it in the Parlour next the Kitchen.


Earl of N. In what part of the Parlour?


Blackhead. In the Flower-Pot in the Chimney.


Good Lord bless me, cried I. I seriously protest, I never heard that any Paper
was found there by my Servants. To be sure they would have brought it me.

Earl of N. But, my Lord, it will be worth your while to send presently to
Bromley, to see whether there be any Paper still, and what it is.


Bishop of R. My Lord, I will send one away immediately. Only my Servants are
without, expecting to be sworn. Be pleased first to call them in, and dispatch
them.


Earl of N. Nay, My Lord, There is no need of their Testimony now. For this
Fellow has said already more than they know. He has confessed, not only that he
desired to see your House, and particularly your Study, but that he did it with
Intention to leave a Paper somewhere in it; and that he did leave one in your
Parlour, and in the Flower-Pot of the Chimny.


Bishop of R. Then, my Lord, I will send away forthwith.


Earl of N. Stay, my Lord, let us first Examine him a little farther.
Blackhead, What Paper was it you left in the Bishop's Chimny in the Flower-Pot?


Blackhead. It was the Association.


Earl of N. Was it this Paper here? Showing the Association that lay upon the
Table.


Blackhead. Yes, it was.


Earl of N. How came you by it? And who advised you to lodge it there?


Blackhead. I had it from Mr. Young, and he advised me to leave it in the
Bishop's House, as I did.


Earl of N. Did Young direct you to put it into the Flower-Pot in the Parlour?


Blackhead. Yes, he did, and I put it there accordingly in the Flower-Pot.


Earl of N. But were not you a third time at the Bishop's House? It was upon a
Sunday, which it seems was Whit-Sunday.


Blackhead. I was.


Earl of N. You pretended to Condole for the Bishop's Imprisonment: It is
manifest that could not be your Business. What was it?


Blackhead. I was desired by Mr. Young, seeing the Association was not found by
those, who Apprehended the Bishop, to go to Bromley, and try to recover it,
that being the Original. I did so, I came into the House before any of the
Servants were aware, I went into the Parlour unseen, and took the Paper out of
the same place where I had put it, and delivered it again to Mr. Young.


Bishop of R. My Lords, I am very much surprised at all this. I cannot but
admire the Wonderful Goodness of GOD, in this my extraordinary Deliverance. It
appears by what this Fellow confesses, that this Forged Association was in my
House, in a Flower-Pot, for many Days together: And that it was there at the
very time I was seized on by your Lordships Order. For he says he put it there
the second time he was at Bromley, which was a pretty while before I was in
Hold: And took it not out till the third time, which was upon Whit-Sunday, the
Ninth Day after I was under Confinement. And by a strange and mavelous
Providence, that Parlour, where he says it lay so long in the Chimney, was
never searched or inquired after by the Clerk of the Council, or the Messenger.


The other part of the House on the Left Hand of the Hall, where my Study is,
and Bedchamber above Stairs, and a Parlour and Drawing Room below; all these
they searched very accurately. Particularly, I well remember the Messenger
thrust his Hand into the Flower-Pots in every Chimney: Which seemed very odd to
me then: But I now understand the meaning of it.

At this, my Lord Sydney, my Lord Nottingham, my Lord Devonshire, and some
others of the Council, affirmed, That they perfectly remembered, both
Blackhead, and Young, did especially direct them to give Order to those who
should be sent to take me to search all the Flower-Pots.

By this time it was thought seasonable by the Lords to confront Blackhead with
Young.

But in the mean while, the Counterfeit Association, being handed about the
Table, was at length delivered to me. It was to this purpose, as much of it as,
by a transient View, I could carry away in my Memory.

That We whose Names were surbsribed, should solemnly promise in the Presence
of GOD, to Contribute our utmost Assistance toward King JAMES' s Recovery of
His Kingdoms. That to this end, We would have ready to meet Him at His Landing,
Thirty Thousand Men well Armed. That we would seize upon the Person of the
Princess of Orange, Dead or Alive; And take Care that some strong Garrison
should be forthwith delivered into His Hands: And furnish Him with a
Considerable Sum of Money for the support of His Army; or to this sense. March
20. -- 9^

And the Forged Subscriptions were, as I remember, after this manner:

Marleborourgh. Salisbury. W. Cant. Tho. Roffen. Cornbury. John Wilcoxe. Basil
Firebrace.


Now upon the first sight of this Paper, I presently said, I protest, my Lords,
I am very much amazed to see my Hand so well Counterfeited. All the difference
is, they have done me the favor to write it finer that I can. Otherwise I
acknowledge it is so like, that I verily believe, I my self, had I seen it in
another place, should have been apt to doubt whether it were of my Writing or
no. I am confident it might, upon the first Blush, deceive the best Friends I
have.

But, my Lords, here is another innocent Person's Name, whose Hand I know very
well. And I dare venture to say, it is even better forged than mine. I mean
Archbishop Sancroft's.

Lord Godolphin. My Lords, I am very well acquainted with Archbishop Sancroft's
Hand. And really it is here most exactly counterfeited.


Moreover, my Lord Godolphin, my Lord Sydney, and others said, That the Earl of
Marlborough's Hand had been so well feigned in a Letter pretended to be written
to Young himself, that it was very difficult for his most intimate Friends to
observe any Distinction. And in that Letter the Bishop of Rochester was said to
have the Paper in his keeping, which appears now to have been meant of the
False Association's being in my Custody.

Nay, my Lord, Sydney assured me, these very Impostors had brought him a
Letter, supposed also to be Written by me to Young, which being but of ordinary
Matters, he thought not worth the keeping, but he well remembered the
Subscription of my Name was very like this in the Association, as well indeed
it might.

By this time Young being come into the Room, my Lord Nottingham spoke to him;

Young, Look upon that Letter, (showing him his own to me, under the Name of
Doctor Hooks,) Do you know that Hand?

Young. No, I don't know it.


Earl of N.. Did not you send that Letter to the Bishop of Rochester by
Blackhead?


Young. No, I know no Hooks, I never writ to the Bishop of Rochester, but in
my own Name, with my own Hand.


Earl of N. What say you, Blackhead?


Blackhead. I did receive that very Letter from Mr. Young 's own Hand, and
delivered it to the Bishop of Rochester with nine.


Earl of N.. (Taking up the Association, and showing it to Young,) Did not you
give this Paper to Blackhead, and order him to put it into a Chimney in the
Bishop of Rochester's House, and into a Flower-Pot, if there were any?


Young. No, I never desired him to carry it thither, or to put it into a
Flower-Pot.


Earl of N. What say you, Blackhead?


Blackhead. Mr. Young did give me that Paper, and directed me to leave it in
the Bishop's House; and, if I could, to put it in a Flower-Pot in some Room;
which I did, in the Parlour.


Young. There is no such matter, I absolutely deny it.


Upon this, the Earl of Nottingham, the Lord Sydney, and some others of the
Counselors, asked Young, Why then did you give us such express Directions, to
send, and search the Flower-Pots, among other Places, in the Bishop's House?

Young. I said nothing of Flower-Pots. I bid you take care that the Bishop's
Person should be exactly searched; because, when he went abroad, he carried the
Association about him; when he was at home, he put it in some private place,
for fear of surprise: Perhaps I might say in the Chimney.


The Lords replied, Nay, we all well remember, you particularly mentioned the
Flower-Pots.

Earl of N. Young, When you perceived that the Persons sent to seize on the
Bishop had missed the Association, did not you then desire Blackhead to go a
third time to the Bishop's House, and to take it out of the Pot, where he had
laid it?


Young. No, I know nothing of it.


Earl of N. What say you, Blackhead?


Blackhead. At Mr. Young' s request, I went to the Bishop's House a third time;
it was upon a Sunday; I privately got into the Parlour, and took the
Association out of the same Flower-Pot where I had laid it, and returned it
back to Mr. Young.


Young. This is a Combination between the Bishop of Rochester and Blackhead, to
taffle the whole Discovery of the Plot.


Which Saying of Young's could not but raise a general Smile among all the
Company, they lifting up their Hands with great Indignation at his unparalled
Impudence.

Bishop of R. I thought, my Lords, the last Time I was here, Blackhead was the
most brazen Faced Fellow that ever I saw; but now I find this same Young to be
a much viler Miscreant than he. This is so base a Suggestion against me, and so
impossible for me to be guilty of, and I know your Lordships so little suspect
it of me, that I need not make any Answer to it in my Defense.


Lord President. Young, Thou art the strangest Creature that ever I heard of;
Do thou think we could imagine, that the Bishop of Rochester would combine
with this thy Confederate, to have an Association written, with his own Hand to
it, and then laid in his own House, in a Flower-Pot there? Which, if it had
been found, must have endangered his Life: And we see it was the most
remarkable good Fortune to him that almost ever happened to any Man, that it was
not found there.


But Young still persisting, that he believed I had taken Blackhead off, they
were both ordered to withdraw. And, I assure my Reader, that during this whole
Examination, though Young's Forgery was so evidently Convicted by the Confession
of his own Companion, and Instrument, yet he behaved himself with a daring
unconcernd Confidence, with a bold and erect Countenance, though it had
naturally very much of a Villain in it. His whole Carriage indeed was such, as
became the Discipline he has undergone for these diverse Years; having so long
been almost a constant Inhabitant, together with his Wife, of many of the
common Gaols in England and Ireland; as you shall find before I leave them.

But to make have to the Conclusion of this Narration; the Lord President
called for the Letter which Young had sent to me under the Name of Hooks. When
his Lordship had viewed it deliberately, he asked also for the Association, and
having compared them for some considerable time, he broke forth in these Words;
Really, my Lords, it is a very great Providence, that this Letter, sent by
Young, under the Name of Hooks, to the Bishop of Rochester, was preserved by
his Servant: For this very Letter, and the Association, were both apparently
Written by the same Hand; you may perceive there is no manner of Difference in
the Writing, but only that the Letter is written in a less Hand, as Letters are
wont to be, and the Association in a greater, as a Public Instrument.

At this the whole Board, one after another, had a perfect fight of both, and
all applauded the Happiness of the Discovery: For it was as clear as Light to
all that were present, that the Letters, and Words, of both, were of the very
same Form and Figure.

Particularly, my Lord Godolphin farther observed, and made it plan to them
all, That the W in W. Cant. in the Subscription, was the very same Letter with
the W in Whereas, which was the first Word of the Counterfeit Association.

For my Part, I could not forbear Exclaiming, Great is Truth, and it will
prevail.

After all this, I asking the Lords, Whether they had any farther Service to
command me? And they saying No, I spoke these few Words.

My Lords, I must always acknowledge, That, next the Signal Providence of God,
in so visibly protecting an innocent Man, your Lordships fair and honorable Way
of Proceeding with me, in not shutting me up close in the Tower immediately
upon my first Accusation; but in openly Confronting me with these Varlets,
whilst the Matter was fresh in my Memory; and in so strictly and impartially
examining them now, has been the Principal Occasion, that my Innocence has met
with a Vindication as public and unquestionable, as I my self could have
wished and prayed for. But still, my good Lords, I do again most humbly
recommend to your Lordships, The Prosecution of this Black Contrivance to the
Bottom, for the Sake of Truth and Justice, and for the Safety of every other
honest Man, whose Lot this might have been as well as mine. I am sure your
Lordships all believe, that there can be no greater Service to the Government,
especially at this time, than to have such perjured Informers, so plainly
discovered, to be severely punished according to their Demerits.

And so I took my Leave of their Lordships.

This is the Substance of what I can remember, as far as my Part goes in this
Surprising Adventure. As to the Account I promised of my Wicked Accusers, my
Reader shall have it as fast as my weak Eyes will give me Leave to write it.

Tho. Roffen.
Aug. 1. 1692. Bromley.
The End of the First Part.

