A SERMON PREACHED before the HONORABLE House of Commons At St Margarets
Westminster, January 30th 1677/8;. By THOMAS SPRAT, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary
to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1678.

Mercurii 30 Die Jan. 1677/8;.
ORdered, That the Thanks of this House be Returned to Dr. Sprat, for his Sermon
this day Preached before the House at St. Margarets Westminster: And that he be
desired to Print his Sermon: And Sir Edmund Jennings, Sir Charles Wheeler, and
Mr. Robert Wright, are to give him the Thanks of this House, and to Desire him
to Print his Sermon.

Will. Goldesbrough Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS, At St Margarets
Westminster, on January 30th 1677/8;.
St Matthew, 5. verse. 10. Blessed are they which are persecuted for
Righteousness sake: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
WE are here Assembled to Lament the Death of one of the best Kings that ever
Lived, and the most Pious Martyrs, that ever Suffered. We are this Day to
bewail a Crime so detested by God, and Man, that, unless this Day had been long
since publicly appointed, by the Voice of the whole Nation, Pronounced by you
the Representatives of it, for us, and our Posterity, to Bewail it Yearly, in
this, and all future Ages; the Guilty Memory of this Day had for ever remained,
an Indelible Disgrace to the Present Age, and to the whole English Name it self.

When we shall recollect the Afflictions, and the Virtues of that Blessed King;
and shall remember, that in his Virtues he Excelled the most happy Princes; in
his Afflictions he Equaled the most unfortunate Men: though it should not
incline us to Murmur at the Divine Providence, whose Judgments are above our
knowledge, and therefore ought not to come under our Censure: yet certainly, it
cannot but make us abhor the terrible Effects of furious Zeal, when it mistakes
Providence: it cannot but raise in us the greatest Hatred of Faction on a
Pretense of Liberty; and of Ambition, when it Counterfeits Religion.

Should it not fill us all with Grief, and Amazement, that such a King could
suffer, as a Tyrant! who was, to His People, the most constant Defender of
their ancient Privileges, the greatest Author of New Ones: or as an Enemy of
the True Religion! who was in his Life the Great Ornament; in his Death the
most devout Example of it: or as unworthy to Govern! who, not only by his
Birth, had a Successive Right to the Crown, which he could not forfeit; but
also, by his Personal Virtues, might have deserved another Title to it, if His
Crown had been Elective, and, as His Murderers impudently pretended, at the
disposal of His Subjects.

Whether we consider Him on the Throne, as he was there, too short a space, the
Vicegerent of Gods Power; or in the Church, as he always imitated, and
resembled the Divine Purity: or should we measure him, as we would any other
Man: should we take His Picture, as He Himself delighted to be drawn, with His
Crown and Scepter laid aside, and his Wife, and Children, or Servants by Him:
whether we observe His Royal, and Christian, or His Private and Moral
Excellencies; we might find, in all, some Extraordinary Character of Greatness,
and of that, which is the only true Greatness, such as was admirably Tempered,
and Adorned with Goodness.

But those other more Resplendent parts of his Life, are a Subject fitter for a
History than a Sermon. And, no doubt, if there shall be any Virtue, any Praise
of Virtue in the Generations to come after us; His Name will live, and be
mentioned with Reverence in the Records of Honor: though not in the Large Roll
of those Kings, who have been only Happy, Prosperous, and Victorous in this
World: yet amongst the far smaller number, but much more Sacred, more truly
Glorious Number of those Kings, that have been Saints, and Confessors, or
Martyrs; and therefore more than Conquerors.

I confess, I might, and, give me leave to say it, I intended to have
Complained, that the present Age had not made that Use of Him, which it ought;
His Enemies for their Repentance, and Amendment; nor even His Friends for His
Praise and Honor. But, blessed be God, I am happily prevented in one part of
the Complaint: I have nothing now to wish, but that His Enemies would as well
perform their Duty to Him, as, it must be acknowledged, you His Friends have
done yours; by that much Desired, long Expected, Yesterdayes Vote; in which you
have given a Resurrection to his Memory, by designing Magnificent Rites to his
Sacred Ashes. So that now for the future, an English Man abroad will be able to
Mention the Name of King CHARLES the First, without blushing: and His Heroic
Worth will be delivered down to Posterity, as it always deserved to be, not
only freed from Calumny, or Obscurity; but, in all things, most illustrious, in
all things to be commended; in most things to be imitated, in some things
scarce imitable, and only to be admired.

In confidence of this, I will leave the rest of His just Panegyric to the
Registers of Civil History: and I will only now employ that short time, your
favor shall allow me, in representing to you that one particular Grace; which,
I believe, He had in as high a degree, as our Mortal Condition, of its self, is
capable to Receive, His Magnanimity in Suffering. And, it will be best become
this Religious Place, and Office, to recommend to you, from amongst His many
other Virtues, that one Virtue of his Divine Patience, which he could learn
from no other Principle, but his Religion.

To this purpose, I have chosen to speak on these words of our Blessed Savior;
wherein he proposes Persecution, which, to Nature, seems the greatest Evil, to
be the greatest Good: such as all his Disciples ought, not only to endure well,
as a nenessary Burden, but to enjoy as a Blessing.

The Words themselves consist of Three Parts.

First, This New, and Strange, Christian Paradox, that to be persecuted is a
Blessing.

Secondly, The only Qualification, that can make it to be so. It must be a
Persecution for Rightneousness sake.

Thirdly, The Great Reason, why it is a Blessing, because it is attended with
the greatest Reward, The Kingdom of Heaven.

I cannot now stay to insist distinctly on these Particulars, or to handle the
Argument in my Text, as a Common place of Divinity. It will neither agree with
the present temper of your Minds, or my own, to treat of it in such cold, and
general terms. But what I shall say on this great, and Primitive Doctrine of
Christianity, shall be only so much, as you may apply to the present occasion:
that when I come to recount the Kings unparalled Sufferings; you His Friends
may be something comforted, in beholding the solid, and eternal Foundation of
His Suffering so well; which was no other than the Faith into which we were all
Baptized: and that therefore the Christian Faith, the Faith of the Church of
England, may have the credit of that greatness of Mind, it Taught the King in
His Extremity.

That To be Persecuted is a Blessing, was a Doctrine never heard of, till our
Savior here first introduced it. No other Teacher, or Lawgiver, ever went, or
durst go so contrary to the interests and pleasures of Flesh and Blood. None
else would have laid so much weight on Humane Nature: or could have made it so
easy: none but He, that was God, as well as Man: He that, as Man, knew what it
was to suffer and, as God, knew how to support those that Suffered.

It Is true, the power of bearing Persecution well, has been always pretended
to, by all Sects, and Nations, and Religions of Men. All History is full of
such great Examples, amongst those, to whom the Gospel was never revealed. But
have not the rest too generally gone, on the wrong, or tottering Principles, of
empty Fame, of doubtful Philosophy, of False, of Imperfect Religions? certainly
seldom any truly Great, seldom any steady, and unchangeable Comfort, little
lasting relief, most certainly scarce any everlasting was to be found, till the
appearance of our Savior, to make Men, on just grounds, to Rejoice, and
Triumph in Pains, and Losses, and Miseries.

Mankind, before that, was left detective in this most necessary Virtue, of
which we have all a perpetual use. For, my Brethren, there is no Retirement so
Secure, no Provision so Large, no Search so happy, as to find out that place,
whither nor Cares, nor Misfortunes make their way. The Sweetest, the Fairest,
the most plentiful, Alas! you see, the most commanding condition is often times
a greater burden; at best, is only a less, and a gentler misery, not any real
hapiness. Of all those that built Houses in the Parable, the most raised them
on the Sand: the best, and the wisest, could only found them on the Rock: on
which, notwithstanding all their prudence, the Winds did blow, and the Sea did
rage about them: all their advantage was not a full quiet; but only that the
Storms did beat on them in vain.

And this is that for which we are only beholden to our Savior Christ; of
whom, we may justly say, in respect of Mankind, as Augustus said of himself,
and Rome, Lateritiam invenit, marmoream reliquit; he found our Nature weak, and
frail composed of Adams mouldring Earth; but he made it, and left it of the
finest, and most durable Marble. He himself came persecuted: but one of the
chief ends of his coming, was to free all that believe on him, and obey his
commands; though not from all persecution, yet from all the Curse of it, nay,
to do better, than if he had taken all persecution quite away, to make it a
cause of Joy, and Felicity, a Blessing to those that are Persecuted.

And, How feeble! How deceitful! How much like a broken Reed, which only
pierces, where it should uphold, are all the other Motives, and Principles of
Suffering well, in comparison to those, that He has Taught!

First. Some Men indeed may strive to endure Afflictions courageously, in a
sense of Natural Decence; by the force of some Natural Passion, or by the
single Precepts of Natural Wisdom. But, What is the chief end, that such Men
can propose to themselves? Can it be much more, than the bare expectation of
transitory Fame, and Honor in this World? or some Temporary Interest, and
Contentment here below? And, What mighty Reliefs, or Rewards are these? such
Consolations, at best, can only stupify the Mind under pain; they are far from
turning the Pain into a Blessing. Such Recompenses are imaginary, contemptible,
perishing, whilst the Labors Men take for them, are great, and real: Whereas to
a Christian Sufferer, the Labors are contemptible, compared to the inestimable
greatness of the Recompense.

Undoubtedly, nothing in this Life can make Afflictions tolerable, much less a
Blessing, but a Belief, that there is another Life; in comparison to the Joys
of which, the Miseries of this Life are of no consideration: nay, a belief,
that we shall partake of the Joys of another Life, if we bear patiently the
ordinary, and extraordinary Miseries of this: and that nothing can teach us to
do the right way, but Religion; nothing, but the Right Religion.

For Secondly, There is also a strange Force, and Resolution of Mind, that may
proceed from False Religions, and from the Principles of Enthusiasm. This kind
must be confessed far to exceed all Natural Courage in its effects: it may
sometimes be hardly distinguishable from the True Patience, that is Taught by
the True Religion it self.

Yet there are very Material Distinctions between them: The chief this in my
Text. The one is only for the True Righteousness sake: the other for a
Counterfeit, Hypocritical Righteousness. And besides, they differ, in that the
True Religion, rightly used, Teaches Men really to Believe, that to be
Persecuted is a Blessing; but never to Persecute. False Religion, and
Enthusiasm may make Men Pretend to Believe, that to be Persecuted is a
Blessing, but Really to Believe, that the Power of Persecuting is a Greater
Blessing, and to Use that Power with the Greatest Cruelty, when they have got
it; as we have felt by Many Dismal Instances, especially that of This Black,
and Guilty Day.

However, it is too true, that Mistaken Zeal, and Deluding Inspirations, have
oftentimes a Prodigious Influence on those Minds, that are Possessed with them;
Possessed in the Worst Sense of the Word: they can easily make Men despise all
Dangers, and Terrors: they can fill their Proselytes with Heat, and Raptures
enough to rush violently on Torments, to Glory in the false Presumption of
Martyrdom, to do, as Empedocles of old, who cast himself willingly into the
fiercest Flames, that he might be thought to go to Heaven. We have seen a
Blind, Fanatical Zeal enrage Forty Men, to make War against a Mighty Nation, in
full peace, in the midst of its Principal City.

And since the Implacable Enemies of our Church and State have had, and still
have such a dreadful offensive Weapon in their keeping, as all Zealous, though
Erroneous Religion is: Should not this, my Brethren, be a serious Admonition to
us, who profess our selves Friends to the Church and State, to make provision
against them, by the better, more powerful, indeed invincible defensive Weapons
of our Spiritual Warfare, that may be learnt from the True, and Unfeigned
Religion? Since they pretend to fetch their Armor from Heaven against our
Cause: ought not we really to fetch ours from Heaven against theirs? we cannot
want all other means of defense; we have Reason, and Justice, and Law, and
Loyalty on our side: All those the Enemies of our Church and State must want:
But let us beware, least if they have any Zeal, we none, they have something
more forcible than any of the other. Most certainly nothing but Conscience
well-inform'd can be an equal Match, for Conscience misguided: nothing but the
power of Godliness; nothing but True Zeal can break the force of False Zeal,
and of the very form of Godliness.

Wherefore, from that Fatal Example, how much the Name of Godliness,
Hypocritically used, stood our Adversaries instead; may we be instructed to
Govern our Minds, and Strengthen our Hearts, and Reform our Lives, by the
Directions and Precepts of the True Holiness; to have our Consciences as much
in earnest as theirs, but better Informed; not only to hate the Hypocrisy, but
to out-doe the warmth of their Zeal. And, if the very Shadow of Christ could do
such wonderful things: What would not his Hand, his Tongue, his Body, his Life
do. If by a sad experience, we have found a feigned, and Dissembled Piety, so
outragiously strong, and too long irresistible: Should we not thence conclude,
what greater Influence, what more durable Authority, the True Piety might have
on our Minds, by the efficacy of its own True Promises, Rewards, and Comforts?
In which God has pitied the Infirmities of our weak Humanity: has supplied them
all in a gracious proportion to our defects: has provided the greatest
happiness for our immortal, and mortal parts hereafter: has furnished us with
the best relief for our Mortal part here.

But, that Religion should bestow the surest aid, and assistance in
persecution, is the more strange: because at the first view, it seems to make
persecution more grievous, by forbidding us many helps, and means of defense,
which nature offers to the afflicted. Does not our Saviors Doctrine command
us, to have the severest thoughts of our selves? It tames the mind, as well as
it requires the body, to be subservient to the mortification of the mind: It
lays so much restraint on our intemperate pleasures, that to a carnal man it
even seems to render prosperity a sort of persecution. It denies us the use of
some kinds of resistance; of all manner of revenge: of all actual revenge,
which is the delight of the powerful; of all revengeful thoughts, which may be
esteemed some ease to the weak.

How then can it be, that such a Doctrine should turn all persecution into a
blessing? yes most certainly: and for the most weighty reasons: of which the
Two principal are here mentioned. In this life, it makes the suffering
delightful, because it is for righteousness sake: in the next, it makes it our
glory, and crown, because of it is just claim to the Kingdom of Heaven.

First, I say, it is this Doctrine only that prescribes such rules, and provides
such helps, for the right ordering of all our thoughts, words and actions in
this Life; that if they be exactly followed, will put us into a condition of
suffering for nothing but Righteousness sake. So much moderation it imposes on
our enjoyment of things in our power: So strictly it forbids all irregular
desires of things in others power: So much it teaches an inoffensive meekness,
and caution of not displeasing God, or injuring Man: that whoever lives
accordingly, whatever his Persecution may be, he cannot but be innocent in it:
And if he be innocent, the Persecution will be so too; and will do him no
manner of hurt.

To a heart so Conscientiously prepared; so certain of its Duty, so rightly
secured in its Cause, the Afflictions of this World have quite another
appearance, than to the rest of the World. They are presently found to be only
the tender Trials of a Merciful Father; to be not only his Trials, but Tokens,
and Testimonies of his Love, and of our Adoption; to Entitle us to the
Privileges of Gods own People, and Children, to his Peculiar Care, to his
Spiritual Joys, to his Kingdom.

That is the other Contemplation, which completes the Blessing. And it is only
the hope of that Kingdom, which our Lord Christ alone has Purchased for us,
that can be Equal to the Wants and Wishes of our Immortal Souls. That only can
Refresh the Distressed, and ease the Heavy Laden, and Support the Living, and
Rejoice the Dying; without that Expectation, the least Mortal Frailties, and
Crosses, even Mortality it self, were an Intolerable Oppression: but, with it,
the Cruellest Mortal Pains may be made light, and inconsiderable: without that
Belief, as Christians of all Men, so Men of all Creatures, were most
miserable. If there were no prospect of Heaven, even Earth it self were a kind
of Hell: so dark, so uncomfortable, so dismally doubtful were the Condition of
Mankind. But now there is a Heaven, so certain, so unquestionable, so near
them, who believe it, and labor for it: to such there shall not only be no
Hell; but even Earth it self, amidst all their Earthly Calamities, becomes a
kind of Heaven: so truly great is their Present Comfort: so unspeakably great
will be their future Felicity.

YOU now behold, the Character, Supports, and Benefits of that Persecution;
which, in the Religion, that all of us have embraced, is reckoned as a
Blessing. This infallibly is the Christian Doctrine. I come next to enforce,
and illustrate it by a Christian Example. And, I might allege that of the
Blessed Author of it, our Savior himself: But, in him, it may be said, the
Godhead did sustain the Humanity. I might urge the Apostles, and Primitive
Disciples. But they also were immediately assisted by a Miraculous Power,
enabling them to do, and to suffer. I might produce a Noble Army of Martyrs, in
all Ages of the Christian Church. But it will now be enough, once for all, only
to mention the blessed Pattern of that Saint-like King: whose wonderful
Patience, in an Age, wherein Miracles were ceased, did almost seem to revive
them: His magnanimous Suffering did evidence, how much Strength, and Luster,
the true Piety may add to the most Princely Mind: the Afflictions, that
surrounded His Head, did not deface, but beautify His Life: as the Thorns, His
Great Master wore at His Passion, they were intended by His Enemies for His
Shame, and His Pain, but they were in Truth His Crown, His Fourth, more
Precious Crown.

When I seriously reflect on all the Sufferings of that Excellent Prince; how
little He deserved the least of them from any Man; how much far otherwise he
merited from many the chief Authors of them; and yet by how many sad
Circumstances they were still increast; against how many fair hopes they still
prevailed; and with what unshaken Constancy He bore them all: I cannot but
conclude, that He was separated, and Consecrated, as it were, by Gods Special
Appointment, to fall a Glorious Sacrifice; to give a new Example of Christian,
Passive Courage, to the decaying Virtue of this Age: and that, as the blood of
Martyrs is truly said to be the Seed of the Church, so the Blood of one
Martyred King, should be the perpetual Seed, both of the Church, and Monarchy
of England.

He succeeded to His Temporal Crowns, by the Conjunction, and Indisputable
Right of many Royal ^ines. Yet he was so far from having the usual allowance,
that seems due to Rightful, Sovereign Princes: from observing whose very faults
too curiously their Subjects ought; and in better times, their honorable
Enemies were wont to retire with respect: so far He was from being thus used,
that even His Virtues were Misinterpreted, and Scandalously Reviled. His
Gentleness was miscalled defect of Wisdom; His Firmness, Obstinacy; His Regular
Devotion, Popery; His Decent Worship, Superstition; His Opposing of Schism,
Hatred of the Power of Godliness. Such was the remarkable aggravation of His
unjust Persecutions; that though He had manifestly the Right on His side, yet
His Enemies, by their Artifices, had got over most of the good, and plausible
words, to be on theirs. Whilst the worst of their Actions were Sanctified, and
made Popular by the Specious Titles of Liberty, Purity, and Reformation: He
Died for the Laws, as a Malefactor; for the Church, the best Reformed Church,
as an Enemy to the Cause of God.

To His People He was ever most Indulgent, still scattering amongst them the
Royal Prerogatives, with a Liberality rather becoming the Mildness of the
Giver, than due to the Ingratitude of the Receivers. For, in Answer to all His
most Bountiful Concessions, He still met with Evil Surmises, Perverse Comments
on all His Acts of Grace: and those seconded by Mutinous Petitions, Seditious
Clamors, and Assaults, and at last an open Rebellion. What shall we say? some
strange fatality, some unusual unheard of Giddiness had unawares seized on,
and, in too great a part, infatuated the English Spirit: to make them grow
discontented, and sick of their very Prosperity; thus rashly to employ the
Riches, and Plenty, they reaped from the first happy part of His Reign, to
render the latter part of it unhappy.

Nor were the Calamities of His Fate only confined to Himself; which, no doubt,
a Mind of so much innocent tenderness, desired; but they were Infectious to all
about Him. That which, in any other Age, would have been thought a proof of the
greatest Human Abilities, to Counsel Wisely, and Faithfully so Judicious a
Prince: and a sign of the greatest Human Felicity to be beloved by so great,
and good a Prince: was then acertain Forerunner of Misfortune.

Of His dearest Servants, the First, whom he received from His Father, and
Himself long Protected from the blind Malice of Envy, was snatched from Him by
the Hand of a base Assassinate. And whilst His Generous Heart was bleeding for
the Loss, many thousands of His Subjects, with Secret Shows of Satisfaction,
nay, with open Testimonies of Joy, Applauded the Horrid Murder of His Friend.

His other best Servant; a Minister, the most able of that time, both for
Counsel and Action; a Friend, one of the best which ever the Church of God had,
since it needed such a Friend: Him he was constrained to give up as a Prey to
Popular Tumults, or, which is as bad, to Popular Justice: nay, which was worse,
and which ought not to have been mentioned, but that the King Himself often
spoke, and writ of it, with such Solemn Remorse; His Royal and guiltless Hand
was made an unwilling Instrument of that unrighteous Action.

But, the Justice this Parliament has done to the Earl of Strafford's Honor,
has Vindicated the Name of Parliaments, in this Particular: and the Repentance
of that Merciful King has paid an honorable Atonement to his Ghost. The
Servants Innocence has been abundantly justified by the Masters so Passionately
accusing His own Weakness, for yielding to his Death. It was indeed a Weakness,
to which the Counsels of His disguised Enemies, or timorous Friends provoked
Him. Yet, he could never at last have been drawn to it, had He not been half
persuaded, that 'twas better for one Man to die, than for the whole People to
perish. And, How justly may we think His Virtues to have been extraordinary!
when His greatest fault (I make bold to call it His fault, and I believe it was
His greatest) had so good, and innocent a Foundation, as the Peace of three
Kingdoms. Have we not great reason to suppose, that His Conscience was most
strictly watched, and guarded from Sin? Could any of His Enemies,
notwithstanding all their boasts in this kind, show us Proof of a Conscience so
tender? which did so Affectionately Lament, so Severely Repent of that Offense,
as if the whole Guilt of it had been His own: whereas, at the worst, the
Infirmity of it only was His, the Guilt belonged to His Enemies.

His own Family was at once Persecuted in many Quarters of the World. There was
scarce a Great House in all Christendom, that had contracted Alliance with
Him, which Gods Visitation did not seem to search out, and to reach in that
Age. An observation, in which His Adversaries were wont much to Glory: As if
he, and his whole Name had been utterly rejected by Heaven. But, success, and
prosperity in this World, is rather a Turkish, than a Christian Proof of Gods
favor: and adversity the like of his displeasure. Or else we might often since
have confuted the very same Men with their own Argument.

His only Sister had a long familiarity with unhappiness. Her he could never
relieve in his most prosperous days. Nor was Providence rowzd to restore her
Family, till about the very year of His Martyrdom.

His own Queen was exposed to all manner of Injuries: Robbed of the Privileges
due to Her Sex; much more to her high Birth, and Condition: declared Traitor
for doing the duty of a Wife: the Laws of Human Society violated, to keep His
very Mind from her: his Letters to her intercepted, published, condemned, as
Correspondence with the disaffected.

His Children were driven from his Paternal care, in that Age, which most
needed it: some bred up at home, under the Discipline of his Enemies; of whom,
even the Tender Mercies were cruel: others wandering abroad, and depending on
the uncertain pity of His Neighbors. What one of the Ancients said of Pompey's
fall, was too true of the Kings: One Country could not contain so great a
ruin: the Shipwreck was cast on many Shores: not indeed to be buried there, as
Pompey was; but to Return again by a wonderful Restitution. Yet that
satisfaction the King himself lived not to see: He only felt the severe side,
their Separation, and Distresses: the comfortable part, their Restoration, His
Blessed Spirit has enjoyed in Heaven, since His Death: and, by a strange,
mysterious effect of the Divine Mercy, his very Death ought to be esteemed the
Principal Cause of their Restoration.

Thus was he unjustly Persecuted, in one part of his Domestic Relations: There
was another also; in whose Ruin he was even yet more nearly concerned: and
that was the Church of England. For, Why may I not call our Church a Member of
His Private Family? seeing he cherished it so Familiarly, converst with it so
constantly, provided for it so carefully: 'Twere well if this were all: but I
must add, he Died for it so Zealously.

For the Service, and Devotions of this Church, his Affections were so
Inflamed, his Judgment so confirmed; his Practice in them so Incessant; that in
all these, he was scarce equaled by any of its own Ministers; I am persuaded,
he was outdone by none. We have undeniable instances, that neither his best
Beloved Recreations; nor one of the most Sorrowful Messages he ever receivd;
not his most Urgent Business; not his Greatest Delights; not his Greatest Grief
could prevail with him, ever to Omit, or but for a Moment to interrupt his
Daily Solemn Prayers.

From this Church he might justly have expected, and he had his last Comforts.
But, alas! when he most needed her help, he saw her in the greatest outward
Desolation her self: Her Chief Prelate, one of the Most Innocent, Devout, and
Magnificent Men of that Age, Beheaded in the view of Forty thousand Men! and
too many of them so Inhumane, as to Rejoice at the Death of a Bishop; against
whom, their Chief Objection was, his being a Bishop.

Of this Church, whose Preservation, and Prosperity had been always his chief
Study, he lived to see the Truth Questioned, the Glory Vanished, the Buildings
Falling, the Revenues Devoured: and so Devoured, that he himself must be
compelled, either to confirm the Sacrilege by his Authority, or to make way for
it by his Blood. Of which two Dreadful Extremes he chose the last: And so
became our Churches Martyr, as he had been her Saint: A Saint incomparably more
holy, than all the Enthusiastical Saints of the Sectaries: A Martyr, to be
preferred before a whole Multitude of Martyrs that swell the Romish Calandar.

Of this Church, in his Imprisonments, the Public Offices were sometimes
denied him: the attendance of his own Chaplains, sometimes forbid: seldom but
precariously allowed: Liberty of Conscience refused the King, by the meanest of
his Subjects, who Claimed it as their Own Due, both by Religion, and Nature,
and made that the Chief Pretense of their Rebellion against him.

His most Secret Duties of Piety were often disturbed by the abuse and outrage
of common Soldiers: hardly the Service of one of his Bishops was afforded him
in his last Agony. Yet Providence so ordered it, that it was the very Bishop,
whom, of all his Clergy, he had most employed in Secular Affairs. Nor could any
thing more justify the Pious, and Conscientious Choice of his Ministers, both
in Church, and State, than that the very same Man, who had Managed his Revenue,
should be thought fittest to direct his Conscience; that his best Treasurer
should be his last Confessor.

As to the Unnatural War against him, he made himself so naked to avoid it,
that, when it was forced on him, he was not in a Capacity to Maintain his own
Just Rights in it: He went so far to meet his Undutiful Subjects in a Peaceful
Compliance; that he divested himself of most of his own strengths, by which he
might have suppressed them. Why then did his Enemies so often tell heaven in
their Prayers, that it was not the Arm of Flesh, which brought them Salvation?
when they had in their Usurped Possession the most considerable Forces, and
Estates of their own Accomplices, or his Friends, his Fleets, his Magazines, his
Revenue, and the far stronger part of all the Carnal Means of the Nation on
their side. Why did they so often boast, in their Way of Vainglorious
humiliations, that they themselves were only dry bones, that a Divine Spirit
animated them, and that God was their Confederate? when it was so far from
being a signal Providence, that the King was at last overcome; that indeed it
was rather a wonder he was not sooner: that You, and such as You, and Your
Fathers, could so long support his declining Cause, against a power so much
more mighty than his, and yours.

But God thought fit to suffer him to be defeated. And, though the Divine
Counsels were in this, as they are in many other things, unsearchable: yet,
thus much we may safely pronounce, that it was not in Wrath to him, but in
Mercy. It was indeed our Wound, and our Calamity, not his. For his Sufferings
that followed his Defeat, redounded far more to his own glory, than if he had
Triumphed in War, or if his Life had smoothly slid away in Peace. His Reign, if
it had continued quiet, must needs have been most happy. That goodness of
temper, had it not been opposed, would sure have been admirable, seeing it was
so great, when most bitterly offended. His Victory, if he had Conquered, would
no doubt have been Mild, and Bloodless: None would have perished by it, but
Armed, and in the Field. He had too great a Heart, to insult over the
Miserable. He would certainly have laid no other Chains on the Vanquished, but
those of Pardon, and Mercy: seeing He forgave them, and pitied them, amidst the
Pride and Rudeness of their own Victory.

This is a Truth undoubted. Yet still I must affirm, that 'twas more for His
own Personal Renown, he was overcome. Many others would have shared with Him,
in the Honor of the Conquest. His Armies, His Commanders, and Fortune it self
might have claim d some part in those Laurels. But, this was a Praise far
Greater, much Rarer, more Christian, wholly Gods, and His Own: that, after His
Soldiers routed, His Garrisons yielded, His Friends reduced to the last
Extremity, but Despair: And, Who but such Friends would not then have
despaired? yet still He kept His own Mind unconquered, and made that naked, and
alone, to encounter, and Triumph over all the Malice of His Enemies.

We are now arrived at that, which, in the Worlds Opinion, was the most
unfortunate: but, in a Christian Account, was the most Victorious part of the
Kings Life. There is still behind a Lamentable Story; to us Lamentable, though
not to Him. But after so many sad Representations, it is time the Veil be drawn.
The deplorable remainder is only fit for such Salvages to hear, who could see
it without Grief, and cause it without Remorse. Here therefore let us pass it
by in Silence: Let us strive to overwhelm the Cruel, and Guilty Part of the
Kings Martyrdom, which was His Enemies Part; by the Contemplation of the
Innocent, and Honorable part of it, that was His own.

And this, my Brethren, is such a way of keeping the Thirtieth of January, as
the Royal Martyr Himself most desired. This way of Observing it, is most
Answerable to the first Design; of Dedicating such Days to the Memories of
departed Saints. For when the Primitive Christians first Met on such (...), on
the very Days, and (...) on the very Places, where some (...) Christian had
suffered: they were not wont to spend their time in Cursing their Enemies, or
Repeating the wretched Circumstances of their Cruelty; but rather in Praying
that God would Convert them, in declaring the Pious Works, and Admirable
Patience of those, that had Suffered; and in giving God the Glory of their
Exemplary Sufferings.

YOU have therefore heard enough, how this Blessed Martyr was unjustly
Persecuted: though I have stopped my Narration on the very brink of the
Precipice. Let us now see, how He made those Persecutions a Blessing: how He
behaved Himself, in those His last, and severest Conflicts: when the Whole
World was a Spectator, too Calmly a Spectator, of the Last Part of His Life:
whilst Wicked Men Furiously Pursued His Death: furiously; for it was one time,
or other, to be the Cause of their own Destruction: whilst Good Men Prayed for
Him, but could not otherwise help Him: nay His Enemies Prayed too, and boldly
Belied Heaven, in Presuming, that His Murder was the Return of their Prayers.
But Heaven was on His side; God supported Him; the Angels Minister'd to Him;
the Devils Tempted, Him in vain, His Adversaries too Effectually.

And, I beseech you, Where can there be found a Worthier, or more plentiful
Subject for our Admiration? than that so Great a King, who had Swayed those
Scepters, that are the Balance of all Europe, should come down from His High
Estate, by so many easy, and deliberate Degrees! should put off all the
Ornaments of a just Sovereignty, to bear all the Indignities of His own
Subjects Tyranny, with so little Reluctance, with so much Contentment! should
prepare Himself still for thicker, and greater Afflictions, by a Glorious
Disdain, and yet a Pious Improvement of all the former! should have a Mind so
Compassionate of others Misfortunes, even of His Enemies Offenses, and yet so
Serene amidst His own Dangers! should have a greater Luster, and Majesty of
Countenance, as Moses had, and that not when he was performing an Act of
Government, and Administering the Law; but when He was dying, by the Unjust
Pretense, of His having broken His own Laws!

For any Man to bear Miseries well, has been ever counted so great an Honor,
that some of the Ancient Heathens have too extravagantly thought, it equaled
Men to God Himself, who is not capable of Misery. That (says one of them) is
truly Divine, to have the Frailties of a Man, the Security of a God. It is
indeed, by all true Philosophy, esteemed to proceed from the greatest strength
of Nature; by all true Christianity, from the highest degree of Grace.

Can any other Virtue, so clearly manifest, of what strong, and firm, and
invulnerable a temper the heart is made? Passive Courage is performed within,
in the Soul it self: when Men are forlorn, oppressed, despised, not so well as
only forsaken: when they have no Flatterers, few Comforters, scarce any but
Enemies near them.

And therefore this Grace before was generally more found in the Poor, Low, and
Obscure part of the World: 'twas commonly excluded from Princes Courts, by a
Thousand Delights, and by the Pompous Dreams of Human Greatness. 'Twas almost
enough Patience before in Great Men, to be only more moderate, and reserved in
their Pleasures.

From the Greatest, and Best of Kings before, Men used rather to take Examples
how to Lead Armies, to Command Nations, to Distribute Justice, to cherish their
Good Subjects, to subdue the Rebellious. These were the Arts of Empire. 'Twas
from the severe Practices of the Cottage, the Cell, and the Gown, and they
usually fetched Instructions, and Examples, how to submit to hard Fate, to
endure Mildly the Rigors of a stronger Power, to contemn the Melancholy, and
Terrors of a Prison, to pardon, or to bear the Affronts of mean Conquerors;
and, by such hands to Dye a violent Death with Decence.

What Praises then can be worthy of that King, who so much excelled the upper,
and the lower part of Mankind, in their different perfections? who out-did the
Upper in Righteousness and Mercy; the Lower, in Meekness, and Long-suffering?
How shall we be able to Extol His Goodness; who could (...) readily lay down
His own Life for His Subjects? when it has been often esteemed goodness enough
in other Sovereigns, to spare sometimes the Lives of some of their Subjects,
that have transgrest their Commands! What Title shall we bestow on that
Magnanimous Courage, which could endure all the Barbarous forms of such a
Trial, and Execution; the Insolence of the Ignominious Judges; the Horror of
the Disguised Executioners; nay, even (pardon the Word, for He Pardoned the
Thing) the Spitle of His Inhuman Persecutors: could suffer this, with as much
unconcerned easiness, as if it had been only the Pomp, and Solemnity of His
Coronation?

To Witness all this, I might challenge the Testimony of those very Servants,
that were, by His Adversaries, imposed on Him in His Restraints: of whom, many
were Converted by His Sufferings, who had been His most bitter Enemies, whilst
He flourished. I might Allege His Speeches, His Conferences, His Personal
Treaties, His Conversation, His Immortal Writings; all Compos d in His Greatest
Distresses; some near the very sight of the Scaffold. They tell us, that when
Caesar Swam for His Life amidst His Enemies, He had such Presence of Mind, as
to Swim with one hand, and in the other to hold up His own Book, and save it
from perishing. But, when the King was encompassed with far greater, inevitable
dangers, He not only preserved, but Wrote that Books; to which, amongst all the
Writings of Princes, I know none equal, but Caesar's, if His: none Superior,
but David's and Solomon's.

But, What need we seek farther, for a Proof of His Royal Courage, and
Christian Patience, than to the very Men that Conquered Him? And that not only
now, when they have so many Reasons, to Condemn their own Cruelty toward Him:
and, of all Reasons, two most unanswerable ones: I wish they would think so:
His Own Pardoning them, and His Sons Confirming His Mercy. But we may even
venture to appeal to their Opinions, and Censures of Him, when He was in His
Lowest, they in their Highest, most Insulting Condition.

His Enemies had Him long amongst them: long they had all His nearest
Concernments open to their discovery: His Chambers, His Cabinets, His very
Body, and Heart. The last part of His Life they forced Him to pass in a Camp,
or Prison, or Hall, or Scaffold. There were no secret conveyances of a Palace;
no officious silence of Servants; there all His behavior was exposed to the
view of all, and chiefly to those, that mortally hated Him.

And what the least indecence or weakness did they discern? What the Greatest
Resolution, and Heroic Spirit did they not see in Him? Did, at any time, any
word, or even murmur of discontent come from Him, for which He ought to have
been jealous of His Enemies presence? Nay rather might He not, in all, have
wished for their most exact, and severe observation? For what did, or could
they observe? What in all His Discourses, but great Truth oppressed, and yet
Gloriously Prevailing? What in all His private Actions, but the most unaffected
Modesty, and Devotion? What in all His Public, but Unmovable Constancy, and,
the most invincible thing in this World, an Humble Conscience well-assured?

How many various, distracting thoughts, of Hatred and Disdain, of natural
Tenderness and Affection (not to speak of Fear or desire of Life) might often
then have assaulted a weaker Heart, in any one of all the dismal degrees of His
Passion! was it not then enough to Discompose and Shake a Mind less
Established: or then when, instead of the most Flourishing Court of Europe, He
saw Himself long abandoned to silent Walls, or Rocks, and Seas, and yet more
cruel Guards? or then when in His Solitude He cast His thoughts back on His
Travels abroad; where He was the Love, and Delight of Foreign Courts. and, on
His Return Home, when the Whole Nation seemed, for Joy, to go out beyond its
own Shores to Meet Him: and, now to find, that the same Nation lay so quiet,
and Astonished at His approaching Murder? or then, when He reflected on the
Spotless Innocence of His whole Life, and compared it as He well might, with
other Princes His Contemporaries: and yet observed the strange Difference, that
Heaven had made in their Fortunes? or then when He found, that after the
Greatest hopes of Peace, and Accommodation, He was so suddenly, so unexpectedly
Hurried to Destruction, that even many of His Enemies, could not keep pace with
the rest, in their Cruelty? or when He saw, that all the second Attempts of His
Loyal Friends had proved as unfortunate, as the first? or, when He remembered
the Innocence, and the Calamities of the absent parts of Himself, and took His
last leave of those His Children that were present? or, when He beheld the
places of His Trial, and Martyrdom; the one the Chief Seat of His own Justice,
the other of His former Splendour?

Or when -- I can go no farther. For this can scarce be spoken without Tears:
and Tears will not become a Death so Triumphant. Let it suffice, that, in all
this, He was not without all Natural Affections; nor can any Man, that is, be
truly Magnanimous. Two things, indeed, came near His Heart: the Misfortunes of
His Family, and Friends; and the Slavery, in which, He saw His Subjects were
going to be Inthrall'd. These only could touch, yet even these could not
disorder His Soul, nor weaken His Faith in God; to whom He Meekly Resigned His
Own Private, and the Public Cause, which was His own too; and by a Divine
Spirit, Foretold the happy Recovery of both.

Let therefore the present Age, and Posterity, let all his Friends and Admirers
know, what his Enemies could not but confess; that in all his Last Words, and
Looks, and Actions; He not only equaled his former Greatness; but he Did, and
Spoke, and Looked, as became the Glory he was going to possess. He parted from
his Crowns, as not ashamed to have worn them, nor conscious of deserving to
lose them, nor unwilling to leave them. He submitted not to the Unjust
Sentence, as a King: he yielded to the Cruel Execution of it, as a Christian.
The dishonorable part he refused; the painful he accepted. He pleaded not for
himself at his Enemies Bar, because it was below him: He Pleaded, and Prayed
for his Enemies, at the Bar of heaven, which only was above him. That Majesty
which Nature gave him, he preserved, he improved: That humility, and charity,
which Religion Taught him, he Practiced, he adorned.

What Comforter, in so great a Tempest, could have inspired him, with such
Security, such Calmness, such Cheerfulness? Who? but He, whom the Winds and
Seas obeyed, He, that walked Himself on the Roughest Waves; suffered himself
the greatest Torments, and was able to make His Disciples do the same. Of that
Divine Teacher He learnt this Heavenly Truth, That Persecution is a Blessing:
and, He behaved Himself Conformable to that Blessed Example, as well as
Doctrine. He was Persecuted for Righteousness sake; whether we take
Righteousness for Justice, or Religion: For both of which He was a Martyr: and,
although his Persecutions might seem a Curse, to him, in this World, because
they deprived him of an Earthly Diadem: yet they were a Real, Inexpressible
Blessing to him: For he is abundantly, unmeasurably recompensed in the Kingdom
of Heaven.

Whether the Kingdom of Heaven be taken, as usually it is in Scripture
Language, for the Gospel of that Kingdom: those Truths, and Precepts, that show
the Way to it: or for the Joys of Heaven it self, to which they Lead: He
certainly has had the blessings of both: He felt, out of question, the sincere
Comforts of the Evangelical Doctrine in this World: his Life showed it; his
Sufferings proved it; his Death most evidently confirmed it. And therefore we
have a charitable, undoubted assurance, that he attained, at his Death, to the
other more happy Sense of the Word: that (as he himself the very Moment of his
Expiring, said he should) He has exchanged his Corruptible, for an
Incorruptible Crown: that the Text of the Sermon Preached before him, at his
Coronation, though it then might seem unseasonable, has proved Prophetical:
which was the latter part of those Words, Be thou faithful unto Death, Rev.2.10
and I will give thee a Crown of Life.

We have now attended this Godlike Man, to the end of his Labors: and, as much
as we can do, by our lmperfect Applauses, and Congratulations, we have brought
him to the end of his Faith, his entrance into the Kingdom of Glory. But, I am
sensible, that, in Zeal to perform my poor Office to his Ashes, I have too much
Trespassed on the Patience of this Great Assembly. Yet, I was led on by some
kind of confidence, that, having this the Subject of my Discourse, I should not
only have your Customary pardon, and more than ordinary Attention, but the most
favorable Concurrence of your tenderest Passions, For though, on less, and
private occasions, there is scarce any Sorrow, but may be wearied and dried up,
by the distance of almost Thirty years: yet I could not but believe, and you
your selves have given me the greatest reasons imaginable to believe it, that
there are none here present, who came not hither still afresh, and most nearly
concerned in the Irreparable Loss of that excellent King.

Perhaps some that have heard me this day, were his own Menial Servants; and so
were Domestic Witnesses of His incomparable goodness; and had a share in His
particular Kindness: many there may be here, who enjoyed the blessed fruits of
His first Peaceful, most Gentle, most Religious Reign: many I see, who grieved
at His Ruin, and endeavored too to support His falling Greatness with the
hazard of all, with the loss of much, that was near, and dear to them. Even the
youngest of us, methinks, cannot but still, most sensibly regret His untimely
Fall; by which they were deprived of so perfect an Example of all Virtue, and
Piety; and were forced to pass away their first years, that else might have
been most pleasant, amidst the Oppressions, and Confusions of their Country.

And certainly, all of us together have just cause to be humbled, under a sense
of Gods Wrath, and to Implore his Mercy, that this Royal Innocent Blood, which
was spilt for the Church, and has cried from under the Altar, may, at length,
cease Crying; not only against the Wretched Instruments of that Cruelty, for
that also, in our own Charity, and by His Example, we ought to Pray for: but,
that His Blood may cease Crying against the whole Nation it Self, which (How
shall I express it, without offense? nay, How with a just resentment?) which
certainly suffered it by their Negligence: Should I not add? by their
stupidity; and too much hastened it by their Sins.

And, if we are all Cordially thus affected, as, I doubt not, but we all are;
with such Indignation for his Undeserved Death; such Veneration for His
Never-dying Memory; may we all endeavor to express these our Affections, not
only by declaring our abhorrence of those Black Counsels, and Accursed
Practices, which finished the last part of His Tragedy; but even of those that
did, any way, though at never so great a distance, in the least, Contribute
toward it. May all of us, according to our several Stations and Abilities:
and, Who can have Abilities to do this, if you here present have not? May all
of us be most industriously Watchful, that the same Schismatical Designs, and
Antimonarchical Principles, which then lnspir'd so many ill Men, Misled some
Good Men, and cost our Good King so Dear; may not once more revive, and
Insinuate themselves again, under the same, or Newer, and Craftier Disguises,
and find an opportunity to attempt the like Mischiefs.

For the Present, Let us all join in our hearty Prayers to Allmighty God, That
he would be pleased to pardon to us, and to our Country, this Heinous, Public
Sin, by the same Infinite Compassion, by which we can only expect Forgiveness
of Our own particular Sins; By that Blood, which speaks better things than the
Blood of the most Righteous Abel, or Charles; By that Blood, which is more
Precious than the Kings: By the Blood, and Merits, and Intercession of Jesus
Christ Our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

