Moore, Mayor. Martis xxxio. die Ianuarii, 1681. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI
Secundi, Angliae, etc. xxxiv.
THis Court does desire Dr. Sprat to Print his Sermon Preached on Sunday
Morning last in the Guild-Hall-Chappel before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
this City.

Wagstaffe.
A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, AND THE Court of ALDERMEN, AT
GUILD HALL Chapel, ON The 29th. of January, 1681/2;
By THOMAS SPRAT, D.D. One of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON: Printed by M. C. for Ioanna Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1682.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN MOORE, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London;
And to the Right Worshipful the ALDERMEN His Brethren.
My Lord,
THough the favor of your Commands is an abundant Excuse for my Printing this
very plain Sermon: yet, I doubt, I need some Apology for Preaching it in such
an Auditory, as I had the honor that day to serve. I fear, it might seem a
presumption for me to discourse on this Subject, in the presence of the
Reverend Judges of the Land, the Learned Sergeants of the Law, and the wise
Governors of your Great and Honorable City: An Assembly of men, from whose
Wisdom and Experience such as I might better learn the Doctrine, and Practice
of Righteousness, and Mercy.

I can only say, that as it was my Duty, so it was my Endeavor to treat of
this Argument merely as a Divine. I designed not to persuade you to these
Virtues by the Principles of Humane Prudence; which such a Congregation could
not be supposed to want; but rather to confirm you in them by the Obligations
and Promises of our Holy Religion: which is the proper business of my
Profession.

It was therefore enough for me, in that place, on that Text, to perform the
part not so much of a Teacher, as of a Remembrancer. And I have attained my
end, if I have laid before you some of the chief Praises, and Rewards, that the
Scriptures bestow on these two excellent Graces: whereof you, that heard me,
are so much more able to give Rule, and, what is much better, Example to the
World.

My Lord, I am Your Lordships most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, Tho.
Sprat.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, etc.
PROVERBS xxi. 21. He that follows after righteousness, and mercy, finds
life, righteousness, and honor.
IN these words there are two most eminent Virtues recommended to us: one the
most useful, the other the most amiable, of all that we can acquire toward our
being, or well being, in this life or the next: Righteousness, the best of all
Natural Virtues; nay, it is a Christian Grace: Mercy, the most excellent of all
Christian Graces.

These two are here represented to our earnest pursuit, not in the severe style
of a strict command, nor in the rigid terms of a legal precept. Though if God
had only thus required them of us, they had deserved our most dutiful
Obedience, considering the high prerogative the Almighty Lawgiver has over us.
But here they are set off to us in the style of the Gospel, in the gentle,
alluring, and delightful form of a Promise. That, which is our necessary duty,
is attended with a free, ample, immense reward.

The Duty is double, The following after Righteousness: The following after
Mercy. The Reward is treble, Life, Righteousness, and Honor: according to the
usual method of Gods gracious dealings with men. His Promises always go beyond
our performances: his Rewards both in weight, and number, by far exceed our
duties.

Of these studies of Righteousness and Mercy we should all be followers, as we
are men; we all profess our selves to be followers, as we are Christians. What
then can be a more proper work for us all, in this our solemn meeting, either
as men, or as Christians, than to reason with our selves, concerning this whole
matter, to convince our judgments of the necessity of these duties, to excite
our affections toward them, by the greatness of their reward?

To this purpose, be pleased that I examine, First, What are the two things,
which are here proposed to our zealous prosecution?

Secondly, What is the way, the best way of following after them?

Thirdly, Let us encourage one another in their attainment, by the largeness of
the recompense, which is here assured to us from the mouth of Divine Wisdom it
self.

My Text, you see, consisting of a twofold Duty, and a threefold Reward, the
Duty comes first to be considered in both its parts; Righteousness and Mercy.
Both which Solomon the wise King has here most wisely put together, and in
their right order. For wherever they both are, Righteousness is the foundation
of Mercy; Mercy is the ornament of Righteousness. And neither of them can be
complete without the other. Whatever is not just can never be merciful:
Whatever is merely, strictly just, without any compassion, it is to a Proverb
highly injurious: it is that which the Scripture calls a being righteous
overmuch. Eccles. vii. 16.


The word Righteousness has several different significations in the Old, and
the New Testament. In the Old it sometimes passes for all manner of Goodness,
frequently for the particular virtue of Justice. In the New it commonly
signifies the same; and besides, it is often raised to a higher meaning, to
express the glorious mystery of our Justification by Christ, and the spiritual
Grace which attends it.

I believe, my Text is most to be understood of that kind of Righteousness, by
which is meant, integrity of Actions, and honesty of Conversation, in all our
public, and private relations in this world. And so I shall chiefly handle it.
Though indeed the other more Divine Interpretation of the Word ought not wholly
to be excluded, in our present meditations. For to all I shall say on this
argument, it must be premised, that without the Righteousness of Christ, to
consecrate all our own righteousness, and mercy, and to make them acceptable to
God, it were a vain presumption for any man to think he can deserve by them,
upon their own account, either honor, or righteousness, or life it self.

But first, I begin with Righteousness, as it is taken in the usual sense of
the Old Testament: for common Justice, and moral Honesty, and obedience to good
Laws.

In explaining the nature of this Virtue, it would be no very modest
undertaking, for me to make a large discourse, before this venerable Assembly;
where I speak to those, whose business it is, not only to instruct, but to
regulate, and steer the whole Nation in the practice of it. Only for our
clearer proceeding, something must be said concerning it.

I humbly conceive, a thing, or person may be called right, or righteous, or
just, either by reason it is so, originally, and independently in its own
being; or because it is conformable to some certain Rule of a Superior Being;
by comparison to whose perfection, the moral straitness, or crookedness of all
inferior things ought to be judged.

Now nothing can be absolutely righteous, and primitively just, but only God
himself; who is the sole Author of all Truth, and Justice, the only Donor of it
to us. His infinite understanding is the only cause, and measure of all Truth.
His unerring will is the only Fountain, and unalterable Standard of all
Righteousness.

As therefore this will of God is displayed in several manifestations to
mankind, so, according to the resemblance of our wills, and actions to his will
thus manifested, there may, and ought to be various kinds of righteousness
amongst men.

As the will of God expresses it self, to our own hearts, in the dictates of
rectified nature, and right reason: so an observance of that will is natural,
and moral Righteousness. As the will of God is declared in his written Word, so
a submission to that Will is Religious Righteousness. As the will of God
appears in the images, and representatives of Gods power on earth, so an
obedience to their Laws is Political, nay, it is Religious Righteousness too:
as far as those Laws do not transgress the higher principles of Gods Natural,
Moral, or Divine Laws.

This seems to be the nature of Righteousness in general. And this threefold
declaration of Gods will, either written in our own Hearts, or spoken in his
Word, or pronounced in the Voice of lawful Anthority, is the most certain, if
not the only, Foundation of that distinction between right, and wrong, equity,
and injury, by which all mankind is to be directed in all conditions, either as
Superiors, Equals, or Inferiors.

And now that this most commendable virtue may not pass among any of us, as it
has with too many in our days, only for an Old Testament Duty, rather belonging
to a moral man, than to a Christian: give me leave to put you in mind, how
essential it is to Christianity it self; what commendations and privileges the
Holy Scripture ascribes to it; what high rank and dignity it holds in Gods
Statute-Book, as well as in men's; and that not only in the Law, but in the
Gospel; and not only spiritual Righteousness, but natural, and political
Righteousness too.

If we shall reflect on the whole progress, and all the revolutions of Gods
dispensations to mankind, we may easily observe, he has always proceeded with
us, not only according to the unaccountable purposes of his own secret will,
whose Judgments are unsearchable, and its ways past finding out: But he has
dealt with us, as after the manner of a God, by his infinite mercy, so, as I
may say, after the manner of men too, by a standing, plain, declared, written
Rule of Justice and Righteousness; by truth of Contract, by Covenant, a double
Covenant, in which we might know what is his, what ours by his gift: a
Covenant, in which we might understand our work, and, if we perform it well,
may claim our recompense.

Thus the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, who has an unlimited Dominion and
Sovereignty over the works of his hands, is yet so much delighted to have
mankind governed by known Laws, that he himself was pleased, if I may so speak
with reverence, to bound, and circumscribe that part of his own Omnipotence, by
the like method.

And in the first, most public appearance of Gods presence to the world, as
soon as he had chosen to himself a peculiar people, when he began to establish
a settled Religion, did not then his care of common Justice, and civil Rights
keep an equal pace with his provision for his own Worship? were his first Laws
to the Jews, Ceremonial, and Ritual only, relating to his own Service alone?
were they not Judicial, and Moral also, respecting as well the peace and
prosperity of Humane Society? of all which Laws, did not God himself seem to
give the advantage to this latter kind? he did, in this at least, that his own
Ceremonial Law, which he then prescribed, was sometime to be abolished, but his
Moral Law never.

For upon his second, more perfect, and last Revelation of Religion in the
Gospel, the way of his own Divine Service was indeed much altered, but not any
one common Rule of Human Justice: no abrogation of any one precept of
Righteousness or Honesty followed upon the great reformation from Judaism to
Christianity, but rather a new addition of more strength, and authority to them
all.

Whoever shall recollect the whole matter, and design of our Blessed Saviors
Preaching, can he possibly think otherwise? Does not the whole sum of his
Divine Doctrine seem well nigh calculated, and fitted as much to establish, and
direct the Courts of Legislators, and the Seats of Justice; as for the Temple,
and the Pulpit? Were not all his Sermons, especially his great Sermon on the
Mount, a perfect Comment on the ancient precepts of Righteousness, and Mercy?
Does he not there free them all, one by one, from gross corruptions? Does he
not vindicate them all by most genuine interpretations? Does he not establish
them all by severer punishments, and more glorious rewards? Especially did he
not exemplify them all, by his own most innocent, just, unblamable, and
merciful life?

Thus confirmed, thus advanced, did our Blessed Savior deliver down the common
Rules of Right and Justice; and thus the same Rules have continued unchangeable
in all successions of the Christian Church; never hindering the great design of
Christianity, but exceedingly promoting it, and being themselves incorporated
into it: So that all along the same do, as you would be done to, the same
definitions of Reason, and Righteousness; the same general precepts of Honesty
in Commerce, and Judicial Proceedings; the same Laws of Ruling, and Obeying,
have been common to Christians with the wisest Heathen Nations: or wherever
there was any difference, the Christian Laws of this kind were the stricter,
and the practice of them too amongst Christians for many ages was, as their
Principles require it ever to be, far more exact.

Whatever our new Saints, that are only so of their own making, have devised,
was it ever so much as questioned amongst the Apostles, and Primitive Saints,
whether the new Law of the Gospel, tho that be styled in Scripture, the Royal
Law of Liberty; whether that did infranchise and set any man loose from the
precepts of internal Virtue and Goodness, or of external Submission to Civil
Government, and internal too? A question indeed there was concerning the
Ceremonial Law, Whether that were to be extinguished? and that carried in the
Affirmative: a question there was also concerning the Moral Law, and legal
Righteousness, Whether that alone could justify a Christian? and that
determined in the Negative. But never did any sober Christian doubt, whether
the Moral Law did oblige under the Gospel or no.

Certainly, till after a thousand years, the Romish Tyranny prevailed over weak
Princes, and blind People, never did any Church of Christ, or pretended Head of
any, take to it self a prerogative to exempt the Christian Church from due
Obedience to the Temporal Power; much less to set up a Spiritual Power above
the Temporal, nay, with a pretended right to Advance or Depose the Temporal.
Certainly never, till the Anabaptistical madness, and Enthusiastical phrensies
of these last Ages, did any Members of the Church of Christ, presume upon an
extraordinary Purity, and Holiness of their own, to declare themselves
Absolved, by a Spiritual Light within them, from the eternal Bonds of Reason,
Right, and Justice, to which we are all indispensably obliged, not only as we
are men, but much more as we are Christians.

And to manifest the just Judgment of God against them all for these
Usurpations, is it not very observable, that the very same men, who most of all
men, that call themselves Christians, have invaded the rights of public
Government, and private Virtue, the Romanist on the one side, the Enthusiasts
on the other, the very same men have made the greatest Invasions on Religion it
self? the one on its Purity, the other on its Unity?

Those of the Church of Rome, Pope Hildebrand, and His Followers, who assumed a
Dominion, and Supremacy over all Temporal Laws, did not they first exalt
themselves in the Temple of God, above all that is called God, above the
Scripture it self, the express Law of God? The Anabaptists in Germany, and
their Successors, of whatever Name or Sect, who first falsely boasted, that
their inward Sanctity, and Inspirations did set them above the low rudiments,
and beggarly elements of this world, as they miscalled the Obligations of
Virtue, and Obedience: did the same men rest satisfied there? Did they not at
the same time, profess, that all sober Piety, and decent Worship, and
intelligible Religion, was as gross, and carnal, and Antichristian, and as
grievous to their spirits, as they had pronounced all the Ordinances of Civil
Government, and moral Virtue to be?

But, God be praised! neither of these abominable examples, is of sufficient
Authority, or Antiquity, to make a President, against the constant, universal
practice of the whole incorrupt Christian, as well as Jewish Institution. Still
therefore the same observation holds good, that Justice and Piety,
Righteousness and Religion came into the world together. In their beginning
they were brought forth as Twins, the most beloved Children of the most high,
the most likely Offspring of Heaven. And as they were Contemporaries at first,
so they have been all along educated together; both cherished alike by God
himself, both observed alike by all wise, holy, and good men.

Nor indeed could it well be otherwise. For the mutual agreement between
Justice, and Piety is inseparable: The perpetual union of Righteousness and
Religion is most necessary. The Principles on which they both subsist, the
ends, which they would both produce, are the same, or subordinate one to the
other. Are not true Reason, and the Word of God some of the chief Principles of
true Righteousness? so they are of true Religion. Are not the Glory of God, and
the happiness of mankind the ends of Religion? so they are of Righteousness.
Religion indeed does carry the blessed work much farther; undertakes to finish
it in another life. But Righteousness begins it in this life, and performs its
part so well, that without it, Religion it self could have little, or no real
influence on the Consciences of its Disciples.

Was not mankind a Society, as soon as it was a Church? and Righteousness
contributed to make it a Society, as Religion did to make it a Church. Was it
not Righteousness that first made men begin to confide in one another? to
commit their private Safety, and Profit to each others Fidelity? That therefore
was the common parent of all other Virtues: That first peopled the world: That
first drew, and enticed men into Houses, and Cities, and then secured them
there: and so divided mankind from beasts in conditions, as well as
habitations. Certainly it was Righteousness, as a part of natural Religion,
that first made men to be men: and so prepared, and then delivered them over to
revealed Religion, and at last to be made Christians, and Saints.

If Righteousness had not tempered, and softened, and reconciled humane nature
within it self: no creature had been more fierce, and salvage, than the Sons of
Adam: none would have had more vehement passions to desire mischief; none more
cunning to contrive it; none a greater power to effect it.

If we take Righteousness out of the heart of a man, we leave nothing there of
the image of God, after which he was created. Take Righteousness out of a
private Family; and it soon turns into a den of Thieves. Take Righteousness out
of a State; and that only, becomes a more regular, more politic, more combined,
and therefore a more pernicious society of mighty Robbers. Take Righteousness
out of the World; and the world would not deserve to be called, as it was at
first, the complete work of God's hands; but a Chaos still, or a rude Forest or
Wilderness; or something worse: For to be inhabited only by rapine, and
violence, is worse, than to be only an innocent, unfrequented Desert.

Thus whatever increase of Civil Arts, whatever flourishing of populous
Nations, whatever intercourse between people and people has been practiced to
supply the necessities, conveniences, and Ornaments of humane life: they were
all at first founded on Righteousness. From that are derived to us all our
temporal Blessings: without that, we could never have enjoyed the means of our
eternal Blessings. For where there is no true Righteousness, there can be no
true humanity, no civility, no kindness of men to one another: and by
consequence, no true Religion. For all true Religion is always accompanied with
some true humanity: wherever the power of Christianity comes, it either finds
some civility, or makes it. What is that which immediately follows Glory to God
on high? peace on earth, good will toward men. And where there is no
Righteousness, there can be no good will; where there is no good will of men to
one another, there can be no place, or no well-grounded hope of Gods good will
to men.

This is the first thing in my Text, Righteousness; a virtue so beneficial, so
necessary to mankind; so highly valued of God himself. This deals with men, as
men, upon the square, upon even terms; justly expecting a like return of good
offices. The next is Mercy. But that has more of superiority, and majesty in
it. That takes men on the greatest disadvantage, with the greatest generosity:
when they are either miserable by distresses, or obnoxious by injuries,
relieves the one, pardons the other. Whatever therefore I have said, or can be
said in praise of Righteousness; still the chief place in our praises, and
practice, ought to be reserved for Mercy. Great indeed is the extent of both
these together. All below Righteousness, is sin: nothing is above Mercy. So
that both together comprehend the whole compass of men's duty to one another,
from the lowest to the highest part of it; which may be all contained in two
words, Honesty, and Charity; that is, the Righteousness, and Mercy in my Text.

Thus they are best together. But if considered asunder, or compared, then
Mercy must triumph over, S. James ii. 13.
and rejoice against judgment. Righteousness is a virtue unblamable: Mercy is a
grace most lovely, and honorable. Righteousness obliges us to yield to other
men their own: Mercy inclines us to give them our own too: and what can be
more? Righteousness makes you not to be enemies to others unjustly: Mercy makes
you not to be enemies to your enemies: nay, to be their Friends, their
Benefactors, even their Gods.

Most certainly, S. James ii. 13.
as he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy: so God
will require Mercy with the greatest Mercy; for he will requite even
Righteousness with Mercy. Of all the Divine Attributes, God is delighted to
exercise his mercy to men, more than any, nay than all the rest: and therefore
he cannot but esteem mercy in men above all other humane endowments. So
essential, so dear is Mercy to God himself, that in his own
inexpressibly-Divine Nature, he seems to give it some special preeminence over
all his other perfections: though no doubt, they are in themselves all equally
Divine and Infinite.

For the sake of his Mercy, God seems willing to change his own eternal mind,
which is undoubtedly immutable. Psalm. cvi. 45.
It is said, He repented according to the multitude of his mercies. When he
injoyns it us, he prefers it before his own Worship: He says, S. Mat. ix. 13.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. His Mercy may be said to sweeten his
Holiness, to moderate his Power, to delay, to stop his Revenge, to enlarge,
beyond all proportion, his distributive, and, after all provocations, to
restrain his vindicative Justice. His Mercy God often employs, without any the
least mixture of his severe Attributes; But he seldom, or never exercises any
of them in this world, so as utterly, irreparably to exclude his Mercy: In the
midst of judgments, he remembers mercy.

The two great Attributes, by which God condescends to govern all humane
affairs, are his Power, or his Mercy. But an Almighty Power alone had been
rather dreadful, than auspicious to mankind. It might have filled men's minds
with fear, and terror, and have frighted them into a servile compliance. It Is
only mercy added to power, that brings authority with it; and charms men's
hearts into a willing obedience.

Which of these two God himself prefers, can we have a clearer instance, than
in the persons and administrations of Moses, and our Blessed Savior? Moses the
Vicegerent of Gods Power; our Savior of his Mercy: Moses the Servant of God;
our Savior the Son of God, nay, God himself.

During the Ministry of Moses, we read much of Countries laid wast, of Nations
plagued, of the Firstborn cut off, of Kingdoms and Armies overwhelmed and
destroyed. Then Religion seemed rather inclined to terrify the world, than to
pardon it; to enforce a Law, than to persuade it; to subdue enemies, than to
make friends. But at the appearance of our Blessed Savior, Religion seemed on
a sudden reconciled to the whole world; and not only to require by its
Divinity, but to deserve by its Clemency the love and reverence of all mankind.
For in our Saviors works, though there were undeniable Testimonies of his
unlimited Power, yet there were more of his boundless Mercy: though both in him
were infinite, yet his Mercy was most apparent.

Such is Mercy, so wonderful, adorable, and universal, in the first great
example, and most perfect Original of it, God himself! It Is well for us that it
is so. And such in truth of imitation, should be the imperfect Copies, that we
take of it from him. Though we cannot come near that Mercy in any measure of
equality: yet we should all strive to resemble it, if we would partake of it:
S. Luke vi. 36. Ps. cxlv. 9.
To be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful. As he is merciful! Yes. As
his mercy is over all his own works, and above all our sins: So should our
mercy be, in our weak degree of proportion; above all our own good works to
other men, above all other men's ill works, and offenses against us. This is the
only way, for us frail, and sinful creatures, to be like our heavenly Father,
in that very thing, in which he is most our Father, most our heavenly Father.

These then are the two great Duties here recommended, both the principal
things in Heaven and Earth. Nothing brings Heaven down so near to Earth:
nothing raises Earth so much toward Heaven. What then can be done better on
Earth? What more worthy of Heaven, than to follow after them both? and what is
it to follow after them, in a right manner, in a true Scripture sense? which is
my second Head proposed.

We read it, according to the Hebrew, (...), etc
He that follows after Righteousness, and Mercy. The Septuagint render it,
The way of Righteousness and Mercy, shall find, and. Indeed whoever would
rightly pursue these, or any other graces, they must do it, in a way; not by
secret shifts, and turnings; not in bypath, or indirectly; not after any
private fancy, or spirit; but by a trodden, direct, lawful Rule: Let me say it,
in the Kings Highway. Thus every man ought to be righteous to all men,
equally, and indifferently, not only to his own Friends, or Sect, or Party. We
may, it is true be merciful to some men more than to others, according to our
opportunities, or obligations, or discretion: But then still we should be
exceedingly careful, that we be not unmerciful to any man.

Thus to follow after these things is to set about their performance, speedily,
zelously, indefatigably, with the whole man, in all our thoughts, words, and
actions; especially the men of this world, as Christian men of this world,
plainly, and sincerely to set your minds, your tongues, your hands, your feet,
to the work: with the clearest conviction of your understandings, that they
ought to be practiced, but chiefly with the most ardent, and unwearied
affections of your hearts, in the practice: For it is the heart, it is
practice, that God most regards.

And to follow after both these graces aright, is to practice them both in
their seasons, and proportions: never to divide two such things, which God
himself has so nearly joined in his Commands; in his own incomprehensible
Godhead has indissolubly united them: so we to conjoyn, and mingle them both
together; never to omit either of them, on a pretense, that it is for the sake
of the other; but with the most charitable, and harmonious mixture of both in
one, to season, to strengthen, to justify all our mercy with Righteousness; to
qualify, to allay, to sweeten all our righteousness with Mercy.

And thus really to follow after both these things, in Scripture Language, is,
really to obtain them. So gracious, and benign are the expressions of the Holy
Ghost in these matters, that your unfeigned labor, and well-directed industry
in the ways of grace, and goodness, brings with it an infallible success: Your
very endeavors after them, if uncounterfeit, and persevering, are often here
taken for the effect it self. So gently, so compassionately does our good, and
only wise God condescend to meet our infirmities, that his Grace does often
prevent our diligence; never fails it, never comes short of it.

Let us but knock, S. Mat. vii. 7.
and the gate of divine Mercy shall be opened to us; Let us but seek, and we
shall find: Let us but ask, and we shall have: Let us but follow after, and we
shall overtake. Nay farther yet, God will not only give us the very things, we
ask, and seek, and follow after: but he often super-adds the recompense of them
at the same time: oftentimes accompanies, and sets off his graces, not only
with their own peculiar gifts, and advantages; but accumulates more, heaps upon
them many other remote blessings.

Of which most bounteous method of Gods dispensations to mankind, Solomon, the
wise Author of this sentence in my Text, of all men living in his time, had the
greatest experience. For when God entirely left it to his will, which he would
choose, either Wisdom, or Wealth, or Power, or Victory; and he had made the
best choice in preferring Wisdom: God did not only plentifully bestow that upon
him, but over and above cast in all the other good things, which in comparison
to Wisdom, he himself had rejected. I Kings iii.
God said to him, Because thou have asked for thy self this thing, and have not
asked for thy self long life, neither have asked riches for thy self, nor have
asked the life of thine enemies, but have asked for thy self understanding to
discern judgment; behold, I have done according to thy words: Lo! I have given
thee a wise, and an understanding heart: so that there was none like thee
before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee. And I have
also, says God, given thee that which thou have not asked, both riches and
honor. And if thou will walk in my ways, to keep my Statutes, and my
Commandments, then I will also lengthen thy days.

So that Solomon, or all men, was the fittest man to continue his own
observation of Gods infinite goodness in this kind, upon Sacred Record to all
generations. And therefore as God had proved to him, concerning Wisdom, and
Understanding, so he pronounces here of Righteousness, and Mercy, without which
the highest understanding is Craft, not Prudence; the greatest seeming Wisdom
is Subtilty, and Artifice, not Wisdom.

Of Righteousness and Mercy, he affirms in my Text, not only that he, who
follows after them shall find Righteousness and Mercy themselves: though that
were much; much more than any other study can boast of, that all our search
shall never be in vain: But here that is supposed, as out of all question: much
more is said: not only that he who follows after Righteousness and Mercy shall
find, but finds, what? not only Righteousness, and Mercy, but moreover Life,
Righteousness and Honor. You shall not only possess these Virtues, if you
sincerely pursue them, but you shall enjoy, so surely, that you may be said
already to enjoy, the happy fruits of that pursuit, which are Life,
Righteousness, and Honor.

That is my third, and last particular, the Rewards, ensuing the right
following after these duties, which, you see, are far more than equal to the
duties themselves. But what if these Virtues had come single, and alone,
without any such blessed train of promises, or bright attendance of rewards?
how ought we to have been affected toward them even then?

Out of all controversy, we ought still to have followed after them most
earnestly, to have embraced them most willingly, for their own sakes, for their
own true worth, and unvaluable beauty. Nor need we to fetch arguments from the
Christian Principles, to persuade us to this. Thus much even the wise, and good
men amongst the Gentiles have taught us. They scarce thought any Philosophy
worthy of a man, that did not oblige him to love Justice, and Bounty, and all
other Virtues, for themselves, for their inward benefit, and invisible
excellence.

And if the very Heathens could have such just apprehensions of things, under
their obscure, and imperfect light; what shame would it be to us Christians, if
we should not far exceed them? what reproach, if we should scarce equal them?
what heinous scandal, if we should come short of them, in our opinions, and
practice of these things? if we should think Virtue of it self to be less
praiseworthy than they did, or less its own reward?

Yet since our most gracious Master, our most indulgent Father has thought fit
to add so much to these self-sufficient Duties; we may thankfully accept of
those promises: we may lawfully look to that recompense of reward, that
recompense, which we could not deserve. And we ought therefore to double our
industry, which is so doubly, so manifoldly requited; most diligently to follow
after Righteousness, and Mercy: since they are things in themselves so
desirable, so advantageous, so inestimable in their Rewards.

First, Of Life, and Honor.

As I said before of the word Righteousness, so I must now say of the words
Life, and Honor: they have different meanings in the Old, and New Testament.
Under the Law, Life, and Honor, and most other legal promises; were, I do not
say only, but commonly understood in a literal sense; for temporal Prosperity,
and secular happiness. But the Gospel, as it has raised the things themselves
much higher, so it has proportionably advanced the words. And therefore in the
Gospel, though temporal felicity be not at all obstructed, but rather
exceedingly promoted by it, yet Life, and Honor, and most other Evangelical
promises, are most frequently to be taken in a more sublime, and Divine sense;
for life immortal, honors unspeakable, joys full of glory.

I cannot now in Justice, but apply this promise to my present subject, in its
full extent, in both its senses: For most surely Righteousness and Mercy are
able to entitle you all to both these lives, to both these honors, both here,
and hereafter.

The first kind of Life, and Honor, which is peace of days, increase of
dignity, and reputation in this world, all those blessings these Virtues may
claim, as their due, and right; as their own by purchase, and desert, though
not from God, yet from all mankind. And in fact they are seldom dispossessed of
them, but by great injury, or extraordinary misfortune, or, to speak in the
Christian language, by some hidden purpose of Divine Providence.

Nor is this only the prerogative of Righteousness and Mercy. But, though this
may at first seem a paradox, yet it is a privilege common to all other Virtues,
that as they have great, and just expectations of a future recompense, so they
are usually accompanied with some very considerable temporal good, and
advantage. And it is the unavoidable, insupportable misery of all vice, that as
its prospect into another world is most dismal, so its condition in this is
ever some way, or other very uncomfortable.

Whatever flattering, and deceitful shapes sin may put on, yet it can never so
dissemble all its defects, so hide all its deformities, but still when we come
to our selves, when the charm is over, we may see, and must confess, that all
wickedness is followed close by some very great, notorious, temporal
punishment, and disadvantage. Some bring loss of credit, contempt, infamy,
hatred: as dishonesty, cruelty, corruption, oppression, inordinate ambition:
which very commonly fails of that vain honor, it unduly grasps at, and loses
that quiet life, of which before it was calmly possessed. Some bring loss of
health, decay of bodily strength, and pleasure, which they only seem to
consult. As Luxury, and Riot bring sickness and diseases: they make men most
unfit for death, and yet most hasten it. Some bring loss of earthly riches, as
Prodigality, and Intemperance; which Poverty pursues as an armed man: so that
men often lose their hopes of another world, not so much, as for the good
things of this world, but even by throwing away their share in this world too.
Nay, Covetousness does the same: by a greediness of getting more, it deprives
it self of the true ends of getting: it loses the use, and enjoyment of what it
had got.

Thus every Vice has its dark shadow, some evil genius haunting it in this
world: its satisfactions are short, and uncertain: its calamities most certain,
most durable, Whilst on the other side every Virtue has its good Angle, is
surrounded with some, visible luster, some worldly advantage. Some bring
health, some wealth, some power, some fame, some contentment; a good at least
equal to any of the other. But Righteousness and Mercy united bring them all
together. You see they freely offer to your possession, they will plentifully
shower into your bosoms all the sweetness, and tranquillity of life, all the
splendour, and abundance of a life, that is honorable.

All this they are here enabled to do, by the gift of a Divine Promise: This in
truth for the most part, they cannot but do, by natural effect, and
consequence. For toward a secure, and happy life, Righteousness does very
much: Mercy perfects what the other leaves undone. Righteousness makes few, or
no foes, none worth making friends: Mercy makes, or deserves to make, all
friends; friends even of foes. Righteousness always commends you to good men,
often defends you against wicked men; never justly provokes wicked men against
you: Mercy moves, Romans xii. 21
melts, reconciles, conquers even the wicked; by the most powerful kind of
victory overcomes evil with good.

What then, in all humane probability, may be reasonably expected from such
inoffensive justice, such charming, such diffusive benignity, and compassion?
what? but the justice, nay more, the thanks, the good will, and good offices of
those, who shall be righted by your justice? what? but the Prayers, the hearts,
the lives, if need be, of those who shall be preserved by your mercy, or
forgiven by your pity? All this from without: Besides the comfortable
assurance, and testimony of a clear, and serene conscience within: which only
is able to make life sweet, honor not a burden: nay it is able to make
undeserved disgrace a comfort, and death it self happy.

And certainly all this is life, and honor; this is praise and glory; if there
be any true life, above a sensual, carnal life: if there be any substantial,
lasting honor, above the perishing shadows of it: if there be not only any
Religion toward God, but if there be any thing true, and just, and honest, and
lovely, and of good report; if there be any virtue, any praise amongst men: if
that be glory, which the very Heathens have defined to be the concurring
esteem, and commendation of the wise, and the good, bestowed on great men, not
only, nor indeed chiefly, for their riches, or power; but rather for their
clemency, and beneficence: perfections most proper to the upper part of
mankind. And they can never do mischief to the lower part, nay they can never
be employed, but in doing good to the lower part of the world. God himself has
said, that Great men are Gods: yet it is not greatness alone, but mercy joined
with greatness, and strengthened with Righteousness, that can make them so.

Yet because it may so happen, by the secret disposal of the all-wise Governor
of all things, that Righteousness, and Mercy may sometimes fail of a Temporal
Reward: because that may come to pass, which yet David professes never to have
seen from his youth to his old age, Psalm xxxvii. 25.
that the righteous man may be forsaken, and his seed beg their bread, or want
an easy subsistence of life: nay, because the merciful man may come short of
his just recompense of honor here below: therefore there is still behind a
sufficient reserve, an unmeasurable compensation, in the other more heavenly
sense of the words life, and honor: which, as sure as God is true, will be, are
the undoubted portion of the righteous, and merciful man.

That life, that honor, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it
entered into the tongue of man to express, or heart to conceive, that is the
most worthy subject of all our thoughts, that ought to be the chief end of all
our designs. Else our designs may be speciously honorable; they may be for life
in a low sense, rather indeed for livelihood than life; only to support a life,
that is but for a moment supportable: But they can never else promote our true
life; they can never else be truly profitable, much less truly honorable.

Our gracious God indeed permits, nay, he encourages you all, in the
prosecution of the life, and honors of this world. His Laws have very many
precepts of true humility, but no levelling principles in them, no more than
yours have. Distinctions of dignity, different advantages of life, degrees of
honor do very well agree with the greatest purity, strictness, and simplicity
of the Gospel: no doubt therefore they must be consistent with the freeness,
and largeness, and generosity of Christianity.

God suffers mankind to be provoked, and excited to Virtue, by all manner of
arguments, by secular, as well as by spiritual promises; by temporal, as well
as by eternal hopes. He allows you all the sober pursuit of the moderate
delights, and plenty of this life: They are his gift, if you obtain them. He
is, no doubt, well pleased with your earnest endeavors after excellency, in
any kind of wise counsel, or useful knowledge, or worthy action. The honors you
reap thereby, he confers upon you: of the good you do thereby, you your selves
have the principal advantage.

Give me leave therefore to add; All these our other designs should so be
proportioned, that being good in themselves, they be not made ill by their
abuse, or excess: all our thoughts of this worlds life, and honors should be so
ordered, as neither to depress our minds too much, by the cares of this life,
nor to raise them too high, by the honors of this world: rather they should be
employed, to assist our souls, and give them wings, in rising higher to
supernatural expectations; to a life, to honor immortal; to carry up our
contemplations, to fix our affections on Heaven, on that prospect above, which
is the last bound of the very eyes of our Bodies; how much more ought it to be
the last object of the eyes of our minds!

And if that life, that honor shall be at the bottom of all your hearts, shall
be the beginning and end of all your pains, and studies, if by Righteousness,
and Mercy you shall aspire toward them, you cannot come short of them. This
way you shall find as near, and as sure a passage to Heaven, from the midst of
your earthly business, and worldly Employments, conscientiously, and piously,
righteously, and mercifully managed as any other man has reason to expect from
the greatest retirement of a solitary Devotion.

I speak this on good authority. For thus the holy Scripture it self dispenses
the joys of Heaven. In the whole course of the Gospel, eternal glory is as
much, at least as much, ensured to the just, and charitable virtues, and graces
of an active life, and of a public station in this world, as to any other part
of all contemplative, or practical Religion.

Whatever imaginations some men may have concerning the true way, and gate,
that leads to celestial happiness: which men have been always too ready to open
to themselves, and to those of their own parties, and opinions; too quick in
shutting it upon all others: too many usurping an authority of brandishing the
terrors of Gods Justice, and of scattering the assurances of his Mercy, when,
and where they please; which were neither of them ever committed to their
distribution: yet whatever claim such men may make to the joys of Heaven: some
pretending to them only by the free Grace, without regarding the precepts of
the Gospel: some only by relying on single Faith, and vilifying of Charity:
some by great scruples in little things, and far less care of great things:
some by censuring of other men's lives, and putting as many as they can, under a
state of Damnation; by being more against other men's Religions, than for their
own: yet undoubtedly none of these is the way. These are all mistaken,
unrighteous, unmerciful ways. The only true way to Heaven, which God himself
has traced out, which Christ himself does often point at, though it be narrow,
yet it is a direct; not a cross way: though it be strait, yet it is passable,
and has a gate always open. And what is this way? what this gate? It is not a
disputing, contentious, comparing, censorious, but a mild, peaceable,
righteous, merciful way. And this it is, By the mercy of God the Father, Christ
made to us Righteousness: and that Mercy and this Righteousness made effectual
to us men by the assistance, and consolations of God the Holy Ghost; and that
received, by men with a lively, efficacious Faith; and that evidenced to be in
men by such effects, as most resemble their Divine Original, such as respect
both God, and man: Which are true Righteousness, and Mercy of men to one
another, accompanied with unfeigned piety toward God.

Is there still behind in my Text any more reward promised to the man, who
follows after Righteousness, and Mercy? Indeed can there be any more, than
mortal life, and honor? life, and honor immortal? yes there is still more. And
it is that, you see, which is the cause of all the other Rewards. It is
Righteousness it self. He that follows after Righteousness, and Mercy,
finds life, righteousness, and honor: which now, if you please, may be thus
briefly paraphrased. He that lives righteously, and mercifully toward men, if
he shall practice these virtues humbly, and constantly; if he shall perform
them so, as not at all to rely on their merit for salvation; if still he shall
find the want, and believe the efficacy; and lay hold on the benefit of our
dear Redeemers more precious Righteousness: he shall then partake of the
fruits, and enjoy the happiness, that is promised indeed to our righteousness,
and mercy, but was purchased only by our Saviors Righteousness, and bestowed
only by Gods mercy.

I am now arrived at the other more Evangelical signification of the word
Righteousness. But I come to it so late, that I cannot treat of it at large.
And it is better to say nothing of it than too little. Only from this, and the
rest of my discourse, I beg leave to present you farther with one short
observation; which perhaps will not be unseasonable, by me to be mentioned with
all Submission, by you to be received with favorable Interpretation.

You may perceive, that the true Doctrine, and Practice of Righteousness, and
Mercy, of men's righteousness, and mercy to one another; of Gods righteousness,
and mercy to men, had the same Divine Author, and example at first, the same
course, and progress afterward: and they are all along in Scripture
represented under the same, or very like expressions. Righteousness, and Mercy
are the sum of the Law in one sense; they are the substance of the Gospel in
another. The only possible means and instrument, to secure, and preserve the
one of these, is Civil Government: The only way to teach, and maintain the
other is Religion.

What now may be fairly concluded from all this? Certainly, that as these two
most admirable things have themselves so long, so well agreed in matter, and
words, in growth, and increase; as they are both the best things in this world;
so the means, and instruments of preserving them both, are both most nearly
united in interest, and ought to be so in mutual affections, and assistance.

Certainly when God himself chose his first Lawgiver, and his first
High Priest, out of the same Family; when he appointed Moses and Aaron two
Brethren of the same house, to be his principal Ministers of Justice, and
Piety: it was not by chance, it was not for want of choice. But there was even
then some mystical intention, and that was even then a happy presage, that
between the true Righteousness, and the true Religion, there should, in all
succeeding Ages be nourished a perpetual League, and Alliance, offensive and
defensive: that, as God himself expresses it, Aaron might be to Moses instead
of a mouth; Moses to Aaron instead of God.

And is there not still the same reason, for the same entire union between both
these things among us, as there was then among Gods own people? have they not
both the same strengths, and dangers, the same hopes, and fears, the same
friends, and enemies, the same friends in Heaven, and Earth, the same enemies
in Earth, and Hell?

The common adversaries of both may begin against Religion, as, God knows, in
most of our memories, they did. But did not then, and will not always, the
ruin of Righteousness suddenly follow the overthrow of Religion? In all, or
most of the seditious practices, tumults, and confusions among us, the false
cause of God has been first pretended, the true cause of God first struck at:
and next to that immediately a false Justice has been made a color to supplant
the true Justice: The Church has been always attempted first to be removed,
that they might come at the State the more easily.

Can there be then a more powerful argument to unite us all in preventing the
like mischiefs, than our common danger? Can there be a better guide to admonish
us all how to prevent them, than our common experience?

I profess I speak this, not only as a necessary caution for the time to come,
but as well in just acknowledgment of what is past. For as we have reason to
thank the enemies of our Religion, on all sides, when they upbraid us, as they
often do, that ours is a mere State-Religion, because the interest of our
Church has been always, ever since its Reformation, inseparable from that of
the Civil Government: Which we freely grant, and must always assert, as that by
which we shall stand, or fall; nay by which, through the blessing of God, we
shall always stand: so we must declare to all the world, that next to the
Scripture it self, and the genuine Interpretation of it by the ancient
Christian Writers, and the uninterrupted use of the best, and purest Ages of
Christianity; next these, the great Establishment, and Strength of the Church
of England, is the protection of the Crown, and the stability of our Civil
Government, and Laws. And thus far we confess, ours is a State-Religion: Our
Church was Reformed by Authority of the State: and above all its enemies, it
best provides for the security of the State.

Wherefore, in the name of God, as the best way to frustrate all our enemies
hopes against our Church and State; which will be the most solid answer to all
their little objections, let us all unanimously persevere, in our several
stations, to pray for, and obey, to strengthen and defend one of the most
moderate, the wisest, the most pious frames of Religion, that ever Christians
enjoyed since the Primitive Age; one of the best, the freest, the most happy
constitutions of Civil Government, that ever mankind enjoyed since the
Creation. May we all agree in this undeniable truth, that whoever would subvert
the State, they are mortal enemies to Religion: whoever would destroy Religion,
they are equally enemies to the State. To both let us be subject, Romans xiii.
not only for wrath, but for conscience sake: And the more for Conscience sake,
because so very little, or no wrath, so much of Justice, and Mercy is to be
found in them both.

May therefore Justice, and Piety, Mercy, and Truth meet together, that Glory
may dwell in our Land: may Righteousness, and Peace, always kis each other
among us. May the Counsels, an persons, that advance, and protect both in th
Nation, be inviolably united in Righteousness and Mercy: may they for ever
prosper with Lif and Honor. AMEN.

FINIS.

