Tulse, Mayor.
Martis 4. die Junii, 1684. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi, Angliae, etc.
xxxvi.
THis Court does desire the Reverend Dr. Sprat, Dean of Westminster, to Print
his Sermon preached at Bow-Church on the 29 th of May last, before the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen, and Citizens of this City.

Wagstaff.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Henry Tulse, LORD MAYOR, And
the COURT of ALDERMEN, And the CITIZENS of the CITY of LONDON, On MAY the 29
th. 1684. Being the Anniversary-day of His Majesty's Birth, and happy Return to
his Kingdoms.

By THO. SPRAT, D. D. Dean of Westminster, One of His Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's Head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street. 1684.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, May the 29 th. 1684.
PSALM 130. 4. There is mercy with thee: therefore shall thou be feared. So our
Old Translation. There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. So
King James's Bible.
BY comparing this twofold reading of these words, we find, the blessings of
God declared in my Text, were very like the double benefit, our Country
received from Heaven on this day: both ways extraordinary, and most auspicious:
whether we consider it, as a mercy, in the King's Birth; or as a forgiveness,
in his glorious return.

And, to make this Scripture yet more applicable to our present purpose, the
inspired Penman of this Psalm appears in the beginning of it, to have been in
the same deplorable state, these Nations were in for many years before the
second of these two most happy days.

Out of the depths he had cried to the Lord. Verse. 1.
Depths, no doubt of the greatest Temporal afflictions, and Spiritual
desertions. Then he cried, Lord hear my voice: Let thine ears Verse. 2.
be attentive to the voice of my supplications. Then, with a deep sense of
shame, and remorse for what was past, he acknowledged, If thou Lord should
mark iniquities, O Lord, Verse. 3.
who shall stand? So devoutly he cried, so passionately bewailed his former
rebellions against Heaven, never ceasing to implore pardon for them, till he
had found by comfortable experience, that there is mercy, and forgiveness Verse.
4.
with God.

A perfect image this of these three Kingdoms calamities, I may say, of our
guilt, before this blessed day of Restoration; and of our deliverance from the
calamities, our indemnity from the guilt, by means of this day.

Out of our depths also we had cried to the Lord. Depths, if ever any were, of
miseries, and distractions in Church and State. We then either did, or should
have confessed, that if God, or the King had marked iniquities against God, or
the King, few, or none could have stood. When, by an adorable Providence, the
remaining Loyal part of the Nation, who had long cried to the Lord for this
day, found inexpressible mercy upon it: nay the very disloyal part, who had
cried to the Lord too, but against it, even they enjoyed an unparalled
forgiveness by it.

Thus far the Psalmist's case, and ours were alike; in our distresses; in our
recoveries. 'Twere well for us, if the resemblance between him, and us, would
hold out so to the end. For after he had been thus oppressed on Earth, and
relieved from Heaven, how did he behave himself? He never forgot, strove never
to forfeit, presently made the best use of all this mercy, and forgiveness:
declared not only what was afterterwards said of Mary Magdalen, that he loved
much, but that he feared much, because much had been forgiven him.

And thenceforth accordingly resolves, that by waiting for the Lord, with a
steadfast hope in Verse. 5.
his word: by waiting for the Lord, more than they Verse. 6.
that watch for the morning; he will lay hold on the plenteous redemption, that
is with him; Verse. 7.
who is not only able to redeem, but shall redeem Israel from all his
iniquities: as, with Verse. 8.
a full assurance of faith, he concludes the Psalm.

It would be, I doubt, but a very melancholy inquiry, an employment fitter for
a a day of Humiliation, than for so great a Festival: Should we go strictly to
examine, whether we, the people of these Nations, have made the Psalmist's
practice our Example? Sure I am, it was, and is still our bounden duty so to
do: A duty incumbent on us all the days of our lives: especially on these days
of our solemn Thanksgivings.

Then, my dear Brethren, we rejoice the best way for mercy, and forgiveness
received from God, and God's Representative the King; when we embrace the
forgiveness so, as to take more care of not offending in the like kind for the
future: when we remember the mercies so, as not to surfeit our selves with the
fruits of them; so, as not only to applaud the Divine Author of them with
empty words, and praises: but when we make our joy solid, and lasting; when we
mingle it not with levity, or vanity, too incident to those that are
overjoyed, but with the cheerful gravity, the easy severity of a Christian
life: And so we do, when we temper our joy with fear, a true fear of God.

The words of my Text have a plain meaning, but a doubtful expression, both in
our own, and in the learned Languages.

There is mercy, or forgiveness, with thee, (...)
or in thee, from thee, round about thee: in his incomprehensible essence: in
all the Attributes of his Divinity: in his very wrath there is a
long-suffering: in his very revenge there is a forbearing mercy. So essential
is mercy to him; so widely spreading from him; so, upon all accounts, with him,
not only that he may be admired, or worshipped, much less that He may be
neglected, or presumed upon, but that thou may be feared.

There is mercy with thee, because of thy (...).
Name: So the Septuagint. His Nature is merciful. His Name is agreeable to his
Nature. He is a God of mercies, and forgivenesses, abundant in goodness, as in
truth, in both insinite.

There is mercy with thee, because of thy (...).
Law: So another reading of the words. And it is well for us sinful creatures,
that there is so: that God has a Mercy, as well as a Law; that he has
forgiveness, because of that Law: that the sweetness of his mercy is answerable
to the exactness of his Law: that the tenderness of his forgiveness far exceeds
all our obstinate breach of his Law, else no flesh living could be justified in
his sight.

But both our Translations render it nearer the Original: That thou may be
feared; so the New: therefore shall thou be feared; so the Old Bible. The first
signifying the Psalmist's unfeigned acknowledgment of his duty: the second
containing his firm intention, and vow to perform it.

So that the words thus explained may be summed up in two parts.

1 st, The great foundation of this whole discourse: the mercy, the
forgiveness, that is with God.

2 dly, The great obligation of special dependence, and service, those mercies
lay upon us, to fear the only Donor of them all.

From which general Contemplation of the mercies of God, and their principal
design, it will be our next business to bring our thoughts nearer home, to the
great end of this days particular mercy. Particular! it was an Universal mercy.
And if we shall find it to have been so; that the favor in it on God's part
toward us, was here at least as much, as there it could be to the Psalmist:
then what can we do less on our part; but to imitate his steady resolution of
fearing God? And in order to that, continually to wait for the Lord, to hope
for him in his own way, the way of his own Word, and Church: to wait for him
more than they that watch for the morning: even more than we once watched, and
wished for the morning of this day.

My first particular is that, which the Psalmist justly makes the ground of his
whole argument: the mercy, and forgiveness, that is with God.

The inexhaustible Love of God to Mankind, as it is the chief subject of the
written word of God, and the very end, for which it was all written; so it is
that, on which the Holy Scripture, the New Testament especially, and this Book
of Psalms, one of the most Gospel-like parts of the Old Testament, does more
vary its expressions, and in which the Holy Ghost seems more delighted to
enlarge it self, than on any other divine matter whatsoever.

Throughout the whole Bible, we find it represented to us by many the most
significant phrases, similitudes, and amplifications. It is often here
resembled to the greatest degrees of kindness, which we behold in the sublunary
World. Sometimes it is compared to the natural tenderness for their young, of
those creatures, that are only guided by the motions, and inclinations of
Sense. Sometimes it is likened to the higher, and better directed affections of
Mankind: to the sympathy, and endearments of a friend, to the provident care,
and indulgence of a Father, to the soft passions, and yearnings of a Mother.

And all these coming infinitely short, as needs they must: For how can Earth,
or frail mortality supply examples, or imaginations large, or tender enough to
set forth to us the heavenly compassions? from thence the Scripture carries our
thoughts into Heaven it self: there gives us a view of the highest, and most
excellent images of goodness: which are more than tongue can signify, or heart
can conceive to be, and yet are in the divine Nature; and are manifested to us
in all the distinct Works of the everblessed Trinity: the undeserved favors of
a Creator, and Preserver, the unspeakable Consolations of a Comforter, the
self-denying sufferings of a Savior; who took on himself our flesh, and dyed
in the flesh to save us.

Now of all this bottomless treasure of Eloquence, by which the riches of God's
goodness are set off to us in holy Writ, this in my Text is one of the most
affectionate words, and therefore it ought to be proportionably effectual on
our practice. It is not only mercy, but forgiveness. That with God, (...).
who is infinitely above us in power, was infinitely offended by our sins, with
him however there is not only a common favor, or a daily support of, or a
continued bounty toward us; not only gentleness to inferiors, or liberality
to those that most need it, or beneficence to those that never merited it: but
that with him there is forgiveness, peace with Enemies, reconciliation with
Rebels, the requital of the freest grace for the highest provocations: that
after all his other mercies of kindness had been so often abused by us, yet
with him however still there is a mercy of pity, and commiseration: which as it
is, in Heaven, the very Crown of all the blessed Attributes in the eternal
power, and Godhead; so, upon Earth, it is the most God-like perfection, of
which the heart of man is capable.

I will not attempt to reckon up an exact particular of all the divine mercies,
and forgivenesses, for which we all stand engaged to the divine benignity. If
they could be so soon reckoned up, they were not so divine as they are. If they
could be spread before us in one view, would it not be a severe objection, a
just cause of sorrow to the best of us, to behold so immense a Catalogue of our
obligations? whereof the far greater part is left wilfully uncancell'd by us,
because of our ingratitude. And alas! do what we our selves can, very much of
it will be always unpay'd by reason of our inability.

Of God's mercy to all his creatures, of his forgiveness moreover to Mankind,
may not the same be truly affirmed, that is of his presence? wherever he is, he
is merciful: he has matter to forgive; he is willing to forgive; and he is
every where.

Which way soever we turn our thoughts, whether we regard the present life, or
the future: whether we consider our selves as the Works of his hands, as we are
men; or of his Grace, as we are Christians; or, as I may say, as the works of
our own hands, as we are sinners: if we observe from how many terms of enmity,
and distance God has freed us; with how many titles of nearness, and relation
he has endeared us: if we recollect, how absolute our dependence is upon him;
how universal our receipts are from him: which way soever we look, his mercies
are so far beyond our repaying by deeds, that they are far above our
acknowledgment by words; nay beyond the very conceptions of our hearts. We may
as well undertake to comprehend God himself, who is certainly incomprehensible.
For among all the mercies, he bestows on the sons of men, one, and that the
chief is, that as he forgives us our selves, so he gives us himself.

Yet though the mercies of God are so far beyond our recompencing, that, not
only our thanks, but we our selves are said to be less than the least of them:
this does not at all acquit us of our duty: rather the greatest bonds are laid
upon us thereby. We see the Psalmist does not only here present us with a
pleasant prospect, but with a serious view of God's mercies: he shows us, that
we are therefore tied to some special, and irrevocable obligations.

And what to do? what retribution to make? All benefits received should be
answered by a greater requital, if possible, or by an equal, by an equal good
will at least. Now for us men to think of making a greater, or an equal return
to Heaven were impiety. How indeed can we, upon our own strength, hope to make
any? since all the return, we can make to God, is of no value at all of it
self: but only according to the price, which his pity, not his justice, puts
upon it.

Wherefore our most gracious Benefactor has prescribed the proportion of our
requital, not at all according to the vastness of our receipts, but rather with
respect to the scanty measure of our weak abilities, and that accepted by his
grace, which is without measure. So that the very return of thanks for his
mercies, which God has enjoined us, is so managed by him, as to become a new
degree of mercy to us. For the most perfect return of thanks, that God requires
of us, and we can make, yet not without his help neither, is that which we of
all things ought most to desire; and it is this in my Text, that because there
is mercy, and forgiveness with God, therefore we should fear him; which is my
second particular.

By fear, in this place, is not at all meant that, which the Philosopher
describes to be ^ passion of the Soul, by which men that are weaker strive to
escape the force of the stronger, and to fly from all things, that have a power
of doing them hurt. Not that fear. For so good men may, and ought to fear the
Devil: so the Devils themselves do fear God, when they believe, and tremble.
And so may the King's irreconcilable Enemies, who next to the Infernal Fiends,
must be one of the vilest parts of the Creation, so may they always fear the
punishment due to so horrid an impenitency.

Nor by fearing God is here intended any servile dread, or abject awe of his
uncontrollable Dominion, and terrible Majesty; as he is the great Judge, and
avenger of all sin. Not that fear. For so the damned spirits in Hell do fear
God: whilst they suffer the extremity of his wrath for having rejected his
mercy. So irreparably wretched is the condition of all wicked men, all Rebels
against God, all that are impenitently so; and, I know not how, Rebellion is in
this sense also as the sin of Witchcraft, that it is too generally accompanied
with impenitency. Wherefore of such men, it is the peculiar curse, whilst they
are in this world, that they shall fear, where no fear is. In the next world
they shall fear too, but after another manner. There they shall have but too
just a cause for fear, which they shall never be able either by strength, or
art to avoid, or by entreaties to deprecate: though God himself had often
before most passionately entreated them to avoid it.

Nor, lastly, by fearing God is here only signified some blind reverence, or
confused acknowledgment of his Omnipotence, as he is Sovereign Lord of the
Universe. Neither this fear. For so a carnal man without grace (without real
grace, I mean, not the counterfeit) so a man that is without God in the world,
may, in some imperfect sense, fear God: may sometimes revere his power, may
tremble at his thunder, may be somewhat startled at his apparent judgments, and
melted a little by his undeserved mercies: and yet at last have no share in his
forgiveness, nor in the plenteous salvation, that is with him, though it be
never so plenteous.

But these are all narrow, ignoble, legal interpretations of fearing God. The
fear in my Text, we find does only proceed from a sense of God's forgiveness,
and so can only be found, in those whom he will forgive, whom he has forgiven.
Wherefore the phrase is to be taken in the most comfortable, and Evangelical
meaning. As the fear of the Lord is the beginning, and the perfection too of
all wisdom: as it is most usually understood in the word of God, to comprize
the principal acts of all true faith, devotion, and holiness; including the
whole compass of all sincere, and undefiled Religion: such a fear of God, as
will teach us to praise him openly, and worship him outwardly, so as to love
him inwardly; and so as both inwardly, and outwardly to obey him: and all this
most reasonably, because of the mercy, and forgiveness that is with him.

First, I say, to praise, and adore him publicly for his mercies. A work most
becoming the Children of men. Of all the creatures, are not we most fitted for
it, by reason of our greater mercies received? our greater capacities to
understand, and declare our reception of them? And are we not therefore most
obliged to it for the same reasons?

But if we should be, not only so irreligious, but so unmanly as to neglect
it, and be silent: if contrary to our very nature, we should look downward, and
not rather upward, to the day spring from on high, that has visited us, yet
still God has not left himself without witness: even all the other works of his
hands, all ranks of Beings, all orders of the Creation, would proclaim the
Providence, and make out the goodness of their Creator.

Thus much do all the inferior Creatures. And how infinitely is their account
of mercies received short of ours? So short, that the greatest part of the
Creation was not made so much to enjoy the mercies of God, and to be sensible
of that enjoyment, as to be mercies to us. What heinous forgetfulness, and sin
would it then be in us, when even the inanimate, and irrational beings, that
were made for our sakes, shall all contribute to the praise of their Maker's
bounty: if we alone shall be insensible of his bounty, or negligent of his
praise; we, for whose sakes they were made, and for whose service they were
ordained by him!

Wherefore the praising God for his mercy, for his forgiveness, is the peculiar
duty of Mankind: As forgiveness is the proper act of his mercy to us. All other
kinds of creatures never did partake of it. All below Mankind are not the
proper object of it. All above us, as the Angels, when they offended, could
never obtain it. With his praises then our hearts should be always full, our
tongues often sounding.

But that is not all. The truest way of praising God is not only performed by
a bare praising him. It is indeed a pleasant thing to tell, how good, and
gracious the Lord is. Yet it is not only merely pleasant to tell. There is
much work, and real labor, and diligent service, that must ensue. Though it is
true that work it self, if rightly performed, will be also pleasant in the end,
and that service a perfect freedom.

However there is first much work required on our parts. Though the goodness of
God is sweet in its Contemplation, yet it cannot be so to any purpose to us,
except it produce in us answerable effects. Else the fruitless Contemplation of
it were most uncomfortable. For it would the more accuse us of neglecting so
great a salvation.

Wherefore most properly speaks my Text, There is mercy with thee, that thou
may be feared. Mercy with God that he may be feared! why not rather that he
may be loved? yes, that without all question. The mercies of God toward us, as
they only flow from his Love, so they ought to produce Love in us: yet not
only Love, but Fear: such a fear, as can never be divided from love; such a
love, as is always joined with a dread of offending, a jealousy of displeasing
the person beloved; and such is a true Gospel-love; such is a true filial fear
of God.

What I have said on the general part of my method proposed, the mercy, and
forgiveness, that is with God, and the principal reason, why it is with him;
this, I have premised, as briefly as I could, in so weighty and copious an
argument, as a necessary introduction, for the applying my text to our selves,
and to this glorious day of mercy, and forgiveness.

A day, of which, amongst its many other felicities, this is none of the least,
that, do what we our selves could, not to deserve any more of these days; do
what our worst adversaries could, that we should have no more of them: yet
neither our sins, nor their malice have prevailed. But we are still met in the
house of God; in a Congregation of true, and dutiful Sons of the Church of
England; in the midst of this, His Majesty's always best-beloved, now I am
sure, I may say, most deservedly beloved City: here we are met once again to
solemnize this day; and to do it, as joyfully as we did at first; nay more, if
possible: Since now by the late defeat of the new Conspiracies of His Majesty's
old, and new Enemies; though it is prodigious he should have any new ones;
however now by the blessed prospect of Peace maintained, and Justice restored,
and Rebellion once more destroyed by its own arts; now by the renewed
affections, and united acclamations of all good men from all quarters of the
Land; by the joint consent of Heaven, and Earth: by the voice of God, and of
the People; which we have been told is the voice of God: The voice not of the
unruly tumult, and giddy populace, but of the good, loyal, and peaceably-devout
People, that is as the voice of God: and by all these methinks I am encouraged
to call this day a new resurrection, as it were, of that great Nine and
twentieth of May, and this year the very Restoration of the King's Restoration.

So perpetually fresh, and triumphant ought to be, and I may venture to
presage, will be in all ages to come, the precious memory of this day: whereof
it may be justly affirmed, that except the general redemption of all Nations,
on a day of all others the most memorable; that day, which was the fountain of
all the good things we obtained on this, or any other day: but except that, on
this day we had heaped on us the greatest blessings, that perhaps ever any
Nation under Heaven received from it on any one day.

To God alone be the glory of all. For what, I beseech you, can be said less of
a day, whose mercy was so diffusive, that it extended to its Enemies, as well
as Friends? Laid good and sure foundations, if they, and we, had but built upon
them, to make us, and them, and all that come after us happy, in all our great
interests, whether temporal, or spiritual.

To you the ancient Friends, and wellwishers of this day, the old Loyal party I
mean, for I doubt not but to many such I speak; you especially who endured the
loss of your Country, in hope of returning on this day; you who so many years
preferred an honorable Exile, before the enjoying such a Country without the
King; To you, I will not say, this was a day of mercy, only because you were
restored to your estates, and possessions by it. Those you had sufficiently
shown, you never esteemed as your chief goods: and therefore I will not reckon
them as the principal blessings, you reapt on this day: But to you this was a
mercy worthy of your perseverance in such a cause, to behold the King, and with
the King, his, and your beloved Church of England restored. The Church, which
was all the while your constant companion, your chief delight, and sometimes
almost your only comforter. This Church you beheld, on this day, decently
reestablished in its own Temples, whose Tabernacle you had so long followed in
the Wilderness.

Thus was it to you a mercy. How much more was it so to those of us, who, by an
unhappy fate, were either born or bred up in those miserable times; who had not
the honor of such a Banishment abroad, but had the necessity of an inglorious
Confinement home; how much, on all accounts to us, was this a day of mercy!

A day, which in exchange of an unlawful yoke of Tyranny, and the worst of
Tyrannies, imposed on us by our fellow Subjects: returned to us the easy, and
blessed Government of our Lawful Prince. A day, that secured to us a lasting,
safe, and innocent peace, not a false, or slavish peace, like that we had
before, worse than the very state of War. A day, which gave us to know, what a
true liberty of Conscience is instead of a Licentiousness. A day, which
restored our King to his Rights, and Prerogatives, our Country to its
Privileges and Laws; for the false shows of which things it had so bitterly
suffered.

But what need I prove that to you, and to us this was a day of mercy? when it
was mercy, and forgiveness to its implacable Enemies.

To some of them it was the first innocent day of their whole lives. O! had it
not been the last. To them it was a forgiveness on Earth of all their past
crimes: and might have been so in Heaven too, if once they would but have
learned to be less familiar with God, and more to fear him. However to them it
was a mercy, that it made them for a time quiet, and harmless, whether they
would or no: that without their own personal ruin, it ruined their usurped
Powers, which had rendered them so guilty toward God, so factious amongst
themselves, so hated of all good men, and at last of all mankind.

But this one day most seasonably took from them the opportunities of
destroying themselves, as well as us, by the numberless confusions, and
phrensies of Enthusiastic zeal. This day gently deprived them of those
wretched arms, by which they had been so long successful against truth, and
the true Religion; which to be is really the greatest of miseries.

Wherefore to the whole English Name, and Nation was this a day of mercy. By
this day our age has been enriched with all the blessings of the right hand,
and of the left. By this we were taught Precepts, and Examples sufficient to
transmit those blessings entire to all posterity. By this the true cause of
God, and of the Kingdom was for ever vindicated by divine Providence, against
the false cause. By this divine Providence it self was vindicated: cleared from
the twenty years mischiefs, and desolations, which their deluded Authors were
wont most arrogantly to impute to the special favor, and indulgence of divine
Providence.

But on this day Sedition, and Rebellion in the State found, or should have
found, its fatal period. Now it might have learned, that although it may be,
for a time, perniciously victorious, yet it can never be quietly settled in
peace: that although God may sometimes in wrath permit, yet he never in
kindness incourages prosperous wickedness.

In a word, on this day, Schism and Sacrilege in the Church were abundantly
confounded, and should once for all have been convinced, that no real arm of
flesh, which for a time they had, no counterfeit assistance of the Heavenly
Spirit, which they pretended to, can always, can long protect them against the
true celestial arms of the unity, order, truth, and charity of the Church of
England, the divine power of its piety, the invincible spirit of its Loyalty.

This therefore also is the day, which the Lord has made. He made it by his
allwise counsel, by his outstretched arm; by a way indeed of all others, the
most divine, by his counsel more than by his Arm. By the admirable conduct of a
brave General, whose name shall ever flourish with this day. Yet not so much by
his undaunted valor, or conquering hand, as by his deep wisdom, and peaceful
arts. We admired the Heroic courage of his undertaking the design. But more,
we loved, we blessed the calm prudence of its management, the easy gentleness
of its execution. Scarce a sword all the while then drawn, amidst so many
armies; yet all contending for so much more than for one single victory. Scarce
a drop of blood spilt, till Justice came to draw its sword, which too was
sheathed almost as soon as drawn. So it was fit, that a mild and peaceful Reign
should be introduced only by the methods of mildness and peace.

We behold, my dear Brethren, how manifold was the mercy of God to us on this
day.

If either the time, or your patience, or my voice would permit, 't would be
well worth our while to consider yet farther, by how many mavelous degrees of
multiplied preservations, and unexpected protections of his Majesty's Life, and
Crowns, God has ever since taken care to guard, and defend his own gracious
gift on this day, and now after four and twenty years, has delivered down to us
the mercy of it safe, and secure, and even augmented.

Amongst many other instances of this kind never to be forgotten, if you would
give me leave, there is one signal, and extraordinary Providence, which being
freshest in our memories, methinks cannot at this time, without injustice to
God, and man, be wholly passed by in silence: I mean the most astonishing
deliverance of the King, and Kingdom from the late horrid Conspiracy.

Heaven, and Earth knows, that the hellish design was spread into two most
villainous enterprises: One, the subversion of the Kings Government, by an open
insurrection against him in his politic capacity: The other, the Murder of his
sacred person: which two, the Rebellious principles of the late Wars taught
Rebels to distinguish in order to the destruction of both.

Of the Rebellion designed; heats, stirs, as some have pleased to complement
it: But of that no honest English man can either speak or think without extreme
detestation; if we either reflect on the plenty, and tranquillity we enjoy, and
our Enemies would have overthrown; that we were and are the happiest people in
Europe, did we but equally understand, and value our own happiness: or if we
shall recollect, not only what we had lost, had the detestable Conspiracy
succeeded, but also from whom, from what kind of Enemies we were delivered by
its wonderful defeat.

Were they not either disciples of the very same ill parties, and Sects of men,
or many of them the very same men, who had once before ruined us by the same
popular pretenses and ill applied names of things they never meant, of Liberty,
Property, and Conscience?

For did we not all the while know the generality of the men themselves, to be
Atheists in Religion, to whom nothing was sacred, who made all things profane?
Monsters in morality, to whom nothing was unlawful, all things common?
Republicans in opinion, to whom the easiest Laws of their own Country seemed
oppression, the mildest Monarchy in the world tyranny? Men whose black designs
required them to be close, and hypocritical: but their Lives proved them to be
loose, and debauched. Men either of desperate fortunes, or, which is worse, in
plentiful fortunes, of desperate principles. Men fierce, cruel, Religiously
cruel toward others, boldly irreligious themselves. Men whom Rebellion once
prosperous had taught to be Rebellious, but Rebellion often forgiven could
never teach them either gratitude, or quiet.

Such had been the blessed Reformers, and Restorers of your Liberties, and
Laws, Privileges, and Consciences, by the desperate insurrection intended, if
God had not miraculously prevented it.

Of the other part of the diabolical Plot, the cruel Assassination of his
Majesty's, and his Royal Highnesses Persons, at the Rye; of that I know you
cannot but on the oneside, with the highest indignation; on the other, with an
ecstasy of joy, acknowledge, that as all the most mysterious subtilties, and
masterly strokes of hells malice were joined in its secret contrivance: So the
wisest, and most gracious arts, as I may call them, of the divine favor were
visibly practiced in its disappointment.

Of the place, where this abominable Scene was laid, as many of you, as know
it, must confess, that it was a spot of ground, the fittest in the whole world,
for the attempting such an execrable parricide. A retired passage out of the
public road; easy to be defended by those within, hard to be approached from
without. A House solitary, and ruinous; a seat of melancholy, and horror: a fit
Emblem of the furious intent of the wretched possessors mind.

There the anointed of the Lord had been taken in a snare. I could not have
utterd these words, but that now I can say, the snare is broken, and we are
escaped. There however had the best of Kings, the breath of our nostrils, been
excluded from the assistance of his few Guards, whom the consciousness of his
own innocence had made few; there, he passing by secure; as he might well think
himself secure in the settled peace of all his other Dominions; secure in the
company of a valiant, and invincible Brother sitting by his side; secure in the
eminent Loyalty of that particular County; but above all; secure in his own
unequaled mercy to all his Enemies; to whom he had done as much as King, or man
could do to make them his Friends: However there had the King been on a sudden
assaulted by unseen treacherous subjects, armed Villains, chosen Assassinates,
Veteranes in mischief and slaughter, Men kept alive only by his forgiveness:
Yet there exposed, defenseless, unarmed, unforewarn'd, had the King -- I can
say no more, and God for ever be glorified, our enemies can say no more.

For then God from on high interposed. God had seen the whole preparation of
the villainy, he saw all their closest Cabals, and most daring resolutions. He
saw them, and frowned with disdain at the fury of their wrath: Smiled with
contempt at the folly of their malice. God knew, when it was time for him to
appear; when a Kings rescue would become a work worthy of Gods omnipotence.

He knew, and he appeared, he appeared in such a manner, as to make the glory
of his immediate presence unquestionable, God wrought not then by the slow
methods of his common providence: Not then by bare natural signs, or obscure
presages, or doubtful tokens of his pleasure: but by a flaming hand lift up on
high, by a dreadful Fire: That being made the prodigious occasion of so great a
mercy, which is otherwise esteemed a dismal judgment.

That surprising Fire of New Market only chance, or negligence then seemed to
have kindled. But the event shows, it came from a higher, and a better cause.
By that was the good King roused on a sudden, driven first out of his own
Lodgings, then by the smoke, and ashes of it pursued out of Town; so forced
thence home to Whitehall, before his appointed time, and his Enemies black hour
prefixed.

Thus God conducted him hither safe, and untouched, passing just by that Same
infamous Rye: which was then innocent, because then unprovided; that otherwise
might have been the fatal womb of so many unspeakable mischiefs.

But hitherto, and for some months after, you may remember, the King suspected
nothing of his danger: imagined nothing of his escape after he was escaped:
perceived not as yet the heavenly protection that had covered his head, I will
not say in the day of battle, but of his ordinary traveling, which might have
proved to him more dangerous than the fiercest Battle. As yet, the wicked
conspiracy was not dissolved, nor as yet were all their merciless hopes lost:
The same wretches, tho somewhat struck with so great a disappointment, yet
still met, and combined, still contrived new places, provided new weapons,
sought out new opportunities to perpetrate the same deed. Still some of them
thought, what one of them, the accursed Ferguson had impudence enough to say;
that by this accident, the King was not so much delivered as reserved for some
greater judgment.

When Lo! in the midst of our profound security, one of the chief partakers in
the dire Conspiracy, being himself not suspected, not invited, not tempted by
promises, not frighted by threatenings, but only those of his own conscience,
then he in mere remorse, and dread of his guilt, came voluntarily in, and
revealed the hidden work of darkness.

And God soon seconded his own favor so well begun. By swift degrees, so many
new discoveries were made: So many sensible concurring proofs strengthened each
other: So many undeniable demonstrations of all circumstances confirmed all: So
many confessions of the principal, both living and dying Plotters broke forth:
And they were plain confessions even when they were taught most to prevaricate,
and most cunningly to equivocate: For of those impious arts the Jesuits are not
now the only Masters: But so many, and so clear evidences did on a sudden
surround and illustrate the whole matter of fact: One particularly, which I am
loath to mention, and I cannot mention it but with pity as well as horror; that
lamentable self Murder, I mean which yet was a much stronger proof than many
living witnesses could have been: All this, I say, meeting together, to
convince the whole world of the reality of this Conspiracy: I dare now
pronounce, that next the having a share in the detested Treason it self, the
next crime is the not believing it. I mean the seeming not to believe it. For
our Enemies themselves cannot but believe it. And most certainly, whoever shall
now pretend not to believe that this Plot was real, it may justly be concluded,
the the same men, at the same time, do desire it had taken but too real an
effect. But I forbear.

We have heard what inestimable mercy there was with God for us; first by so
miraculously giving us, and then in an equally miraculous course of Providence,
by continuing to us the mercy of this day.

But to what purpose, think we, was all this mercy with God for us? Only that
it might be thus faintly repeated, and imperfectly rejoiced in once a year?
That cannot be sufficient. The greatest, and most durable end of this days
mercy is undoubtedly the same, that we find in my Text to be the chief
intention of all Gods mercies: that therefore the divine Majesty should be the
more feared.

Indeed all Gods mercies do exact from us a suitable return of some kind of
fear: Yet some more than others. Those his mercies, that flow gently down from
Heaven, calmly falling on all our heads every day, in blessed influences
relating to this life, or the next, but without any great noise, or astonishing
circumstances: They require all our Love, all our thanks, and some fear too
mingled with them: A fear of vilifying them by neglect, or forfeiting them by
abuse.

But such mercies, as these before us, preservations of Crowned heads, and
Royal Families, devastations of Kingdoms prevented, mighty Nations freed from
slavery: these come, when they come upon us, with a greaterforce, and
concussion of thoughts, and tho with a delightful, yet, give me leave to say
it, with a formidable train of terrible delights. These mercies therefore; as
they expect from us our equal love of God, so they may well demand our greater
fear of him: more of our submission to his power, and of our reliance on his
will; more of our adoration of his unsearchable counsels; and of our humble
thankfulness for his declared goodness.

Thus most solemnly does this mercy call for our fear of God, according to all
the interpretations of the Word: That we fear him so as to reverence him for
all the secret degrees of ripening this mercy foregoing this day: that we fear
him so as to bless him, for all the ensuing happy days we have ever since
enjoyed, as a consequence of this: That we fear him, so as to stand in aw, and
so as to sin no more: That with a careful diligence, in our particular duties,
with a zealous fear of God, with an unwearied vigilance over our selves, with a
dutiful watchfulness for our King too in our several stations, we dread, and
revere God for this, and all his other mercies, least we be forced to do so for
his Judgments: Since the same God, who has thus bestowed on us the greatest of
mercies, is also able to inflict Judgments as great.

That is evidently one part of our duty rising from the contemplation of this
days mercy, for this undeniable reason, we should all be induced not to
disobey, or dishonor, but to fear God.

There is still behind another very considerable part of it, which respects God
too, tho it seems more immediately to concern the King. It is, that the mercy
of God on this day, the forgiveness which God put into the Kings heart, to be
willing, into his hands to be able to dispense to all his Subjects; this should
lead us all to fear, that is, in Scripture Language, to honor the King.

But this Doctrine, which else where is the most proper subject of this days
solemnity, I thank God, in this Assembly, I need not spend time to enforce.
Your known, and steady Loyalty has saved me that labor. Yet, what it were
superfluous to advise the Kings friends, is, God knows, but too seasonable to
wish his Enemies would do.

Let it therefore be the fervent, charitable prayer of us, and of all Loyal
minds on this day: and true Loyalty is most generally accompanied with true
Charity: That God at last would turn the Kings Enemies hearts, and so they
shall be turned. From what, less than Gods mercy can we expect so great a
change, since all the Kings mercy has not been able to effect it? But O! that
now in this our day, their day too once it was, as properly as ours, and may be
so again by their amendment: O! that now they would mind the things, that
belong to all our Peace. O! that now they would understand, that the best, and
only lawful way to preserve the Reformed. Religion amongst us, is to defend it
only its own way, and not by practicing its very Enemies principles. O! that
now they would reflect with grief on all their fresh contrivances against his
Majesty's Crown and Dignity: And if for no other, yet for this reason they
would seriously repent of them, that the King was so ready to forgive all their
old offenses, without so much as staying for their repentance. O! that now at
length they would begin to fear the King for his mercy: Since amidst all his
power hitherto, they have never had any other just cause imaginable to fear
him. O! that henceforth they would forbear, upon any more pretenses of
Reforming the Church and State, to violate that Royal goodness, which when all
was done, was next under God, only able to heal the breaches, and compose the
distractions, they had caused once before under the disguise of such
Reformations.

God, of his infinite compassions grant, that they may be converted, and we
united; that without any other fear, but of God, and the King, we may serve God
all the days of our lives; that we may long enjoy the Kings mercies, and they
may have no more such need of his forgiveness,

Amen.
FINIS.

