Aut Deus, aut nihi. God or nothing OR A Logical Method, comprised in twelve
Propositions, deducing from the Actual Being of what we evidently experience,
the unavoidable necessity of a GOD, Against the ATHEISTS of our Age and Nation.

^y Vincent Hatterliffe, Gent. sometimes Student of Corpus Christi College in
Cambridge.

Dixit insipiens in cord suo, non est Deus. The fool has said in his heart;
there is no God,

Psalm. 13. ver. 15. (...), Printed by Ralph Wood for the Author, (...) are to
be sold by Nath. Brook at (...)

The Preface.
Courious Reader,
VIew, and censure at your pleasure; but you will be deceived, if you think to
feed either Eye or Fancy here: it is meat for their Master, the Understanding.

If you respect the matter of it, it is the voice of Creatures in Gregorian,
without Quaver or Cratcher: It is Gold in wedges, the plainer the purer, which
flies the fair impressions of the Mint, lest it should be mixed: It is a Lady
in her Night-clothes, without paint or patch; who is so rich in her own, that
she disdains to use a borrowed beauty. In a word, it is a Logical Discourse in
Mood and Figure; clothed according to the old fashion; fit, but not fine.

The Peasant persuades himself there is no other Golden Rule in Arithmetique,
then what is drawn in Golden Figures. The Pecunious Merchant would choose
Geometrical Instruments, not by the proportion of the Lines and Distances, but
by the preciousness of the Matter wherein they are drawn: and were a Dairie-maid
to choose her Mansion in Heaven, she would take up her Eternity no where, but in
the Milkie Way.

The Musician judges of the Ditty's goodness, by the fitness which the Words
carry with his Aires and Lessons. The verbal Critique affects no Language, but
what is stuffed with Tropes and Metaphors, and blown up with Allusions and
Eruditions. The Poetique Vein tastes no style, but what by continual jumping
and quavering in the Air, sympathizes with their Fidling Fancies. Thus our
English Palates are of late become French; nothing pleases but what is larded:
yea, and Spanish too; nothing can frame it self to their humors, save mighty
Oleo's, heapt up with a numerous variety of Heads and Feet, without head or
foot. Thus, like Aesops greedy one, they lose the Substance for the Shadow, and
will never take the pains to possess themselves of the Oceans treasure, unless
they find it prodigiously floting at the top; having neither are nor breath
enough to dive, like Negro's, to the bottom to fetch it up. That face is in
their eyes the sole beautiful, which is most bedawb'd with painting; they judge
of the comeliness of bodies by the costliness of their Clothes; and like those
foolish Birds, they stand picking at the empty colors of Zeuxis false Grapes,
rather then feed on the full substance of true ones, in a Tempe or a Thessaly.
All men are drunk in their conceit, who speak not Phrases and Sentences at
every breath; they account whatsoever is not Bombast, to be Barbarism; they
think there is no Utterance, but in Eloquence; no Reason, but in Rethorique; no
Force, but in Flourishes; no Light, but in Lightness. Hence they prefer an
Owens Epigrams far before an Aristotle's Ethiques, because he out-wits him; and
Sidney's Arcadia before St. Austins Divine City, because he out-words him; thus
they support the tottering Stories of their new Buildings with beams of Ash,
rather then of Oak, because it has a smoother Bark; and compose their Walls of
Chalk, rather then of Flint or Freestone, because it looks the whiter, and
feels the softer: and whilst they in this manner cannot distinguish betwixt
Good and Fit, (whereof the Oracle of Christianity, St. Austin, has made a
Treatise) they build Castles in the Air, which fall down as fast as they are
set up. Who but a mad man would expect Eloquence in a Syllogism; or esteem it
dull and flat, because it has not the Conceit or an Epigram in place of its
Conclusion in the end of it? Who but a fool, will deny a Consequence deduced in
lawful form, because it is not delivered in pure Ciceronian; or hold an evident
Proposition to be false, because it has neither Trope nor Figure; or reject a
Logic Term as inept and insignificant, because it is not found in Manutius
Phrases?

Let therefore an Orator breathe Eloquence, and a Poet Wit; it is the height of
a Philosophers excellency, to speak Reason in proper terms, and to serve
himself of Words, not to serve them; lest by that means he become guilty of
disservice to his Reader, by withdrawing his attention from the substance which
he pretends to teach him, Reason, to the empty sign and shadow of vain
Ostentation and splendid Ignorance. If therefore, Reader, you be one of these
Verbals, shut this Book as soon as you have opened it; it is not (I assure you
aforehand) for your Palate.

For if you would know the matter and form of it, It is Reason wrapped up in a
common Syllogism, and God (as once he was) in Swaddling-clothes, poor, but
pure, re-appearing to the eyes of Infidels; not as then in the midst of
Heathenisme, but in the heart of Christendom; who, as they have quite put out
the Eye of Faith, so have they shut that other of Natural Reason so close, that
all things are too gross and blunt to obtain entrance, save the most subtle
Evidence of Demonstration and Metaphysical certainty. Hence they reject, as
flat, all those Arguments (so much celebrated, and pressed by Antiquity) drawn
from the Existency, Order, Beauty, Proportion, etc. of this visible World;
because, say these Sages, it is not Metaphysically certain, that we are not
deceived, in judging, that there is any real World without us, or Humane body
with us; because all these things may happily be Illusions, Fantasies, Dreams,
Fictions of the Brain, etc. with such monsters of men as these, I am to
encounter in this present Treatise. Therefore to give scope to the Dispute, and
way to their Nicety, I abstract from the real Existency of all sensible
Creatures which seem to be within us, or without us; let them (for the present)
be termed Illusions, Dreams, Fantasies, yet if Atheists only grant me, that
they either think in their hearts (with the Fool) there is no God; or doubt
whether there be one or no, (which no Atheist can deny to be his thought) I
here undertake, from that very thought of theirs alone, That there is no God,
to prove there is one.

View therefore, and censure at your pleasure, but not with a cursory and
heedless Eye, as you read Pamphlets and Play books, to gain Pastime, and lose
Time; but with an eye fixed and open: weigh each Proposition in an equal
balance, without losing a dram of the full weight of them; and that done, if
you be satisfied, Yield; if unsatisfied, Answer.

The Contents.
The first Proposition. IT seems that there is something now in actual being.
The second Proposition. Something is now in Actual Being. The third
Proposition. There has always been something in Actual Being. The fourth
Proposition. There shall be always something in Actual being. The fifth
Proposition. Amongst all things which always have been, are now, and ever
shall be, there must be some (I determine not yet whether One or more) which is
absolutely, and essentially necessary, and not produced by and different cause;
that is, to which it is Essential to be in Actual being, and so cannot but be
from all Eternity to all Eternity the same, without the least change, or
alteration. The sixth Proposition Whatsoever is an Actual Being Essentially,
must be of it self; that is, independent of any Cause different from it. The
seventh Proposition. No Actual Being that is superfluous, defective,
inordinate, absurd, or difform from the Rule of right Reason, can be
Essentially necessary, or of it self. The eighth Proposition. No Actual Being,
which is abnoxious to Deordination and Absurdities, can be Essentially
necessary, or of it self. The ninth Proposition. Nothing can be an Actual Being
Essentially, and of it self, which is not endued with the light of Reason. The
tenth Proposition. Only Actual Reason in its full Perfection and Latitude,
that is, Reason it self, is an Actual Being Essentially necessary. The eleventh
Proposition. Only Actual Reason in its full perfection, or Reason it self, is
Essentially an Actual Being of it self. The twelfth Proposition. Reason it
self, being Essentially necessary, and of it self, is God. The first Attribute.
The Unity of God. The second Attribute. Gods Indivisibility. The third
Attribute. The Spirituality of God. The fourth Attribute. The Simplicity of
Gods Being. The fifth Attribute. The Ubiquity of God. The sixth Attribute. The
Eternity of God. The seventh Attribute. The Omnisciency of God. The eighth
Attribute. Of Gods Omnipotency. The ninth Attribute. The Goodness of God. The
tenth Attribute. The Purity and Sanctity of God. The eleventh Attribute. Of the
infallible Veracity of God. The twelfth Attribute. Gods Justice. The thirteenth
Attribute. Of the ever Blessed Trinity.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord Marquis of Dorchester, Earl of Kingston,
Viscount Newark, Lord Pierrepoint, etc.
My Lord,
SCarce had this Alien (born in a Foreign, and nourisht in this Nation) opened
an eye in search of a Noble Mecaenas, to naturalize and protect it, when your
Eminent VVorth and Learning attracted them wholly to your self: the one
assuring a proneness to accept; the other, a power to set a true Estimate of
this small Present. As small indeed as Nothing, if you regard the minuteness of
the Volume; and yet as great as All things, if you consider what is exhibites,
viz. GOD, the Best of All things, whose unavoidable existence it first
endeavors to deduce by Logical Consequence, from what every one most evidently
experiences; then to shadow out his Essence, and lastly, to give some taste of
his Attributes: and this only as a Foundation to a further discovery (in some
ensuing Tracts) of his Power, Providence, Revelations, Mysteries, and Conduct
of sinful Man to eternal Happiness. May it therefore please your Honor, to
deprive your more Serious and Important Affairs of so small a portion of time,
as may suffice to cast an eye upon his small Tract: And for the Author of it,
as you Justly possess the Ancient Domaine of his Name and Family, so you would
please Favorably to Patronize those few dispersed Relics which yet remain of
it; whereof I am the least and lowest.

My Lord, Your Honors most Humble Vincent Hattecliffe.

Aut Deus, aut nihil. God, or nothing.
The first Proposition. It seems that there is something now in actual being.
THis Proposition is so evidently true, that it cannot possibly be denied, or
called into question, by any one who ever reflected of what passed by most
manifest experience in his own thoughts; and so neither ever was, not ever can
be impugned by any who are in their right wits.

The second Proposition. Something is now in Actual Being.
Proof.
THis Proposition, the first being supposed as a most clear undeniable truth,
is most evident, for that very seeming to any one, that something is, must be
something; for it must be a Representation that something now is: now every
Representation represents something either truly, or falsely; if it represent
something truly, then there is something; if falsely, yet there is a false
Representation of something: now this Representation represents; to represent
is to do something, that which does any thing, must be something; for nothing
can do nothing: therefore if there seem to be something in Actual Being, there
is something in Actual Being; to wit, that very Representation, or seeming that
something is.

The third Proposition. There has always been something in Actual Being.
Proof.
IF ever there had been nothing at all in actual being, then there could not
possibly be any thing now actually, which notwithstanding is proved to be true
in the former Proposition; for that which should have been after there had been
nothing at all, would either have been a being essentially necessary, which is
impossible; for such a being must always be, and so there would always have
been something: or it must have been a contingent being, that is, which can be
at one time, and not be at another: Now every such contingent thing must have
some cause to give it its actual existency, or being, which it has not
essentially of it self; for that which once was nothing, or had no actual
being, can never become any thing of it self, or without a cause distinct from
it: for all things contingent are indifferent, or indetermined of themselves
before they are, to be or not to be actually. Now it is impossible, that that
which of it self is indeterminate, or indifferent to be, or not to be actually,
should determine it self of it self to be; for then it should be indeterminate,
and determinate to be essentially, which is a plain Chymera, and contradiction.
Therefore every contingent thing must be determined to be, and be put in actual
being by some producing cause really distinct from it: now every cause must be
supposed to be actually, before it can be supposed to produce any thing; for to
produce any thing, is to do something; but nothing can do nothing. If therefore
the time had ever been, when there was nothing, there could never have been any
thing, but de facto, there is now something, as is proved: therefore there was
always something.

Neither would this truth be infringed, if one should deny all contingency, and
put every thing to flow one after another, and have their beings for such, or
such a space of time by inevitable necessity (which I will prove hereafter to
be false;) for even this admitted for the present, yet the production of
effects by distinct causes remaining still in force, it will remain evident by
virtue of the former argument, that there has been always something in actual
being; for had there ever been nothing at all, there could have been no cause
of any thing; for nothing can do nothing. Neither can any thing possibly begin
to be for such a determinate space of time, through an essential connection to
such a determinate time, as we shall see in the fifth Proposition.

The fourth Proposition. There shall always be something in actual being.
Proof.
THere is now, and ever has been something, as is proved; if therefore it
could ever happen that all things should cease to be; either something
essentially necessary (if there be any such being amongst all things) must
cease to be, which is impossible; for if it be essentially necessary, it cannot
but be; for every thing must always be what it is essentially: or if there be
nothing essentially necessary, all things contingent must cease to be; but that
is impossible: for seeing every contingent thing must have its being from some
cause really distinct from it, so long as that cause is apt, and able to
conserve it in being; and that there is no other cause present, and enabled to
destroy it, it must remain in its being: If therefore all things being
contingent cease to be, they must either lose their beings for want of a cause
to conserve all things, or by reason of some cause which destroys all things.
Not the first, for nothing can cease to be for want of that which is wholly
impossible, and so can confer nothing neither to its being, or not being. Now
that it is impossible that any cause can give being to all things, is evident;
for seeing that very cause is comprised within the number of all things; if it
give being as a distinct cause to all things, it must give being to it self,
and so be distinct from it self, and be supposed to have a being before it is;
for every cause, as is said, must be supposed to have an actual being, before
it can be supposed to do any thing; for nothing can do nothing: and yet if it
be its own cause primarily and absolutely, it cannot be supposed to be before
it is produced; therefore it will be either supposed to be before it is, or not
to be when it is: it is therefore evident, that seeing there can be no cause of
all things, all things which are, cannot cease to be, for want of a producing
cause. Neither for the like reason can all things cease to be, by reason of
some cause destroying all things; for such a cause is wholly impossible: for if
all things be destroyed, there can nothing remain in actual being; but that
which destroys all things, must be supposed to be whilst it destroys all
things; for to destroy any thing is to do something, and nothing can do nothing.

If it should be replied, that that which destroys all other things distinct
from it, may cease to be, after it has destroyed all those things, and so all
things will lose their actual beings, and there will be nothing: I answer, If
all things, as we now suppose, be contingent, then nothing can destroy all
things, save it self: for every contingent thing must have a cause, as is
proved; it cannot therefore be supposed to be, unless the cause of it be also
supposed to be actually, therefore is cannot destroy all things, save it self,
and remain it self in being; for then a contingent thing should be without a
cause, which is impossible. And the same argument concludes, admitting, that
all things were succeeding one another by way of cause and effect, through
inevitable necessity: For then every thing in actual being must suppose the
being of its cause, and so could never destroy all things save it self, because
it could not be, when its cause is destroyed. Thus the fourth Proposition is
made evident, that seeing there is something now, there must always be
something hereafter.

The fifth Proposition Amongst all things which always have been, are now, and
ever shall be, there must be some (I determine not yet whether one or more)
which is absolutely, and essentially necessary, and not produced by any
different cause; that is, to which it is essential to be in actual being, and
so cannot but be from all eternity to all eternity; the same without the least
change or alteration.
Proof.
IF there were no such essential necessary being as this, there could never
either have been, be now, or ever hereafter be any thing in actual being; but
there always has been is now, and ever shall be something in actual being, as
is already proved. Ergo.

I prove the major, or first Proposition. Whatsoever is not essentially an
actual being, cannot be of it self; for were it of it self, it must be of its
own essence, or essentially; for the essence of a thing is nothing really, but
the thing it self. Seeing therefore it cannot be of it self, whenever it is,
it must be from something else, that is, from some cause; now if that cause be
not essentially of it self, it requires as much another cause, to have an
actual being, as the former required it; and so there will be no settlement nor
firm foundation in causing, till one come to some cause which proceeds not from
any other, but is essentially of it self: but every thing which is unsettled in
it self, that it may have consistency, must have its firmness and foundation
from something, which is in it self firm and constant; for other wise it
destroys it self, and falls to nothing: therefore seeing that every cause
which is not essentially from it self, is as unsettled, and infirm in causing,
as was the first cause mentioned in this Argument; there must necessarily be
found some cause essentially from it self, to give firmness, as a foundation to
all the rest: And to put a concatenation in dependency of causes and effects,
without such a firm cause as this, would be as foolish and absurd, as to put a
wall of stones, one holding up another in the air, without any firm foundation,
whereon some of them are to rest and stand. Neither will the infinite progress
in multiplying contingent, or caused causes without end, help the matter: For
as a wall composed of infinite stones, one holding up another, without a
foundation, would be as absurd, as if it consisted of a finite and determinate
number of stones; so will it be in this infinite progress in causes, without
being supported by a necessary existent cause; and there will be no other
difference save this, that the one will be only a finite, but the other an
infinite absurdity. Nay, as the now instanced Wall would not be only absurd,
but a mere Chymera, and fiction of the Brain, unless it were sustained by some
power able to supply the want of a foundation; for otherwise it would fall down
as fast as it is builded up, and never come to have any frame of a Wall in it:
So the forementioned contingent causes and effects, would not only be inept
and foolish, but wholly implicatory, and impossible: seeing in the former
supposition there is nothing possible, which can supply the absence of that
essential actual being, which is to give firmness to all contingent causes, as
their foundation in causing; and consequently all things would be impossible,
and it would imply a contradiction that any thing should ever be put in actual
being: But that is manifestly false; for it is made evident, that something is
now in actual being, therefore there is some actual being essentially
necessary. Neither will it any way darken the light of this Proposition, if
denying all contingency, one should say, that every thing proceeds by fatal
necessity, and by an inevitable, and essential exigency one from another in
their different successive durances, for such a determinate measure of time:
(as has been above touched, and shall hereafter be examined) For seeing even
in this supposition every thing has its necessity from its causes, and nothing
from it self, or of it self, it will be as ridiculous, and implicatory a
supposition, as the former supposing contingency. For Exempligratia, the effect
A, will have no necessity of being now, but from the cause B; nor the cause B,
but from its cause C, and so each will be necessary dependently of another
cause; therefore unless there be found a cause independent of all others, and
having a necessary being essentially from it self, it will be a collection of
causes and effects, hanging one upon another, like the stones of a Wall in the
air, without all ground or foundation; and therefore as absurd, and implicatory
as the former. Whatsoever Systeme therefore be put of causes and effects, the
truth of this fifth Proposition stands firm, and immovable, that amongst all
things in actual being, etc. there must be something essentially necessary.

Yet to give it more strength and light, I will endeavor to prove that the
Systeme of succeeding subordinate causes, producing one another, without any
cause improducible, (whereupon whatsoever cause that is produced, depends
either mediately, or immediately) whether they have a contingent only, or a
necessary connection with their effects, to be wholly impossible by this
Argument.

If this Systeme be subsistent and solid, then all Causes and Effects, that
either are now, or ever have beem are, and have been produced by a Cause; but
that is impossible. Ergo, the Major is evident, as containing nothing but the
supposed Systeme; for whatsoever is produced by a cause, must have a cause
producing it. The Minor I prove. If it were possible, that all the Effects and
Causes that are now, or ever were, could be, or have been produced by a Cause,
then it is possible that they should be all Causes, and Effects, and yet should
not be all Causes and Effects that either are now, or ever were, but that is
impossible. Ergo, The Minor is evident exterminis. For it only asserts that
both parts of a Contradiction, all, and not all, cannot be true. The Major I
prove. Whatsoever is conceived to be produced by a Cause, must be conceived to
have a producing Cause; this is clear. But if all Effects and Causes, that
either are, or ever were, be conceived to have a producing Cause, they must be
conceived to be all, and not to be all. Ergo, This Minor is evident, for they
must be conceived to be all, as is now supposed, and affirmed in the Systeme;
and yet they cannot be conceived to be all, for the cause which is conceived to
produce all, will be excluded from the number of all that are, or ever were
produced by a Cause. The force, etc. This Argument cannot possibly be avoided,
otherwise then by answering that it proceeds upon a false supposition; for the
number of produced Causes and Effects being infinite, it is always false, to
say all, for still there will be more, and more without end, and one can never
reach to all. To this I reply, by demanding whether the Authors of this
Opinion intend by this Answer to elude all universal Propositions de omni,
concerning this number of produced Causes, by denying the supposition of all,
by reason of the infinity of the number, if it were admitted, exempli gratia,
all effects and causes, that either are now, or ever were, are and were, either
Corporal or Spiritual; all men that either are now, or ever were, are and were
animalia rationalia, all bruits irrationalia, etc. If they intend this, they
take away the chief gound of humane discourse, by denying all universal
Propositions, upon pretense that they proceed upon false suppositions, there
being no such thing as All, in an infinity of things proceeding one from
another, in every particular species of them: so, omnis homo, omnis leo, omnis
arbor, etc. will be false suppositions, and consequently cannot compose a true
proposition; nor will this enumerative argument be of force: Petrus est animal
rationale, and Paulus, and Johannes, et idem de singulis aliis, ergo, omnis
homo est animal rationale; for it may be eluded by saying I deny the
supposition, omnis homo, all men; because all cannot be said in an infinite
number. If this be their intention, then they are obliged to give disparity
betwixt these forenamed universal propostions, and that proposition which I
advanced, of all causes and effects produced, for this being as really and
universally true, as the other, if the supposition of all be admitted, they
must give a solid reason, why all causes may not be admitted in this, as well
as all men, etc. in the other. If they should give this disparity, that omnis
homo, all men, etc. in the foresaid propositions, is an abstract from time and
place, and so supposes not to signify all men, as constituted in time and
place, as omnes causa product and, all produced causes signifies in my
propositions; for by omnis homo est animal rationale, is no more signified,
then that it is the formal intrinsecal notion, or essence of a man, to be a
reasonable creature: I answer, that this is not a sufficient disparity, for
omnis res est producibilis ab aliqua causa, abstracts as much from time and
place, and (in this opinion which I impugn) is as much signifying the formal
intrinsecal notion of every thing, as animal rationale is of homo, in as much
as res in genere is conceived in order to its existency, or actual being: and
hence, as from the intrinsecal notion of a man, consisting in animal rationale,
is rightly inferred this Proposition, That all the men that ever yet were, were
animalia rationalia, because the same essence is common to all, and every
individuum of the same kind, though this second Proposition abstract not from
time: so from this Preposition, omnis res est producibilis ab aliqua causa,
must be rightly inferred this, All things that ever were yet in actual being,
were produced from some cause. Neither will it avail any thing to instance in
the infinite series of things in possibility to have an actual being hereafter
one from another, by way of cause and effect without end, wherein it cannot be
said, that all effects shall proceed from causes, or all causes shall produce
their effects, because in this infinite series, there is no such thing as all.
This, I say, availes nothing, for the comparison is not rightly instituted
betwixt all things which have been, and all things which are in possibility, or
may be hereafter; for those causes which have been, or which are past, though
they be not now any thing themselves, yet they remain in virtute sua, that is,
mediately or immediately, in the works which they have produced, and whereof
some now remain, by a continual descent of causation, from their efficient
virtue; so that the present effect (a) exists by virtue of the cause (b), and
(b) by virtue of (c), and (c) by virtue of (d), etc. so that the effect (A)
has so necessary a dependence immediate, or mediate, of every precedent cause
in this line of production, that it could not now be, if any of the precedent
causes, how distant soever from it, had not been before it; so that from the
actual being of any effect now, the authors of this line of produced causes
without end, must confess, that a forcible inference is drawn, of the actual
praeexistency of all and every cause of the said effect, either immediately or
mediately, having a necessary dependence a well of all, as of any one of them,
as being a fruit lineally deduced from them all, which cannot possibly be true
in an infinite series of produced causes; because in a number infinite, one can
never say all, as these Authors affirm. but in the instance alleged, of
Causes and Effects possible hereafter without end, and so infinite; those which
remain, and shall remain without end in the state of possibility, so long as
they remain in that state, are a pure nothing, not having any being at all,
neither in themselves, nor in virtute sua; there being nothing in actual or
virtual being, save only causes able to produce them; so that they are merely
in potentia causae, and no more, neither receives the cause any virtue to
exist from the effects which it can produce; for that which is yet nothing,
cannot give any thing to another thing: whence appears, that the instance
objected is defective, there being an evident disparity, betwixt the causes
which have been produced heretofore, and the effects which may be produced
without end, or time hereafter; for first from the effects which now are
existent, by an ascendent successive line, a mediate consequence is forcibly
drawn to all the causes, which by connected causalities, have wrought the being
of this present effect, which cannot be done possibly in an infinite line, even
according to the acknowledgement of these Authors; but contrariwise the actual
existence of this present cause, has no dependence at all of all or any of the
effects, which may successively proceed from it; but can subsist actually by
virtue of its causes, though it should never produce any effect at all; and
therefore there is no necessary dependence immediate or mediate, betwixt the
cause and the effect, as there is betwixt the effect and the cause; whence no
forcible inference can be drawn, from the actuality of the cause, to the
necessary sequel of all possible effects; and consequently, all the causes
that ever have been of this effects, mediate or immediate, are demonstrable by
this present effect to have had an actual being: but all effects which may
possibly proceed mediately or immediately from this present cause, are not
inferred from the actuality of this cause, so that all may be said in the one,
but not in the other; the first therefore is finite, but the second is an
infinite number. If therefore the instance had been rightly instituted, it
should not have been put betwixt the effects which are inpossibility to be
hereafter, and the precedent causes which already have had their actual being;
but betwixt the effects which may be hereafter, per posterius and posterius
without end, and the causes which might have been heretofore per prius and
prius without end. For both these are eqully infinite, inexhaustible,
indeterminate in potentia, and syncategorematical; for as descending from this
present effect (A,) there shall or may be always effects one after another
without end possible; so ascending from the same effect (a) there might have
been causes one before another without end. But as the instance thus stated
concludes nothing, that the produced causes have de facto prodeeded one from
another without end; so supposes it some improducible cause, which might
endlesly have produced causes one before another, and before all those which it
actually produced. Or if we turn the comparison another way, it should have
been proposed, betwixt the causes which have had actual being, and the effects
which shall have actual being, wheresoever they are in actual possession of
that being, and then the instance had been of force; for as beginning from the
cause (A) which now is in actual being, to all the effects hereafter possible,
when they are put in actual being, the number will be determinate, exhaustible,
and finite; so beginning from the same effects (A) to all the causes which have
had actual being in their several precedences, the number will be exhaustible,
and determinately finite: the infinity therefore is only conceiveable in the
endless succession of possible effects, whereof all can never be in actual
possession of their beings a part post, and an infinite precedence of possible
causes, whereof all could never have been in actual possession of their beings
a part ante, which in effect is nothing else, then to say, that there is some
necessary improducible cause, which could have produced causes one in time
before another without end, and can produce effects one in time after another
without end; and as this improducible cause can produce nothing so late, but he
can product something which shall exist after it; so could it not produce any
thing so soon, but it could have produced something which might have existed
before it. Whence follows evidently, that there must be always a first and a
last, a beginning and an end, a determinate number, and so a proper all, of
things which either have had, or ever shall have had the exercise of their
actual being: for the effects which are actual now, are the last of all actual
beings which ever were before, and those of the next ensuing moment shall be
then the last, and so shall it be without end. Now if actual things have an
end, they must have had a beginning; for an infinite actual time without all
beginning could never have come to an end, because infinity is that which is
without end: seeing then all actual time which has been heretofore, is come to
an end in this present moment, which is the last that has been, or is actual,
it is evident, that it had a beginning. Neither will it avail to say, That it
is only infinitum a part ante, but not a part post; for I answer, that such
an actual infinitum, is a pure Chymera, that is a thing without an end which
has an end. And it will press as little, to instance in the imaginary moments
of precedent time, begore any thing was produced by a cause, which were
infinite a part ante, and yet came to an end a part post, when things were
first caused: For I answer that those moments were pure nothings, and mere
fictious or false conceits of our understanding; for time is nothing but
either the measure of mutable things, or rather the mutability or mutation it
self: (as I shall declare hereafter) when therefore it is supposed that no
mutable thing is in actual being, it is impossible to conceive truly that there
is any time; for those fained moments are nothing else, then that improducible,
and immutable cause, which has power to produce something actual and mutable,
which should have bin before all other things which he has caused, as the
imaginary moments possible to be hereafter, are nothing save the same cause,
either alone or with other causes which can produce mutable effects after all
those which shall have been actually produced; by reason therefore that this
power of the first cause is without beginning or ending, as being wholly
immutable, and so not measurable by time, we conceit that time possible in
precedence, and of futurition, is composed of successive moments.

Thus therefore having passed through these occurring difficulties, I return to
my former Argument, and press it thus: All the effects which now are in actual
being (even according to the adverse opinion) have necessary dependence,
mediate or immediate, of all the causes which have preceded them in the line of
their causation; therefore it is a truth and a proper expression to say, that
all those causes have concurred mediately or immediately to these present
effects; but it is impossible that all those precedent causes should be
produced by a cause, for then they would be all, and not all, as I have already
proved: therefore amongst the causes which in the line of causation have
concurred immediately or mediately to these present effects, there must be at
least some one which is a producing only, and not a produced cause, which is
my fifth Proposition.

Hitherto I have only labored to evince, that such beings as are subject to
continual generation, and corruption, and which by a line of Succession follow
one another, in production and desition, must have had some improducible cause:
some difficulty may yet remain in these greater and more solid parts of this
Universe, as the Earth, Water, Air, Heaven, Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. for these
still remaining (so far as we can judge by our experience) in that main
substantial being which they ever had, may occasion a difficulty how they came
to be. Forasmuch therefore as touches this present propostion, either it must
be said, that they are of themselves, and never had any producing cause, and
then my present proposition is in part afferted, that amongst all actual beings
there must be improducible causes: or that they were produced by causes
successive one to another, and all caused, which I have already confuted: or
that they are causes one above another, and one producing another without end,
and all actually and eternally existent, which I have a fortiori, evinced to be
false, by my former Argument, against infinite successive causes; for it would
be both an actu infinitum, and as hard to understand or believe, as a first
improducible cause; and it would destroy it self by being as impossible, as
that of succeeding causes, etc. Neither will the instance of infinite divisible
parts less, and less without end, in continuo, make a parity with infinitum
actu. For first, that opinion is not certain: and secondly, if it be true, I
answer, that parts whilst they are in continuo, are only potential, and not
actual parts, no nor entia actu; for nothing is an actual being but the totum
it self, and when that is divided, of one totum or whole thing, there is made
two, and if each of them be divided, they become two less totums, and so
without end by each division, a new totum will begin to be, which was only in
potentia before; for so long as they are in continuo, they are the continuum
without any beginning, ending, term, or determination, save only the terms of
the whole continuum; so that it is impossible to say the part (a) is of this
determinate length, breadth, or profundity, so long as it remains in continuo,
for it has nothing to terminate it, till it come to the utmost superficies or
point of the continuum. And seeing every actual being must be determinate, and
no indeterminate thing can be ens actu, there will be nothing actual in
continuo, save the totum it self, or the continuum, because that only is ens
determinatum, having its fixed and determinate limits: so that in every
continuo, there is only one actual thing, containing in potentia, many things,
which by actual division may become acta less continuums then that is wherein
they are contained; and so every continuum contained in potentia in a greater,
will be less then its continent, when it becomes a continuum by a new division,
and this without end; there being then no actual determination of different
parts in continuo, there can be no actual distinction of them; and if no
distinction, no actual number; and if no actual number, there can be no actual
infinity, or infinitum actu.

Thus I have proved my fifth Proposition, and have been something prolix in it,
because it contains the mainest difficulty of the whole deduction.

Against the three last precedent propositions may be objected, that there
appears no contradiction, in constituting the essence of something not
absolutely and always necessary, but yet having a necessary and essential
connection with such a determinate term of time, v. g. that it have an essence
requiring necessarily to begin its actual being in the determinate instant (A),
and to continue till the determinate instant (G), and the same is of so many
determinate hours, days, months, years, etc. and this without any cause at
all, but of its particular essence, or of it self: whence will follow, that one
thing may begin to be actually in such a term of time, and then cease to be;
and after many revolutions of time another thing may begin, and desist from
being, in another discontinued portion of time, etc. So that a time may be
given wherein there was nothing at all, nor shall be any thing, though there be
something now in actual being. I answer, that such an essence as this, implies
a manifest contradiction, in our present supposition, of no being at all: for
supposing once that there be nothing at all, it cannot be supposed, that there
are any determinate instants, or parts of time, to which that being can have
any necessary and essential relation; for those instants, or parts, must be
something; and so this objection suppose nothing at all to be, and yet
something to be, which is a clear contradiction. And hence also follows, that
it is as clear a contradiction as the former, to affirm, that any thing
essentially annexed to a determinate space of time, should be of it self, ab
aeterno; for that limited eternity must be presupposed to be actually, before
you suppose that any thing can be actually and essentially annexed to it,
seeing the actuality of no being can be essentially annexed to that which is
nothing actually; for then something should depend of nothing: now I subsume,
but it is impossible to conceive that pretended not beginning, or eternal
determinate time designed in the objections to be presupposed as actually
existing, before that being commensured essentially to that forenamed space of
time, ergo. This Minor I prove because it is wholly impossible to conceive any
actual durance of time, whether eternal or not eternal, whether infinite of
finite, before we conceive something actually existent, which is a second sign
of posteriority of Nature, we conceive measured by such a determinate space of
time; for no part of time whatsoever, can have any other proper notion (if it
be any reality distinct from the thing which dures) then to be an affect, and
(as many think) consequently an effect of that which dures by it; both which
suppose either the thing effected to be its subject, or the thing effecting it
to be its cause; and by consequence, that thing to be in priority, and this in
posteriority of nature, in relation to it: whence it follows, according to the
common strain of Philosophers, that it can have no essential dependence of it
in its actual being; for what is supposed to be actually, before the actual
being of another thing, cannot essentially depend in its actual being upon that
before which it is supposed to be actually.

Secondly, seeing that that which this objection pretends to be eternal, or ab
aeterno, must have an essential relation to this or that determinate actual
space of time, for which alone, and for no other, it has a necessary being of
it self, and that ended ceases of it self to be any longer, I cannot conceive
such an essence without a manifest contradiction; for it is impossible to
conceive any thing to have an essential relation to be so soon, or in such a
priority of time that no time can be conceived to be possible before it, if it
continue only for a determinate space of successive time, and then as it
existed (in his supposition) of it self ab aeterno, so of it self it ceases to
be in this or that determinate instant of time. For in this supposition, that
determinate instant will terminate a time which is determinately finite;
therefore from that instant ascending, one may attain to the first instant of
that time; and so that time will have a final and last instant, and
consequently be finite, and not eternal, wherein no first instant is to be
found. Seeing therefore (as we shall see hereafter) successive eternity is but
a mere possible indetermination of one priority conceived before another, and
that no indeterminate thing so long as it remains indeterminate, or as such,
can possibly be, or ever have been ens actu, an actual being; it is also
impossible to conceive such an indeterminate successive eternity, to be any
actual thing in it self, or any thing else, save the necessary and immutable
power of some cause which can produce nothing so soon, but it could have
produced something, which might have been before whatsoever it has actually
produced; and if it had produced any thing before that, it could yet have
produced another thing which would have been, and so in infinitum, without all
term or limit.

The sixth Proposition. Whatsoever is an actual being essentially, must be of
it self, that is, independent of any cause different from it.
Proof.
THis Proposition is already proved, for the essence of a thing is really the
thing it self, as is evident; if therefore any thing exist actually from, or of
its effence, it must exist actually from, or of it self: now every thing which
is essentially an actual being, exists actually of its own essence; therefore
every thing which is essentially an actual being, exists actually of it self.
If it should be instanced, that supposing an inevitable necessity of all
things, all things would essentially be actual beings for that measure of time
wherein they are, and yet they would not be of themselves, but from their
determinate causes unavoidably producing them; I answer, that this necessity
(were there any such) proceeds not from the essence of the effect, but from the
determination of the cause; for therefore only the effect is necessary,
because the cause cannot but produce it: for the effect being purely nothing
before it is produced, cannot possibly necessitate the cause to produce it; for
to necessitate any thing, is to do some thing, but nothing can do nothing: it
is not therefore the essence of the effect to be actually in such a space of
time, but rather the essence of the cause to produce such an effect in such a
time. So that even this false supposition admitted, what soever is an actual
being essentially, must be of it self; for the supposed inevitable necessity of
all things is only extrinsecal from the cause, and so not essential, or
intrinsecal to the thing in actual being: neither indeed can either the
beginning to be, or perseverance in being for such a determinate time only, be
essential to any thing; for time being nothing but a measure of mutability, or
rather mutability it self, (as we shall see hereafter) whatsoever is
essentially in or for such a determinate space of time, will be in time, and
not in time, for that whole space wherein it is supposed to be: in time, as is
supposed; and yet not in time, for whatsoever it is essentially it is
immutably, for nothing can change its essence: To say therefore, that any thing
can be essentially for, or in such a determinate time, is to affirm that is is
mutable whilst it is not mutable, and necessary whilst it is not necessary,
which is a plain contradiction. Nay farther, it is to affirm, that such a being
is tota simul, because it cannot but be for such a time, and yet not tota
simul, but by succeeding parts, because it is in time, which is another
contradiction.

The seventh Proposition. No actual being that is superfluous, defective,
inordinate, absurd, or difform from the rule of right Reason, can be
essentially necessary, or of it self.
Proof.
FOr what necessity can there be of absurdities or defects, etc. seeing their
not being is better then their being, and the works of nature are better
without them then with them? For if any thing absurd and contrary to reason
could be essentially necessary, and of it self, and all thing must proceed from
that being which is essentially necessary, and of it self, as is above proved,
then all things which have a being must be absurd and contrary to reason. But
it is evident that all things which have a being are not absurd and contrary to
reason, ergo. The Minor is evident by the Reasonableness, Order, Beauty,
Perfection, Connection, and Symmetry which are found in those things which we
experience to be. The Major I prove, for nothing can give that which it has
not it self, therefore, if that which gives, that is, produces all things, be
absurd and contrary to reason, it cannot give, that is, produce any thing which
is perfect and according to reason. For if that which is contrary to reason
could work according to reason; (and whatsoever gives or produces any thing
which is according to reason, must work according to reason) then that which is
contrary to reason will be according to reason; for whatsoever works according
to reason, must participate of reason, and so be according to reason. Again,
whatsoever is, there must be some reason why it is: But there can be no reason,
why any thing which is contrary to reason should be, ergo. The Minor is
evident, for if there were reason for it, it could not be contrary to reason,
unless you make the same thing to be according to reason and contrary to
reason. I prove the Major, for if any thing could be without any reason why it
is, then any one may put what he pleases to be, or not to be, without any
reason: and so all humane discourse will be frustrated, which gives reasons for
what it affirms, and deduceth all things from reason. But of this more
hereafter.

The eighth Proposition. No Actual Being, which is oboxious to Deordinations
and Absurdities, can be essentially necessary, or of it self.
Proof.
SEeing no absurdity can be essentially necessary, as is proved, nothing which
can be subject to any absurdity can be essentially necessary; for whatsoever
actual being is essentially necessary, must always be necessary; but that
which is subject to such deviations, may at some time not be necessary; for it
may happen that it falls into some of those absurdities to which it is
obnoxious, and then it becomes abfurd and inordinate; but nothing which is
absurd can be essentially necessary: seeing therefore every actual being
essentially necessary excludes all absurdities, nothing which can be absurd,
can be an actual being essentially necessary.

The ninth Proposition. Nothing can be an actual being essentially, and of it
self, which is not endued with the light of Reason.
Proof.
WHatsoever is an actual being essentially, must essentially exclude all
disorders and abfurdities, as is proved in the two former Propositions, but
nothing save that which is endued with the light of reason, can essentially
exclude all disorders and absurdities, ergo. I prove the Minor: whatsoever
excludes essentially all disorders and absurdities, must have something
essentially repugnant to all disorders and absurdities; this is evident. But
nothing is essentially repugnant to all disorders and absurdities, save the
light of reason: Therefore, what soever has not the light of reason excludes
not essentially all disorders and absurdities. I prove the Minor.

Therefore only is any thing disordered and absurd, because it is contrary or
difform to the light of reason is essentially repugnant to all disorders and
absurdities. The antecedent is evident; for why is any thing disordered or
absurd, then because it is otherwise then reason dictates it should be? I prove
the consequence, for if disorder be nothing save a repugnancy to the light of
reason, then nothing but the light of reason is essentially repugnant to all
disorders.

I will give force and light to this Argument, by propounding it in another
manner, thus. Whatsoever is not capable of it self, to govern and direct it
self perfectly according to the rule of reason, cannot of it self preserve it
self from all inconverniences, disorders, and absurdities; this is evident, But
whatsoever has not the light of reason, cannot of it self govern it self
perfectly according to the rule of reason, ergo. The Minor is clear; for who
can possibly conceive, that that which has no knowledge nor understanding of
it self, which neither knows whether it be good or bad, right or wrong, well or
ill, orderly or disorderly, according or contrary to reason, nay, nor whether
there be any such thing as reason or no, should be capable to govern perfectly
it self of it self, according to the rule of reason? Thus were the Sun
constituted so far from the Earth, that it could neither heat not enlighten it;
or so near, that it blinded all who saw it, and burnt up all before it; or that
the Earth were removed so far off, or near to the Sun, that the same
inconveniences and disorders followed; if neither any Tree ever bore fruit, not
any sensible Creature exercised any faculty of his senses; if all bodies were
weak, feeble, diseased, and deformed; if all things were put out of order,
place, time, number, weight, measure, proportion, beauty, filled with nothing
but horrid disorders, defects, deformities, disproportions, absurdities,
fooleries, (which certainly, if we respect only the course of Nature, are main
transgressions against the rule of Reason, foul blots upon the beauty of
creatures, and prodigious monsters in the progress of natural causes) yet what
soever had not the light of reason, could neither prevent them, nor resent
them, nor redress them of, and by it self, or by any thing included essentially
in the actuality of its being; but every thing would actually exist as before,
if some external cause did not destroy them, which could not be, if they were
essentially actual beings, as is already proved.

It will be said this Argument proves too much, and so in effect proves just
nothing: for it concludes not only, that actual beings devoid of the light of
reason cannot free themselves from all disorders and defects, but that they can
free themselves from none at all; for if the light of reason be only that
which is essentially repugnant to disorders, they will have nothing essentially
repugnant to any disorder whatsoever, and so will be exposed to all, and unable
to preserve themselves from any one. Which notwithstanding appears manifestly
false, to all who cast an eye upon the constant Symmetry, Splendour, and
Proportion of this Universe, and the specious progress of natural causes and
effects; which though wholly empty of the light of reason, digest all things
conformably to the rule of reason. I answer, that the Argument contends not,
that actual beings not enriched with the use of reason, cannot conform
themselves to the prescript of reason in many things, but that they cannot
effect it of themselves in all things, as not retaining any thing essentially
repugnant to all inconveniences (which may be cast upon them) in the actuality
of their beings; for if they had any such perfection, they could not possibly
be obnoxious to the least disorder: that conformity therefore which they have
to reason, and the resistance to many accidents of disorder thwarting the laws
of reason, they enjoy not from themselves, but from reason, and that only so
far as they flow from reason, and are certain particles and participations of
reason. That this may be understood, I divide reason into two branches; the one
active, the other passive; the one working, the other wrought; the one
conceiving, the other expressing what it conceives; the one may be termed not
unfitly. Ratio ratiocinans, Reason reasoning, the other, Ratio ratiocinata,
Reason reasoned. Thus the Idea of some curious and sumptuous building framed in
the mind of a skilful Architect, is Reason reasoning; that is, contriving,
working, acting, ordering, digesting, the prefect proportion of that building
within it self. But the building it self accomplished according to the Idea,
will be Ratio ratiocinata, Reason reasoned, that is, wrought, expressed,
formed, and framed according to the thoughts of that Idea. Thus a learned
person composes a Treatise both according to be sense and words, by his inward
thoughts, which are Reason reasoning; and after couches it in writing, which is
Reason reasoned; and though whosoever contemplates with a considerate eye, the
strength and art of reason, comprised in such expressions, yet he plainly
discovers that neither the parts of the Building, nor the words of the Treatise
had it from themselves, but from a working and active reason expressing it self
in them: and though those parts and words, so long as they remain conform to
that reason which framed them, cannot swerve from reason, nor fall into
disorder, or nonsense, yet they contain nothing in their actual beings which
essentially repugns against the disordering and depraving them, but would
retein them no less being dissipated and disordered, then they did before. And
if the reason from whence they issued were so vigorous and active, that it
constituted them in so firm a consistency of that posture and order, which it
imprinted upon them, that no natural cause should have power to deface or sully
it; yet even that immobility would disclose it self to a piercing eye, no more
to proceed from it, then it proceeded from it self. And though such a constant
beauty and decorum could not be interessed by the force of nature, or disturbed
in its course; yet that touches not the essential, but the natural, or
well-being of it; not that it would lose its being, were it put in some
disorder, but that nothing in nature is empowered to disorder it.

Thus though the cariere of the Sun and Heavens find no obstancle or remora in
nature, yet were they curbed in their full speed, they would not in a moment
fall to nothing.

By this distinction thus illustrated, (whereon I will more insist hereafter)
it is evidenced, that the light of reason is only essentially opposed to all
inconveniences and deordinations; and that whenever that which is not
illustrated with this active light, preferves it self from any of them, it
proceeds not originally, or essentially, from it, but from that participation
of passive reason, which the active has infused into it.

Seeing therefore that all the beauty and decorum of irrational beings, is
only a copy drawn by the alive hand of Reason, the ninth Proposition remains
evident, That nothing can be an actual being essentially, and of it self, which
is not endued with the light of Reason.

Hence therefore follows first, the implicancy of that old, deceased, buried,
rotten, and consumed Error, now lately raked out of the ashes of Heathenish
Ignorance, and Poetical Fictions, That there is an universal Matter, infinite
in extent, and eternal in durance, without beginning or ending, whose being is
essentially actual, and of it self, incapable of being produced, or destroyed
by any cause whatsoever. For seeing this supposed matter is not endued
essentially with the actual light of reason, nay, is so far from it; that it is
in the least capacity of all other things, to preserve it self from disorders;
as being nothing but a compact of disorders, a chaos of confusion, and a being
so rude and deformed, that were not there some intelligent cause to order and
digest it into some form and fashion, it would remain the most absurd of all
beings, and the very next to nothing; having, as they coin it, all things in
power or possibility and yet being nothing of any thing which it has. In a
word, it is no better, when these new inventors have made the best of it, then
all things in disorder: it is the Mirror of misule, the Embrio of beings, the
World in a lump, Heaven and Earth in mortar; and the first edition of
Absurdities written in the large volumes of infinty. For whether they make it
consist of Atoms, as the Ancients did, or of different Spirits, as others
lately have conceited, it is nothing but infinite confused mixtures both of the
one and the other, till brought into some fixed posture and proportion, some
determinate being is drawn out of it. Is it then possible to conceive, that
such anear alliance to nothing, as this Matter is, should arrive to that
infinite height of perfection, to be essentially and actual being, of, and from
it self? Were it of it self, it must be essentially and absoluterly necessary,
as is proved; but what absolute necessity is there of absurdities and
disorders? Were it wholly necessary, it could admit of no change or alteration;
for whatsoever is essentially necessary, is, and must be always, what ever it
was: but this supposed Matter is, and ever was, and will be subject to infinite
alterations, putting on perpetually new forms, postures, proportions, mixtures,
distances, approximations, places, figures, correspondences, conjunctions,
separations, unities, divisions, continuations, contiguities, and a thousand
more, so that it is constant in nothing but inconstancy; were it an actual
being essentially, it must be a rule of rectitude to it self, and so be
essential rectitude, excluding all disorders; when this Matter has disorder
coeternal with it, and coessential to it. How came it alone of it self to give
being to it self, when of it self alone it can give a determinate being to
nothing else, but only suffer other active and efficient causes, to make out
of it, determinate beings?

Let therefore the authors of this most pernicious and Antichristian novelty,
either prove that this infinite, eternal, and uncreated matter, had from all
eternity a most perfect actual light and use of understanding, to rectify it
self according to the perfect rule of reason; or confess that it must
essentially depend in the actuality of its being, of some cause endued with
such a light: or all the world will see that they speak against reason, and
deceive themselves, and others, by a vain and senseless fiction.

Hence also it follows evidently against Arislotle, that the whole Moles, or
fabric of this visible World, could not be of it self, or essentially, an
actual being, without any cause; for neither the Earth, whereof all inferior
visible things are naturally composed, nor the other Elements, nor the spacious
body of the Heavens, nor that glory of the Sun, not that beauty of the Moon,
nor that luster of the Stars, nor that admirable composition and proportion of
the bodies of Men and Beasts (seeing they are so far from possessing the light
of Reason, that have neither sense nor life: nor Plants and Trees, though they
have some degree of life) nor Beasts, Birds, and Fish, though they have life
and sense, because none of these have the light of Reason: no nor the Souls of
men, nor the Angels themselves, though endued with the light of Reason and
Understanding, can possibly have been essentially actual beings, and from
themselves; for the actual light of reason which they have, is not essential,
but accidental to their beings; because, as appears in Infants, they can be
actually, without the actual use of reason. All therefore that is essentially
included in the actual being of an Angel, or humane Soul, is to be a power, or
virtue, able to use reason and understanding; so that they are truly conceived
to be, before they are conceived to exercise reason: wherefore, they can be
actually no more of themselves, then any other thing which has no such power;
for it is not the power to use reason, but the actual use of reason, which
enables any thing to exclude essentially all disorders, and defects against
reason from it self. Seeing therefore Men and Angels must be supposed to be
actually, before they can be supposed to produce any act of reason, (for the
being of all causes must be presupposed to the production of their effects, for
nothing can produce nothing) their beings include not essentially the actual
use of reason, and so cannot essentially exclude all deviations and
deordinations from reason, which can be only effected by an act of reason.

Hence also follows, the actual use of Reason, or the acts of Reason, as they
are experienced and actuated amongst men, (and the same is of Angels) cannot be
of themselves, or essentially necessary, both because they presuppose the
beings of Men and Angels, as their producing cause; as also, because such acts
of reason being limited and finite, though they may essentially exclude sorne
disorders, yet they are still subject to a thousand, or rather infinite others,
which by reason of their narrowness and shallowness, they can neither foresee,
nor prevent, nor remedy. These truths therefore being settled, I come to the
tenth Proposition.

The tenth Proposition. Only Actual Reason, in its full perfection and
latitude, that is, Reason it self, is an actual being essentially necessary.
Proof.
THis Proposition follows evidently from the precedent; for seeing there is
now, ever was, and shall be something in actual being, and that this could not
be, unless there had been always some thing, or things, essential necessary;
and that nothing frustrate, disordered, defective, or absurd, actually, or
possibly, can be a necessary actual being: and that whatsoever has not the
light of reason, actually exercised, nay, even acts of reason limited and
imperfect, cannot essentially exclude all disorders and inconveniences, etc.
from their actual beings; it follows inevitably, that actual reason in its full
perfection, or reason it self, and that only, is an actual being essentially
necessary: which Argument may be thus framed by way of resolution. If actual
reason it self, or in its full perfection, be not essentially a necessary
actual being, all other things would be subject to disorder; if all were
subject to disorder, nothing could be essentially necessary; if nothing were
necessary, nothing could have been which is not essentially necessary; that
supposed, no actual being could be now; but is most manifest that there is now
some actual being, therefore from the first to the last, Reason it self, must
be essentially a necessary actual being.

Or yet more briefly and clearly thus: Something must be essentially necessary,
as is proved in the fourth Proposition; but nothing (as is proved in the
following Propositions) which is not reason in self, or in its full perfection,
can be essentially necessary; therefore only reason it self in its full
perfection is essentially necessary.

The eleventh Proposition. Only Actual Reason in its full perfection, or
Reason it self, is essentially an actual being of it self.
Proof.
THough I use only in these and the former Propositions the word, Actual
Reason, because it is the fittest in our language to express my meaning, yet I
take indifferently for Synonoma's, or words of the same signification, Actual
Reason, Understanding, Knowledge, Wisdom, and the like; all being in reality
the same thing: this premised, I prove the Proposition.

This Proposition is manifest: first, from the precedent and sixth Proposition,
wherein is proved, that whatsoever is an actual being essentially necessary, is
of it self. Secondly, from the Arguments for proof of the former Proposition.
Thirdly, a priori, or from the very nature of Reason it self, thus: That must
necessarily be of it self, which must be, and cannot possibly be conceived to
be from any thing else: But reason it self must be, as is proved from the
former Proposition, and cannot possibly be conceived to be from any thing else,
Ergo, etc. The Major is most evident; the first part of the Minor is already
proved; I prove the second part of the Minor. If reason it self could possibly
be conceived to be from any thing else, that from which it is conceived to be,
must be either wholly devoid of reason, or endued with imperfect reason, or
reason it self in its full perfection. It cannot be from reason it self as from
any thing distinct from it self I for reason it self cannot be any thing but
what it is, to wit, reason it self. Neither can it proceed from imperfect
reason; for no cause can totally produce any thing perfecter then it self; for
nothing can give that to another which it has not it self: now it is evident,
that reason in its full perfection, is perfecter then imperfect reason. Neither
can it be produced, by any thing devoid of reason, for the same reason; for
that which is reason it self, is more perfect (according to all Philosophers)
then that which has in it no reason at all, and the reason hereof is evident;
for that which essentially excludes all imperfections, as is already proved,
reason it self does, must be more perfect then that which excludes them not, as
is above demonstrated, that nothing devoid of the light of reason can exclude
them all essentially; therefore reason in it is full perfection must be of it
self. Fourthly, I prove the said Proposition by another Argument, a priori, in
this manner. Whatsoever has in it self all things essentially required to be
of it self, must necessarily be of it self; this is evident: But reason in its
full perfection, has all things essentially required to be of it self, in it
self; Therefore it is of it self. I prove the Minor. All that can be conceived
to be essentially required for any thing to be of it self, is, that it self be
a most perfect actual rule of Rectitude to it self; for this is to be its own
rule, its own measure, its own direction, its own rectitude, light, knowledge,
life, being, existency; for were such a being from any thing save it self, that
from which it proceeded, as from a different cause, would be the rule of
rectitude and perfection to it, and not it self to it self; for the total
cause must always be the rule and measure of all the perfections which are in
the effect; for whatsoever is in the effect, must have been precedently in the
cause, for nothing can give that which it hat not: whatsoever therefore is a
most perfect actual rule and measure to it self, must be equivalently as much
to it self, as if it were its own cause; and be as truly and adequately of it
self, as other things are from their total causes: so that if it have no other
rule, nor measure of rectitude and perfection then it self, it can have no
cause at all different from it self, and so must have its actual being
essentially of it self. Now I subsume, but actual reason in its full
perfection, is a most perfect actual rule of rectitude to it self; therefore
actual reason in its full perfection, is an actual being essentially of it
self. The consequence is clear, I prove the Minor Actual reason it self, or in
its full perfection, is a most perfect actual understanding and comprehension
of it self; it is, Intellectio ^psius intellectionis, An actual understanding
of actual understanding: it is Cognitio cognitionis, A knowledge of knowledge.
For it would not be reason and understanding in its full perfection, if it were
ignorant of any thing; and if it know not it self, it must be ignorant of
something, nay, of the best of all things. Seeing therefore it is a most
perfect knowledge of it self, it is a guide and rule unto it self; and being
reason it self, which is the original rule of all rectitude, it must be a most
perfect rule of rectitude to it self, and so must be its own rectitude, and
rectitude it self; for it is impossible to conceive, that reason it self either
should be contrary to reason, or admit of any thing in it self contrary to
reason; for then reason should not be reason. And thus I have made way to the
twelfth and last Proposition.

The twelfth Proposition. Reason it self, being essentially necessary, and of
it self, is God.
Proof.
THis Proposition is clear, ex terminis, by the bare notion of the terms
wherein it is propounded; for the true God was never conceived by any who had a
real notion of him, to be any thing, save actual Intellection, or Reason if
self, essentially necessary and of it self; an essential rule of Rectitude to
it self; a most clear comprehensive Knowledge of it self, or necessary
exclusion of all defects and deformities from it self; the Quintessence of all
true perfection within it self, and the source of all beings without it self.
Seeing therefore I have evidently proved in the former Propositions, that there
is now something in actual being; and thence evidently deduced, the necessity
of the actual being of Reason it self, beautified with all these admirable
perfections; I have made evident, what I intended and promised in the Title of
this small Treatise, that there is a God: and therefore may safely conclude,
there is either A GOD, OR NOTHING; but it is evident there is something,
therefore it is evident there is A GOD. From this truth that God is reason it
self, or in its full perfection, I draw these ensuing Corrollaries, or
Deductions; of the Attributes of God.

The first Attribute. The Unity of God.
SEeing God is Reason it self, that is, all the perfections of the Reason
summed up and identified in one and the same actual being, it is impossible to
conceive, that there should be more true Gods' then One.

The second Attribute. God's Indivisibility.
Whatsoever is divisible may be divided into parts, as is clear; but Reason it
self cannot be divided into parts: for whenever any whole is divided into
parts, the whole is destroyed but Reason it self cannot be destroyed, for it is
essentially a necessary actual being, which cannot but be, as is proved;
therefore God, being Reason it self, is not divisible.

The third Attribute. The Spirituality of God.
GOd is Reason it self; therefore he essentially excludes all things which are
obnoxious to disorders, or deviations from Reason: but every corporeal
substance is of it self obnoxious to such defects, as is proved; therefore God
is no corporeal substance; therefore he is onesy spiritual.

The fourth Attribute. The Simplicity of God's being.
GOd is Reason it self; Reason it self is reason in abstracto; things
abstracted are simple essences, or beings, without all concretion or
composition; therefore God is most simple and pure in his being, without all
commixtion or composition of parts, essential or integral; for had he any
parts, those parts could be nothing but different Reasons; for Reason can
consist of nothing but Reason; and then he would be a compound of differen
Reasons, and not Reason it self: which is a most simple identity, without all
composition of different things united together, but not identified, in one
imperfect compound.

The fifth Attribute. The Ubiquity of God.
ALL things must proceed immediately from Reason it self; therefore Reason it
self must be in all things, for nothing can produce any thing immediately, if
it be distant from that thing which it produces; for if it be distant, it must
work by some efficient virtue, or quality, issuing from it though that
distance, and then it works not immediately, but by interjection of that
diffused virtue, which only works immediately: if therefore all things must
proceed from Reason it self immediately, Reason it self can be distant from
nothing; and because it cannot in it self be contiguous to any thing, by reason
that it has no corporeal Quantity to fill any place, it must be in the very
essence of the thing which it produces: if therefore that which it produces be
a corporeal thing and actually fill any place, because Reason is in that thing,
it is said truly to be in that place, where that corporeal thing is, and
consequently to be every where, that is, in all real places, where any thing
capable of it self to be in a place is collocated. The difficulty is in the
first Proposition: viz. That all things must proceed immediately from Reason it
self. This I prove. Every thing must proceed from Reason it self, therefore
every thing must proceed immediately from Reason it self. The ancecedent is
already proved: I prove the consequence. Whatsoever proceeds from Reason it
self cannot contain any thing contrary to Reason, for Reason it self can do
nothing contrary to Reason; for so Reason should be contrary to Reason, and
then it would not be Reason; but whatsoever proceeds not immediately from
Reason it self, may contain something contrary to Reason; therefore whatsoever
proceeds from Reason it self, must proceed immediately from Reason it self. I
prove the Minor. Whatsoever proceeds totally and adequately from any other
immediate cause then Reason it self, may contain something ( viz. in its actual
being, at least according to some circumstance or other) which is contrary to
Reason; therefore nothing can proceed totally from any immediate cause, save
Reason it self, if all things proceed from Reason it self, and nothing which
proceeds from Reason it self, can contain any thing contrary to Reason, as is
now proved. That whatsoever proceeds totally and adequately from any immediate
cause save Reason it self, may contain something contrary to Reason, is already
made evident; for seeing all such causes are subject to Ignorance, and devoid
of infallible directive knowledge of all circumstances which may occur in the
immediate total production of such effects, they are obnoxious to fall into
some imprudent and unprovident proceeding in the production of them, left
wholly to themselves: Seeing therefore all things must proceed from Reason it
self lest this imprudence committed in the production of any effect should be
ascribed to reason it self, as an effect to its cause, it is plainly necessary;
that all other causes (I speak of necessary, not free causes, of which we shall
treat hereafter) should be immediately directed, and preserved from such errors
and deviations, by the infallible, all-seeing Wisdom, and Providence of Reason
it self; so that all circumstances and things considered, and compared
together, there will be no real being, produced contrary to reason, or sullied
with the least disorder. Now this direction of reason it self, seeing it must
reach to all, and every the least action of all necessary causes, is the
immediate influence and concourse of reason it self into every effect; for it
contains a decree of reason it self, that such effects be actually produced in
such determinate circumstances, and by means of such causes: for it is not
possible to conceive the concourse of God, to be any thing, save reason it self
effectually decreeing, and defining the actual being of all things which ever
were, are, or shall be, in their fit circumstances, all things and occurrences
considered, as I shall hereafter make manifest. Thus therefore I have proved,
that reason it self produces immediately all things, and so is in all things;
and consequently by reason that all places are filled with these things, in
which reason it self is, by means of them it is in all places; and if corporal
thing could be in infinite places, it would also be in infinite places, which
is the proper notion of Gods Ubiquity: for that is nothing else, then that it
is impossible that any place should be, in which God is not, And I add
farther, that if place, or ubication, be any thing distinct from the thing
which is in place, that God is in that also, for the same reasons, as he is in
all other things; not as locally contained immediately in these places, but as
being the immediate producing cause of those realities, or modifications, which
are called places, or ubies: and this presence of God in all things is to be
confidered for the first instant, or priority of Nature, (as the School speaks)
which respects the actual being of every thing in it self, or before it be
considered in time and place; so that it is not a local, but a causal presence,
not including place, but yet excluding local distance from any thing which
supposes place.

The sixth Attribute. The Eternity of God.
ETernity may be taken either improperly, for a succession of time without
beginning or ending; and in this sense, God is not in himself eternal, because
he has no change of being, of parts, or properties, which may succeed one to
another, and be measured by time: so that according to this improper acception,
he can only be said Denominative, or by way of denomination, (supposing that
any changeable beings have been always, or in all times, without beginning) to
be in all times, or eternally by succession, because he has (if this
supposition were true) been in all those beings which have been from successive
eternity; no otherwise then I have declared in the former Attribute, that he is
said to be in local and divisible places. Or eternity is taken properly, for an
unsuccessive, and simultaneous, or indivisible durance, whereby God at once is
what he is totally, and unchangeably; so that as he sums up all perfections in
his indivisible being, so he sums up all instants and parts of time, in one
indivisible point of his eternal durance. God therefore being reason it self,
and that being essentially a necessary actual being, as is proved, it is
impossible that he should ever be truly conceived, either not to be, or to be
any thing but what he is, and consequently in himself, and according to his
essence he is most properly eternal.

The seventh Attribute. The Omnisciency of God.
REason it self can be ignorant of nothing; for were it ignorant of any thing,
in that whereof it is ignorant, it might admit, or do something contrary to
reason, as not being an essentical rule of rectitude to it self, in such things
whereof it is ignorant; for if it knew them not, it could not determine,
whether they were conformable to reason or no; but reason it self can neither
admit into it self, nor do any thing contrary to reason, for then Reason should
not be reason, Ergo, etc.

The eighth Attribute. Of Gods Omnipotency.
Whatsoever has, or can have any finite being, must be squared according to
reason; therefore it must be a participation, or expression of the first
reason; therefore it must proceed from the first reason, or reason it self;
therefore God being Reason in self, whatsoever has, or can have a being must
proceed from God; therefore God is Omnipotent. Or thus. It is reason that
whatsoever reason it self judges to be put in actual being, should be put in
actual being; this is clear: but whenever it is reason (all things
considered) that any thing should be done, that is to be done; therefore
whenever reason it self judges that any thing should be put in actual being,
it is to be put in actual being; therefore it cannot but be, then when reason
judges it should be; therefore reason it self, which is God, is Omnipotent,
seeing every thing must be done, which he judges to be done. The difficulty
will be in this Minor, viz. whenever it is reason (all things considered)
that any thing should be done, that is to be done, or must necessarily be done.
Which I prove thus: All things must proceed immediately from reason, as is
proved; therefore all things must be done according to reason, for reason can
do nothing contrary to reason; but it would be contrary to reason, not to have
that done which reason dictates, (all things considered) should be done;
therefore whatsoever reason dictates or judges (all things considered) should
be done, that must necessarily be done. Seeing therefore, whatsoever can be,
must be capable to be judged by reason it self, that in some circumstance or
other it may be done, God can produce every thing, save himself, that can have
can actual being; which is to be omnipotent.

Hence follows evidently, that those who put any necessary actual being of it
self, save God who is reason it self, take away the omnipotency of God; for
they put some actual being distinct from God, and so not God, which God cannot
produce: and hence appears the vanity and blasphemy of that new revived
Opinion, of an Eternal Infinite Increated Matter, which I have already consuted.

The ninth Attribute. The Goodness of God.
TO be good is to be communicative of it self to others; therefore what which
is most communicative of it self, has the greatest goodness; but seeing all
things must proceed immediately from Reason it self, which is God; God is the
most communicative of himself to others; therefore God is the best of all
things, or has the greatest goodness.

The tenth Attribute. The Purity and Sanctity of God.
GOd is reason it self; therefore he can do nothing contrary to reason: but all
sin is contrary to reason; therefore God can do no sin, for then reason should
not be reason; therefore God essentially excludes all sin, and so is more
opposite to sin then any thing else; for whatsoever is not reason it self,
being endued with imperfect understanding, has nothing essentially in its
actual being, which excludes all sin; for every thing, which is not reason it
self, can act contrary to reason, being left to self, and so may sin. But the
highest Purity and Sanctity consists in the greatest opposition to all sin;
therefore God has the highest Purity and Sanctity of all other things. And by
reason of this sovereign Sanctity, God can neither command, nor counsel, nor
approve, not be any way Author or favourer of any the least sin in others; for
all these proceedings being contrary to reason, cannot be done by reason it
self.

The eleventh Attribute. Of the infallible Veracity of God.
IF God could speak any the least untruth, it must either proceed from
Ignorance or Malice; not from Ignorance, for Reason it self being Knowledge it
self, can be ignorant of nothing: Not from Malice, for all Malice is sin, and
we have proved that Reason it self cannot sin; therefore God essentially
excludes all untruth in speaking; therefore his Veracity in speaking is most
infallible.

The twelfth Attribute. Gods Justice.
His Justice may be proved by the same argument: for all Injustice done to
others, either proceeds from Ignorance or Malice; neither of which, as is
proved, can be in God. But particularly because all Injustice is directly
against reason, and reason can do nothing against reason.

The thirteenth Attribute. Of the ever blessed Trinity.
THis is a Mystery above the reach of all created capacity, and so can neither
be demonstrated, nor expressed fully by humane understanding. Only endeavors
may be used to invent the easiest ways to frame a right notion of it, as
Christian Faith delivers it; which I conceive, in this expression which we have
made of God, to be Reason it self in its full perfection, may with some more
then ordinary facility be explicated. God therefore is Reason it self in its
full perfection; therefore he is essentially a comprehensive actual Knowledge
of himself, and contains all true and right reason essentially. Now this
comprehensive knowledge, which reason it self is of it self, is not a mere
contemplative, barren, weak, fruitless, and inefficacious Knowledge; but
practical, working, strong, lively, vigorous, fecunde, and acting within it
self: for if the weak acts of created understanding have power to express
themselves both to others, by signs and words, and to the understanding which
has them, by occasioning the production of reflex acts upon them; it cannot be
conceived, that the most perfect, nay perfection it self, in understanding,
should be devoid of this perfection: and so by the infinite strength, vigor,
and power of it, express it self to it self; and is no less its own expression,
then its own knowledge; and because this expression, being most prefect, is
most perfectly adequate and commensurate to it self; that which is expressed is
that very thing, which that which expresses; for were it not that very thing,
there would be some difference, and so some dissimilitude betwixt that which
expresses, and that which is expressed; and then it were not (as I have showed
it must be) a most perfect and adequate expression of it self.

This infinite perfection therefore thus adequately expressing it self within
it self, must also be its own approbation, love, satisfaction, joy, repose, and
infinite content, which the expresser and the expressed take mutually and
indivisibly one in the other; so that Reason it self is no less a love, joy,
and full repose, in this expression, then it is an expression of it self: for
it is not possible to conceive, that Reason it self should not approve, love,
joy, and rest, in that expression which is the most absolute, complete,
prefect, beautiful, lovely, and ravishing expression which can be thought on:
seeing therefore Reason it self, must always proceed according to reason, it
must necessarily love, joy, and satisfy it self in this expression. And
because this joy, and satisfaction, etc. must be perfectly adequate to that
wherein it joys; for were it less then that wherein it joys and quiesces, it
were not most perfectly conform to reason; and yet reason cannot but be most
perfectly conform to reason; it must be of equal perfection with that which
expresses, and that which is expressed; neither can it be different, or dislike
in any regard to the expressing and expressed reason; for as imperfect
accidental love is an accidental union of two different lovers, so the most
perfect substantial love, or quintessence of love, (such as that of God is) is
a substantial unity of the lover and that which is beloved; so that both, as
one principle, breathe out a love which is one with them both. So that there is
in this most hidden and Divine Mystery; Cognitio exprimens, Knowledge
expressing; and Cognitio express a, Knowledge expressed; there is Intellectio
intelligens, an intellectual act understanding; and Intellectio intellecta, an
intellectual act which is understood; there is Sapientia concipiens, Wisdom
conceiving, and Sapientia concepta, Wisdom conceived; there is Ratio
ratiocinans, Reason reasoning; and Ratio ratiocinata, Reason reasoned: and yet
all that is signified by all these terms is one and the same thing; for it
neither expresses, nor understands, nor conceives, nor reasons any thing in
these Divine acts, but most perfectly, and adequately what it self is; so that
both what is expressed, understood, conceived, reasoned, and the formal
expression, understanding, conception, ratiocination whereby we conceive that
to be expreed, etc. is one and the same thing; for the action being
specificated by the term, when the term is one thing (as it is here) with that
whence it proceeds, the action must be the same when them both; so that it is
its own expression, intellection, conception, ratiocination. In like manner,
there is in this mystery Dilectio diligens, and Dilectio dilecta, Love loving,
and Love loved; and the same is of Satisfaction, Joy, and full Repose, active
and passive, (as the School speaks) but I find neither words nor time to
express them; and yet this loving beloved love, etc. of this expressing and
expressed expression, is (for the same reason) the very one self-same thing;
for it loves nothing (in these acts) but what it is it self, as it expresses
nothing, but what it is it self. Whence appears a most perfect and simple Unity
in the Essence and Nature of God, in all those productions, and processions;
which is that main fundamental Point, which Christians believe, and profess
against Heathens and Infidels, in this high Mystery of the ever blessed
Trinity. This Unity therefore established, I proceed to deduce briefly from the
same Principles, the most sacred Trinity of the Divine Persons, which all
Orthodox Christians maintain against Jew, Turks, and Heretics; which I deduce
thus: There is the same thing expressing and expressed; therefore there is the
same thing producing, and produced. I prove the consequence, for every
expression of any thing, is a production of something, as appears in all
expressions which we know; if therefore this expression be a production, it
must produce something; but (as I proved) it expresses nothing, save that very
thing which expresses, for it is an expression of it self; therefore it
produces nothing, save that very thing which, that is, which produces. It may
be replied, that to understand any thing, is as much to produce the
intellection of it, as to express any thing is to produce the expression of it;
and therefore God by understanding himself essentially, produces himself
essentially. I answer, by denying the parity; for even a created intellection
may and does understand it self, without producing it self; for an
intellection, so far as it is only Contemplative and Theorical, is only the
sight, and not the production of its object; and rather supposes its object,
and is the sight of it, then either produces its object, or the sight of it;
but whatsoever expresses any thing, works upon that which it expresses; and
either produces it, or the expression of it, if it be different from its
expression. Now I proceed. If therefore this expression be a production, and so
there must be that very thing produced which produces, there must be a true
distinction betwixt the producer and the produced; so that the producer is
unus, and the produced alius, and consequently must make a number, and be two:
and because actiones sunt suppositorum, and suppositum in rationali natura (as
that of God is in the first place) is termed rightly Persona, a Person;
therefore these must be two Divine Persons: So that there is in this expression
and production, Principians, and Principiatus; One who is the Principating, and
another who is derived from him who principlates. There is Originans, and
Originatus; Gignens and Genitus, Pater and Filius, etc. Now it is impossible to
conceive, that one and the same Person should be both Father and Son,
generating and generated, principiating and principiated, producing and
produced, expressing and expressed: for seeing these notions found real
references, respects, and relations, betwixt the producer and the produced,
etc. it is not possible to conceive them, without a real personal distinction,
and duality in number; for one sole Person can never found a real relation to
himself, but only relationem rationis; and the same reason proves the same
distinction betwixt that Love, Joy, and Repose, etc. which indivisibly proceeds
from this producing and produced duality: so that there must be a triality, or
number of three, in one reality; that is, one real thing thrice suppositated,
and personated; or one real thing subsisting thrice; and by thrice subsisting
has a true numerality, or distinction of three. The Mystery therefore seems to
me (I crave pardon, if I either think or speak amiss, and refer my judgment to
those, who are empowered to allow or condemn it) to be One thing thrice over,
and that necessarily and essentially, by force of its infinite vigor, activity,
fecundity, and perfection; whereas all other things finite and limited subsist
but once, as not having strength and perfection enough to give themselves a
double, or a triple subsistence: which power of duplifying and triplifying it
self supposed, all those seeming contrarieties and contradictions, which
natural humane Reason raises up against this Mystery, will clearly appear to be
mere illusions and misconceipts of our weak capacity; which imagines that to be
a contradiction in one thing subsisting thrice, because we find it to be one
in created things, which subsist but once: for this triality of subsistence
consisting in a real distinction, numerosity, and multiplication of the same
thing, makes that to be equivalent to different things, whereof each have no
more then one sole subsistence, or subsist but once. Thus in this Mystery there
is as truly a Father and a Son, two distinct. Persons, the one ingenerate, and
generating the other, as father and son are two amongst men: Thus there is as
real a procession of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, as Heat
proceeds from Light and the Sun. Thus the Nature of God is perfectly one, and
the Persons perfectly three; because this one Nature subsists thrice: Thus the
Divine Nature is communicable, because it is one in three; and the
Personalities incommunicable, because they are three in one. Seeing therefore
number is an absolute perfection in created and finite beings; for two things
of equal perfection are better then each of them taken solely by it self; and
the same perfection twice repeated, is better then only once; why should this
perfection be wanting to God? And seeing fecundity, to produce something of
like nature to it felf, is an absolute perfection in created beings; why should
not God have it? And seeing Love, Charity, Joy, and Content, is an absolute
perfection amongst men and Angels; why should not God enjoy that perfection
properly, and perfectly, to whom no absolute perfection can be wanting? For
seeing there are three ranks of perfections amongst men; The first in the rank
of Essence, and intrinsecal and radical being; which may be termed Essential.
The second, in ordine naturae, or active power of such an Essence, which are
termed Natural. And the third, in ordine humano; or of Sociability, and mutual
Communication one with another, which we call Moral: I see no reason, why all
these ranks of perfection should not be found both perfectly and formally in
God. His Unity, Omnipotency, etc. may be called his Intrinsecal, and Radical,
or Primary Essential perfections, as he is considered in ordine Essentiali; his
Fecundity and expressive Production, his Natural Perfection, as he is
considered in ordine activo; and his Love, Friendship, Charity, Joy, etc. in
the procession of the holy Ghost, his Moral Perfections, in communication and
society of the Divine Persons. And yet all this is nothing but Reason it self,
and in the full latitude of its perfection; his essential and intrinsecal
notion, is the fullness of Reason; his natural activeness, is nothing but an
adequate expression of that very Reason which is his Notion; his Love, Joy,
Repose, etc. is no other thing, then the plenary Satisfaction in that
expressing and expressed Reason; which can be no other then a perfect
conformity to Reason, and so nothing but Reason. Thus by some dark and flashing
glimpses we have discovered this ever blessed Trinity, in an ever blessed
Unity; one in three, and three in one; three Persons in one Nature; a number in
an Unity, and one and the same thing subsisting thrice over. O most Sacred and
Divine Mystery, thou art as sweet and delicious, as thou art high and
inconceiveable; the more I contemplate thee, the more I know thee; the more I
know, the more I admire thee; the more I admire, the more I love thee; the more
I love, the more I praise and adore; and the more I adore thee, the more I
aspire and languish to enjoy thee! And if any of you, dear Christians, have
learnt (by perusing this small Tract) to know there is A GOD, OR NOTHING, give
me leave to exhort you, conformably to your knowledge, to admire, love, praise,
adore, and covet to enjoy, as your last End and Bliss, A GOD, OR NOTHING: for
(as devout A Kempis says most truly) Quicquid Deus non est, nihilest, and
pronihilo reputari debet; in a Christian estimation, whatsoever is not God, is
nothing, and is to be reputed as nothing.

FINIS.
The Index of the principal Matters contained in this Tract.
A.
Some Actual Being is essentially necessary page 13, 16 Actual Being
essentially necessary is of it self page 65 Actual Being essentially necessary
is always necessary page 45 Angel, what the notion thereof imports
essentially? page 60 Attributes of God deduced from his necessary existence
page 71
B.
TO Be actually of it self, it to be essentially page 10 For a Thing to Be of
it self, what is essentially required page 67
C.
THere can be no Cause of All Things which are, and ever have been page 15, 16,
etc. No Cause can destroy allthings page 8 Infinity in causing is impossible,
as well in simultaneous as successive causes page 30, 31 No Cause can totally
produce a thing perfecter then it self page 66 The being of All Causes is ever
to be presupposed to the production of their effects page 60 There must be
always a determinate number of Causes, which have produced effects page 20, 21
No settlement in causing without a cause not caused page 11 Causes caused in
infinitum; is a pure Chymaera, or impossibility page 11 All Causes of Things
past, or present, must remain either in themselves, or in virture sua page 20,
21 All Causes and Effects, which shall or may be hereafter, are now nothing at
all, save the power of their Cause, which is now page 22, 23 Nothing which
proceeds inevitably from a Cause, can exist alone page 9 Nothing that is
Contingent, can be alone page 9 Nothing, that is Contingent, can be of it self
page 12, 13
F.
ETernity twofold page 80 Gods Eternity what it is page 81
G.
GOd is Actual Intellection, or Reason it self page 70 The Notion of God what
it imports universally, or in the understandings of all men. page 70 God has
no mixtion, or composition of parts, and why? page 74 God how he is said to
concur to all particular effects. page 78, 79 Gods Omnisciency demonstrated
page 82 Gods Indivisibility demonstrated page 72 To be Good, what it imports
page 85 Divine Goodness demonstrated to be the greatest of all page 86
I.
WHatsoever is Indeterminate, can be no Actual Being page 32
K.
KNowledge purely contemplative, presupposes its Object page 95
M.
MAtter neither Eternal, nor Infinite, nor of it self page 55, 85
N.
NOthing can do nothing page 2 Nothing can be absolutely necessary, which can
have a Cause page 13 Nothing can be without some reason, why it is page 44
Number why found in God page 99, 100
O.
GOds Omnipotency demonstrated page 83, 84
P.
PErfections threefold, Essential, Natural, Moral; all in proportion found in
God, and how? page 100, 101 No Actual Parts, whilst they remain in Continuo
page 33
R.
REason it self cannot but be actually page 65, 72 Reason in its full
Perfection cannot but be of it self page 67 Actual Reason in its full
perfection, what page 68, 69 Reason it self produces all things immediately;
and why? page 75, 76 Reason it self how said to be every where, or in all
things page 75 No real Effect in the world contrary to Reason, all
Circumstances considered page 78 How Reason it self concurs to every effect
page 78 Reason it self can do nothing contrary to Reason page 76 Reason it self
is its own Rule, Knowledge, Light, etc. page 68, 69
S.
THe Spirituality of God demonstrated page 73 His Sanctity, or Purity, also
page 86 Soul of man, what the notion thereof imports essentially page 60
T.
NO actual Time, can have been abaeterno, or without beginning page 35 Time for
the future may be without end, because it shall never be all actual page 3 Time
imaginary is nothing real, save the power of the first Cause. page 28 All Time
past, which was once actual, must be finite. page 26 No Time can have an Actual
End, which had not an Actual Beginning page 27 Time is nothing, but the
Mutability of actual Beings page 28 All things which are actually in this
moment of Time, depend in their Beings of all the Causes, which mediately or
immediately produced them page 29 No Being can be limited Essentially to such
determinate instances of Time, if no such instances be actually page 34, 35 No
Being can depend Essentially of Time, seeing Time is consequent to the thing
during page 37 Whatsoever is supposed to be Essentially for such a space of
Time, will be in Time and not in Time page 41 How the Trinity of Persons in the
Unity of the Divine Nature, or Essence, may be best represented to our capacity
page 89, etc. 94, etc.
V.
THe Unity of God demonstrated page 71 Gods Ubiquity demonstrated page 74 Gods
Ubiquity, what it imports page 79 Gods Veracity demonstrated page 87
FINIS.

