THE Bride-Womans COVNSELLER. BEING A SERMON PREACHED at a WEDDING, May the
11th, 1699, at Sherbourn, in Dorsetshire.

1 COR. Chap. 7. Ver. 34. But she thrt is Married cares for the things of the
World, how she may please her Husband.

By JOHN SPRINT.

London: Printed by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the Waterside. For the
Benefit of the Poor.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
Courteous READER,
WHEN thou have perused this Discourse, thou will see Cause enough to believe
me if I tell thee it was designed only for the Pulpit, not for the Press; but
it has so fallen out, that the Doctrine therein contained is so unhappily
represented to the World by some ill-natured Females, that I am necessitated to
offer it to a Public View; by means of which, though I should purchase the
Character of a Block-head, yet I hope I shall get the advantage of convincing
the World that I am not such an impudent Villain as my waspish Accusers have
reported me to be. Be it known unto thee Reader, whosoever thou art, that I
have not met with one Woman among all my Accusers whose Husband is able to give
her the Character of a dutiful and obedient Wife. I observe also, that good
Wives are no more offended with my discourse than modest Matrons are when vile
Strumpets are painted in their proper Colors; the most that such have to say,
is, that I might have done well to have said as much to the Men, which for
their satisfaction I will promise to do, when I see this Discourse has had
that happy Success as to reform those imperious Wives, who never think their
Husbands love them well, unless they will obey them too.

Upon the whole, I find it is Women's Guilt which makes them so uneasy, and puts
them to that pain which they feel in their Consciences, for which I know no
better an Anodyne than a speedy Repentance and Reformation; which if they
neglect, in despite of all their loud noise and clamours, the Truths which I
here publish will pursue them to Judgment, and there witness against them, not
only as Traitors to their Husbands, whose Authority they usurp, but as Rebels
to the Great Monarch of the World whose Sacred Laws they Impiously violate.

Farewell.
1 COR. Chap. 7. Ver. 34. But she that is Married, cares for the things of the
World, how she may please her Husband.


THE Word Cares, in the Original signifies more than ordinary Care, and
implies a dividing of the Mind into diverse Thoughts, casting this way, and that
way, and every way, how to give best content. Finding no other Verbal
Difficulties, I shall leave Words and pass to Things, and shall lay the
Foundation of my Discourse in this Proposition.

It is a Duty incumbent on all Morried Women, to be extraordinary careful to
content and please their Husbands.

From which Doctrine, I shall take occasion faithfully to present the Duty of
married Women to their Husbands.

Obj. And why so? (may the Women say) why could not you have pitched upon v.
33. and have taken occasion from thence to have told married Men their Duty to
their Wives? Or, if we must be told our Duty, why could you not have come to a
Composition with us and have brought our Husbands in to have shared with us?

A. Truly I foresaw not only these, but a whole Iliad of Female Objections,
would be started against my Design but if Reason may take place, I hope I am
able to silence them all: And here, amongst the many Reason, which might be
produced to justify my Attempt, I shall only offer to your Consideration these
few.

1. Because the Woman's Duty is harder and more difficult than that of the Man:
Precepts for Ruling and Governing are more taking, and have a more pleasing
relish, than those which enjoin Subjection and Obedience. You Women will
acknowledge that Men can learn to command, and rule fast enough, which as
Husbands they ought to do; but it is very rare to find that Women learn so fast
to Submit and obey, which as Wives they ought to do: Women have need of Line
upon Line, Precept upon Precept, here a Little and there a Little; and all
little enough to make them perfect in their Lesson.

2. Because Women are of weaker Capacities to learn than Men, and therefore
when they have a hard and difficult Lesson, and but weak Abilities to learn it,
they had need of more Help and Assistance afforded them; and so it behooves us
not only to tell them their Duty in Conjunction with their Husbands, but also
to teach them singly and by themselves.

3. Because that (according to the Observation which I have made) most of those
Distractions and Disturbances which have attended a Married Life, and that have
brought so much Reproach and Disgrace on that Honorable State, are owing to
the Indiscretion and Folly, if not to the Obstinacy and Stubborness of
disobedient Wives; and I shall not scruple to affirm, that the number of those
bad Husbands, which their Wives have made so, is greater by far than the Number
of those whom their Wives have found so when they were first married.

4. Because the Love of a Husband does very much depend upon the Obedience of a
Wife; Stubbornness and Obstinacy in a Wife may check and quench the Affections
of an Husband, but are no proper Methods to kindle and inflame themselves. When
the Wife becomes pliant and yielding to her Husband's Will and Desire, she
then lead him captive at her pleasure, and leaves him so fast bound in the
golden Fetters of Love, that she may do even with him what she pleases. An
obedient Wife, (says one) is the likeliest Woman in the World to command her
Husband: So that, in plain Terms, you are more afraid than hurt, and instead of
being so scrupulous of having your Duty told you, you should use your utmost
Diligence to learn and practice it, if ever you mean to have your Husbands
loving and kind to you.

5. Because that all that pretend to, is to lay your Duty before you; and shall
I therefore become your Enemy, because I am come to tell you the Truth? As for
good Wives, the Knowledge and Practice of their Duty is so comfortable and
pseasant to them, that I am sure they are not listed in the number of these
Objectors, and I wish, that where there is one of these there where a thousand;
as for Bad ones, I am sure they have need of being told their Duty more than a
little, and of this sort I wish there were none at all: And if by poor
Endeavors in this Discourse, I can but be instrumental either of lessening
their Number, or of preventing their Increase, I shall obtain my End. Under the
shelter of these Reasons I shall adventure in the Face of all Objections to
pursue my Design, which is to prosecute this Doctrine, viz.

That it is a Duty incumbent on all married Women to be extraordinary Careful to
content and please their HUSBANDS, which I shall do in this Method.

1. Prove it by Reason and Argument. 2. Show how and which way married Women
must endeavor to please their Husbands. 3. Make some Improvement of it.
The Reasons of the Doctrine are such as these:

1. Because the Woman was made for the Comfort and Benefit of Man [ Cor. 11.9.]
Neither was Man created for the Woman, but the Woman for the Man: The great End
of her Creation (next the Glory of God) was, that she might be serviceable and
helpful unto Man; and therefore you find, when the wise Creator was about to
make the Woman, he assigns this very Reason for it, [ Genesis 2.18.] And the Lord
God said, It is not good that Man should be alone, I will make an Help meet for
him.

Now if the Woman owes her Being to the Comfort and Profit of Man, it is highly
reasonable that she should be careful and diligent to content and please him,
otherwise she does wickedly pervert the End of her Creation.

2. Because of the Woman's Occasion the Man was ruined and undone [1. Tim.
2.14.] And Adam was not deceived, the Woman being deceived was in the
Transgression; That is, Adam was not at first deceived immediately by the
Serpent, but only enticed and deceived by the Woman, who was the Tempter's
Agents; so as that she was both first in the Transgression, in order of Time,
and also the Principle, in contributing to the Seduction of Man; therefore it is
but fit and just, that she, who has been so greatly instrumental of so much
Mischief and Misery to Man, should be actively engaged to please and comfort
him: And indeed we find that God imposed this Task upon her, as a punishment
for seducing her Husband, [ Genesis 3.16.] And thy desire shall be to thy Husband,
and He shall rule over thee: Wherein is implied, not only Subjection to him, in
obeying his Commands, but it reaches farther to the bringing under unto him
the very Desires of the Heart to be regulated by him so far, that it should not
be lawful for her to will or desire what she her self liked, but only what her
Husband should approve and allow; even before the Fall, the Will of the Husband
was to have been the Woman's Directory, as is evident from the foregoing
Reason, her Compliance with which had beeh easy and pleasant; but since the
Fall, Man is grown more humoursome, and hard to be pleased, and Woman less able
and willing to do it; which being so through her own means, it was but just and
righteous with God to impose a Work upon her, which her self made so hard and
difficult; and therefore it is not the Woman's pleading, that her Husband is
hard to be pleased, that will excuse her Negligence herein: This may, indeed,
be a Memento to her of her Original Guilt, but 'twill by no means excuse her
from the performance of her present Duty; nay, rather if should be a Motive of
her greatest diligence. Man in his Innocence had nothing of Morosity and
Sowerness in his Nature, but had all that Affability and Sweetness of Temper as
rendered him highly endeared to his Yoak-fellow: He was then so kind, and
Good-humoured, that he required nothing at her hands, but what she could
perform with delight and ease; all his Commands were so full of Charms, that
the Woman must first have offered violence to her own Inclinations, before that
she could have been able to have resisted them.

He Ruled, and she Obeyed; yet she
Did, in Obeying, Rule as well as he
Until that fatal Hour came, when the Woman seduced her Husband from his
Innocence; and then the Nature of Man was sadly changed, his Temper grew harsh
and severe, and Humors became troublesome and tedious; so that the Pleasing of
him is now become a business that requires a great deal of Art and Skill, of
Diligence and Industry; and she that is married, divides her Mind into diverse
Thoughts, cast about every way, and uses variety of Methods to please her
Husband: And this I believe is experienced Truth with most Women; which if it
be, you may thank your Mother Eve for it, who, when she had gotten a good
Natured and Loving Husband, that was easy to be pleased, could not then be
contented, but must try Practices with him, till she had spoiled him; which
proved fatal, not only to her, but to her Daughters also; who, if they have
Husbands, and have them good too, must take a great deal of Care and Pains to
make them so.

3. Because upon the doing or neglecting of this, the Happiness or Misery of a
Married Life does depend. A good Wife, (says one) should be like a Mirror
which has no Image of its own, but receives its Stamp and Image from the Face
that looks into it: So should a good Wife endeavor to frame her outward
Deportment, and her inward Affections according to her Husband's; to rejoice
when he rejoices, to be sad when he mourns, to grieve and be troubled when he
is offended and vexed: And would Women thus endeavor to do, they would not
only content and please their Husbands, but they would thereby open a way for
the obtaining of their Husbands what they themselves do will and desire; such
Wives may be sooner tired in making their Requests, than their Husbands would
be in granting them; and their Husbands would think, that they could never do
enough to gratify and oblige them: And where Matters are thus carried between
Husband and Wife, the one submissive and obedient, the other respectful and
kind, how happy, how comfortably do they spend their days! But when the Wife
shall act the reverse of this, and instead of being careful to oblige and
please her Husband, shall upon every little occasion pout and loure, frown and
fume, rail at and wrangle with her Husband, making the House too hot to hold
him; if the Husband be of a rugged and resolute Temper, and will retaliate the
Affronts that are offered him, I know no place in the World so like to Hell, as
that House wherein they dwell: But if the Husband be of a meek and patient
Temper, the carriage and deportment of such a Wife, though it cannot provoke him
to vent his Passion in such a stormy and tempestuous manner, yet it gives him
those inward wounds of Spirit, as make his Life short and miserable: The
contentions of a Wife are a continual dropping, says the Wiseman ( Prove.
9.13.) And (says Bishop Hopkings on the place) it is such a dropping, as will
at last eat and fret through his very Heart, though it were made of Stone. One of
the best Ministers that ever I knew for Piety, Learning, and Goodnature,
(famous for Learned Tracts) had (says a late Writer) an hard name, because of
his Wife's Complaints: he would say, all was a little Domestic talk; but that
Domestic Talk broke his Heart, that before he died he said, God has blessed
me with some Parts, that I now begin to be useful in the World and must I now
go out of the World, through the Humor of a Woman? And many (says he) die of
the same Disease. All Evils, as Elements, are most troublesome out of their
proper Places; as Profaness in Ministers, whose Work it is to beat it down;
Injustice in Judges, whose Office it is to condemn it; and Discomfort in a
Wife, who was made to be a Comfort: 'Twas this that gave rise to the Proverb of
Solomon [ Prove. 21.9.] It Is better to live in a corner of a House Top, than
with a brawling Woman in a wide House. It Is much more desirable to live poorly
and solitary in the open Air, exposed to all the Injuries of the Weather, nay
to thrust into a little corner on the Top of the House, than to have a spacious
Habitation, and numerous Family, governed by a contentious Wife, whose
perpetual Scolding and Brawling within doors, upon the least Occasion is more
intolerable than the Thunder and Lightning and blustering Winds, which may
molest him without. It Is an hundred pities (says Mr. Swynnock) that the Tongues
of such Shrews have not as many Blisters as their Jaws have Teeth, and it is
never better with their Husbands than when they are hoarse. To conclude this
Head, whilst the good Wife that is careful to oblige her Husband, makes both
him and her self happy; the imperious, clamorous and turbulent Wife, that at
every word spits Passion and Poison, is a Torment and Vexation to her self, and
a pernicious Plague to her Husband.

2. I come now in the Second place, to show how, and which way, married Women
must endeavor to please their Husbands.

And here there are three things they ought to do.

1. To Love them 2. To Honor them 3. To Obey them
All which you do solemnly Covenant and Engage before God, Angels, and Men,
when your Nuptial Rites are perfom'd. I have heard some Women say indeed, that
they never did, nor would say those Words after the Minister; but I think then,
those Ministers were very remiss in their Office; and had I been to have
officiated, those Women should have been content to have stayed for Husbands
till they had been willing to have spoken out, Love, Honor, and Obey; which
are Duties, the performance of which is absolutely necessary to maintain both
the Honor and Happiness of a Married State, and is the only proper Method that
Women can take to please their Husbands, as I shall show more particularly.

First, Every married Woman, in order to please her Husband, ought to love him:
Let every Woman love her Husband, as the chiefest and best for her of Ten
Thousands; for whose sake she can forget her own People, and her Father's
Family; with whose Company and Converse she can be contented and pleased,
should all the World besides be annihilated; and though even Nature does teach a
Woman to love her Husband, yet God does also enjoin it, [ Tit. 2.4.] That they
may teach the young Women to be sober, and to love their Husbands, etc. Partly
(says one) because some Women have put off Nature, and are become wild,
without Natural Affection; and partly because God would have the Wife's Love to
her Husband to proceed not so much from an Instinct of Nature, as from
Obedience to Scripture. And the Apostles confines this precept to Young Women
too, thereby suggecting to us, that it is the Duty of a Woman, newly married
especially, to use all means to endear her Husband to her self, and her self to
her Husband; and carefully to avoid all Occasion of Differences with her
Husband, at her first Entrance into that State. Agreeable to which, I remember,
Plutarch, amongst his Conjugal Precepts, has this for one, viz. That it
behooves those People that are newly married, to avoid the first Occasion of
Discord and Dissension, considering that Vessels newly formed and subject to be
bruised, and put out of shape by many slight accidents; but when the Materials
come to be settled and hardened by Time, nor Fire, nor Sword will hardly
prejudice the Solid Substance. It Is a common foolish Pactice of young Women,
during the Time of Courtship, to use all the Arts and Methods they can contrive
or devise, to charm their Lovers and captivate the Affections of those who make
their Addrsses to them; you may read, Come love me in the pleasantness of their
Looks, in the neatness of their Dress, in the Discretion of their Words, in the
obligingness of their Carriage and Deportment; but they are no sooner married,
but they grow as remiss and careless in their Endeavors to please their
Husbands, as before they were zealous in arting their Charms: Now their
pleasant Smiles are turned into Frowns, the neatness of their Dress into
Sluttery. She who opened her Mouth with Wisdom, in whose Tongue was the Law of
Kindness, now speaks unadvisedly with her Lips, and carries her self so
disrespectful toward her Husband, as if she studied how to disoblige him, and
to alienate his Affections from her; by which means many times Women make
themselves to become the Wives of Madmen and Sots; whereas had they been as
careful after their Marriage to have pleased their Husbands, as they were
before, they might have made their Husbands happy, and themselves too; and had
they had that Conjugal Love, which they ought to have had, they would have done
it; for Love is an Affection that will render Persons active and diligent to
content and please those who are beloved by them; and when the Wife has so much
Love for her new Husband, as to make her careful to oblige, and fearful to
offend him, in process of time she will soon engage his Affections to her, as
that she may defy the World to alienate them from her. When two Boards are
first glued together, a small matter will loosen them; but if carefully looked
to till they are well fastened, and the Glue be hardened 'twill not be an easy
matter to disjoint or sever them.

Secondly, Married Women, in order to please their Husbands, ought to honor
them. The Persian Ladies have the resemblance of a Foot worn on the top of
their Coronets, in token that the height of their Glory, Topknot and all, does
stoop to their Husbands Feet. And here the Honor which is due from the Wife
to the Husband, is either, First, Internal, or Secondly, External.


First, Internal. And this is when she cherishes an high Esteem of him in her
Mind, when she thinks on him as one whom God has appointed and ordained to be
her Superior and Head. The Apostle, (1. Cor. 11.7.) calls the Woman the Glory
of the Man, and that too, as one thinks, for this Reason, because it is an high
Honor to him, that so Excellent a Creature as a Woman is should be his
Inferior: Surely then a Woman that harbors mean and contemptuous Thoughts
of her Husband, is her Husband's Shame and Disgrace; and though Women may think,
that their Thoughts are free, that they are at Liberty to think as they please,
yet let them know, that the Heart-searching God takes Cognizance of their
Thoughts, and is very much displeased when he finds any to be such as are
beneath the Dignity and Excellency of the Husband. If Michal despises David in
her Heart, God makes his Curse to fall upon her; and though she dishonor her
Husband secretly in her Thought, God makes her a public Example of his
Displeasure, by punishing her with Barrenness, which in those days made a
Woman very contemtible: and therefore you find, that when Elizabeth had
brought forth a Child, she triumphs in it, and says, God has taken away my
Reproach, [ Luke 1.25.] for which some give this Reason: The Messiah being
promised to come of the Race of the Jews, every teeming Woman had the hopes of
being the Parent or proparent at least of him. But there is.

Secondly, External Honor: which is when that high Esteem which the Woman
has of her Husband, is expressed or declared either in Words or Actions,
giving those Titles which may bespeak the Dignity and Excellency of his Person:
So Sarah called her Husband Lord, and is commended for it, as being a fit
Pattern for other Women to imitate, [1. Pet. 3.6.] It Is a Custom more common
than comely, for Women to call their Husbands by their Christian Names, as our
John, and our Thomas, etc. as if they esteemed them at no higher a rate than
their very Servants that attend them; nay, it may be they will call them by
reproachful Names, such as Fool, Sloven, Clown, Sot, etc. and what they have to
say for their Vindication, I know not; but if words are thoughts Interpreters,
we may shrewdly Guess what it is they aim at. Those Women who will not
condescend to give their Husbands the Title of Lord and Master, it is to be
feared will not scruple in little time to usurp that Authority which that Title
does imply; and the Husband may quickly experience what it is to be under the
Discipline of the Apron. The Woman is obliged to honor her Husband by her
Actions: Her deportment and carriage, in all that she does, should be such, as
may evidence the Honorable Opinion she has of him, as her Lord and Head; and
truly this will much facilitate the Performance of the next Duty you are bound
to, which is,

Thirdly, to obey them: And however light Women may make of this, yet I know
not of any duty belonging Men or Women, in the whole Book of God, that is
urged with more Vehemence, or pressed with stronger or more cogent Reasons than
this is. Subjection and Obedience to their Husbands is required from Wives, as
absolutely and peremtorily as unto Christ himself, [ Ephesians. 5.22] Wives submit
to your Husbands, as unto the Lord; and is extended to all the Husband's
commands, Ver. 24. Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so should
the Wives be to their Husbands, in Every thing.

Obj. But what if an Husband commands the Wife to do that which is sinful?

Ans. By Every thing in the Text, is meant all that comes within the compass of
his Authority to command; and certainly God never gave to any Man Authority to
command that which is contradictory to his own Laws; excepting this, or the
Imposibility of the thing commanded to be done both God and Nature has given
the Husband Authority to Command, and the Wife is bound to obey, however
unnecessary or unfit she may think it to be: Otherwise (says Bishop Hopkins)
when the Apostle commands Wives to be subject to their Husbands in Every ahing,
it would signify no more than Every thing which they think fit. And this
certainly is no greater a Subjection than every Husband will readily yield to
his Wife, and falls infinitely short of the Apostle's Intent, who requires the
Subjection of the Wife to the Husband in Every thing, as the Church is subject
unto Christ, which certainly is not in every thing she thinks fit; neither
ought she to take upon her to Judge or Reject his Laws, but to fulfill them: And
though this Duty may seem, on the first View, to be difficult, yet in conjunction
with the two former, it will become easy and pleasant. Love your Husbands as
you ought, and you will not refuse to honor them; if you love and honor them,
you will not scruple to obey them; and if you love, honor, and obey them, you
will then do what becomes good Wives, and indeed what is, or should be at lead
sufficient to please your Husbands. And therefore, for a Conclusion of what I
have to say to you Married Women, let this be your Motto, and let it be woven
with threads of Gold in the Ornaments of your Heads, viz. LOVE, HONOR, and
OBEY, and carry it accordingly in your Practices toward your Husbands, and I
am persuaded that you will find as great a scarcity of bad Husbands then, as
there is of good Wives now. I come now to the Improvement of this Doctrine,
which invites me to apply my self to you Men, and that too both to the Married
and Unmarried.

First, To you that are single and unmarried, you may from this Doctrine learn
how great a Friend Religion is to the Comfort and Happiness of Man in this
Life, in the Institution whereof God has not only wisely consulted the
Interest of his own Honor and Glory, but has graciously condescended to adapt
its Precepts to the Comfort and Happiness of Man in every State and Condition
of Life; you are now single, but it may be you have designs of altering your
condition by Marriage; and if you do, God has given such Laws for your Wife to
observe, as will, if duly regarded, make her an Help-meet for you: and such a
Wife it behooves you to choose, if ever you would be happy in that State: If you
marry a carnal and graceless Wife, void of the fear of God, she will perhaps
scoff at all that I have said and will be careful for nothing but to please her
self, and gratify her own wild and extravagant Inclination; but if you Marry in
the Lord, i. e. if you marry a Wife that truly fears God, and lives in an
habitual obedience to his Commands, she will make conscience of loving,
honoring, and obeying, and be extraordinary careful to please you in all
things.

Secondly, To you who are Married: You have heard how great an Obligation is
lain on your Wives, to love, honor and obey you, and to endeavor to please
you in all things; remember that their Duty is hard, the frailty of that Sex is
great, and therefore beware of making their task more difficult than necessity
does require, or than their Nature will bear; though it is true they are in
subjection, yet still remember they are part of your selves, and therefore let
your Authority be united with love, as your love must be governing love, so let
your commands be loving commands. In the same Chapter, where the Wife is
commanded to be subject to her Husband, as the Church is to Christ, she Husband
also is commanded to love his Wife, as Christ loved the Church; which one will
have to be expressed in these four Particulars: First, by bearing with and
pardoning her weakness. Secondly, By being willing to submit to many
Inconveniences for her sake. Thirdly, by interposing your self betwixt her and
dangers. Fourthly, By endeavoring to promote her Spiritual Good and Welfare.


But I must forbear enlargement, least, that, by overlading the memories of the
Women, I should cause them to forget their Duty which has been set before them.

FINIS.

