COPIES OF THE INFORMATIONS AND Original PAPERS Relating to the Proof of The
Horrid Conspiracy Against the Late KING, His Present MAJESTY, AND THE
GOVERNMENT: As they were Ordered to be Published by His late Majesty.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Thomas Newcomb, One of His Majesty's Printers; and
are to be sold by Sam. Lowndes over against Exeter-Change in the Strand. 1685.

THE INFORMATION OF Josiah Keeling, OF THE Parish of St. Butolph without
Aldgate, In the County Of Middlelsex, Salter, Taken the 12th of June. 1683.
THis Informant Deposes and says, That some time before that His Majesty went
last to Newmarket, about a Fortnight or Three Weeks as he remembers, Mr.
Richard Goodenough (Undersheriff to Mr. Bethel and Mr. Cornish, late Sheriffs
of London) did at the Sun-Tavern behind the Royal Exchange, take this Informant
aside, and ask him how many Men he this Informant could procure to take away
the Life of the King and Duke of York: He having begun his Discourse with this
Informant by telling him that we (meaning thereby himself, this Informant, and
other Citizens of London) were like to be in Slavery, and to lose our Charter:
To which Question this Informant answered, to the best of his Remembrance, That
he could not procure any to do that work. This Informant further says, That
meeting the said Goodenough a second time, while His Majesty was yet at
Newmarket, he told this Informant, That the only way to prevent Shedding of
Blood, was to take off the King and Duke privately, and renewed his Former
Request to me (this Informant) to procure what Men I could, toward the
Effecting of it; and upon this Occasion he met me often in London, and came
down to my House. This Informant further says, That he at the Solicitation of
the said Goodenough, and others, did speak to diverse Persons that Mr.
Goodenough had told this Informant there were several Men that would be
Concerned in taking off the King and the Duke, and they wanted more to make up
their Complement, which were to be Forty in number. Among the Persons that this
Informant spoke to, there were Three, viz. James Burton, of Wapping White
Chapel, Cheese-Monger; William Thompson Carver of the same; and Andrew Barber,
Instrument-maker of the same: That Meeting by Appointment at the Mytre-Tavern
within Aldgate, with one Richard Rumball a Malster-man, living at a place
called The Rye (if this Informant mistakes not the Name) within two miles of
Hoddesden, in the County of Hertford, or thereabouts, did agree on the Saturday
next before His Majesty's Return from Newmarket last to go down to the Rye,
being the House of the aforesaid Rumbal, and there to effect their Design of
taking off the King and the Duke. The manner whereby they proposed this should
be Effected, That the said Rumbal's House where they were to meet, being by the
Highways side, they that were to be Actors in the Fact, were to hide
themselves under a Wall or a Pale; and when His Majesty's Coach should come
over against the said Wall or Pale, Three or Four were to Shoot with
Blunderbusses at the Postilion and the Horses; and if the Horses should not
drop, then there were to be Two Men with an empty Cart in the Lane near the
place, who in the Habit of Laborers should run the Cart thwart the Lane, and
so to stop the Horses; besides those that were to shoot the Postillion and
Horses, there were several appointed to shoot into the Coach where His Majesty
was to be, and others to Shoot at the Guards that should be attending the
Coach. This Informant further says, That meeting with Mr. Robert West, of the
Middle Temple, Barrister, they went to the Dolphin-Tavern in Bartholomew-Lane,
behind the ^^yal Exchange, where they met the said Rumball, and one Hone of
Southwark, (as this Informant believes he was either a Carpenter or a Joyner)
and they discoursing together, when His Majesty would come home from Newmarket,
Mr. Rumball said, He heard that he would come that night: Mr. West said he had
heard that His Majesty would not come till Monday; and, said he, I hope he will
not come till Saturday, that is the Saturday come Sennight. To which Rumball
replied, I hope so too. If he do not, said Mr. West to Rumball, why then how
many Swan-Quills? how many Goose-Quills? and how many pair of Crow-Quills, will
or must you have? Whereto Rumball answered, Six Swan-Quills, twenty
Goose-Quills, twenty or thirty (the informant does not exactly remember which)
pair of Crow-Quills, with Ink and Sand proportionable. This Informant asking,
either the said West, or else the said Rumball, what was meant by those several
sorts of Quills; Was answered, That by the first were meant, Blunderbusses; by
the second Muskets; by the third, Cases of Pistols; by the Ink and Sand, Powder
and Bullet. This Informant seeing Rumball the same Week that His Majesty
returned Home, told him he had seen the King passing by his House, and that if
he had but Five Men with him, he could have done his Business, and the Dukes,
for that there were but Five Life-Guard-men with them. This Informant further
says, That the said Geodenough about a Fortnight ago, came to this Informants
House, and going from thence to the Coffee-House, he told him, after he had
pulled out some Papers, that he this Informant must take one of the said
Papers; who asking the said Goodenough, what he must do with it? he the said
Goodenough answered, that he must take to his assistance nine or ten Men, such
as he could trust, to the end they might consult all the Housekeepers,
Journey-men and Apprentices, to see what number of men might be raised upon
occasion, either to justify the Act, if the King and Duke should be taken off,
or if not, what strength could be made up in Case of an Insurrection or a
Rebellion: And he being told by this Informant, that we were well, indeed
better than any other Nation, (that is) much happier if we could be quiet,
otherwise we should involve the Nation in Blood and Confusion; He replied, That
he was clearly for taking off the King and the Duke, and then there should be
quickly an end to it. And this Informant further says, That the two Papers now
produced by him, were delivered to him by the said Goodenough, and that the
Paper beginning with these words, viz. 4. From White-Chappel Southeast, and
ending Round Goodmans Fields, was Written with Goodenoughs own hand, as this
Informant believes. And this Informant says, That he had received a Third
Paper from the said Goodenough, which he gave into the hands of one Joseph
Helby a Carver of Limehouse, who put it into his Pocket, but said he would not
meddle in it. This Informant further says, That the said Goodenough told him
he had divided the City and Subburbs into Twenty Parts, and showed this
Informant the Names of the Divisions in Writing, having, as he said, taken it
out of the Map. In the Company of the said Goodenough and this Informant was
one William Rumball, the Brother of the said Richard Rumball, to whom a Paper
was offered, but he would not meddle. In each Division there was to be one
Principal Man, to take to his assistance eight or nine more as he thought
convenient; but he Named none of them to this Informant. This Informant further
says, That on Thursday last he going into the Salutation-Tavern in
Lumbard-street, was told there were above-Stairs some Acquaintance of his; he
going up, found the said Goodenough there, together with one Wade, Nelthrop,
and the aforesaid West, all Barristers at Law; they called this Deponent in
Jest by the Name of Gulick; and he asking them what they meant by it, they told
him, Gulick was a brave Fellow and headed the People at Cologne, and they hoped
to see this Informant do the same at Wapping; and they asked how their Friends
did in Wapping and what Strength they could make there: The Informant answered,
They would do well enough there, and concluded they were privy to the Design.
In this Company was one they called Captain Walcot, who went over with the Earl
of Shaftsbury, and came back with his Corpse; as also one they called Colonel,
whose Name this Informant does not know. This Informant further says, That the
said Richard Rumball in the Conversation abovementioned with the said Burton,
Thompson, and Barber and this Deponent, affirmed, That to take off the King and
the Duke would be a Keeping of one of the Ten Commandments, since it would
prevent a Rebellion, whereby abundance of Blood must be shed. This Informant
further says, That he asking West and Goodenough on the Thursday
abovementioned, what Care was taken for Arms, he was answered, That he need
not take Care of that, for there was Provision already made; and that the said
West recommended Secrecy above all things to this Deponent, otherwise the
present Design miscarrying, they should never be able to Retrieve it. West
further told this Deponent on Easter-Eve, That since the Design to be executed
upon the King's Return from Newmarket had failed, they intended to take the
King and Duke off between Windsor and Hampton Court.

Josiah Keeling.
12 Die Junii 1683.
Josiah Keeling, Iuratus fuit Coram me,

L. JENKINS.



The Joint Information of Josiah Keeling, of the Parish of St. ^utolph without
Aldgate, in the County of Middlesex, Salter, and of John Keeling of the Parish
of St. Anne Blackfriars, Citizen and Turner, taken the 14th of June, 1683.
THese Informants being in Company with Richard Goodenough, this 14th day of
June, between the hours of Twelve and One, at the Dolphin-Tavern behind the
Exchange; and the said Josiah Keeling asking him what account he had of those
Twenty Divisions that he had made of the City, or to that effect; He answered,
That he had an account of Lee a Dyer in Old-street, Middlesex, and that he
could raise him 500 Men: And the said Goodenough being asked by the said
Informants where those Men should have Arms and Ammunition, and also where
other men that were designed to be Raised should have the like: It was Replied
by the said Goodenough, That there were Twenty Thousand Pounds already
promised, which should be had upon Demand, and that the said Money was to be
distributed to the Twenty Principal Undertakers, proportionably to the Lists of
Men they brought in; or the said Goodenough Replied to that effect: The said
Goodenough further adding, That the Duke of Monmouth and all his Friends would
be concerned in raising the said Money; and that the said Duke would be at the
Head of the said Party, which they propounded to be Four Thousand in number,
and that many more would quickly fall in. And the said Goodenough further said,
that a certain Colonel (whom the Informant takes to be Colonel Romsey) would
advance Eight Hundred or a Thousand Pounds toward Paying for Arms. And the
said Goodenough further said, that Wade the Counselor of Bristol or
thereabouts, kept in Town two or three hundred pounds, toward paying for Arms.
And the said Goodenough being asked what he would Contribute toward the
carrying on of the said Design, (he being a Rich Man) he answered that he had
about threescore pounds in Plate and fifty or threescore pounds in Gold, and
had he more it should all go to the same use: And the said Josiah asking him
what Provision of Horse there was, the said Goodenough answered that there were
a hundred ready, and Men to Mount them, and if occasion be, there should be
more in readiness; and the said Informants further say, that the said Josiah,
being asked by the said Goodenough, what Progress he had made upon those Papers
he had entrusted with him, and Josiah showing him the Paper of Number Three
(which Goodenough owned to have been delivered by him to the said Josiah, with
two Papers more) and telling him all was well enough with us, but asking him
withal, what we should do for Arms and Ammunition, he the said Goodenough
answered, that if there was Faith in Men, Money should not be wanting to buy
Arms and Ammunition; and that he was to meet this night them that were
principally concerned. And these Informants say, that the said Josiah (being
desirous to pry into the secrets of their design against the Tower) propounded
to the said Goodenough, that a Person with the Staff of a Constable should
bring in a Man bound as an offender before the Lieutenant, or Major Roe; and
that at the same time, another Person should be brought in upon the same
Color, and by that means secure the Guard at the Gate, till such time that a
Body of Men which was to be lodged in the Corner-house of Thames Street or the
next to it, should come to their help; For which proposal the said Goodenough
applauded the said Josiah very much, clapping him upon the back. And the
Informant Josiah asking what to satisfy our People we should do for a few
Arms, he answered, that the said Josiah should have Money to buy them. Josiah
then asked him what Gun-smith he would recommend him to, adding whether he had
not best deal with Mr. West's (meaning Mr^ West the Lawyer's Gun-smith)?
Whereto the said Goodenough answered, that Gun-smith was a very honest Fellow,
and that he need not distrust him: The said Josiah further asked him, saying,
you must have some Arms; Are those disposed that were to be sent to Rye?
Whereto Goodenough answered, they were not. Then the said Josiah asked him if
they were at West's House, or at the Gun-smiths; Whereto Goodenough answered,
they were at the Gun-smiths; who lived in Sheer-lane, on the left hand, as one
goes from Fleet Street: And the said Josiah asking the said Goodenough whether
they went on with their Design of Killing the King and the Duke between Windsor
and Hampton Court; he the said Goodenough replied No, because they did not
usually go together, but they would do it at the Bull-Feast in Lion fields. And
these Informants further say Not.

Josiah Keeling. John Keeling.

14 Die Junii 1683.
Iurati Pradicti Johan. and Josiah Coram me,

L. Jenkins.



The Joint Information of Josiah Keeling of the Parish of St. Butolph without
Aldgate, in the County of Middlesex, Salter, and of John Keeling of the Parish
of St. Anne Blackfriars, Citizen and Turner, June the 15th, 1683.
THe Informants say, That being in the Company of Richard Goodenough at the
Sun-Tavern behind the Royal Exchange, between the hours of One and Three of the
Clock on the fifteenth day of this instant June, 1683. They asked the said
Goodenough what Persons of Quality would be concerned: He the said Goodenough
replied, That he had discoursed William Lord Russel, Son to the Earl of
Bedford; and that the said Lord Russel told the aforesaid Goodenough, that he
would be concerned in it to his utmost, and that he would use all his interest
to accomplish the aforesaid Design of killing the King and the Duke of York:
And these Informants further say, That asking the said Goodenough, what
Colonel that was that yesterday he the said Goodenough told the Informants,
Josiah and John, would advance eight Hundred or a Thousand pound toward
carrying on the Design of Killing the King and Duke, he the said Goodenough
Replied, it was Colonel Romzey; and the Informant Josiah asked the said
Goodenough whether it was that Romsey that Married the Lady Smith, and had
Commanded Forces in Portugal for his Majesty, (i. e.) the King of England, he
Replied it was.

Witness our hands this 15th day of June, 1683. JOSIAH KEELING JOHN KEELING.


The Information of Josiah Keeling, given upon Oath at Hampton Court, the 23d
of June, 1683.
ANd this Informant further says, That several Gentlemen, viz. Mr. Roope, Mr.
Fitton Gerrald, and Mr. Allen, and one other, whose Name this Informant has
forgot, who as they said came to visit their honest Wapping Men, that this
Informant would recommend to them for such, and also to Dine with them at some
Tavern, which was the Fortune at Wapping, where was Mr. Samuel Gibbs, Mr.
Edmund Hunt, Mr. Robert Ferguson, with several other persons that this
Informant does not remember, where the aforesaid Gentlemen began to drink
Healths, some of which were as follows: To the Man that first draws his Sword
in defense of the Protestant Religion, against Poperty and Slavery: Another was
to the Confusion of the Two Brothers, Slavery and Popery; and being asked what
they meant (as this Informant verily believes) it was replied, The Two
Brothers at Whitehal: The next was to the pinning of Mackinny's Head on the
Monument for burning the City in 66. And this Informant asking what was meant,
they said it was the Duke of York. And this Informant Dining at the Horse-shoe
Tavern on Tower Hill, with Edward Norton Esquire, Mr. Starkey, Mr. Ogle, Mr.
Goodenough, and others forgot by this Informant, they drank the foresaid
Healths, and did explain them as the aforesaid Company did. And this Informant
further says, that Fran. Goodenough sent a Letter to this Informant by one
Cherry, to acquaint the said Informant, That the said Goodenough would with
some other Gentlemen Dine at the End of the Town where this Informant dwells,
and that this Informant would speak to such men as he could trust, to meet the
aforesaid persons at the Siracusa House; There came with the aforesaid
Goodenough one John Row late Sword Bearer at Bristol, with a Dorsetshire
Gentleman whose name this Informant has forgot; also at the same Meeting was
Mr. Edmund Hunt, Andrew Barber, William Tomson, James Burton, as this Informant
verily believes, with several others forgot; where it was agreed we should
discourse so that it might not be understood if we were overheard. Then the
question was if the Football was laid down, how many we might reasonably
expect would come in at first Laying of it down from our end of the Town to
play at it? To which it was replied, it was uncertain, but as many as were
there would be concerned; to which it was answered by Row and Goodenough, if we
would not in a little time kick the Ball effectually we should be made Slaves;
for says Row the Lord Mayor has imposed Sheriffs upon you, and the King will
take away your Charter, and then you will be in a fine condit^on, and Goodenough
spoke to the same purpose; upon which Hunt replied, That he could do as much
good as any body, for that Football players often got broken shins, and he the
said Hunt could Cure them. And this Informant further says, that this
Discourse was grounded upon this Foundation, What Men can be raised against the
Churchwarden at Whitehal, which was understood the King. And this Informant
further says, that Richard Goodenough, and Richard Rumbal told this Informant,
that there was a Remonstrance or Declaration ready drawn up, which would be
^inted against the day that this designed Commotion was to be, wherein they
would ease the people of Chimney Money, which seemed to be most Grievous,
especially to the common people, and that they would lay the Kings Death upon
the Papists as a continued design of the former Plot.

JOSIAH KEELING.

Copy of a Note given in by Josiah Keeling 23d. of June, and by him received
from Goodenough.
From the Tower Eastward on the South Side of Rosemary-Lane to
Maiden-head-lane, the West Side of Maiden-head-lane, the North-side of Upper
Shadwel, Westward to new Gravel-lane, the West Side of new Gravel-lane to the
Thames, and by the Thames to the Tower.

The Streets and Allies of Note within the bounds.
St. Katherine's. East-Smithfield. Ratclift-High-way. Victualling-Office.
Butcher-Row. Redcross-street. Armitage. Nightingale-lane. Artichoack-lane.
Red-Mead-lane. Wapping. Gun-alley. Cross-alley. Well-alley. Warners Yard.
Salters-alley. Green Bank. Gun^alley. Pump^alley. Love-lane. Back-alley.
Meeting-horse-alley. Old-Gravel^lane. Brewer's-lane. Tobacco-pipe-alley.
Cinamon-street. Crown-street. Queen Street. King Edwards Street. King Street.
Carman-Rents. Crown Yard. Harrow-alley. Seven Star-alley. Garter Yard. Wests
Garden. Blew-gate field. Fleece Yard. Chamberlain's-alley. Frankland-street.
Match Walk. With all other Places within the Outbounds not Named.
The Information of Thomas Shepard, taken by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Sunderland, etc. June the 27th. 1683.
SOme time before my Lord Shaftsbury went for Holland, the Duke of Monmouth,
Lord Gray, Lord Russel, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Colonel Romsey, and Mr. Ferguson
met at my House in Abchurch-lane, where the subject of their Discourse was how
to seize Your Majesty's Guards, and in Order thereunto, as I afterward at
their next Meeting was informed, the Duke, Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas Armstrong,
walked about that end of the Town one night, and gave an account that they
found them very remiss in their places, not like Soldiers, and that the thing,
provided they could have a sufficient strength, was feasibly enough; but
finding that failed, the Project was wholly laid aside, so far as I know: After
that Mr. Ferguson told me of a Project was on foot for Destroying Your Majesty
and his Royal Highness coming from Newmarket. Colonel Romsey, Mr. West, and as
I remember Mr. Wade came to my Counting House one Evening, and began to
Discourse of it; upon which I told them, that supposing they should effect what
they talked of, it could not be expected that if the Duke of Monmouth should be
Crowned, but in Honor and for his own Vindication, he must search out the
Assassins, and both Try and Execute them: So that instead of expecting a
Reward, they must lose their Lives; upon which they ceased their Discourse, and
went away soon after. Some time after this, Mr. Ferguson told me of a general
Insurrection intended both in England and Scotland, and in order to it, that
Sir John Cochran, Mr. Bailey, Mr. Monro, Sir Hugh and Sir George Cambell, were
come up to Treat with some of our English Men about it; and that the Lord of
Argile had made a Proposition, That if they would Raise him Thirty Thousand
pounds he would begin it in Scotland, but finding no hopes of Raising that Sum,
the Scotch were willing to accept of Ten Thousand pounds: And by means of a
Letter, which came as I was informed (for there was no Name subscribed) from
one Mr. Stewart, to some unknown Man, which I have forgot; Concluding then that
it was intended to Mr. Bailey, or some other of those Gentlemen, having had some
small acquaintance with Mr. Stewart, formerly by means of his Brother, who was
then a Merchant in Bordeaux, and one of my Correspondents, I came acquainted
with Mr. Bailey, who told me from time to time what steps they made in it, how he
Conversed with the Duke, Lord Russel, Major W. and as I remember, Colonel
Sidney; and that he had diverse promises of the Money, and desired it might be
paid into my Hands; at length he told me that Five Thousand pounds they had
agreed to Raise amongst themselves, and that they expected the other half
should be Raised in the City; but finding no Moneys could be got in the City,
that Project fell likewise, and as Mr. Bailey told me, all his Countrymen were
going beyond Sea.

A few days after came out the Discovery, and I never saw any of them since.
Mr. Ferguson told me that my Lord Essex was hearty in this business, and that
John Trenchard was a Man to be depended upon in the West: They had likewise
good hopes of Sir William Courtney, and that my Lord Shaftsbury had sent
Captain Walcot down to him, who returned with a very cool Answer that he found
them not what he expected, but believed if it came to a Rising, they would
prove right enough, I had almost forgot to acquaint your Majesty that both Mr.
Ferguson and Mr. Bailey told me; That Mr. Charleton had once promised to see the
Ten Thousand pound paid.

Thomas Shepard.
Jurat coram Me

June 27. 1683. SUNDERLAND.



The Information of Joseph How of the Parish of St. Giles's without
Cripple-gate, in the County aforesaid Distiller, taken upon Oath before Sir
Reginald Forester Baronet, this 15th day of June 1683. against Thomas Lea of
Old-street in the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid Dyer, for speaking
of Dangerous and Seditious Words.
THis Informant Deposes and says, That the said Thomas Lea, being at his
House in White-Cross-street, on Thursday last, between two and three of the
Clock in the Afternoon, being the 14th of this instant June: The said Thomas
Lea, was discoursing with him, this Informant, about the loss of the City
Charter, and other things; upon which the said Thomas Lea fell into a Passion,
and told this Informant that he was one of the number of Ten Thousand Men,
which were designed to be ready at an hours warning, and in Order thereunto,
there was Twenty Thousand pounds in Bank to carry on the Undertaking; and many
more did every day subscribe money or engage their personal assistance: And the
first enterprise they venture upon, is to go very near Windsor, and for to
seize the Blackbird and the Gold-Finch; and that Three Hundred Men were
designed for that Enterprise: And afterward to seize the Militia, Whitehal,
and the Tower: But this Informant answered that he judged it impossible, the
Tower being now so very Strong; but the said Thomas Lea told him that he had
been round the Tower in Company with a Captain of a Ship, and had found out a
place where a breach might be made, which is to be done by placing some Ships
on the Thames side, with Mortar Pieces therein to dismount the Guns; and also
to bring the Major part of those Seamen which were in Arrears of Pay to perform
the work, they being angry and in want, therefore the fitter for that purpose:
And that for the better carrying of the Design, several Meetings are held (as
this day for one) at the King's Head Tavern in Athist-Ally near the Royal
Exchange, at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon: Further Informs not.

Joseph How. Regin. Forester.


June 25, 1683. The Examination of Colonel John Romsey.
THis Examinant says, That in October or November last, there was an
Insurrection intended by the Earl of Shaftsbury, and That the said Earl of
Shaftsbury told this Examinant, that Bristol was to be his Post, and the
Examinant being asked what Persons of Quality or Capacity to Command as
Officers, were named as intended to take part in this Insurrection; He
Answered, That he heard my Lord Russel named and complained of, and Mr. John
Trenchard named by the Earl of Shaftsbury; and this Examinant further says,
that Row the Sword Bearer of Bristol told him, That Mr. West had acquainted him
the said Row, that there was an intention to Assassinate the King at His coming
from Newmarket in October last: the Examinant does not remember whether the
Duke was there or no, but that if he were he was likewise to have been killed
(as the said Row told this Examinant) and this Examinant further says, That
about the latter end of November, or the beginning of December last, this
Examinant having Matters of Law depending, became acquainted with Mr. Robert
West, and employed him as his Referee therein; That the said West acquainted
this Examinant with the Design to Murder the King at His coming from Newmarket
in October last; and told this Examinant, That though it miscarried at that
time, it was not to be given over so, and therefore desired that he this
Examinant, Mr. Richard Goodenough, and some others which he cannot charge his
Memory withal, should meet at his the said West's Chamber, where this Examinant
and they did meet within three or four days after, to the best of this
Examinants Remembrance, and there Discoursed about the same Design, and let it
fall at that time; and this Examinant further says, That about the Month of
February last, the abovesaid Persons met with this Examinant at the said Mr.
West's Chamber, to consider how the Design should be brought to effect at the
Kings return from Newmarket; and Mr. West, and Mr. Richard Goodenough undertook
to find out Men for that purpose. And this Examinant further says, That about
this time the said West and Goodenough did desire that this Examinant would be
acquainted with Richard Rumball of the Rye near Hogsden in Hertfordshire, who
was the Man that would undertake to Command the Party that should take off the
King and the Duke: and that at their desire this Examinant did consent to a
Meeting with the said Rumball. When Richard Goodenough brought this Examinant
to meet Mr. Rumball at the Angel Tavern near the Old Exchange, the said Rumball
acquainted this Examinant how the Ground lay, and would have had him gone down
to see it, but this Examinant refused it. And this Examinant further says,
That after that they had several Meetings, to try if they could make up the
Number of Forty or Fifty Men for that purpose, under which Number the said
Rumball would not undertake it. And this Examinant further says, That at their
next Meeting two or three days before or after the Kings coming from New Market
in March last, They did resolve that Arms should be bought against the next
Journey to New Market in Autumn or any other opportunity, as at the Playhouse
or coming from Windsor to Hampton Court, or otherwise: And that Mr. West did
undertake to provide so many Cases of Pistols, so many Carbines, and so many
Blunderbusses, and this Examinant thinks Ten Muskets: And that it was
resolved, That there should be Arms provided for Fifty Men at least. And this
Examinant further says, That the Men were to be divided, some to shoot the
Postillion and Horses, some to Fire upon the King and Duke into the Coach and
the remainder to Charge the Guards. And that there was also a Cart to be laid
in the way, by which means the Coach should be hindered from going on. That the
said Rumbal said at their next Meeting, after the Kings Passing by his House,
that there were but four of the Guards Attending the Coach, and that if he had
had but a small number of Men with him, he could have taken off the King and
the Duke with Ease: And this Examinant further says, that at this last Meeting
Captain Walcot was there present. And this Examinant further says, that he did
not meet again in five or six Weeks after with the said Company though often
press't by Mr. West that it was not fit to give it over. And this Examinant
further says, That this Examinant, the said Goodenough, West, Walcot, Norton,
Wade and Holloway, did Meet at Mr. Wests Chamber about three weeks or a Month
since; and did then resolve to try what Men could be Raised in London and the
Liberties; and that they might be more certain, London was Divided into Twenty
Parts; and Mr. Holloway, Mr. Wade and Mr. West, undertook to make the Division;
and Mr. West and Goodenough did undertake to find a Man for every Division that
should bring in the certain number that they could Raise respectively. And this
Examinant further says, that in the first Fortnight or thereabouts they did
very little; but the next Meeting after Mr. Goodenough brought in an account of
seven Divisions, which amounted to Three Thousand Nine Hundred Men or
thereabouts; and that he the said Goodenough did believe that the remaining
Divisions would afford as many Men more: And it was further resolved at that
time, that the Design in hand should be kept secret until such time as the
return of the whole Divisions should be brought in.

And this Examinant being further asked, whether he did hear any Commanders or
Commission-Officers Named to Command these Forces, he says he heard of no
particular Names, but in General that there were a Hundred old Officers about
the Town; that after that they certainly knew how many Men all the Divisions
would amount to they then resolved this Examinant should carry the Proposal of
Commanding these, Forces to the Duke of Monmouth; but the Listings not being
finished, he never said any thing of it to his Grace. And this Examinant
further says, that the pretense to make this Levy of Men was to assert
Religion and Liberties. And this Examinant further says, that there was a
Declaration designed to be Published when these Forces should be up; but that
to the best of his memory he never saw it nor heard it Read, but he believes
some part of it was Discoursed of in this Examinants presence; as that touching
Liberty of Conscience, and something relating to the Law and the Judges. And
this Examinant further says, That to the best of his memory on Tuesday last
was Sennight, this Examinant, Captain Walcot, West, Nelthrop, Goodenough and
Wade, me at the Salutation Tavern in Lombardstreet, to know what progress
Goodenough had made in the other Thirteen Divisions, who told this Examinant
and the rest, that he had done nothing since the last Meeting; but that he was
to meet with some persons that Afternoon, who were to give him a further
Account: And this Examinant further says that after they had Dined, one that
was a Stranger to this Examinant came into the Room to speak with Mr.
Goodenough, and that Mr. West asked him, if he had seen the Gazette of that
day, in which was a Relation of a Commotion in Cologne by one Gulick, and told
him he should be our Gulick, for that in Dutch Gu -- was Keil and ick was ing,
telling this in a jesting manner. And this Examinant further says that on
Saturday last was Sennight, he this Examinant, Mr. West, and Mr. Norton, met at
the George Tavern upon Ludgate Hill, and then this Examinant was told that a
Discovery was made of what they had been doing; and at present this Examinant
further says not.

I. Romzey.
25 Die Junii 1683.
Capt. and Recognit. Coram,

Albemarle. L. Jenkins.




Further Informations of Colonel Romzey.
FUrther this Examinant says, that Mr. Ferguson and the rest did in several
Meetings since the beginning of February press for the having the Men got ready
that were to Kill the King and Dake, and it was told him by Mr. Goodenough and
Richard Rumbal and West, that a great many were poor and could not furnish
themselves with Horses or Arms; this was presently after his coming out of
Holland: Mr. Ferguson replied, he would provide the Money; and in two Meetings
afterward he told them he had Six Hundred pounds ready in Gold, that they
might depend on him, when they had got the Forty or Fifty Men, under which
number Richard Rumbal would not undertake it; and then Rumbal and the rest
asked Ferguson at the first Meeting w^ had, if he thought the Duke of Monmouth
would not revenge the Kings Death, and Hang those that had been the Actors; Mr.
Ferguson very freely undertook to have it under the Dukes Hand against the next
Meeting, but when we met, he told them there was no saying any such thing to
the Duke; but he said that we must all be ruined if it were not done: Then they
asked if the Duke would appear when it was done; to which he made answer, That
a Person would be there, but he must be excused for Naming any Names, and
desired not to be pressed: I told them always they were not to trust to what
Mr. Ferguson said, for he was so willing to have the most Barbarous Murder
done, that he would say any thing to encourage them to do it; such Discourse as
this happened several times at our meetings, some saying, When our Swords were in
our Hands, if he would not protect them, that then he should be cut off too:
Such Hellish Discourses as these we entertained our selves with, until the News
of the Firing of New Market came to Town: And then Mr. Ferguson sent for most
of us, and was earnest that Goodenough and Rumbald should get what Men they
could, and that he could help them with Six, and that Rumbald should attempt it
with as many as could be got, but it was given over for that time, because
neither Arms nor Horses were ready; then he promised that he would immediately
get the Six Hundred pounds into his own hands to provide all things in a
readiness against the first opportunity, whether at the Playhouse, between
Hampton Court, or going to Winchester; and said that some persons were already
out to see a fit place to do it in, and if it could not be done before that,
then all things should be ready against the King and Dukes going down to
New Market, as Horses bought and kept in a readiness, and Arms which Mr. West
undertook to do, he being acquainted with a Gun-smith, and upon Mr. Ferguson's
Promise that he would procure the Money, Mr. West bespoke the Arms, and they
were ready in a very little time: But when Mr. West came and told Mr. Ferguson
that the Arms were ready (for six Weeks now I did not see Ferguson, but Mr.
West acquainted me with all passed as follows,) he told the said West that his
Friend had not brought him the Money as he promised; also Mr. West was forced
to pay for the Arms out of his own Money, which was not repaied him as he told
this Examinant not above twenty days since or thereabouts: The said West told
this Examinant that Mr. Ferguson told him he might send for his Money when he
would, by a Note to Major W. but he must tell him the Name that he would make
the Note payable to, that he might tell the same to Major W. the Name I have
forgot. In some very few days after, as he the said West told this Examinant,
the said Ferguson told him, that he must not send any Body or Note to receive
the said Hundred pounds, but Richard Rumbald, because the said W. would not
trust any body else; West sent the said Rumbald very early one Morning, but the
said Major W. was gone out of Town before he came to the House, which he went
and acquainted the said Ferguson with: In a few days after the said Ferguson
paid the said West a Hundred pounds in Gold, and as the said West then told
this Examinant, that the said Ferguson told him, he did receive the said
Hundred pounds of Mr. Charlton; and about fourteen days since the said West and
this Examinant going to Mr. Ferguson, he told us that there was Three Thousand
pounds Raised for to buy Horses, and to maintain them and the Men in a
Readiness, that if any opportunity offered all might be ready; but did not tell
us from whom he was to have this Money, neither did either of us ask him any
question about it. Further this Examinant says, That to the best of his
Remembrance, in January last, Mr. Nelthrop told this Examinant, that meeting
Colonel Sidney, he told him that now something would be done, for that it was
resolved to send some persons into Scotland to some Gentlemen there to come to
Town, that they might know what the Scots would do, but they knew not of a Man
fit to send; and the said Nelthrop told this Examinant that he recommended one
Mr. Aaron Smith as a fit man. And further this Examinant says, That the said
Nelthrop told this Examinant that the Colonel and others had sent him (Aaron
Smith) with a Letter to Sir John Cochran to advise him and his Friends to come
to London about their Carolina affairs, and that a good Gelding was bought for
him, or Money given to him to buy one; as also Money was given him by Colonel
Owen to pay his Expenses on the Road and also that some Money was given to his
Wife for her Maintenance, she being in poverty. Upon this Letter Sir John
Cochran came to London, and some other Scotch Gentlemen, whose Names this
Examinant does not know, but as the said Nelthrop and Mr. Ferguson did acquaint
this Examinant, they were to Treat with some of this Nation what was to be done
for the Delivery of the Nations: The said Ferguson told this Examinant, That
the Scotch Gentlemen did acquaint those they Treated with (not Naming any of
their Names) that their people were in very great Poverty, but very willing to
set themselves at Liberty, but they had no Arms nor Ammunition nor Money to buy
any and without they could let them have Money to furnish Arms and Ammunition,
they could do nothing. During this last Transaction of the Scots for Money, I
did not see Mr. Ferguson, but Mr. West who went constantly to him did tell me
their Discourse; as that sometimes the Scotch Gentlemen were departing
discontented, and then again in three or four days that they were like to agree
and that Money should be provided for them: Often he told me of such changes as
these in that Transaction and that Mr. Ferguson did assure the said West, that
the Money would be all paid in one week; I answered the said West, who would
have had me gone to Ferguson, that I would not see him until I was certain it
was paid, for the said Ferguson undertook much and did nothing but promise what
he could not do. There was a Debate what Declaration should be presently after
the Murder of the King and Duke and amongst other things a Free Parliament was
one Head, Liberty of Conscience was another: That those that had their Lands
taken from them at the Kings Restoration should have them returned. A
Reformation of the Expensive part of the Law. Mr. Ferguson undertook that one
should be ready. Mr. West did further acquaint this Examinant, that my Lord
Howard had been at his Chamber to Pump him the said West what we were doing,
and that his Lordship did desire to have a Meeting with the said West and this
Examinant, which neither the said West nor this Examinant were willing to; and
the said West did further acquaint this Examinant that my Lord Howard did
propose a Council of Ten to meet; but we not consenting to meet, the said West
did civilly put off the Proposition, as he the said West did inform this
Examinant. And further this Examinant says, That Discoursing with Mr. West and
Mr. Goodenough, and others about the Scotch Affair, they did tell me, That the
last Spring there was a Treaty with the Earl of Argile, and that then without
Money the Scots declared they could not begin, but that the Earl of Shaftsbury
broke that Design, not consenting to pay the Money: This Examinant never heard
any thing of this Design, until the said West, Norton and Goodenough did tell
him thereof. And this Examinant further says, That Mr. Nelthrop and Mr. Wade
did always oppose the Murdering of the King and the Duke, and so did Captain
Walcot, but at last the said Walcot consented. And this Examinant further
says, That Mr. Bourn, and Mr. Goodenough's Brother were at some of the last
Meetings about the raising of the Men: This Examinant says, That to the best
of his Memory he has here set down every thing that was said or Transacted in
the Debates when he was there, but he was absent from some.

I. Romzey.

Colonel Romzey's further Information.
THis Examinant further says, That being sent by the Earl of Shaftsbury about
the beginning of November last to Mr. Shepard's a Merchant near Lombard Street,
where was the Duke of Monmouth, Lord Russel, Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong
and Mr. Ferguson; this Examinant told them my Lord Shaftsbury had sent him to
tell them it was high time to come to some Resolution about the Rising; They
made him this Answer by Mr. Ferguson (and afterward my Lord Gray said words to
the same effect) that Mr. John Trenchard had promised and assured them at his
first coming to Town that Term, that he could in four hours time have a
Thousand Foot and Two or Three Hundred Horse, but now they had sent to him to
know the certainty, he had returned to them this following answer; That Men
would not be got from home on two or three days warning, but that when such a
thing as a Rising should be, he must know it sooner, that he might acquaint Men
to make Provision of Settlements for their Families; so they could not go on at
this time any further. And for this reason, and that they heard Sir William
Courtney would not stir, my Lord must be contented. This Message I returned to
my Lord: On this my Lord resolved to leave England. This Examinant further
says, That there was a Project of Government drawn up by Mr. West and Mr.
Wade, which they delivered to this Examinant, and he gave it to Mr. Ferguson,
who told them that he heard Colonel Sidney had drawn one, that he would compare
them together and reduce them into one entire one. And this Examinant further
says, That Mr. Nelthrop told him that my Lord of Essex, my Lord Russel,
Colonel Sidney, and young Mr. Hamden were the persons that did Treat with the
Scotch Gentlemen, and so did Mr. West, and I think Mr. Ferguson. Mr. Nelthrop
and Mr. West, during the time I did not see Mr. Ferguson, told me that now they
were resolved to raise Ten Thousand pounds for the Scots, and that next week it
should all be paid in; that was about a Month since. But they had been with Mr.
Shepard the Merchant, and he told them there was none paid. This Money was to
buy Arms in Holland. Mr. Ferguson told this Examinant the Rising must be in
Scotland before Harvest, or else their people would not be got together; and
that in four days after the Scots were up we should have the first Intelligence
and that then we must Rise in this Town and in Taunton. My Lord Howard was at
first one with my Lord Essex and the rest, but he told Captain Walcot and Mr.
West what passed amongst them, for which reason he was l^f^ out of the
meetings. Further this Examinant says, that Mr. Wade and Holloway told him how
they had fixed the matter for Bristol; that they were sure of Three Hundred
Men, and that they would Post them in all the cross Streets, so that none of
the other party should get together in a Body or out of their Houses. By this
means they should be Masters of the Town without spilling one drop of Blood.
And this Examinant further says that Goodenough told Wade, West and this
Examinant, that about twenty five Hundred Arms would be wanting for the Men
that would Rise here; for without they were Armed that were on the first to
Rise here, we should be beat; therefore West and this Examinant did acquaint
Mr. Ferguson from the rest that did meet, of the necessity of having so many
Arms. He replied, Money should not be wanting; but how so many Arms could be
bought without a discovery? Mr. West did undertake that if Money were given,
the Arms might be had; and some person of the Company did name a Gun-smith that
was an honest Man that might without suspicion have two or three Hundred Arms,
and other Gun-smiths might, if enquired after, be found, that might lodge
proportionable quantities in their Shops, and the Men should be led to these
Shops and Armed. It was said by Goodenough that six Hundred Arms were together
in the Artillery Ground, which might be easily seized on. Many debates we had
about the Tower; some proposed the taking of it by daytime, by sending some
Men only with Pocket Pistols, and when the Sign was given they were to fall on
the Guard; but this was left off as not agreeing with a Rising by night; and
then the other way was to clap two or three hundred Fagots to the Gates and set
them on Fire, which would make those within surrender and that Ships should
come and lie before the Tower and batter it at the same time the Fagots were on
fire.

I. Romzey.

Colonel Romzeys Letter to the Earl of Rochester concerning the Scotch Pedlars.
My Lord,
WHen the Rising was to have been in November, Mr. Ferguson did say that he
could promise for Three Hundred Scots in this Town that would be ready at a
days warning, and that there was in England Twelve Hundred that might be
depended upon; that Three or Four Hundred did always abide here, the rest were
scattered throughout England with Packs on their Backs for the Maintenance of
themselves; that a great many of them were Gentlemen's Sons and all of them had
been at Bothwel-Bridge, and betook them to this way to get (and carry)
Intelligence as well as a living.

J. Romzey.

Another Letter from Colonel Romzey to the Earl of Rochester.
My Lord,
I Do not know whether I have already in any of my Papers where I mention Mr.
Roe, acquainted the King of one passage he told me, (but I think I have) that
Gibbons the Duke of Monmouths Footman did tell him, that nothing but taking off
the Two Brothers would do the business, and if he would go with him, he would
show him the place to do it; he carried him to my Lord of Bedfords Garden,
where I think he told me is a Mount to look into Covent Garden, and said no
place can be like this to lodge Men in to do the feat and showed him the
Garden-door where they might make a Sally on the Coach if they mist with their
Fire. Mr. Roe asked him, but how will you bring the Men in? He told him my Lord
was long in the Country, and he was so well acquainted with the Porter and
Servants that he could have the Key at any time. The said Gibbons told Sir
Thomas Armstrong as if Roe had proposed it to Gibbons, and Sir Thomas came to
me in a great Passion and told me what I have related, and bid we speak to Roe
to warn him of talking of any such thing. When I did speak to Roe he Confessed
the thing, but that Gibbons moved it to him, for he knew not any thing of my
Lord of Bedfords Garden or Servants.

This was to be done as the King came from the Play. I cannot recollect whether
I was twice at Mr. Shepards with the Duke of Monmouth, etc. or but once; but if
I was but once, then I heard Mr. Ferguson relate to my Lord of Shaftsbury some
part of their Debates at another time, as that they had resolved of the 19th of
November for the Rising and some Heads of a Declaration: Whether I heard this
Debate at Mr. Shepards or at my Lord Shaftsburies Lodgings I cannot be positive
in, but Mr. Shepard I believe may remember.

J. Romzey.

The further Information of Colonel Romsey.
THis Examinant further says, That Mr. Ferguson was at this Examinants House
for seven or eight nights, intermitting a night two or three, which time he
told me he went to his Wife. During the time he was at my House, the Duke of
Monmouth came to see him, to the best of my remembrance twice; the first time I
was with them, and all the discourse that passed was about my Lord
Shaftsburie's death, and relating the Affairs of Holland and the Confederates,
the Duke not staying a quarter of an hour. The next time I was not in the room
with them. Sir Thomas Armestrong came several times in a Morning to see him,
sometimes before I was stiring; the first time I showed him the room where he
lay, and did not go in with him, but went to dress me, I being in my shirt.

Andrew Barbers Informations read in Council, 23 June, 1683.
ON Saturday morning, about the latter end of March last past, Mr. Keeling came
to me, and told me that he and some other Friends of mine would have me come to
the Mitre Tavern within Aldgate, because they would drink a glass of Wine with
me; and there I came to them, and found Mr. Rumbal, a one Eyed man, Mr.
Keeling, Burton, and Thompson, I sat down with them and drank; soon after Mr.
Rumbald fell into Discourse concerning getting of Arms to his House; he was
speaking he thought it would be a good way to send them in a Barge, but he
concluded 'twould not be safe; but said, he thought that those that would be
concerned should ride with Arms themselves betimes in the Morning or in the
Night and so come to his House, and there they should be refreshed and their
Horses, till he should order them what to do. Some I understand were to
continue on Horseback, and they that were to kill the Horses, Coachman, and
Postillion, and to shoot into the Coach were to be on foot; and he would order
Carts to be set cross the Road for to hinder them. So then Rumbald asked if we
could shoot well, I told him I could not, I never shot at a mark in my life;
the others said, let them alone for that; says Keeling, he is a good Soldier
and a lusty man, what do you think of him? he made no answer, so I answered I
was no Soldier fit for that work, and said that it would be Murder to Kill,
and he said it would be a means not to Kill, but to save many thousand men's
Lives. When I had done, he said he would order some to bring word what Coach by
the color of the Horses, that they may not be mistaken, for this was to be as
I understood in Rumbalds own ground, for his House joins to the Road; and he
said they must come by his House to come to London, so he said he would engage
his Life to do it, if he had but Thirty men, but he expected Forty* and for
Horses Mr. Keeling said, he would get as many as he could, but it was not
concluded on, by reason Rumbald did expect to have seen more at that place, but
Mr. Keeling promised him they should be ready at the next Meeting, which was to
be the next Wednesday after, as I remember, but then I resolved never to come
into their company more, nor be concerned with them, because I did understand
there would be Murder committed, nor have been in their company since, nor I
never saw that Rumbald before nor since. Likewise I replied, if you should do
so, how will you escape? Rumbald answered, he would fight his way through, and
separate themselves into By-roads, and make what way they could for London, and
then they should do well enough. All this time I never heard that this was
intended against the King, for he was never mentioned in any respect, that I
did understand, but I did verily believe that it was meant by his Royal
Highness. So we paid our reckoning, which was I think six pence apiece, and
they went toward the Exchange, but I directly home, and have not been in their
company since, nor no other tending to such evil work.

Andrew Barber.
Moreover, Rumbald said, that there was never above one or two that rid before
the Coach; and likewise, if they could get to Cambridge Heath, or thereabouts,
they should have friends enough for their help.



In the Gate House the 29th June, 83. Major Holmes Confessed.
THat in order to the late Earl of Argile's going into Scotland, and raising a
Rebellion there, he had proposed that 30000 l. Sterling should be sent to him
from hence, by some great persons, with whom a Treaty was held for that purpose
by Ferguson; but that they refused to advance so great a sum yet, condescended
to send him 10000 l. which Holmes knows not whether the late Earl has
accepted of, as sufficient for effectuating that design.

Upon his being asked who were the great men by whose means the Money was to be
advanced, he protested that he had never conversed with any of them, but that
he had heard often the Duke of Monmouth and particularly the Lord Russel named;
and as to the Lord Gray, he did not remember that his Lordship was mentioned
unto him in the matter of Money, but did confess that he had frequently been
told of his being engaged in, and a promoter of the design in general.

He confessed that the Letter marked Numb. 2. is from the Countess of Argile to
her Husband, and that he was to have sent it away by the Post last Tuesday into
Holland, had he not been taken into Custody. That it was directed for Peter
Harvie Linen Weaver (which is not a true name) in Bow Churchyard, and was
left at one Mr. Browns House a Sider-Seller there, where Holmes usually
received her Letters under that borrowed name, but says that he cannot
decypher this, nor any of her Letters.

As to the long Letter marked Numb. 3. he protests he cannot Decipher it, nor
can positively say for whom it was to have been directed, yet thinks it was to
have been carried by Castarres to Fergusn, and by him to the chief men
concerned in the Design.

Upon inquiring what is become of the parcel of Books, which are the Printed
Case of the Earl of Argile, and in what method they were brought over from
Holland, he confessed that they had been shipped on board of a Vessel, called
(to the best of his memory) the Success of Colchester, bound for London, and
that Spence was afterward to come in the Passage Boat designed to have come to
Graves-end, but that the wind having been very cross, he came on shore at, or
somewhat near Harwich, from whence he came by Land to London.

Upon asking what was meant by the Figures 80 and 81, in the Letters marked
Numb. 5. he said he did not well remember, but when I told him that I knew by
the Cipher, Money was meant by 50, and Officers by 51. he confessed that it was
so; whereupon I did observe to him, that as the late Earl was to have had
Money, so he was to have been furnished with Officers for the carrying on the
Rebellion in Scotland, which also he confessed, but said withal, that this
Letter was intended for his Lady, which he knew by a mark on the back, and
showed it to me.

The Examination of Robert Blaney of the Middle Temple Esquire 29 June, 83.
THis Examinant Deposes and says, That this Deponent was invited about
Christmas last, on Wednesday the 27th day of December last, (as near as he can
remember) by John Row, late Sword Bearer of the City of Bristol, to Dine with
Colonel John Rumzey, at his House in Soho Square, where were present the said
Colonel Romzey, Robert West, Richard Goodenough, Joseph Tyley of Lincolns Inn
Esquire Christopher Battiscomb Gent. and the said John Row, and this Examinant;
where being together after dinner, and much Wine and other strong drink drank
in the said company, a Discourse was began, but by whom this Examinant cannot
remember, about the times being very bad and dangerous for Sober Men, and what
Remedies were fit to redress Grievances, and rid our selves of Arbitrary Power,
or to that effect; and it was there likewise discoursed and said, but by whom
in particular this Examinant cannot exactly remember it being so long since,
that we should never be well till we were rid of two people, by whom as this
Examinant did apprehend, were meant His Majesty and his Royal Highness the Duke
of York. And it was likewise said, That if the Great People did but agree to
Join and Rise, or words to that effect it might be done, for the Countries were
all willing and ready; then as this Examinant does remember by some one, it was
in the said company proposed, and as he verily believes by the said Mr. West,
that either a Deed of Bargain and Sale, or Lease and Release (one of them it
was) should be executed to bar both Him in Possession, and Him in Remainder; by
which as this Examinant did then apprehend, was meant the taking off His
Majesty and his Royal Highness, and so he believes the rest of the said company
did also. And a glass of Wine did pass round the said Table as a Health to the
Executing of the said Bargain and Sale, or Lease and Release, (which he cannot
tell, but one o^ them it was.) And this Examinant further says, that he never
was present at any other Consultation with the before-named persons, or any
others about the Death of the King, or his Royal Highness, or the raising of
any Rebellion, that this Examinant can remember; except that being very
frequently as a familiar Acquaintance with the said Mr. West, he has often
asked him, and the said Colonel Rumzey, whether the great Men would do any
thing, and whether any business would be done; or he used words to that effect,
but they did constantly as this Examinant remembers answer him No, that nothing
would be done; and the said Colonel, Rumzey seemed (as this Examinant did
apprehend) to be very shy of him this Examinant; and much like Discourse this
Examinant has had with the said Goodenoughs, but never was as he remembers
acquainted with the prosecution or particulars of such a Design in the least.
And one Nathaniel Wade also this Examinant has had some such Discourse with,
about freeing our selves from Arbitrary Power and Popery by a general Rising,
but any particular ways and methods for the same, or otherwise, this Examinant
never knew of, or was privy to. And further at present this Deponent cannot
recollect.

Robert Blaney.
29 Jun. 83.
Jurat. coram me

L. JENKINS.



The further Examination of Robert Blaney, July 1. 83.
WHo says, That he saw Ferguson since the Earl of Shaftsburies death, in the
House of one Bourne a Brewer, living in Queenstreet over against the Lord
Keepers; that it was about a quarter of a year since; that Ferguson was in a
Nightgown, and therefore he believes he lay in that House; that the Discourse
they had was about the Earl of Shaftsbury and his death.

This Examinant says, that about three weeks after the Earl of Shaftsbury had
concealed himself, he saw him at a Merchants House, whose name he remembers
not, but the House is in Woodstreet, near St. Albans Church, the corner House,
having a little Yard before it, next door to a House that was one Mr. Biddolphs.

He says, he knows nothing of the manner of the Earl of Shaftsburies Escape,
nor of Fergusons, nor knows no other places but the abovementioned, where
either of them were at any time concealed.

He remembers that he was twice or thrice at the Sign of the Sugarloaf, near
the Devil Tavern with Ferguson, and once with another person, who he thinks was
young Shute, about the time the Earl of Shaftsbury absented himself; but that
Ferguson was not then disguised, but in the Habit he used commonly to wear,
which was a Russet color Campane Coat, and a brown short Perewig.

Thomas Lee Dyer of Old-street, his Confession, 1, and 2 July, 1685.
I Having been often in the Company of Mr. John Atherton, he told me, about May
last, that Mr. Goodenough must speak with me, and Mr. William Thomas. We went
to the Salutation Tavern in Lumbard-street, Mr. Goodenough came to tell us and
then drew out some Papers, (but I saw not what was in them) and there told us
that our Rights and Privileges were Invaded and that some Gentlemen had taken
into consideration how to retrieve them or words to that effect; and did then
ask us whether we were willing to assist, and then told us that the City and
Suburbs were divided into Twenty parts, and did desire us to see what men we
could get and told us, that we must discourse with them about a Foreign
Invasion at first and if that took, then we might know of them, whether they
would be willing to assist in their own persons, or by Money; Some time after
we met Mr. Goodenough at the Amsterdam Coffee-house in Bartholemew-lane; I told
him that I had acquainted Mr. Charles Bateman and he desired to speak with Mr.
Goodenough. That Mr. Bateman told me I must have a care, and speak at a great
distance that he was willing to assist, if he could see but a cloud as big as a
man's hand and after I called on Mr. Bateman, and went with him to a
Sea-Captains, and from thence to the Duke of Monmouths House in Soho Square. As
we went, Mr. Bateman told me that the Duke had told him, that he was glad that
ever he came acquainted with those Protestant Lords; and did assure me that the
Duke was very right for the Protestant Interest and that we need not mistrust
him and then we called to see Mr. Goodenough, but were too late. The same
afternoon I went to see for Mr. Goodenough and found him at the Dolphin Tavern
in Bartholemew-lane and I appointed him to come to the Kingshead in
Swithens-alley in Cornhil; where he came and told me, that they were making
ready and asked me what I had done in that matter? I told him not much, because
I doubted they were not prepared with Money and Arms, he told me that they had
both. I asked him what store of Money they had? he told me, Twenty thousand
pounds, and then we went into company, and talked no more about that affair.
Some days after I met with him again, and he told me, that he had seen Mr.
Bateman, and that he hoped he would be very serviceable, and asked me what that
Southwark man was? I told him he was very honest and willing, and that I had
spoken with him, and he desired that he might speak with him. I called him, and
they discoursed together alone, and after that he asked me, who that ancient
Gentleman was, I told him, that he was an old Soldier and that his Name was
Franks; he desired me to call him, and I did, and discoursed the matter, and he
not hearing of it before, was a little surprised; but said, that he was willing
to fight for Privilege, which he thought was Invaded, but not for Religion.
The next day I went to meet Mr. Goodenough at Richards Coffee-house at
Temple Bar; there I met with Mr. Hone, and he had me over to the Kingshead
Tavern, and there told me, it had been our great mischief, that there had not
been an understanding betwixt the Cavaliers and us; that there were a great
many brave men about the Temple, and that the job had been done upon the
Blackbird and Gold-Finch some time before, if it had not been for an accident
that happened at Newmarket. Soon after came in Mr. Francis Goodenough, and Mr.
Hone told me that I might be free with him. We discoursed about the matter, he
said they were making all things in a readiness against their coming from
Windsor, and that he thought they must get Three hundred Horse to seize them
coming from Windsor. Some time after I met with Mr. Richard Goodenough, and
asked him what readiness things were in, he told me that in a few days he
thought he should have an account how many men they could raise. I told him
that I had spoken with Mr. Rous, and that he could help them to Arms for a
Hundred men; and that a way was proposed how to raise a Thousand Seamen, if
they would be at the charge of a Golden Ball to be played upon Black Heath. He
asked me what the Ball would cost? I told him, I was informed about Twelve
pounds. He said, if it were Forty, they would be at the charge of it. Then he
desired to speak with Mr. Rous, and appointed to meet him at the King's Head
Tavern in Swithings-alley, and they met and went into a room apart, and
afterward we went to Joseph's Coffee-house in Exchange-alley, and Mr. Rous told
me, that he would see and get Ten Sea-Captains to manage that affair. The next
day I met with Mr. Rous at the Amsterdam Coffee-house, there he spoke with two
Captains, as he told me, and from thence he went with them to the Angel and
Crown Tavern in Thredneedle-street, but I did not go with them* I saw him
afterward at the King's Head, and he told me, he must have Mr. Goodenough go
with him to Wapping, I acquainted Mr. Goodenough with it, and he told me, that
that business of the Tower was left to some men, that understood those affairs
better than himself, and that they must be in a readiness to do all together; I
asked him what that was, he told me they must Seize the Tower, and take the
City, and secure the Savoy and Whitehall, and the King and the Duke. Sometime
after I met Mr. Francis Goodenough in Westminster hall, he had me behind Kidals
Coffee-house, and told me, that the Countrey-Gentry were ready, and said, he
desired it might not be delayed long. The next time I saw Mr. Richard
Goodenough, was at the King's Head. I called at Mr. Ienkes, and understood that
he had almost dined, and I left word that I was gone thither, and he came to
me, and I told him I had spoke with one in Old-street, and that he was willing
to assist with Money, and another in White-cross-street, that told me, that he
would assist himself, and had Arms for Ten men, and Mr. Goodenough told me,
that they were about Summing up their Men, and that they should be ready in a
fortnight or less.

The Examination of Hicks living in Friday-street London, taken before His
Majesty the third of July 1683.
WHo says, that he did hear from Wade (as he thinks) that the City was to be
divided into parts, and that Wade told him, there would be a Rising of the
Papists to cut all their Throats, to which he had answered, that he did not
believe it; But that the Law of Nature taught him to stand upon his own
defense. And that he the Examinant further adding, that this imported Evil and
that he would not consent to it. Wade then replied, he the Examinant must
perish then by himself.

The Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple Barrister at Law, taken
the 23 June 1683.
THis Examinant says, he having a general acquaintance with those of the City
of London, that are commonly called Whiggs; observed about Michaelmas last a
general discontent amongst them, by reason (as he apprehends) of the Elections
that had gone before of the Mayor and Sheriffs, and of their apprehensions of
the loss of their Charter: whereon this Examinant fearing that their hearts
might transport them to commit some extravagancies, and to prevent his own
Families being ruined by them, was very inquisitive to know whether any
Insurrection might be designed. And this Examinant after some time, was
informed by some persons, who at present he cannot remember, that an
Insurrection was intended in November last in the City of London, but the
particulars of it this Examinant was never acquainted with; and he heard soon
after that the Design was wholly laid aside. And this Examinant further says,
That about the time His Majesty came from Newmarket, in or about October last,
he heard that there was a Design to seize the King and the Duke of York; but
this Examinant does not know the place where, nor the persons who were to act
therein. And this Examinant further says, that about the latter end of
October, or the beginning of November last, this Examinant met with Mr. Robert
Ferguson, whom he had been long acquainted with, and the said Mr. Ferguson,
gave this Examinant an account of the great miseries the people of Scotland lay
under, and did believe the people of England would suffer the like, and Popery
over run the Nation, unless the people themselves endeavored to prevent it.
And told this Examinant, that two ways had been thought on (but named not by
whom) one by a general Insurrection in several parts of the Kingdom, and the
other a more Compendious and safe way of taking away the King and Duke by some
surprise in some Journey. To which this Examinant answered to this effect, to
wit, That he looked upon the first method to be impracticable and full of
hazard, the Militia, Navy, Forts, and Ammunition being in the hands of the
Government, and the people as it were naked; and such an attempt might intail a
long and Bloody War upon the Nation, and must end in the destruction of the
King and Duke, or else it would be vain. And therefore the second method of
taking them off by surprise was most rational, if there were a necessity of
doing the one thing or the other. And this Examinant further says, that after
this discourse, the said Mr. Ferguson went into Holland, and after his return
from thence, had several Discourses with this Examinant to the same effect,
concerning the destroying the King and the Duke; and that there would be an
opportunity shortly of doing it, either upon the King and Dukes going to, or
coming from Newmarket.

This Examinant further says, That soon after the said Mr. Ferguson, Mr.
Richard Goodenough, Mr. Richard Rumball, this Examinant, and sometime Colonel
Rumzey (so called) and Capt. Walcot met, sometimes at this Examinants Chamber,
and sometimes at other places where they used to debate and consider of the
method of putting the Design of Killing the King and the Duke in Execution.

And this Examinant further says, That none of the persons above mentioned,
save Richard Rumball only, was to act in person, in the said attempt, but the
said Robert Ferguson, Richard Rumball, and Richard Goodenough undertook to
provide the persons to make the said attempt, which persons were to be 40 at
least, and 50 if they could procure them.

This Examinant further says, That there was also a further debate what sort
of Arms should be made use of in the Attempt: And it was agreed there should be
Blunderbusses, Muskets or Carbines, and Pistols; but how the said Arms should
be carried down, whether beforehand, or by the persons on Horseback, this
Examinant does not remember they came to any resolution.

This Examinant further says, that it was resolved some of the persons who
were to make the Attempt should kill one or more of the Horses in the Kings
Coach, and then one party should set upon the Coach and shoot into it, and
another party fight the Guards; and if there should be occasion, a Cart should
be overturned in the Road on purpose to stop the Coach.

And this Examinant further says, that after the said Resolution above-taken,
this Examinant was much troubled in his mind, and endeavored to represent
several difficulties and hazards in the thing, and the ill consequences thereof
whether it succeeded or not, with an intention to have diverted the thing.

And this Examinant further says, that after the Fire at Newmarket, and before
the Kings return from thence sooner than was expected, this Examinant and the
other persons abovementioned met at this Examinants Chamber, where because
they had no certain intelligence how long the King would stay there before his
return to London, it was agreed, to the best of this Examinants remembrance,
that the Attempt should be wholly laid aside.

And this Examinant further says, that some short time after the Kings return
from Newmarket, there being a Discourse at a Tavern in the City between this
Examinant and the said Rumball, and one John Keeling, concerning the
disappointment of their said attempt, in not having the Arms ready; and the
said Keeling openly mentioning Blunderbusses, Muskets, and Pistols, this
Examinant advised him to call the said Arms by the names of Swan-Quills,
Goose-Quills, and Crow-Quills, that the Drawers might not take notice.

And this Examinant further says, that at the same Tavern, the said Richard
Rumball told this Examinant, and the said Keeling, that the King came by his
House with a slender Guard of Six Horse, much tired and that six men well
provided might have made the attempt and succeeded in it.

And this Examinant further says, That some short time after, it was agreed by
this Examinant, the said Ferguson, Rumball and Goodenough, that some Arms
should be bought to be in a readiness for any occasion: And because this
Examinant was no otherwise capable to serve in any such Design, it was proposed
to him and he undertook to buy some Arms; and accordingly this Examinant
bespake of one Daft a Gunsmith in Sheer-lane, 30 Case of Pistols, 30 Carbines
with Belts and Swivels, and 10 Blunderbusses, besides Bullets and Flints, on
pretense of sending the same into America, but the same were not entered at the
Custom House till Tuesday last, although this Examinant did design to have
done so six weeks before.

And this Examinant further says, That being at a Tavern about three weeks or
a month since with Nathaniel Wade, Richard Nelthrop and others, where the said
Mr. Nelthrop was reading a Gazette, wherein there were Relations of Tumults at
Cologne, abetted by one Gulick, the said Keeling came into the Room to speak
with one of the Company; and Mr. Nelthrop in a jeasting manner called the said
Keeling Gulick; whereupon the said Keeling said to this Examinant, What think
you for all your jeasting, if I and some few more of my Friends should save the
City Charter and the Nation? or words to this effect. To whom this Examinant
replied, he would do very well to do so: but then asked him the manner how he
would do it? To which he answered, That no body should know it till they had
done; but hoped he should not be hanged for it: Upon which words this Examinant
suspecting the said Keeling meant some extravagant thing, bid him take care not
to do any foolish thing and ruin the Protestants.

And this Examinant further says, That about Easter last some Discourses were
had concerning the making some Attempt upon the King and Duke, between Windsor
and Hampton Court, but no resolution therein was ever taken to this Examinants
knowledge or remembrance.

This Examinant further says, That there was some Considerations lately had
how to make an Estimate of the strength of the Protestant party, in case they
should be put upon their own Defense; when it was agreed that the City and
Subburbs should be divided into twenty parts, and that some person well
acquainted in each Division, should enquire into and make a return of the
number he should find; which returns are not yet made to the Examinants
knowledge: And more this Examinant for the present says not.

Robert West.
23 Die Junii 1683.
Capt. and Recognit coram me

L. JENKINS.



The further Examination of Robert West Barrister at Law of the Middle Temple,
the 24th of June 1683.
THis Examinant says, That he was informed of the Insurrection in his former
Examination mentioned to have been designed in November last by Thomas Walcot,
who told this Examinant that the same was projected by the late Earl of
Shaftsbury, and was to have been put in execution the 19 of November last, but
that he looked upon it as a mad thing, which he had no thoughts to engage in;
and afterward told this Examinant that it was wholly laid aside.

And this Examination further says, That to the best of his remembrance
Francis Shute lately deceased was the person who acquainted this Examinant that
an Assassination of the King and Duke in their return from Newmarket in or
about October last had been intended, and that he heard the same from Mr.
Ferguson; and this Examinant asking Mr. Ferguson about it, the said Ferguson
told this Examinant, that it had not been thought of time enough, and therefore
could not be done or words to that effect.

And this Examinant further says, That he discoursing with the said Ferguson
concerning the late intended Attempt upon the King and Duke in their return
from Newmarket, asked the said Ferguson what care was taken to justify the
same, if in case it took effect, for that the other party might in revenge shed
a great deal of Blood, and immediately proclaim the Princess of Orange, which
would overthrow the whole Design. To which he answered me that care would be
taken about it and that the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs and most of the Lieutenancy
should be secured. But when this Examinant desired to know what persons were to
be concerned, he bad this Examinant ask no questions, for things would be
managed well, as he said; and that if London was secured, all England would
fall in.

And this Examinant further says, that when this Examinant asked the said
Ferguson whether any Declaration was prepared to be published upon such
occasion? he told this Examinant that it had been considered of and was ready,
and would be printed ready to be dispersed: but when this Examinant asked him
how it should be done, he answered it was assuredly so, but this Examinant must
ask no questions.

And this Examinant further says, That before this Examinant bespake the Arms
mentioned in his former Examinations, the said Ferguson told this Examinant
that he would give this Examinant money to pay for them, for he had five or six
hundred pounds at Command, but he paid not the money to this Examinant till
about three weeks or a month since and then paid it this Examinant in ninety
three Guineys, but would not tell this Examinant of whom he had the said money.
And this Examinant further says, That the said Ferguson told this Examinant
that the Scots intended to make some Insurrection in Scotland this Summer, but
were not well able to do so without the assistance of ten thousand pounds or
some other great sum to buy Arms for them, which he had hopes of getting for
them and that they expected, and he hoped they would be seconded by a party in
England both in London and in the Northern and Western parts. And when this
Examinant asked him what persons of Note would engage in it and what method
they would use; He answered, First let us sound our strength and if there be
encouragement from that, you will not want men of Quality to take their Post,
but you must excuse me from naming of them till there be occasion. And this
Examinant further says, that though he frequently enquired whether any money
had been paid to the Scots, he could not certainly be informed that any money
had been paid.

And further says this Examinant, that the Arms in his former Examinations
particularly mentioned were directed by the Company then present to be bespoken.

And further this Examinant says, That he has been often in company with Mr.
Edward Norton of Dorsetshire, as this Examinant does believe, with Nathaniel
Wade a Barrister at Law and Francis Goodenough an Attorney at Law, at the
Castle-Tavern in Fleetstree* and at the Green Dragon Tavern upon Snow-hill;
where some Discourses were held concerning an I^^urrection in Scotland and of
one in England, if there should be occasion or be thought requisite; at which
time the said Parties last mentioned, declared they would not be wanting to act
their parts therein. And this Examinant further says not.

Robert West.
24 Junii
Cap and recognit. coram me

L. JENKINS.



The further Examination of Robert West, taken by my Lord Keeper the 25th June,
1683.
THis Examinant further says, That Robert Ferguson in his two former
Examinations named, told and sent this Examinant word by a Note, That if this
Examinant would send to Major John Wildman (commonly so called) he would pay a
hundred pounds for the Arms in this Examinants farther Examinations mentioned
to be bougth by this Examinant; and this Examinant not being willing to speak
with the said Wildman himself, sent Richard Rumbald to receive the money; but
the said Wildman was gone out of Town before the said Rumbald did call at his
house. And this Examinant further says, That upon some discourse at one of the
Meetings in his former Examinations mentioned, it was proposed, whether some of
the chief Ministers of State, particularly the Lord Keeper, the Lord Marquess
of Hallifax, and the Earl of Rochester that now is, should be killed and it was
agreed that it was very necessary they should be killed; but no particular
persons were appointed to do it, as this Examinant remembers, it being thought
almost impossible for any of the said Ministers to escape. And further, this
Examinant says not.

Robert West.
25 Junii 1683.
Cap. and recognit. coram me

Fr. North, C. S.



The further Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple, Barrister at Law,
taken before Mr. Secretary Jenkins the 26th of June 1683.
THis Examinant further says, That some time in the last Spring, and to the
best of this Examinants remembrance, whilst the King was at Newmarket, Francis
Shute, late deceased, came to this Examinant with a Message from the Lord
Howard of Escrick, as he told this Examinant, to this effect, viz. That the
Lord Howard had a Project for raising a Body of Men to make an Insurrection and
desired this Examinants concurrence and assistance in it; and shortly after,
the Lord Howard and Mr. Shute came to this Examinants Chamber in the Temple,
where the Lord Howard told this Examinant, That except some effort were made by
the People toward saving their Liberties and Religion, all would be lost; or
used words to that effect. And this Examinant telling his Lordship that he saw
no way of doing so, that did not endanger the People more in case of a
miscarriage, his Lordship told this Deponent, he had thought of a method
^easible in his opinion, and it was this, to the best of this Examinants
remembrance, viz. That Ten men of Skill and Conduct in Martial Affairs should
meet and each choose to himself ten men whom he might use, that every of these
ten should raise 20 men, so as to make up a Body of two thousand men: that
empty Houses should be taken for these men, as near the several Gates of the
City and other convenient Posts as could be: that the night before the
Execution intended, the Men should be got into those Houses, and acquainted
with the execution; such as refused should be clapped into the Cellars, and the
rest sally out at the most convenient hour, and seize and shut up the Gates,
and then demand the Inhabitants Arms: and he doubted not but they would deliver
them and People enough come into assistance. His Lordship named Col. Rumzey,
Col. Danvers, Mr. Clare and three others whom this Examinant has forgotten,
for six of the principal Ten, and desired this Examinant to speak to them to
consider of the Project and fill up the number of Ten; but this Examinant
having no mind to engage in it, only told Col. Romzey of it and none other of
the Parties abovenamed, who told this Examinant he would not meddle in it, and
advised this Examinant to proceed no further; and when the said Lord Howard
came to this Examinant for an answer, this Examinant told his Lordship, that he
could meet with no encouragement; whereupon his Lordship replied he could make
as good a shift as other men, and he would trouble himself no further and came
not since to this Examinant.

And this Examinant further says, That the Lord Howard at another time told
this Examinant at a Tavern in the City, That he thought it no difficulty with
500 Horse to surprise the King, Duke and all the Court at Newmarket, by beating
up their Quarters about break of day; but this Examinant told the said Lord
Howard it was impossible to get such a Body to so great a distance unobserved,
at which his Lordship seemed convinced.

And this Deponent further says, That the said Ferguson told this Examinant,
That the Arms to be bought with the said 10000 l. lay ready provided in Holland
to be Transported for Scotland, and that the Earl of Argile would go over with
them and Head the Scots in Person; and that one English Lord offered to pay the
whole 10000 l. by Mortgaging his Estate, if the rest of the Managers would have
secured him their proportions. But he should not name the Lord's Name then but
since the said Ferguson told this Examinant it was the Lord Gray. And further
this Examinant says not.

Robert West.
26 Iunii 83.
Capt. and Cognit. Coram me

L. Ienkins.



The further Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple Barrister at Law.
THis Examinant says, That he was informed by Mr. Ferguson, and to the best of
his remembrance by Colonel Romzey likewise, That the late Earl of Shaftsbury
advised the Duke of Monmouth when he went into Cheshire in September last, That
if his Grace were attended with a good appearance of Gentlemen and Freeholders
there, his Grace should set up and declare for a Free Parliament. And that when
his Grace was taken into Custody by a Messenger, the said Earl of Shaftsbury
advised that the said Messenger should be killed and his Grace return into
Cheshire and declare as above or else Post into the West of England and set up
there. But his Grace and the Lord Gray of Wark were of another opinion, viz.
That his Grace should Surrender himself which his Grace did accordingly.

And this Examinant further says, That since the Insurrection intended in
November last was laid aside, this Examinant was informed by Colonel Romzey,
that one great reason of its being laid aside, was, that one Mr. John
Trenchard, on whom there was a great Reliance for a considerable body of Men in
the West, viz. at Taunton, would not undertake to procure such a Body, for
which he was much reproached by the Lord Gray.

And this Examinant further says, That some time before Mr. Ferguson went over
into Holland, the said Ferguson, this Examinant and one Mr. John Roe late
Sword Bearer of Bristol were together at the Young Devil Tavern in
Fleet Street, where some Discourse was had concerning the killing the King and
Duke of York and of a general Insurrection; but this Examinant cannot remember
any particular passages of that Discourse.

And this Examinant further says, That after the said Ferguson went for
Holland, viz. about Christmas last, Colonel Romzey, this Examinant, Richard
Goodenough and the said Roe, several times met and discoursed concerning the
said Design against the King and Duke; as also of a general Insurrection, which
they distinguished by the names of the Lopping Point, and General Point: One of
which Meetings, to the best of this Examinants remembrance, was at this
Examinants Chamber in the Temple, where were present besides Colonel Romzey,
this Examinant, the said Goodenough and Roe, Mr, Joseph Tyley, Mr. Edward
Norton, and Mr. Richard Nelthrop. And the said Mr. Nelthrop approved of an
Insurrection, but always expressed a Detestation of the Design to kill the King
and Duke, as a base ungenerous thing: But the said Roe declared, he would be
one to execute it rather than it should fail to be done.

And this Examinant says, That at some or all of those Meetings it was
discoursed in what place, and in what manner the said Design against the King
and Duke should be put in execution; and it was proposed to be done either in
the Playhouse, by planting Men in the Pit about the King's Box, armed with
Pistols and Pocket-Blunderbusses, who between the Acts of the Play should make
the Assault, or in their return from the Playhouse by night under Bedford
Garden Wall; because of the convenience for one part of the Assailants walking
unsuspected in the Piaza and another walking so in the Square within the Rails,
and another being about the Church Porch, who upon the first Assault might
prevent Assistance to the King out of Covent Garden: Or else it might be done
as the King and Duke were passing down the River in a Barge, either by
overrunning their Barge with a Hoy, or else Boarding their Barge, and shooting
a Plank or two out of the bottom with Blunderbusses, and so to sink it; but
both these ways were looked upon as very hazardous and probable to miscarry,
and therefore neither was agreed on.

And this Examinant further says, That in the last Christmas Holy Days,
Colonel Romzey invited this Examinant, and several others to Dinner at his
House in Kings-Square in Sohoe Fields, where Dined this Examinant, Mr. Richard
Goodenough, Mr. Francis Goodenough, Mr. Roe. Mr. Blaney, and to the best of
this Examinants remembrance, Mr. Joseph Tyley, and some Discourse was then had
of the said Design against the King and Duke, and of a general Insurrection,
which this Examinant proposed to them being Lawyers to call and distinguish
them in this manner; The Design of Killing the King and the Duke, Executing a
Bargain and Sale, which was a short manner of Conveyance: And the general
Insurrection, By the executing a Lease and Release which is a longer
Conveyance, which Distinction was received, and often afterward made use of;
but the same Blaney was never afterward, as this Examinant remembers, at any
other Meeting.

And this Examinant further says, That some short time after Christmas last,
this Examinant, Colonel Romzey, Mr. Walcot, and Mr. Rumbold met at the
Salutation Tavern in Lumbard-street, where it was Discoursed, that some
Preparations ought to be made against the time, that either the said Design
against the King and Duke, or a general Insurrection should be put in
Execution: And it was ^^greed, That Ferguson should be sent for Home, and that
Ludlow should be sent for if it could be, and that Blank Commissions should be
drawn up for Officers both Civil and Military and a Model of Government; but
there was some doubt in whose Names those Commissions should run, and at last
it was proposed (but this Examinant does not remember by whom) that they should
run in the Name of the Con^ederate Lords and Commons of England. After which
Meeting, this Examinant and Colonel Romzey went the same night, to the best of
this Examinants remembrance or soon after to a Coffee-House in Pope's Head
Alley, to enquire for one Mr. Thomas Shepard a Merchant, for Directions how to
send to Mr. Ferguson then in Holland, and there found Mr. Shepard. And this
Examinant, by the consent of the said Colonel Romzey, wrote a sort of Canting
Letter to Ferguson, to invite him over for his Health, but there was no
particular business in the said Letter; and the said Mr. Shepard sent it: But
Mr. Ludlow was never sent for, nor any Commissions prepared, nor any Frame of
Government drawn up to this Examinants knowledge, or as he ever heard of.

And this Examinant further says* That about Christmas last he was informed,
to the best of this Examinants remembrance, by Colonel Romzey, that a design
for a general Insurrection was carrying on, and was managed by a Cabal or
Council, and that the said Cabal differed amongst themselves, and the business
was like to be at a stand; but the persons of that Cabal, the said Colonel
Romzey, did not then give this Examinant any account of: But the said Colonel
Romzey, this Examinant and Nathaniel Wade agreed to draw up some few
Fundamentals, which they thought reasonable, and the said Colonel Rumsey to
present the same to the Lord Russel, for him to present to the Managers or the
Duke of Monmouth, which they did accordingly, but the same were rejected, as
the said Colonel Romzey told this Examinant, and this Examinant has no Copy of
them.

And this Examinant further says, That about Hillary Term last, this Examinant
was informed by Mr. Joseph Tyley, and since by James Holloway of Bristol, that
there was a considerable Party in Bristol, well provided for, and almost
impatient for Action, and had laid a rational Design, if they could be seconded
in other places.

And this Examinant further says, That he was informed by Mr. Richard
Nelthrop, that Colonel Sidney had sent Aaron Smith into Scotland with Letters
to Sir George Cambel, and Sir John Cochran, or one of them, upon pretense of a
Purchase of Land in Carolina, but in truth, to get them up to London, in order
to settle matters for a Rising, or used words to that effect: and that the said
Colonel Sidney gave the said A^ron Smith Fourscore Guineys, or some such Sum
for his Charges: And Mr. Ferguson has since told this Examinant, that the said
Aaron Smith behaved himself very indiscreetly in the said Journey, and run a
hazard of discovering the Design.

And this Examinant further says, That Mr. Ferguson often told this Examinant,
that it was agreed between several Scots and several Persons of Quality here in
England, that the Scots should have 10000 l. from hence to buy Arms, and then
should Rise in Scotland, and be seconded here by an Insurrection in England; or
if the English would help the Scots to 30000 l. they would attempt a Rising in
Scotland, without being seconded in, or further assisted from England. And that
the 10000 l. was to be paid this day and that day, but at length the 10000 l.
sunk to 5000 l. but the Scots were resolved to Rise though they had nothing but
their Claws to fight with, rather then endure what they did. And about three
Weeks or a Month since, the said Ferguson told this Examinant that Colonel
Sidney and Major Wildman had used the Scots ill and broken with them after
making them attend two Months; and the reason they broke upon was, That the
Scots would not agree to declare for a Commonwealth and the extirpation of the
Monarchy, but that the said Ferguson had hopes of raising the Money otherwise,
but would not tell this Examinant how; neither could this Examinant ever be
certainly informed whether any part of the said Money has been paid to the
Scots. And this Examinant further says, That Mr. John Roe has told this
Examinant, that he the said Roe was acquainted with some Scotchmen here in
London, who informed him that there were 2000 or 3000 Scots (many of them
Bothwel-Bridge Men) who were Journey-men and Pedlers in and about England, and
were under the order and management of ten or twelve Scotchmen in London, who
could in a Month or six weeks time draw in all up to London; and that the Earl
of Shaftsbury had a great command of these men.

And this Examinant further says, That about three Months since or
thereabouts, this Examinant being upon the Exchange, met with Major Wildman,
who told this Examinant for News that the Marquess of Huntly and Earl of
Douglas, two eminent Papists, were reported to be made General of the Forces,
and Governor of Sterling Castle in Scotland and that a Resumption or
Repurchase of the Abbey Lands was going to be made there. Whereupon this
Examinant told the said Major Wildman, That he this Examinant had a Plantation
in America where the Churchmen never had Footing, and would go thither if he
was driven from hence. To which the said Major Wildman replied, Keep here, and
don't talk of being driven out, drive them out hence. And this Examinant
saying, He did not see how that could be done: The said Major Wildman returned,
it may be done, and must be done, and shall be done; or used words to that
effect.

And this Examinant further says, That Mr. Rumbald told this Examinant not
long since, that Major Wildman had showed him a Paper in the nature of a
Declaration or Remonstrance, which he intended to have Printed and Dispersed
among the People at the time of the intended Insurrection; and that he the said
Wildman had formerly encouraged the said Rumbald in the attempt upon the King
and Duke in their way to or from Newmarket, but afterward seemed to discourage
him.

And this Examinant further says, That after the Fire happened at Newmarket,
and this Examinant, Colonel Romzey, Walcot, Ferguson, Rumbald, and Richard
Goodenough had met twice, and resolved to let making any Attempt upon the King
and Duke alone. The said Ferguson on Saturday or Sunday before the Kings
return, borrowed Forty Gunies of Colonel Romzey, as the said Colonel Romzey and
Ferguson have since told this Examinant, in order to set the same on work, but
did nothing in it; and has since repaid Thirty Gunies, if not the whole Forty
Gunies to the said Colonel Romzey.

And this Examinant further says* That after the Kings return from Newmarket,
the said Colonel Romzey, this Examinant, Ferguson, Rumbald, Goodenough, and
Walcot, as this Examinant believes, met at the George and Vulture Tavern on
Ludgate Hill, where the Arms in this Examinants former Examinations mentioned
and the Sorts and Sizes thereof were agreed upon: And the said Ferguson told
the Company that one was employed to see for some Convenience between
Hampton Court and Windsor, to make the Attempt upon the King and Duke, but he
never made any Report of the Message, though he was pressed to it by this
Examinant and others, being then wholly intent, as this Examinant perceived,
upon Managing the Scotch Insurrection.

And this Examinant further says, That soon afterward there were several
Meetings between all or most of the Parties abovementioned, at the Castle
Tavern in Fleetstreet, and Green Dragon Tavern on Snow-hill; but this Examinant
does not remember any particular Discourse at any of the said Meetings, other
than concerning the Progress of the Scotch preparation toward an Insurrection.

And this Examinant further says, That there was since proposed making an
Attempt upon the King and Duke in their return from the Dukes Playhouse in the
narrow part of the Street, but the same was wholly rejected and this Examinant
never heard of any Attempt designed to be made upon the King and Duke at a
Bull-Feast, nor never heard that a Bull-Feast was to be had till about Ten or
Eleven days since.

And this Examinant further says, That the said Ferguson told this Examinant
that the Insurrection in England intended to second that in Scotland would be
in this manner, viz. That one Party should be up in the West at Bristol,
Taunton, and thereabout, another in Yorkshire at York, another in Cheshire at
Chester, and if it could be done, another in Devonshire at Exeter; in every of
which places some Persons of Quality would appear, but named them not, and that
the main Push was designed at London, and was ordered thus, viz. That several
parties should at once Attack the Tower, the Guards and the Exchange, the Mews,
the Savoy, and White Hall, and one at Westminster should fall upon the back of
White Hall, that a Party of Horse should be laid at Stains Bridge to way-lay
the King and Duke, if they went toward Windsor, and another Party of Horse to
way-lay them in their Road to Portsmouth if they went thither; that the Mayor
and Sheriffs should be seized but the Design was not to be Communicated till it
was ripe for Action; and added, that he hoped the Duke of Monmouth and Lord
Russel might be prevailed with to appear in London.

And this Examinant further says, That after the Scots were disappointed of
the Money promised to them the said Ferguson would have had this Examinant to
have met and discoursed with Sir Thomas Armstrong, but this Examinant refused
to do so; and he once asked this Examinant to wait upon the Duke of Monmouth
but this Examinant refused that also.

And this Examinant further says, That though the said Ferguson was shie of
Naming Persons of Quality to this Examinant yet he always believed he meant the
Duke of Monmouth, Lord Russel* Lord Gray; Colonel Sidney, Mr. Charleton, Major
Wildman and others, but this Examinant never Discoursed with any of them
himself. And Colonel Romzey about two or three Months since to the best of this
Examinants remembrance told this Examinant that the Lord Howard of Escrick,
Colonel Sidney, Mr. Hampden Junior, Major Wildman and others whom this
Examinant has forgotten were Managers of the Design.

And this Examinant further says, That Richard Rumbald was commonly called
Hanibal by reason of his having but one eye, and that it was usual at the
Meetings abovementioned to Drink a Health to Hanibal and his Boys and this
Examinant believes the Ninety three Guineys in this Examinants former
Examination mentioned to be paid to him by the said Ferguson for the Arms were
given to him by Mr. Charleton, for that the said Ferguson had before told this
Examinant, that he should have the said Money when Mr. Charleton came to Town,
and when the said Ferguson paid the said Guinies to this Examinant he told him
he had not them in his Custody above half an hour, and this Examinant met the
said Charleton going from him when this Examinant came to him.

And this Examinant further says, That about five Weeks since after the said
Treaty with the Scots seemed to be broken off, this Examinant, Colonel Romzey,
Mr. Walcot, Mr. Wade, Mr. Norton, Richard Goodenough, and James Holloway, met
at the Young Devil Tavern between the two Temple Gates, where it was agreed to
divide the City into several Parts and to give the several Parts to several
Persons to examine what Force might be Raised in every one of them, and if 3000
Men could be Raised for the first Onset it was thought sufficient encouragement
to venture upon an Insurrection, and it was not doubted but 20000 Men would
fall in if the first Onset had any success; and in order to this a large Map of
the City and Suburbs was bought and hung up in this Examinants Chamber, where
Mr. Wade, Holloway, and Mr. Francis Goodenough divided the City and Suburbs
into Twenty Divisions, which were to be Managed thus: One principal Man in each
Division should employ Fourteen or Fifteen under him and give them their
particular Walks, so that they might not interfere one with another and be
deceived in their Numbers. These were to provide Ten men apiece at least, so
that 150 Men in each Division would make 3000 out of the Twenty Divisions and
what was over might be kept for a Reserve, but there was no particular Method
as this Examinant remembers agreed upon to use these Men, but was deferred till
the Number was certain, after which Division so made the said Richard
Goodenough by reason of his general Acquaintance undertook to find out Men to
act accordingly, and some short time after the said Parties abovementioned met
at the Green Dragon Tavern, where the said Goodenough declared he had employed
several Persons from whom he hoped to have a good account in a little time, and
the next Week after the said Parties abovementioned and one Mr. Zachary Bourn
a Brewer whom the said Goodenough had employed in it, met at the Salutation
Tavern in Lumbardstreet, but this Examinant came not thither till the company
just broke up, and did not hear what passed there: And about a Week after the
same Parties except Holloway (who was gone to Bristol) met again at the Green
Dragon Tavern on Snow-hill, where the said Goodenough reported that he had an
account of 1300 Men out of Two of the Hamlets, and that Southwark would yield
more and Spittle-Fields a great Number but had no particular account of other
places.

And this Examinant further says, That about Three Weeks since Richard Rumbald
told this Examinant that he suspected Mr. Keeling had discovered all the
Designs, as well that of the intended Assassination from Newmarket as the other
Design then on foot and that if he were sure of it he would take care to get
him knocked on the Head, but was unwilling to do so till he were fully
satisfied and about a fortnight since the said Rumbold told this Examinant that
he had several Reasons to convince him that the said Keeling had made a
Discovery, and but that he made so many Protestations and Imprecations to the
contrary he would kill him. And this Examinant has heard from Mr. William
Rumbald, that he lent the said Keeling an Hundred pounds on Saturday was
Sevenight last, least the said Keeling should be tempted by want of Money,
which he then pretended to labor under. And on Monday was Sevenight last this
Examinant was informed by the said Mr. William Rumbald that the said Keeling
was with Persons that Afternoon, some of whom he believed would have killed the
said Keeling if he had not deceived them by many imprecations that he had made
no Discovery. And this Examinant further says, that this Examinant, Colonel
Romzey, Mr. Wade, Mr. Nelthrop, Goodenough and Norton had notice on Sunday was
Sevenight last, by means of the said Keeling's Brother that the said Keeling
had made a Discovery, and thereupon they resolved to meet early the next
morning in order to their Escapes and according to their appointment met in
Goodmans-Fields, where they endeavored to hire a Boat for Holland, whither all
except this Examinant were resolved to go, but by reason they could not get
clear of Gravesend before five or six a Clock on Tuesday Night, and so might be
taken, they laid aside that Design and every one shifted for himself.

And this Examinant further says, That when this Examinant was much dejected,
and refused to go for Holland, most of the Company and particularly Colonel
Romzey looked wistfully in this Examinant's Face, as if they suspected
Treachery in this Examinant. Whereupon this Examinant told the said Col.
Romzey, this Examinant if he were taken, would not save his Life unjustly, and
instanced that he had never spoke with the Duke of Monmouth and could say
nothing against him and would not do Injustice to the Colonel but rather give
his Right Hand to serve him; which Complement the Colonel returned and so
parted and there was no agreement between all or any the Parties abovenamed to
favor one another and further this Examinant says not.

The further Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple Barrister at Law
before the Lord Keeper the 27 June 1683.
THis Examinant further says, That Mr. Richard Rumbald and a party of his
Friends about Ten years since designed and were prepared to have killed the
King and Duke of York in their Journey to or from Newmarket and lay in Ambush
for that end, but the King and Duke went an unusual Road through the Forest
that time, which they never went before or since, and so escaped them; and the
said Rumbald also told this Examinant that he once had a mind to have taken one
of the Cellars under the Duke's Playhouse, and by placing Barrels of Powder
there have Blown up the Playhouse when the King and Duke were there; but the
consideration that a great number of other innocent People must have perished
in it diverted him from it, though a Friend to whom he communicated the design
endeavored to overruled that objection by saying, What have the Iack-Daws to
do amongst the Rooks?

And this Examinant further says, That at some Meeting before or about
Christmas last there was a discourse concerning Surprising some Garrisons in
case of an Insurrection and it was proposed for Portsmouth, that some Gentlemen
should go into the Town and Treat the Officers of the Garrison who in that bad
Air were apt to accept of an Invitation and drink plentifully, and that in the
height of their drinking a party of Men who might be brought into Town on a
Market Day in Country men's Habits should Surprise the Guards, who likewise to
that end should be Treated and it was thought the Townsmen who were uneasy
under the Insolences of the Garrison would be apt to close in and assist in
the Enterprise. Pendennis Castle was also mentioned as a place naked and easily
seized and that might be of great use: And this Examinant does not remember any
thing said about Hull, but Mr. Ferguson lately told this Examinant, that he had
good assurances of having Newcastle.

And this Examinant further says, That after the intended Insurrection in
November last was laid aside, Ferguson to the best of this Examinants
remembrance told this Examinant that the Lord Shafisbury had sent Mr. Walcot to
Sir Wiliiam Courtney in Devonshire, to engage him in an Insurrection and to
join with some Person of Quality if it should be thought fit to send one
thither, but Mr. Walcot returned without any encouragement from Sir William
Courtney: And though this Examinant knew that the said Mr. Walcot took a
Journey into Devonshire, yet the said Mr. Walcot kept the business of it close
from this Examinant and would own only making a visit to a Friend.

And this Examinant further says, That the Places usually resolved on for
places of Rendezvous in case of an Insurrection in London, were Saint
Iames-Square, Covent Garden, Lincolns-Inn-Fields, Smithfield, the
Royal Exchange, St. Georges Fields in Southwark, Goodmans-Field, Spittle-Fields
and Moor-Fields, where the Arms in the Artillery Ground were to be Seized.

And this Examinant further says, That Mr. Roe told this Examinant, That he
had Discoursed with one Mr. Hicks a Tobacconist, an Anabaptist Preacher, a
great Ringleader of the Anabaptists; and that the said Hicks had told him, that
the Anabaptists could, and he believed upon a good consideration would make up
an Army of 20000 Men, and 1500 of the 20000 would be Horse; and though perhaps
there would be a necessity of making use of some great Men at the beginning
(and this Examinant thinks he mentioned the Duke of Monmouth) yet when the
Anabaptists were once up, they would not lay down their Arms, till they had
their own terms.

And this Examinant further says, That to the best of his remembrance he was
informed by Colonel Romzey, that the Managers of the general Insurrection had
one or more Meetings at the House of Mr. Thomas Shepard Merchant in
Abchurch-Lane, or St. Clements-Lane in Lumbard-steet, London; and that if the
Money were paid to the Scots, the said Mr. Shepard was to return it into
Holland: and this Examinant, to the best of his remembrance, once to twice
asked Mr. Shepard, whether any Money were paid? who answered, it was promised
several times, but he had not any assurance of its being paid. And this
Examinant believes, the said Mr. Shepard did know of the intended Assassination
of the King and Duke, but does not remember that this Examinant had any
particular Discourse with the said Mr. Shepard about it, the said Shepard
having failed to meet this Examinant, Col. Romzey, and others, several times
when he had promised to do so.

And this Examinant further says, That Mr. Ferguson, to the best of this
Examinant's remembrance, told this Examinant since the King went to Windsor,
that there had been some thoughts of Surprising Windsor with 500 Horse, but
upon consideration, it seemed impracticable, but he named no Persons to this
Examinant.

And the said Ferguson desired this Examinant, to speak to Mr. Richard
Goodenough to meet Sir Thomas Armstrong, which this Examinant did; and this
Examinant believes, the said Goodenough and Sir Tho. Armstrong, have had
several Meetings, and the said Goodenough has Communicated to Sir Thomas
Armstrong the design last carrying on for Raising 3000 Men out of the Twenty
Divisions of the City and Suburbs, and the Progress that was made in it.

And this Examinant further says, That at one of the Meetings concerning the
last mentioned Design, Mr. Richard Goodenough Reported one Man (but would not
name him) would undertake to bring 1000 Men out of the Hamlets, and if occasion
were to give satisfaction, he would show them all a Footbal Match or other
Pastime, but the said Goodenough reported withal, that he found most Persons
insist upon terms, and required to know what ease and advantage they should
have in matters of Religion, their Liberties and Properties, and what assurance
they should have of their being performed before they would actually engage in
Arms, for they would not Fight to change Persons only, but Things; But whether
any thing was done in order to give them such satisfaction, this Examinant
knows not.

And this Examinant further says, That the fundamentals in this Examinant's
last Examination mentioned to be prepared by Mr. Wade, Col. Romzey, and this
Examinant, were only rough drawn up by the said Mr. VVade's own Hand; and this
Examinant did not write them, nor had any Copy of them, because if they had
been approved of, it was intended to have drawn them into form, and therefore
this Examinant cannot set them forth exactly, but to the best of this
Examinant's remembrance, the substance of them was to the effect following.

1. That the People should annually meet at a certain time to Choose Members of
Parliament, without any Writ or particular Direction to do so.

2. That the Parliament should Meet at, and Sit for a stated time, and not be
Dissolved, Prorogued or Adjourned, but by their own Consent, and that no
Prorogation or Adjournment should hinder their Meeting before the day, to which
they were Prorogued or Adjourned, if there were occasion.

3. That the Parliament should consist of a House of Lords, and a House of
Commons, but the exact number of both or either of them, this Examinant does
not remember.

4. That only such Nobility should be Hereditary as were assisting in this
Design, the rest should be only for Life, and upon their Death the House of
Lords be supplied from time to time with new ones out of the House of Commons,
but whether by the Election of the Lords, or of the Prince, this Examinant does
not remember.

5. The Militia should be in the Parliament, and the Parliament have the
Nomination if not the Election of all Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
and other greater or lesser Officers Civil or Military.

6. That what Acts passed in both Houses should be a Law for one Year without
the Prince's Consent, and what Acts passed both Ho^ses in two several
Parliaments should be a Perpetual Law without his Consent.

7. That a Council to the Prince should be Elected out of the Parliament, a
certain Number of the Lords to be Elected by the Commons, and a certain Number
of the Commons to be Elected by the Lords, but the Number of the Council, or of
either Lords or Commons to be of it, this Examinant does not remember.

And this Examinant further says, That before the said Ferguson went for
Holland this Examinant pressing him to know, whether the Duke of Monmouth were
acquainted with the Design against the King and Duke, and would not Hang all
Persons concerned in it, if it succeeded, the said Ferguson said, what if I get
it under his Hand, that he shall not? To which this Examinant answered, It
would be sufficient Satisfaction; but when the said Ferguson returned from
Holland, and this Examinant pressed him again to have Security fit to be relied
on, he asked this Examinant, Whether that were fit to be proposed to the Duke?
And this Examinant saying, If he durst not propose it, he thought other Men
ought not to venture upon it: Whereupon the said Ferguson said, That he had
mentione^ something concerning the King to the Duke of Monmouth, but not
Assassinating him; to which the Duke Answered somewhat sternly, You must look
upon me in the Capacity of a Son; Which answer for some time dampt the Design,
and always clogged it: But at length it was resolved, that if the Duke did
prosecute the Actors in it, that the Duke himself should be killed if it could
be done. And this Examinant believes Colonel Romzey was present at, or made
acquainted by this Examinant with the said Discourse.

And this Examinant further says, That the said Ferguson, to the best of his
remembrance, told this Examinant, that some thoughts had been formerly of
making an Attempt upon the King and Duke the last Lord Mayors Day, either going
out of the Coach into Guild Hall, or in the Hall at Dinner (which might be done
with Men with Swords only) or in their return from thence at Ludgate, or
Pauls-Church-Yard, but for the great hazards in either of these ways, nothing
was resolved on.

And this Examinant further says, That this Examinant perceiving that little
or no preparations were made for the last Designed Attempt in the
Newmarket-Journey, told the said Ferguson of it, to which the said Ferguson
answered; That he should have a Sum of Money for it when things were fixed, but
not else, for a Sum had been Deposited in a Man's hand (but named not whose) for
the former designed Attempt in the October Journey, and though it was not made
use of, it was not returned, and there was no asking for such Money again. And
this Examinant further says, That at one of the Meetings concerning the
Attempt upon the King and Duke, this Examinant propos^d to the said Ferguson,
that some of the Duke of Monmouths Servants or Dependants should be brought
into the Action, which might be some security to the Persons engaged, or at
least make the World think the Duke concerned in it, if he were not. But Mr.
Rumbald did not care to engage with any of them, however this Examinant
believes the said Proposal had been Communicated to some of them, for that this
Examinant was told (to the best of his remembrance) either by Colonel Romzey or
Mr. Ferguson, that Sir Thomas Armstrong offered to engage, if Colonel Romzey
would; but the Colonel refused, and that in case of a general Insurrection, Sir
Thomas Armstrong would the night before it attempt to kill the Duke of York, by
going to him with a pretense to discover some Plot against him.

And this Examinant was informed by Mr. John Roe, That one Mr. Gibbons, who was
or had been a Servant to the Duke of Monmouth, ^et the said Roe in
Covent Garden, or carried him thither, and there told the said Roe, that was a
Convenient place to do the Trick in (by which this Examinant understood the
Attempt upon the King and Duke) and that he the said Gibbons would engage to be
one in it.

And this Examinant further says, That about a fortnight before the Kings
return from Newmarket, when the Attempt was resolved on to be made, Mr.
Ferguson told this Examinant, That the Duke of Monmouth and several Lords
should be invited into the City to a Dinner the same day that the King was to
return, so as they might be ready to appear in the City upon the Arrival of the
News, and the said Ferguson told this Examinant, that some preferment was
designed for this Examinant, and desired this Examinant to consider and give a
Note of such Lawyers as this Examinant thought fit to be, and would accept of
being Judges; but this Examinant only smiled at his vanity, and never gave the
said Ferguson any such account.

Robert West.
27. Iunii 1683.
Capt. and recognit. Coram me

F. North, C. S.



The further Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple, Barrister at Law.
AND this Examinant further says, That at one of the Meetings held for
managing the business of the Assassination of the King and Duke in their
Newmarket-Journy, there was some Discourse about getting the Arms down to Mr.
Rumbald's House, and the said Rumbald first proposed to put them up in long
Chests, and send them down by some Empty Carts from Smithfield, and afterward
he thought to make use of two trusty Watermen of his acquaintance, who should
lay them in the Boat, and carry Oysters over them (as sometimes they used to
carry Oysters) up Ware-River, and land them at, or near his own House; or else
every Man was to carry his own Arms under long Coats: But no particular way was
resolved on, but such was to be used, as should appear most safe: and at the
same or some other Meeting for the same purpose, it was discoursed how the Men
should get down unobserved, and it was thought best that they should go from
London in the Evening, in small numbers, so as to arrive at the place about
Midnight, and go into an empty House near Rumbald's own House, where their
Horses should be put into a Barn, and be refreshed; and Rumbald was to send
away his Servants early to Market, and his Wife and Daughter he resolved to
Lock up above Stairs: But the greatest difficulty was, how these Men should get
off after the Business was done; the Road might be full, and the party Cut off
by some force that might come from London, and therefore Rumbald proposed, that
if he survived the Action, or were not disabled in it, to bring them a back way
over the Meadows, and over Hackney-Marsh (to the best of this Examinant's
remembrance) which he said was a very good way, and all of it to be Gallopped,
and by that meas they might get to London as soon as the news could. Or else
the said Rumbald offered that the party should retire into his own Yard, which
was Walled in with a high Wall, and Moated round, which he would undertake to
defend against any Force that could assault them, and before night he thought
all would be dispersed and shifting for themselves, and the Road be clear to
London, but which Course he would take, was left to his Discretion, as the
Circumstances of the Case should require.

And this Examinant further says, That the several ways proposed to surprise
and take the Tower of London were these, to the best of this Examinant's
remembrance; One was so send ten or twelve Men Armed with Pistols,
Pocket-Daggers, and Pocket-Blunderbusses into the Tower, under pretense of
seeing the Armory; another number should go to see the Lions, who by reason of
their not going into the inner Gate, were not to have their Swords taken from
them; that the persons who went to see the Armory, should return into the
Tavern or Sutlers House just within the Gate, and there Eat and Drink till the
time for the Attempt was come; that some persons should come in a Mourning
Coach, or some Gentleman's Coach, to be borrowed for this occasion, under
pretense of making a visit to some of the Lords in the Tower, and just within
the Gate some of the persons issuing out of the Tavern should kill one of the
Horses, and overturn the Coach so as the Gate could not be shut; and the rest
of the persons within, and those who went to see the Lions, should set upon the
Guards, that upon a Signal of the Coach driving down, a party of Men (two or
three Hundred or more if they could be got, and were to be lodged in empty
Houses to be hired for that purpose, as near the Tower as could be had) should
be ready to rush out, and (...) the noise of the first shot, immediately run
down to the Gate, (...) break in. This way if at all put in Execution, was to
be in the (...) time about two a Clock, because after dinner the Officers are
usually dispersed or engaged in drinking, and the Soldiers loytering from
their Arms.

Another way proposed was, that several Men should enter Actions against one
another in St. Katherine's Court held for the Tower Liberty within the Tower,
and that at the Court-day, at which time great Liberty is allowed to all
Persons to come in, a party of Men should go as Plaintiffs and Defendants, and
Witnesses, who joined with some others, who should come in under pretense of
Curiosity as abovementioned, should attempt the surprise, and be seconded by
the Party from the hired Horses; and to the best of this Examinant's
remembrance, a Coach was likewise to be made use of in this Case. And at one of
the late Meetings for carrying on the last Insurrection, Mr. Goodenough
reported, that an Engineer told the said Goodenough, that he would recommend
some honest stout Fellows to be Laborers and Workmen in the Tower, who should
be acquainted with the Design, and ready to assist in it.

Another way proposed was, to surprise it by night, but that was full of
difficulty; and all that this Examinant remembers to have been proposed was,
that a parcel of Faggots should be carried down to the Gate and fired, and to
some other Part (this Examinant thinks the Watergate) if it were practicable,
and a great quantity of Faggots should be prepared to throw into the Ditch, and
to make up Works. That which most perplexed the business was, that to surprise
the Tower by night, was very difficult, and to begin an Insurrection in the day
time, was as difficult, and would lose many advantages that the night or break
of day would afford; and therefore no resolution was taken: These were only the
Debates of the meetings of this Examinant, and the other Persons in this former
Examination named, but this Examinant never heard what the Principal Managers
considered of or resolved on in the Case.

And this Examinant further says, That Mr. Ferguson used to go by the name of
Roberts; and told this Examinant, he was to go for Holland with or soon after
the Bill for the Money to be paid to the Scots, and that the intention was to
Land the Arms at Edinburgh-Frith, to the best of this Examinant's remembrance.

And this Examinant further says, Mr. William Rumbald told this Examinant,
that after it was violently suspected that Mr. Keeling had made a Discovery,
but had denied it, it was proposed to Mr. Keeling for the satisfaction of his
Friends, that he should go into the Country for sometime (where it was easy to
Kill him and Bury him privately.)

And this Examinant further says, That after it was certainly known that a
Discovery was made, it was said by Mr. VVade to the best of this Examinant's
remembrance, that if a Thousand Men could be got together, it were better to
venture a push here or in the West, and die like Men, than be hanged like Dogs:
To which it was answered by Colonel Romzey, as this Examinant believes, It is
in vain to think of it, the Hearts of the People are down, and our Great Men
are good for nothing, or used expressions to that effect.

And this Examinant further says, That on Monday was Sennight last, Mr.
Ferguson perceiving this Examinant much dejected and Colonel Romzey, Mr. VVade,
Mr. Norton, Goodenough and Nelthorp in some Confusion, laughed, and said to
them, Gentlemen, you are Strangers to this kind of Exercise, I have been used
to fly, I will never leave off as long as I live, and I hope to see some of
you at Dunbarr before Michaelmas, or to that effect.

Robert West.

The further Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple, Barrister at Law.
THis Examinant further says, That at some meetings concerning a General
Insurrection; it was discoursed that a Body of Five hundred Horse would be
necessary to scour the Streets, to prevent the Kings Party from embodying, and
for Fighting the Horse Guards, or for a pursuit, and to that end it was
proposed, that some endeavors should be used to bring up a Party of Horse from
the Adjacent Counties, and that some means should be thought on to seize the
Lifeguard Men's Horses in their Quarters, and the Citizens and Gentlemen's
Horses in the Livery Stables, and if there were success, and a great Body of
Horse should be necessary, the great number of Hackney Coach-Horses in Town
would make a good force. It was further proposed, that Baricadoes should be
made in several great Streets, and several Churches be used for lodging the men.

And this Examinant further says, That at some of the said meeting^ it was
reported, that the Kings Regiments of Foot had not their full Compleatment of
men, but wanted a great number, and that the Officers used to lend one another
men when they went upon the Guard, and therefore the Foot were not so terrible
as might be apprehended.

And this Examinant further says, That it was intended in the beginning of the
general Insurrection in the West, to send out a Pa^ty of Horse to seize the
Marquess of Worcester, now Duke of Beaufort, and his eldest Son, and another
Party to seize the Bishop of B^th and Wells, and some other eminent Men of
that Party, if they were ^en in those parts.

And this Examinant further says, That some time before Christmas last, he
was informed by Mr. Roe, to the best of this Examinant's remembrance, that the
Country expected the City would have been in Arms on Michaelmas-Eve, when the
present Sheriffs of London and Middlesex were Sworn, and that he was Credibly
Informed, that there were Five hundred Horse in the Adjacent Counties ready to
be marched to their Assistance upon the first notice, and that they continued
in a readiness for two days, expecting notice; but this Examinant does not
remember that he named any person from whom he had this Information.

And this Examinant further says, That Mr. Ferguson told this Examinant, that
some Nonconforming Ministers had told him, they suspected he was driving on a
Design to Assassinate the King and Duke, and begged of him to desist; for that
it would bring a Reproach upon the Protestant Religion, whatsoever the event
might be, and that he was forced to assure them, there was no such thing
intended: but alas, said he, they are weak silly men, and not fit for these
thing, who cannot distinguish between Destroying a Prince merely for his
Opinion in Religion, and Destroying Tyrants who Design to overthrow the Laws,
Religion and all Civil Rights, and hate the Nation. It is a pious glorious
Action, and such as will teach all Princes to use their Subjects kindly, or to
that effect.

Robert West.

The further Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple, Barrister at Law.
THis Examinant upon further Recollection says, That after Capt. Walcot had
acquainted this Examinant of the Insurrection intended to have been made in
November last, the said Walcot came the second time to this Examinant, and told
this Examinant, that the Lord Sha^tsbury had prevailed with him to engage in
it; and that if it proceeded he would engage in it, and desired this Examinant
to buy for him, the said Walcot, a long stiff Tuck of some Cutler this
Examinant knew, which this Examinant undertook and bespoke, but was so long
before he could procure it, that the said Walcot had otherwise provibed
himself, and the Design was laid aside first, and this Examinant was forced to
keep the said Tuck, the Cutler refusing to take it again.

And the said Mr. Walcot told this Examinant, to the best of his remembrance,
that the Lord Shaftsbury had formerly sent for Sir George Cambel and Sir John
Cockran, about settling a Scotch Colony or Plantation in Carolina, but he
believed that was only a pretense, and that the real truth was to Concert
Matters in order to some Design in Scotland; for the Lord Shaftsbury had sent
for him, upon pretense of some Command in Carolina, but when he came, the Lord
Shaftsbury was very cool in it. And this Examinant further says, That the said
Mr. Walcot refused a long time to act in any wise, in the Attempt upon the King
and Duke in the Newmarket Journey; but at length, by the persuasion of
Ferguson, as this Examinant believes, he undertook to Command the Party who
were to Fight the Guards, or to be one of them, but refused to act in the
Assassination it self.

And this Examinant further says, The said Ferguson told this Examinant, that
when the Earl of Arg^le was in England last Year, he had offered to make a
sturdy Commotion in Scotland, if he might have had but 6000 l. (for so low he
came down from his first demand of 30000 or 40000 l..) but our Great Men were
jealous of him then, and would not trust him, though he offered that they
should employ whom they would themselves to lay out the Money in Arms, which he
said was a great Oversight and Opportunity lost. And this Examinant believes,
the Assassination of the King and Duke designed in October last, was Projected
and Abetted by the late Earl of Shaftsbury and that the Money in one of this
Examinant's former Examinations, mentioned to be advanced for that Design, was
advanced by the said Earl, because this Examinant had heard (but cannot say
positively from whom) that the said Earl complained of having been ill used in
that Matter, in the Money not being returned, though it was not laid out.

Information of Carleton Whitlock, 5 July 83.
MR. West some time in Easter-Term last, in the Court of Requests, told me,
That some desperate Fellows had designed to have killed the King, or would have
killed the King as he came last from Newmarket, if they had not been afraid
that the Duke of Monmouth would have Hanged them. Upon which I told him, That
it had been a villainous Action, and that all Mankind would have detested the
Action, and the Murderers; and that if it ever had been in the Duke of
Monmouth's Power, he would certainly have Hanged them for it, if they had done
it. He told me afterward, That there was a Design of raising a considerable
Sum of Money to buy Arms, as I remember, in Holland; and that Major Wildman,
Col. Algernoon Sidney, and Ferguson, managed the Business; and that my Lord
Russel was very active in it, or Words to that effect: And that Writings were
drawn, or drawing, or to be drawn, for the taking up of the Money; as I
remember, he said Ferguson was to manage on the behalf of the Scots. This he
told me at his House one Day, when I Dined with him; but upon my not Examining
him to Particulars, he said nothing to me but thus generally: Only at his House
he said, That some of them were for a Commonwealth, and others for Monarchy.

At Mr. Shute's Funeral, in the public Room, Nelthorp came to me, and asked me
for something for poor Ferguson, as he called him; and told me, He was doing a
good Work for all Honest Men. I told him, I would give nothing to any Man, for
doing a Work I did not know of.

C. Whitlock.

Mr. Edmund Waller's Confession.
I Did once meet Mr. West, I do not know the certain time; and he railed so
much at those he called Protestant Lords, that I asked him, if he would have
them be Rebels? and told him, That such Men as he, and nothing else, could
ruin the Kingdom. This was in the Temple, before the Hall. The last and only
other time that I ever spoke with him in private, that is, alone (for we walked
in the Temple-Cloysters) I met him there; and he told me, That some People, not
naming himself as one, had had a Design to set upon the King (I am not certain,
whether he named Newmarket) but he said, It was over. I went from him hastily,
and only said, These things will Hang you, and undo a great many other People:
As I remember, when he said, There had been such a Design; I told him, I did
not believe it: and then he said, It was to have been done as the King came
from Newmarket; and was going on to say more, but I interrupted him, and went
away; and I believe he was jealous of me; for he called after me, and said,
There was no Danger. This was, as I think, the Saturday before this Conspiracy
was spoke of in Westminster Hall.

July 6th. 1683. Edm. Waller.

Information of Zachary Bourn.
RIchard Goodenough bringing Mr. Ferguson, alias Roberts, (for that Name he
used to go by) to my House, it was a great while 'ere I understood any thing at
all of the Design; but so many coming to him daily as did, made me jealous; I
did imagine something of it. Upon which he took an occasion one Day to ask,
What I thought about the Gentlemen that came so often to him? and then says;
Admit there should be a Design on foot, for the Good of the People of England,
Would you be against it? To which I answered, If I can do it with a safe
Conscience, I could not tell well what I should be persuaded to. As to that,
says he, I shall easily satisfy you: And then went on to prove a mutual
Covenant between the King, and the People; that his Majesty had broke it on his
side; so the People were again at Liberty. But to the Matter, says he, as
indeed I will be plain with you; If you love your self, you must come in; for
there is a Design on foot so laid, and so far gone, that it is impossible it
should fail. Then I desired him, if he thought it convenient, to let me know
some Particulars; which he said, He would, provided I would promise him
Secrecy: but especially, I should say nothing to my Father or Wife; for he
thought, I would not speak to any Body else: Upon which I said, I would. And
then he was plain, as he said, and told me as follows:

That there was not a County in England, but had prepared for the Business,
less or more, but especially in the North and West; and that they were sure of
most Places of Strength throughout the Kingdom; but especially, Bristol and
Newcastle: And that they were then a considering, how to secure Portsmouth; but
were afraid they should not, the Garrison was so strong.

And that the Scots were to stir at the same time we were; and that we were to
lend them 10000 l. to be remitted into Holland, to buy Arms for them; and that
he was to go over with the Bills of Exchange: That he found out a Person could
deposite the Money upon good Security, which the Lords had promised should be
given: That there was a Dutch-Merchant or two, that he had got to provide the
Arms, for the English could not do it without Suspicion.

Then I asked him, Who the Lords were? He told me, There was the Duke of
Monmouth, Lord Gray, Lord Russel, and Major Wildman, and Col. Sidney. I told
him, I wondered the Duke would be persuaded to take up Arms against his Father;
for my part, I should be very unwilling to trust him. He answered me, That he
had the greatest Assurance in the World of him; and that I need no more be
afraid of the Duke, than of him.

He told me, The Lord Argyle, who was to command the Scots, was of my Opinion
too; for he had a few days before, sent a Letter to him, to be well satisfied
in the Point; and that he had sent him such an Answer, as he did not doubt
would satisfy him.

He told me, The Duke of York had Fourteen thousand Men in half pay about the
Town: And for his part, he thought we ought to defend our selves; for we could
not tell, but our Throats might be cut every Night. I asked him, How he could
tell all this? He told me, That they had a great deal of Intelligence from the
Tory Party; for there were some, that were willing to play a sure Game, and so
keep in with both Sides. Some little time after this, there came one Mr. John
Row, that was Sword Bearer of Bristol, with one James Holloway, of the same
Place, a Merchant, to enquire for Ferguson; but he was unwilling to see them.
Then Row asked me, to go and give him a Dish of Coffee; which I did: And James
Holloway gave me an account of the Posture of Affairs at Bristol; which I
wondered at, being the first time that ever I saw him, viz.

That they had been ready this two or three Months; that there was but Eight in
Bristol, that knew of it; that he had had some Cannon he had taken out of some
Ships he was concerned in, had lain there so long, he was afraid they would
mistrust something: That he had great plenty of Powder and Bullet in his own
House; and that they had a couple of Ships there, that would carry forty Guns a
piece; which they intended to seize the first Rising, and fit out to Sea. And
then their manner of getting together was thus: Some of those Eight had Houses
out of Town, where they would get all of the Town they thought were for their
Purpose: The Dissenters, under pretense of a Meeting; and the Others, under
some Color or other: And then tell them the Design; and if they would not go
with them, they would secure or force them; and that they would seize all the
Head Men of the Contrary Party, which were not above Thirty in all: And that
they would post Men at the Corner of every Street; so that there should not a
Man stir, without they pleased.

And that to their Assistance, they should have some Colliers out of King-Road,
and some Scotch Pedlers that were about the Country; many of whom were of
Bothwel-Bridge.

He said further, That the King would have by the Time they begun, a great many
Thousand Pounds, that they should seize; and that there was a great many of the
Tory Party, that had a great Sum of Money by them, which they must borrow: And
that there was not a good Horse within Five Miles about them, but they knew
where to have him: That they wanted but two hundred Musque^s; for they thought,
they should have more Men than Arms, which he was come up about; which he
hoped, the Lords would help them to: But if they could not, Mr. Wade would lend
them the Money to buy them; and that he should pack them up in Parcels of
Goods, and send them by the Carrier to his House. Mr. Wade told me himself, He
would do it; that is, lend the Money; but it was some time after this. Mr. Row
sat by, and approved what Holloway said to be true. After this I went down to
the Wells, and staid about a Fortnight. When I came Home again, Mr. Wade came
to me, and told me, I must promise Secrecy, and then he had something to say
me; which was, That Affairs were settled every where very well, but in London:
And though the Lords had a Design to let London alone; yet they saw there was a
necessity, that the Business must be done effectually in London; for if they
let that alone, it was enough to maintain a War against the whole Kingdom, and
that their Friends here would be all ruined: and that in order to the securing
of it, they had taken this Method, by which they might know their Strength.
They had divided the Town into so many Divisions, and had got honest Fellows to
consult what Men they might expect out of every Division; and that they had no
Body about me, that they thought could serve them: and therefore desired me to
think, if it was not possible to get about an hundred and sixty Men out of
Bloomsbury, St. Giles's, St. James's, and Soho; and that I might, by way of
Discourse, ask some of my Acquaintance, If there should be occasion to defend
our selves, whether they could not find out Ten, or Fifteen, or Twenty Men,
that would assist: That they should have a Meeting again in Two or Three Days;
and then he would give me an Account of it, and I should go to them. And
accordingly, on Friday following, being the Eighth of June, toward Evening, he
came and fetched me out, and carried me to the Dragon-Tavern on Snow-Hill; where
I met Colonel Romzey, Mr. Robert West, Captain Walcot, Mr. Norton, Mr. Wade,
Richard and Francis Goodenough. Then I was asked, If I could not do what Mr.
Goodenough had spoke to me about? and was desired, not to say any thing about
the Business to any Body in direct terms, but especially to any of the
Ministers; for West said, They were a parcel of Rogues, that had ruined the
People ever since Constantine. I told them, I thought Mr. Mead, and Mr. Lobb
might be trusted; and that they were, if they would, capable of serving them
very much. But they would not hear it then; but the next Meeting, which was on
Monday the 11th. Ditto, at the Salutation in Lumbard-street, they did think it
was necessary Mr. Lobb should be spoke to, but not directly; which I did: For
the next Day I went to him, and talking of the badness of the Times, I said,
There was but one way to help our selves, and that was by Arms; and if we
should have occasion to do so, I asked him, where he could find a good Parcel
amongst his People, that he thought would stir? He told me, That the Spirits of
the People were low; but he did believe, there was a pretty many of them, that
would make use of an Opportunity, if it was put into their Hands: But he could
see no Hopes of such an Opportunity as yet; we were too great Cowards. But I
bid him not be out of hopes: And so our Discourse ended; for his Wife came in.

The next Meeting, which was on Thursday the 14th. Ditto, at the Dragon on
Snow-Hill, Richard Goodenough brought in an Account of the Divisions he was
concerned in; which was all the Town almost, but where I was; and at
Westminster, where Mr. Grange, a Brewer, was concerned, but he never met with
us; but Goodenough said, He promised Two hundred Men, and would be free of his
Purse. At this Meeting, they resolved on This, which had been Consulted before,
(for now they began to be sure of the Design; for they had a Probability of
Eight or Nine Thousand Men, from the Account Goodenough gave in and others)
That Whitehall should be secured, and the manner thus: That the Men in
Westminster should be ready to make an Attaque on that side, that they would
get about 100 Seamen that should come up in Long-Boats with Hand-Granadoes and
should Attaque that part next the Water and that a Party of about 500 should
come down by Charing Cross, part of which should secure the Mews, and the rest
march down and surprise the Guards in their sleep, for it was to have been
about one or two in the Morning, and that all the Chief Ministers of State were
to be secured, the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs and some of the Aldermen,
another party to secure the Savoy and Sommerset-House, and that in
Covent Garden and Lincolns-Inne-Fields were to be Bodies of Men to be ready to
give assistance if need were, and that all the expedition imaginable was to be
made, for now it was put into the hands of a great many, and there was danger
of a Discovery. Mr. Goodenough told us that day that he had met with an
Engineer that would do strange things about taking the Tower, and that he had
six or seven Mortar Pieces that belonged to the Tower, and that he would take
care to keep them this Month or six Weeks; at that time Mr. West said he
thought I must secure my Neighbor, meaning the Lord Keeper, but I told him I
would do no such thing as to fall on a Neighbor; truly he said he should be
very willing to come to an account with him, and if he did he should put him in
mind of College. At this time Goodenough said the People that he had spoke of
the Matters to, desired they might know what they must trust to, for if the
Design was only to change Persons they had as good have the Father as the Son,
and therefore desired some Heads might be thought on and carried to the Duke to
be signed by him the night before the Design began, and these Five things were
resolved on: 1. That the Militia should be in the hands of the People. 2. That
they should choose their own Sheriffs in every Country. 3. That we should have
a Parliament once a year, and that they should Sit as long as they had any
thing to do. 4. That they should have Liberty of Conscience. 5. That all the
Nobility of England that had acted contrary to the Interest of the People
should be Degraded.


Mr. Wade was to put these in Writing, and to carry them the next Morning to
Colonel Romzey who was to go to the Duke with them, which he did, and on
Saturday the 16th. Ditto at the George and Vulture on Ludgate Hill he brought
us this Account, That he was to wait on the Duke twice before he could speak
with him, but at last did; that the Dukes answer was, That all of them were
things of moment, and that they could not be done without a Parliament but must
be left to them, that he would do what lay in his power toward the obtaining
them, but there being word brought to one Le^ a Dyer in St. Giles Cripple-Gate
Parish, that there was High Treason sworn against him and Richard Goodenough,
Goodenough would not come to us that night, so this only was concluded on,
that we should meet on Monday at the Castle-Tavern in Fleetstreet, and that
some time on Monday Mr. Lee and Mr. Wade should go to Mr. West's Chamber to
survey the Map of the Town to find fit places to meet in and give us an account
at our Meeting, but on Sunday they had an account all was Discovered by one
Keeling whom they had some suspicion of some days before; upon Monday Morning
they met at Captain Tracy's where Captain Walcot Lodged, Colonel Romzey came to
my House and gave Mr. Ferguson and me an account of it, and took me with him to
Captain Tracy's where they consulted how to retrieve the Business: Most were
for pushing for it, and so to die with their Swords in their Hands; and another
way was proposed I think by Mr. West, to kill Keeling and one Doctor Butler
which I think Colonel Romzey named, who was said to be the person brought
Keeling in to Discover, and that this would give them such a Blow would make
them afraid: The manner of taking Doctor Butler was to be thus: Some men to go
to him (as it was to be after the killing of Keeling) and undertake to give him
an exact Account of the Murder and the rest of the Plot, and so to meet at a
Tavern where was a convenient Room for the purpose, and there to have
Assassinated him, but I left them in the dispute and went not again till
Morning, when I came there they were all gone but West, who told me that one
Rumbald and others had been in company with Keeling all the day before and he
had persuaded them into a belief he had sworn nothing against any Man and so
escaped from them, though this Morning they ^ound to the contrary.

At one time talking to Ferguson about this Matter, he said nothing was to be
expected from the Rich old Citizens, and therefore half a dozen of them must be
taken out of their Houses and Hanged on their Sign-Posts and their Houses given
as Plunder to the Mobile and that would scare the rest. Another time meeting
Roe after the Fire at Newmarket a great while, he began to talk of the Design
at Newmarket, which he declined when he found I was ignorant of it, but by him
and others I understood afterward that there was a Consult several times at
West's Chamber against the Life of his Majesty, and that in order thereunto
West had bought as many Arms as cost about 100 l. of a Gunsmith in Shere-Lane,
but the Fire happening prevented the Design. Another time talking with Roe, he
said there was no way like Lopping, that was his Majesty and his Royal
Highness; to which I answered, I never approved of such ways, and that he might
do it himself for me if he would have it done, upon which he replied he would
be one with all his heart* and that it might be done through or over my Lord of
Bedford's Wall as his Majesty went to the Playhouse, or as he went to
Hampton Court from Windsor. At another time I met West on the Exchange, and he
told me the Lords were all a parcel of Rogues, and Ferguson a credulous Fool,
for that they would Trick upon the Scots and us too, that he had laid out a
parcel of Money for Arms, and that he could not get it again, which I told
Ferguson when I saw him but he said he should have it. Some time after I met
him in Lineol^s-Inne-Fields and he told me that he had a Note to one Major
Wildman for the Money and that he would go for it next Morning, which he did, but
the Major was gone out of Town. Some time after I went to Mr. Owen's in
Bloomsbury, where Ferguson then Lodged and there I asked him about West's
Money, he told me he had given it himself, for that it was sent to him just
before Mr. West came in and he had given it him. On Monday they met at Captain
Tracy's, Mr. West gave a Note to one Tottle to go to the Gunsmith to fetch the
Arms he had bought, lest they should be found there and carry them with him to
one of the Plantations, I think New York, which Tottle did then profer, if they
would push for it he would not go his Voyage, though I think he said his Ship
was at Gravesend, nor would he come alone, but undertake for a Hundred Seamen
and others presently.

The persons that used to come to Ferguson were Sir Thomas Armstrong very
often, sometimes two or three times a day, Colonel Romzey, Captain Walcot, Mr.
Wade, Mr. Norton, Richard Goodenough, Richard Nelthrop, Mr. West, Mr. Charleton
with a wooden Leg, Mr. John Freak, Mr. Blaney once or twice, Mr. Thomas Shepard
Merchant, Sir Robert Rich, John Starkey, (Mr. Baily a Scotch-man, and Sir
Camel, and a great many more of his Countrymen) and several from Wapping, all
whom I know when I see, also Mr. John Ayloff used to come when he was in Town.

Ferguson told me of a certain person of Quality in that part of Ireland next
Scotland that could raise Twenty thousand Men, and that he had promised it, I
asked his Name but he would not tell me; he told me it was Aaron Smith was sent
to Scotland about this business, and that he had like to have spoiled all, but
that the person to whom he carried the Letter went to the Council and showed
them a Letter he had about some business of Carolina, and asked leave to come
to London about it, and so got off this suspicion.

Zec. Bourne.
July the 6th, 1683.
Zec. Bourne's further Information.
THat Mr. Baily the Scoth-man sat up one night with Mr. Ferguson, and he went
several times with him to the Duke, and the other Lords, that Ferguson Lodged
at several places a few nights at a time and so to my House again, at one Mr.
Bickerstaff, a Sword-Cutler in Covent Garden, at a German Doctors at the Green
Posts in St. Martins-Lane, and Mr. Owens in King Street in Bloomsbury.

That we met at the Salutation in Lombard Street by the persuasion of Captain
Walcot, for he said Mr. Thomas Shepard would meet us there, he went out of Town
every night and so could not come further, that I have often carried Letters to
the Exchange to Mr. Shepard from Ferguson, that he used to come often to my
House to him, that I believe him to be the Man was to return the ten thousand
pound, for Ferguson told me he had a great Correspondence with several
Merchants in Holland and that he did return my Lord Shaftsbury's Money when he
went over.

That Captain Walcot would have spoke to one Mr. Collins an Anabaptist Preacher
(he Preaches somewhere in Moor-fields) that could assist us greatly, but they
would not hear of it being a Parson.

Mr. West told me that Mr. Ayloff was at the buying the Arms in Shear-lane, and
if at the buying, I suppose at the contriving the use for them; that two or
three days before the Discovery was made by Mr. Keeling, thinking the business
was pretty ripe, Mr. Norton was desired to write to Mr. Ayloff to come to Town
which he did.

That Ferguson desired me to tell them one night when we met, that he must have
a party to seize Mr. L'Estrange, for he should find strange Papers, and that
great care must be taken to secure the Paper-Office at Whitehal.

Zec. Bourne.

THat Ferguson told me that one Mr. Owen of Gray's Inn would give a hundred
pound toward the Design, and further he told me that he was the Author of
those two Libels, viz. A Letter about the Black-Box; And a Letter concerning
His Majesty's Declaration: that as he walked in the Fields at that time the
Discourse was about the Black-Box, it came into his mind to write about it,
which he did in an Alehouse in Chancery Lane, and that afterward when His
Majesty's Declaration came out concerning the Duke of Monmouth, he finding no
body took notice of it in Print, he resolved to write an Answer to that, which
he said he did as he lay in his Bed one Morning, and further told me, he got
one thrown on His Majesty's Hat as he walked on the Tarras Walk at Windsor, and
another laid under his Pillar, but would not tell me who it was had so disposed
of them two for him; and farther told me that the Duke of Monmouth gave him
fifty Guinies for that piece of service and so has done every year since. Mr.
Bethel that was Sheriff of London was once at my House with Ferguson and had
some private Discourse with him.

Zec. Bourne.

The further Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple, Barrister at Law.
THis Examinant upon further Recollection says, That at the Meetings for
carrying on the Assassination of the King and Duke, it was resolved, that Sir
John Moor the late Lord Mayor of London should be killed, as well as the
present Lord Mayor and Sheriffs, and that if the people did not pull him in
pieces, his Skin should be stead off and stuffed and hung up in Guild Hall, as
one who betrayed the Rights and Privileges of the City.

And it was further resolved that Mr. Papillion and Mr. Dubois should be
declared Sheriffs, and Sir Thomas Gold or Alderman Cornish (but this Examinant
thinks Alderman Cornish was pitched on as the brisker Man) to be Lord Mayor,
and that they should be forced to take those Offices upon them, and if they
refused should be knocked on the head. And Sin Robert Clayton and Sir Patience
Ward who had behaved themselves like Trimmers in their Mayoralty, and neglected
to repeal several Bylaws whereby they might have prevented Sir John Moor from
being Lord Mayor, should be forced to appear publicly and own the fact, or
else be knocked on the Head.

And it was further proposed that most of the Judges should be killed or
brought to Trial for their Arbitrary Judgments, and their Skins stuffed and hung
up in Westminster Hall.

It was further said by Colonel Rumzey, to the best of this Examinants
remembrance, that though he was not for shedding much blood* there would be a
necessity of taking off some of the chief Abhorrers and Addressers in most
Counties, otherwise they would be making head, but this Examinant was of
opinion that a public Declaration of safety to their persons and Estates if
they would submit, was a better expedient and would win more upon the People:
And it was further resolved that some of the principal reputed Pentioners in
the late long Parliament should be brought to Trial and Death, and that there
Skins should be stuffed and hung up in the Parliament House, as Betrayers of the
People, and of the Trust. It was proposed that Bishops Deans and Chapters
should be wholly laid aside, but no resolution was taken concerning their
Lands, because the present Tenants might be induced to submit in hopes of
preserving them, and would be sure to struggle if they saw they must lose them,
and those who had those Lands in the late times would be sure to engage in Arms
for us or submit in hopes of having those Lands again. Some discourse was had
of applying those Revenues, and of one half or two thirds of the Colleges in
both Universities to public uses in ease of the People from Taxes. It was
further proposed that it should be publicly declared to the people that they
should be eased of the Chimney Money, and have Toleration in matters of
Religion, which was thought would engage all the meaner people: That England
should be a free Port, and all Strangers who would should be Naturalized, which
was looked upon as a means to engage Foreigners on our side, that there should
be no Taxes for the future bu^ the Excise and Land^ Taxes which should be
appropriated to particular uses, and all forfeited Estates should be applied so
too.

And this Examinant further says that this Examinant enquiring of Ferguson
what Fond of Money was provided, it was answered by him and Colonel Romzey,
that if the business were done and backed with success there could be no want of
Money, there would be half a years Revenue of the Chimney Money then due
besides what the Excise-Office and Custom-house will afford, and that there was
Money and Plate enough among the Bankers and Goldsmiths which must be taken up
upon Public Faith if there were occasion, and be punctually repaid again for
the reputation of the Cause.

And this Examinant further says that when Walcot agreed to engage in the said
Action he desired his Name might be concealed whatsoever the effect of it
proved; whereupon Ferguson replied no Man ought to be ashamed of it, for it is a
glorious Action and such as I hope to see rewarded by a Parliament, and that
the Actors in it shall have Statues erected to them with Inscriptions of
Liberatores Patriae.

And this Examinant further says that he acquainted Mr. Thomas Shepard
Merchant that this Examinant had provided Arms in his former Examination
mentioned, and that Ferguson promised to see for a convenience of committing
the Assassination between Hampton Court and Windsor.

And this Examinant further says that Mr. Bourn a Brewer between great
Queen Street and Parker-lane was acquainted with the intended Insurrections,
and has talked with this Examinant about them, and declared himself ready to
engage in an Insurrection, but not in the Assassination, and the said Bourn was
knowing of the Arms bought by this Examinant, but was not at the Meeting when
they were agreed to be bespoken; and this Examinant believes he acquainted Mr.
Carleton Whitlock, Mr. Edmund Waller both of the Middle Temple, and Mr. Holford
of Chancery Lane of the intended Assassination and Insurrection in November,
but he did not do so till after the time for Execution was past: And further
says, that in the beginning of October last this Examinant met with Colonel
Sidney at Vxbridge, where the said Colonel told this Examinant that many tricks
had been played in the Scrutiny of the Poll for the Lord Mayor, and that Sir
William Prichard was declared though not duly chosen, but said he, all that I
can say to it is what a Justice of Peace of Essex said lately to a Country
Fellow brought before him for Killing a High-way-man that would have Robbed him;
Friend says the Justice you have done well, but you might have been Robbed if
you would; and so we may be inslaved if we will, or else need not, or he used
words to that purpose, but this Examinant to the best of his remembrance never
spoke to the said Colonel since.

Robert West.

The further Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple Barrister at Law.
THis Examinant upon further Recollection says that Richard Goodenough and
Francis Goodenough formerly offered to act in the intended Assassination of the
King and Duke if a sufficient number of Men could not be got to do it; but
afterward believing there were Men enough besides, they both declined it.

And this Examinant further says, that at some of the Meetings concerning the
said Assassination, Colonel Rumzey said it would be very convenient to take off
Colonel Leg the now Lord Dartmouth, for he was a stout Man and of desperate
Courage, and believed if he could get into the Tower, would in Revenge fire all
the Gunpowder in the White Tower, which would endanger the whole City. And it
was said concerning the Lady Ann Daughter to the Duke of York, that it would be
best to Marry her to some small Country Gentleman and have a Breed only to keep
out any Foreign pretenders to the Crown; and at one of the said Meetings, when
it was discoursed whether the King or Duke should be killed singly, it was
agreed, that Rumbold should send out a Spy before, who by some signs should
give an account at a distance whether the King and Duke were both together or
not, and at one of the said Meetings when it was designed that it would be
convenient to take off some of the Chief Ministers of State, as the Lord
Keeper, Lord Halifax, Lord Hyde; Richard Goodenough said, take the Keeper
Prisoner, and Try him at Oxford for the Death of College, and hang him upon
the same Post on which College was hanged.

And at one of the said Meetings this Examinant saying he was well enough Armed
for one, for he had a good Musket Blunderbuss and Case of Pistols; the said
Rumbold desired to see 'em, and finding 'em very good said he believed he must
use the Blunderbuss in the Assassination, and told Ferguson he must Consecrate
it if he should use it.

And this Examinant says that at one of the said Meetings, this Examinant was
appointed to speak to one Captain Bon a Seaman at Ratcliff to undertake the
Raising a body of Seamen to surprise the Tower in case the Assassination had
been committed, and this Examinant accordingly proposed to the said Bon whether
he would undertake to do so; but the said Bon replied he was going to settle in
America where he was born, and did not care to be concerned, and feared he had
not interest enough amongst the Seamen if he would, which this Examinant
reported to the next Meeting, and the said Bon is since gone to live in
New England where he was born, or in New-Iersey.

And this Examinant further says that Richard Goodenough told this Examinant
that he had spoken to one Mr. Grange a Brewer in Westminster to try what Men
could be Raised in Westminster for carrying on the last Design of Raising three
thousand Men out of the City and Subburbs, and also spoken to one Barnes a
Hatter in Fleetstreet to try what Men might be raised thereabouts, but this
Examinant never spoke to either of the said Parties about it, neither does this
Examinant know nor has heard what other Persons were employed by Goodenough or
any other Person in that Design, and further says not.

Rob. West.

The further Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple Barrister at Law.
THis Examinant upon further Recollection says that when the Insurrection
intended in November last was resolved on and Walcot agreed to engage in it,
the said Walcot desired this Examinant to lend him some of this Examinant's
Suit of Silk Armor, viz. a Back, Breast and Head piece, and afterward asked
this Examinant to take some Command of Horse under him and to engage some young
Men of the Temple, telling this Examinant he could make this Examinant a
sufficient Officer in two or three days time, but this Examinant refused to
engage himself or his Friends either, though he offered the said Walcot the use
of his Armor.

And this Examinant further says, That when the Arms in his former
Examinations mentioned were ordered to be bespoke; it was also proposed that
Ferguson should provide the 600 l. he pretended to have ready for that purpose
to buy Horses, which should be kept at Livery-Stables in the names of private
Gentlemen, and be always in a readiness to be made use of as an opportunity for
any Assassination or other Occasion should offer, and the night or two before
they were to be used should seemingly be brought out of the Livery-Stables by
men to be employed for that purpose, but Ferguson not bringing the Money no
Horses were bought.

And this Examinant further says, That after the Treaty with the Sctos seemed
to be at an end, and the 10000 l. not like to be had, Ferguson told this
Examinant that the Duke of Monmouth was willing to speak with this Examinant
and Goodenough to consider what ought to be done in the City and Suburbs, and
to leave the Lords and other people (by which this Examinant supposes he meant
the Lords Gray and Russel, Sidney and Wildman) but this Examinant refused to go
to the Duke or to Sir Thomas Armstrong, and knows not whether Goodenough went
to the Duke, though he did go to Armstrong.

And Ferguson likewise told told this Examinant, That if the English would not
agree to stir, it was his opinion and the opinion of many of the Duke's
Friends, and of the Scotch Gentlemen that were here, that the Duke should go to
Scotland and head the Scots there; whereupon Mr. Wade who was then present
said, If the Duke did go thither he would wait upon him in the Expedition as a
Voluntier.

And this Examinant further says, That at some Meeting for the carrying on the
intended Assassination, Ferguson said the King went frequently in the night
cross St. James's Park in a Chair without any Attendance, and that it would be
easy for Two Men with Swords barely to dispatch him and make their Escape;
whereupon Colonel Romzey said it was a strange thing to him, that the great Men
who were so desirous to have the business done, should not make a Purse and buy
some good Office at Court for some Man whom they could trust, who should roar
loud of the Duke of Monmouth and the Wiggs, and by that means get into
reputation and trust and should observe and give an account of the King's and
Duke's Walks and Hours and any Journeys they designed; and the said Colonel
said he had told Armstrong so and bad him tell his Lords.

And this Examinant further says that about the time the Insurrection intended
in November last was carrying on this Examinant observed the Lord Howard of
Escrick and Walcot to be very intimate and often together, and the said Walcot
told this Examinant that the Lord Howard was as right as any Man for the
business and as forward to engage, but this Examinant does not remember that he
ever spoke with the Lord Howard himself about that Insurrection. And further
says Mr Roe told this Examinant that Gibbons the Duke of Monmouth's Servant
offered to be one to commit the Assassination of the King and Duke. And further
says not.

Rob. West.

The further Examination of Robert West of the Middle Temple Barrister at Law.
THis Examinant further says, That after Ferguson had told this Examinant that
a Sum of Money for carrying on the Assassination of the King and Duke in
October last was paid to a certain Person who never returned it, of which the
Lord Shaftsbury complained: The said Ferguson at another time a little before
the Discovery told this Examinant that Richard Goodenough was the person to
whom that Money was paid, and that he called Ferguson Fool for returning some
Money he had received for the same purpose and Colonel Romzey told this
Examinant that Mr. Charleton paid that Money.

And this Examinant further says that when Mr. Goodenough told this Examinant
that he would speak to Hone the Joyner to be one of the Assassinates, he said
he would first try him whether he would undertake an Attempt upon the Duke of
York before he would break the whole Business to him; and as he found him
willing to that he would proceed. And this Examinant believes Mr. Goodenough
did accordingly, for that the said Hone coming to this Examinants Chamber soon
after, and being asked by this Examinant whether he had lately seen Mr.
Goodenough? The said Hone answered he had, and talked with him about a Jobb
upon the Duke of York: And this Examinant asking him whether they were agreed?
Hone replied yes, but this Examinant does not remember that Hone then mentioned
the King or any Name or description implying the King. And about five or six
weeks since the said Hone came to this Examinants chamber about a small
alteration this Examinant designing to make in his Chamber; and then the said
Hone asked this Examinant, Master will nothing be done? To which this Examinant
answering he believed not, the said Hone replied, if this Duke of Monmouth
would be true and appear openly, I could bring fifty or sixty honest Fellows
from our side of the Water (meaning Southwark) who would be ready for business
as well as my self, and this Examinant asking him what business? Hone replied
any business, either a brisk push (by which this Examinant supposed he meant a
General Insurrection) or the other Trick or Jobb of taking off the two
Brothers, the Captain and Lieutenant which were two Names used for the King and
Duke.

And this Examinant further says that when the Discourse was had concerning
the Killing the Ministers of State, Colonel Romzey said, the Lord Halifax was
one of the Greatest Rogues, and deserved it more than any Man, for he
professing himself formerly of our Party knows our weakness and Divisions and
has exposed us and made the Court venture upon things which they would never
have done otherwise. And when Goodenough proposed that the Lord Keeper should
be Hanged where College was Hanged this Examinant having an Opinion that the
Lord Keeper was an Enemy to this Examinant and had used him very hardly in a
Cause this Examinant lately had in Chancery, this Examinant desired that he
might have the Custody of the said Lord Keeper a little while to make him
sensible of his unkindness to this Examinant, but this Examinant never designed
or desired to Kill the said Lord Keeper or any other person, nor would have had
his Hands in any Man's Blood.

And this Examinant further says that Ferguson lately told this Examinant that
Mr. Cromwell, Son of Richard Cromwell, who usually goes by the Name of Mr.
Cranbourn was so vain as to endeavor to make a Party for himself or his Father
in the City: and Goodenough formerly, viz. about Christmas last told this
Examinant that he believed the said Mr. Cromwell and Mr. Ireton, the Son of
Lieutenant General Ireton would assist in the intended Assassination of the
King and Duke in Person.

And this Examinant further says, that Mr. Goodenough told this Examinant that
he had spoken to one Partridge a Shoemaker and Almanack-Maker in Covent Garden
to Act in this Assassination, and that the said Partridge offered to join in it
if it were to be done in Town but was not able to Ride and therefore would not
join in the Attempt out of London: And further said that the said Partridge had
erected several Schemes and thereby found the Duke of York would scarce
outlive March or April, and that the King was under an ill Direction too, and
the People would be Victorious. And Mr. Ryley told this Examinant the same
thing as to the Schemes erected by Partridge.

And this Examinant further says that Colonel Romzey told this Examinant that
when Mr. Trenchard refused to go into the West and raise a Force for the
intended Insurrection in November last, the said Mr. Trenchard was sent for to
the Duke of Monmouth's House about it, and there were present the said Duke,
the Lord Gray and Colonel Romzey. And further told this Examinant that the Lord
Russel had prepared to go the then next morning to his Post which was somewhere
in the West, but this Examinant does not remember the place.

And this Examinant further says that after the Discovery, Walcot told this
Examinant, Colonel Romzey, Wade, Norton, Nelthrop, Goodenough and Ferguson,
that notwithstanding the said Discovery he was persuaded God would yet deliver
this Nation, but he did not approve of the present Instruments who had
undertaken it, or used words to that purpose.

And this Examinant further says that he having a Son lately Born desired
Colonel Romzey to be Godfather, who said he would not, except he might name him
Brutus, but was afterward prevailed with to do that Office, and give the Name
of John to the Child being the said Colonels own Christian name.

Robert West.

The further Information of Robert West of the Middle Temple Barrister at Law.
THis Examinant upon further recollection says, that Ferguson formerly, viz.
soon after his return from Holland told this Examinant that Dr. Owen and one
Mr. Collins either and Anabaptist or Independent Preacher were the most
sensible Ministers about the Town, and were both of Opinion that the intended
Assassination and Insurrection were both lawful and necessary, and that Colonel
Owen Dr. Owens Brother was Privy to them and joined with Colonel Sidney and
Major Wildman in the management of the Treaty with the Scots, and that one Mr.
Mead a Nonconformist Minister was zealous in the business of an Insurrection
but was not for beginning it in London, and Mr. Nelthrop told this Examinant
the same thing of Mead, and that he was able to Raise a thousand Men or more.

And this Examinant further says that Mr. Nelthrop told this Examinant that in
case of an Insurrection which he much desired, he would go along with the Lord
Russel wheresoever he took his Post and would furnish out himself and a man
with able Horses and Arms, and a good sum of Money.

And this Examinant further says, that upon a discourse with Colonel Rumzey
concerning a general Insurrection, the said Colonel told this Examinant that if
he could have a thousand resolute Fellows to follow him and an other thousand
Men to secure him at his back he would undertake to drive the King, all the
Court and the Guards out of Town so as they should not dare to look back till
they were fled to Windsor.

And this Examinant further says that the Money which this Examinant received
from Ferguson amounting to something more than the Arms bought by this
Examinant cost, this Examinant by the direction of Colonel Romzey paid Five
pounds to Mr. Wade to give to one Manning who was to have been one of the
Assassinates, and also in the last designed Insurrection to pay some Debts
which Manning owed, and the said Colonel Romzey, Mr. Wade, and Mr. Norton gave
Manning a Guinny or 20 s. apiece more. And the said Wade asking this Examinant
whether he would personally engage in the last intended Insurrection, and this
Examinant saying his infirm Constitution was not able to bear the toil of a
Soldiers life, Mr. Wade told this Examinant, then he must sit out some Men
that would, and that this Examinant should give his Blunderbuss to Manning who
was a strong stout Fellow able to carry it, which this Examinant agreed to, and
to fit out two Foot Soldiers, or do any thing else was fit for him to do.

And this Examinant further says that at one of the last Meetings for Raising
the three thousand Men out of the City and Suburbs, Mr. Bourn reported he had
communicated the business to Mr. Lobb a Nonconformist Parson who had a
Congregation of poor zealous Men, and that Mr. Lobb embraced it readily, and
promised to employ two trusty Men of his Congregation to go amongst the rest
and engage as many as they could. And this Examinant further says, that
Ferguson had four several Lodgings during this Examinants Correspondence with
him, at three of which this Examinant visited him, viz. at Mr. Bourns the
Brewer, at Mr. Owens a Lawyer living at the further end of King Street in
New-Southampton Buildings, and at a Cutlers over against Wills Coffee-house in
Covent Garden, his fourth Lodging was in St. Martins-lane in the Fields at a
Dutch Doctors, or German Quacks, which this Examinant never was at, and knows
not the name of.

And this Examinant further says that Colonel Romzey discoursing with this
Examinant further concerning the Duke of Monmouth, told this Examinant the Duke
was inclinable to answer the peoples expectations, and submit to be little more
than a Duke of Venice, but the Lords about him and Armstrong designed great
Offices to themselves and will not endure to hear of Terms, but cry all shall
be left to a Parliament, whereupon this Examinant saying to him, it were but
just to discover all their Intrigues, but the being an Informer is an ugly
thing, Colonel Romzey replied, it is true our people are not worth venturing
for and the other people are not worth saving, besides it would give a great
blow to the Protestant interest all the world over. And further says not.

Robert West.

The Examination of William Hone Ioyner taken before Sir William Turner Knight
and Alderman of the City of London, and one of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace the 4th day of July, 1683.
THis Examinant says that about the Fire time at Newmarket Mr. Richard
Goodenough came to him to Cliffords-Inn where he was at Work at one Mr. Cark's
Chamber, and asked him to go along with him and told him he wanted some
Laborers; This Examinant then asked him if it were honest? Upon which Mr.
Goodenough clucht his Fist and struck it toward his Mouth twice or thrice and
told him it was to seize the King and the Duke, and that there would be 20 l.
apiece to buy Horse and Arms. This Examinant then told him he was well settled
in his Trade and did not care to trouble himself. He then further told this
Examinant that they had taken care to secure the City, and then they appointed
to meet the next day at the Amsterdam Coffee-House, where they met together,
and from thence they two went to one Sergeants a Cooks-shop at the Sign of the
Roe-Buck at the Corner of Bartholomew-Lane where they Diaed, and whilst they
were there, there came in one Keeling and one Rombald who had but one eye, and
after some Discourse Mr. Keeling said let us go, and Mr. Goodenough said we
want Clothes, Mr. Keeling replied he had Clothes for half a dozen, and further
said let us make what we can and go, Mr. Goodenough answered no, and pointing
to Rombald said, there is one knows the temper of the People better. This
Examinant further says that Mr. Goodenough, Mr. Rombald and Mr. Keeling went
from thence to a Tavern in Bartholomew-lane where this Examinant came to them,
but heard no Discourse at that time but drank and went his way.

This Examinant further says that a Fortnight after Witsontide he met Mr.
Joseph Keeling and his Brother in Threadneedle-Street near the Exchange and
they would needs Drink with him, and he went with them to the Flanders
Coffee-House, and then Mr. Ios^as K^eling told him his Brother was a stout Man
and could bring together thirty M^n for his share, and then they went all three
into a Room above-stairs, and then Mr. Josias Keeling said these words to him,
You know the business of the Rye, this Examinant at that time knew the meaning
of the Rye, but not the place they called the Rye: And they being three
together they fell into Discourse concerning the King and the Duke of York, and
how they should dispose of them and depose the King, and they being hot in this
discourse this Examinant said he was for saving the Duke and securing the King,
afterward the two Keelings sent this Examinant to look for Goodenough and told
him they must needs speak with him presently, and after this Examinant had been
from place to place to find him, and missing of him he returned back to the
Tavern where he found the said two Keelings and Goodenough and some others who
this Examinant does not know; and there the said Goodenough and both the said
Keelings retired into a private Room, but what passed between them this
Examinant does not know neither has he seen them since. This Examinant further
says that about Michaelmas last was twelve month as he remembers Mr.
Goodenough spoke to him to make a private place between his Roof and the
Ceeling Joists of his House with intent as he told this Examinant to put Money
in it because the times were dangerous. So this Examinant cut the Rafters and
untyled part of the House and made such a private place, and made a Frame and a
Door for a Man to go in, and the Brick-layer Tyled it over and over the Door,
but what use the said Goodenough afterward made of it this Examinant knows not.
This Examinant says that the Persons engaged in this Conspiracy are Mr.
Richard and Francis Goodenough, (...). Robert West, the two Rombalds, and one
Adderton a Glasier, and Lee a Dyar, and both the Keelings; and a Crape-Weaver
who lives about Chiswel-Street.

This Examinant says that he has worked for the said Mr. West at his Chamber
in the Temple, and one day meeting him in Fleet Street he asked this Examinant
if the Ball were once up whether Gamesters would come in in four or five hours
time? This Examinant replied he thought they would. And at another time being
at Work at his Chamber they fell into discourse together concerning the
Deposing of the King and the Duke, and words to that purpose, but what the
particular words were he does not well remember. This Examinant says that to
the best of his remembrance as he was Drinking with Mr. Lee at the King's Head
Tavern in Chancery Lane about a Fortnight after Witsontide last, the said Mr.
Lee told him there was a Captain of a Ship would appoint the hurling of a
Silver Ball at Blackheath, which would draw a great Company of People together,
and then he would give them Brandy and then they would go and seize on the
Tower.

This Examinant further says that he being at Work at one Mr. Percivals at
Chip^nham where the said Adderton the Glafier was also taking order to Work,
the said Adderton asked this Examinant if Mr. Goodenough had said any thing to
him about the Business? This Examinant asked him what Business? The said
Adderton replied he had told Lee of it, and that was all passed between them.

Will. Hone.
Capt. and Cognit, coram me Die and Anno praesen.

Will. Turner.



Information of William Leigh:
I Do declare that my first acquaintance with Mr. Ro^se and Mr. Lee was by
reason of Captain Blagg and his Business to go his Mate, and the first time
that ever Mr. Ro^s^ spoke any thing to me about the Plot, was one day I met him
by the Exchange; He told me he had something to say to me; and to the best of
my remembrance he asked me presently after, if I did know of any Seamen that
were fitting to make Captains in Wapping: I told him No, but I would see what I
could do; and he promised, he and Mr. Lee to come to the Blew Anchor by Wapping
Dock next morning about Ten a Clock but came not: Another day, he and Mr. Lee
came down and discoursed with some of Mr. Rowse's Friends that he met, but they
did not like his way and so parted.

And the first time that ever I heard of tossing up of a Ball was by Captain
Blagg, but I do declare I knew not the meaning of it till Mr. Lee and Mr. Rowse
asked me about taking the Tower; and whereas he or Mr. Lee and Mr. Rowse, or
both, asked me about tossing up of a Ball, as I take it on Black Heath: I asked
what they would do there? They told me there was some Hundreds of Horse ready
in the Country; and as for Captain Blagg, I heard him say that Mortar-pieces
over Southwark side would be the best way for the taking of the Tower; and I
have heard him say, as near as I can remember, he could raise some Seamen, but
the number I have forgot; and all that Mr. Lee spoke before the King and
Council in my hearing was true. All this I am willing to attest; and for
knowing of any others besides Mr. Lee and Mr. Rowse and Captain Blagg to be
concerned in this Plot, I know not, neither can I call to mind any words spoken
by any but those three.

William Leigh.

The further Information of William Leigh.
Shall it please your Majesty,
SInce I sent in my Paper, I have sent something more which came in my mind
since, That is about getting some Seamen that might be fitting to go Commanders
or Captains of Ships; and as he asked if I could not get two or three; sometime
afterward I did enquire what he would do with them, he told me to make Masters
of Ships. I asked for what end? He told me to put in Ships at Deptsord or
Woolwich, that is Men of War to make Guard Ships to stop all going and coming:
I did ask him what he would do with them when there was no Guns nor Powder nor
Shot on board; but I told him if he had the Tower then he might do something:
but his Answer was, if not then, some time after that, says he, Mr. Rous by
Name we must secure the Tower and Whitehall both together, or else there could
be nothing done: For, says he, we must take the King and then our work is done,
to the best of my remembrance: I asked what was then his Oath of Allegiance? He
told me if they had the King he should be King sti^l, but fight under his
Commission. I do think Mr. Lee was there present.

Will. Leigh.

Information of the Lord Howard to the King the 11th. of July 1682.
The First Part of my Narrative being a Summary Account of all that Occurred to
my Knowledge from September 29th 1682. to the time of the Earl of Shaftsbury's
Death.
ABout the middle of September 1682. I had occasion to go to a small Estate at
Tolibury in the County of Essex, where I continued about a Fortnight waiting to
hear of the ultimate issue and result of the long contested Election of the
Sheriffs of London, which was shortly to receive a final Determination by the
Swearing of the new Sheriffs into their Office.

During which time of my continuance in the Country I received two or three
Letters from Captain Walcot, importing in a mysterious Style, well enough
understood by me, that the matters of Negotiation betwixt me and the Merchant
my Correspondent were brought to a good Conclusion, and that my presence was
speedily desired for the better perfecting the same.

Upon the 29th. of September (being the day which put an end to the long
Dispute about the Sheriffs) I returned to my House at Knightsbridge, where I
had not been above two or three days before I received a Visit from Captain
Walcot, who acquainted me that the Earl of Shaftsbury had withdrawn himself
from his own House into a Retirement in the City, where (though he was secreted
from most of his Friends yet) he desired to see me, for which purpose his
Lordship had sent him to me to show me the way to his Lodging.

I presently closed with the Invitation, and went along with him to one Mr.
Watsons House about the further end of Woodstreet (reckoning from Cheapside)
where I found his Lordship alone, who immediately begun to advise me in this
manner, viz.

That finding the due Election of the City frustrated by the Pseudo-Sheriffs
forcibly obtruded upon them, he could no longer think himself safe (though
Innocent) in the future administration of Justice which must hereafter be
expected to be wrested by such Ministers to the Humor of the Court, but this
Danger threatened not him only, but me also, and all honest Men in England, in
the sense whereof he had thought it necessary for him (and believed it no less
necessary for me) to withdraw himself into the City, where he had made such
preparations (meeting with a disposed matter) that he did not doubt but in a
short time he should be able to reduce things to a better posture: That in
order hereunto there were several Thousands (I think he mentioned 10000) who
were ready upon Notice given ^o betake themselves to Arms. First to make
themselves Masters of the City, and afterward Sally out and Attack the Guards
at White Hall, that they were to be assisted with about a 1000 or 1200 Hor^e to
be drawn insensibly into Town from several adjacent parts of the Country under
the Conduct of several good Officers, amongst whom he made mention of Major
Bremen (and of him only) but there was nothing hindered the putting of this into
speedy Execution but the Backwardness of the Duke of Monmo^th and the Lord
Russel (to whom were affixt the Lord Gray, the Lord Brandon, Sir Henry
Ingoldsby, and several other Gentlemen who would not stir without the Duke) who
had unhandsomely failed him after their promise given him to be Conc^rre^t with
him in the like undertaking (at the same time) in Devonshire, Sommersetshire,
Chesbire, Lancashire, and other Counties to give variety of Diversion to the
standing Forces; That the Lord Gray seemed to be more forward then than the
rest to join with him, with whom (if he could be gained) he intended to Couple
me for the raising of Essex, and that the Lord H^rbert and Colonel Romzey would
be assistant to him in the Conduct of the City Affairs, together with very many
Eminent Citizens who desired to have their Names spared till the time of
Action, with many other particulars too long to be enumerated in this short
Summary.

To all this I answered, That I was glad to hear and was willing to take it
upon his Credit, that the City was in as great a readiness for Action as he had
expressed; and that there would be so considerable a Body of Horse brought out of
the Country for their Aid as he had intimated, nor did I doubt but he had
prudently provided for all the requisites to so great an undertaking. But
withal that I could not but be much surprised to hear that there should be so
great a misunderstanding betwixt him and those Noble Lords whose Concurrence I
thought absolutely necessary for so great a Work, that if they had failed him
(as he had related) after an appointment made, they had acted very unsuitably
to the Character they bore, and would deservedly forfeit the opinion was had of
them, that I must be allowed the ^iberty to discourse with them about it and
till then to suspend as well my Censure of them as the Resignation of my self
to him in the matters propounded by him; upon these terms I parted from him
promising to see him again within a day or two.

The next day I went to Moor-Park, where the Duke of Monmouth then was and in
short acquainted him with what I had heard, as well concerning himself as the
Lord Russel, etc. He absolutely denied that he, or (as he believed) my Lord
Russel had ever made any such appointment with my Lord Shaftsbury, that they
were altogether Ignorant of what was doing by the said Earl, who for some time
(upon what Capricio he knew not) had withdrawn himself from them and acted upon
separate Councils of his own grounded (as he feared) upon the hasty Conceptions
of some Hotheaded Men, who might lead him into some untimely undertaking,
which in all probability would prove fatal to himself and all the Party: For
prevention of which he said he would be glad (if he knew where) to give him a
Meeting, and to resettle a better understanding with him.

Having had this Account from the Duke I made a second Vis^t the next day
(being Thursday the 3d or 4th of October) to the said Earl, to whom I
communicated what had passed the day before betwixt the Duke and me, and
thereupon took occasion to strengthen my self with Arguments of the absolute
necessity of a speedy Con^erence betwi^t him and the other Lords as well for
the removing the present misapprehensions they had of each other, as also for
the Consolidating them into such an Union and Concert of Councils as might
render them all jointly helpful to the Common Interest by an harmonious and
uniform Acting to the same end in which they did all agree however they might
differ in the means. This I urged upon him with all the vehemence that the
nature and importance of the thing required, but he still persisted in a
refusal of a Meeting, saying with some more than ordinary warmth, That he had
long discovered in the Duke a backwardness to Action, by which they had lost
great opportunities, that he had cause to suspect that this artificial
dilatoriness of the Du^e procee^ed from a private agreement betwixt his Father
and him to say^^ ^ne another. That People (so he termed that Imaginary Army in
the City) were impatient of longer delays, having advanced so far already that
they could not safely retreat: The intention of an Insurrection being
commnnicated to so many that it was morally impossible to keep it from taking
Air if it was not speedily brought into Act, that one of his Friends (whom I
afterward understood to be Rombald) had drawn almost an Hundred Horse into
London by small and unobservable Parties a little before Michael^as Day, who
(after they had c^ntinued here a good while at their Expense) were again
retired to their respective places of Abode; That such frequent Disappointments
would weary the Party and flat their Spirits and make them at last resolve to
sit down in a total Despondency; But it was much to be feared the Duke acted
with a Prospect very different from theirs, he designing nothing more than the
Advancing himself whilst they could not hope that ever their Liberties should
be well secured for the future, but under the Government of a Commonwealth:
That for these Reasons he was fully determined to be no longer expectant upon
the Duke's Motions, but would pursue his former intentions of Attempting the
deliverance of his Country by the help of an honest Brisk party in the City,
with whom if the rest of the Lords would be cooperating they might share with
him in the glory of so honorable an Undertaking, but if they would not he
hoped he should be able to effect the Work without them.

Howard.
July 11. 83.
This was the Substance of the second Conference I had wit^ him, which I
reported the next day to the Duke, who desired me to make one Assay more to
procure an Interview.

This occasioned my going to the said Earl a thi^d time upon Saturday the 5th
or 6th of October, at which time I did preva^^ with him to give me a promise of
meeting the Duke and ^y lord R^ssel the next day in the Evening, but in stead
of coming, he sent his Excuse both to the Duke and me, the next Morning by
Colonel Romz^y, and streightway removed to another Lodging, where he continued
to secret himself till the time of his departure out of England.

During the time of his Concealment, diverse intimations were given, some to me
by Captain Walcot, others by others to the Duke of Days appointed for their
intended Insurrections; One appointment was about the later end of October, at
which time the Kings return from Newmarket was expected; but this was prevented
by the Duke, who prevailed with them to put it off to a longer day in
expectation of a Concurrence of the Country with them.

This Adjournment (as I remember) was for a Fortnight, at which time returns
from the Country gave Discouragement to the proceedings.

After this the second of November was made a day peremptory, as I have been
informed, but that also was put off I know not upon what Disappointm^^t, which
often Failures caused the said Earl to take Resolutions of Conveying himself
beyond the Seas, which he did accordingly.

Whilst these things were in Agitation, I have several times had some dark
Hints given me from Captain Walcot, from Goodenough, from West, from Ferguson,
of Striking at the Head, of shortning the Work by removing two Persons, by
which I did apprehend that there was a design of making some Attempt upon the
King and the Duke, or one of them; but when and where, and by whom, and in what
manner and place this was to be acted, I never saw.

This ends the Transactions during the Life of the Earl of Shaftsbury, the rest
shall be made a Second Part.

Howard.
July 11. 1683.
A Continuation of my former Narrative.
AFter the Death of the Earl of Shaftsbury, it was considered, That as there
had appeared both in City and Country, a very prompt and forward disposition to
Action; so it might justly be feared that either the minds of Men might (in
time) stagnate into a dull Inactivity, unless proper Acts were used to keep up
the fermentation, or (which was equally dangerous) that the unadvised Passions
of a Multitude might precipitate them into some rash and ill-guided
undertakings, unless they were under the steering and direction of some steady
and skilful hand. For prevention of both these Evils, it was thought necessary
that some few persons should be united into a Cabal or Council, which should be
as a concealed Spring both to give and to guide the motion of the Machine.

The persons designed to this general Care were the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord
Russel, the Earl of Essex, Mr. Algernoon Sidney, Mr. Hambden Junior, and
another whose Abilities and Qualifications did in no degree fit him for such a
Province.

The first Meeting of these Six was about the middle of January at Mr. Hambdens
House, at which Consultation there was only propounded some General Heads,
which were afterward (upon more mature thoughts) to be Debated, viz. Where the
Insurrection should be first made, whether in the City or in the more remote
parts of the Country, or in both at the same instant; what Counties were
thought to be best disposed to, and best fitted for this enterprise; what
Persons in the respective Counties were the most useful and most ready to be
engaged; what Towns easiest to be gained, and the most proper for a general
Rendezvous: what Arms were necessary to be provided, how to be got, where to be
disposed, what sum of Money was of absolute necessity to answer public
occasions; how and by what Methods such a sum of Money was to be raised so as
not to draw into observation, nor to administer occasion of jealousy: And
lastly, which was the principal and thought to challenge the chiefest Care, how
Scotland might be drawn into a Concert with England and which Persons there
fittest to be Consulted withal about this Matter.

This was the sum of that days Conference.

The second Meeting was about 10 days after, at the Lord Russels House, where
were present every one of the foresaid Six.

At this Meeting it was propounded that a speedy understanding should be
settled with the Lord Argyle, and that in order thereunto some fit Person or
Persons should be thought of to be sent to him, and to be a constant medium of
Correspondence betwixt him and them that care should be taken to be rightly
informed of a true state of Scotland, of the general Bent and Inclination of
the People, of the Capacities or Incapacities they were under, and that some
trusty Messenger should be forthwith dispatched thither to invite two or three
of the most valuable Gentlemen of that County into England to the end they
might be advised with about the general Design.

The Persons nominated to be called into England, were the Lord Melvin, Sir
John Cockran, and I remember another Gentleman of the Family and Alliance of
the Lord Argyle, who (if I mistake not) was of the same Name also, and a
Knight, but of this I retein but an indistinct remembrance.

Some other things were considered of, but of no great moment.

At the Conclusion of this Meeting it was agreed, that there should not be any
other Meeting of this Cabal (unless in case of some extraordinary Emergency)
until the return of the Messenger sent from hence, and the arrival of the
foresaid Gentlemen out of Scotland.

This affording a kind of Vacation I soon after went into Essex whether I was
called by the Concerns of my Estate, after that I went to Bath whither I was
enforced to go by the Infirmity of my health, so that what was done or argued
on after this, I can give no account but by hearsay.

Howard.
July 11. 1683.
A Supplement of some things which (upon recollection) have occurred to my
memory since my former Information.
I Remember that my Lord Shaftsbury complaining of diverse persons who had
deserted him and fell short of their Engagements to him, amongst the rest named
his Cousin Charleton (meaning Mr. Charleton of Totteridg) who (he said) had
promised and was able to bring in great assistance to him, upon which he did
much rely, but was quite fallen from him, and had so wholly attacht himself to
the Duke of Monmouth and my Lord Russel that he would act only by their measure.

Speaking also of Major Wildman, He said that he was very forward in the Work,
and very active in it; And being told by me, that amongst other things which
were wanting in such Enterprise, the want of some Great Guns seemed to me not
to be the least. He told me that they should be furnished with two Drakes by a
Friend (whom he did not name) which two Drakes I have since thought may be
those two small Pieces found with Major Wildman.

The Person mentioned in my former Narrative who (as my Lord Shaftsbury said)
had offered to kill the Duke with his own hands, I do now distinctly remember
to be Mr. John Ayloffe, to whom he Answered [No Jack thou shall not kill him
till we have an Armed Force to Justify it.]

About the 10th or 12th of October after a stop put to the then intended
Insurrection, the Duke of Monmouth told me that he had seriously thought of it
(meaning the Insurrection) and that after diverse ways proposed and seriously
considered of he was clearly of Opinion that there was nothing so easy to be
accomplished, nor so probable to do the Work effectually as to fall in upon the
King at Newmarket with a smart party of Horse of about Forty or Fifty, which he
said he could soon have in a readiness. To which I answered, That I was of the
same opinion, but whether or not it would be decent for him to appear in person
in an Attack to be made when the King was in Person deserved his consideration.
Two days after I spoke to him of it again, and asked him what thought he had of
it; He answered me that it could not be brought about soon enough. After which
I never Discoursed more with him about it; but upon reflection I am apt to
think that from this time and not before the Design of Way-laying the King in
his return to London was first meditated, and I am the more confirmed in this
Opinion from the Consideration of the behavior of the Duke of Monmouth and
Lord Gray who seemed to be very big of Expectation of some great thing to be
attempted upon the day of the King's coming from Newmarket, upon which day (as
I have before observed) Sir Thomas Armstrong was not to be found till the
King's Coaches were come into Town, and I do verily believe he was to have
headed the Party. To this also may be added, That the Duke of Monmouth within
few days after told me that he had that day given order to have his Horses
carried into London to have been in a readiness to have Mounted upon any
Emergency.

I do further call to mind, That there is a considerable Person living in
Spittle-Fields whom I very well know, and have often been in his Company (but
cannot remember his name distinctly) this Man I have been told did undertake to
bring in two or three Hundred Men upon the strength of his own Interest when
occasion should require; He is well known to Mr. West.

Howard.

Further Information of Colonel Romzey, June the 11th 1684.
SIR Thomas Armstrong was at the Meeting at Mr. Shephards when I was there, and
was one that undertook to view the Savoy and M^ws to see in what posture the
Soldiers were and how easy or difficult it would be to surprise them.

Sir Thomas Armstrong did tell that Gibbons came to him and acquainted him that
Mr. Roe and he had been to see the Earl of Bedfords Garden and told him that
was a fit place to take off the King and Duke at, but in other Terms which now
I have forgot.

Sir Thomas Armstrong did come to me the Sunday night after the Fire at
Newmarket and told me that he just came from Ferguson, and that notwithstanding
they returned so soon Ferguson did not doubt to have Men ready by that time to
do the business and desired me to go with him to Fergusons Lodging in his Coach
which I did, when I came there Ferguson told me the same but that they wanted
Money, Mr. Charleton not being to be found, upon which Sir Thomas desired me to
lend some and he would see me repaid and said if he had been in stock he would
have done it himself; upon their persuasion I went t^ my House I think in Sir
Thomas his Coach and brought forty Guinnies; he again repeated that he would
see me repaid; several times after he told me Ferguson had my Money and wondered
I would not go to him to receive it.

After the Discovery Sir Thomas came one night and told me he wondered I was not
gone and did importune me to be gone with the first and in the mean time to
keep close for that I was mightily hunted after.

I. Romzey.

A Letter from Sir William Stapleton, Governor of the Leeward Islands, to Sir
Leoline Ienkins.
Nevis Ian. 25th. 1685. Righ Honorable,
WHAT now offers to inform your Honors is that having seen the Kings
Proclamation and a List in Print of the Conspirators in the last Most
Detestable Plot; I found one James Holloway Merchant therein specified fled and
Indicted, who went by another Name, viz. John Milward, whom I have caused to be
secured in order to send him home by the next good opportunity, which is by one
Captain John Wilkinson Commander of the Ship Joseph of London a good Sailer.

William Stapleton.

The Information of James Holloway Read the 11th of April 1684.
Great SIR,
I Your Majesty's most humble, but too much mis^ed, and disobedient Subject do
here most faithfully, according to the best of my Remembrance, give you an
Account of what I knew concerning the late discovered Conspiracy, how I came to
be concerned, how far I was concerned; how it was to have been carried on in
Bristol: why I did not come in at the first Discovery, and cast my self at Your
Majesty's Feet for Mercy; how I made my escape, and where I was till taken. If
I shall through forgetfulness omit any thing that it may be thought I am privy
to, I shall be ready and willing truly to answer any question that shall be
asked by Your Majesty, or any Your most Honorable Privy Council, no way
despairing of Your Majesty's Mercy, but remain in hopes that that Fountain of
Mercy which has so abundantly flowed from Your Sacred Breast ever since Your
happy Restoration is not yet Dry, and that there is some drops left for me,
who doubt not but to Serve Your Majesty both at home and abroad, much more
Living than my Death will.

That which I have cause to impute the occasion of my being Concerned, was my
too Public Spirit, preferring Your Majesty's and my Countries Interest much
before my own, but especially in attending the two last Parliaments, promoting
an Act for the Encouragement of the Linen Manufacture, and the preventing of
Frauds in Your Majesty's Customs, etc. Which would have brought in, and saved
to Your Majesty near 200000 l. per An. and employed many thousands of Poor,
etc. as is well known to many Worthy Persons about your Court, and indeed
proved my Ruin, otherwise than in this Concern, by bringing me into too great
Acquaintance for one of my Capacity, and by that to be concerned as I was. My
Attendance on those two Parliaments I doubt have been misrepresented.

How far I was Concerned:
After the Dissolution of the two last Parliaments, I observed a great
dissatisfaction in People in most parts where I traveled, but heard nothing of
any Design till July 1682. when one Mr. Joseph Tyly of Bristol came from
London; I meeting with him; asked What News, he answered to this effect, All
bad, and if some speedy course be not taken we shall be all undone, for by
their Arbitrary, Illegal ways and by force of Arms they have got Sheriffs to
their Minds, Witnesses they had before, but wanted Jurors to believe them, now
they have got Sheriffs, naming Mr. North and Mr. Rich, who will find Jurors to
believe any Evidence against a Protestant, and so hang up all the Kings Friends
by degrees; I then told him that I thought it was impossible such things could
be done, but the King must hear of it; no said he, there is none suffered to
come near the King, but those who have been declared Enemies to the King and
Kingdom by Parliament, naming some that were mentioned in the Printed Votes,
who to save themselves do endeavor to keep all such things from the Kings
knowledge, and persuade him against Parliaments, with much more suchlike
discourse, by which I found the same was discoursed throughout England,
Scotland and Ireland as a means to engage People. At length he told me that the
Protestant Gentry, naming the Earl of Shaftsbury, Lord Howard of Estrick and
others were come to a Resolution, seeing fair means would not do, but all
things on the Protestants side are misrepresented to the King by such great
Criminals, and none more in favor than those, to take the King from his Evil
Council, and that by an Insurrection in several parts of England at once, viz.
London, Bristol, Taunton, Exeter, Chester, New Castle, York, and some other
places in the North, and that there would be a considerable party ready in
Scotland, and another in Ireland, Therefore, said he, we must consider how to
manage affairs in Bristol, for if they proceed at Michaelmas in choosing Lord
Mayor as they did Sheriffs, and to swearing of North and Rich, it must begin in
October or November, otherwise there will be some Sham-Plot contrived to take
off most of the Stirring Men in the last Parliaments; with much other Discourse
to the same effect, adding, that Mr. Wade would come down very suddenly, by
whom we might expect a full Account of all. About the end of August as near as
I can remember, Mr. Wade came down, who confirmed what Mr. Tyly had said, but
could say little as to any farther Resolution they were come to above, either
of any Time or Method agreed upon, but that the Design went on, and men were
employed in all parts to try how people were inclined, who found enough ready
and that there would be no want of Men, if it was once begun. Then we
considered how it might be managed in Bristol, and what Number of men might be
needful for the first Onset; toward which he said, We might depend on 150 Men
from Taunton or thereabouts, and concluded that 350 might be sufficient to
secure it without the Bloodshed of one man, it being our Design to shed no
Blood if possible, but this we resolved not to acquaint any of our Friends
with, till the Day and Method was resolved, of which he said we should have ten
or fourteen days notice; and having soon considered of a Method, waited in
expectation of further Advice, but none came till November; then we heard that
some dis-appointment happening they were forced to delay it, though there was
more and more cause for it. The end of December or beginning of January had
advice that it was deferred to the beginning of March. The third of March I
came to London, and meeting with Mr. Wade, asked him how things went, who
answered that he could not tell what to make of it, for he could find nothing
done more than was nine Months before. The Great Persons who were the Managers
having done nothing but talked of things, but now there was some others
appointed to manage it, who were Men of Business naming them to me, viz. The
Earl of Essex, the Lord Howard of Estrick, the Lord Gray, the Lord Russel,
Colonel Sidney, Major Wildman, Mr. Hambden the younger, and Mr. Charlton, who
he did suppose would make something of it, and not do as the others had done,
make a years talk to ens^are many thousands of people to no purpose; for these
had already sent Messengers into Scotland and Ireland, to know their minds,
naming one Aaron Smith sent into Scotland, and at the return of the Messengers
would come to a resolution as to time and method, but he was confident they
could not be ready before Midsummer by reason they had done so little in order
to it. Mr. Wade was then designed into the West upon the Earl of Stamford's
Business, and said if he could understand any thing more before he left London
he would take Bristol in his way and acquaint us with it. This Journey he
brought me to Colonel Romzey with whom we had little discourse, he being going
forth with his Lady. The sixth of March I left London, and went directly for
Bristol; about the twelfth of March Mr. Wade came to Bristol, but then could
say no more than as above, the Messengers being not come back from Scotland nor
Ireland and was of his former opinion, that if any thing were done, it could
not be before Midsummer, he then expected to be about two Months in the West,
and said that if any thing was agreed upon sooner, one Mr. West a Councellor
had promised to write to him in the name of Inglestone, and direct his Letter
to be left at his Brothers in Bristol, who Wade ordered that if any such Letter
came, to open it, and if any thing material in it, to send it by a Messenger to
him into the West. About the 17th of March came a Letter for him from West in
the name of Inglestone, which his Brother opened, and not understanding the
Style, brought it to me, but I knew not the meaning thereof. The Contents was
to desire Mr. Wade to get his Clients together the next Saturday come
Fortnight, for that was the day appointed to Seal the Writings, and neither of
us understanding it, his Brother sent it by a Messenger after him, who found
him at Taunton, and his Answer by the Messenger was, that he knew not the
meaning of it, but should be within ten Miles of Bristol the next Saturday,
desiring that if any other Letter came, to send it to him. About three days
after came another Letter as above, desiring him not to call his Clients
together, for the time of Sealing was put off, which Letter was also sent to
him, but he understood it not, saying, it was some rash business or other and
so went back again.

The fifth of April I came to London, and that evening went to Mr. Wests
Chamber in the Temple where I found him, who then did not know me, but when I
told him my Name, from whence I came, and mentioned the two Letters Mr. Wade
received from him, he began to be somewhat free in Discourse with me. I then
told him that Mr. Wade and his Friends were surprised at the Letters, not
knowing what he meant by them, and did desire to know, concerning which he
seemed a little shie, but after a little Discourse, began to tell me, saying,
There was a Design to take off the King and Duke coming from Newmarket, which
they expected would have been that Saturday mentioned in his Letter, had not
the Fire happened, which caused them to come sooner; Nay, said he, had we known
they would have stayed so long as they did; their business should have been
done: I then asked him what he meant by desiring Mr. Wade to get his Clients
together by that day, and what he could propose they should have done, to which
he could say little, only that they might be ready. I then told him, that I
thought it a very rash thing, and that few in England would approve of it, that
I was sure none about us would, being a most Cowardly dishonorable action,
besides the basest sin of Murder; Then, said he, what is designed by the
General Design but to take them both off, and if it had been done that way, it
would have prevented a great deal of Bloodshed in the Nation; No, said I, no
such thing is designed as I know of, the General Design being only to get the
King off from his evil Counsels, who had advised him to put a stop to
Proceedings against Popish Plotters by Dissolving of Parliaments, etc. and to
bring all Popish Offenders to Justice, and such who had betrayed the Liberty of
the Subject; and this I think was all the Discourse we had at that time, being
the first of my acquaintance with him: that night I went with him to a Tavern
in Fleetstreet, where was Captain Norton, Richard Goodenough, and one Mr.
Aylif, who, to my knowledge, I never saw before nor since; whilst I was with
them there was no Discourse of any Business, but I soon left them together. The
next day Mr. Roe of Bristol, brought me to Mr. Ferguson, at the House of one
Mr. Bourne a Brewer, but was not admitted to see him himself; Ferguson then
went by the Name of Roberts, who when I had told my Name and from whence I
came, was pretty free in Discourse with me, and told me the Design went on very
well, that there were some Scottish Gentlemen come up, who were treating with
the Managers, and did hope they would agree in fews days, and come to a
Resolution both as to time and method, of which we should have timely notice,
but by all his Discourse at that time I could not perceive that he knew any
thing of the Newmarket Design.

That day I had some discourse with Colonel Romzey at his house who I found was
privy to the Newmarket Business, and his Opinion was that the General Design
would come to nothing, for he did not approve of the Managers actings, and said
there was nothing like the other Design, for that would put an end to all in a
little time; when I told him that I thought none in our parts would be for it
which I think was all the Discourse we then had, only he promised that if any
thing was agreed before Mr. Wade came up, I should hear of it, so I took leave
and went for Bristol the next morning. About ten days after, hearing nothing
from them, ( Ferguson having told me that he thought all would be agreed in
four or five days, and promi^ed to advise) I wrote to Mr. West desiring to know
how they went on, who wrote me that they still met with delays, and were come
to no Conclusion, after that I heard no more till May. About the beginning of
May I came up to London again, in Company with Mr. Wade and some other Bristol
men, but when we came up, my Business being in the City, and theirs about the
Temple, we parted; after two or three days I met with Mr. Wade, and asked how
he found things, who told me, he doubted all would prove a Sham, for he thought
there was nothing intended, finding nothing materially done in order to what
had been so long discoursed. Then we went to Mr. West, and discoursed him fully
about the Contents of his Letters, who told us, they were resolved to kill the
King and Duke as they came from Newmarket, in order to which, he had provided
Arms for fifty Men, Pistols, Carbines and Blunderbusses, and that they were
promised the House of one Rumbald a Malster, which lay in the Road, and the
King must come by his Door, there the men should have been Lodged. Then we
asked who was to have acted it, to which he could give but a slender Answer,
and could or w^^ld name but two Men, who were Rombald and his Brother, saying*
if they could have raised six or eight hundred pounds to have bought Horses,
and something to encourage men, they should have (...) men enough; so that we
found they had few men, if more than two, and no Horses, only a parcel of Arms,
which afterward he showed us at a Gun-smiths House in a little Lane near
Temple Bar. Then we asked him what they designed if it had taken effect, to
which he answered, that the men should have come up with all speed to London
and dispersed themselves immediately, declaring for the Duke of Monmouth, and
that the King and Duke being dead, no opposition could be made; then we asked
who were for this Design, he named Colonel Romzey and Richard Goodenough, and,
as far as I can remember, no more; so we found it was carried on by them
contrary to the knowledge or approbation of those who managed the General
Design: then we declared our great dislike of it, telling him, it was a base
Dishonorable and Cowardly Action, and would seem odious to all the World, that
any pretending themselves Protestants, should be concerned in such a Bloody
Action, and that we thought it was his Cowardice put him upon it; to which he
said, that he could not Fight, but would be as forward with his Money as any of
his Capacity. Then we went to Colonel Romzey, who we found to be wholly of
Wests Opinion, saying, that except something be done that way, I know nothing
will be done at all, for he knew the other Managers would do nothing; so we had
little Discourse at that time. After this we went to Ferguson, who told us how
things stood; we then found that he knew of both Designs, but was only for the
Insurrection, and told us, that the Managers had been Treating with some Scotch
Gentlemen; that they were almost agreed, and the Money they were to be supplied
with, would be ready in three or four days, being ten thousand pounds which was
to be returned to Holland to buy Arms, etc. for Scotland. He also told us that
the Scotch Gentlemen had made another proposal to the Managers, thus, If they
would supply them with thirty thousand pounds, they would begin it in Scotland
first, which they could soon have, and then would Invade England, desiring the
Managers only to get a Party in the North of England, ready to oppose any Force
from coming out of England against them, before they had settled Scotland: but
this was not approved of, the Managers choosing rather to supply them with 10000
l. and to begin it in England the same time. Then we daily expected to hear
when the Money would be paid, but still found nothing but delays, the Managers
not agreeing how to raise the Money, and that if the Money had been ready, they
were come to no Conclusion as to any method more than they were nine months
before, having done nothing ^^t talked to ensnare people, reporting about in
all parts how the Liberties of the people were daily more and more infringed,
and that Arbitrary Government and Popery was coming in apace; which incensed
people very much, and made such a grumbling in all parts, that we feared longer
delays would make the common people in many parts mutiny, it being as we
thought so gen'rally known; except something was suddenly done, it was
impossible it should remain undiscovered; so the next time we met with Romzey
and Ferguson (tho never together) we declared our dissatisfaction by Reason of
such long delays, and spoke it so as that it might come to the managers Ears,
as we suppose it did, being to this effect: That we thought they had only a
design to betray people, drawing many thousands into a snare, for their actions
showed little otherwise, being so long discoursing a thing of that nature, and
done so little toward it: few days after meeting with Romzey again, he told us
they were of different opinions concerning a method, some for beginning the
Insurrection only in London and Scotland, some for it in all places at once as
at first proposed, others for several places in England and Scotland, and not
in London, saying, that if it was not begun in London, but in other places,
there would be forces raised in London to send out against them, which would
take out most of their strength, and that then London might be easily secured;
sometimes they were for beginning it only in London and Scotland, and to have
people come up to London from all parts of England: to which we answered, that
we though no way better than what was first proposed, ( viz.) the beginning of
it in many places at once, as before mentioned, for although we had engaged
none in or about Bristol, nor should not endeavor it till all things were
concluded, yet with the assistance we were promised from Taunton, did not doubt
but to get men enough to secure it, and that we knew not where to get ten men
that would come for London, and supposed it might be so in other places, men
might be willing to secure their own Country, who would not be willing to leave
all and come for London. Romzey then said, if he knew where to get at the head
of 1000 men, he would begin it presently, and desired that we might meet the
next night with some others and consider of things; so the next afternoon we
met at Richard's Coffee-House near Temple Bar, and from thence to a Tavern
near, I think called the little or young Devil Tavern, where met eight persons,
( viz.) Colonel Romzey, Robert West, Captain Norton, Captain Walcot, Richard
Goodenough, Francis Goodenough, Nathaniel Wade and my self (this was the first
time I knew Walcot.) When we were all fit, Colonel Romzey spoke to this effect,
as near as I can remember the same words: Gentlemen, If we can raise three
thousand men in and about London, there is a person of Honor will appear at
the head of them and begin the business; which we supposed to be the Duke of
Monmouth, and do not well remember whether he mentioned his name or not. Which
proposal much surprised Mr. Wade and I, that he should then question the
raising of 3000 men, whereas when it was first mentioned to us, we thought they
had been sure of many thousands in London at an hours warning. Then it was
considered how 3000 men might be raised, and how they might do something to the
purpose: Then we declared what method we had concluded on for the management of
Affairs in Bristol, which was as follows, and they could think of no better
way: so it was concluded that London and the Suburbs should be divided into
Twenty parts, and one man made choice of in each divisi^n, who should choose out
ten in his division that he could trust, and each of those ten to find out
fifteen, which would make 161 in each division; so that twenty divisions would
produce 3220. In order to which, a Map of London was to be bought the next day,
and each division drawn out in a particular Paper, mentioning every Street and
Lane of note in it, with the North, East, South and West bounds thereof, and to
be brought the next Meeting two or three nights after; at the first Meeting it
was agreed, that none should know of this Design, viz. (of the chief Managers)
till all the Men were secured, and that those seven (I being not to stay long
in London) should meet every two or three nights till all was completed. At
this meeting Romzey and West would be often saying, there was nothing like the
lopping business, meaning the taking off the King and Duke, and that it might
be easily done as they went to or from Windsor, or to or from the Playhouse,
but I never heard any agree with them in it. Next Day a Map was bought and
brought to West's Chamber in the Temple, where some met to divide it and draw
out the divisions against the next meeting. The next place we met at I think
was the Castle-Tavern in Fleet Street, where some of the divisions were
brought, all being not done, and then it was considered how they should be
distributed, being we were most strangers* and agreed, that Richard Goodenough,
who had been Undersheriff, and so had a general Acquaintance, should do it,
who was willing to undertake it, the rest of the divisions to be ready against
the next meeting, which was two or three Nights after at the Green-Dragon
Tavern upon Snow-Hill, where when Mr. Goodenough came he told us, That he had
disposed of some of them, and did hope it would take effect, and that in a week
or ten Days he should have fixed the twenty Men; the consideration how things
should be managed, was deferred till they were sure of the Men, only some
mentioned their Opinions how the Tower, Whitehal, and other places might be
best surprised. The Tower was thought might be best gained in the Day time,
Whitehal and other places in the night, with many such things in way of
discourse: Romzey was still upon the old strain of killing the King and the
Duke, saying at this the last meeting I was at, (going for Bristol next
Morning) that it might be done in Windsor-Park, and that he would undertake it,
but not except every one there present would go with him, to which not one
con^^nted, I replying, that I was for no such thing; but seeing the other
business had gone so far, and was known to so many, if they could bring it to
bear in London and other places, I rashly said, rather than fail of Bristol we
will undertake it at Noonday with an Hundred Men: to which Romzey said I was a
bold fellow; they then promised (when they were sure of the Men) to advise and
take care for some Arms for us at Bristol, and that we should have some Great
Person come down to Head us; but I heard no more till the news of the Discovery
came in public Letters. I remember one time when VVade and I was with
Ferguson, he told us that the Duke of Monmouth was brought to a low Condition,
all his Places being taken from him, and his Tenants in Scotland (being so
severely dealt with upon account of their Religion) were not able to pay Rent;
so that his Estate there, which was accounted worth Ten or Twelve Thousand
Pound per An. did not yield him the last Year Two Thousand Pound, that he was
not well pleased with the management of Affairs, and desired Mr. VVade to
Appoint a place where he would meet the Lord Gerrard, and Sir Thomas Armstrong,
to discourse them; to which Mr. VVade replied, he would meet none of them, for
such Great Men had betrayed the Nation already, and ensnared too many Thousands
to no purpose.

How it was to have been acted in Bristol.
We concluded that the only way to secure Bristol would be by a surprise, which
with about 350 Men (150 of which we depended on from Taunton, the other 200 to
be raised in and about the City) might easily be done about 4 of the Clock in
the Morning, as soon as the watch were gone off, without the Bloodshed of one
Man, thus, dividing the City into fourteen parts, so making thirteen Posts
besides the main Guard, which should at first have been at the Toulsey (which
is in Bristol as the Exchange here) we supposed 20 Men might be sufficient for
each Post, and the remainder for the main Guard, out of which might be spared 4
or 6 Files to be constantly marching about, and to assist where there might be
occasion. The method we designed for the raising 200 Men in and about the City
was thus, first to find out 30 Men, 2 for each Post, and 4 for the main Guard,
who might be able each of them to procure 6 and to command them, which would
have made 14 for each Post, and 28 for the main Guard, to whom the Taunton Men
should be added, ( viz.) 6 to each Post, and the remainder to the main Guard,
who should have come in the Day before, some at every entrance of the City, and
lodge themselves at Inns and Alehouses as near the Posts they were appointed
for as they could: Each Man being to know his Post and Commanders before they
came; the Bristol Men to Lodge themselves and Arms, with Arms for the Taunton
Men, in an House as near as possible to their Posts, and to send one out from
each Post, between Three and Four of the Clock in the Morning to observe the
motion of the Watch, and to advise as soon as they were gone off, that they
might all immediately repair to their respective Posts, calling the Taunton
Men; and as soon as they had gained their Posts, to send out a File of
musketeers to fetch in such and such men in each of their Divisions as they
should have had an account of before, and convey them to the main Guard, which
in the fourteen Divisions would have been about Sixty Persons,
Commission-Officers and others; then to fetch in all the Arms and Ammunition
they could find, which two things being done (as we supposed might be in a
little time, and without any opposition, the Posts being so near each other,
that it would have been impossible for any Number to get together) we resolved
next to declare the reasons for our taking up Arms, and to encourage all to
come in to us that we could trust, not doubting but we should soon have had
many Thousands in the City, and out of the adjacent Counties, Gloucester,
Somerset and Wilts.

The Reason why I did not come in, etc.
When the News of the Discovery first came to Bristol, and some time before, I
was in some trouble by my Creditors, and forced to abscond though thought I had
sufficient to pay them, only desired time to get in my effects, their Mercy I
feared more than your Majesty's, and thought if I should come in and find mercy
with your Majesty, I could at first expect no better than a Prison, and if from
it discharged by your Majesty, to be kept in by them upon account of my Debts.
Secondly, hearing there was very many (in and about Bristol) supposed to be
concerned, and I (though knowing so much) being able to prove so little against
any Man, but such against whom there was sufficient proof without me, feared
that if I should come in more would be expected from me than I could prove, and
so might fa^l of Mercy, it having been our resolution not to discover the
Design to any of our Friends till the Managers had agreed both upon time and
method, therefore considered how to make my escape, there being then a strict
search in all Ports, thought best to continue in England for some time, till
the heat might be over, and so got an ordinary habit and a little Horse about
40 Shillings Price, and traveled the Country as a Man dealing in Wool, in
Gloucester-shire, Oxfordshire and Summerset-shire, till about the middle of
August, then repaired toward Bristol, and by Letter with my Wifes Assistance
(all other Friends thereabout fearing to act for me) prevailed with a Poor Man
who had a small Boat about Ten Tuns, for Twenty Pounds reward and the like per
Month, for six Months, to go with me for France, and from thence to the
West Indies or where I would, my Name being then in no Proclamation or
Declaration, if it had I should not have prevailed with the Man to go with me.
So the Twenty third of August Sailed from Kings-Road for Rochell, the 25th.
proving bad whether, cracked our Mast, and so put into St. Ives in Cornwall,
where we stayed till the fourth of September, then put out again for Rochell,
but meeting with contrary Winds was forced into several places in France, and
gained not our Port till the Seventeenth. In Rochell I loaded her with Brandy
and other Goods, and the fourth of October Sailed from thence for the
West Indies (being willing to know how my Concerns lay there, that my Creditors
might have their own, though I knew I might be much safer in France) and arrived
at Barbados the eleventh of November* there I heard of my Name being in the
Gazette, therefore stayed but two Days landing part of my Cargo, from thence I
went to Antigua, where I landed and disposed of the remaining part, staying
there about ten Days; but it being too soon for the Crop, and my charge being
the same lying still or going farther, also thinking it not safe to lie long
there, resolved to see the rest of the Caribby-Islands, and so went down to
Mounserat, Nevis, S. Christophers, S. Estatia and Anguilla, and so back again
to S. Christophers, supposing that to be the safest place, I being known to
none there, where I stayed about three Weeks. About the fourteenth of January I
wrote to my Factor in Nevis about what was due to me, who on receipt of my
Letter discovered me, so that Sir William Stapleton presently sent his Warrant
to St. Christophers to Apprehend me, but before it came I was gone down to St.
Estatia, expecting to meet my Vessel there, which I had sent up to Barbados,
and it being known where I was gone, the Deputy Governor of St. Christophers
sent five Men with his Warrant after me, to whom on sight thereof I submitted,
though had an Opportunity and might have escaped, but was rather willing to cast
my self at His Majesty's Feet for Mercy, than live such a Life any longer, not
daring to appear where there was need of me (among my Factors) who I doubt will
take too much Advantage by my Troubles for my Creditors Interest. In Nevis I
was kept a Prisoner 13 Days, where I promised Sir William Stapleton that I
would make what Discovery I could, giving him the Names of some who I had
acquainted with it in Bristol, which I suppose he has given an Account of
desiring him that it might be kept private, for if it was known they would have
Advice of it; but it was not kept so private as I expected, for the Night I
came off I was told of it, therefore suppose they were advised by a Bristol
Ship that came away before us, by which I wrote not a word, I suppose she might
be at home long before us, we being nine Weeks and five Days. All that I can
say against any of them, except William Wade who is beforementioned, is That I
Acquainted them with the business, as I believe many Thousands in England were,
and do suppose they would have been concerned. Hereunder is an Account of many
other Persons that I have heard were concerned in the Design for an
Insurrection, which is all that I can call to mind of any thing material that
ever I heard concerning the Plot.

A Paper found in Mr. Charleton's Custody.
Worthy Sir,
THe particulars underwritten, are a brief Account of what Service was done
since May the 15th. 1680. during which time Six Pound per annum has been paid
for Rooms, most what for that Service, besides Wages to two Servants amounting
to upwards of Ten Pounds, which is not at all charged to the Account. And all
Earned and Charged on that Account is but 56 l: 10 s. for Paper and Print, viz.
l. s. d. The Black Box, First Impression Paper and Print Number 1500. 05 00 00
Second Impression with Alt^rations Number 1500. 05 00 00 The Answer to the
Declaration Three Sheets, Number 3000. Paper and Print 18 00 00 The two
Conferences, Five Sheets, Number 2500. Paper and Print. 25 00 00 Reasons for
the Indictment of the D. of Y. Number 1000. Paper and Print 02 10 00 For Bags,
Boxes and Portridge 01 00 00 Sum is 56 10 00 Whereof Received 33 00 00 Remains
23 10 00

Besides all the large promises when engaged in that Service, viz. to be the
Parliament Printer (and when the Parliament sat, had not one Sheet to do of all
the vast Numbers done for them.) Also 100 l. per annum and Reimburstment for an
Engine made on purpose for the Service, which cost 15 l. A Former that cost 16
l. being rotted in the former Public Service.

Toward all which, Eight Guineas were received of Mr. Ferguson said to be his
own Gift. This is a Brief Account of what past under Mr. Ferguson's Order,
which shall be faithfully made appear to his Face if he dare stand the Test. By
Sir, your most humble Servant.

Captain Walcot's Letter, To the Right Honorable Sir Leoline Ienkins.
Honored Sir,
I Being in the Country, and to my great trouble seeing my self in his
Majesty's Proclamation, I came last Night to Town, resolving to lay my self at
his Majesty's Feet, let him do with me what he pleases; This is the first
Crime I have been Guilty of, since His Majesty's Restoration, and too soon by
much now: If his Majesty thinks my Death will do him more good than my Life,
God's Will and His be done. Until I sent your Honor this Letter, my Life was
in my own Power but now it is the Kings; to whom I do most humbly propose, That
if his Majesty desires it, I will Discover to him all that I know re^^ting to
England, Scotland, or Ireland; which I suppose may be something more than the
Original Discoverer was able to acquaint His Majesty with; especially as to
Ireland: There is not any thing his Majesty shall think fit to ask me, but I
will answer him the Truth, as pertinently and as fully as I can. My inti^acy
with a Scotch Minister, through whose Hands much of the Business went, I judge
occasioned my knowing very much: And I do further humbly propose, That if His
Majesty thinks it advisable, I will follow those Lords and Gentlemen that are
fled into Holland, as if I fled thither, and had made my Escape also, and will
acquaint the King, if I can find it out, what Measures they resolve of taking
next: I do assure his Majesty, the business is laid very broad, or I am
misinformed. And I am sure as to that particular, if (...) being with his
Majesty, and your Honor, be not Discovered, I shall be ten times abler to
serve ^im, than either Mr. Freeman, or Mr. Carr; for they will trust neither of
them. There Is scarce any thing done at Court, but is immediately talked all the
Town over; therefore if his Majesty thinks what I have presumed to propose
Advisable, I do then further most humbly Propose, That my waiting upon his
Majesty may be some time within Night, that your Honor will acquaint me the
Time and Place where I may wait upon you, in order to it; and that it may be
within Night also, and that no body may be by, but his Majesty, and your
Honor; And if his Majesty pleases to Pardon my Offenses for the time past, he
shall find I will approve my self very Loyal for the future; if not, I resolve
to give his Majesty no further troubl^, but to lie at his Mercy, let him do
with me what he pleases. I purpose to spend ^uch of this Day in
Westminster Hall, at least from Two of the Clock to Four* I beg your Pardon I
send your Honor this by a Porter: I assure your Honor, it was for no other
reason, but because I would not have a Third Person Privy to it; And that I
might have the better opportunity to make good my Word to his Majesty, and to
approve my self

Your Honors most humble Servant, THO. WALCOT.

Minutes of Walcots Confession before His Majesty the 8th of July 1683.
THe first Business was spoken of in a place and at a time he does not now
remember.

But it was agreed that Lord Shaftsbury should have the Command in London.

Lord Russel in Devonshire.

Lord Brandon in Cheshire.

Duke of Monmouth in Taunton and Bristol.

This agreement did not hold long; Some coming to Town that said the Countries
were not ready.

The last business was spoke of about a fortnight before Ash Wednesday last:
Captain Walcot had no Conference about it with any Lord but with the Lord
Howard of Escrick.

Ferguson did oblige Captain Walcot to bring him and the Lord Howar^ together:
The Lord Howard and Ferguson discoursed together of the ways and means to
surprise the Tower.

Lord Shaftsbury told him that the City was divided into twenty parts, and that
there was to be a Chief to every part and he was to choose fifteen Men to
assist him within his Division.

Lord Shaftsbury told the Duke of Monmouth that the King was to be deposed.

Rumbald was Lieutenant of Horse in Fairfax's Army. Walcot served in the same
Army.

Richard Goodenough said the Duke of Monmouth expected six thousand Men
t^gether in London.

Lord Russel and Lord Gray were to Mortgage Lands for the Raising of ten
thousand pounds.

Lord Howard of Escrick was concerned in the Grand Consultation.

Captain Walcot always opposed the Assassination: He will leave 800 l. a year
behind him.

Ferguson told Walcot about a quarter of a year ago that the Earl of Essex was
in this Affair.

A Note taken from Walcot, by Captain Richardson Keeper of Newgate, July the
11th. 1683.
IF Colonel Romzey be to be spoke with I would have you speak with him to be
tender of me, that will do him no hurt, he has room enough to serve the King
upon others, and if Mrs. West, would do the like to her Husband, her Children
--

On the other side,

Run no hazard nor speak with him before any Body, if you cannot be private
leave the Issue to God.

Two Letters from the Mayor of New Castle, Dated June the 1st. 1683. To Mr.
Secretary Jenkins, about Pringle, etc.
Right Honorable, New Castle June the 1st. 1683.
WE presume to acquaint your Honor there are two persons Apprehended and
Committed to his Majesty's Goal here, with whom there are found diverse
Seditious Papers and Letters, they were for going beyond Seas, the one of them
goes by the Name of Alexander Pringle, the other Edward Levitson, when their
Papers and Writings were seized on they attempted to destroy and convey the
same, but were prevented: We have sent by Express the Writings so seized on to
his Grace the Duke of New Castle our Lord Lieutenant, to forward the same with
this Letter to your Honor. What Commands we receive from your Honor shall be
obeyed by, etc.

Right Honorable, New Castle June the 13th. 1683.
WE Received your Honors Letter of the 5th. Instant, do acknowledge your
favor and kindness therein, we have and shall make it our chief Care and Study
to Apprehend all such Offenders and do our utmost Endeavors on all occasions
for his Majesty's Interest and Service, we are satisfied one of these persons
is Alexander Gordon of Earlestone though now called Pringle, both these
Prisoners were delivered Yesterday to Colonel Strother to be safely Conveyed
into Scotland, according to his Majesty's Commands. We are, etc.

A Letter to Mr. Alexander Pringle, seized at New Castle.
SIR, London, March the 20th. 1683.
ON Saturday last I had the occasion of seeing a Letter from yo^ directed for
Mrs. Gaunt, in whose absence Mrs. Ward had received it, at the Reading of which
I was not a little troubled, considering my f^ll resolutions signified to you
in my last, for effectuating of which I had spoke for passage and taken my
farewell of Mother Gaunt she going into the Country; And that very Week I was so
set upon by the Gentleman with whom I stay and Jo. Johnston with some others,
to stay but a month, and if that did not accomplish somewhat in hand to help
Trading, then I should be no longer detained. After I was prevailed to retract
so far I Ordered Jo. who had time at Command to give you an ample account of
matters: And withal Jo. was desired by our Friends from Scotland to stand here
in my place: The like Engagements of Secrecy, etc. being taken, and thereupon
I ordered (...) to show you the grounds of my staying, and to desire if you
inclined to cross the Water to come this way. But since many are the confused
ye^ troubled Thoughts that have possessed me for Yielding: Concerning which as
also my yielding to it, take the subsequent account. In my last, or it
precedent to it, I showed you that Trading was very low here and many breaking,
which has made the Merchants, such as they are, to think that desperate
Diseases must have desperate Cures. And while that they have some stock it will
be be^ter to venture o^ut than to keep Shop and sit still till all be gon^ and
then they shall not be able to act but let all go, which Resolution I thought a
thing not to con^ide in seeing the most of them are Fireside Merchants, and
love not to venture where storms are any thing apparent. B^t about my departing
they showed the Model of Affairs in such order that I see venture they must and
venture they will, whereupon I demanded how our Trade would be carri^d on.
Answer, They knew well what goods had proven most prejudicial to their Trade
and therefore they thought best to insist upon Negatives. In which whatever I
proposed is assented to, as I find, and this they thought b^st to still some
Critics in the Trade and by this m^^ns to endeavor the dispatching the old
rotten Stuff before they order what to bring home next, this looks somewhat
strange to m^, but when I consid^r all circumstances I think they for
themselves do best in it, for our M^rchants I made account only to have had
some stock for to s^t the broken on^s up again and so bid them here farewell and
they to try their way and we ours since they think ^it that some of those wh^m
we have found (as you will say when you hear them named) treach^rous ^ealers in
^ur Trade consulted and accordingly have done, whereupon I fear or rather hope
that our Merchants though broke will rather desire to live a while longer as
they are, than join with such, and to advance their Trade unless sure^ grounds
of their ^id^lity be gotten than is or can be expected. And this is the bottom
of all my sorrow. But to proceed I fi^d (if all hold that is intended) that
they think it is almost at a point to set forward if they had their Factors
home ^ho are gone to try how the Country will like such Goods as they are for
or against the making sail of. Friends I mean Merchants wrote to me that after
I had spoken to you possibly you might come this way the better thereby to
advise them wh^t to do in this case for I have signified somewhat of it to them
but not so far as this; because I th^ught to have seen you long ere this time
but I hope you will not misc^nstruct of my staying, seeing in it I designed
nothing b^t advancement of our Trade. B^t once this week those Factors s^^t for
will be here, and then matters will (in instanti) either off or on, break or go
through: Wherefore in reference to friends I desire you will advise me what to
do if you cannot or think it not convenient to come here, if you do let ^
Letter precede, and if any strange thing fall out this week or the next, I will
again Post it toward you. I think when this and the next week is gone (and no
news come from you) that I shall set forward being still so ready as that in
twelve hours I can bid Adie^.

The Whiggs are very low as well in City as Suburbs all Meetings being every
Sunday beset with Constables to keep them out, and what they get is stolen
either evening or morning. This Winter most of the great B^nkers and Goldsmiths
in Lombard Street are broke and gone. The Bantam Factory in the Indies is taken
by the Dutch. Confusion confusion in Town and Co^^try, such as you never saw.
Mrs. Ward and several others desire to ^e re^embred to you: My endeared
Respects to your self and B. with the young Me^ ^rrived. This I have writ i^
short and i^ have* expecting ^ line with as great ha^te (...) you see is
needf^l; for matters are full as high as I tell you. Farewell.

From your Friend and Servant, Io. N.
Be sure that you direct not for Bed^al-Green, but for me at Mr. Meads i^ (...)
near London. Directed on the back thus; To Mr. Alexander (...) to be (...) at
Mr. Alex^nder (...).



The Examination of John Nisbet of Stepney taken before John Tendering Esquire
THis Examinant being duly Examined, does say that he was born in
Northumberland, that he was bred a Scholar at Ede^burgh in Scotland, that he
came from thence to London, that he was Usher at Mr. Waltons School at
Bednal-green, that from thence he came to Mile-end, and there lived about a
year in the House of one Mr. Matthew Richardson, and taught his Children* This
Examinant says further, That he came down to Bradwel with Mr. Richardson, and
that being a Scholar he did intend to go beyond-Seas into Flanders, and put
himself into some College.

This Examinant wholly denied that he knew Mr. Richardson to have any other
Name.

Capt. coram me.

Jo. Tendering.



A Copy of Earlestoun's Commission,
Omnibus and singulis Religionem vere Reformatam Profitentibus ad quos
praesentes pervenient.
QUin, Variae Augustiae, pertristes persecutiones, and opprobria nostrae (hic
in Scotia) Ecclesiae, magna, ad vestras pervenere aures, neutiqum est nobis in
dubio: Quum, depressus, and quoad externa, Status devastatus; quo, pro Fide
Sanctis tradita, and nostroe Ecclesiae privilegiis and jure peculiari
contendendo, redacta est, fere omnibus ^it notus: Quorum intuitus and
consideratio una cum magna, de vestri (in nobis interesse, spe concepta) hunc
Dom. Alexandrum Gordon de Earlestoun Legatum nostrum, vobis omnibus,
Reipublicae Israeliticae fautoribus, and benevolentibus mittere and demandare
non ^ine multa causa, persua^it; causam, and Statum nostrum malitiose,
subtilitate adversariorum vobis representatum, cognoscentes qui, eo ipso ut,
nos, and quicquid a nobis actum, vobis reddant ridiculo; in male representando,
and Pseudographias actorum nostrorum disp^rgendo, vigilantissimi sunt: Quasi
progressus nostri and principia Verbo Dei (s^premo controversiarum judici) and
vere Protestantismo, essent contraria: Quum nos, nec quicquid ten^re, nec
tenere cupere, Verbo Dei scripto, and antiquis, civilis, and Ecclesiastici
Status legibus; and pristinae reformationi contrarium, declaramus, sed cum
omnia in eo fundentur, potius (Deo dante) actiones ^ostras ei reddere conformes
cupimus. Quapropter nos Protestants, Antierastiani, Antiprelatici, and
Tirann^de agitati, in Scotia Presbiteriani, buic nostro legato, concredimus ei
plenum consensum and assensum dantes fideliter, and vere, omnes vere
Reformatos, ad quos perveniet, informatos reddere; Quod solummodo nos ipsos in
vi^ Domini puros (Dei gratia) quoad possumus servare, intentes sumus and viam
majorum, vere Illustrium, i^ nostra nobili reformatione propaganda in diversis,
ejus, a Papismo, Prelatura, and Erastia^ismo gradibus, and vestigiis incedere
cupimus, atque haec sunt nostraru^ persecutionum (pro praesenti) capita, and
causa. Ad quorum pleniorem and clariorem notitiam, hujus nostri Legati
relationi remittimus; Testimonio cujus, cum sit in rebus nostris, publicis
declarationibus and martyrum Testimoniis, sat versatus, ejusdem nobiscum
judicii, and sub iisdem perpessionibus fidem dare potestis. Humillime igitur
oramus and obsecramus ut relatio^i ^ujus nostri Legati tanquam vere fides a
vobis detur, and ut nullius narrationi, vel datae vel quae posthac detur, de
nobis, principits, and progressu nostro sicut verbo Dei, votis, juramentis, ei
datis, and relationi hujus nostri Legati, contraria cum sit tantum calumniose
ab adversariis data credatis. Quocirca, omnes Zionis fautores oramus; nostrum
statum, quo redacti sumus* non parvi facere, sed serio perpendere; Deus enim
omnes, ad sympathium vocat, and perpendum est, omnes conjurationes and
Adversariorum consultationes, in universam Ecclesiam esse destinatas: Et uno
membro patienti totum corpus cum eo compati debet. Datum Edinburgi decimo die
Aprilis, Anno Domini mille^i^^ sexcentesimo octuagesimo secundo. Et ex nostro
mandato subscriptum a Clerico Conventionis nostro sic subscribitur Jacobus
Renwick.

The Examina^ions of Gordon late of Earlestoun taken before the Committee of
Council, July the 5th. 1683.
In presence of the Earls of Linlithgoe, Perth, Bishop of Edinburgh and
Register.
ALexander Gordon of Earlestoun being Examined again by Order of the Council
upon several Interrogators arising from the Letter sent to him by Io. N. Dated
London, March the 20th. 1683.

As to the Secrecy to be taken of the Man that was to stand in Nisbets place.
That it was an engagement of Secrecy and some Queries to try if they agreed in
Principles.

Being interrogat of the account of Matters written to him by Io. at the desire
of Io. N. Declares that it was a Letter under the Metaphor of Marriage, and
that by the Marriage he understood a Rising designed there.

Being interrogat what the Merchants being low and breaking did mean. Answers,
That he thinks it means that their people, viz. the Dissenters were breaking in
their Stocks by Excommunications and other Courses, and therefore they were
resolving upon desperate courses; which was Rising in Arms.

Being interrogat what is meant by the said Merchants. Answers, Some that lived
at their ease and quiet would not venture to Rise when they saw much danger.

Being interrogat what is meant by the Model of Affairs that would make them
venture. Answers, That they had shown to Io. N. a Model how they would go about
their affairs in order to their Rising.

Being interrogat anent their Resolution to insist on Negatives, and what were
the Goods that proved prejudicial to them formerly. Answers, That the meaning
was, they resolved to agree in what they would put down, which he thinks was
the whole Government, Civil and Ecclesiastic, but that they would not
determine positively what they would set up.

Being interrogat what was it that Io. N. proposed to them that they assented
to. Answers, He thinks he had stated the grounds of the quarrel Relative to the
present Government, and that they had assented to it. But declares that when
Io. N. was speaking to him of these things, he thought them of that nature that
he shunned discourse upon them to receive Information concerning them, because
he had no mind to meddle with them.

That by Critics of the Trade, is understood the Scotch Fanatics, because
they are nice in associating themselves.

That by the dispatching of the old rotten Stuff, he thinks it the dispatching
of the Sectaries or the present Government, but rather thinks it was the last.

That by the Broken ones which he was to set up, is meant the Scotch Fanatics
to be helped by Contributions, and that by their trying their way and we ours,
was meant the English was for Rising in Arms, but the Scotch Fanatics were for
delaying some time.

That by these called Treacherous Dealers, he thinks is meant both the
Secretaries and the present Government, who had formerly broke their
Government, but never heard these persons named.

That they being at a point to set forward, is meant their being ready for
Rendevous.

That by Emissaries is meant persons sent out both in Scotland and England from
London to try the Peoples inclination to a Rising and to incite them to it, and
that these Merchants who advised Io. N. to send for the Declarant to come that
way were the Meetings of the Fanatics in Scotland.

That by Advancing of the Trade he thinks is meant the Carrying on of the
Rising.

By that part of the Letter which tells that when the Factors would return that
matters would in instanti be off or on, That the meaning was that when these
Factors came in they expected Money for buying of Arms and then they would
instantly have Risen, but that the Money was not come in at that time when he
did meet with Io. N.

That by the strange thing that might have fallen out in a week or two, he
understands no other thing than the Insurrection intended.

Declares that this Io. N. was a person that past under the name of John
Nisbet, an Englishman, and stayed at one Mr. Mead's in Stepney, which Nisbet
was an Usher of a School at Bednal-green before.

That the close of the Letter bearing that things were fully as high as I tell
you, is meant the present intended Rebellion.

That by the Capital Letter B. is meant one Mr. Brake a Minister in Lewarden in
Friesland, and the young men are some Students who are in Holland.

Being interrogat what he heard of the Earl of Argile's concurring or assisting
in this Insurrection. Answers, That he heard by report in Holland, that Argile
had undertaken to Raise ten thousand Men to assist in that Rebellion, and that
he was to furnish himself with Arms in Holland, and about the time of this
report which he thinks was in December or January last, he heard Argile was in
Holland but that he did not see him, and to the best of his memory Io. N. also
told him of the Earl of Argiles concurring in the Rising, but remembers of no
other person.

Being interrogat upon the little Letter from Stepney which he thinks was about
the beginning of May, Dated Friday at seven a Clock, That the Man whom he
speaks of, is Mr. Mead a Minister, and that by the words what my Hands find to
do was meant Io. N's. going to Holland and that the Declarant was to meet with
Mr. Mead to let Io. N. go.

Further declares that John Iohnston was one, who at other times past under the
name of Murray, who is a little Man Pock-marked, and wears a Periwig. Sic
subscribitur.

A Gordon, Linlithgow, Perth, Io. Edinburgen. Geo. Meckenzy, I. Drummond.
This is a true Copy of the Original Declaration and Answer made by Alexander
Gordon, late of Earlestoun to the Interrogators proposed to him by the
Committee of Council, which is attested by me

William Paterson Cls. Sti. Concilij.



A Copy of Alexander Gordons Examination, June 30. 1683.
THe said Alexander being interrogate what he knew of the Author of that Letter
directed to Alexander Pringle of the date 20 of March last, to be left at
Alexander Hopes House in Gloss-haven, Rotterdam, which runs upon the Metaphor
of Trade, answers, That the Author of that Letter seems to him to be one
Io. Nishet, with whom he conversed a year ago at London, and ordered the said
Alexander to direct his Letters to Bednal-Green, and since to Mr. Mead in
Stepney near London: and that he the said Alexander had written a Letter to
this Io. Nisbet, challenging him why he came not sooner over to Holland as he
had promised, dated about January last; and that he received this Letter by the
Metaphor of Trade in answer thereunto; and that the venturing spoke of in the
Letter was to signify a resolution of a speedy Rising in Arms; and that the
Factors therein mentioned, signified their Agents and Emissaries who were sent
out into different corners both in England and Scotland, to know the Pulse of
their Accomplices and Parties if they were in readiness to join and rise with
them, and that they brought back accounts of their willingness so to do, and
readiness for an Insurrection. And as to the assistance they were to have from
Scotland, he understood it at his last coming here, and some Months before he
came over in May last, he heard amongst the Dutch People commonly reported that
there was to be very shortly a Rising in* England, and that the Earl of Argile
was to furnish from Scotland Ten Thousand Highland-Men for their assistance;
and that at his coming hither last he heard that there was a Person come from
England to Sir Io. Cockram, alleging he came about the Aff^ir of Carolina,
but that he had discovered himself to a Servant of the Lord Treasurers that he
had come to Scotland upon other matters, and that the Letters for Scotland from
any Correspondents of the Party in which Earlestoun was engaged was directed to
Mr. Henry Emertson written in Edinburgh; and that before he came last hither in
May, the meeting of these Phanatical People had received a Letter from England
subscribed by one I. S. whom he take to be one Murray as he named himself to
Earlestoun (as the other forementioned person named himself Io. Nisbet) in
which Letter there was the Metaphor of a Marriage anent which all things were
agre^d and the Marriage ready to be solemnized which occasioned their sending
for him the said Alexander Gordon to have his mind concerning that Affair; and
they interpreting that Letter signed by I. S. from England to concern the
seeking of their assistance in their intended Rising there, he did dissuade
them from it: and that by the Marriage they understood a Rising to be intended
in England; and that it was ready to be solemnized was to signify that an
Insurrection was to be very speedily on foot; and declared that these with whom
Earlestoun conversed here declared that they believed that the Persons who came
from England to Sir Io. Cokram were sent to manage a Correspondence in order to
the design of Rising in Arms.

The Relation of Alexander Gordon of Earlstoun of what he was informed of, and
heard as follows.
ABout the time of the Election of Rich and North, I heard that there were some
designs of Rising in Arms of some people in England, and in order thereto there
was some Treating with my Lord Argile, but not agreeing to the terms my Lord
left them, and I heard it ceased for some time and went over to Holland; and
when he was there, I was informed of the renewing of the Treaty, and agreed
upon the following terms, viz.

That the Earl of Argile should raise Seven Thousand Men, and the Treators (who
as I was informed were Englishmen) were to advance the said Earl Ten Thousand
pound Sterling; and this was agreed to in April last.

The persons in England were by Information the Duke of Monmouth, the Earl of
Shaftsbury; but after the said Earls decease I did not hear so much of the Duke
of Monmouth. I was also informed of Ford Lord Gray of Wark his being in the
Design.

I was also informed that those concerned in Scotland most in the said Design,
were Sir John Cockram, Ierviswood, Sessnock Elder and Younger, and that Sir
John Cockram the one day kissed His Majesty's Hands, the other day went to the
Cabal anent the above-written Design.

I was also informed, That no small number of the Gentlemen in the West and
other places in Scotland upon their resentment of the present Government,
particularly as to the Test and other Papers put to them, were not resolved to
stand to them although they should take them, but rise upon the first occasion.

This Information I heard from Murray alias Iohnstoune, who as I heard was a
West Countryman in Scotland, who offered to take me along to their Cabals, but
upon my refusal to meddle in the designs kept himself and told no more than
those generals.

I met with Mead at one Mr. Cooks a Merchant living near the Exchange in
Austin-Fryers in London, but I do not mind what he spoke of the aforesaid
Design to me, but thinks not, for I was a stranger to him, and not acquainted
before that time; and this I subscribe before these Witnesses Sir William
Hamilton of Prestoun, Master John Vans Keeper of the Tolbooth of Edinburgh.

A Copy of the Interrogators proposed to Alexander Gordon sometime of Earlstoun
in the Committee, 25th of September, 1683.
TO Interrogate the said Alexander Gordon what Correspondence he did hold with
the pretended General Convention from whom he had his Commission. And if he did
not write a Letter to, and hold correspondence with them before he came last to
Scotland, and upon what account he did write that Letter to the said Convention
which is mentioned in one Letter to him from one Michael Sheills, bearing that
the Convention had received his Letter, etc. And if to his knowledge the said
pretended Convention General did not hold any exact Correspondence and
Intelligence with the disaffected Party and other their Adherents both in
England and in the United Provinces of the Netherlands, and what the said
Correspondence was and if it was not to the weakening and diminishing if not to
the ruining and overturning of His Majesty's Government both in Church and
State as it is now Established within His Majesty's Dominions.

2. Upon what account was he moved to accept of the said Commission and what
other Instructions he had from the said pretended Convention General in order
to the Methods he was to take for inviting the assistance and supply of the
Foreign States and Churches unto which he was Commissionate and if he had not
Instructions for imploring their Aid by Supply of Money and other Necessaries
for sitting and capacitating the distressed Party in Scotland to subvert and
overturn, at least to resist His Majesty's Government in this Kingdom.

3. Who were the Persons who did sit and assist in the said Convention General
when his Commission was ordered, and who did preside thereat. And that he would
declare such of the Members of the said Convention as he either knew or heard
of by their proper Names and Sir-Names and place of their Residence and from
whom he received the foresaid Commission, and who were present at the delivery
of the same to him, and what a person Mr. James Renvicle is who subscribes as
Clerk to the said Commission, and if that was his own true or only a borrowed
Name; And if the same was borrowed that he would declare what his true Name is,
and where his place of Residence was, and if he knows what is become of him
since, or where he now is, and to interrogate him after the same manner in
relation to Michael Sheills.

4. If the said General Convention was not compos^d of Persons sent from
particular Districts within this Kingdom and how many such Districts there were
and who were the leading Persons within these particular Districts and what
sort of Persons they were who were Commissionate from these reserved Districts
to the pretended General Convention. And what farther he knows in Relation to
the Government and management of Affairs within these particular Districts.

5. To interrogate the said Alexander Gordon what Persons he knew either in
Scotland, England, Ireland, or in the United Provinces of the Neatherlands that
did hold Correspondence with the said pretended Convention General in order to
their acting and consulting of their Affairs or concerting of measures and
Methods to be taken in the Prosecution of their purposes and designs, etc.

Interrogators to be put to the said Alexander Gordon in Relation to the late
Horrid Conspiracy.
IMprimis, That the said Alexander Gordon would ingenuously declare the true
and Genuine meaning and sense of that Letter written to him by Io. N. from
London and would give a full and satisfactory Account thereof to the Lords of
the Committee such as may satisfy rational and knowing Men conform to the
meaning of the Writer, who was his Correspondent, and who would never have writ
to him in Riddles and Mysteries, seeing by the Letter it appears that he was
informing Alexander Gordon with the State of their Affairs and with the
measures and resolutions they had already taken. And therefore to interrogate
him who this Correspondent was who subscribes Io. N. and where he resided and
what was his Trade and Occupation and with whom else he the said Alexander did
know him to keep Correspondence, and how he became to be acquainted with him,
and of that way and manner of writing under the Metaphor of Trade and Commerce,
etc. Had not been conceived and agreed to betwixt the said Alexander and the
said Io. N. and their party before thereby to vail and disguise their
Rebellious contrivances and who were present at the contriving of such a
Metaphorical way of Writing besides the said Alexander and Io. N. and if these
and the like Methods were not a common Rule and Practice of these Barbarous and
execrable Conspirators for disguising of their Horrid and Bloody Designs
against the Person of His Sacred Majesty and Royal Brother and for rising in
Arms against his Majesty and his Government.

2. What he knows in relation to the said Horrid Conspiracy against His
Majesty's Person and the Person of his Royal Brother or of rising in Arms
against His Majesty and Government and who were accessory to the said Horrid
Designs either in Scotland, England, Ireland, or any where abroad, whither in
the United Provinces of the Netherlands or else where, and that he would give
an account of them in so far as he knows by their Names Sir-Names and Places of
residence and such other designs as he knew them by, and likeways that he would
give an account of the particular designs methods and contrivances treated upon
and concerted for the rising in Arms against the King and Government either in
Scotland, England or Ireland, and by what Persons the said Treaties and Designs
were carried on as to all which he would give a particular and distinct account
to the Lords of the Committee.

3. To interrogate him anent the other Letter Written to him under the Name of
Mr. Pringle, and what was the true meaning thereof and by whom the same was
written, and if the Trade therein specified do not relate to the condition of
the Fanatic and disaffected Party, and what other import the said Letter does
bear and from what place of the world the same came.

A Copy of the Examination of Alexander Gordon late of Earlstoun.
Edinburgh, 25th of September, 1683. The Earl of Linlithgow. Lord Livingston.
Lord President of Session. Lord Collintoun. Lord Castlehil
JUSTICES,
The Lord Pitmedden. The Lord Harcarss.

The Earl of Linlithgow Elected President.
TO the first Interrogator answers, That the first time he met with that
pretended Convention was near the Inne^-Kirk of Kyle in the Fields about two
years ago; and there were about Fourscore persons or thereby; and that he was
brought there from his own House by one Io. Nisbet, whom the Declarant knows
not further than that he is a West-Country-man about Glasgow; and that Io.
Nisbet is another Io. Nisbet that wrote a Letter to him to Holland under the
notion of Trade, relating to the Rising and Rebellion in England. And farther,
That about a year and half ago he met with another Convention consisting of
fourscore persons or thereby in the Fields within five miles of the former
place near Inner-Kirk, and that very few of them had Swords; to which Meeting
he was advertised to come by a Letter sent to his House subscribed by Mr. James
Kennick who is Clerk to the Convention and heard of no Ministers being amongst
them at either of these times and says there were people there from all the
Districts in the several Shires of the Kingdom: which Districts he was informed
were fourscore; and that he knew none of the persons in either of these
Meetings except Mr. James Kennick the Clerk, the said Io. Nisbet who came from
a District besides Glasgow, and William and James Stewarts who came out of
Galloway and Robert Speir who came from the Lothians, and one Forest who came
from the Upperward of Cluyd and that at these general meetings they produced
their Commissions from the several Districts to the Clerk that it might appear
that they were commissionate to get relief for the distressed in their bounds,
that the business of the Convention was to provide for those amongst them were
in want and for their own security against the dangers they were in, being
denounced Fugitives from the Laws, and in hazard to be caught by the
Governors; and that he heard nothing treated or spoke amongst them as to
rising in Arms, nor knows of any Correspondence these of the Convention had
with any in Ireland; and as to England he supposes there was a Correspondence
there, but knows not these that managed it, except the said Io. Nisbet, he
having shown the Declarant a Letter he had from Michael Sheills one of the
Clerks of the Convention, which he saw in the end of March or beginning of
April last.

To the second Interrogator, the reason why he accepted of the Commission
produced, declares, He accepted it upon the account to see if there could be a
way found for the distressed Brethren to go abroad, or to have something from
abroad to maintain them there.

To the third Interrogator declares, He remembers no more persons were present
but these condescended upon in the first Interrogator, which he says was
occasioned by his being so long abroad; and although upon seeing their faces he
might know several of them, yet knows not their Names, nor the places of their
Residence.

To the fourth declares, The said general Conventions were composed of persons
sent from the several Districts, of which there were as he heard about
fourscore in number, in which fourscore Districts he was told there would have
been six or seven thousand men, but knows not of any Gentlemen or leading Men
amongst them. As to the Commission, it was sent him to Newcastle by a common
Receiver whom he knows not, directed to him at his Lodging at the Sign of the
Vine in the Gateside in Newcastle, his Landlords Name being George Marshal a
public Innkeeper, and addressed to him under the Name of La Graveil, being the
Name he went by, and that the same was under a Cover of James Kennick their
Clerk who subscribed it.

To the last Interrogator repeats his answer made to the first Interrogator,
and knows no further.

Being further interrogate upon the Interrogators given in anent the Conspiracy
in England, declares, The the first time he heard of any design of rising in
Arms was at the time when the Competition was anent the Sheriffs at Midsummer
was a year, and then he heard the Duke of Monmouth was to Head the Rebels; and
this he had from Io. Nisbet and one Mr. Murray a Scotch-man then at London; and
declares, That in January last the Declarant being in Holland he heard by
general report that the late Earl of Argile was to raise some thousand
Highlanders to assist the Rebels in England by making a diversion, and was to
get a Sum of Money for that effect; and that in March last he having received a
Letter from Io. Nisbet in Holland, he came over to London, where he met with
the said Nisbet and Murray, who told the Declarant they designed to rise
presently in England and to Rendezvous in Six or Seven places at one time
pa^ticularly at Coventry and London and that they computed several Thousands in
Yorkshire who were to join with them. That Murray desired the Declarant to go
along with him to meet with the late Lord Russel and Gray and the Lord Wharton
(but of Wharton they said they were not very sure of him being a feared Man)
and with Mr. Ferguson and spoke of several old Officers of Cromwels that were
to be there but the Declarant not being for the present Rising shunned to meet
with these persons or any of them, and both Nisbet and Murray told the
Declarant that Sir John Cokram was with them and heard from these Two Persons
that both the Cessnocks were concerned in that business. As to the Letter
written by Io. N. of the 20th of March, and directed for the Declarant at
Rotterdam Declares that Io. Nisbet sent the said Letter and that under the
Metaphor of Trade throughout the whole Letter is meant the design of Rising in
Arms and a Rebellion and that by the Words (dispatching the old rotten Stuff)
is meant either the excluding the Sectaries from joining with them or
destroying the Government both Civil and Ecclesiastic which last the Declarant
supposes rather to be the Words and that by the Factors are meant their
Emissaries for carrying (...) the Rebellion; and for that strange thing that
was to fall out that ^eek as the next the Declarant thinks is meant the sudden
Muster of the Rebels. In the close of the Letter which says things are full as
high as I tell you, is meant that the Rebellion was instantly to break out, and
having met with Io. Nisbet after his coming from Holland the said Nisbet
explained to him that the sense of the said Letter was as is abovesaid.

As to a Letter direct to the Declarant under the name of Pringle of the 2 May
1683, declares, That the Name of the Subscriber which is blotted out was so
blotted before it came to his Hand, but by the Contents of it he knows its from
one Rob. Iohnston a Tenant or Vassal to the Lord Gray on the Border and that
the Traders and Trading there spoke of is the designed Rebellion and that the
said Robert Iohnston offered to come to Scotland with the Declarant to have
seen some of our disaffected people here and to have met with them. And that A.
T. mentioned in the said Letter which the Letter says labored to undervalue
the disaffected party in Scotland which he calls your Goods, is the Name of
Andrew Young who stays about Newcastle whom he supposes to be a suspect Person
because he was feared that Colonel Struthers would apprehend him. And that he
supposes the way that that Letter came to his Hand was from some Persons that
were at a Meeting at Midsummer about that time, where was present several of
those People that had Commission from the several Districts, but that he
himself was not at that Meeting.

Examination of Mr. Steil and Andrew Oliver anent Mr. Aaron Smith's coming to
Scotland, and his going to Sir J. Cockram's House at Ochiltree. Edinburgh 11th
of December, 1683.
MR. Thomas Steil in Iedwart-Forest declares, that in February last, an English
Gentleman coming to Iedwart being recommended to the Declarant by one David
Sheriff Stabler in Newcastle, only that he might direct him to Ochiltree, spoke
only to him of ^arolina Business anent which he was to transact with Sir John
Cockram; and that the Declarant got him one Andrew Oliver in Iedwart-Forest for
hire to be his guide to Douglass, and that the said Oliver went with him from
that to Sir John Cockrams and declares he knew not his name and had no
knowledge of him, but that he was called when he was at Iodwart, Clerk, but
afterward heard he was called Smith.

Andrew Oliver in Barwick Tenant to the Marquess of Douglass being Examined
declares, a little before Seed-time last the Declarant met with Mr. Thomas
Steil at Linalie the Marquess's House, of purpose to bring hom his Wife from
Douglas to Iedburgh-Forest, and the Declarant being upon his way and coming to
Provost Ainslie's House in Iedburgh, and there being a Stranger there an
English man ready to take Horse to go to the West, the said Mr. Thomas Steil
having told the Deponent there was a Stranger who knew not the way and would be
desirous of his company, and the Deponent having called for the Stranger in the
House he and he took Horse together and rode to Peebles that night and the next
day came to Douglas, and the Stranger upon the way told his Name was Samuel
Clerk, which he thinks was the next day after they came from Iedburgh; and the
next day the Stranger not being able to get a Guide, to convey him to
Ochiltree, at the desire of Mr. Thomas Steil's Wife did go along with him from
Douglas to Ochiltree, and the Stranger went into the House of Ochiltree to call
for the Lord; the Deponent not having gone in with him, where he staid about
one quarter of an Hour and came back to a House in the Town where the Deponent
was to Lodge. That de Deponent heard from the Stranger that his business with
the Lord of Ochiltree was concerning Carolina business, and of their design to
send Families there in the Spring to Plant, and that he commended the Country.

And. Oliver. Io. Edenburgen.

Edinburgh, Sederunt and Iournals of Council, 20 Dec. 1683.
MR. Thomas Steil Chamberlain to the Marquis of Douglas, being Prisoner as
alleged, Entertaining and Corresponding with Aaron Smith when he was in
Scotland, and providing him a Guide to Sir John Cokram's House of Ochiltree,
who being Examined with the said Guide and all that appears is, That the said
Aaron Smith, under the Name of Clark, was Recommended by one David Sheriff,
Innkeeper and Stabler of Newcastle, to Steil, as being his Acquaintance when
he came to Iedburgh, to help him to one that should guide him the way being a
Stranger, without any suspicion or knowledge of his being a person guilty of
any Crime or evil Design. The Lords upon consideration of the Bill appoint a
Letter to be written to the Secretaries to cause Examine Aaron Smith upon the
time of his coming to Iedburgh, and what past betwixt him and Steil and any
other Interrogator proper, seeing it is said that the said Aaron Smith denied he
was ever in Scotland; and that another Letter be written to the Mayor of
Newcastle to Examine the Innkeeper; and in the mean time allows Steil to be at
liberat on Caution to appear when called, under the penalty of 2000 Marks; and
that he shall not go off the Country without License, to prevent any practizing
with the Innkeeper.

Alexander Gordon of Earlston, his Deposition before a Committee of His
Majesty's Privy Council, and two of the Justices. Edinburgh the 25th of
September, 1683.
ALexander Gordon being further interrogate upon the Interrogators given in
anent the Conspiracy in England, declares, That the first time he heard of any
Design of rising in Arms, was at the time when the competition was anent the
Sheriffs at Midsummer was a year, and then he heard the Duke of Monmouth was to
head the Rebels; and this he had from John Nisbet, and one Mr. Murray a
Scotch-man then at London, and declares, That in January last the Declarant
being in Holland, he heard by general report that the late Earl of Argile was
to raise some thousands of Highlanders to assist the Rebels in England by
making a diversion, and was to get a sum of money for that effect; and that in
March last he having received a Letter in Holland from John Nisbet then in
London, he came over to London, where he met with the said Nisbet and Murray,
who told the Declarant, they designed to rise presently in England, and to
Rendezvous in six or seven places at one time, particularly at Coventry and
London, and that they computed several thousands in Yorkshire who where to join
with them; That Murray desired the Declarant to go along with him to meet with
the late Lords Russel and Gray, and the Lord Wharton, (but of Wharton they said
they were not very sure, being a fearful man) and with Mr. Ferguson, and spoke
of several old Officers of Cromwels that were to be there, but the Declarant
not being for the present rising. shunned to meet with these persons, or any of
them; and both Nisbet and Murray told the Declarant, that Sir John Cochran was
with them, and heard from these two persons, that both the Cessnocks were
concerned in that Business. As to the Letter written by Io. N. of the 20th of
March, and directed for the Declarant at Rotterdam, declares that John Nisbet
wrote the said Letter, and that under the Metaphor of Trade throughout the
whole Letter, is meaned the design of rising in Arms and a Rebellion; and that
by the word Dispatching the old rotten stuff, is meaned either the excluding
the Sectaries from joining with them, or destroying the Government, both Civil
and Ecclesiastical, which last the Declarant supposes rather to be the meaning
of the words; and that by the Factors are meaned their Emissaries for carrying
on the Rebellion; And for that strange thing that was to fall out that Week or
the next, the Declarant thinks is meaned the sudden muster of the Rebels; In
the close of the Letter which says, Things are full as high as I tell you, is
meaned that the Rebellion was instantly to break out; And having met with John
Nisbet after his coming from Holland, the said Nisbet explained to him that the
Sense of the said Letter was as is abovesaid.

As to the little Letter directed to the Declarant under the name of Pringle,
of the second of May, 1683, declares that the name of the Subscriber: which is
blotted out, was so blotted before it came to his hand; but by the Contents of
it, he knows it is from one Robert Iohnstoun, a Tenant or Vassal to the Lord
Gray on the Border; and that the Traders and Trading there spoke of, is the
designed Rebellion; and that the said Robert Iohnstoun offered to come into
Scotland with the Declarant, to have seen some of our disaffected people here,
and to have met with them; and that A. Y. mentioned in the said Letter, which
the Letter says labored to undervalue the disaffected party in Scotland, which
he calls your Goods, is the name of Andrew Young, who stays about Newcastle,
whom he supposes to be a suspected person, because he was afraid Colonel
Struthers would apprehend him: And that he supposes the way that that Letter
came to his hand, was from some person that was at a Meeting at Tweeds-Moor
about that time, where were present several of these people that had Commission
from the several Districts, but he himself was not at that Meeting. Sic
subscribitur

Linlithgow, I. P. C. Alex. Gordon.

Here follows the Letter signed Io. N. which was found upon Earlston.
Sir,
ON Saturday last I had the occasion of seeing a Letter from you, directed for
Mrs. Gaunt, in whose absence Mrs. Ward had received it, at the reading of which
I was not a little troubled, considering my full resolutions signified to you
in my last; for effectuating of which I had spoke for Passage, and taken my
farewell of Mother Gaunt, she going into the Country: And that very Week I was
set upon by that Gentleman with whom I stay, and Jo. Johnstoun with some others
to stay but a Month, and if that did not accomplish somewhat in hand to help
Trading, then I should be no longer detained. After I was prevailed to retract
so far. I ordered Jo. who had time at command, to give you an ample account of
matters; and withal, Jo. was desired by our Friends from Scotland to stand here
in my place the like engagements of Secrecy, etc. being taken, and thereupon I
ordered him to show you the grounds of my staying, and to desire if you
inclined to cross the Water to come this way, but since many are the confused,
yea troubled thoughts that have possessed me for yielding, concerning which, as
also my yielding to it, take the subsequent account.

In my last, or it precedent to it, I showed you that Trading was very low
here, and many breaking, which has made the Merchants (such as they are) to
think that desparate Diseases must have desparate Cures: and while they have
some Stock, it will be better to venture out, than to keep shop and sit still
till all be gone, and then they shall not be able to act, but let all go: Which
resolution I thought a thing not to confide in, seeing the most of them are
Fireside Merchants, and love not to venture where storms are any thing
apparent. But about my departing they showed the Model of Affairs in such
order, that I see venture they must, and venture they will; whereupon they
first demanded how our Trade would be carried on. Answer, they knew well what
Goods had proven most prejudicial to the Trade, and therefore they thought to
insist upon Negatives, in which whatever I proposed is assented to, as I find;
and thus they thought best to still some Critics in the Trade: And by this
means first to endeavor the dispatching the old rotten Stuff before they order
what to bring home next. This looked somewhat strange to me, but when I consider
all circumstances, I think they for themselves do best in it: For our Merchants
I made account only to have had some stock for to set the broken ones up
again, and so bid them here farewell, and they to try their way, and we ours;
Since they think fit that some of these whom we have found (as you will say
when you hear them named) treacherous dealers in our Trade, consulted, and
accordingly have done: Whereupon I fear, or rather hope that our Merchants,
though broke, will rather desire to live a while longer as they are, than join
with such, etc. to advance the Trade; unless surer grounds of their fidelity be
gotten, then is, or can be expected, and this is the bottom of all my sorrow.
But to proceed, I find (if all hold that is intended) that they think it is
almost at a point to set forward, if they had their Factors home, who are gone
to try how the Country will like such Goods, as they are for, or against the
making sale off. Friends, I mean Merchants, wrote to me, that after I had
spoken to you, possibly you might come this way, the better thereby to advise
them what to do in this case, for I have signified somewhat of it to them, but
not so far as this; because I thought to have seen you long ere this time. But
I hope you will not misconstruct of my staying, seeing in it I de^igned nothing
but advancement of our Trade; but once this Week these Factors sent for will be
here, and then matters will in instanti, either off or on, break, or go through.
Wherefore in reference to Friends, I desire you will advise me what to do, if
you cannot, or think it not convenient to come here; if you do, let a Letter
precede, and if any strange thing fall out this Nota, That this week His
MAJESTY was expected from New Market, but came eight days sooner, by reason of
the ^ire.
Week or the next, I will again post it toward you; I think when this and the
next Week is gone (and no News comes from you) that I shall set forward, being
still so ready, as that in twelve hours I can bid adieu: The Whiggs are very
low as well in City as in the Subburbs, all Meetings being every Sunday beset
with Constables to keep them out, and what they get is stolen, either at
Evening or Morning, This Winter many of the great Bankers and Goldsmiths in
Lombard Street are broken and gone: The Bantam Factory in the Indies is taken
by the Dutch: Confusion, Confusion in Town and Country, such as you never saw.
Mrs. Ward and several others desire to be remembered to you. My endeared
respects to your self and B. with the young men arrived. This I have writ in
short, and in have, expecting a Line with as great have as you see is needful,
for Matters are full as high as I tell you. Farewell.

From your Friend and Servant, while Io. N.
London, March 20. 1683. Postscript, Be sure that you direct not for
Bednal-green; but for me at Mr. Mead' s in Stepney, near London.



A Letter as it was written with Argiles own hand, which was addressed to Major
Holms, and marked Number 3. June 21.
THough I cannot by this Post send you a full account of your Affairs, yet I
send you as much as may make you take measures what Bills to draw upon me,
which I hope you will fully understand by Mr. B's. help; the whole account
amounted to several Pa^es; but I only give you one to total, as sufficient.

I gone so I and refuse object first you time much is way the our would of
altogether concerned do upon absolutely do to do effectually as that it be to
is at all be 335759424244575769 money 36 47575657 of and to 69224736535657 and
they have is at be that no some their 2345535958, etc. 50000 4548464758 part as
against the but concurrence from be less nor like place and interest is small
and power against need do bring which Birch that cannot time are out upon an
324753235657 to 56444256594858444367 projected meat very may little done the
been Purse I to shall my lists I to great venture they prospect provided have
can willing God given conferrence week Brown I of things said some the now
their my head guard mention 324344675748465257 things which to your hope some
ago as over some if do spoke for of know and encouragement confer have and self
be order resolve and to reckon all and undertake honest or was far be Shoes
undertaking many of to for purchase was as is the a possibly us of by force it
(...) so how the credit for time Birch and some greatest them concerned will
for and to and 404843 slation good may only the if more will if should expect
tollerably standing and by and necessar the the more the hazarded to it 8 and
think urge so necessar I the that so affairs have business very I possible of I
send here against my till what little upon know not which money
25405748575840524244 I service any what shall resolve thee at did least
effectually thought and far if business reckoned for still the there I or stuck
you upon money by first sum if then Bills 26435640465359 52 5769455356424457
well that 3841444058 51595058458594357 need trouble something very a frighten
the probably not 2000 the tho the once for and 575942 4244575735 will 4057
5748575840524244 and to money could foolish Brown many the not to Gods Brand
besides stay Io^ seat yet to proposed 322240565157 a deal the things as all
once less any drink well on know I as pay whether never the received to any
calculate about to that that the such with you I other II for considerable be
particular add I are of le^t I but all have it Enemies to cannot to Friends
made part I writ wish may be service Mr. an whole there consider persons it
when knowing any and payments to I it low shall little little meaning
Intelligence thing out had which Tents usual whole with 673151485048584840 and
by the more of if but the that blessing raise a 5456538445758405258 4753565744
can Virgins supply to call 485650405243 not keep imaginable tho them 4853485244
standing many number 25 4753565733 only at standing a 5159505848585943 first
considerable with more can them Country 425351514052434443 in and there
40565157 it was Weeks half I so to at 600 think needs precise I the the it a
within what requisite not Sum truly this grounds to say Mr. thing nor know they
as has the grounds occasioned I they both do is Red only let I distance in I
half in I the little would 4057485758405242 first shall number very 1000 and
the consider small confess them work proposed pleased cannot are 2000 Brand it
544453545044 the be 40565157 then be 4044440564852464604^84744564443 little
4553564244575758445650485244 have the but it will 455356574457 and as we yet
together only it for buy it consider employ better Interest small so to some
47535657 a future the to total the absolute of and designed and Wagons are but
of proposed or and because what add as out meddle touch of I knowing Merchant
there is that what is 404540485644405844515458 Red I not but I of expect of up
I enforce at be that should a is in considerable put I done this all have by
the not to had before able will I if and a they have will is for
5753504348535956 shall necessars the or of if is is they very incident for the
daily not Clothes necessar to there the necessar best of the 60405639 events
little to hope 5644564457 many Sum were for so in we them more will in and it
had any many yet be may all 51485048584840 and will it without and not but more
got triple on is very 45535959 now be God and but is what a if odds it as near
named not brush of not less power proposed an of thought my and go you in or
resolved so I intend hear them our 45564844524357 to neither to will much till
any the know on in proposition could what other I of could be the and be but
that easy were I all differ was absolutely soon more to sent above at well
right foot their together Provisions the suddenly that 404258485352 will take
will of the be unwilling the will can at is get Brand not 40565157 no should
the much their not and men the are be while do to advantage the husbanding for
number is be for 5747534457 only to whole Provisions Charges good can to II my
meddle Money as freely for the and be estates do project all after see be I it
such you all 47535657 the yet I distance to dare them direction Gods hands in
on not prevent and have some help may from a a be pray very II Necessars and
that to a occasion prices the submit they but not own had made be do men some
of Sum be necessar 47535657 such bestowed nothing they one it Money of Brand
not to sent engaged whole with a concerned own Money next prove Money far then
but some impossible first be be most to of 4744564858535657 20000 to up do tho
there done case and yet number without hard appointed lest 1200 like give will
after necessar proposed as should leave hard had number I peremptor I
673347535657 stood possibly those thought juncture I do mention this as as mean
other I as neither give know offer have. Adieu. Gil. St. The total Sum is 128
8. which will be paid to you by Mr. B.

Follows in plain writing on the back of the Letter.
I have found two of the Books I wrote to Mr. B. were lost, I believe he has
the blew one; we have received his Letter: I have nothing more to say to him at
present; I hope he knows how to write to me, and understands my Address, and to
instruct you; if he do not, I have lost six hours work.Adieu.



The Decypher of the said Letter as it was done in England.
Sir, June 21.
THough I cannot by this Post send you a full account of your Affairs, yet I
send you as much as may make you take measures what Bills to draw upon me,
which I hope you will fully understand by Mr. B's. help; the whole account
amounted to several Pages; but I only give you one to total, as sufficient.

I gone so I and refuse object first you time much is way the our would of
altogether concerned do upon absolutely do to do effectually as that it be to
is at all be 33 success 69 Money 36 Horse of and to 69 2 H 36 orse and they
have is at be that no some there 23 Foot etc. 50000 fight part as against the
but concurrence from be less nor like place and interest is small and power
against need do bring which Birch that cannot time are out upon an 32 Ho 23 rse
to recruited projected Meat very may little done the been purse I to shall my
lists 1 to great venture they prospect provided have can willing God given
conference week Brown I of things said some the now there my Head guard mention
32 de 67 signs things which to your hope some ago as over some if do spoke for
of know and encouragement confer have and self be order resolve and to
reckoning all and undertake honest or was far be Shoes undertaking many of to
for purchase was as is the a possibly us of by force it tho so how the credit
for time Birch and some greatest them concerned will for and to and aid station
good may only the if more will if should expect tollerably standing and by and
necessar the the more the hazarded to it 8 and think urge so necessar I the
that so affairs have business very I possible of I send hear against my till
what little upon know not which Money 25 Assistance I service any what shall
resolve the at did least effectually thought and far if business reckoned for
still the there I or stuck you upon Money by first Sum if then Bills 20
Dragoons 69 Forces well that 38 beat Multitudes need trouble something very a
frighten the probably not 2000 the tho the once for and success 35 will
assistance and to Money could foolish Brown many the not to Gods Brand besides
stay Job seat yet to proposed 32 22 Arms a deal the things as all once less any
drink well on know I as pay whether never the received to any calculate about
to that that the such with you I other II for considerable be particular add I
are of lest I but all have it Enemies to cannot to an account to Friends made
part I write wish may be service Mr. an whole there consider persons it when
knowing any and payment to I it low shall little little meaning intelligence
thing out had which Tents usual whole with 67 31 Militia and by the more of it
but the that blessing raise a Protestant Horse can Virgins supply to call
Ireland not keek imaginable tho them join standing many number Horse only at
standing a multitude first considerable with more can them Country commanded
in and there Arms it was Weeks half I so to at 600 think needs precise I the
the it a within what requisite not sum t^uly this grounds to say Mr. thing nor
know they as has the grounds occasioned I they both do is Red only let I
distance in I half in I the little would assistance first shall number very
1000 and the consider small confess then work proposed please cannot are 2000
Brand it people the b^ Arms them be appearing gathered little Forces Stirling
have the but it will Forces and as we yet together only it for buy it consider
employ better interest small so to some Horse a future the to total the
absolute of and designed and Wagons are but of proposed or and because what
add as out meddle touch I knowing Merchant there is that what is affair attempt
Red I not but I of expect of up I enforce at be that should a is in
considerable put I done this all have by the not to had before able will I if
and a they have will is for Soldier shall necessars the or of it is is they
very incident for the daily not Clothes necessar to their the necessar best of
the War 39 events little to hope repress many sum were for so in we them more
will in and it had any many yet be may all Militia and will it without and not
but more got triple on is very Foot now be God and but is what a if odds it as
near named not Brush of not less power proposed an of thought my and go you in
or resolved so I intend hear them our friends to neither to will much till any
the know on in proposition could what other I of could be the and be but that
easy were I all differ was absolutely soon more to sent above at well right
Foot their together provisions the suddenly that action will take will of the
be unwilling the will can at is get Brand not Arms no should the much there not
and Men the are be while do to advantage the Husbanding for number is be for
Shoes only to whole provisions charges good can II my meddle money as freely
for the an be Estates do project all after see be I it such you all Horse the
yet I distance to dar them direction Gods hands in on not prevent and have some
help may from a a be pray very II necessars and that to a occasion prices the
submit they but not own had made be do men some of sum be necessar Horse such
bestowed nothing they one it money of Brand not to sent engaged whole with a
concerned own money next prove money far then but some impossible first be be
most to of Heretors 20000 to up do tho there done case and yet number without
hard appointed least 1200 like give will after necessar proposed as should
leave hard had number I peremptor J 67 33 Horse stood possibly those thought
Juncture I do mention this as as mean other I as neither give know offer have.
Adieu. Gil. St The total Sum is 128 8. which will be paid to you by Mr. B.

Written in plain sense on the back of the Letter.
I have found two of the Books I wrote to Mr. B. were lost, I believe he has
the Blue on: we have received his Letter. I have nothing more to say to him at
present: I hope he knows how to write to me, and understands my Address, and to
instruct you, if he do not I have lost six hours work. Adieu.



The Copy of the said Letter, as it was given in by Mr. Spence, according to
the plain Sense thereof, without the Preface or Postscript, being set down
already with the Cipher and Decypher.
I Know not the grounds our Friends have gone upon, which has occasioned them
to offer so little Money as I hear, neither know I what Assistance they intend
to give; and till I know both, I will neither refuse my service, nor do so much
as object against any thing is resolved, till I first hear what Mr. Car^^^res.
Red, or any other you send, shall say; only in the mean time I resolve to let
you know as much of the Grounds I go on, as is possible at this distance, and
in this way. I did truly in my Proposition mention the very least Sum I thought
could do our Business effectually, not half of what I would have thought
requisite in an other Juncture of Affairs; and what I proposed I thought
altogether so far within the power of those concerned, that if a little less
could possibly do the Business, it would not be stood upon: I reckoned the
assistance of the H^rse absolutely necessary for the first Brush, and I do so
still: I shall not be peremptory to urge the precise number named, but I do
think there needs very near that number effectually; and I think a 1000 as
easy had as 8 or 600, and it were hard that it stuck at the odds; I leave it
to you to consider if all should be hazarded, upon so small a d^^^er. As to the
Money, I confess what was proposed is more by half than is absolutely necessary
at the first weeks work, but soon after all the Sum was proposed, and more will
be necessary, if it please God to give success, and then Arms cannot be sent
like Money by Bills: There are now above 1200 Horse and Dragoons, and 2000 Foot
at least of standing Forces in Scotland.
Brand very well appointed and tollerably well commanded, it is right hard to
expect that Country people on Foot, without Horse, should beat them the triple
their number; and if multitudes can be got together, yet they will need more
Arms, more Provision, and have more trouble with them: But the Case is, if
something considerable be not suddenly done at the very first appearing, and
that there ^e only a multitude gathered without action, though that may
frighten a little, it will do no good, the standing Forces will t^ke up some
station, probably at Stirling, and will to their aid not only have the Militia
of Twenty thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse, but all the Heretors, etc. to
the number it may be of Fifty thousand; and though many will be unwilling to
fight for the standing Forces, yet the most part will once join, and many will
be as concerned for them, as any can be against them: and though we had at
first the greatest success imaginable, yet it is impossible but some will keep
together, and get some concurrence and assistance, not only in S^^tland
Brand but from (...).
Birch, and Ireland; it will not then be time to call for more Arms, fra less
for Money to buy them, no Money nor Credit could supply it, we should prove
like the Foolish Virgins: Consider in the next place how Diss^nting Lords.
Brown can employ so much Money, and so many Horse, better for their own
interest, tho the Protestant Interest were not concerned; is it not a small
Sum, and a small Force, to raise so many men with, and by Gods blessing, to
repress the whole Power of Scotland.
Brand, that some hope are engaged against us, besides the Horse to be sent,
need possibly stay but a little while to do a Job, if future events do not
bring the ^eat of the War to Brand, which is yet more to the advantage of
England
Birch, as to the total of the Money that was proposed by the best Husbanding
it, cannot purchase Arms, and absolute necessaries for one time, for a Militia
of the number they are to deal with, and there is nothing out of the whole
designed to be bestowed upon many things usual, and necessary for such an
Undertaking, as Tents, Wagons, Clothes, Shoes, Horse, Horse-shoes; all which
are not only necessary to be once had, but daily to be recruited, far less out
of the whole sum projected, was any thing proposed for Provisions of Meat or
Drink, Intelligence, or incident Charges; some very Honest well-meaning, and
very good Men, may undertake on little, because they can do little, and know
little what is to be done. All I shall add is, I made the Reckoning as low as
if I had been to pay it out of my own Purse; and whether I meddle or meddle
not, I resolve never to touch the Money, but to order the payment of
Necessaries, as they shall be received; and I shall freely submit my self to
any knowing Soldier for the Lists, and any knowing Merchant for the Prices I
have calculated, when there is an occasion to confer about it, it will be a
great encouragment to persons that have Estates to venture, and that consider
what they do, that they know that there is a project, and prospect of the whole
Affair, and all Necessaries provided for such an attempt: If after I have spoke
with Mr. Carstares.
Red, I see I can do you Service, I will be very wiling; if I be not able, I
pray God some other may; but before it be given over, I wish I had such a
conference as I writ of to you a Week ago, for I expect not all from Di^^enting
Lords.
Brown, some considerable part of the Horse may I hope be made up by the help
of your particular friends. I have yet some things to add, to enforce all I
have said, which I cannot at this distance; and some things are to be done to
prevent the designs of Enemies, that I dare not now mention, lest it should put
them on their Guard, I have a considerable direction in my head, but all is in
Gods hands.

The manner of Decyphering is explained more at large in another Book, called,
an Account of Discoveries made in Scotland, etc.



Part of William Spence his Deposition.
At the Castle of Edinburgh, the 19th. of August, 1684
MR. William Spence, of the Age 33 Years, or thereby, not married, Solemnly
sworn, Depones, That in the Paper subscribed by him; the Letter dated 21. June,
and the other without date, marked A, are written plain, and in the true Sense,
so far as his knowledge reaches, and that he had no Key to open the Letters
with, but the Alphabetical Cipher: That by the 128 Gilders, 8 Stivers,
mentioned in the end of the long Letter, he understands that it is the Key
thereof; and by the payment of the same, he understands the way of using it.
That he does truly believe there was an Insurrection intended, within these two
Years; and as for what is to come, he cannot tell what the People abroad may be
doing: That he had often heard of Designs and Associations; but that they were
directly intended to hinder the Duke his Succession to the Crown, he cannot
say: For all that he understood was pretended for the Ground of any designs of
Arms, was the defense of the Protestant Religion, the Liberties of the Kingdom;
and if against the Duke his Succession only, in so far as that might be
prejudicial to these; and that he thinks upon the King's death Troubles may
probably arise: That Mr. West, to whom the Letters were directed, was not one
of that name; but Major Holms, to the best of his knowledge* And this is the
Truth as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur.

W. Spence.

The Information of Robert Smith, formerly of the Parish of Dunscore, in the
Sherifdom of Dum^reis, in the Kingdom of Scotland.
AT all the Conventicles for near two years before the Rebellion in the year
1679. There were great Contributions of Money (which were cheerfully given)
under the pretense of a Subsistence for their Ministers, and the Poor of their
Persuasion (the only design that was known to the meaner sort of People) but
the greatest part of the Money was employed for Arms and Ammunition for a
General Rising: In order whereunto the Phanaticks in the Months of April, May
and June, 1679. were preparing themselves, by keeping several great
Field-Conventicles (both in the West and South) in which were considerable
Numbers of Armed Men. And although they were generally very fond and forward to
put their design in Execution; yet it was hastened a Month sooner then was
intended, by the Skirmish that happened about the middle of June within two
Miles of Lowdon-hill, between a Party of his Majesty's Forces under the Command
of Captain (now Colonel) Graham of Claverhouse, and a strong Field-Conventicle,
in which I was my self with a Party of a Troop of Horse (levied in Nith^dale in
the end of May, and beginning of June) whereof I was Cornet, under Mr. William
Ferguson of Caitlock, Captain, and John Gibson of Auchinchein Lieutenant. The
same Night after that Skirmish, I was at the Earl of Lowdon's House with Robert
Hamilton, John Balfour, and David Haxton (both Murderers of the late
Archbishop of Saint Andrews) John Ker in Minebole, and several others, in
number about Twenty Seven Horse. The Earl himself was in the House, and I saw
him pass into the Garden; but I did not perceive that he came into our Company,
though I have reason to believe that Robert Hamiliton was with his Lordship and
his Lady in some of the Chambers, because I saw him leaving us all of his
Company in the great Hall, and going into the private Rooms, where I am sure
was my Lady, as I do not doubt but my Lord was also, for it was from thence
that I saw him pass into the Garden: But my Lady did publicly that Night
entertain and long all the Company. The next morning at four of the Clock we
came from that Earls House, and made all the haste we could to Hamilton, in
order to join the Body that we had parted with the day before; and the next day
we all Marched to Glasgow, where (the morning after) we were beaten by some
Troops and Companies of the King's Forces, and thereupon returned to Hamilton.
From thence I went in Company of Mr. David Williamson (who was a Preacher and a
Captain) with Sixscore Horse to the Shire of Galloway, where we met and joy^ed
Six Troops of Horse and about as many Companies of Foot that were Levied in
that Country and Nithsdale for our Assistance. Thereafter we went into Dumfreis
where we stayed a night, and had notice of the Kings Forces coming to the Kirk
of Shot^; whereupon we marched with all possible Diligence to join the rest of
the Rebels at Hamilton; seizing all the Arms and Horses that we could find by
the way, especially at Drumlanriq, Thorn-hill, Sanebar, Cumnock, Cesnock,
Newmills and Strevin; but at Ces^ock we received four hundred Lances, which we
were told were the free and voluntary Gift of Sir Hugh Campbell, the Father,
and Sir George, the Son. There was one passage in this ma^ch, which I cannot
forbear to relate, viz. That as we were passing by the old Castle of Treve
(where his late Majesty of blessed Memory had a Garrison, in the beginning of
the unhappy Troubles of his Reign) Old Gordon of Earlstown (who in few days
after was killed at Bothwell-Bridge) in my hearing spoke to the Officers that
were about him as follows, Gentlemen, I was the Man that commanded the Party
which took this Castle from the late King, who had in it about 200 of the Name
of Maxwell, of whom the greatest part being Papists we put them all to the
Sword, and demollish'd the Castle, as you see it: And now (though an Old Man) I
take up Arms against the Son, whom I hope to see go the same way that his
Father went: For we can never put trust in a Covenant Breaker; So Gentlemen,
your Cause is good, ye need not fear to fight against a forsworn King.

Upon Saturday the 21st. of June, 1679. the main Body of the Rebels came to
Hamilton, and lay encamped betwixt that place, and Bothwell-Bridge until Sunday
the 29th. when we were defeated by the King's Forces, During which time there
came to our Camp great store of Provisions and Arms from Glasgow, Hamilton,
Lanrick, Lesmahago, Newmills, and several other places in Clisdale, and the
parts adjacent; but I do not know the particular Persons from whom they were
sent, save only what I have said concerning our receiving the 400 Lances at
Cesnock: But about a week before our coming to that Place, as we were passing
by the Earl of Galloway's House of Garlis, his Brother the Lord of Rymstone
came to see some of the Gentlemen that were of our number, and accompanied us
Ten or Twelve Miles, returning aftewards to his House; but before his going he
gave Assurance that both his Brother, the Earl of Galloway the Lord Kenmore and
himself were our Friends: And I did hear him giving great Encouragement to the
meaner sort of People that were in Arms with us, by bidding them to be Cheerful
and Courageous; for he did assure them that they had very good Friends in the
Country; and we did believe that within few days thereafter, as well the Earl
of Galloway, and Lord Kenmore, as the said Lord of Rymstone would come and
join with us, and had we been able to continue some time longer together in a
considerable Body, and had given the least fail to the King's Forces, we
expected that many Persons of great Quality and Interest, would have joined
with us: Whereof a perfect Account can be given by Earlstown (now a Prisoner in
Edinburg) if he will but ingenuously declare what he knows.

The Night before the Fight, the Rebels (one Hamilton Moor) held a Council of
War, consisting of Robert Hamilton, David Haxton of Rathillett, John Balfour,
Major Ledmont, Mackcrellan of Barscob, Gordon of Home, Mr. William Ferguson of
Caitloch, (my Captain aforesaid,) Gordon of Craig, Gorton of Newtoun, Gordon of
Earlstone Elder, Gordon of Earlstone Younger, Gordon of Craichlaw, Captain
Mackculloch, Macdougall of Freugh, Captain John Smith, Captain Home, Mr.
William Clelaud a Captain of Horse, Mr. James Fowler a Captain of Foot, Andrew
Story a Captain of Foot, and several other Gentlemen and Officers, whose Names
I do not at the present remember, but do well know the Places of their abode.
There were also several of the Ministers in this Council of War, viz. Mr. John
Welsh, Mr. Robert Archiebald, Mr. Alexander Hasty, Mr. David Williamson (who
also as I have said before was Captain of a Troop of Horse) Mr. David Home, Mr.
John Bl^kater, Mr. John Blackloth, Mr. Donald Cargil, Mr. John Kid, Mr. John
King, Mr. John Dick, Mr. Thomas Forrester, Mr. John Dickson, Mr. Robert
Sandilauds, Mr. Patrick Vernatt, and Mr. John Harraway with some others: But at
this time Mr. Richard Camron and his Brother Mr. Michael, with some few other
Ministers were gone to Holland with Moneys to pay for Arms that were formerly
brought by Kersland's Son (as I was since informed) and some other Phanaticks
living there. In this Council there were very hot debates betwixt Welch's Party
(the most considerable of the two) who were content to lay down Arms upon their
getting an Indulgence, and Robert Hamilton's Party who would rest satisfied
with nothing less than the Extirpation of Episcopacy, and setting up a pure
Presbyterian Government, as they called it. And the Differences were so great
betwixt them, that the choice of their chief Officers (which was designed to
have been that Night) was put off till the next day, (being Sunday) at Ten in
the Forenoon; but were prevented by the King's Army coming before Sunrising,
to the Northend of Bothwel-Bridge: However, they did that Night appoint two
Commissioners, (viz. Mr. David Home and Captain Mackculloch) to treat for them
with the Duke of Monmouth: On whom they waited accordingly about half an Hour
before the Fight, but returned without any Success. The general Discourse
amongst the Rebels on Friday and Saturday was, That the Lord Burgany would
certainly come in to them the Monday following (had not the Fight on Sunday
prevented him) to command their Forces in chief, and to appoint such Field
Officers, both for the Horse and Foot as he should think fit, unless they had
been appointed by the Council of War before his coming; but in either of the
Cases they were to have had their Commissions from him: For it was most
certain, that they would not allow Robert Hamilton to be their Commander in
chief The Rebels did frequently and openly express the great Confidence they
had in some of their Friends about the Duke of Monmouth, and particularly the
Lord Melvil, the Lord Newark, Sir Thomas Armstrong, and Sir Hamilton of Preston
(the Elder Brother of Robert Hamilton) besides some others whom I do not now
remember, but could know them, if I should hear their Names.

When the King's standing Forces begun to pass the Bridge, the chief Officers
of the Rebels were consulting what was fit for them to do, and it was resolved
that they should all March away in good Order toward Carrick, and the Ruins of
Galloway, until they should be furnished with Arms and Ammunition, which were
Landed at Borrowstenness (besides what was expected from Holland) but could not
then be brought to them, by Reason of the King's Army having been interposed
between them and that Place. And moreover they were in Expectation of
considerable Reinforcements both of Horse and Foot, which were on their March
from several parts of the Country. But their chief Encouragement to prosecute
this Design, was the Confidence they had, that the Duke of Monmouth would not
put any hardship upon them; which I have good Reason to believe was true; for
when I was in Company with all the Rebels Horse (about 1600. in number) less
than a mile from the Field of Battle, marching up on a rising Ground (in our
Retreat) I looked over my Shoulder, and saw the King's Horse at a stand, after
they had pursued us a little way, which we looked upon as having been done to
favor our escape: For if they had followed us, they had certainly killed or
taken us all, a few only excepted, who were very well mounted; and we were
often afterward told, that they were stopped by the Duke of Monmouth's positive
Command, when they were violently pursuing us, after they had quite broke our
Foot (consisting upwards of 4000.) and were within less than half a mile of the
Body of our Horse (running away) which then was in great Consternation and
Confusion: However, we marched that forenoon in as good Order as we could
(twelve miles over a Moor) to Newmills, without any of his Majesty's Forces
giving us the least Disturbance, where we separated, some going toward Air,
others to Galloway, and the rest to Nithsdale; amongst which last, were the
most resolute of the Officers, to the number of betwixt 45 and 50; who
continued together in Arms, going up and down the Country in Galloway,
Nithsdale and other places thereabouts (after all the rest were scattered)
until a Party of the King's Forces, under the Command of Claverhouse came into
Galloway, and then we (for I was my self all along with that small remainder of
the Rebels) went into the West, where we were most kindly entertained in many
places, though I do not remember the Names of the Persons by whom: But I do
well know their Habitations; and I was afterward told by Mr. Richard Camron,
and his Brother Mr. Michael, that they and several others were sheltered and
entertained by Sir Hugh, and Sir George Campbells at their House of Cesnock.
After some stay in the West, I returned to my own House (Kilroy) within four
miles of Dum^reis, where having staid about five or six weeks, the said Mr.
Richard Camron, and his Brother Mr. Michael (who were some short time before
returned from Holland) came to see me, and stayed with me two Nights: They told
me, that they had bought four small Brass Guns with a considerable quantity of
Ammunition and Firearms, which they had in a Readiness, to have been Shipped
at Amsterdam, in Order to their having been landed at Greenock) when they
received the News of the Defeat at Bothwell-Bridge: Whereupon they put up the
said Guns, Arms and Ammunition in a secure place in Amsterdam, until there
should be Occasion for them. The Sunday after their coming to my House, Mr.
Richard Camron kept a Field-Conventicle within a mile of Sir Robert Dalyell's
House, where were about three thousand in number. The Occasion of this Meeting
(where I was present) was to see how the Count^y stood inclined, and who would
join with him. From thence the said Mr. Richard carried with him twenty Men
(whereof I was one) to the Lord of St. John's Kirk (a Cousin of the Lord
Carmichael's, and I suppose his Name is also Carmichael,) whose House is about
two miles from Biggar, and toward thirty from Edinburg, where we stayed four
days: During which, there was several Conventicles kept in the House, at which,
the Lord and his Lady were constantly present. And the Sunday after we kept a
Field-Conventicle on Tinto-Hill, to which, there was People gathered from all
Parts of the Country thereabout, to the number of between three or four
Thousand, whereof many were well Armed. From this Hill I went with Mr. Richard
Camron aforesaid, and upwards of twenty more to the Lady Gilkerscleughs's House
(a Widow Lady) in Clidsdale, where we stayed a Week, and kept several
Conventicles with her. About this time the Duke was come to Scotland, and
whilst we were in this House, it was one Night at Supper proposed by Haxtoun to
kill his Royal Highness, the said Lady being present together with the two
Camrons, four Gentlemen of the North, whom I knew not, and two of my Neighbors
whose Names are John Harper, and Robert Nalson.

This Haxtoun said he would do it himself if he could come at him; and thought,
that it might best be done when the Duke was at Dinner; wherefore he asked, If
there were any there that would go and observe all the manner of his Royal
Highness's Dining? Whether People might get into the Room to see him at Dinner?
And if there were any Number, or Crowds of People got in? Saying, That he was
too well known to go upon this Errand himself. So Mr. Michael Camron undertook
it, and took me along with him, who were particularly instructed to observe,
whether people could go in with large Coats or Cloaks upon them, and Women with
Plads; and whether they could pass the Sentinels with their Swords: And
according as he should find matters, he would afterward contrive the best way
to effect the Business. Accordingly we two went, and saw the Duke at Dinner;
but as we returned to our Lodging, at one Danald Mackay's House, at the Head of
the Co^gate, near the Grass-market, Camron (by chance) met there a man which
knew him; whereupon we both betook our selves immediately to our Horses, and
were pursued by Twelve of the King's Dragoons, who followed us so close, that
we were forced to part Company; and I went to my own House, where being again
in danger by a Party of Claverhouse his Troop, and not thinking my self safe, I
came into England, where I continued three years, and was at many Presbyterian
House-Conventicles in Shrewsbury, Brummigham and Bristol; but never see a
Field-Conventicle in this Kingdom, save one at Clee-hill (some few miles
distant from Ludlow) upon a Sunday in May, 1681, where were met to the number
of upwards of 1000; and some of Note were amongst them; but I do only remember
the Names of Mr. Burton (a Lawyer whose Country* Residence is in Shropshire)
and Mr. Wardin, a Merchant in Brummigham, besides the two Ministers who
preached there, whose Names are Mr. Thomas Eaglesall, who lived in a little
Market Town (called Kinver) in Worcestershire, near Justice Foley's House, and
Mr. Thomas Case, who lived near Shrewsbury; and their Sermons were wholly
tending to raise Faction and Sedition, in the same manner as I have too
frequently heard in the Field-Convent^cles in Scotland. About a year and half
ago I went over into Holland, when I saw the (since deceased) Earl of
Shaftsbury, and the late Earl of Argile, a^ Amsterdam; but did not speak with
either of them; and saw Ferguson at R^tterdam, with whom I spoke; but nothing
concerning the Government. Then Mr. John Hog, and the other Scotch Ministers
belonging to Rotterdam (knowing that I was in the Rebellion, and could not
safely live at Home) advised me to enter my self a Soldier in the Prince of
Orange's Army; which I did accordingly in Colonel James Douglas's Regiment, in
his own Company, where I served a Year; and then became known to Mr. Thomas
Maxwell, a Captain in that Regiment, whose Countryman I am; and he
understanding that I was fled from home upon the Account of my Accession to
that Rebellion, told me how fair an Opportunity I had to serve the King, by
making a full Discovery of all Persons that I knew to be guilty of it, or any
ways aiding and assisting toward the promoting the same. Adding, that if I
would follow his Advice in that matter, he doubted not of his putting me in a
way to deserve and obtain the King's Remission, whereby I might be enabled to
live peaceably at home hereafter. To which I did very readily consent: And he
having thereupon (the 12th. of November last) obtained my Discharge from my
Colonel, I have since discovered what I could. And particularly that at
Rotterdam (since my said Discharge) I had seen several of the Whiggish
Ministers, some whereof I remember were at Bothwel-Bridge, who came from
Scotland about the beginning of September last, viz. Mr. Thomas Forre^ter, and
Mr. Patrick Vernatt (formerly mentioned in the Council of War) who preach
frequently in the Scots Church at Rotterdam, As do Mr. Gordon (who is Brother
to James Gordon, a Merchant there lately deceased) Mr. John Harvey, Mr. George
Barclay, and Mr. John. Sinclair, all Phanatick Preachers. The most part of whom
(as the abovementioned Mr. Forrester told me) went over from Holland into
Scotland, about the month of August last; but that they found themselves in
such daily Hazards of being apprehended, that they returned back again to
Holland; and that this bad News which they brought over with them, is the
reason why Robert Hamilton's late intended Journey to Scotland was put off,
whither I was sometime before informed he did intend to go, and to carry Arms
along with him to some of his Friends there. The said Forrester told me
further, That they resolve to keep no more Field-Conventicles, finding, that
those Meetings have served only to weaken their Party, through the seizing of
some, and dispersing the rest (which made their Friends publicly known) and
that now the English and they join Councils, and resolve to go on more warily.
I did likewise discover, that the manner of the said Ministers, their passing
to and fro betwixt Holland and Scotland undiscovered, was by their being clad
in Sea-mans Clothes, and working in the Ships as Seamen. As also, that I was
persuaded, before they shall attempt any thing toward a new Rebellion, or
making use of the Arms, that the two Camrons left in Amsterdam (which are now
in the Custody of the late Earl of Argile, as I was told about nine Weeks ago
in Vtrecht, by Sir John Cochran's second Son, and Mr. William Cleland,
mentioned in the Council of War) they will first endeavor to dispatch the King;
and that being done, they doubted not but they could soon overcome the Duke,
and all others that would oppose them: Which I heard my self discoursed in a
Meeting about two months ago, at Mr. Thomas Hog, a Phanatick Preacher his House
in Vtrecht, where were present (besides Mr. Hog, and my self) Sir John
Cochran's Son, and Mr. Cleland, already mentioned, Mr. James Steward, the
Lawyer, his Lady, the Lady Kersland, and her Son, with several others, whose
Names I do not remember: But this Language they speak only amongst their
confident Friends: For they make the common sort of People believe, that there
was no such thing as a Phanatick-Plot; but that the raising of that Report was
a Contrivance of the Papists, to make use of false Witnesses, for taking away
the Lives of True Protestants; which I have often heard, not only discoursed in
Houses where some of the ordinary sort of People were in Company; but also
preached in the Churches, where the Sermons (for Oath) to bring up their
Children in the true Protestant Faith, and in the Discipline and Doctrine of
the Kirk of Scotland, according as they are obliged by the Solemn League and
Covenant; and at their Communions, debarring always from their Sacrament all
such as have not taken the Covenant, and do not adhere to it. But of all the
Fugitive Preachers lately gone over from Scotland into Holland, none is more
perversely violent against the Government, than Mr. John Sinclair (who for many
years was Minister, and kept a Boarding School at Ormiestoun) whom about twelve
Weeks ago I heard preach in the Scotch Church at Rotterdam; and a great part of
his Sermon was railing against the Duke* and the Privy Council of Scotland,
saying, That he (meaning his Royal Highness) was a Rebellious Enemy of God; and
had got such a Hand over those perjured Rogues (meaning the Lords of the Privy
Council) as they all intended to overturn the Protestant Religion, and to
introduce Popery; which (he further said) could very easily be done,
considering the small Difference that is betwixt them since Episcopacy was
re-established; and in his Prayer after Sermon, I heard him pray earnestly,
That God might open the King's Eyes, to let him see the Evil of his Ways, and
turn from it; otherwise, That God might take him out of this World, from being
a Curse, and a Scourge to his Holy People. And further prayed, That God would
turn the Counsels of his Counselors, as he did that of Achitophel into nothing.

The late Earl of Argile lives now in the Province of Frisland, where he has a
small Estate, purchased partly by his Father, and partly by himself; upon one
of their Family or Tenants foretelling many years ago, that they should be
driven from their Estate in Scotland, as I was often told in Holland,
particularly by Mr. John Hog Minister of the Scotch Church in Rotterdam and Mr.
John Pitcairne, who keeps a Meeting House at Vtrecht. The Earl of Lowdon with
two Servants only, and Sir James Dalrymple of Stair with his whole Family, live
at Leyden, besides Mr. Douglas (a Minister) and some few more whose names I do
not remember. There are many Phanatick Housekeepers in Rotterda^, who harbor
the Rebels and Fugitives that come over from Scotland, Viz. Robert Gibs, Mr.
Livistoune, John Gibbs, Mr. Russell, James Delapp, James Thomson, John
Greirson, James Nory, John Jack, George Weir, all Merchants, and the Widow of
the lately Deceased James Gordon Merchant, whose House was the Common
Receptacle of the chief of those Rebels and Fugitives. The Gentlemen that I
left at Rotterdam are, Mr. Denham of Westsheills with his Family, Captain
William Cleland, John Belfour, with his Family, Captain William Ferguson of
Caitloch with his Family, Captain Andrew Story. The Ministers there are Mr.
John Hog, Mr. Robert Fleeming (settled Preachers of the Scotch Church) Mr. John
Harraway, Mr. Thomas Forrester, Mr. Alexander Hasty, Mr. Patrick Vernat, Mr.
John Blakater, Mr. Gordon, Mr. George Barclay and Mr. John Sinclair aforesaid,
who is now settled a Preacher in the English Church at Delfe. At Vtrecht I left
Mr. James Stewart the Lawyer with his Family, and his Elder Brother the Lord
of Coldness, Mr. Cochran, (Sir John's Second Son) the Lady Kersland and her
Son, and Six Ministers, Viz. Mr. Thomas Hogg, Mr. John Pitcairne, Mr. John
Ogilvy, Mr. John Veitche, Mr. Robert Ker and Mr. Robert Menteath, besides some
others of less Note, whose names I do not remember I left at Vtrecht three
English Gentlemen who lived there for some time before, and go by the Names of
Esquire Packwood, Mr. Smith a Merchant of London, and Mr. Jones a Welsh-man,
but I do not believe that these are their true Names for they fled from England
upon the Discovery of the late Plot* as did likewise several other Englishmen,
whom I did often see there, but could not learn their Names. I did also see and
speak with Sir John Cochran, but he and 7. or 8. Scotchmen more (whose names I
know not) went two days after my Arrival there, to Gilderland, where a great
many of the Rebels and Fugitives live (as they think) most safe and at ease
amongst the Bores; for they were afraid of Staying at Vtrecht (as some of
themselves told me) by reason of the Spies that they were informed were sent
thither from England to make enquiry after such of his Majesty's Subjects as
lived there. And Mr. Cochran and Captain Cleland told me as their Friend, that
the report amongst our Countrymen was that I likewise was sent thither as a
Spy; which although they did not believe, yet they advised me to be gone away
privately, assuring me withal that I was every hour I stayed there in hazard of
losing my Life. Upon this I returned to Rotterdam, where my Credit with that
Party continued about a week, until I was suspected by my old Captain and
three of the Ministers, Viz. Harraway, Forrester and Sinclair, who about 7 or 8
Weeks ago carried me with them to Church, and there proposed (as a Test of my
Sincerity to the interest of the good Cause as it was commonly called) that I
should take the Covenant and the Sacrament with a Solemn Protestation that I am
still (as I have been in former times) an Enemy to the King and the present
Government: All which I refused to do; and then they debarred me for ever from
their Meetings and Company: Nevertheless I did often thereafter insinuate my
self into both, though without any Success; for I could not recover their good
opinion, but on the contrary was daily threatened with the severest effects of
their revenge.

White Hall, 24 Feb. 1683/4. Robert Smith.

The Information of Zachariah Bourne taken the 5th. of December, 1683.
THat Mr. Bailey sat up one night, if not two, with Mr. Ferguson, and went
several times in the Evening, with him to the Duke of Monmouth, and the chief
managers of the Conspiracy: Ferguson told me, he was the Chief man for the
Scots, next the Lord Argile. The Night he sat up with Ferguson, I believe it
was about the Declaration, for the next day he was going to show it me, but
some body came up to him, and hindered him. Mr. Bayly's great business to meet
the Chief Conspirators was (as Ferguson told me) to get the 10000. l. for the
buying of Arms, for the Insurrection in Scotland.

Carstares I saw often come to Ferguson, but for any Discourse he had with him
he never told me of, or with any other but Mr. Bailey, as I can at present
remember.

Zac. Bourne.

The Deposition of Mr. William Carstares, when he was Examined before the Lords
of Secret Committee, given in by him, and renewed upon Oath, upon the 22d. of
December, 1684. in presence of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council.
Edinburgh-Castle, September 8. 1684.
MR. William Carstares being Examined upon Oath, conform to the Condescension
given in by him, and on the Terms there-in-mention'd, Depones, That about
November or December, 1682. James Stuart, Brother to the Lord of Cultness,
wrote a Letter to him from Holland, importing, that if any considerable sum of
Money could be procured from England, that something of Importance might be
done in Scotland: The which Letter, the Deponent had an Inclination to inform
Shepard in Abb-Church-lane, Merchant in London of; but before he could do it,
he wrote to Mr. Stuart above-named, to know from him if he might do it; and Mr.
Stuart having consented, he Communicate the said Letter to Mr. Shepard, who told
the Deponent that he would Communicate the Contents of it to some persons in
England; but did at that time name no body, as the Deponent, thinks: Some time
thereafter, Mr. Shepard told the Deponent, that he had Communicate the Contents
of the Letter abovenamed to Colonel Sidney, and that Colonel Danvers was
present, and told the Deponent, that Colonel Sidney was averse from employing
the late Earl of Argile, or meddling with him, judging him a man too much
affected to the Royal Family, and inclined to the present Church Government;
yet Mr. Shepard being put upon it by the Deponent, still urged, that one might
be sent to the Earl of Argile, but as Mr. Shepard told him, he was suspected
upon the account of his urging so much; yet afterward he pressed, without the
Deponents knowledge, that the Deponent being to go to Holland however, might
have some Commission to the Earl of Argile, which he having informed the
Deponent of, the Deponent told him, that he himself would not be concerned, but
if they would send another he would introduce him; but nothing of this was
done: upon which the Deponent went over, without Commission from any body, to
Holland, never meeting with James Stuart abovenamed: He was introduced to the
Earl of Argile, with whom he had never before conversed and did there discourse
what had past betwixt Mr. Shepard and him; and particularly, about remitting of
Money to the said Earl from England; of which, the said Mr. Stuart had written
to the Deponent, namely of 30000 pounds Sterling; and of the raising of 1000
Horse and Dragoons; and the securing the Castle of Edinburgh, as a matter of
the greatest importance: The method of doing this was proposed by the Deponent,
to be one hour, or thereby, after the relieving of the Guards: But the Earl did
not relish this proposition, as dangerous; and that the Castles would fall of
consequence, after the work abroad was done. James Stuart was of the Deponents
Opinion, for seizing the Castle; because it would secure Edinburgh, the
Magazines and Arms. As to the 1000 Horse and Dragoons, my Lord Argile was of
Opinion, that without them nothing was to be done; and that if that number was
raiss'd in England to the said Earl, he would come into Scotland with them; and
that there being so few Horse and Dragoons to meet them, he judged he might get
the Country without trouble, having such a standing Body for their Friends to
Rendezvous to; and the said Earl said he could show the Deponent the convenient
places for Landing, if he understood, and as the Deponent remembers, where the
Ships could attend. The Deponent remembers not the Names of the Places. The
Deponent spoke to the Lord Stairs, but cannot be positive that he named the
Affair to him, but found him shie: but the Earl of Argile told him, he thought
Stairs might be gained to them: And that the Earl of Lowdoun being a man of
good Reason and disobliged, would have great influence upon the Country, and
recommended the Deponent to Major Holms, with whom the Deponent had some
acquaintance before, and had brought over a Letter from him to the Earl of
A^gile; but the Deponent had not then communicate any thing to the said Holms.
James Stuart laid down a way of correspondence by Ciphers and false Names, and
sent them over to Holms, and the Deponent, for their use (which Ciphers and
Names are now in the hands of His Majesty's Officers, as the Deponent
supposes^) and did desire the Deponent earnestly to propose the 30000 pound
Sterling abovenamed to the Party in England, and did not propose any less; for
as the Earl told the Deponent, he had particularly calculate the Expense for
Arms, Ammunition, etc. But James Stuart said, that if some less could be had,
the Earl would content himself, if better might not be, but the Earl always
said that there was nothing to be done without the body of Horse and Dragoons
abovementioned; During the time of the Deponent his abode in Holland tho he
had several Letters from Shepard, yet there was no satisfactory account, till
some time after the Deponent parted from the Earl of Argile, and was making for
a Ship at Rotterdam to transport himself to England* James Stuart wrote to him
that there was hopes of the Money. The next day after the Deponent came to
England, he met with Sir John Cochran, who with Commissar Monro, and
Ierviswood, was at London before he came over; and depones, That he knows not
the account of their coming, more than for the perfecting the Transaction about
Carolina: and having acquainted Sir John (...) with the Earls demands of the
30000 pound Sterling, and the 1000 Ho^s^ (...) Dragoons, Sir John carried him
to the Lord Russel, to whom the Dep^nent proposed the Affair, but being an
absolute Stranger to the D^ponent, had no return from him at that time; but
afterward having met him accidenly at Mr. Shepards house, where the Lord
R^^sel had come to speak to Shepard about the Money abovenamed, as Mr. Shepard
told the Deponent. The Depon^^^ (wh^^^ they were done speaking) desired to
speak to the Lord (...), which the Lord Russel did, and having reiterate the
(...) for the 30000 pound Sterling, and the 1000 Horse and (...), he the Lord
Russel told the Deponent, they could not get so (...) raised at the time, but
if they had 10000 pound (...) would draw People in, and when they were (...)
soon be brought to more; but as for the 1000 (...) he could say nothing at the
present, for tha^ (...) upon the Borders. The Deponent made the same (...)
Ferguson, who was much concerned in the (...) the promoting of it. This Mr.
Ferguson had in (...) before, as the Deponent remembers in a Conversation (...)
in Cheap* side, or the Street somewhere (...) for the saving of Innocent Blood,
it would be (...) few, insinuating the King and Duke, but cannot be positive
whether he named them or not; To which the Deponent (...) for our wild People
in Scotland, my Conscience does not serve me for such things; after which the
Deponent had never any particular discourse with Ferguson as to that matter;
but as to the other Affair, Ferguson told the Deponent that he was doing what
he could to get it effectuate; as particularly that he spoke to one Major
Wildman who is not of the Deponent his acquaintance. Ferg^son blamed always
Sidney, as driving designs of his own. The Deponent met twice or thrice with
the Lord Melvil, Sir John Cochran, Ierviswood, Commissar Monro, the two
Cessnocks, Montgomery of Langshaw, and one Mr. Veatch, where they discoursed of
Money to be ^ent to Argile, in order to the carrying on the Affair; and tho he
cannot be positive the Affair was named, yet it was understood by himself, and
as he conceives by all present, to be for rising in Arms, for rectifying the
Government. Commissar Monro, Lord Melvil, and the two Cessnocks were against
meddling with the English, because they judged them men that would talk, and
would not do, but were more inclined to do something by themselves, if it could
be done. The Lord Melvil thought every thing hazardous, and therefore the
Deponent cannot say he was positive in any thing, but was most inclined to have
the Duke of Monmouth to head them in Scotland, of which no particular method
was laid down. Ierviswood, the Deponent, and Mr. Veatch, were for taking the
Money; at one of these Meetings it was resolved, that Mr. Martin, late Clerk of
the Justice Court, should be sent to Scotland, to desire their Friends to
hinder the Country from Rising or taking ^ash Resolutions upon the account of
the Council, till they should see how matters went in England. The said Martin
did go at the Charges of the Gentlemen of the Meeting, and was directed to the
Lord of Polwart and Torwoodlie, who sent back word, that it would not be found
so easy a matter to get the Gentry of Scotland to concur: But afterward in a
Letter to Commissar Monro, Polwart wrote that the Country was readier to concur
then they had imagined, or something to that purpose. The Deponent, as
abovesaid, having brought over a Key from Holland, to serve himself and Major
Holms, he remembers not that ever he had an exact Copy of it, but that
sometimes the one, sometimes the other kept it, and so it chanced to be in
his Custody when a Letter from the Earl of Argile came to Major Holms,
intimating, that the would join with the Duke of Monmouth, and follow his
Measures, or obey his Directions: this Mr. Veatch thought fit to communicate to
the Duke of Monmouth, and for the Understanding of it was brought to the
Deponent, and he gave the Key to Mr. Veatch, who as the Deponent was informed,
was to give it and the Letter to Mr, Ferguson, and he to show it to the Duke of
Monmouth; but what was done in it the Deponent knows not. The Deponent heard
the Design of killing the King and Duke, from Mr. Shepard, who told the
Deponent some were full upon it. The Deponent heard that Aaron Smith was sent
by those in England to call Sir John Cochran, on the account of Carolina, but
that he does not know Aaron Smith, nor any more of that Matter, not being
concerned in it. Shepard named young Hambden frequently as concerned in these
Matters.

Signed at Edingburgh Castle, the 8th. of September, 1684. and renewed the
18th. of the same Month. William Carstares. PERTH. CANCEL. I. P. D.
Edinburgh.
Edinburgh Castle September 18. 1684.
MR. William Carstares being again examined, adheres to his former Deposition,
in all the parts of it, and Depones he knows of no Correspondence betwixt
Scotland and England, except by Martin before-nam'd: For those Gentlemen to
whom he was sent, were left to follow their own Methods. Veatch, as the
Deponent remembers, stayed sometimes at Nicholson, Stabler's House at
London-Wall; sometimes with one Widow Hardcastle in Morefields. The Deponent
did Communicate the Design on Foot to Doctor Owen, Mr. Griffil, and Mr. Meed at
Stepney, who all concurred in the promoting of it, and were desirous it should
take effect; and to one Mr. Freth in the Temple, Councellor at Law, who said he
would see what he could do in reference to the Money, but there having gone a
Report, that there was no Money to be raised, he did nothing in it, nor does
the Deponent think him any more concerned in the Affair, Nel^hrop frequently
spoke to the Deponent of the Money to be sent to Argile, whether it was got or
not, but the Deponent used no freedom with him in the Affair. Goodenough did
insinuate once, that the Lords were not inclined to the thing, and that before
they would see what they could do in the City. The Deponent saw Mr. Ferguson,
and Mr. Rumsay, lurking after the Plot broke out, before the Proclamation,
having gone to Ferguson, in the back of Bishop-gate-street, at some new
Building, whether he was directed by Ierviswood, who was desirous to know how
things went, Rumsay was not of the Deponent his Acquaintance before, but they
knew as little of the matter as the Deponent. This is what the Deponent
remembers, and if any thing come to his Memory, he is to deliver it in betwixt,
and the first of October: And this is the truth, as he shall Answer to God.

William Carstares. PERTH CANCEL, I. P. D.

At Edinburgh, the 22d. of December, 1684.
THese foregoing Pages, subscribed by Mr. William Carstares Deponent, and by
the Lord Chancellor, where acknowledged on Oath by the said Mr. William
Carstares, to be his true Depositions, and that the Subscriptions were his, in
presence of us Underscribers.

William Carstares. PERTH CANCELLARIUS. David Falconer. QUENSBERRY. George
Mekenzie. ATHOL.

Copy of the Lord Russel's Examination in the Tower.
My Lord Russel Asked,
WHether he knows of any Consultations tending toward an Insurrection, or to
surprise His Majesty's Guards at any time, and by any persons, and by whom?

Whether he has ever been at Mr. Shepards House, and how often, and when last?

Whether any Lords were in company, and who?

Whether at any time the Duke of Monmouth, Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong,
Colonel Romzey, Mr. Ferguson, or any of them were there, and how many, and
which of them?

Whether there was any discourse concerning a Rising in the West, or any parts
of the West, or at Taunton, and what the Discourse was, and by whom?

Whether there was any discourse concerning the surprising the Kings Guards at
any time?

Whether the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas Armstrong did
undertake to view the Guards to see if it might be done, and in what posture
they were?

Whether they gave any account that they had viewed the Guards, and how they
found them?

What did Mr. Ferguson say at any of those Meetings, and by whom was he
directed?

Whether he knows of any Design for a Rising in Scotland? Whether he has been
at any Consultations for that end, with any persons, Scotchmen or others, and
with whom? What Moneys the Scotch demanded at first, and whether they did not
consent to take Ten thousand pounds, and how was that or any part of that to be
raised, and by whom?

My Lord Russel's Answer to the preceding Interrogatories.
MY Lord knows of no Consultation tending to any Insurrection. His Lordship
knows nothing of any Consultation or Design to surprise his Majesty's Guards at
any time. diverse times

His Lordship does acknowledge to have been frequently at Mr. Shepard's House.

His Lordship cannot precisely set down the time that he was there last.

To the two Articles relating to the Lords that were in company at Mr.
Shepards, his Lordship answers that he went thither with the Duke of Monmouth;
but as to the rest of the persons then present, his Lordship conceives that he
ought not to answer, because there were ill Constructions made of that Meeting,
nor cannot positively remember.

His Lordship answers,

There was no discourse as he remembers concerning any Rising in the West, or
any parts of the West, or at Taunton, nor particularly of Mr. John Trenchards
Undertaking, nor any discourse about Mr. John Trenchard as he remembers.

His Lordship answers there was no Discourse at Mr. Shepards about surprising
the Guards, nor of the Duke of Monmouth's, my Lord Grey's, nor of Sir Thomas
Armstrong's Undertaking to view the Guards; nor was there any account there
given by the said persons of their having viewed the Guards, nor how they found
them.

Nor was there any such Undertaking elsewhere to his knowledge.

To the question what Mr. Ferguson did say at any of those Meetings, his
Lordship answers that he cannot tell what Mr. Ferguson did say there, nor does
he own that Mr. Ferguson was there.

His Lordship knows of no Design for a Rising in Scotland, nor knows any thing
of the whole Article relating to Scotland, nor any part of it.

His Lordship has heard general discourses of many distressed people,
Ministers and others of the Scottish Nation that were fled and that it were
great Charity to relieve them.

This Examination was taken the 28th day of June, 1683. before Us

L. Ienkins, I. Ernle, R. Sawyer, H. Finch.


Notes of some things Confessed before His Majesty and the Council, taken out
of the Books of Minutes.
JOhn Rouse consest that Money was Collected in the City at the intimation or
desire of some Parliament Men, for the Kings Evidence, that receiving that
Money for that purpose from some of them he sent it to those Persons for whom
it was designed.

Bourn Confesses, That Sir Thomas Armstrong used to come every day to Ferguson
when he lay at his House, that he has seen him since the discovery when
Armstrong urged him to get some friends together to make a push and that it was
better to dye with Swords in their hands.

Walcot Confesses, That Aaron Smith was sent into Scotland by those Gentlemen
that transacted the matter.

Bourn says, That Ferguson Lodged at his Fathers House a Month or six Weeks,
That he left no Papers in his House and used to say he would never be hanged
for Papers.

Shepard says, Bailey told him Charlton had undertaken to raise the whole 10000
l.

Romzey says, The Lord Russel was about going away from Shepard's when he
arrived there, and that his Lordship said Trenchard was a Coward, and that he
would go down himself and begin the Rising.

Charlton confesses, He had paid Oats 80 l. per quarter for his subsistence of
which he had but 10. l. of my Lord Shaftsbury, and was himself the rest out of
Purse but that he was told a Parliament would reimburse him.

Shepard says, That Ferguson and Bailey told him that Charlton would procure the
10000 l. himself, and raise it upon a Mortgage.

Charlton further says, He paid Oats about 400 l. in all.

The Information of John Rouse taken at his desire in Newgate the 19th of July,
1683.
THe Informant says, That the design of the Rebellion and seizing the King was
begun by the Earl of Shaftsbury at his House in Aldersgate Street, before the
meeting of the Parliament at Oxford, where the Duke of Monmouth, Sir Thomas
Armstrong, Lord Russel, Lord Gray, Major Manly a Brewer at Whitechappel, and
others whom he saw there and as he was told likewise by his Servants,
frequently met there; the foundation of all the Scurrilous. Libels was laid,
particularly that of the Raree-shew.

That all those Clubs at Mile-end-green, the Sun behind the Exchange, at
Russel's in Iron-Monger-lane, and at the Salutation in Lumbard-street, were to
carry on that Design, he cannot recollect all names, but declares that he knows
all those of Note that were at those Clubs were thoroughly acquainted with the
Design. These Clubs were divided into three Factions, by reason of which
division the Informant says the Design went on so flow as it did, and at last
it fell between the Duke of Monmouth, and a Commonwealth; and the greater
number carried it for the Duke of Monmouth, because it was found upon his going
into the West, Ch^chester and Cheshire, the vogue of the people went for him.
Those that were for a Commonwealth were absolutely resolved to have nothing to
do with the Race of the Stuart's; but they pitched upon Richard Cromwell, whom
this Informant knows to be in England. The longest day that was appointed for
execution of this was at Midsummer-day last, when the people should be at
Guild Hall chosing Sheriffs.

Five hundred Horse were promised to be sent in from the Country, who were to
seize the Guards.

The pretense of the Conspirators was to secure His Majesty from being killed
by the Papists, that if he would not comply with His Parliament at Oxford, then
to set up the Duke of Monmouth. That this was long designed likewise before the
meeting at Oxford.

The Informant says, That it was resolved by the Conspirators, that when they
should have accomplished their Design, and that the Tower and City of London was
seized, then they were to go to Whitehal and demand their Privileges, and
Freedoms, with their Swords in their hands.

He has been present at many of these Clubs where these Designs have been
consulted of, and all the persons of any note, Commons as well as Lords were
consenting to the Conspiracy; he says he can prove it by many Witnesses.

He says my Lord Shaftsbury and Oats were the Principal movers in all this
business.

A particular Account of the Situation of the Rye-House.
THe Rye-House in Hartfordshire, about eighteen Miles from London, is so called
from the Rye a Meadow near it. Just under it there is a By-road from
Bishops-Strafford to Hoddesden, which was constantly used by the King when he
went to or from Newmarket; the great Road winding much about on the Right Hand
by Stansted. The House is an Old Strong Building and stands alone, encompassed
with a Mote, and toward the Garden has high Walls, so that Twenty Men might
easily defend it for some time against Five hundred. From a high Tower in the
House all that go or come may be seen both ways for near a Mile distance. As
you come from Newmarket toward London, when you are near the House, you pass
the Meadow over a narrow Caus-way, at the end of which is a Toll-gate, which
having Entered you go through a Yard, and a little Field, and at the end of that
through another Gate, you pass into a narrow Lane, where two Coaches at that
time could not go abreast. This narrow Passage had on the Left hand a thick
Hedge and a Ditch, on the Right a long Range of Building used for Corn-Chambers
and Stables with several Doors and Windows looking into the Road, and before it
a Pale, which then made the Passage so narrow, but is since removed. When you
are past this long Building, you go by the Mote, and the Garden Wall, that is
very Strong, and has diverse Holes in it, through which a great many Men might
shoot* Along by the Mote and Wall the Road continues to the Ware-River which
runs about Twenty or Thirty yards from the Mote, and is to be past by a Bridge.
A small distance from thence another Bridge is to be past over the New-River.
In both which Passes a few Men may oppose great Numbers. In the outer
Courtyard, which is behind the long Building, a considerable Body of Horse and
Foot might be drawn up unperceived from the Road; whence they might easily
issue out at the same time into each end of the narrow Lane, which was also to
be stopped up by overturning a Cart.

Notes of what passed between the Late KING, His Royal Highness the Duke of
YORK, and the Duke of MONMOUTH, at the Time of his first Rendering himself.
Taken in Writing at that Time by his Royal Highness.
November the 25th. 1683.
YEsterday the Duke of Monmouth came and Surrendered himself to Mr. Secretary
Ienkins, and desired to Speak alone with the KING and DUKE, which was Granted
him. He first Threw himself at His MAJESTY'S Feet, acknowledging his Guilt, and
the Share he had in the Conspiracy, and asked His Pardon, then Confessed himself
Faulty to the DUKE, asked his Pardon also, assured him if he should survive His
MAJESTY, that he would Pay him all the Duty that became a Loyal Subject, and be
the First should Draw his Sword for him, should there be Occasion. He then
Desired His MAJESTY would not Oblige him to be a Witness, and then gave an
Account of the Whole Conspiracy, naming all Those Concerned in it, which were
more than Those had already been Mentioned by the several Witnesses. He denied
any Knowledge of the Assassination. When he had made an end of his Confession,
His MAJESTY Ordered him to be put into the Custody of a Sergeant at Arms. This
day Admitted him to His Presence, and Ordered a Stop to be put to the Outlawry,
and Promised him his Pardon. He further added, That Dr. Owen, Mead, Griffin,
and all the Considerable Nonconformists Ministers knew of the Conspiracy.

The Duke of Monmouth's First Letter to the KING, mentioned, P. 151 of the
foregoing Account.
IF I could have Writ to Your MAJESTY sooner* with any Safety to my Self, I
would have done it, to have told you, that there is nothing under Heaven has
Struck Me so to the Heart, as to be Put into a Proclamation for an Intention of
Murdring of You, SIR, and the DUKE. I do Call God Almighty to Witness, and I
Wish I may Die this Moment I am Writing if ever it Entered into my Head, or ever
said the least Thing to any Body that could make them think I could wish such a
Thing; I am sure there cannot be such Villains upon Earth to say I ever did.
But I am so Innocent to this Point, that I will say no more of it, for I know
God Almighty is Just, and I do not doubt but he will put it into Your Heart
that I am Clear of this Most Horrid and Base Accusation. But, SIR, the Chief
Intent of this Letter is to Beg Pardon both of You, SIR, and the DUKE, for the
many Things I have done that have made You both Angry with Me: But more
especially of the DUKE, though I might have some Justification for my Self that
many People made Me believe he Intended to Destroy Me; for to you, SIR, I do
Protest before God Almighty, and I Wish I may never Prosper more, that all I
have done was only to Save You, as I shall Convince Your MAJESTY, if ever I am
so Happy as to Speak to You, and I Hope You will let Me do it, before it be
long, for I have that to say to You, SIR, that will for ever I Hope Settle You
Quiet in Your Kingdom, and the DUKE after You, whom I Intend to Serve to the
Uttermost of my Power, and, SIR, to Convince him that I will do so, if Your
MAJESTY will Give Me Your Pardon, I will Deliver my Self up into his Hands,
that the DUKE may bring Me to You; besides, SIR, I should be Glad to have him
by when I Speak to You, but no Body else, and by this Kindness of the DUKES, if
ever I should do any Thing afterward against Him, I must be thought the
Ungratefullest Man Living. What Good can it do You, SIR, to take Your Own
Child's Life away that only Erred and Ventured his Life to Save Yours? And
besides, SIR, I am Sure I can be Serviceable to You, and if I may Say so, make
the Rest of Your Life Happy, or at least Contribute a great Deal toward it.
You may believe Me, SIR, for I do not tell You this out of Fear, but because I
do Think my Self sure of it. I do Beg of You, SIR, if You have any Thoughts of
Mercy of Me, that You will let Me know it soon, for the sooner I speak to You
the better. And now, SIR, I do Swear to You, that from this Time, I never will
Displease You in any Thing, but the whole Study of my Life shall be to show how
truly Penitent I am for having done it, and how Well I will Deserve the Life
You give Me. And for the DUKE that he may have a more Firm Confidence of the
Service I intend to do Him, I do here Declare to Your MAJESTY, that I will
never ask to see Your Face more, if ever I do any Thing against Him, which is
the greatest Curse I can lay upon my Self,

Monmouth.

The Duke of Monmouth's Second Letter to the KING mentioned P. 152 of the
foregoing Account.
YOU must allow Me, SIR, still to Importune You not without Hopes of Prevailing
at last upon Your Generosity, so as it may get the better of Your Anger to Me.
I am half Distracted, SIR, with the Thoughts of having Offended You; and the
Torment it gives Me is perhaps greater than Your forgiving Nature would know
how to inflict upon the most Criminal Offenders: The Character I lie under is
too heavy for Me to bear; even Death it self would be a Relief to Me, could I
have it without the Aggravation of leaving the World under Your Displeasure: I
must therefore throw my self upon Your Compassion, which being a Virtue so
agreeable to Your Nature, I hope Your Child, SIR, will not be an unfortunate
Instance of Your denying it, when it is Implored* I confess, SIR, I have been in
Fault, Mislead, and Insensibly Engaged in Things of which the Consequence was
not enough Understood by Me: Yet I can say I never had a Criminal Thought
toward Your MAJESTY, not pretending by that to Insist upon an Absolute
Justification of my Self. Your MAJESTY will Consider, that whilst I was Under
the Apprehensions of great Anger and Violence against Me, it might easily
Corrupt my Judgment, and by seeing Things in a wrong Light, Betray Me into very
Fatal Mistakes: But now that I have had Time to Recollect my Self, every thing
like a Fault toward Your MAJESTY appears to Me in such a Reproaching
Terrifying Shape, that I have a Remorse for it, which could it be seen, I
assure my Self it would Move Your Compassion to Me. I Humbly beg, SIR, to be
Admitted to Your Feet, and to be Disposed of as You Direct, not only now, but
for the Remainder of my Life: And though my Resignation is too full to admit
any Reserve, Your MAJESTY will permit me to offer to You, Whether You will let
pass any thing as a Penalty upon Me, which may lay a Stain upon my Innocent
Children? Whether You will make Me Undergo the Ignominy of a Trial, before You
give Me Your Pardon? And of what Use or Satisfaction can it be to You to
Forgive Me, and yet give Me the Cruel Punishment of hearing my Self Arraigned
for Treason against such a KING, and such a FATHER? And whether my being
carried to the Tower in case You be pleased to Excuse my ^ryal, c^n have any
Effect but an unnecessary Mortification of One, who God knows is already
enough Afflicted, and some kind of Blemish too, to my Family, as well as an
useless Limitation of Your MAJESTY'S Mercy? SIR, I lay these Things before You
in the most Submitting Manner that is Possible, with an Entire Resignation to
what You shall Determine. Neither do I Imagine to Receive Your Pardon any
otherwise than by the Intercession of the DUKE, whom I Acknowledge to have
Offended, and am Prepared to Submit my Self in the Humblest Manner; and
therefore beg Your MAJESTY would Direct how I am to Apply my Self to Him; and I
shall do it, not as an Outward Form, but with all the Sincerity in the World.
If what I have said can Move You to Forget my past Faults, it will be a Grace I
shall Endeavor to Deserve by all the Actions of my Life: And I am so sensible
how Ill a Guide my Own Will has been to Me, that I am Resolved for the Future
to put it Entirely into Your MAJESTY'S Hands, that I may by that Means never
Commit a Fault but for want of Your Directions or Your Commands. Dear, SIR, be
pleased to Revive by a kind Answer the most Miserable Disconsolate Creature now
Living,

Monmouth.

The Copy of a Letter to the KING, Signed by the Duke of Monmouth, mentioned P.
155 of the foregoing Account.
I Have heard of some Reports of Me, as if I should have ^essen'd the Late
Plot, and gone about to Discredit the Evidence given against Those, who have
Died by Justice. Your MAJESTY and the DUKE know how Ingenuously I have Owned
the Late Conspiracy; and though I was not Conscious of any Design against Your
MAJESTY'S LIFE, yet I Lament the having had so Great a Share in the other Part
of the said Conspiracy. SIR, I have taken the Liberty to put this in Writing
for my Own Vindication, and I beseech You to Look Forward, and Endeavor to
Forget the Faults You have Forgiven Me: I will take Care never to Commit any
more against You, or come within the Danger of being again Mislead from my
Duty, but make it the Business of my Life to Deserve the Pardon Your MAJESTY
has granted to Your Dutiful

Monmouth.

FINIS.



